AN Historical Relation OF THE CONSPIRACY OF John Lewis Count de Fieschi,
AGAINST The CITY and REPUBLIC OF GENOUA, In the YEAR 1547.

Written in Italian by Augustine Mascardi, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Pope
Urban the Eighth.

Done into English by the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire

Conjura vere Cives Nobilissimi Patriam incendere. Gallorum gentem,
insestissimam Nomini Romano, ad be'lum arcessunt; dux ^^stium cum exercitu
supra caput often. Vos cunctamini etiam nunc. and dubitatis, quid, in^ra moenia
deprehensis hostibus faciatis?

Cato, in Salust. Bell. Catilin. London, Printed for John Newton at the Three
Pigeons over against the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1693.

November. 8th, 1692. Imprimatur, Edmund Bohun.

TO The QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty.
MADAM,
IT is so high a Presumption in me to beg Your Majesty's Acceptance of the
ensuing Translation, that were not Your Royal Clemency as extensive as Your
Power, I could not hope for Pardon. There are but few Authors, whose Writings
can without Arrogance intrude upon those small portions of Time, which the
weighty Cares of Your Royal Station permit Your Majesty to call Your own.
Nevertheless the consideration of Your Majesty's Indulgence to all Your
Subjects induced me to think that, as the Almighty Being, whose Vicegerent You
are, regards not so much the value of the Sacrifice, as the sincerity of him
that offers it, so Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to forgive this
Officious submission of one, who has nothing to recommend himself, or what he
Addresses to Your Great Name but an unfeigned Loyalty.

The same Motive that first encouraged me to attempt the Translating this
Historical Tract, inspired me likewise, in a great measure, with the Ambition
of laying it at Your Majesty's Feet: Not only because it was written by an
Author of an established Reputation, but also because it bears so visible a
Resemblance to the late Happy Revolution, that placed Your Sacred Majesty on
the Throne of these Kingdoms. The Parallel, I must confess, agrees not in all
particulars. Genoua bears no proportion to England, nor Doria to His present
Majesty, whether we consider his Character or the Actions he performed. And
besides, England has received a far more signal and valuable Deliverance by
His Majesty's Arrival, than Genoua did by the means of her Great Benefactor.
Their Civil Liberties were for a while under an Eclipse, and their Constitution
was very much altered by that Faction that sided with the French: but their
Religion was still the same with that of their Oppressors; nor had they the
dismal Prospect, that we had continually before our Eyes, of the sad Choice of
being either Martyrs or Apostates. And our Ingratitude, as well as Folly, is
far worse than that of those Genoueses, who were so fatally blinded by Avarice,
Ambition, or Revenge, as to mistake the Traitor for the Patriot, and lend
Fieschi their Assistance to destroy Doria, and enslave themselves. But herein
our side of the Parallel falls very short of that Conspiracy. For, to our great
Comfort, the Enemies of Your Masty's Government are not likely to bring their
Designs to so dangerous an Issue: They have not a Fieschi to lead them, nor a
French Army so near at hand to second them, nor are they in themselves so
numerous and powerful.

May the Great God of Heaven and Earth every day lessen their Number, and their
Power, and their Malice, and still preserve those Sacred Lives on which the
Glory, Happiness, and Security of England does depend, from all Dangers, and
from all Treacherous Attempts: May the Constant Care of Heaven defend Your
Majesty's Government against all Opposition and Designs, Prosper Your Arms with
Victory, and Your Counsels with Success, and long continue to us the Blessings
we now enjoy by the Addition of many Periods of Years to Your Majesty's Happy
and Auspicious Reign: May all Your Subjects endeavor to express their Sincere
and Loyal Affections with as much Zeal and Vigor, as shall be always showed in
Your Majesty's Service by,

MADAM, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Subject
and Servant, H. Hare.

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
READER,
I have resolved to give the World an Historical Account of the Affairs and
Transactions of Italy in the last Century; what my Reasons are for setting my
self such a Task, thou art not to expect I should at present impart to thee.
How able I am to perform the Work I have undertaken, must be lest to thy
Judgment: But as to the Candor and Sincerity which are indispenably requisite
to a Good Historian, those, I promise thee, shall be faithfully and diligently
observed. Truth, free from the Blemishes of irregular Passions, is the darling
Object of my Pen, and shall be my first and greatest Care. Hatred, I know, too
generally attends it, because Vicious Persons dread an Enterview with this
Beautiful Virgin, no less than weak Eyes avoid the Sun shine. But however, Wise
Men, and Princes especially, (who are much the properer Judges) would not have
the Public imposed upon, nor Posterity deluded by the Artificial Lies of a
Mercenary or biased Historian. And if any of their Ancestors, or Kindred's
Faults are transmitted to After Ages, it is not the Writer that Records them,
but the Persons who commit them, that are to be blamed: And let those, who have
any hard thoughts of such a Writer, remember, that the Evangelists who were
guided by an infallible Spirit, and who are the best Patterns we can follow,
have not concealed from us either St. Peter's Denial of his Master, or the
Unbelief of St. Thomas, though they were both of them Apostles. But of this I
shall treat more at length on See Trattato Secundo dell' Art Historica cap. 6.
page 194. Scritta di Agost. Mascardi. Edit. Venet. 1635. Octavo.
another occasion.

Among the Remarkable Accidents which are to be taken notice of, as happening
within the period of time, I propose to write of, I have pitched upon the
Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi, that by this short Essay, the World
may know what Judgment to make of the rest of the Work. For having never yet
set my self to write History I should be very unwilling to be guilty either in
my Style, or Method, of any thing that might distaste the Reader, and so render
my Pains useless and ineffectual. It Is true, this short Essay in History,
though now Published, was never designed for the Press, being begun by Chance,
and writ in haste: And consequently not so free from Errors as I could wish it.
I took it in hand more for my own diversion, than the Public View, and
therefore the Critics must excuse it, if it falls short of an Exact History.

But the Work I am a bout is of a larger Extent: It Is designed for the Public
Good: Its end is to instruct as well as delight the Readers: It preserves the
Memories of Brave Men from Oblivion: And is an Authentic Record of past
Transactions: Therefore it must be managed in all its parts with Judgment and
Discretion. However, as I am not so vain as to despise the Censures of so
Learned an Age as is the present; so neither shall I be so inconsiderate as to
Publish my own Composures till they have undergone the Examination of those,
whose Opinions I can more safely rely on.

Fieschi's Conspiracy now appears in Public: And as Apelles stood behind his
Picture, Anxiously expecting what Sentence should be past on it by the Judges
of Painting, so am I no less desirous to know what the Learned World thinks of
this Essay of mine. And I plainly and ingenuously declare, That I shall not
only think my self extremely obliged to any Person who will impart freely to me
his real Sentiments of this Tract; but also that whosoever finds any remarkable
Error either in my Style or Method, and does not communicate to me his
Animadversions on it, will be very unkind to the Public: For after such a
Friendly Challenge, if the History I am about be tainted with those Blemishes,
the World, I hope, will be so Just as to impute them to my want of due
information, and not my unwillingness to receive it.

Some perhaps will be of Opinion, that so small a part of an entire History
should not have been Published by its self. To these, I Answer, that Fieschi's
Conspiracy, as I have related it, is to be looked on as an Historical Tract not
at all depending on the larger Volume; For in that it will appear under another
Figure. Many of the particular Accidents, which I have here enlarged on, being
there to be omitted, and the most Remarkable of them being only to be hinted
at. It Is at present my intention, in this short Essay, to describe the Rise,
Progress, and Conclusion of one Action, with all the Circumstances attending
it: Which will give me occasion of trying how I can draw in Mignature, those
Beauties, which a complete Body of History represents in their full
proportions. Nor do I herein proceed without the Authority of very great
Examples. I shall not insist on the Ancients, especially Salust, since the
present Age assords me a Pattern of equal Value. His Eminency Cardinal
Bentivoglio has writ some Historical Tracts in our Tongue with so much
Eloquence and so Judicious an Exactness, that I desire no better a Precedent:
His Style is always strong and noble, and yet it wants not a Copious and
Harmonious Fluency: His Thoughts are always well linked together, and properly
adapted to the Subject: His Observations show how thoroughly he Considered what
he writ, and how clear a View he had of the Consequences of Things: His
Sentences, whether Moral, or Political, are so weighty in themselves, and so
seasonably brought in, that they are always welcome to the Reader: His Speeches
are full of Life and Energy: In a word, whatever he has writ, shows us it is
possible, that a Poetical Fancy, a Rhetorical Vein, and a Solid Judgment, may
meet in one Person. In imitation of his Works, especially his Historical
Essays, I have endeavored to manage Fieschi's Conspiracy; though I must
acknowledge after all, that my Writings are but a faint and ill drawn Copy of
so Excellent and Perfect an Original.

Perhaps some may think the Speeches in this small Tract are too long and too
many: To these, I Answer, That were it seasonable, much might be alleged in
See this point fully discust in Mascardi's Trattato Secondo dell Art
Historica, cap. 4. page 159, etc. Ed. Ven. 1655.
defense of them, but at present, though I have Considered what Objections may
be urged, yet I think there is no need of defending my self, till I know what
is laid to my charge. Let it suffice, if I repeat, what I have already told my
Reader, that being desirous in this short Essay to touch upon all the parts of
a Complete History, I was forced to Embrace those Occasions of enlarging,
especially in the Speeches, which otherwise I should have let slip. Besides,
let it be Considered, that when an Affair of this Moment comes to be debated,
when the Persons that are to deliberate on it are of different Opinions, and
when all the Reasons Pro and Con are to be seriously and maturely weighed,
'twill not be found so easy, as some may imagine, to end the dispute in Six
Words. Nevertheless I submissively referr my self to the Judgment of the
ingenious Reader: Which I shall eagerly expect to be informed of. As likewise I
must earnestly entreat all Persons who are willing to forward the design I have
in hand, to furnish me with such Memoirs as they are Masters of, and they may
think I have not seen. For these will also be extremely useful to me. And the
more exact and particular the Notices are which I shall receive, so much the
less will the Reader be disappointed in the Matter and Method of my History.
But if the Learned World, who I think have no small Interest in Works of this
Nature, shall neglect to give me the Assistance I have begged of them, they
must blame themselves, and not me, if my History falls short of their
Expectation.

Augustine Mascardi.

The Life of the Author, as it is Recorded in the Book of the Glories of the
Academy Degli Incogniti at Venice.
Augustine Mascardi derives his Original from a very Noble Family, which about
Four Hundred Years ago began to flourish in Liguria: He was Born in the Castle
Della Specie, a Place sufficiently remarkable, and situate on the Confines of
Lunigia. He was hardly arrived to those Years, when others just begin to know
that they are alive, before he showed himself wonderfully inclined to Learning:
And this Natural Propensity of his being improved by a Liberal Education, his
Youth proved very fruitful of excellent Composures both in Latin and Italian,
wherewith he so obliged his Native Country, (being equally Master of both those
Languages) that the Wits of that Time could not forbear vying with one another
in the delightful Employment of giving him his due Encomiums. Hereupon the
Great Cardinal Alexander d' Este, and all that Illustrious Family, took him
into their particular Favor and Protection; which he gratefully acknowledged
by transmitting their Glorious Actions to Posterity in several of his Writings.
About the same time the several Orations he occasionally made in Praise of See
Pros. Volg. Part Secunda, p. 367, 396, 536.
Great Princes then Living, and Aug. Mascardi's Pros. Volg. Part Secunda, p.
271, 298, 325, 349.
Persons deceased who had been Eminent for their Piety, and Pros. Volg. Part
Secunda, p. 414, 433, 456, 478.
Canonized for their Zeal to the Catholic Religion, gained him the Glorious
Character of the Tully of his Age, not only in Italy his Native Country, but
also in all Foreign Parts, where the Italian Tongue was at all esteemed. After
this he went to Rome, where his Merits were quickly taken notice of, and
rewarded with the General Applause due to a Person of so extraordinary Wit and
Learning. Put some unlucky Accident in his Affairs forcing him to remove to
Genoua, he had there an opportunity to display his Eloquence in that famous
Academy; which he did to the extreme satisfaction of the Learned Nobility of
that City, in his excellent Discourses on Cebes's Table. From hence after a
while he came back to Rome, where being entertained in the Palace of Prince
Maurice Cardinal of Savoy, he writ on the occasion of Pope Urban the 8th's
Coronation, a description of the Solemnity, and a Panegyrical Discourse on that
Pope, Entitled, The Pomps of the Campidoglio, when His Holiness Pope Urban the
8th took Possession of the Church of St. John Lateran. This Discourse was so
full of fine thoughts elegantly expressed, that all Italy admired it, and
Mascardi's Fame received from it so great an increase, that he was ranked among
the best Writers of the Age. Hereupon the Pope advanced him to the Dignity of
Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and he likewise was made Rhetoric Professor in
the Public Schools of Rome. These Employments were indeed of no inconsiderable
value, but yet below his great Merit, Fortune always declaring her self an
Enemy to Worth and Virtue. Some few Years after this Mascardi came to Venice,
to take care of the Impression of his Works, and honored our Academy so far as
to be admitted a Member of it. But after a short stay with us, his Employments
called him back to Rome, where his Ingenuity and Learning again exerted it
self, no less to his own immortal honor, than to the enriching and beautifying
our Language: For in all his Writings he showed himself a Man well skilled in
all useful and genteel sorts of Learning, of a sound Judgment, pure Eloquence,
fruitful Fancy, and a noble way of Expression peculiar to himself. The
Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi is a clear proof how well he would
have succeeded in his design of Writing a general History of the Transactions
of Italy in the last Century; since by this he has made it evident, vident,
that he was Master in the highest degree of all those perfections, without the
concurrence of which, as he proves in his incomparable Tract of the Art of
Writing History, no Man deserves the Name of a Complete Historian. At last when
he had arrived to a very high pitch of Glory and Renown, Death robbed the
Learned World of this inestimable Treasure; so great a loss was universally
regretted: But his Memory still lives, his Reputation grows every day more and
more Illustrious, and our Posterity many Ages hence will envy our happiness in
having had for our Contemporary a person of so conspicuous and real Merits.

THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE.
PRefaces, as they are generally managed, are a direct Contradiction to
Horace's Rule, and prove neither Diverting nor Profitable to the Reader. For
they usually consist of little besides the Common Excuses that Authors
suspicious of their Fame, and distrustful of their Abilities (or at least
desirous to seem so) are pleased to make for their exposing themselves to the
Public View and ^ensure of the Age: Vainly conceiting that Three or Four Pages
spent in such Apologies will either hide or atone for ^aults, or add fresh
Luster to the Real Beauties of the Books they Publssh. For my part I always
looked upon such Introductions as tedious and impertinent; and I am the more
consigned in that Sentiment, When I consider the Practice of those Writers who
are worth imitating, the Intrinsic Value of whose Works daily gains an nnask'd
Applause, and will doubtless effectually recommend them to the deserved Esteem
and Admiration of future Ages. Among these I cannot but reckon Mascardi, the
Author of the ensuing Tract; the present scarcity of whose Writings, after so
many Editions, is a sufficient Evidence how Universal an Applause they have met
with in the Learned World. The short Character of him, which I have prefixed to
the following Translation, fully informs us how highly he was Esteemed by the
most Eminent Persons in Italy; nay, even by that Great Judge and Patron of Wit
and Learning Pope Urban the Eighth, whose Poems probably will live when his
Pontificate is forgotten. Nor will the Illustrious Character given of Mascardi
by that Famous Vt ingenio atque Natura praestanti nemini concedit, ita multa
insuper obtinet variae Lectionis and scientiarum praesidia eruditissimus
eloquentiae Professor Augustinus Mascardus: queis adjutus non secus in ejusmodi
Tractatione [nempe de Historica methode] quam in caeteris facere consuevit: --
Se quoque possit Tollere humo victorque virum volitare per ora Gabr. Naudaei
Bibliogr. Polit.
Naudaeus, contribute less to the Eternizing his Memory, and Establishing his
Reputation.

As for the Historical Account of Fieschi's Conspiracy, which I have here
Translated, it found so kind a reception, that in less than Twenty Tears, Two
Impressions in Venet. 1629. Bologna. 1639.
Quarto being sold off, it was Printed the Third time in a Venet. 1647. in 240.
lesser Volume with the same success. Nor was it long confined to the Italian
Language; for it appeard in French in the Year 1639, being Translated by the
Sieur Bouchard Fontenay, and Printed by the Famous Camusat Printer and
Bookseller to the French Academy then newly Erected by Cardinal Richelieu. It Is
highly probable this Translation was not much inferior to the Original, when we
consider the station that Camusat was placed in by that ingenious Society, and
the Great Character that is given of him by Monsieur Pelisson; Hist. de
L'Academie Francoise, p. 12, 13. Impr. a La Hay, 1688. in 120.
who tells us, That he was not only the most Excellent and Accurate in that
Art, of any that then practiced it, but that he was a Man of very good Sense,
and never Printed any Books, but such as were of an intrinsic Value: Insomuch
that it was reckoned almost an infallible Mark of the Excellency of any
Treatise to be Published by Camusat. Thus bath the ensuing Tract found its
deserved Applause both in France nnd Italy, and therefore I cannot think those
Hours misemploy'd that I spent in Translating it: However had I known that it
had already appeared in our Language, which I did not till after I had finished
my Translation, I should hardly have begun the Attempt. But after I had perused
the Two former Versions of it, I found my self, out of Justice to my Author,
rather obliged to proceed in the Publication of these Papers, then to desist
from it. The First English Translation of this piece of Mascardi's, that I know
of, makes up the Fifth part of the Third Book of Ibrahim, or the Illustrious
Bassa, a Romance written by Monsieur Scudery, and Englished in the Year 1674.
Scudery is indeed so ingenuons as to acknowledge that he is obliged to Mascardi
for that part of his Story; and it were to be wished that he had been so just
to our Author, as to have given us only a Translation of him. But instead of
that he has foisted in so many Fictions of his own, as degrade Mascardi from
the Majesty of an Historian, and bring him down to his own Level of a tedious
Romancer. And besides this, Mascardi has been much abused by the Translator of
Ibrahim, who exposes himself in almost every Page to his just Censure, That he
was neither Master of his own Language, nor of the French; and consequently
might have employed his time much better, then in troubling the World with an
ill Translation of a Book tedious by its length, uselese in its design, and
therefore on very good grounds disliked (as such Romancers generally are) by
the present Age. Nay even the Fair Sex have now left these vain Amusements, of
which they formerly were Zealous Admirers for the more delightful and
profitable Study of True History: Being justly sensible that one of the
strongest Motives to Virtue must be drawn from the Real Examples of it. And
these a good Historian never fails to represent in their true Light, with the
happy Consequences and great Rewards attending it. Whereas the Subject of our
Modern Romancers is generally the blameable excess of all Humane Passions and
Desires, as an ungovernable Anger, an exorbitant and boundless Ambition, and
insatiable Revenge, an inconsiderate and blind Rashness, and a foolish and
irregular Love. These, and such like are the shining Accomplishments of the
Fictitious Heroes and Heroines: And it is no wonder that when an Author of Wit
and Fancy employs all his Art in representing Vice in so lovely a Dress, the
unwary Readers are taken with its borrowed Charms, and are seduced into these
fatal, though pleasing, Errors.

As for the other Taanslation of Fieschi's Conspiracy, which I saw not till
after the first Sheet of mine was Printed, it came out in the Year 1678, among
other select Discourses Translated from those Celebrated Wits of France,
Pelisson, Sarasin, and Voiture. I expected in this to have found the faults of
the former Translation, so well mended, that the Publishing of mine, would
rather injure Mascardi's Reputation, than, in any measure, do him Justice. But
upon perusing this Version, and comparing it with the Original, I found that
besides the roughness of his English Style, and sevaral very obvious Errors,
the Gentleman had allowed himself the extravagant Liberty of Omitting, where he
pleased, several material passages of it: Whereby those Beauties that sbine
through a regular and well connected History are quite lost; and Mascardi has
suffered no less by the Injudicious and Arbitrary Abbreviatures of this
Translator, than by that barren superfluity, for which Scudery is so justly
censured by Monsieur Abondance Sterile Boileau L' Art Poetiqae Chant. premier.
Boileau.

These Considerations induced me to believe, that this Third Translation would
not be unacceptable to the World, nor much derogatory to the Fame of so Great
an Author. How I have performed my Part in it, I freely leave to the Judgment
of those who understand the Idioms of both Languages: Which though not so
different from each other, as the English is from the French, yet are not so
nearly alike, as to admit of a Translation too nicely and exactly Literal.

For this Reason I have all along changed Mascardi's Expressions where I found
them not suitable to the English Dialect: And where, I thought the turn of that
required it, I have in some places abridg'd the length of his Periods, in
others I have enlarged upon his thoughts, as I believe he himself would have
done, had he been to write in English. But I have not at all, (as I know of) by
either of these Methods, varied from my Author's Sense, or gone beyond the
Liberty which he Mascardi's Trattato Secundo dell' Art Historica, p. 165.
Edit. Venet. 1655. in 120.
himself allows, the Rules of Translation require, and all who have been
successful in performances of this kind, either in Prose or Verse, have without
scruple indulged themselves in, even where they pretend not to a Paraphrase, or
an Allusion.

Having said thus much concerning the ensuing Tract, and the several
Translations of it, it will not I suppose be improper to take some notice of
the subject it treats of. Fieschi's Conspiracy was a Transaction as remarkable
as any that happened in the last Century: Whether we Consider the crafty and
well disposed Methods by which it was carried on, the Foreign Force that was to
have seconded the Attempt, or the Wonderful Providence of God in defeating so
Egregious a Villainy, just as it was upon the point of being put in execution.
The Copiousness of the subject might perhaps be some inducement to Mascardi to
choose it for his first Historical Essay; but I suppose his main design in it
was to encourage the Genoueses in a vigorous and resolute defense of their
Liberties, by representing the good success that had in the last Age attended
the supporters of that Noble Cause, and the shameful defeats and
disappointments that blasted all the Projects of the Enemies of the Republic.
And if we reflect on the Circumstances of those times, it was a very seasonable
and necessary piece of Service not only to Genoua, but also to all Italy.

For it was not long before the Venet. 1629.
first Impression of this Tract, that a Dion. Petav. Ration. Temp. p. 1. l. 9.
p. 654. Ed. Franc. 1665. Octavo.
French Army was sent against Genoua under the Command of the Constable Les
Diguieres, for the Assistance, as was pretended, of the Duke of Savoy. Though
had the design succeeded, it is highly probable, the benefit of the Conquest
would have accrued to the French King; who now began under the Conduct of
Cardinal Richelieu to aspire at an Universal Monarchy to be founded on the
Ruins of the House of Austria, which was then visibly declining.

In order to this end it was necessary he should first Conquer Italy: Which,
(as Monsieur de Memoires de Monsieur de Brantome, T. 2. p. 39. Imp^. a Leyd.
1666. in 12.
Brantome told Charles the Ninth,) it was impossible he should ever compass
till he could recover Genoua, and be Master at Sea. Both these Advantages
Francis the First lost by disobliging Doria; and the Genoueses have ever since
had the greatest reason to be Jealous of a Crown that has so often
endeavored, sometimes by open force, but much more frequently by secret
Conspiracies, to Reduce them to a State of Slavery. The Irruption therefore of
the French Forces into those Parts, and the daily increase of their Power, very
probably induced Mascardi to employ his Pen for the safety of Genoua, and the
repose of Italy, by exciting in them a just and seasonable apprehension of so
Formidable a Neighbor. And it is very great pity that this excellent Historical
Tract is not again Reprinted in its Original Language, for the better
Information of those Genoueses who may be apt to be wheedled by Monsieur
Rebenac's smooth Harangues into a vain Opinion, that the French King really
designs their Repose and Prosperity; and therefore desires their Friendship and
Alliance, whom about Eight Years ago he treated like the Vilest and most
Despicable Slaves. But the Circumstances of Affairs are not a little changed
from what they were: And Louis the XIVth who then laid his peremptory Commands
on this Republic, to Restore the Fieschi's to those Dignities and Possessions
that their Ancestors had justly forfeited by this Execrable Conspiracy, and
upon their Wise Refusal, expressed his Resentments of it, (as all Europe knows)
with an unheard of Insolence, is now fain to sue to them for a Neutrality: And
that in Terms but little suitable to those Pompous and Swelling Titles his
Flatterers have forged for him.

It would be no difficult matter to draw a Parallel between the Genoueses of
Fieschi's Party in the last Age, and the English Malcontents in this. Their
Forgetfulness of their late Miserable Servitude, their Ingratitude to Doria the
Restorer of their Liberty, their Fondness of a French Government, the
Fickleness and Instability of their Resolutions, their easy Credulity in being
more than once deluded by the same fair Pretenses and specious Promises, and
the wonderful Defeat of all their Designs, should methinks make the Application
Obvious enough to the most Bigoted Enemy of our present Settlement, But
perhaps this Obstinate Sect will be as regardless of the Examples drawn from
History, as they have hitherto been of all the Arguments that have been urged
from Reason, to Convince them of their Error: However, let them consult their
own Experience, and that may sufficiently inform them, that Providence seldom
(I might say, never) fails even at the last Critical Instant, to rescue an
Established and well Administered Government from the Tyrannical Yoke of a
Foreign Invader, or a Rebellious Subject. They might likewise for their farther
discouragement remember what a constant Series of ill Success has attended all
their Projects; that their Plots have been still disappointed, their most
Cunning Designs unravelled; and that after their incessant and restless
Endeavors for almost Four Years, Their Majesty's Sacred Persons are yet safe,
and their Government stands secure. So that unless this discontented Party
continue under the same change, Infatuation that has so long possessed them,
they must certainly now despair of ever seeing Popery and Arbitrary Power again
Triumphant in England. And this, if any thing, will perhaps induce them out of
a tender regard to their own safety to desist from their unnatural Conspiracies
and Barbarous Attempts against the Religion and Liberties of Providence of God
has fixed on so firm a Basis, that, I doubt not but, the final Consequence of
all their Malicious Projects, how subtly soever they may be contrived and
carried on, will be the destruction of their Cause, and their own unpitied
Ruin.

H. Hare.

(...) A RELATION OF THE Conspiracy OF John Lewis Count de Fieschi.
IT pleased the Divine Providence to grant to the Republic of Genoua, a
respite from the Miseries under which they had lately Groaned: For the Citizens
being wea^ed out as well by their Civil Dissenti^ns, as by the Oppression of a
Foreign ^ower, were at last made sensible by ^hese their Misfortunes, how
necessary it was for them to Agree. They presently found the good effects of a
settled Government, every Man's private Stock daily increasing even beyond
expectation, when instead of misapplying their Industry, and weakening their
strength, he fomenting different Factions, they wisely studied to improve their
own Estates; and when that Money which was before consumed in providing for an
Army, and imfeeding the insatiable Lusts of the Foreign Governors, was far
better employed in Traffic and Merchandice. This Happiness the Republic
enjoyed when, of a sudden, there happened a most unfortunate accident, which
had like to have deprived the Genoueses, of the Liberty they had so lately
regained, by the intended Subversion of the Established Government: I me^n the
horrid Conspiracy of John Lewis Count de Fieschi, the Original where of is so
necessary to be known, that shall derive it from its first Source.

During the heat of those never to be forgotten Wars in Italy between the
Emperor Charles the 5th. and Francis the first King of France; Andrew Doria, a
General very Famous both for Courage and Skill in Maritime Affairs, fought
under the French Colors; his conduct wonderfully kept up the Reputation and
promoted the Interests of that Crown: While at the same time that he faithfully
discharged the Trust reposed in him he took a severe Revenge of the Spaniards,
for those Cruelties they exercised at the sacking of Genoua in the Year 1522.

But Princes are very often so satally unhappy as to disesteem their bravest
Subjects, while they are ready and willing to serve them with Faithfulness and
Diligence. Thus did Francis the first, who by these indiscreet Methods
exasperated the mind of Andrew Doria, though he was at that time so absolutely
necessary to the carrying on the French Designs. The Pay assigned him, was not
returned to him; Philibert de Chalons Prince of Orange, whom Doria had made a
Prisoner of War, was set at Liberty by King Francis, without paying the Ransom
due to Doria; the King did likewise with great importunity, and (when that was
denied) with high words, demand the Marquess del Vasto, and Ascan^^ Colonna,
who had been taken in Battle by Philippin Doria Vice Admiral to Andrew. But
that which afflicted this good old Man far beyond the Considerations of his own
private Interest was to find that the King would not perform those his
Promises, which regarded the profit and the reputation of the Republic of
Genoua; whereof this was an eminent Instance. The City of Savona having
transferred there Obedience from the Republic of Genoua to the Crown of
France, proposed to themselves great advantage from the Convenience of their
Haven, which brought them in a vas^ profit, to the irreparable damage to the
Trade of Genoua. This Andrew Doria frequently complained of to the King,
earnestly desiring, that as a ^compence for his past Services, h^^ Majesty
would restore to the Republic^ that which by all the Rules of Justice entirely
belonged to her. The King was so well satisfied of the reasonableness of this
Petition, that he promised it should be granted: But when he had balanced in
his Mind on the one side the Obligations he was under to be Just to his Word,
and on the other side the hopes of improving his Interest, he rosolved
(contrary to his promises,) to keep the City in his possession. He had found by
experience how instable the Genoueses were in their Resolutions, and how little
he could rely upon the assistance of the Republic for the advancing the
Interests of his Crown in Italy. For the City of Genoua, being sometimes
oppressed by a ^action of the Nobility, and sometimes objected to the Caprices
of the giddy Mobile, did, without due consideration, ^lter the Form of its
Government according to the Temper of the prevailing Party. Therefore the King
thinking it so necessary for the furtherance of his designs in Lombardy, to
^ave at his command a convenient Port, he made choice of Savona, and gave the
charge of it to Monseigneur de Montmorancy. By this stratagem the King assured
himself, that he had both put a check to the inconstancy of the Genoueses, and
made his own undertakings more easy to be accomplished: For the City of Savona
lying near to Piedmont, Montferrat and Lombardy, was by its situation no less
proper for War, than for Commerce; which gave the Genoueses occasion to fear,
that its increase in Wealth and Reputation would in a few Years spoil the
Traffic of the Port of Genoua, and thereby enable Savona to claim an equal
share with them in the Dominion of the adjacent Seas. All these matters had
been frequently represented to the King, but without any good effect, so that
at last Doria was necessitated out of his sincere Love to his Country to
abandon the French Interests. He being now thoroughly exasperated by the many
Contempts before related, grew every day less and less exact in the furthering
the King's designs and it happening luckily about this time, (1528,) that the
City of Naples was besieged by the French under the Command of Lautrech
Viceroy of Milan, Philippin Doria in pursuance of the directions given him by
Andrew, did by his voluntary negligence suffer the French King's Affairs to
receive an irreparable damage. For he, who but a little before had with
incredible Valor, obtained a remarkable Victory over the Emperor's Fleet in the
Gulf of Salernum, (in which Fight the Imperalists lost Don Hugh de Moncada
Viceroy of Sicily, their Admiral,) was now pleased to permit, without any
opposition, some small Vessels laden with Provisions, to sail by his Fleet into
Naples: And this Relief coming so seasonably to the Besieged, proved the ruin
of this Enterprise. As soon as Pope Clement the Seventh had received notice
that Doria began to fall off from the Interests of France, he dispatched orders
to Cardinal Salviati his Nuncio in that Court, to represent to the King, how
necessary it was for him by just and satisfactory Concessions, to regain to the
service of his Crown a Person of so approved Courage and Skill in Maritime
Affairs; since it was highly probable, that Doria, if he were thoroughly
exasperated, would shelter himself, and the Interests of the Republic, under
the Emperor's Protection; which could not fail to defeat the Expectations the
French then had of the Conquest of Naples. At the same time that these friendly
intimations were posted away to the Court of France, the Pope dispatched Sanga
his Secretary to Cajole Doria into his Service, with the offer of a large
Pension. The Court of Rome was at that time justly apprehensive, that Doria's
Interest and Reputation might probably over-balance the Affairs of Italy to the
advantage of the Emperor, if he should be induced to comply with the honorable
proposals offered him by his Imperial Majesty: Therefore that this foreseen
accident might be effectually provided against, and not (as was falsely
pretended) for any occasion the Pope then had of Doria's commanding his Fleet,
this Crafty Embassy was resolved on as the most likely method to prevail. When
this important affair came to be debated in the French King's Privy Council,
some that were Enemies to Doria, took this occasion to represent him as a
Person so excessively haughty in the exercise of his Authority, and so
thoroughly disgusted at the King's Usage of him, that it would be impossible
ever to regain him to the French Interests; therefore that a sudden stroke
might frustrate those designs, which could not without vast difficulties (if at
all) be diverted by an amicable accommodation; and that the Emperor might want
so necessary an Assistant in this juncture of Affairs, it was thought advisable
that Doria should be Assassinated. This advice was not rejected, but in
pursuance of it, (as was generally reported,) necessary Instructions were
privately given to Monsieur de Barbezieux who was then Sailing for Italy, with
the French Fleet, of which he had been created Admiral a little before. Doria
in the mean time received private intelligence of these designs; and being
thoroughly exasperated with so ungrateful and perfidious a return for his former
Services, he immediately entered into a close correspondence with the Marquess
del Vasto his Prisoner of War, by whom he offered his Service to the Emperor,
which was very readily and kindly accepted. And now Doria made a public
Renunciation of his Friendship with the French King, by sending him back the
Collar and the Instrument of his Admission to the Order of St. Michael.

The Articles that Doria made with the Emperor when he first entered into his
Service, were such as the Republic might reasonably promise themselves from a
sincere Patriot. He wholly neglected this advantageous occasion of increasing
the Honors and Revenues of his Family, contenting himself that he had
effectually secured the Liberty of Genoua, and restored to them their Dominion
over Savona, by the Protection and Assistance of his Imperial Majesty. This
Resolution of Doria so thoroughly awakened the French King out of the slumber
into which the false Policy of his Ministers had cast him, that being desirous
to repair his past negligence, by his present sedulity, he thought it advisable
to endeavor to regain Doria to his Interests by honorable and advantageous
Proposals: But the King's Repentance began so late that it proved absolutely
fruitless. For Doria being now thoroughly bent upon the delivering his Country
from the power of Foreigners, would not admit of any offers that might delay
the execution of these his generous designs. Nevertheless the French King who
had been so careless to keep in the friendship of Doria, became now so eagerly
impatient to recover that without considering how great respect was due to a
Crowned Head, he stooped so low as voluntarily to offer a full satisfaction in
all those particulars, which Doria had often Petitioned for, and had been as
often denied: Nay, with so great indiscretion was this affair managed, that, by
making these Proposals to Doria, before some other person had privately sounded
his Intentions in it, the King exposed his Royal Dignity to the disgrace, and
himself to the shame and vexation, of receiving a peremptory repulse. Accidents
of this nature are often observed to happen in the Courts of Princes; who being
puffed up with insolent thoughts of their own power, believe that their Fortune
needs not the assistance of any one to establish or support it. And sometimes
brave Men, who are constantly in the Camp, or at Court, miss of that esteem
which is due to their Merits, and which is daily bestowed on far less deserving
persons, if they have but the advantageous Character of being Foreigners: It
being too Natural to Princes, as well as the rest of Mankind, to undervalue
their present Enjoyments, and hanker after unexperienced Novelties, no less in
the Public, than in the Private, Circumstances of their Lives.

Doria having for these reasons, settled himself, and the Twelve Galleys under
his Command, in the Emperor's Service, he presently applied his Mind to the
deliverance of his Country from the Dominion of France; for, like a true
Patriot, the Liberty of his Country had always been the only Object of his
Thoughts. The Republic was at this time overpowered by a Popular Faction, who
under the pretense of the public safety, fomented with Arms and Tumults the
unwarrantable Passions of Private Families; not making a due difference between
the Liberty of the Commonwealth, and the Licentiousness of some of the Members
of it. Hence it came to pass, that whenever any Faction found that their own
Forces were too weak to desend them in their Irregularities, they reinforced
themselves with Foreign Auxiliaries, and thereby brought into the City a new
Model of Government. One while the Faction of the Adorni Expelled that of the
Fregosi; a while after the Fregosi overpowered the Adorni: Sometimes they gave
themselves into the Protection of the Duke of Milan, then again they removed
the Governors he sent them Next they chose to be under the Government of the
French, by and by they shook off that Yoke, and then were again willing to
receive it. So that by the frequent change of Applications the dangerous wounds
that had so long afflicted the Republic, (and that ought to have been once for
all thoroughly healed by a general Concord,) were still kept open: All this
Doria was sensible of, and therefore, that he might encourage the good
intentions of those persons who joined with him in their earnest Wishes for the
Public Safety, he approached with his Galleys near the City of Genoua.

Nor was a prosperous success wanting to these his generous designs. For many
of the Citizens, being thoroughly wearied out with the Calamities of their past
Dissentions, and being afflicted with the Plague, returned to more sober
Thoughts, and heartily Prayed for a safe and lasting Concord. At this time the
City was Governed in the French King's Name by Monsieur Theodore de Trivalce, a
person whose signal behavior in those Martial Employments wherewith he had
been entrusted, had acquired him the Character of a Prudent as well as a
Courageous Commander. Nevertheless his Conduct was at this time such as was
greatly wondered at by those that knew him, and the rather because it did not
seem to answer those former Actions by which he had so deservedly established
his Reputation. For although he very well knew that the discourse and the
designs of the Genoueses tended strongly to a mutual agreement among
themselves; yet he was very negligent in the thwarting these their
Inclinations: Either because he thought, the end of it would only be a
Reconciliation of the private Animosities between the Families of the Nobility
and of the Commonalty: Or because, he could hardly think it possible that the
Government of Genoun, which was put in the French King's Hands merely by their
intestine divisions, could be taken from him by the united strength of the
Citizens; he presumptuously conceited that to be much too weak to resist the
King's Forces, when headed by so Valiant a Leader as himself: Doria finding the
Citizens so well disposed, and being thoroughly apprehensive of the vast
Advantages so unexpectedly given him by Monsieur de Trivulce's oversight,
immediately applied himself to the bringing this his Enterprise to a
conclusion; which succeeded so well, that without the shedding of any blood he
took the City, and drove out of it the French Garrison. The Genoueses received
him with all the marks of an incredible Joy, and many of them persuaded him to
accept of the Principality of Liguria, now that Fortune had so kindly offered
it him: But he generously refused it, his Mind being far above the dazzling
splendour of a Crown. The next thing he did was to exhort the Citizens in a well
weighed Speech, (fitly becoming the Father of his Country,) to repent of their
past Errors, to know their true Interest, and for the future to maintain their
Liberty, (which he now freely presented to them,) by laying aside all those
Dissentions, which had for so many Years kept their Country in continual
Miseries. The City being thus restored to its Ancient Liberty, it proved no
difficult matter for them, either to gain the Castle, into which Monsieur de
Trivulce presently retreated, or by force of Arms to Conquer Savona: As a
punishment of whose Rebellion, its Harbor was made useless Two Vessels of the
largest size being sunk just at the mouth of it to choke the passage. The City
of Genoua being thus vastly obliged to Doria for so many signal Kindnesses to
them, they were desirous to give effectual demonstrations of their Real
Gratitude to himself and his Family; hereupon they granted to him and to his
descendents very large and noble Privileges, and erected to his Immortal Memory
a Statue of Lunigian Marble, in the base whereof an Inscription was Engraven,
which declared him to be the Author of the Public Liberty. Then, for their
better security, the Genoueses, with the advice of Doria their Deliverer,
Constituted a Form of Government answerable to a Free State, under which their
Ancient Splendour began to revive: And this renowned Patriot having Achieved
many Glorious Enterprises, and growing decrepit with the Infirmities of Old
Age, retired from the hurry of the World to a pleasing Repose in his own
Country, them enjoying in his own Mind the fruit of those Victories, and that
Quiet, which he had been the happy Instrument of He kept with him in his Family
Jannetin Doria, the Son of Thomas, his Cousin-German: This Jannetin was a young
Man of a very ready Wit, and of approved Courage; of which he had given so many
signal demonstrations in those Employments which he managed under Andrew, that
he was deservedly adopted for his Son, and by the Emperor's consent designed to
succeed him in his supreme Command of the Maritime Affairs. Hence it came to
pass that Doria, being highly esteemed by all the Princes of Europe for his
excellent Endowments, being reverenced by the Genoueses as their common
Benefactor, and having gained a large Stock both of Reputation and Wealth, his
House was frequented more like the Palace of a Prince, than the Residence of a
private Citizen. These things, (which I have here related in as few words as
the matter will allow,) were the true occasion of the Conspiracy so cunningly
and deliberately contrived by John Lewis Count de Fieschi: And by this
Memorable Example all free Cities may perceive, how vastly prejudicial it is to
their Public Affairs, to advance any of their Members, (though never so
Eminent for Virtue, Valor and Conduct,) to a great degree of Honor, Riches,
or Power, above their Fellow Subjects: The necessity of preventing which
dangers, induced the Athenians wisely to Publish their Law of Ostracism.

This happy settlement of the Public Affairs of Genoua, and of Doria's private
concerns, was much envied by Pope Paul the Third, (of the House of Farnese,)
Successor to Clement the Seventh, (of the Family of Medici,) and by the King of
France. For the City of Genoua having thrown off the French Yoke, and being
sheltered under the Emperor's Protection, proved the occasion of very great
hindrances to the French King in his designs upon the Duchy of Milan, wherein
the Pope was very desirous he should be successful; that the Emperor's Power,
which was now grown Formidable to all Europe, might be a little checked; and
that he might be revenged of the Emperor for his putting by one of the Farneses
from the Acquisition of that Duchy, in which transaction the Ambitious
Self-Interested Pope showed himself very Zealous.

These considerations so exasperated both the Pope and the French King that
they could not endure that Doria the only Adviser and Promoter of those
Measures, should be so safely fixed in an Honorable Repose, as to be only an
unconcerned Spectator of their Misfortunes. Besides this, Paul the Third had an
Animosity against him upon another account: And this made the more lasting
Impression upon his Mind, because it was occasioned by some private Injuries
which had mutually past between them; the Original whereof I think it necessary
to relate, as serving to my present purpose.

Imperial Doria, Bishop of A City in the Isle of Corfica.
Sagona, having by the kindness and assistance of his Counsin Andrew, got
together a great Sum of Money, he Purchased with it an Estate in the Kingdom
of Naples, which upon his Deathbed he bequeathed to Andrew; on this condition,
That he should take care to Relieve the Necessities of some of his Relations
who were ^ow in the World. But the Pope's Officers, pretending that the
Inheritance of this Estate was wholly devolved to the Apostolic See by the
Ancient Customs of the Church, took possession of it immediately; and executed
their Commission with so much insolence and extortion, that they seemed rather
to be common High-way-men, than Collectors deputed to enter upon the Lands and
receive the Rents. Doria represented to the Pope the ill usage he had suffered
from his Officers, and made out his claim to the Estate; which, though it was
not allowed by the Officers of the Pope's Exchequer, yet it proved an
inducement to Cardinal Alexander Farnese the Pope's Nephew, to offer him
civilly to resign his pretended interest in it, on condition he would receive
it as his free gift. Doria being irritated with Scorn and Anger at the
Cardinal's unseasonable Liberality, in giving him what was his own, (though the
Cardinal's covetous temper did seldom permit him to be guilty even of that
seeming Generosity) and thinking the usage he had met with to be directly
contrary to the measures of Justice, as well as unpardonable affronts offered
to a Person of his Rank, he resolved, notwithstanding the apparent dangers of
such an Enterprise, to lay aside for a while his wonted respect to the Roman
See, and the usual calmness of his Temper, that he might gain Satisfaction by
those methods, which best become a Soldier, sensible of injuries and desirous
to revenge them. Hereupon he imparted his Intentions to Jannetin Doria his
Cousin, and gave him orders to seize the Pope's Galleys and bring them into the
Port of Genoua, which was accordingly done. After he had detained them for some
days, he released them of his own accord; being very well pleased to let the
World see, that tho he wanted neither Power nor Courage to show his resentments
of the Indignities put upon him, yet he had so much respect for the head of the
Church, as to restrain himself, (tho he had these great advantages) from taking
a complete Revenge. The most judicious Politicians commended Doria's Prudence
in this Action for these two Reasons: First, that he did it at the instance of
the Genoueses, upon whom the Pope had taken reprizals in his own Territories,
using them withal very ill, since the Seizure of his Galleys: And next (which
they supposed the chief reason) that enjoying so high a Command under the
Emperor, he would not make use of his Princes Authority to revenge his own
private Injuries; knowing better how to make the due distinction between
Public and Private concerns, whereby he prevented a Flame from bursting out,
which though kindled at first upon a trisling Quarrel, might not perhaps have
been extinguished without much Bloodshed.

The Pope and the French King being thoroughly vexed to find their Affairs both
Public and Private in so ill a Posture, applied their minds with the utmost
intention, to cause such alterations in Genoua, as might give them a fair
opportunity to open the Scene they had laid for the Execution of their Designs.
The King had twice though very unsuccessfully, attempted by Arms to recover
Genoua, wherein he first employed the Count de St. Paul, and then Caesar
Fregose: This alarmed the Genoueses to stand upon their Guard with Vigor and
Diligence, for the preservation of their Liberty, fully confiding that their
City would victoriously repel the attacks of a Foregin Power, unless it should
be betrayed by the intestine discord of the Citizens. However (it being beyond
the reach of humane Wisdom to foresce all Accidents, or to discover
Conspiracies so secretly laid, and cunningly carried on) Fortune, which was not
yet entirely reconciled to the interests of Genoua, offered her Enemies a
prospect of unexpected success, by the methods I am now going to relate.

John Lewis de Fieschi a young Man of a Haughty and Turbulent Spirit, was about
this time almost distracted with ambitious Thoughts, how he might advance his
Title and Reputation. He descended from the noble Family of the Lords of the
Territory of Lavagna, and as his Estate was large, so his Interest was very
great, being attended by his Friends and Adherents, (who were substantial Men)
and served in great Splendour by many of his own Vassals. Nevertheless he was
not contented with these happy and honorable Circumstances, derived to him by
Inheritance from his Ancestors; but suffered himself to be carried away by the
impetuous heat of his Youth, and the pernicious dictates of Ambition (the too
common Seducer of noble Persons) to aspire at a height of Power and Dignity, no
less dangerous to be obtained than difficult to be kept. Even from his very
Childhood there was observed in several of his Actions a Fierceness and
Arrogance hardly to be found in any of so tender an Age: From whence several
considerate Persons were induced to suspect, that his riper Years might push
him on to endeavor the Disturbance of his Country's Peace. These his natural
inclinations (pernicious enough of themselves) grew more prevalent by an ill
Education, that pestilent distemper which too often infects young Men beyond a
possibility of cure. For although Paul Pansa a Man of Eminent Learning and Virtue,
was appointed to instruct him in the Liberal Arts, yet those with whom he most
intimately conversed, being very lewd and profligate Fellows, made it their
endeavor to cherish and propagate, in the mind of the young Count, the wicked
design of subverting the Republic, applauding these proposed Enterprises as
worthy of the most noble and generous Spirits. To this new kindled and
increasing Flame his Mother continually added a supply of Fuel: For being very
Ambitious, and not having Discretion enough to foresee the dismal consequences
of her Proceedings, she often excited her Son, who was of an aspiring Temper
with sharp reproofs; as if by enjoying his own Estate and living upon it, he
sunk into the despicable Character of a private Country Gentleman, and
degenerated from the Reputation of his Ancestors, who always maintained a
considerable interest both in their own Country and in the Courts of Foreign
Princes. And that nothing might be wanting to force this falling weight to the
bottom of the precipice from whence he had slipped by his wild Ambition, his
Friends advised to peruse diligently the life of Nero, the History of
Cataline's Conspiracy, and Nicholas Machiavell's little Book, Entitled the
Prince: By reading these Authors, his mind was by degrees tinctured with
Cruelty, Perfidiousness, and a love so great to his private Interests, as to
banish all Apprehensions of Divine and Humane Laws. These vices he first
admired, and though the innate Sense of good and evil was sometimes so
prevalent, as to suggest to him that he ought to detest and abhor such
Practices as unworthy of a Man of Honor, yet at length yielding to his corrupt
Inclinations, he excused them by the Actions of these great Men, recorded by
Historians, and too much imitated by the most Politic Statesmen. So powersully
are the Actions of our lives insluenc'd either to Virtue or Vice, and our wills
insensibly changed by reading the Works of eloquent Authors; whose charming way
of Writing seldom fails to over-balance the sober Dictates of our own Reason,
which rather ought to be our Guide.

These qualifications of the young Count were quickly found out by those who
diligently watched for all opportunities of raising their own Fortunes by the
Ruin of Genoua. Upon several accounts they thought him the most proper
Instrument that could be, to carry on this their important Design; and
therefore they failed not very often to excite him to it, by proposing to him
very great Honors and Advantages. The first who by the French King's Order
held a correspondence with him to this end, where Caesar Fregose and Cagnino
Conzaga, as was discovered not long after by some Papers, which fell into the
hands of the Marquess del Vasto, Governor of Milan by the Emperors Commission.
He being desirous by a provident Caution to prevent the Disorders which might
hereby interrupt the Peace of Italy, acquainted Doria with his Suspicions: But
the good old Man gave no credit to them, being oversway'd by the Affection he
bore to the Count, and by the Observations he had made of the indiscretion of
altering his measures upon a bare conjecture. Afterward William Bellay the
King's Principal Minister of State, managed this business by the assistance of
Peter Luke Fieschi; and as the report went, the Pope was as zealous in it as
the French King. For the Count having taken a journey to Piacenza, the
Residence of Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's Natural Son, who assumed the Title
of Duke of that State; he bought of him four Galleys at a moderate Price, on
this express Condition that the Count should receive out of the Pope's
Exchequer a sufficient allowance for the Manning, Arming, and Maintaining of
them. For the Ratification of this Bargain, the Count de Fieschi continued his
Journey to Rome, where he was received by the Pope, with all the signs of an
extraordinary love and an entire confidence; and obtained of him without any
difficulty the encouragement he had so earnestly wished for. It was the
conjecture of some Persons that the Story of the Count's buying the Galleys of
the Duke of Piacenza, was invented to save the Pope's credit, he being
unwilling to afford his assistance to Fieschi's enterprise in so public a
manner, as it must have been, had he declared that they were fitted out by his
Order. I know that some Writers are very sollicitous to acquit the Pope and his
Son from the scandal of having stirred up the Count to so black a design
against his Country, by the Testimony of Apollonio the Duke's Secretary and
intimate Friend; who being kept Prisoner at Milan, and being put to the Torture
to force from him a satisfactory answer to this Question proposed by Don
Ferrante Gonzaga, did even in the extremity of his Suffering, constantly deny
that either the Duke or the Pope had any hand in Fieschi's Conspiracy. Nor do I
think it worth my while to contradict them herein, but shall leave these
conjectures on both sides to be sifted by those whose copious Writings may
adinit of a longer digression. This is beyond dispute, that the general Opinion
at that time was that the Count's final resolutions were determined by the
advice and encouragements he received from Rome: And the Emperors Ministers of
State thought it was so manifest, that when the Pope sent Camillo Vrsino to the
Emperor, after the Duke's death, to desire the restitution of Piacenza, they
very freely and sharply reproacht his Master the Pope, with the favoring and
forwarding so infamous a design. That this was likewise the Opinion of Andrew
Doria, may appear by the following Circumstance. The Pope sent him a Letter of
Condoleance upon the Janu. 2. 1547.
death of his Cousin Jannetin, to which he returned no answer, slighting it as
a piece of ill timed Ceremony: But a while after when the Duke of Piacenza was
Sep. 28. 1547.
killed by several Conspirators, Doria took the Pope's Letter, and having
altered some expressions in it as he thought necessary, he sent it back to the
Pope by vay of Condoleance for the Duke's Death Besides this, it is most
certain that while the Count de Fieschi staid in Rome, the French King's
Ministers did again solicit him to put those designs in Execution, to which
they perceived him very much inclined. To this end Cardinal Augustine Trivulce
Protector of the Affairs of France, being sensible how much diligence had been
used by the other Ministers of that Crown, and particularly a little before by
Petter Strozzi when he passed over the Alps with his Army into Piedmont)
resolved not to be behind any of them, in manifesting his zeal for the King's
Interests. Therefore he fixed a time for meeting the Count, and knowing him to
be excessively ambitious of Fame and Glory, he applied himself to him in this
manner.

Were Fortune propitious to your virtue (most noble Youth) I should then have
just occasion to rejoice with you, whom I should now behold exalted far above
that middle State of life enjoyed by trading Citizens. But since the Iniquity
of the times denies you a reward suitable to your Merit, I desire you kindly to
accept my affection, by which I Sympathize with you in your Misfortunes, and
from my heart wish you (as all good Men do) a concurrence of more happy Events.
Your Birth is so noble, and your Endowments are so Rare, that the general voice
of the World calls you to a higher Station, that you may be the better able to
promote their common good. Among the rest of your Admirers, I, who upon the
account of my Employments have a nearer view of Public Transactions, do
heartily wish to see your Valor displayed to the eyes of Europe, on a Theater
more stately than that whereon you now so well act your part. You were born in
such an unhappy juncture of time, that the present constitution of your own
Country makes it unlawful and dangerous for you to aspire to any very eminent
Dignity; for the Genoueses having disclaimed their Obedience to the King of
France, and brought all to a common equality, will by no means permit you to
enjoy any Character above the ordinary level of a Citizen. Besides this, Andrew
Doria and his Cousin Jannetin, under the specious pretense of restoring to
Genoua its ancient Liberty, have so firmly established their own Power, that the
most universal Concord of the Genoueses consists in their being willing to
enslave themselves to the Arbitrary commands of that Family. Thus by a servile
Subjection to the Tyranny of two private Persons, do this foolish People
sufficiently punish themselves, for having rashly executed their blind
Resolution of withdrawing themselves from the Protection of a most powerful
Prince. These Doria's being thus Bolster'd up by the assistance of the
Emperor's Army, (to whose affairs the late turn in Genoua has been very
advantageous) and growing more formidable by their numerous Fleet which almost
fills the Port, you may be sure will never permit any noble and resolute mind
to exert its self: For if any of the Citizens should give Proofs of a
remarkable Courage, they would presently be jealous of it, fearing least it
should portend danger to the increasing Fortune of their Family; and would
under the pretense of securing the public Safety, abuse those ambitious Titles
granted to Andrew, of Fathers of their Country, and Restorers of its lost
Freedom to the oppression of Persons more Valiant and Deserving than
themselves. Hence it is that any so well Born and Accomplished as your self,
cannot fail while their Power is so great to be continually disturbed with
Injuries, besides the danger that their lives are daily exposed to. It Is true,
none of the Disorders I have hinted at have hitherto appeared; but the reason
of that is to be ascribed partly to the distrust, the Doria's have of their new
gotten and yet unsettled Power, and in a great measure to the moderation of
Andrew, who curbs Jannetin in his rash and ill advised Designs. Can you think
that this Young Man, whose haughty Temper, and impetuous Passions, know no
limits, will be hindr'd by any consideration of the unlawfulness of the Action,
from executing those designs his Fancy may prompt him to? Since he finds
himself guarded by Soldiers whom he can trust, and is upon the account of the
important office he bears, every day addressed to with vast respect by the
young Nobility of the City? Can you think that so high a Spirit will suffer it
self to be confined within the bounds of a reasonable Power? Or that his thirst
of Empire, which increases daily by the near view he has of it, will be
satisfied without the Blood of many innocent Persons? Can you think that that
addition of Honor and Authority which Fortune partial in his Favor, and the
Genoueses blinded with an excessive love to Andrew have fixed upon him, will
content him? Or can you believe that he does not aspire after the acquisition
of a more pompous Title, than that of Jannetin Doria? As for my part, I cannot
give credit to a supposition so improbable. For he has not Moderation enough,
either to know how, or to be willing to give a check to so fierce torrent of
extraordinary Felicity. These his Projects are for a while retarded (as far as
I can guess) by his expectation of Andrew's Death, which cannot be very far
off; and then you will see him assume to himself an absolute Power: Although by
so villainous an Invasion he casts indelible stain on all the benefits done by
Andrew to his Country To this end being already possessed of the hearts of the
Nobility and the Populace, he encourages the one in Idleness and Luxury, and
takes care to give the other full employment by the profits of Merchandise,
that being disused to any bold Enterprises; nay, even to the handling their
Weapons, neither of them may dare to make any Opposition to his Designs. Thus
under the appearance of a settled Peace, he cunningly conceals his intended
Parricide. But supposing that the Divine Providence, (which has hitherto
preserved the Republic) should cut off all possibility of his succeeding in
these his attempts: How great a reproach to their Birth ought the rest of the
Citizens who descend from as noble a Parentage, to think it, that Jannetin
Doria their equal, continues in the secure enjoyment of a Power and Dignity so
far above theirs? What color of Reason can be alleged for it, that in a Free
State (where so many no ways inferior to him, either for Birth or Valor, are
contented to live privately) he only should keep up the magnificent Port of a
Sovereign Prince, treating the rest of the Nobility as if they depended upon
him like his Menial Servants? By what Law of any well constituted Republic? By
what custom of any Nation not altogether Barbarous? In what History of any
civilized People is such a Precedent to be met with? And if you have not
hitherto been sensible of the contemptuous behavior of this insolent Man
toward your own Person, it must rather be abscrib'd to the inadvertency of
your tender Years, than to Jannetin's Affability.

However, you will be greatly deceived, if hereafter you expect to be exempted
from the common Miseries that attend your Country. You must, believe me, Sir,
you must join with others of the Nobility, in offering him your Attendance and
your Service: And Jannetin may then reekon it among the chief Trophies of his
insufferable Arrogance, that he is caressed, reverenced, and humbly bowed to by
John Lewis de Fieschi, Count of Lavagna, the Proprietor of a large and well
peopled Territory. How much more eligible therefore would it be for you to
awaken your mind to such Resolutions as are worthy of your Country, your
Family, and your own Personal Endowments? And immediately to apply your utmost
endeavors to free your self and your Countrymen from so fordid an Infamy?
Perhaps you may object, that though you should be willing to undertake this
Enterprise, yet you want a sufficient force and seasonable Opportunities to
bring it to perfection. But I hope these difficulties will be cleared, when I
assure you that before your departure from Rome, you shall receive all
necessary Instructions and Succors for the furthering this Design; in which,
when it is ripe for Execution, I am empowered by my Master the King of France
to promise you the assistance of his Forces. You will likewise find these
further encouragements even in Genoua it self. The Populace (urged by their
irreconcilable hatred to the Nobility,) will not only be as a Sword to fight
for you, but as a Shield to defend you. Jannetin's prosperous Fortune will
enchant him to so great a degree of Stupidity, that he will fall an casie Prey
to your Artifices. Your own Subjects and those of the Duke of Piacenza will be
powerful enough to guard you from the attacks of any that shall dare to oppose
you. In a word, all things invite you to a certain Victory: Nothing is now
wanting but your own final Resolution, not to Fight, but to Conquer and
Triumph. Therefore consider well the necessity that lies upon you, either to be
a Prince or a Slave, either to make your self formidable to your Enemies, or to
live under continual apprehensions of their Malice.

Cardinal Trivulce could not have touched Fieschi's Soul in a more sensible
part: For his envy was excited to so high a degree by this representation of
Doria's Grandeur, that he looked upon it as a continual Reproach to himself; as
if he were inferior to Jannetin in any sort of Accomplishments. Thus Fieschi's
inclinations being so strongly disposed toward this desperate Design, it was
no difficult matter for the Cardinal to kindle the Flame, when he made use of
so proper an incentive, as fallacious Arguments eloquently expressed. And the
Count hereupon grew very desirous to know what Proposals the King had empowered
Cardinal Trivulce to offer him; and when the Cardinal had accordingly informed
him, he thought the Conditions were too valuable to be despised. The
Particulars of them are as follow.

That he should forthwith enter into the King's Pay, and receive a sufficient
Allowance for the Maintenance of six Galleys. That there should be secured to
him the full Pay for 200 Men to be put in Garrison in the Castle of Montobbio.
That he should be declared Captain of the Horse, and that 12000 Crowns a year
should be assigned him for his own Allowance. These Articles were quickly after
ratified on the King's part at a little distance from Naples, by John
Caracciolo Prince of Melsi; Fieschi nevertheless deferred his final Resolution
in this matter, till his return to Genoua; having satisfied the Cardinal both
by the Alteration of his Countenance, and by some Words that dropped from him,
after this Interview that he would follow the Measures directed by the Crown of
France. This his delay it is thought proceeded from one of these Reasons,
either because he was not yet fully satisfied in his mind of the justice or the
feasibleness of this attempt; or because he desired to have leisure for a free
Conference with his friends by whose advice he might the better know what
Methods to follow in the design he had undertaken. When he came to Genoua, he
made it his Bustness to observe Jannetin's conduct with more than usual
Diligence: For although the spendor of the Doria's Family was principally derived
from Andrew, yet it being too generally the Practice of the World to worship
the rising Sun, the Citizens of Genoua followed that Maxim, and paid their
Court to Jannetin, as the chief object of their hopes. Jannetin's Temper was
naturally haughty, which added to his Military Education, and the respect that
was paid him as the Commander of 20 Galleys, and as designed by the Emperor to
be his Uncle's Successor in the office of Admiral, increased his Pride to a
high degree. He was likewise so far exalted in his own Opinion, upon the
account of some signal Proofs he had given of his Valor, that his Spirit
seemed to aim at a higher Condition, than the equality of the Subjects of a
Free State could allow of. This made him neglect to gain by affability the
affections of those Persons whom he thought would be obliged to adhere to him,
for the sake of their own Interest; seeming to think himself safer and greater
in a vain ostentation of his Power, than in being really beloved and esteemed
by his Country. For these causes he was hated by the popular Faction: But the
young Nobility who attended him, had a greater regard to the profitable
Employments they hoped to receive from him, than to the imperious manner in
which he behaved himself toward all. Sometimes he treated the Count Fieschi
with haughty and arrogant Language; at which he was so exasperated, that
instead of endeavoring to gain his Friendship by the servile Submissions then
generally practiced, he rather wanted Caution and Temper to hide his
Resentments; but gave him plainly enough to understand by his deportment, how
little he cared to see him.

And that Jannetin might want no Demonstrations, that Fieschi resolved to have
no dependence on him, even in the maritime concerns, which made him so much
respected, he bought of the Duke of Piacenza the 4 Galleys, (as I before
related) to the infinite dissatisfaction of Jannetin. In the mean time Cardinal
Trivulce fearing least if he should abate of his former Diligence, his hopes of
fixing Fieschi in the French Interests might be disappointed, and well knowing
that in all Resolutions of importance, Young Men must be brought to a
Determination while their Temper and Fancy are warm with the Project, to
prevent any Luke-warmness which serious thoughts might suggest; he dispatched
Nicholas Foderato, a Gentleman of Savona, one of the Count's Relations, to him
at Genoua. This Person by frequently representing the Cardinal's Demands, and
vastly magnifying his Promises, at last brought the Count to an express
Declaration that he would assist the French Forces in reducing the Republic to
its former subjection; on condition that the King would fully make good the
offers that had been formerly proposed to him to increase his Grandeur and
enlarge his Power. Hereupon Foderato rid Post for Rome, to get the Capitulation
ratified by the subscriptions of those Ministers, whom the King had Authorized
for that purpose: As soon as Foderato had begun his Journey, Count Fieschi
imparted the whole Affair, to some few of his confidents, and having asked
their Advice concerning it, they very freely blamed him, not for the design it
self, but for the Methods he intended to take for the putting it in Execution.

For this reason he sent in all have to recall Foderato; from whom having
received the Packet of Letters, and dispatches he had entrusted him with-all,
he proposed in a few words his Intentions to be deliberately canvassed by his
Friends. The Persons whom he thought worthy to be of this private Consult, were
these three: Vincentio Calcagno of Varese, a Servant entirely faithful to Count
Fieschi, who sincerely endeavored to preserve his Master's Life and Honor:
Raphael Sacco a Lawyer of Savona, whom Fieschi made use of as the Judge and
Auditor of the concerns of his Territory: And John Baptist Verrina a Citizen of
Genoua: Verrina having the advantage of living very near Fieschi's Palace, he
by degrees insinuated himself into the Count's Familiarity, cunningly
pretending a great zeal for his Interests that he might by Fieschi's assistance
prop up his own decaying Fortunes; and herein the sly Hypocrite succeeded so
well, that he soon gained the Ascendant over him, having engaged him to lend
him several Sums of Money, and (which is far more considerable) to communicate
to him his most important Secrets.

His Ambition was large, and prompted him to form great Designs; for the
effecting whereof, his natural Ingenuity never failed to suggest to him, the
likeliest Methods: His inveterate hatred to the Nobility, procceded partly from
the resentment of private Injuries, and partly from a Factious dislike of the
present Constitution; wherein, by Andrew Doria's Advice, the Nobiity were
restored to the Administration of Affairs which they had formerly enjoyed, and
from which they had been so long unjustly excluded. This frustrated Verrina's
Expectations, of having any share in the management of the Government: Which,
together with the uneasy consideration of approaching Poverty, (his Debts
every day increasing, and his Estate decaying,) proved an irresistible
incitement to him (his mind being exasperated with the disappointment of Honor
and Wealth) as it generally does to Persons involved in the like Difficulties,
^esperately to engage in this rash Deign; hoping it might give him some
prospect of being delivered from the inconveniences of his present
Circumstances, and of being reinstated in that happiness and those advantages,
which his disturbing Memory told him he formerly possessed.

Thus Verrina being sensible, that he you would no longer conceal his Misfortunes,
while the Public Tranquillity lasted, made it his endeavor to bury the
remembrance of them under the ruins of his native Country. For if the designed
Villainy proved successful, he assured himself, that his Circumstances would be
every way vastly improved; but if it should not (as was a very great hazard) he
buoyed up his mind against all ominous fears of future Calamities, with the
prospect he had that his name should live, though under a Character remarkably
infamous; for dering to be crushed under the weight of so bold an attempt, and
to expose himself to a destruction almost certain, for the gratifying his
Revenge, by involing his Enemies under the same fate So stupid and heedless are
Men animated with Ambition, that, though it is their chief aim to advance and
eterni^^ their Reputation, yet it is equal to the^ by what Methods they acquire
it, whether by the noble pursuits of Virtue, or the mean and inglorious
Practices of Vice. -- But Calcagno was a Man of a very solid and mature
Judgment; and having been long accustomed to the delights and the plenty of a
wealthy Family, abhorred the very thoughts of those Dangers into which he
foresaw the Count would precipitate himself: But, besides this, he acted upon
the generous Principles of Sincerity and Gratitude: For having been bred up in
the Fieschi's Family from his Infancy, he had a real affection for the Count's
Person, without any selfish regard to the advantages he might reap from his
Estate; whereby those who have distinct Interests of their own to pursue are
(too generally) influenced to expose their Patrons to the utmost hazards, that
they may accomplish their covetous Designs. -- Sacco perceiving that the
prosecution of this affair would be liable to great Hazards, stood Neuter, that
he might have the better opportunity to declare his Sentiments in favor of
those measures that Fieschi should resolve to follow. The Count imparted his
mind to them, in a short but very pathetick Speech: Telling them that he was
positively resolved to endeavor some considerable Alteration in the present
Constitution of Genona, and that he therefore desired them to give their
Opinions what Methods would be the likeliest to accomplish it. Nevertheless
Calcagno, whose cordial Affection to his Patron, and many years Domestic
dependence on him had inspired him with the greater confidence, took the
freedom to speak to him to this purpose,

If (Sir) you are so unalterably resolved to proceed in your attempts against
the Government of Genoua, as your expressions seem to declare to us; it will
then be in vain for me to think that my contradicting you in it can produce any
good Effect, or prevent those common Calamities which I heartily deplore: But
if the dictates of Prudence, and your good Genius can induce you to admit of
second thoughts, (which usually are the wisest and the safest) I shall on this
occasion give you as great a proof of my Fidelity, by my freedom in speaking,
as I have done all the rest of my life by my diligent and industrious
management of your concerns. You have hitherto enjoyed a constant course of
Felicity; Fortune has never yet made you the object of her frowns: Hence it
comes to pass that your mind is not accustomed to entertain any impressions but
what represent all your designs crowned with Victory, your Dignity advanced,
and your Dominions enlarged. These (Sir) are generally the Dreams of those who
have long been the Favorites of Fortune. But I am very apprehensive that some
cross accident will dissipate these pleasing Shadows, and then your
disappointment will be much more grevious to you, because you did not in the
least foresee or expect it. To effect an alteration of the Government of the
Republic, is at this time a work liable to so many difficulties, and exposed
to so evident dangers, that should I represent it to you safe and easy, I
should offer the greatest violence to my own Reason. For you can propose to
your self but these two Methods to accomplish your design; either to make use
of a Foreign Force, or to preva^ by a secret correspondence with some of the
Citizens: As for the former, do not yet see any Preparations made toward it;
and if there were, it is impossible that an Army can March either so fast or so
privately, but that it must give an Alarm to the Emperor, to Doria, and to the
Genoueses. All Italy is at this time to our great Misfortune in such a Ferment,
that the eyes of Europe are vigilant in watching our Motions; and Genoua, being
the only Maritime Frontier of this Province, is you know suspected, and
therefore strongly guarded and jealously observed. And since the Duchy of
Milan is already become the Seat of the War, and is destined to be at last a
Prey either to the Italians or the French Forces, you must needs think that, in
common Policy the Emperor will take the greater care of Genoua, which he
esteems as the main Bulwark of his Power in Italy: Doria will herein, attend
him not only with his twenty Galleys, but also (which is much more
considerable) with the sincere affection of the Citizens (whom he has so much
befriended) and with the assistance of the whole Fleet bound for the Levant,
which is entirely devoted to his Service. The City of Genoua is now so
exasperated at the Tyrannical proceedings of the Dukes of Milan and the French
Kings, that the very mention of a Foreign Force is become odious and detestable
to them. Therefore unless your Army is very numerous, you can only discover
your Intentions, but never bring them to any effect; and that you may be
sensible how irreparable a damage this would prove to you, you must consider
that nothing but a conclusion unexpectedly successful can ever obtain applause,
or even, justify an undertaking of this Nature. And how or from whom you can
expect to be supplied with such an Army I cannot imagine; for supposing that
the French King (on whose Protection you so much rely) is desirous to raise new
Tumults in Italy, yet his own pretensions to the Kingdom of Naples and the
Duchy of Milan, will keep the best part of his Army (whose present Business is
to secure their own Frontiers) so fully employed, that the Auxiliaries he sends
you, must be very few and inconsiderable. Or if I could so far impose on my own
Reason, as to believe that either he or any other Potentate would supply you
with Forces proportionable to your design, yet even then you must expect to be
opposed with perhaps a greater, to be sure an equal force, by his Imperial
Majesty who has taken the Genoueses into his Protection. So that at last your
Happiness or Misery will entirely depend on so great a hazard, as the uncertain
event of a Battle: And whether it goes against or for you, you must be
contented to accept of such Terms as the Conqueror shall Prescribe, and the
only reward firmly entailed on you will be the indelible infamy, of having
ungratefully robbed your Country of her Liberty, and put her under the Yoke of
a Barbarous Enemy. Perhaps you may expect to receive a nearer and speedier
assistance from those Citizens who are of your Faction; but I am sure if I am
at all acquainted with the Temper and Inclinations of the Genoueses, you build
your hopes on a very crazie and tottering Foundation. From which order of them,
pray, Sir, is it that you expect these Succors? Is it from the Nobility; These
you know are already of Doria's Party, to whom they are engaged by many
Obligations, and to whom they owe their share in the Administration of the
Government, and the happiness of an honorable Peace: And how can you think
that they, who run the risk of worsting their Fortunes by every slight
alteration, should now, out of Complaisance to you, help forward a turbulent
Revolution, which must precipitate them into greater and more inextricable
difficulties than they have yet been involved in? Will they to comply with your
Ambition forget all the Obligations they lie under to their Country, their
Liberty, their Families and their Estates? Can you believe that they will
prefer your Friendship before Doria's Protection, whom on many accounts both
Private and Public they have for a long time reverenced as their Father? Nor
can you reasonably suppose that the inclinations of the Populace are a whit
more favorable to your designs; for how much the greater their Aversion is to
the very name of the Nobility, so much the less (you may be sure) will they
trust you, who being the chief of them, make it your endeavor to destroy your
own order, without a reasonable pretense or Provocation. And if some few of the
Mob should give credit to your Proposals, their Leaders will never sink their
own Reputation so low as to accept of a Deliverance obtained for them by you.
If your design be to set up your self as Prince or absolute Governor of
Genoua, what Action can be less agreeable to the Populace than this? What can
be farther from meriting a general Applause? But perhaps you will tell me, your
intentious are only to re-establish the Ancient Democratick Constitution, which
Genoua till Doria subverted it by force of Arms; and such a Declaration as this
you think will so charm the Commonalty, that they will presently take up Arms
in your Favor. For my part I am so far from obstinately maintaining the
contrary Opinion, that I verily believe, those who are dissatisfied at the
present State of Affairs, will greedily embrace so fair an occasion of acting
over again their former Tragedies. The more readiness and vigor they exert in
Prosecuting this Cause, so much the more do they advance their own Interest,
and this consideration will not suffer them to be Idle; but you will find when
the Spoils come to be divided, your share will only be the infamy of having
begun the Insurrection; unless you can be so credulous as to suppose that the
Families of the Adorni and the Fregosi, will resign to a Nobleman that Power
and Pre-eminence, in the management of the Democracy, for which they have for
so many years had mutual contests. They will give to your Rashness the
honorable Character of Valor; they will follow your Standards, because they
shall be thereby freed from their Subjection; they will rejoice to see the
Nobility pulled down by a Nobleman; to see the Bowels of your Native Country
pierced by your Weapons; the Public Tranquillity disturbed by your Madness;
and their own Tyranny once more set up by your folly: And while they preserve
in a great measure their Reputation from being tainted with the infamy of
promoting your wicked designs, (Pardon me, Sir, that I am so free as to call
every thing by its true name) they will only wait at a due distance till the
times invite them to share with you in the reward of your Labors, the glory of
your Boldness, and the Triumphs of your Victory. And how deplorable would your
circumstances then be? Or to what Party could you without shame and blushes
apply your self? The Nobility will hate you for betraying them: The populace
will deride you, and laugh at those Policies, whereby they only reap so great
advantages; your Country will detest you for having been the occasion of the
loss of her Liberty: The Emperor who has taken the Republic into his
Protection, will be your declared Enemy: Nor can you with a secure confidence
rely on the Friendship of the French King, who has himself aimed at an absolute
command over Genoua. In a word, you will be odious to the whole World; for all
Mankind do on very reasonable grounds detest treacherous Practices. I am indeed
very unwilling to speak, what it is absolutely necessary you should hearken to
and seriously consider; but the constant fidelity I have always showed in your
Service, and the sincere affection I bear to your Person, inspire me with a
boldness suitable to this occasion. I am afraid (may Heaven avert the ill Omens
my mind portends,) I tell you, Sir, I am more than ordinarily apprehensive,
that these turbulent and unquiet thoughts are suggested by your evil Genius,
which has destined you to the loss of your Reputation, your Life, and your
Estate. You are sensible that Jannetin Doria looks on you with an envious Eye,
and you have sometimes complained to me, that you did not think your self
secure from his treacherous designs: Why then, (Sir) will you furnish him with
Arms to destroy you even by the Rules of Justice? How gladly will he embrace
this opportunity of gratifying his private Revenge, under the color of
preserving his Country from Ruin and Confusion? How greatly will he rejoice
within himself, when he shall hear that you have precipitately engaged your
self in such Resolutions, as will on very good grounds justify him and his
Party in the forcible opposition he will openly make you? You will be declared
the Disturber of the Public Peace, an Enemy to the common Liberty, the
betrayer of your Country, a rebel to the Republic, and (in a word) the
Catiline of Genoua. I am struck with so much horror at the thoughts of it, that
I have not the power to represent to you, how many Enemies, this odious
Character publicly given of you, will arm for your destruction; and these not
only the Nobility, the Tradesmen, the Laborers, and the Mob of Genoua, (whose
resistance perhaps you may think despicable) but also Foreign Princes and their
Subjects, will oppose you with so unanimous a vigor, that the sad conclusion
of the whole will be your sinking under the violence of this part of the World
joined together in a Confederacy, to punish your dangerous attempts by the
infamous death of a Malefactor. Your territories will be forfeited to the
Public Bank: Your memory will be Scandalous and Detestable in the Annals of
Genoua: Jannetin will be acknowledged as the second deliverer of his Country,
and the restorer of her Liberties, and all his glory will be built upon your
Ruins? Perhaps the gratitude of the Genoueses will induce them to set up near
Andrew Doria's Statue, another equally magnificent, to the Honor of Jannetin,
in the Pedestal whereof shall be inscribed: John Lewis de 'Fieschi the Public
Enemy my subdued by Jannetin Doria, the Public Benefactor. Therefore let not
the impetuous rashness of your age, and the violence of your resentments, hurry
you into designs of so hazardous a Consequence; but let the consideration of
your Self, your Family, and your Vassals, lay some restraint on these blind and
unruly Passions: Remember (Sir) what you owe to God, to your Country, to your
Reputation, and to your Birth: Reflect with a generous compassion on the
Miseries in which you will involve your Mother and your Wife: And by abandoning
your present thoughts, free the minds of all that love you, from these just and
necessary apprehensions. Your blooming Youth, and your early Valor are too
rich a treasure, to be so prodigally Sacrificed to the Mercy of Fortune.
Therefore (your faithful Servant once more entreats you) enjoy with a contented
mind the affluent Patrimony your Ancestors have left you, for you are yet in a
station every way so eminent, that you may (if you please) live the object of
Jannetin's envy, and beyond the reach of his Malice or his Treachery?

This discourse of Calcagno, founded on so many powerful reasons, and coming
from a Person who had given many undoubted Testimonies of his zealous
affection, made so good an impression on Fieschi's mind, that his resolutions
seemed to be pretty well inclined to the safer side: But Verrina, foreseeing
that the whole design might yet be left unattempted, if he should suffer the
Count calmly to consider of what had been alleged, he made this detestably
impious, though plausible opposition, to the solid Arguments produced by Calcagno.

Would to God the affairs of the Republic were in those happy circumstances,
that the Citizens might quietly enjoy their Estates; then (Sir) there would be
no reason for you (as there is at present) to desire a Reformation: For, as
Calcagno has well observed, there ^s no one at this time in Genoua, who ^s
equal to you either in the extent of Territories, the Nobility of Birth, or a
Treasury well furnished with ready Cash; and therefore (I am of his mind) it is
not the part of a Wise Man when he is in Prosperity, to tempt his Fortune,
which generally changes to his disadvantage. But Destiny, the cruel Enemy of
your Repose, has so entangled the affairs of the Republic, tha^ unless you
undertake some great, tho^ hazardous design, you must inevitably Perish.
Jannetin Doria, who for so many years has gratified his ambition thoughts, with
the expectation of being Master of Genoua, cannot endure you who are so able to
cope with him, and to ruin these his vast Projects. The implacable hatred this
Proud Man beam to you, you may plainly discover by his imperious Looks, and his
contemptuous Behavior: If you think these Testimonies fallible, surely you
cannot but conclude, that since your purchase of the Gallics, you are (as a
Nail struck through and dencht in his heart) an insupportable Torment to him.
His Arrogance aims at the free and absolute Dominion of the Sea, nor will he
suffer any one to presume to disturb him in his possession, or to share the
power of it. How then can you suppose, that since Princes very often Sacrifice
their Brethren, Children, and even Parents, to a groundless Jealousy that they
weaken the security of their Empire, Jannetin should suffer you to partake with
him in his Maritime Dominion? His stubborn Nature, which will not bend, must
therefore be forced to a compliance. And you must either tamely resign your
Galleys, and by a shameful Retirement to your own Palaces, yield him all that
his Ambition craves; or you must by the Arts of Policy, and an unwearied
Industry, excite against your Rival a sufficient number of Enemies to curb and
restrain him. However if you resolve to purchase your safety from the dangers
now imminent, with the loss of your Reputation, and to accept of your Life as
granted you by Jannetin; God forbid I should be too importunate an opposer of
those Dictates of Self-preservation; though even his inveterate hatred cannot (I
am sure) prompt him to wish you in circumstances more despicable and wretched.
But the greatness of your mind checks my unworthy Suspicions of your Conduct,
and promises that I shall see the Vanity and Pride of this Arrogant Man pulled
down and crushed by your Courage. Therefore (Sir) propose to your self, and that
with an inflexible resolution, the undertaking this Enterprise, which is so
brave, as even Jannetin himself will envy you for it Fortune has placed between
you two, the absolute Command of all Liguria, and it is impossible for either
of you to acquire so great a Dignity, till he has (like Tullia) driven the
Wheels of his Triumphant Chariot over the breast of his Competitour. He will be
the surest of the Victory, who can by the most expedite Methods dispatch his
Enemy out of the World. There is an equal necessity lies on both of you, to
take care of your safety; therefore he will be the wisest of you, who by a
swift and resolute Stroke, shall ruin his Adversaries slow Projects before they
are half ripe. You must either be the Aggressor, or you must expect to be
Attacked; you must either fall into your Enemies Snares, or catch him in yours;
in a word you must either Kill or be Killed.

Perhaps Calcagno may think my expressions are too sharp; but Necessity, which
in desperate Cases gives an edge to Fortitude, in Villainous Attempts shields
the Innocent from Danger and Infamy. Therefore let him blame Janetin's Folly,
your Countrey's Ingratitude, and the Injustice of your Partial Destiny, which
have plunged you in these inevitable Difficulties. While you stand upon your
own defense, you injure none, but only obey the Dictates of Nature. And when
you see a Tempest of ill Accidents threatening your Ruin, Prudence will direct
you, to throw them (if you can) on your Enemy's Head: If this carries along
with it some color of Injustice, who can blame you for it, when Providence has
left you no other means to secure your own Life, but by the death of your
Rival, nor permits you to defend your Innocence and exerts your Courage in any
other Methods, but those of Villainy? But why do (...) give it so undeserved an
Epithete^ That Term you have learned (Friend Calcagno,) from the Trivial
Notions of some Pedant, whose humble studies never gave him an insight into
Machiavel's Rules of Policy. These reproachful Characters are (I grant you,)
fixed on the Actions of Private Men, when for their Covetous Ends they incroach
on their Neighbors: But should you by this Rule involve under the same Odium
the Gallant Undertakings of Princes, all the Empires and Principalities of the
World would be founded on Villainy, for they all at first began, and have since
increased, by Oppression; the weaker being still crushed by the power of the
stronger. By Nature all Men are on a Level; it is Boldness and Courage only,
that in favor of some particular Men destroys this equality. Hence those who
by subtlety or force could possess themselves of the Supreme Power, have
as^um'd the Magnificent Style of Emperors, Kings, and Princes. Perhaps some few
(like Calvagno) may, because they distrust the success, blame your Resolution:
For hazardous Attempts are never praised, till they are completely executed:
Then the happy Event, makes the Undertaking appear not only Lawful but
Honorable; and what before was censured as Rashness, shall then receive the
Encomium of Valor and Conduct. Thus while Julius Caesar the Dictator was at
the head of his Army striving for the Roman Empire, not only Pompey, but the
greatest part of the Senate, stuck obstinately to the defense of their
Privileges, and declared themselves his Enemies; but when the Battle of
Pharsalia had decided the Controversy, by the Total Rout of Pompey's Forces,
and he had taken upon him the Government of the Republic, those Hatreds and
Prejudices were quite extinguished, and how sincerely the Romans loved him,
their Remarkable Zeal in Prosecuting and Punishing his Murderers will
sufficiently inform you. Let the Genoueses then for a while call you Tyrant and
Usurper, and trouble not your self at these Reproaches, which will only be the
impertinent expressions of their Malice, and the last groans of their expiring
Liberty. By degrees they will accustom themselves to acknowledge and respect
you as their Lawful Prince. You see (Sir,) how firmly I rely on your good
Fortune; since I call this Principality yours, even before I see any
preparations made for the acquiring of it. But the present posture of affairs
is such, that Genoua must be yours if you are not wanting to your self: For
though there are (as Calcagno thinks) some obstacles in your way, yet how
easily may they be surmounted by your Forces, which are so much superior to
them? And suppose there were such Hazards and Difficulties in this Enterprise
as have been represented, it is no more than has been the Fate of all Ancient
and Modern Hero's, as History will inform you. Great Undertakings are always
accompanied with great Dangers; as (you see) the highest Hills border on the
steepest Precipices. And what Man of a daring Spirit, and aspiring Thoughts,
would ever, for the uncertain fear of some eminent Misfortunes, yield himself a
willing Prey to Calamities that must unavoidably fall upon him? It Is indeed the
best Counsel can be given to private Men, to rest satisfied with a competent
Fortune; but in affairs of State these trimming Counsels are pernicious,
especially where the execution of the grand design opens the Scene: For then
it is so far out of our power, either to retrieve past Errors, or politickly to
regulate each step of future proceedings, that we must either gain the utmost
point we aim at, or meet our Ruin in the prosecution of it. But let us not
suppose so sad an Event of our Undertaking: It Is a necessary piece of Sagacity
to have a prospect of distant Misfortunes; not that we should torment our
selves with the daily expectation of them, but that prudent Considerations may
pull out their sting, and make them more tolerable; it is fit, indeed, that we
should proceed cautiously, but then we must take care that an excess of Caution
do not abate our Courage, or slacken our Resolution. Something after all, must
be left to the disposal of Providence, and the direction of your good Genius,
which having chosen you to be the Deliver of Genoua, and the Restorer of the
Ancient Renown of Italy, will certainly find a way to extricate you out of all
your Difficulties: Therefore why should you refuse to accept the Monopoly of
these Favors which Fortune liberally offers you? To what end should you call
in the French to share with you both your Fame and your Conquest? They have
lost their own Reputation, as well as their Territories on this side of the
Alps; and their Spirits are no less sunk than their Credit, since King
Francis's Imprisonment, so that they are hardly able to secure their own
Frontiers from the Emperor's Forces, whose Triumphs have already reached to the
bordering parts of Germany. Besides this, I beg you would look back on their
inveterate Hatred to the Italian Nation; and let their Usage of Andrew Doria,
be a warning to you; who after he had served that Crown, with so much Honor
and Success, met with such unworthy Treatment, by the influence of the Nobility
(for they could not allow even him so high a place in the King's Favor, till
his Gold had purchased their Intercession in order to it,) that he was fore'd
to accept the Emperor's Protection, and to serve under him. It Is true, the
French King has many Accomplishments truly Royal, but yet he suffers (as almost
all great Princes do) the Inconveniences of being imposed upon by his Ministers
of State; of whose worth and integrity he has so excessive an esteem deeply
impressed on his Mind, that there is no Prince more liable to be ensnared by
the Artifices of his Courtiers, nor any less sensible of his Infirmity, and of
the ill Consequences of it. You must either therefore be a Slave to these
Ambitious and Covetous Men, or else you may assuredly expect to lose (as Doria
has already done,) both the King's Favor, and the uncertain Rewards of your
past Services. But what Recompense can the French make you, suitable to the
Hazards and Fatigues you will undergo, for them? Perhaps they will entrust you
with the Government of Genoua, encumbred with the vile dependences I told you
of: But this would be to abase your self to the inferior quality of a mercenary
Officer in that Country, wherein Nature has already given you so large a share
of Power, and seems to promise you the absolute Command. And if the Emperor, or
the City, should make a vigorous opposition to your designs, with what Succors
can the French assist you, whose Territories are at so vast a distance, and who
are themselves strangely disordered by intestine Jealousies and Animosities?
It Is undoubtedly certain that you must rely on the Loyalty of your own Subjects
and the sincerity of your Friends and Allies; and why should you not make use
of these Forces (so properly your own) to set on your own head a Crown so fit
for you, and which you so justly deserve? Then, when your Power over Genoua is
thoroughly settled, and you have in your possession the Keys of the Maritime
Gate into Italy, the greatest Kings in Christendom will be Ambitious to be your
Friends and Confederates. Then the Envy of your Competitors being Conquered, we
shall see the Family of Fieschi raised to a higher Dignity than any Family of
Genoua ever yet arrived to. Then your Enemies, who have despised and ridiculed
your Youth, being crushed under your Feet, you will have it in your power to
satiate your Revenge in their Blood. Jannetin, even Jannetin Doria himself,
your Treacherous Enemy, in spite of his Pride, and notwithstanding his
Nobility, the station he so much boasts of, will fall a suppliant at your Feet,
will Reverence you as his Lord, and Obey you as his Prince; by your Nods he
will Regulate his Actions, your Will shall give Law to his Desires, and he
shall acknowledge that he holds his Life only during your pleasure. Therefore
let the French keep at home, and there let them hear the Echoes of your
resounding Triumphs.

It is your part (Sir) Vigorously to oppose and surmount all Obstacles, which
may make the Execution of your Project seem difficult: Perform it (I beseech
you) with a Courage and Boldness worthy of your Birth. Let the Merit of your
own Exploits purchase that Renown which Heaven has decreed you: Let the World
see that you owe your Advancement only to your self: And though the hopes I
have entertained of you are vastly large, yet let your Actions exceed them: In
short, do not sheath your Sword till you have entailed this Princely Dignity on
your Family, and thereby secured to your own Name an Immortal Reputation.

Fieschi, till now, never thought of acquiring the Principality of Genoua for
himself, but for the French King; being content to reduce the excessive Power
of the Doria's into narrower Limits, and to better his own Condition by calling
in the French: But being desirous of Glory, and naturally inclined to attempt
hazardous Undertakings, it proved no difficult matter for Verriua to dissuade
him from his Affection to the French, by proposing to him these methods of
setting up himself: Which having over-balanc'd the weight of Calcagne's
Reasons, hurried him on to the execution of a Project both Villainous and
Dangerous in the highest degree. However he was much shocked at the
apprehension of the difficulties which would attend his design, without the
assistance of the French Forces: And Raphael Sacco made it his endeavor to
confirm him in these Perplexities, out of a partial Affection to France his
Native Country: he advised him to accept of the Conditions proposed to him in
the King's Name by Cardinal Trivulce, and to Act by that Model, till a silent
and leisurely progress, should open a Path toward the completing his grand
design.

But Verrina, who looked upon all Moderation extremely prejudicial in an affair
which required an inflexible Resolution, applied himself to remove those
difficultics which made Fieschi grow lukewarm in it. He replied with great
vehemence, that to be terrified with Fantasms, was below the Spirit of a
Nobleman: That the Garrison in Genoua consisted not of above Two Hundred Men:
That Doria's Galleys, though many in number, were not now in a posture of
defense; the Season of the Year obliging them to be laid up in their Harbors;
that Andrew and Jannetin were so far from suspecting any Violence, that both
their Persons and their Houses were without a Guard: That the Count might
quickly bring in a good number of the likeliest Men that the Neighboring
Country and Villages would afford, and that these should Kill the Two Doria's
in their own House: That it would be easy at the same time to send another
party of Men by Sea to seize Doria's Galleys: That the remaining part of the
design would effect it self, the Populace bearing such an Inveterate hatred to
the Nobility, that a slender invitation would be sufficient to make them
espouse his Quarrel: And that he himself had already disposed their Minds for
it, and would take care they should not fail to rise when their Assistance
should be requisite.

These and several other things subtly aggravated by Verrina, who knew how
great an influence he had over Fieschi, dissipated all his Doubts, and fixed
his Resolution to proceed according as Verrina had persuaded him. Hereupon he
set his thoughts to devise a Method how to bring this affair to a happy
conclusion. The first and unanimous Resolution of all the Conspirators was,
That since the safety of the present Government depended so entirely on the
lives of the Doria's, 'twas absolutely necessary in order to a change of the
constitution, that they two should be killed: And to make sure of a complete
Revenge, it was likewise resolved that Adam Centurio Father-in-Law to Jannetin,
and several of the Prime of the Nobility should be used in the same manner. As
soon as Count Fieschi began to entertain thoughts of this Project, and after he
had bought the Galleys, he retired into his own Territories; where he spent his
time chiefly in training and reviewing the Militia of those Countries,
pretending that he apprehended an Invasion from his Neighbor the Duke of
Piacenza, whereas his real design was to make his Subjects capable of serving
him in his undertaking against the Republic toward the latter end of the
Autumn he returned to Genoua, where he used great Artifice to obtain the
Friendship of those Senators who were of the Popular Faction: He insinuated
himself into their acquaintance with a wonderful Affability: To some of them he
made liberal Presents: Others he assisted both in paying their Debts, and in
making a party for them to gain the preferments they desired: To every one of
them he applied himself with all possible demonstrations of a sincere
Friendship. And being of a very quick wit, and naturally very easy and
complaisant, it is hardly credible how soon he gained an entire Considence with
them, and thereby secured himself of the assistance of their dependents. When
he sound that he had won their Affections, and could rely upon their Secrecy,
he began as opportunities were offered, to speak of the Tyrannical Government
of the Nobility, sometimes showing by his Speeches (which were often
interrupted by dissembled sighs) how much he piti'd the sad Estare of the
Populace; sometimes hinting that, if they would not be wanting to themselves,
some effectual remedy might be found out, to repress the Arrogance of the
Nobility; at other times he advised them with the sharpest Ironies to Passive
Obedience under their Slavery leaving always in their minds a greater
Propension to Discontents, by his perplexed and dubious Expressions: But above
all, if any accident hapen'd which crossed the Inclinations of the Popular
Faction, he took occasion from thence to discourse largely to them of the
Maladministration of Affairs, under the present Government. Nor did he
disdain to seek with diligence the good opinion of the meanest Plebeians, but
was always ready to court them, with smiles and affable discourse, and he took
care to please their eyes with the dazzling splendour of his Clothes. These
Artificial Advantages were much set off by a graceful Person and a face adorned
with all the charms of a healthy Youth: Youth, Beauty, graceful Action seldom
fail.
His Air and his Behavior were so extremely genteel and easy, that he failed
not to gain the Peoples affections as soon as he showed himself in Public to
them; Dryden's Misc. Poems. 1. part P. 59.
which he often did for the ends, and according to the Methods 2 Samuel 14.25
unhappy deluded Absalom formerly pursued.

Besides this he delighted frequently to exercise his skill in Martial
Discipline and Horsemanship, for the excellent performance of both which, his
body was so proportionably framed, that in this posture especially he always
appeared a most lovely object to the Spectators.

But because the reputation of Liberality is the certainst Snare to entangle
the Mobile, Count Fieschi (as is reported) called to him one day il Console.
the Warden of the Silk-weavers Company, of whom there is in Genoua a very
great number. He asked him very civilly concerning the circumstances of his
Associates, and understanding that they were reduced to extreme want (their
Trade in Genoua being much decayed by the excessive increase of it in other
Places) he expressed a most tender compassion toward the poor Sufferers,
saying, he would not abandon them at a time of so great necessity; and
therefore ordered that those whose Poverty was known to be most pressing,
should be secretly sent to his House to be relieved. The next day a great
number of these Wretches flockt together to visit their Benefactor; who to
signalize his Liberality, caused a large quantity of Corn to be divided among
them, telling them, that as the relieving the needy and the afflicted, had
always been the Character of his Family, so he would never by any means
degenerate from his Ancestors, therefore whenever they wanted sustenance for
their Families, they might confidently expect it from him, and (though their
modesty should restrain them from the importunity of Beggars) they might at any
time find at his House all necessaries ready provided for them. Thus did he add
a greater luster to his Bounty, by seeming desirous to conceal from the view of
the World, both that and the miseries of the persons relieved: Who went home no
less cheered by the assistance, than astonished at the liberality of Count
Fieschi, who they thought deserved as a reward from Heaven, the highest
dignities and the happiest success.

However being apprehensive that the Nobility would suspect his designs, if he
made it his whole business to gain the affections of the Mobile, his next study
was how to poize the Balance so even, as to secure himself of a confidence and
friendship with both. To this end he perfected himself in the art of
Dissimulation: He went oftener than usual to visit the Doria's, and not only
made many professions of an affectionate esteem for Andrew, (to whom he openly
declared himself to be under many obligations) but also disguising the
inveterate hatred he bore to Jannetin, he treated him with the intimacy of a
Friend, asking his advice and praying his assistance in the management of his
concerns. And because there had formerly been some quarrels between them, which
had embittered their Spirits toward one another, he begged of Jannetin, with
the promises of a sincere kindness for the future, that he would absolutely
forget what was past.

By the secret League between the Duke of Piacenza and Count Fieschi, the Duke
agreed to send him two thousand Men, which, with two thousand more raised in
the Count's Territories, were thought sufficient to quell the risings of the
Citizens if any should oppose him; and to this end, he sent one of his Galleys
to the coasts of Genoua, under the pretense of fitting and manning it for a
Maritime Expedition against the Algierines and other Infidels in their own
Seas. Nor was Verrina wanting to forward these designs; for he made it his
business to gain over to Fieschi as great a party as he could; and being expert
in the Artifices of Popularity, he in a little time engaged some hundreds of
the Populace under a promise, to stand by him in a great undertaking that was
then carrying on for their advantage.

By these preparatory Methods they thought they had laid a sufficient
Foundation for their Project, and therefore held another consult to determine
in what manner they should attempt the final Execution of it. Their first
Opinion was that there should be notice given of the Solemnity of una Messa
nova.
an extraordinary Mass to be celebrated in St. Andrew's Church, unto which the
two Doria's, and those of the Nobility, whose lives they aimed at, should be
invited. But this resolution appeared no less uncertain as to the success of it
than Inhumane and Sacrilegious; for they thought it was very probable Andrew
Doria would excuse his absence on the account of his Age, and send in his stead
Philippea or some other near Relation with his accustomed offering. And it
shockt them not a little to consider how horrid a thing it would be, to begin
their enterprise with so unparalleled a Profanation of the Church, and of the
highest Mysteries of Religion. This proposal therefore was absolutely rejected;
although Verrina, as he was prompted by the violence of his Temper, assured them
he would at that very instant dispatch Andrew, under the plausible disguise of
a friendly visit. But as Men when once they have broke through the Restraints
of Virtue, fall headlong into all manner of Wickedness, so these slender
remains of a modest Scrupulosity, which checked them in their former resolution,
a little after proved too weak to hinder them from projecting a more destable
piece of Villainy.

For it happening about this time, that the Marriage was to be celebrated between
Julius Cibo Marquess of Massa, related to Fieschi, and one of Jannetin Doria's
Sister; it was resolved that Fieschi should invite the Bride and several Ladies
to Supper, and with them not only the two Doria's, but also those of the
Nobility whom they thought the most dangerous Enemies to their Project, all of
whom were to be Murdered barbarously, by hired Ruffians, concealed in the
House for that purpose, Inter sacra mensae. Thuanus in Anno 1547.
against the sacred Laws of Hospitality and Converse. That immediately after
the commission of this unparalleled Treachery, Fieschi attended with his
Guards should ride about the Streets of Genoua, calling upon the Mob to assist
him in the recovery of their Liberty: That during these Tumults, some of the
Count's Party should possess themselves of the Town Hall, where Verrina in a
plausible Harangue should discover to the Populace, Fieschi's intention to
change the state of Genoua into an absolute Monarchy, and having represented to
them how necessary it was to reform the Government, which had been so much
corrupted by the insolence and selfishness of the Nobility, should Crown the
Count Fieschi Duke of Genoua, and force the Plebians, whom they before hand
bribed to it, to swear Allegiance to him; and if any Man either by his Words or
Actions should testify his dislike, he should be presently killed.

To complete this design the more easily, it was ordered that the ablest
Soldiers the Count had, should in the least suspected manner they could, lodge
themselves in Genoua, and the Duke of Piacenza was again solicited to hasten
the promised Succors. These Transactions (especially the raising of Soldiers)
could not be managed so secretly, but Don Ferrand Gonzaga, whom the Emperor
had appointed Governor of the Duchy of Milan, in the room of the Marquess del
Vasto, had very shrewd suspicions of what was intended: For watching carefully,
for the security of his own Government, over every Motion of his Neighbors,
and receiving constant intelligence concerning the Actions of those Princes
whom he mistrusted, by able and faithful Persons employed by him in that
Office, he quickly came to be informed, that there were Two Thousand Men
raising in the Duchy of Piacenza with great have for the Service of Count
Fieschi. And guessing by the silent Methods of their Proceedure, that there was
a Private Treaty between Fieschi and that Duke, he presently dispatches a
Courier to Genoua with Advice to Doria, and to Don Gomez Suarez the Emperor's
Resident there, that they should be watchful, and stand on their Guard, for
that the young Count Fieschi was underhand contriving some great design. Andrew
Doria was nevertheless so far deceived by the flattering shows of Affection,
and by the serenity of Countenance which he constantly observed in Fieschi, and
finding all things in the City in the same quiet posture they were before, that
he again refused to give Credit to these likely Symptoms of the Conspiracy. It
happened, that while Doria and the Resident were discoursing of this Affair,
Fieschi unexpectedly came into the Room, with so pleasing and cheerful a Look,
and while he staid there discoursed with them so solidly concerning several
matters, that Doria being charmed with his Conversation, whispered the
Resident, and asked him, How he could suppose, that a Mind so well
Accomplished, and a Person of so Angelical a Beauty would attempt so cruel a
piece of Villainy? Nor did he change his Opinion when Gonzaga having from the
Court of France received some Confirmation of his former suspicions, sent
another Message to him, seriously advising him to search to the bottom of the
design; informing him likewise, that the Pope's Galleys were ready at Civita
Vecchia, and the French Galleys in the Port of Marseilles, to support and
assist, if occasion were, the Fortune of Fieschi.

And certainly, did not History mention several very eminent Persons, who on
light grounds were incredulous to what they heard concerning Designs against
themselves, Andrew Doria's excessive good Nature would deserve a sharp Censure:
For that when he had such assurances given him, that his own Life, and, through
that, the Constitution of the Republic was aimed at, he gave greater Credit to
Fieschi's dissembled Looks and Actions, than to the pregnant Evidences of so
foul a Conspiracy; as if it were not usual for those who have such designs in
hand, to dissemble, for a while, their intended Mischief under a smooth
Countenance; or as if any Care and Vigilance were too much to preserve one's
own Life in Safety, and one's Country from Ruin. But since Ancient Histories
afford us several Examples of very Wise Men, who have suffered themselves to be
deluded by a fatal Incredulity in matters of the greatest importance, we may
reasonably affirm, that these Events preordain'd, or inevitably permitted, by
an overruling Providence, could not be completed, but by these Momentary
Mistakes of the wisest Politicians, (as an Epidemical Distemper may sometimes
seize on the soundest Body) that we may not attribute too much to Worldly
Wisdom, when we find it so defective in matters of the greatest moment. But
certainly Paul Pansa was much more overseen, who viewing Fieschi's Actions with
a careful and friendly Eye, from the time that he bought the Galleys, could not
but suspect there was some extraordinary design in hand, and yet did not then
give that Check to it which his Station and Dignity allowed. The Transactions
which he every Day saw and heard were just occasion for the increase of these
suspicions. For Fieschi, whose usual custom it had been to impart to Pansa his
most secret affairs and designs, now became very close and reserved to him, and
very frequent in his Consultations with his other ill chosen Confidents, whose
Characters I have before represented. For although, while he entertained his
Friends, or appeared on Horse back in the streets of Genoua, he wonderfully
disguised his thoughts from the public view, by a dissembled cheerfulness in
his countenance and behavior, yet when he returned home the Scene was quite
changed, and the perplexing agitations of his Soul plainly discovered
themselves by a profound Melancholy, and a wild distracted Look. His aim in
concealing his designs from Pansa's knowledge, was only because he knew for
certain, a Man so well principl'd in Piety and Morality, would use his utmost
endeavor to deterr him from so wicked an Enterprise: Or at least he suspected
that Pansa, who had been bred up at a distance from the warlike sound of Drums
and Trumpets, under the Peaceful Influence of the Muses, (who always choose a
quiet retreat from Noise and Tumult) would examine every Circumstance of the
Project with an excessive Caution, and dissuade him from proceeding in it
beyond the limits of security; which in undertakings of this Nature no Man
ought to flatter himself with, because it is utterly impossible.

One Day, it so happened that Count Fieschi being after his return home, more
than ordinarily disturbed with Melancholy Thoughts, and Pansa perceiving by the
apparent uneasiness in his Looks and Behavior, that his Mind was strangely
distempered, he resolved immediately to discourse with him concerning it, least
if he should delay any longer, the Disease might grow incurable, before any
Remedy were administered. Finding him therefore retired into a private
Apartment, he accosted him in this manner.

As it is very unbesitting a well-bred Person to pry into the secrets of
others, so it is on the other hand very laudable to conceal what is so
imparted; and as I have not given you my promise of Secrecy, because I hope all
my Actions have sufficiently demonstrated my Fidelity, so I have hitherto
forborne enquiring into your Concerns, least I should be guilty of any thing
that might incur your displeasure. Nevertheless your unaccustomed reservedness
plainly declares to me, that the Project you are now designing, is of the
highest moment, since you take such pains to hide it from your Friends. Your
Looks, so full of disturbance and inquietude, give me occasion to share with
you in your sollicitous Apprehensions; and though I know not the reason, yet I
am full of fears for your safety. This proceeds from no other cause, (Sir) but
the excess of my Love to your Person, and my sincere and ardent Wishes (as is
my duty) for your Prosperity. For how can I persuade my self that what you aim
at is really desirable, since the thoughts of it do so violently shock the
usual Serenity of your Mind? Certainly the conclusion of that affair, which,
though yet in Embryo, gives you these disturbances, cannot be so tranquil as a
wise Man would wish: And this mighty Inquietude and Commotion of your Soul, is
But an unhappy Omen of the unsuccessful Event of your Enterprise. I will not
pretend to dive into the Secret which you have thought fit to conceal from me:
(though what Service am I able to do you, if you at all suspect my Truth and
Faithfulness?) but (pray Sir consider) whither can their persuasions lead you,
whose Conversation always leaves you oppressed with a Load of Cares and
Discontents? And (if you will allow me to probe your Wound, that it may the
more easily be cured,) I do more than doubt, that these your secret Conferences
with crafty and ill designing Persons, will by degrees alienate your Mind from
the Rules of Virtue and True Honor. Their Piety is not so sincere, nor their
Moral Principles so well founded, that I can expect they should give you any
advice consistent with your Honor or Religion. Perhaps they impose on the
Candor of your Nature, and the small experience of your Years, thinking, that
because your Temper is inclinable to the pursuit of Glorious Actions, you will
the more easily join with them in any rash Project, which they shall disguise
under those colors. Shut not your Eyes (I beg you Sir) against these dangers,
but rather exert your utmost and most diligent Attention: For one Mad Man may
push you into a precipice, from whence a Thousand Wise Men with all their Arts
cannot retrieve you.

It Is an easy matter to set your own, or your Neighbor's House on Fire, but
how much Toil and Labor and Sweat will it cost to stop and extinguish it?
Therefore (pray Sir) take good heed that these Fellows do not make you their
Property to bring about their own Ends; and by their deceiving you into an
irreparable loss, do not from thence build up their own Fortunes. There are but
few Counselors (too few alas!) so honest, as without the prospect of
Self-Interest, to promote and aim at what is Just and Honorable; therefore it
is absolutely necessary for you to try them by this Touchstone. For my part I
cannot persuade my self, that those, whose Lives are a continued Scene of
Flagitious Crimes, will ever instill or advance the progress of Virtue in any
other Person. For although a Man's Discourse and his Actions may be separately
considered, revertheless, Experience informs us, that a good Example preaches
Reformation more effectually than the most Eloquent Discourses; for these grow
contemptible when the daily practice of him that gives the Advice contradicts
his Exhortations. Therefore (Sir) what unreasonable things do your importunate
Confidents demand of you? Into what new and dangerous designs do they
endeavor to wheedle you? Your Circumstances cannot be bettered by any public
Confusions, though their's may. Fortune, which has so long smiled on your
Family, may very probably alter her Countenance to an Angry Frown, should you
be so imprudent as to irritate her; and (I almost dare assure you) every
alteration that may happen, will be much less desirable than your present
Condition. Envy has a long time been endeavoring to canker your Happiness, and
when your Mind and your Affairs are once in a disorder, that unlucky Fury will
quickly force her entrance, by the means of several Persons, now much your
inferiors both in Honor and Estate, who make it their business to find some
reasonable grounds, on which, to found their Calumnies against you.

It Is true, the chief delights of Youth flow from the Prospect their large
Hopes afford them: But it is as true, no state is more dangerous than a secure
Prosperity. Therefore, pray Sir, take care that (according to the Fable of our
Ancient Mythologist) you lose not the real Substance which you now possess, by
catching at a distant and uncertain, though perhaps, a very tempting Shadow.
They (alas!) who fill your Head with these designs, have nothing of their own
to lose: Tumults, Seditions, and a public Anarchy, assord such Wretches,
Shelter, Maintenance, and, too often, an increase of Honor and Riches; for
those whose Fortunes are low built, cannot fear, as the great ones do, any
shock in their easy descent to Ruin and Beggary. But (Sir) for you it is
absolutely necessary to order your steps with Caution; for Fame expects it from
you, that your Actions, if they do not exceed (as I hope they will) yet at
least shall not come behind, the performances of your Ancestors.

Fieschi heard this discourse with great uneasiness and impatience; for his
resolutions were unalterably fixed on the design from which Pansa tried to
dissuade him; nevertheless with some marks of Confusion in his Looks and
Gesture, he returned him this Answer in few words, That he proposed no Aims to
himself but those that were Generous and Worthy of his Birth, which in due time
he would be sure to acquaint him withal.

While the Conspirators were in great expectations of the Day appointed for the
Feast, (which was to be the Fourth of January,) there happened an Accident
which forced them to hasten the execution of their Project, though to their
unspeakble regret, because it deprived them of the opportunity of cutting off a
great part of the Nobility, whom otherwise they might have surpised all
together, they being then to assemble for the choosing a new Duke of that
Republic. For Andrew Doria being seized with a violent Fit of the Gout, which
with its excessive Torments threw him into a dangerous Fever, he could not meet
according to his promise; and Jannetin was obliged by some urgent business to
leave Genoua. So that Fieschi, and his Confidents, considering that
Conspiracies have often been ruined, but hardly ever forwarded by unnecessary
delays, resolved that on the Second of January, very early in the Morning, or
as soon as they could possibly get ready the preceding Night, they would put
their great design in execution. Hereupon Fieschi began to give out, that he
would send out one of his Galleys to molest the Corsaires, for the Pope
allowing him but just enough to maintain Three, he was desirous to supply his
Fourth Galley with all Necessaries, by the Prizes she should take from the
Infidels. By this specious and well disguised Artifice he brought in several of
the Men sent him from Piacenza, and some of hisown Vassals, pretending he would
choose out the likeliest of them for his Expedition: And least the number of
those that came from Piacenza should seem to exceed what was requisite for the
Manning a Galley, and thereby give some suspicion of a farther design in it, he
caused some of them to be chained together, and so led like Men designed for
the Oar: Others he caused to be disarmed, and to come into the City by several
of the Gates, and he afterward took care to furnish them with Arms. Then for
the more easy deceiving of Jannetin, he first imparted this his Project to him
as a Token of his Friendship, requesting him earnestly to interceed with Andrew
Doria, that there might be no Obstacle put to his Enterprise; for, as he
pretended, he was under some apprehensions, least in pursuance of the Truce
between Solomon the Grand Seignior, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, he might
be stopped in his intentions of Privateering.

On the First of January, (the Day preceding that Night which had like to have
been Fatal to Genoua) Count Fieschi sent for certain Soldiers of the City
Guards to his Palace, some of whom were his own Subjects, others had by his
means obtained their Freedoms of the City of Genoua; having done this, he went
to Andrew Doria's House, where he staid till it grew late, expressing all the
Marks of a Cordial Love and True Respect for him and his Family: And it so
happening, that John Adorea, and Pagano, Two Young Children of Jannetin's, as
they were playing about the House met Fieschi, he took them in his Arms and
kissed them several times in the presence of their Father. Just as he was
going, he again desired Jannetin, to order his Soldiers not to stop his Galley,
which was that Night to begin its Voyage toward the Aegran Sea, and earnestly
entreated him not to be disturbed if he should hear the discharging of Guns, or
any other Noise; for those Enterprises (as he very well knew) could not be
managed without some sort of Tumult. When Day was quite shut in, Count Fieschi
caused all those Armed Men, whose assistance he thought requisite, to come into
his Palace: Those, of whose Courage and Fidelity he had, had the greatest
experience, he posted at all the Gates and Avenues, giving 'em strict Orders to
let all enter that would, but to suffer none to go out again.

Count Fieschi's Palace was situated in that higher part of Genoua, which is
called Carignan, a place, as it were, divided from the rest of the City. For as
two sides of it are bounded by the Walls of Genoua, so from the East it views
the delightful Villa's of Albaro, and the pleasant Valley of Bisagne, and its
front is toward the Sea. Thus by its lofty situation it is in a manner
separated from, and proudly seems to domineer over the City that lies at its
Feet. On this Ascent, and in an Island, stood Fieschi's Palace: So that 'twas
as conveniently placed, as could be, for carrying on such a design; for none of
the adjacent Houses could be at all Alarmed by the Tumultuous Noise of Military
preparations.

When they came to set the Watch in the Castle of Genona, Gigante Corso the
Governor (whose Integrity was equal to his Valor) found several of his
Soldiers missing: And having inquired diligently at their several Quarters, he
received information, that Count Fieschi had enticed them to follow him to
Carignan. The Novelty of the thing made him suspect some dangerous design; so
that he immediately imparted, what he had observed, to Doria, and to the
Senators that kept their Residence in the Ducal Palace.

Now began to appear the Fatal Effects of Fieschi's cautious Hypocrisy; for
Jannetin Doria, being prepossessed with the Count's pretended design of fitting
out a Galley, dissipated these Suspicions, by declaring to them (what he
thought was real) that Fieschi had recalled these Soldiers, his Subjects and
Dependants, to serve him in Privateering toward the Levant.

Thus short sighted are the Apprehensions of us Mortals, who too often think
our selves secure, when our Enemy has not only designed, but is just upon the
point, of completing our Ruin.

Count Fieschi, after he had staid a while in his own Palace to give necessary
Orders, he went out again to visit some of the Merry LeVeglie. Meetings, which
in the depth of Winter the Nobility use to keep by turns in their several
Houses. About Four Hours after he had began his Rounds, he came to Thomas
Assereto's House, where he found got together, by the contrivance of Verrina,
Three and Twenty Young Gentlemen who favored the Popular Faction. He staid
there with them a while, entertaining them with great Civility, and then
invited them to Sup with him at Carignan; toward which he urged this as a
great inducement, that the Night was calm, and the Moon shone clear. As soon as
they came to Carignan, he carried them into some of the farthest Apartments,
and ordered Pansa to keep his Wife Lemora at the other end of the House, till
he came to her, which should be in a little time. This Lady was of the
illustrious Family of Cibo, Sister to Julius, Marquess of Massa, and to Aubrey,
who after he had lived to see a Century of Years completed, and had enjoyed a
Prosperous, though decrepit, Old Age, Died in the Year 1623, being Honored and
Lamented by all Italy.

While these things were transacting in Fieschi's Palace, Verrina very
cunningly went into the City as a Scout to spy, whether there was any motion or
disturbance in the Ducal, or at Doria's Palace, or in any other part of Genoua.

In the mean time Fieschi's Guests looked on one another, being mightily Amazed
to see the House more than usually full of Arms and Armed Men: But at last the
Count himself, whose Countenance was quite changed, (whether by the
Apprehensions of the Parricide he was just going to commit, or by the excess of
his Rage and Malice against Jannetin, which having been hitherto stifled within
his Breast, began now plainly to show it self in his Looks and Words, leaning
upon the Table, and having struck it with great Vehemence, spoke to them in
this manner.

Gentlemen,

Matters are now come to that pass, that no one who has a drop of noble Blood
in his Veins, can any longer tamely bear these Oppressions. My patience and
constancy have long since been shockt, by the dreadful prospect of my Country's
Ruin, and my Countrymen's falling under the Tyranny designed for them by an
ungrateful Villain. Were it possible that these dangerous Distempers, which
have already attackt the vitals of the Republic, could receive any remedy by
our delays, I for my part would be very willing to consent to any Truce which
might secure our common Safety: But since our affairs are driven to the last
Extremity, there lies a necessity upon us to exert our utmost force for the
preservation of our Country from Ruin. Dangers, such as ours are to be
conquered by a bold Resistance, for nothing increases the weight of them more
than a lazy expectation of Events. Jannetin Doria has long since been
surfeited with a series of prosperous successes attending him: Now he is become
a Vassal to Ambition, that tormenting extravagancy of the Mind, and is got so
near to the conclusion of his wicked designs, that neither fear nor modesty
restrain him from threatening (more by Actions than by words) Genoua with
Servitude, and me with Death. Was it not enough for this Villain to, behold the
Genouese Populace, who but a little while ago possessed the Sovereignty of all
Liguria, now deprived of that power and dignity, and subjected to the insolent
scorn of the Nobility; but must he aim at enslaving us to an absolute Monarchy,
wherewith he is designing to invest himself? To this purpose he grows uneasy
at his present condition, and in his own Country (which yet enjoys the
happiness of being a free State) he puts on the barbarity of a Foreign Invader;
his Pride and Stubbornness are so great, that they cannot be mollisied by our
humble and modest compliance, nor can we by any Methods, how cautious soever,
escape the fatal consequences of being suspected and hated by him. You see how
strongly he has environed our Maritime Coasts, with his twenty Galleys; you see
how proudly he passes through the City, attended by such of the Nobility, who
having by the means of Andrew Doria usurped that Dignity which was lately
yours, now pay Jannetin for it the price of a servile obsequiousness; but that
which most sensibly affects me is the invincible reasons I have to think, that
he designs to oppress the public Liberty by the assistance of the Emperor his
too powerful Patron. And because I alone, out of a sense of the duty I owe to
my Country, and of the particular obligations I have to your Party, would never
consent (as several others of the Nobility have done) to the unjust
depredations that have been made on the rights of the People, Jannetin is
employing all his Engines for my destruction. Why therefore, Gentlemen, do we
yet continue careless and cowardly Spectators of our approaching Calamities?
For what enterprise do we reserve our Strength and Courage, if we now unhappily
abandon our own and our Countries safety, when there is need of our utmost
force to preseve it from Desolation? It Is now the time for us to punish, if we
can, these Villainous Conspiracies, and not to lament and deplore them: Tears,
Sighs, and querulous Language, are Weapons proper only for Women, but whosoever
deserves the nobler Character of a Man, ought to revenge his injuries in such
vigorous Methods as are worthy that Sex, which Nature has honored with so
large Prerogatives. We have all of us too long patiently endured the insolence
of those, who impute this our good Nature, to a servile and base Temper. And
the impunity with which their former Crimes have escaped, do only encourage
these oppressors to increase the grievances which we have till now disguised
under a forced silence and a dissembled contentedness. And what further are we
yet to expect from these Villain? Perhaps when you are wholly deprived of the
small share you now have in the Administration of affairs, their cruel mercy
may induce them to spare some of your lives; but how much wished for will Death
be by those who will daily be entertained with the dismal prospect of the ruin
of Estates, the destruction of Families, Murders treacherously perpetrated
under the pretense of Law and Justice, Matrons and Virgins ravished, and many
more Villainies committed, by Jannetin Doria's Soldiers, and by his
approbation? These and many more Calamities are the unavoidable consequences of
a Tyranny, which owes its Birth to the ruin of a flourishing State, and cannot
be established but by the Death of all brave and worthy Patriots.

Therefore (my Friends; are our Souls so degenerated? Is our Blood so
spiritless and chill? Are our Weapons so very dull and blunted, that we cannot
exert a vigorous Revenge, and put an end to the infamous life of him, who
glories in that he has reduced us to this unfortunate and despicable
condition? Shall we not pierce every fiber of that Heart that has harbored
projects so villainous and cruel? Shall we suffer one, who at the best, is but
our equal, imperiously to trample upon us, and to have the same absolute power
of Life and Death over us, as if we had been born his Slaves? For my own part I
declare, I had much rather purchase my liberty with the utmost toil and hazard,
than to slide with ease and sloth into the state of Servitude; and as I may
(without arrogance) believe that our common Enemies, design my death as well as
the subversion of the Republic, so do I with the most cheerful willingness
Sacrifice my life for the preservation of our National Liberty, which if I
should not much prefer before the safety of my own Person, I were unworthy to
live a moment longer. But however, I would fain see in you, those vigorous
Emotions of mind, which not only your Quality and Educattion, but even those
great dangers which at this time threaten your ruin, require from you. And
whether you would have me act the part of your Leader, or of a common Soldier
in so just a cause, I am ready according to your Orders, either to Command, or
to obey. I here consign my self to you with an assurance, that as my Person
shall be always in your Power, so my Soul shall be undaunted, and unshaken
under whatsoever event may attend our undertaking.

But, Gentlemen, whether your honor or your safety is dear to you, you must be
of good Courage, and take up Arms with me: For this resolution is absolutely
necessary to you all, to those of you who are inspired with a forward valor
it is exceeding glorious, and to those with whom a cautious abhorrence of War is
more prevalent, self-preservation makes it indispensably requisite. Nor do I
invite you to join with me in a rash, and inconsiderate enterprise, for it is
many Months since I not only projected all the methods to effect it, but made
it my business to provide a sufficient number of Soldiers; who being now
conveniently posted about the City, seem to give us full assurance of an easy
and certain victory, almost without the hazard of a Battle. So that when you
call to mind the contemptuous behavior of our governing Nobility, and the
excessive pride of Jannetin Doria, I am sure these Reflections must awaken in
you a desire of an honorable revenge: And this will inspire you with so
vigorous a courage in the use of your Weapons, that our Enemies will, to their
loss and shame, admire the courage of us whom they have so much despised, and
on the other side we shall know by experience, whether their fortitude in War
is any ways equal to their Arrogance and Luxury in times of Peace. Thus far, my
Friends, I have laid before you my thoughts of the present state of affairs:
It Is time now to put an end to my discourse, that we may proceed in our
successful enterprise. Let us march into the City, where multitudes are ready
to join with us in our honorable undertaking. The Gates and Avenues are in the
power of such Soldiers as I have brought over to my Interests; and when I give
the signal, the Genouse Galleys will fall into the possession of some stout
Seamen, who will with their lives defend their Prize, and annoy the Enemy.

In the City fifteen hundred Tradesmen and Artificers wait ready armed for our
coming: By this time two thousand of the Infantry of Piacenza, and as many of
my own Subjects are got into the Suburbs, and are calling upon the Populace to
assist them in restoring the Liberty, resettling the ancient Government of
Genoua, and extirpating the insolent Tyranny and Usurpation of Jannetin Doria,
and his confederate Nobility.

Therefore rouse up your Courage, and march with me; that this Night (which in
Brightness Rivals the clearest Day) may put an end to the Memory of our past
Servitude, by restoring to the despised Populace their Just Dignities and
Rightful Privileges.

And if, after what I have said, there is any one of you, who shall be so
Obstinate and Self-conceited, as to make any Objection or Opposition to an
Exploit so Noble and Generous, as is the preserving our Country from imminent
Servitude, let him look upon this Dreadful Scene of Warlike Preparations, and
assure himself, that where there are so many Swords, his Breast shall not
escape unpierc'd. I must freely and plainly declare to you, that it is
absolutely necessary for us all to Fight, or to Die: And his Blood who shall
refuse to Succor his Country in this time of Danger, shall be shed in this
very place to wash out the stain of his Ingratitude and Perfidiousness: And
this Hand of mine shall Slay the first Victim, which Consecrates this Night to
the Love of our Country, if any one dares be so untimely scrupulous as to make
any Resistance.

This Threatening Speech, together with such a number of Armed Men appearing in
their view ready to execute these Menaces, so much Astonished the Imprisoned
Guests, that for some time they remained silent: But at last being more
affected with the Apprehensions of their present Danger, (being on all sides
hemmed in by Count Fieschi's Soldiers) then with the Horror of the Impious
Action they were going about, expressed their readiness to Obey the Count's
Orders, and to sollow him as their Leader. Two only of the whole Company
dissembling a Cowardice, (Honorable on such an occasion) Petitioned Fieschi
not to engage them in an Affair so far distant from their Profession; least
(being surpised with excessive Fear in the heat of the Fight) they should
rather be a hindrance than a help to his Enterprise. And so exquisitely did
they feign this unusual Torrour, that the Count, after he had a while
discoursed with them, supposing as they pretended, their Company might be
prejudicial to him, was well satisfied that they should continue in an
Apartment of his Palace confined under a strong Guard. These were John Baptist
Cattaneo Bava, and John Baptist Justiniano, the Son of Urban; who voluntarily
Acting the Cowards at such a seasonable Juncture, to keep themselves from being
the Infamous partakers in this Public Parricide, deserve for it much greater
Praise, than Junius Brutus for counterfeiting the Madman: For by that
dissimulation he only secured himself from the Jealousy of the Proud Tyrant
Tarquin, but these Worthies by their pretended Timorousness, did what in them
lay, for the common safety of the Republic.

Fieschi's Servants had by this time furnished a Table with several Dishes of
Meat, as a Collation rather than a Supper; of which hasty Banquet while some
few of his Guests without sitting down just tasted, the Count himself went into
his Wife's Apartment, where he found her discoursing with Pansa, and in a few
words imparted to her the design he was going about. This Lady being strangely
surpised at the horridness of the Fact, and the consideration of the Dangers
her Husband exposed himself to in the prosecution of it, fell at his Feet in
the manner of a Suppliant, and accompanying her Words with Sighs and Tears, and
all the Marks of a real and intense Sorrow, spoke to him to this effect.

I beg you (my Dearest Lord) by the sincere and ardent Love I bear you, and by
whatever in the World you value at the highest Rate, take care of your Life,
and do not by so base an Act Blemish the Honor of your Family. By these Tears
I shed, and by these Knees of yours which I now embrace, do not, I entreat you,
so far forget the Duty you owe to God, to your Country, to me, and to your
self: Why will my Fieschi precipitate himself and me into Calamities which he
may so easily avoid? How shall I be able to undergo the weight, of expecting
every Minute, (with the Ominous Presages of a Trembling Heart) the piercing
News of your Death; which will be but the beginning of my Disconsolate and
Disgraceful Widowhood; for how can I expect better Usage (though the Calamities
of that State seldom fail to move Compassion) than to be pointed at, and taken
notice of, as the Partner of your Bed, and the Concealer, if not Sharer, of
your Treason. Can you be so Cruel as to abandon me for a Prey to the Lust of
the Soldiers, and the Fury of the Populace, who (I fear) will e're it be long
come to pillage and destroy this House, as part of the Just Punishment due for
your Rebellion; and in that Lamentable Outrage how can I expect to be free from
their Violence and Rudeness? Therefore, my Dear Lord, alter yet your
Resolutions, and proceed no further in this.

She would have proceeded, but her Grief interrupted her, and Fieschi
perceiving that Panla was prepared to second the Countesses Request with
Arguments to dissuade him from so Flagitious an Enterprise, put an end to their
intended Debate by this Answer.

Let not my Leonora presage so unhappy a conclusion to my Enterprise, but
rather entertain her Mind, during my absence, with the pleasing hopes of a
Fortunate Event. My Destiny has engaged me in this Design, and my Affairs are
now in that posture, that whether I will or no, I must proceed; therefore (my
Dearest) compose your Mind to that temper, as not to be surpised with
excessive Joy at my good Success, nor with too intense a Grief, if the contrary
should happen. Within a sew Hours you will hear either of my Death or Victory.
And so Farewell.

About this time Verrina returned to the Palace, and assured Count Fieschi,
that there was no reason for him to apprehend any manner of opposition in any
part of the City: that his Galley well Manned and Armed stood ready for a
Signal to block up the entrance of the Darsenne, and shut up (as it were)
Doria's Vessels which were then in that Harbor. Fieschi upon this distributes
Arms to those whom he had got together, and about Ten at Night began his
Expedition, having Marshaled his Men in this order. His Vanguard consisted of
One Hundred and Fifty Chosen Men, whose Courage and Skill in these Affairs he
had frequent Experience of. Next Marched the Count himself (attended by the
Nobles of his Party,) and, as it became a careful General, he made it his
business to see that his Soldiers observed the necessary Discipline of keeping
in their Ranks and Files. When they were come near to the Suburbs, Fieschi
dispatched his Natural Brother Cornelius to seize the Gate del Arco; which he
took without great difficulty, the Garrison-Soldiers who were but few, not
expecting to find themselves in a time of Peace to be so fiercely Attacked from
without, and at the same time betrayed from within their Walls by the Treachery
of Fieschi's Adherents. The Count being flushed with this good Success, sends
away presently his Two Brothers Jerome and Ottobuoni, together with Vincentio
Calcagno, to possess themselves of the Gate of St. Thomas. Just at this time
the Galley discharged their Cannon, which was the Signal agreed on to give them
notice of its arrival to the place appointed. As soon as Fieschi heard this, he
and the Soldiers that attended him hastened their March to the Bridge of
Cattani, having in their way thither passed through St. Andrew's Arch to St.
Donate's, and from thence all along the Street called Piazza de i Salvaghi.
When they came to the Bridge of Cattani, Verrina being got on board the Galley,
Thomas Assereto endeavored to make sure of the entrance into the Darsenne; who
at first had a free admittance granted him by those who guarded this Port,
because when he told them his Name they knew him to be a Servant of Jannetin's;
but as soon as they saw how many Soldiers followed him, they suspected his
design, and by main force thrust him out again, and put themselves vigorously
on the defensive. So that this Stratagem failing, and it being very necessary
that some Body should get in at that passage, and open the Gate for Fieschi's
entrance, it was resolved that Scipio Borgognoni, one of the Count's Subjects,
famed for his Courage and Conduct, should Arm and Man some of the smallest
Vessels, with which, thus provided against all Exigences, he should by Sea
force his passage into the Darsenne, and open a way for the Conspirators
Irruption at the place, where the Imposts upon Wines are assessed and paid. And
thus was the design successfully executed: For although there were some
Contrasts before the Soldiers in Garrison would quit their Post; yet the
Assailants being more in number, and of a more daring Courage, than the
Besieged, they quickly forced them to abandon their Fort.

By this time Fieschi arrived by Land to the Darsenne, and waited every Moment
for the Signal which was to give notice that his Galley was got safely thither:
But it happened that she came some time later than had been agreed on; for, the
Water being shallow, she ran aground, and it cost them full half an Hour to
Lanch her out again into the Deep.

These tumultuous motions by this time had raised a Hurly Burly in the
Darsenne; but before the Genoueses could be thoroughly alarmed with it, Count
Fieschi hearing the Signal given, ordered his Soldiers to fall upon Doria's
Galleys with all imaginable vigor and fury, which was accordingly executed, he
himself performing his part in this Assault. This unexpected violence, and the
sight of such a number of armed Men in possession of the Port, quickly alarmed
both the Seamen and the Galley Slaves; and now the Air was filled with a
confused and dreadful noise, the Slaves joining together in the common cry of
Liberty, and endeavoring to burst their Chains, the detestable Badges of their
Villainy and Servitude. But Count Fieschi never intended (nor would it have
much forwarded his design) to be Master only of so many empty Vessels;
therefore to prevent the damage that would accrue to him by the flight of these
Slaves; he made all possible have to get on Board the Admiral Galley which made
no great have either to escape or to return the violence the Enemies had
offered its Commander and Soldiers, La Capitana
being startled at these unexpected disorders. Fieschi being eager to
accomplish this design, ordered a plank to be laid for his Passage, one end of
it resting on the shore, and the other on the ladder in the poup of the Vessel;
this moveable Bridge proved the ruin of the whole Project; for neither end of
it being fastened, and the Galley happening, by some accident or other, to thrust
farther from the shore, Fieschi and the Bridge he so rashly trusted with his
life, were of a sudden plunged in the Waves.

He was armed at all points, and with the weight of this he was so oppressed,
that he could not save himself by swimming back to the Shore; and the darkness
of the Night, and the tumultuous Noises of so great a concourse of People,
hindered his Friends from perceiving the fatal Accident, or hearing the cries
and shrieks of their Leader in this desperate Extremity, which quickly put an
end to his life; he being rather stifled in a puddle of Muddy Water, than
drowned in the clear Ocean, and being clogged and weighed down by that Armor,
in which he had placed his greatest security.

Thus the Almighty by his unerring Providence derides and frustrates those
Cobweb Policies and vain Projects, wherewith unhappy short-sighted Mortals
amuse themselves, for this formidable Conspiracy, which had been framed and
carried on at the expense of so much time, and so many cunning Artifices, which
was now secured and strengthened by a competent Army, and was just ripe for
Execution, was at this very instant shattered and destroyed, by an event
sudden, unexpected, and in all appearance purely casual: Divine Justice
involving the Conspirators in those dreadful Calamities, to which their
Treacherous cruelty had designed to sacrifice their Native Country.

In the mean time (notwithstanding this Accident) the Conspirators boarded
Doria's Galleys, and maun'd them with a sufficient number of their own
Soldiers, of whose fidelity they had had the greatest experience.

Nor were Fieschi's two Brothers Jerome and Ottobuoni any ways wanting in the
Execution of their Commission; for as soon as they heard the Cannon discharged,
(which was the signal agreed on) they attackt the Gate of St. Thomas with 600
Men; intending when this was in their Power, to march from hence directly to
Doria's Palace (which was situated without the City Walls, and at a small
distance from this Gate) and there barbarously to assassinate Andrew Doria and
his Nephew Jannetin. The Garrison that was posted at this Gate, made an
honorable resistance for some time, and had not Fieschi corrupted some of the
Soldiers with Bribes, it is not a little probable that this attempt had proved
unsuccessful. For Sebastiani Lerearo and his Brother, one of them being
Captain, and the other Ensign of that party, coming in at that instance to
their assistance, held the Conspirators to a sharp and bloody Combat, till at
last the Captain being taken Prisoner and the Ensign killed in the Skirmish,
the defendants being betrayed by some of their fellow Soldiers, and briskly
assaulted by their Enemies, were at last put to flight, and so lost that Gate
they had so well defended; and which the Conspirators rather bought with their
Money than acquired by their valor. The Shouts of the Soldiers, the Clashing
of Weapons, and the Noise of the tumult grew so loud that it was heard to
Doria's Palace. The old Man was at this time confined to his Bed by a violent
fit of the Gout; but however was mightily alarmed at these unaccountable
Confusions; as was also Jannetin's Wife, who being waked by them presently,
told her Husband she apprehended the Galley Slaves were in a Mutiny. He
presently got up, and persuading himself that he should only find his own
Seamen engaged in some una rissa accesa per cagione dignoco.
jocular quarrel, or some accidental squabble easily reconcilable, he marched
toward the Gate of St. Thomas. And as if sat had hurried him on to his
certain destruction, he took no Arms with him but a Sword, nor any attendants
but one Servant, and a Page, who carried a Torch before him; although his
Uncle, prudently considering that the danger might be greater than it at first
appeared, had advised him to take with him a sufficient number of Men and Arms
to defend himself against any Violence that might be offered him; and his Wife
had with the most tender and affectionate Entreaties endeavored to persuade
him not to stir abroad till Morning: But he was deaf to her Prayers, and
regardless of his Uncle's Advice.

Jannetin, when he came to the Gate, supposing it was still Guarded by those
Soldiers of his own Party, whose Charge it used to be, being vexed at this
unseasonable Disturbance, and not finding so ready an admittance as he
expected, called out to them aloud con Pusata alterezza.
in an imperious manner (as was his custom) and commanded them to open the Gate
to him; which the Conspirators very joyfully did, as soon as they knew by his
voice, that it was Jannetin Doria, whom they hated and feared as one of the
greatest Obstacles to their wicked designs.

Having thus a fair opportunity for executing their Malice, they lost no time;
but as soon as ever Jannet in had put his head within the Wicket, they fell
upon him with all the Weapons they had at command, and barbarously Murdered
him leaving hardly any part of his body free from the bloody Characters of
their Cruelty. But Divine Justice signalized it self in the revenge of this
Murder, for at the same instant that unhappy Doria sell a Sacrifice to the
fury of his Enemies, Count Fieschi (as some Writers observe) who was the chief
contriver of this Murder, and by whose particular order his Soldiers
perpetrated it, ended his life in the wretch'd manner above related.

Jannetin Doria was a Person worthy of a longer life, for he was a true lover
of his Country, and a Scourge and Terror to the Corsaires of Barbary and other
Pirates, who cruis'd about the Coasts of Genoua, and interrupted the freedom of
Commerce: Therefore (if Genoua must have lost him in the Flower of his Age) his
Death would have been much more glorious, had he expired in the heat of Battle,
fighting against the common Enemy, than to perish (as he did) by the inhumane
Malice of Seditious Assassines and Traitors, who had set their Country in a
Flame and were just upon the point of completing its ruin.

It was a thing to be wondered at that those who murdered Jannetin did not, as
was at first resolved, run presently to Andrew Doria's Palace, and at the same
time (as would have been no difficult matter) have secured themselves (by
acting the same Villainy on the Uncle which they had lately done on the Nephew)
from the possibility of another Revolution, under the Conduct of that Patriot,
who had once before, and might again restore the liberty of Genuoa. Nor had
they reason to expect any thing at his hands in case he should furvive their
Malice and overthrow their Designs, but to be made memorable examples of
Public Justice, both for their bold Rebellion and their many Murders,
especially that of Jannetin which they might be sure would most nearly affect
him. But this Flagitious Act they forbore; whether it were that the horror of
what they had already done raised such a tumult in their minds, as is usual
with wicked Men that they knew not for a while, what to resolve on next. Or
whether they were stopped in the violence of their Carcer by Jerome Fieschi the
Count's Brother, who had no great apprehensions of any ill Consequences from
the life of Andrew Doria, a Man of Fourscore years Old, and very infirm in his
Body, left without guards and very thinly attended; now that he had dispatched
Jannetin a bold and resolute Young Man, and that Doria's Galleys and those of
the Republic were (as he believed) in the possession of his own adherents, and
that he had subdued his Enemies within the City, and taken their most
considerable Fortresses, so that he thought himself secure of the Conquest: Or
lastly, whether he feared that while the Soldiers greedy of Rapine where wholly
intent upon the Plunder of so rich a Palace as Doria's, their Enemies might
surprise them and cut them in pieces; or were desirous (as is probable enough)
to reserve that magnificent furniture, (which the rudeness of the Soldiers
would not have spared) whole and entire, as it then stood, to grace the
Triumphs of his Brother at his Victorious Entry.

In the mean time the Noise and Tumults increasing, and Andrew Doria not
knowing the occasion of them, inquired often what was become of Jannetin, but
could hear no Tidings at all of him, nor receive any satisfactory Information
about the Dreadful Confusions that reigned in all Quarters of the City: At last
he sent Louis Julia, one of his Domestics, into the City to learn the cause of
these Disorders, who brought him word in a very little time, that Count Fieschi
was become Master of the City; that the Circumstances of the Republic were
extremely dangerous; that the Galleys were in the possession of the
Conspirators; that the Populace were in so high a Sedition, as to declare
openly for Liberty, and to wish Success to the Arms of Fieschi whom they looked
upon as their Deliverer; that Armed Men outragiously Violent were to be met
with in every Street, who like Mad Men threatened Destruction, and a general
Plunder to all the Houses of Rich Men; that there was nothing to be seen but
Quarrels, Bloodshed, and Murder; and that in all parts Opprobrious and
Reproachful Language, with the bitterest Curses and Execrations against the
Nobility were to be heard; and lastly, that himself was in a particular manner
destined a Sacrifice to their Rage and Malice.

This News, though it did not at all affrighten the good Old Man, yet it
touched his Soul with so sensible a Grief, to see his Country, which he had
always loved with the tenderest Affection, just upon the brink of Ruin, that he
resolved without making any resistance to yield himself a Prey to the Impetuous
Fury of the Conspirators: Saying, that he ought not to live after the
Subversion of the Republic; and that he was now willing and desirous that the
small and unhappy remainder of his Life, should have the same Period with the
expiring Liberty of Genoua.

But the earnest Requests and Tears of his Wife, together with the obliging
Violence of his Servants, overruled his former Resolutions, and prevailed with
him to hasten his departure; which, they told him, was now become necessary:
Representing to him withal, that since the Annals of his Life were full of so
many generous and public spirited Actions, he ought to reserve the close of it
for the Common Good of his Country: That therefore he ought to be willing to
Live, that he might see his own Glory and Reputation redoubled, by restoring
Genoua once more to her Liberty, and repelling that Tyranny which was now
imminent, but under his Auspicious Conduct might yet be Crushed: That now was
the time for him to render his former Conduct the more illustrious, by
supporting these Misfortunes with a calm Fortitude, and by consulting the
Dictates of his own Mind, which he used to preserve serene and free from the
surprise of sudden Accidents, or the oppression of Despair: That Genoua had now
nothing to rely on for her Recovery, but the safety of his Person: That though
the Republic were for a while Oppressed by the Arbitrary Sway of the most
Egregious Villains, yet she could not despair of a Resurrection to her former
Glorious State, while she knew her Deliverer to be safe: That on all these
Considerations he should retire to some more secure place, and there prepare
those Remedies for the Public Distempers, which the present state of affairs
made it impossible for him to do while he continued in the City, (besides the
extreme danger his Life was in every Minute) that he must not look upon his
Retreat, as a timorous flight from the Perils and Disorders of his Country,
but as an Embassy in which at this Exigency Afflicted Genoua employed him, for
her own Safety and Benefit.

Thus by the united persuasions and entreaties of his whole Family, the good
Old Man, (who bent beneath the weight of so many Years, and was no less
afflicted in his Mind with the sad prospect of the Miseries of his Country,
than in his Body with the tormenting pains of the Gout) was prevailed with to
suffer himself to be carried on his Servants Shoulders, and by them set on his
Mule, which conveyed him to Mazone a Fortified Castle belonging to the Family
of Spinola, and Fifteen Miles distant from Genoua; in his way thither he stopped
at Sestri, and there heard the afflicting News of his Nephew Jannet in's Death.

While such a series of good Success attended the Arms of the Conspirators,
they at last began to miss Count Fieschi their Leader, and several of them were
detached to make a narrow search and enquiry after him. At last, when no news
at all could be heard of him, they grew suspicious of the Fatal Accident that
had ended his Life: However, the Governing Party among them smothered these
rising Jealousies as well as they could, least if it should be noised among the
Soldiers, they should desert their Colors, and through despair throw up a
Conquest already so far advanced. They loft a strong Guard at every Gate,
Ottobuoni Fieschi was entrusted with the Galleys, and Two Hundred of the most
Valiant of the whole Army, under the Command of Jerome Fieschi, were detached
according to their first Resolutions, to March through the Streets of Genoua
and excite the Mobile to take up Arms and join them. But this design did not
succeed according to their expectation, for although a vast number of the Scum
of the People fell in with the Conspirators, when they first Proclaimed a
General Liberty to be obtained for them by the means of Count Fieschi, and that
under his Protection they should continue in the secure enjoyment of it, yet
not one Tradesman of any Wealth or Reputation stirred a Finger in their
behalf. Whether it were that they abhorred and dreaded these Tumults and
Confusions, out of a sincere desire for the continuance of the Public
Tranquillity; or that they thought it a Precedent too dangerous to be allowed
of, that one of the Nobility should make use of the Populace only as Tools, for
the gratifying his own private Ambition, Avarice, or Vanity: Or whether they
thought themselves slighted by Count Fieschi, in that he undertook an Affair of
so public an Importance, without communicating his designs and intentions to
them from the very first: Or lastly, whether the remembrance of those excessive
Grievances under which they had been formerly Oppressed, made them hate the
Democratick Form of Government. For the Sovereign Power being placed in the
hands of the most despicable of the Populace, Public Affairs were managed
without any respect either to Discretion, or Decency, and the determination of
the most difficult matters falling to the share of Fellows that had neither
Sense, Virtue, Education, nor Experience, their Resolutions were consequently
Indeliberate, Violent, and Dangerous.

It Is hardly to be expressed what a disorder these Tumultuous Transactions had
put the whole City into. The People run about as if they had been distracted,
without knowing wither they had best to go; they asked one another what was the
cause of these Dreadful Confusions, but they were all struck with such a Panick
Fear, that they had not the power to return an Answer. Women of all Qualities
appeared at their Windows, and with the moving Eloquence of Sighs and Tears,
Lamented the Dangers to which their Husbands, Brothers, and Sons, were forced
in this Exigency to expose themselves for the necessary defense of their
Country. The Nobility were so Amazed, that they knew not whether it were best
for them, to assemble in a Body at the Doge's Palace, or to stay at their
several Houses, and defend them, as well as they could, from being Pillaged.
The Emperor's Ambassador being surpised at this unexpected Accident, was
preparing to leave Genoua, that his Master's Dignity might not receive any
Affront, or Outrage, by the Insolence which the Enraged Mobile might offer to
his Minister; but being over-perswaded by Paul Lasagna, a Man who had a great
influence over the Populace, he went to his House and staid there. This Lasagna
during these Distractions, got together a considerable number of his Friends
and Dependants; and having an inveterate Pique and Emulation with the Family of
Spinola on the account of their vast Riches and powerful Alliances, he staid at
home expecting the upshot of Fieschi's Rebellion; that he might accordingly
take such Measures as would best promote his own Interests. For he hoped that
by this Revolution there would be a way opened for the reinstating the Family
of the Adorni in their Ancient Possession of the Principality of Genoua;
several of those who now declared for Fieschi, being sincere and affectionate
Friends to the Adorni. The Emperor's Ambassador being resolved to stay in
Genoua, and to give what Assistance he could to a Republic so entirely devoted
to the Interests of the House of Austria, went with all speed to the
Ducal-Palace, where he found Jerome Doria the Cardinal, Adam Centurio, and
others of the Nobility, who met the rest of the Senate, and consulted with
them, Nicholas Franco being President of the Assembly, for at this time there
was no Or Duke.
Doge of Genoua. The result of their Deliberations, was, that Boniface
Lomellino, Christopher Pallavicino, and Anthony Calva, with a Cornet of the
Guards, and Fifty Soldiers, should march to the defense of the Gate of St.
Thomas; but in the way thither meeting with a Squadron of Fieschi's Party, they
Engaged with it, and being deserted and betrayed by several of their own Men,
were forced to retreat for shelter to the Palace of Adam Centurio: There having
reinforced themselves with several fresh Men, and being joined by Francis
Grimaldi, and Dominic Doria, they went boldly by another way toward the Gate,
to enquire what was become of Andrew Doria. But finding the Gate strongly
Guarded, and Lomellino (who had bravely attempted to break through their Ranks)
being taken Prisoner by the Conspirators, they were again put to slight, and
were quickly followed by Lomellino, who had had the good Luck to make his
Escape.

The Conspirators had not yet heard any Tidings of Count Fieschi, and Verrina,
who foresaw that without him their whole Project, though so far advanced, was
in an extreme hazard of being totally frustrated, and having in vain searched
all places where he thought he might find him, began to grow desperate, and
betook himself to his Galley: For by securing this he thought himself, safe,
what Event soever should happen. If Fieschi's Design succeeded well, then he
should be Master of the Darsenne, and preserve the strength and flower of the
Count's Army for other necessary Services: If the Attempt should fail, as the
present Circumstances of Affairs seemed to Threaten, he could then save himself
from the danger of being taken and punished as a Rebel, by Rowing as fast as he
could toward Marseilles. Nevertheless his keeping at such a distance proved a
very great inconvenience to Jerome Fieschi: For that Party of the Conspirators
which were on Land, seeing themselves, as it were, abandoned, both by Count
Fieschi their Leader, and by Verrina the Adviser and Contriver of this Design,
and both of them being Instruments absolutely necessary for the carrying of it
on, they could not entirely confide in the Conduct of Jerome Fieschi. Who being
very Young, had neither Experience nor Prudence, but in all his Management
showed himself to be hurried on by an Impetuous Rashness, without considering
himself, or harkning to the Reasons that others offered him. Besides this, the
Soldiers could not have that Esteem and Reverence for him, which they generally
bear toward Persons of an approved Valor, and an established Reputation;
which are the surest Methods to gain an Ascendant over the Hearts of the
People. So that they did not only begin to fall of from their first Ardor, but
also took all occasions that they could to desert the Service. Of so great
Moment is the Esteem Soldiers have of their General, toward the good or bad
Success of any Enterprise. But one Accident, which on all accounts should much
rather have abated the Heat and Rashness of Jerome Fieschi, helped rather to
increase it, and to puff him up with that senseless Ambition which afterward
proved his Ruin. By this time the certain News of Count Fieschi's Death was
confidently reported among his Adherents: And his Brother Jerome looking upon
himself as now the absolute Master of all these Forces, and thinking that the
prosecution of his Brother's Ambitious Designs was devolved to him as part of
his Inheritance, he flattered himself with the Prospect of obtaining for
himself that Principality, for which he had hitherto Fought in his Brother's
behalf. These deluding hopes, and the near view which he thought he had of
their Accomplishment, made him exert his utmost Vigor to complete his Victory;
for the Inducements are vastly greater when we know that we our selves shall
reap the Fruit of our Toil and Hazard, than when we only Act, as Engines, for
the Profit and Advancement of others.

In the mean time the Senators, and the other Citizens, who were assembled in
the Palace, were not wanting in their Assistance to their Country, now in all
appearance reduced to the last Extremity; but not having a sufficient number of
Forces to Cope with the Conspirators, and being Ignorant of Count Fieschi's
designs, they could not after all fix on any certain Resolutions. They thought
fit however to dispatch Jerome Fiesco, and Benedict Canavale, as Commissioners
from the Republic to Count Fieschi, to demand of him what his pretenses were
for raising these Commotions, and what End he designed by them. And quickly
after Cardinal Jerome Doria, a near Relation of Count Fieschi, accompanied by
John Baptist Lercaro, and Bernard Castagna, two Senators, was preparing to go
at the entreaty of the Senate, to desire a Personal Conference with the Count
himself; that so he might try whether the dignity of his Character, which
sometimes has greater power than the Ties of Blood, or the Force of Eloquence,
would be sufficient to restrain him from making any farther progress in so
dangerous an Affair. But several Wise Men dissuaded the Cardinal from exposing
the Reverence of his Order to the Insults and Affronts of the Populace, who at
the best are Rude and Inconsiderate, but were now in a very high Ferment.
Hereupon he turned back again, thinking it safer and better to deferr the
interposing the Authority of his Office, till he should have an opportunity to
discourse privately with Count Fieschi. So that the Senate proceeded to a new
Choice of some Gentlemen who were sent to know the Count's demands. Their Names
were, Augustine Lomellino, Hector Fiesco, Ansald Justiniano, Ambrose Spinola,
and John Balliano. These stopped at ( the Church of the Theatins) St. Cyro, and
there waited for Count Fieschi, whom they saw coming toward them, as they
thought, with his Friends, Guards and Attendants. As soon as the two Parties
were come pretty near to one another, Thomas Assereto, and others of the
Conspirators, drew their Weapons and begun to Assault the Genouese
Commissioners so fircely, that Lomellino and Hector Fiesco being not prepared
for so rude a Treatment, got back into the City with great hazard of their
Lives. When this Tumult was a little appeased, Ansald Justiniano went up to
Jerome Fieschi, and demanded of him where he might find the Count, that he
might impart to him the Message wherewith the Senate had entrusted him. To this
Jerome Fieschi returned a surly Answer, telling him, That he need not enquire
any farther for Count Fieschi, that he himself was possessed of that Dignity,
and that therefore he expected they should presently yield up to him the Senate
House, with all other Public Buildings and Fortifications which they were yet
Masters of. By this unadvised and ill timed Answer, the Genoueses concluded,
that John Lewis Count Fieschi was Dead. This inspired them with a new Life; for
after these Public Commissioners were returned to the Senate, and had
acquainted them with the certain News of the Elder Fieschi's Death, and with
the Arrogance of the Younger Brother, they Ordered that Twelve of their Number,
should get together as many of the Guards and the Populace, as being well
Armed, would be sufficient either to drive Fieschi's Vanguard out of the City,
or to cut them off if they should make a stubborn Resistance. But however, upon
second thoughts, they found it was not requisite to run the hazard of a Battle.
For those of the Mobile who, at the general cry of Liberty, went out and joined
with the Conspirators, chiefly out of a desire to plunder the Palaces of the
Nobility, now finding their expectations frustrated, and repenting of the
Sedition they had raised, fell off by little and little, and returned to their
own homes. For the Morning coming on apace, none of them were willing to be
discovered to be Accomplices of the Conspiracy. And several of their own Men
were inclined to follow this Example, thinking it better worth their while, to
contrive a secure retreat for themselves, than with the hazard of their Lives
to obtain a complete Victory, the profitable Consequences whereof would fall
only to the share of their Leader. So that Jerome Fieschi being arrived to St.
Laurence's Church, (which is the Metropolitical Church, and not far distant
from the Palace, whither he was marching in order to possess himself of it) and
being startled no less at the thinness of his own Troops, and their
unwillingness to engage the Genoueses than at the Number of Men which had been
got together by the order of the Senate, he was at a plunge what course he
should take. But at last, out of extreme caution for his own security, he went
back by St. Donate's, marching slowly to the Gate del Arco.

On the other side the Senators and chief Citizens of Genoua, who were
assembled at the Palace, received new Life and Vigor by this unexpected turn
of their Affairs: Insomuch that some of them were of Opinion, that, since
Fieschi's Troops were in such a disorder and consternation, it would be rather
advisable that those Genouese Soldiers, whom they had got together, should make
a brisk Assault upon them, than that the dignity of the Senate should descend
so low, as to Treat with their Rebellious Subjects on a Capitulation for Peace.
But those whose Age entitled them to the Character of Prudent and Experienced
Persons, were against this Proposal; as thinking it less Politic, though more
specious than the other: For, by avoiding a Battle, they should save the Lives
of many Citizens, who must have perished in it, (and how Laudable is this
Avarice, if I may so call it, in Governors and Generals!) as also by the same
caution prevent any sudden Accident, that might turn the Scale of Affairs, and
again involve the Commonwealth in those Miseries and Dangers, which, like a
Ship that has escaped the Perils of a Tempestuous Sea, and is now almost got
within sight of her desired Haven, having lately felt, she had reason to be
cautious of those Methods that perhaps might again reduce her to the same
Calamitous State. For the City being already in a great Ferment, and it being
in the Night time, and several Eminent Citizens being dissatisfied at the
present Constitution, and several others of them being already declared Rebels,
'twou'd have been as great an Error in Politics for the Government of Genoua
to have trusted them with Arms, as it would be ill management in a Physician to
perplex his Patient with such Medicines as would stir the Humors of his Body,
and set them on working, when he is so extremely Weak, that nothing but a quiet
and gentle course of Physic can possibly keep him alive. The Glory therefore
of healing these Public Distempers is to be attributed to the Prudent Advice
of Paul Pansa, who had before tried, but in vain, by the most reasonable
disswasives, to prevent them, and to preserve Fieschi's Family from the sad
Fate that attends Perfidiousness and Rebellion. He was called into their
Assembly, where having given them a satisfactory account of the Reasons of his
Conduct, he was ordered to go to Jerome, now Count Fieschi, and command him
from the Senate to quit the City, and to disband his Forces: Which if he would
comply with, the Republic promised an Act of Oblivion for what was past, and a
General Pardon to all the Conspirators. Hereupon, and by Pansa's persuasions,
and the Advice of Nicholas Doria his near Kinsman, who went with Pansa to make
up this Accommodation, Fieschi having left the City, an Instrument was drawn up
signed by Ambrose Senarega Secretary to the Senate, whereby the Public Faith
was given as a Security, that the Government would make good what they had
promised. So that Fieschi quietly retreated to Montobbio with his Guards and
Adherents. His Brother Ottobuoni, with Verrina, Calcagno, and Sacco, who
secured themselves on board the late Count Fieschi's best Galley, when they saw
their Affairs entirely ruined, they steered their course to Marseilles,
carrying with them in Chains Sebastian Lercaro, Manfred Centurio, and Vincent
Vaccaro, who were taken Prisoners at the beginning of the Tumult, between the
Darsenne and the Gate of St. Thomas: But these Gentlemen they afterward
released, setting them on shore at the Mouth of the River Varo. Thus Fieschi's
best Galley Sailing with all possible have toward France, and the Galliots
being likewise dispersed, the Haven of Genoua was again open, and a free
passage left for all Vessels to come in and go out without opposition. Hence it
came to pass that about Three Hundred Turkish Slaves, Su lospuntar dell' Alba.
who were Cruising about the Island An Isle of Tuscany.
Elba, took the opportunity offered them by the general Confusion; and having
Armed and Manned Doria's Galley, called the Temperance, they presently turned
her Prow toward Africa, and made such have, that, though Don Bernardin
Mendozza's Two Galleys pursued her with great Expedition and indefatigable
Diligence, they could not overtake her. To this considerable loss of Andrew
Doria's, we may also add the slight of the Galliots boarded by Fieschi, which
were rowed off by the Slaves that Managed them, and the plundering the other
Galleys that remained, of all their Arms and Furniture.

'Twas Four Days before the Body of John Lewis Count Fieschi was found: So that
the Populace were inclined to believe he, with the others, had escaped to
Marseilles. This made several Apprehensive that the War was rather deferred
than ended, and that after Count Fieschi had openly thrown off the Allegiance
of a Subject, and begged the Assistance of the French, for completing his
Ambitious Designs, he would at his return prosecute the War with greater
Vigor, and with a Cruelty suitable to his Perfidiousness. But this suspicion
lasted not long; for in a little time Fieschi's Body was found and taken up;
and after it had for a while been exposed to the Public View, near the place
where he fell in, it was, by the order of Andrew Doria, carried to the Main
Ocean, and there Buried in the Waves, though some indeed falsely gave out, that
it was hanged on a Gibbet, which Ignominy, though the Person deceased had very
well deserved, yet it would have looked more like the Vain Efforts of an
Impotent Malice, in Executing a Dead Man, than the Just Punishment of a
Criminal.

Now were the Genoueses perfectly free from all Fears and Apprehensions; and
the Morning after the Senate being Assembled, sent Benedict Centurio, and
Dominic Doria, to Condole with Andrew on the loss of his Nephew Jannetin, and
to conduct him back to the City; where, all Tumults being appeased, Benedict
Gentile a Person of known Prudence and Integrity, and much beloved for his
Candid and Affable Behavior, was chosen Duke of the Republic of Genoua. As
soon as the Genoueses found themselves released from those excessive Fears
which had lately possessed them, and saw their Public Affairs again restored
to their former Channel, of an undisturbed Tranquillity, they began to reflect
on the greatness of their past Dangers; which appearing much more Formidable
now that they were calmly debated and considered, than when the General
Confusion hindered them from thinking of any thing, but how to escape or
surmount the particular Danger that at that instant Threatened them, they were
inclined to be of Opinion, that the Terms of Accommodation lately granted by
the Republic, were not only too gentle, but also might be unsafe and
dishonorable. This occasioned a long Debate in the Senate, many of them being
of the contrary Opinion, but at last all Doubts were so thoroughly cleared, and
all Objections so fully answered, that it being put to the Vote, it was
Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the Public Faith given to the
Conspirators ought not to retard the Executing on them the Punishment due to
their Villainy. This their Resolution was grounded on the following Reasons:
That the Pardon lately granted had passed in an Assembly, where there was not
the Number of Senators requisite by the Constitutions of Genoua, to give this
or any other Public Act a sufficient Validity: That a Promise extorted from
any Man by Fear or Necessity was not at all Obligatory: And what greater and
juster Fears could any on ebe sensible of, than those they had lately felt,
when they saw the Republic in such extreme danger of an irrecoverable Ruin?
That the Crime of High Treason was in all respects so Heinous, that no Plea
could be allowed of for the mitigation of its Punishment: That it is hardly
possible to invent Tortures severe enough for the Betrayers of their Country
to suffer: And that so remarkable an Example of Impunity, when the Villainy had
been so horrid, and the Consequences of it had like to have been so Fatal,
would probably encourage others in the like Attempts. On these Grounds they
declared their Capitulation with the Conspirators to be ipso facto invalid, and
that being thus set aside, they formed Processes against the chief of those who
were concerned in the Treason and Rebellion. The Palaces of John Lewis Count
Fieschi were Confiscated, and by the Emperor's consent divided into several
Houses for Merchants, and other Private Men, and Leas'd out as the Senate
thought most proper for the increasing their Revenue: Fieschi's La casa de
Fieschi all Inviolata.
Palace in the Street called L'Inviolata, a large, Princely, and Magnificent
Stucture, was demolished and raised even to the very Foundations: Fieschi's
Three Brothers, and Verrina, who were looked upon as the Prime Contrivers and
Managers of the Conspiracy, were declared Traitors and Rebels: As for other
Persons concerned in it, they being adjudg'd only Accessaries and Abettors of
the Fact, were several of them by Name Condemned to Banishment for Fifty Years.

But Ottobuoni Fieschi, not content with the secure retreat he enjoyed at
Marseilles, came back a while after to Mirandola, and by his frequent Journeys
from the French Army, which then lay Encamped thereabouts, into France, and his
returns thither again, gave the Republic just occasion to suspect that there
was some new design carrying on against them. Jerome Fieschi having Lodged
himself in Montobbio, and Verrina being come back to him with several others of
his Adherents, he made it his business to Fortify the Castle, and to lay in
vast Stores of Ammunition and Provision. This gave so great an Alarm to the
Senate, that having consulted the Emperor, they were all of Opinion (as he was
likewise) that it was absolutely necessary for them to possess themselves of
that Fort. It stands just at the back of the City, and besides other Natural
Advantages for strength, its high situation made it formidable to the
Genoueses, as being a place able to do them a great deal of Mischief, if that
Nest of Traitors that had sheltered themselves there, should prevail with the
French to make use of it, toward the recovery of their former Power in Genoua;
which could not be compassed without the Ruin of their present Constitution.
For these Reasons therefore the Senate sent Pansa again to Count Jerome
Fieschi, to try if he could persuade him, and those of his Family who had any
Interest in the Reversion, to sell it to the Genoueses on such Terms as should
be agreed on at a Treaty between both Parties. But Fieschi having but a small
stock of Prudence, and perhaps being puffed up with a vain Opinion of Success
from the Liberal Promises wherewith the French had buoyed him up, he did not
only deny to comply with the Senate's Proposal, but also, as if he had studi'd
to increase the Jealousies they had of him, and to hasten his own Ruin, he told
Pausa, That he kept the Fort for the Service of a far greater Prince than
himself, meaning the French King. This Answer so surpised the Genoueses, that
after many threatening Messages sent to Fieschi, and Public Declarations
against his Proceedings, they resolved to try if they could out him by force.
In order hereunto they sent several Companies of Soldiers, with a good Train of
Artillery, under the Command of August in Spinola, an Experienced Captain, to
besiege the Fort, which, after having hold out for some time, was forced to
Capitulate, but could obtain no better Terms, than that Jerome Fieschi and his
Adherents should surrender themselves at discretion. This dedition of theirs
occasioned many Disputes in Genoua, which were at first whispered about, till
being debated in the Senate, both sides of the Question found its resolute
Assertors both in that Assembly, and in all Public Meetings. When it was
proposed in the Senate, what should be done with Jerome Fieschi, and the rest
of the Prisoners, the House divided upon it, some were for Pardoning, and
others were for Executing the Conspirators. And, (as it commonly happens when
any thing is debated by Men that are bigoted to their Opinions,) every one
defended his own Sentiments with so much Zeal, and Animosity, that laying aside
all thoughts of Moderation between both, some aggravated the Fact as the most
Execrable Parricide that ever was committed, and others represented it as the
consequences of Juvenile Rashness and Levity, severely enough punished by the
Death of Count Fieschi, and the other Penalties I have already mentioned, and
therefore not deserving any farther Censure. This Party had so well exerted
their Eloquence, in praising Clemency even to an excess, stiling it a Quality
absolutely necessary for those that sit at the Helm of Government, and in
extenuating the Crimes of the Conspirators, calling their design the effects of
the late Count Fieschi's Ambitious and Revengeful Temper, and the
Inconsiderateness of his Brothers who were very Young, that they had almost
gained their Point, and got it resov'd that they should be acquitted. But
Andrew Doria hearing of what Vote was like to pass, and being extremely
grieved, that the Traitors had so strong a Party even in the Senate House, who
seemed rather Betrayers of their Country, than such Patriots as deserved a
place in that Assembly, he came thither, and discoursed to them so excellently
on the Subject, that he turned the Scales to the Juster side: And without any
Debate, it was Resolved Nemine Contradicente, That Jerome Fieschi, and the rest
of the Prisoners, should be put to Death: Which was accordingly Executed upon
them.

Thus the Conspiracy of John Lewis Count Fieschi, which had so much Affrighted
and Disturbed Genoua, ended at last in the Ruin of himself, his Family, and his
Adherents. Had it proved Successful, and Advanced him to the Power he so much
aimed at, of being absolute Prince of Genoua, yet it is my Opinion, that he
could not have long enjoyed the Fruits of his Prosperous Villainy. For (to say
nothing of the Interests of several Princes in Europe, and particularly of the
Emperor) the Genoueses cannot bear the heavy Yoke of Servitude. Therefore
although some Rich Men, of the inferior Rank of Citizens, growing Proud and
Turbulent, have always had a Pique against the Nobility, and have been ready to
join with any Seditious Tumult, or Foreign Force, that pretended to divest them
of their Authority; nevertheless the Populace in general, who Enjoy the Ease
and Tranquillity of Living under a Moderate Government, cannot hanker after so
great Change as is that of a Free Republic, into a Despotick Monarchy. It Is
true, the Plebeians of Genoua have sometimes Revolted out of their Natural
Inconstancy; sometimes out of Covetousness and Envy at the Wealth of some
particular Men; sometimes out of an insatiable desire of Revenge on some
Person, Family, or Party, whom they Hated: Yet nevertheless I cannot find by
their Annals, that any of these Revolts ever ended in the loss and extinction
of their Liberty, but only in changing their Governors, and in making some
small alterations in the Form of their Government. As for Example, the
Governors whom they received from France, and from the Dukes of Milan, never
pretended to Act as Absolute Princes, or to be Obeyed without Reserve. And when
at any time they stretched their Authority beyond its due Limits, the same
Genoueses, whose Discord had first given them Footing, began to grow Jealous
that their Liberty was struct at, and formed an Association for the Expelling
the Foreigners. Nor did the French King's Entry into Genoua with a Victorious
Army, or his Building Fortresses almost inexpugnable, accomplish his Design of
Governing the Republic after the French manner. For the innate Love of
Freedom, always inspired this Nation with an undaunted Courage and irresistible
Vigor, in opposing any Foreign Force whenever they grew Jealous of it; and
besides this, those few Eminent Citizens that were Malcontents, had so slender
grounds for their Dissatisfaction, that 'twas a very easy matter, in times of
common danger, to sweeten their Tempers into a Mutual Reconciliation with each
other, and an entire Affection to their Fundamental Constitution. For although
the being excluded from the Honors and Dignities of the Republic, (whereunto
nevertheless by a Law peculiar to Gennua, called The Law of Ascription, there
is a way left open for Deserving Men,) and the being sometimes subjected to the
Insolences of a Proud and Indiscreet Senator, may seem a great Hardship and
Misfortune, yet if with this are balanced the many Advantages flowing from a
freedom and security of Commerce, and the many Privileges and Liberties enjoyed
in the Chief City of so Wealthy a Republic, the cause of Complaint, if there
be any, is extremely Minute and Inconsiderable. For in Genoua there is not only
an Impartial Administration of Justice exactly observed in all Cases without
respect of Persons, the Nobility themselves, notwithstanding their Superiority
over others, as to Birth, Fortune, or Quality, being Punishable for the
Injuries and Oppressions they are guilty of toward the meanest Complainant;
but also every one is absolute Master of his own Estate, which under an
Arbitrary and Despotick Government, must (together with his Life, and the
Honor of his Family) lie exposed to the unbridled Passions of a Flattered and
Abused Tyrant These Reasons incline me to believe, that Count Fieschi, with the
Assistance of those few Villains whom Verrina had procured for him, might have
Plundered the City, and Enriched himself with the Spoils of so many Wealthy
Families, and besides all this, taken a full Revenge on his Enemies; but I can
hardly persuade my self that he could ever have Oppressed their Liberties, and
Established himself their Prince, unless the Genoueses had so far lost their
Senses as to think to Cure some small Malady, by applying a Remedy much more
Sharp and Violent than the Distemper, which instead of healing the Disease,
must unavoidably destroy the Patient.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Translator's Preface, P. 2. l. 4. r. confirmed. P. 3. l. 1. r. the
famous. P. 14. l. 22. r. same strange. In the Book, P. 2. l. 7. r. in
fomenting. P. 21. l. 13. r. Imperial Doria in Italick Letters. P. 29. l. 17. r.
were. P. 38. l. 10. r. an indelible. P. 44. l. 7. r. splendour. P. 53. l. r.
grievous. P. 77. l. 25. r. and the station. P. 80. l. 13. r. such Fantasms. P.
82. l. 6. r. Adam Centurtone. P. 84. l. 15. r. with the attractive splendour of
his Dress and Equipage. P. 89. l. 12. r. Phillippin. P. 90. l. 14. r. Sisters.
P. 91. l. 25. r. in the Margin alla Sfilata singly, or not in a Body. P. 107.
l. 12. r. Aegean. P. 111. l. 20. r. words. P. 122. l. 17. r. they expressed. P.
126. l. 4. r. this. P. 137. in Margin, r. con L' Vsata alterezza. P. 135. in
the Marg. r. di givoco. P. 159. l. 5. r. arrived at. P. 163. l. 21. r. Turkish
Slaves at break of day took the Opportunity. l. 32. dele who were Crusing about
the Island Elba. In Marg. dele (b) an Isle of Tuscany. P. 164. l. 2. r. toward
the Coast of Africa. P. 167. l. 20. r. any one.

Books Printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons against the Temple-Gate in
Fleet Street.
A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion in several Essays, or the Light
of Nature a Guide to Divine Truth, by Mr. Tim. Nourse, in Octavo.

A Charge given at the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of
Surrey holden at Darking the 5th of April 1692, by the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire
one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County.

The History of Don Quixot of Sancha, and his Trusty Squire Sancha Pancha, now
made English, according to the humor of our Modern Language, and Adorned with
several Copper-Cuts, By J. P.

The Historical Relation of Count de Fieschi's Conspiracy against the City and
Republic of Genoua, done into English by the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire

The Ghost of the Emperor Charles the Fifth appearing to Volcart the Porter,
being a comparison between the said Emperor, and the present King of France, in
a Dialogue concerning the times.

A Memorial for the Learned, or Miscellany of Choice Collections from most
Eminent Authors in Philosophy, Physic, History, and Heraldry.

A Sermon Preached at St. Hilary's in the Isle of Jersey before the Garrison,
April the 10th, 1692. By Phillip Fall, M. A. Rector of St. Saviors in the
said Island.


