A Loving Invitation, And A FAITHFUL WARNING TO ALL PEOPLE, Who believe they
must give an Account to the Righteous GOD for the Deeds done by them in the
Flesh, That they speedily seek to make their Peace with the Living GOD, who
made them, before the Stroke of his Justice come upon them.

Which is the Breathing of my Life, even to All who Resort unto, or be
Separated from the House of RIMMON, But are not yet truly come to own the Seed
of Life, the LIGHT of CHRIST in their Consciences, to be their Teacher; And so
to believe in it, as they may be saved by it.

By MARTIN MASON.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand.

A Loving Invitation, And A FAITHFUL WARNING TO ALL PEOPLE.
My Friends,
ALthough you have not yet put on the Wedding Garment, yet can I freely give
this friendly Title to you; for I have nothing but bowels of Love, and
unfeigned Affections in my bosom for you, that in Gods appointed time his Light
may be the Leader of you, and a Savior to you from all your sins.

It Is Satan's design to keep the Soul in sin while it is in the body; and that
he may uphold his devilish kingdom for term of life, he feeds man with a man
hope of a Heaven after Death, though he dye in sin; and this is the Devis
Masterpiece, to deceive the Simple with that Fools Paradise. But know this, No
unclean thing can enter into Gols Kingdom; And as the Tree falls so it lies;
You cannot dye in sin, and be crowned Saints: In the Grave there is no
Repentance, nor Redemption out of the Pit; the Papists Purgatory cannot purify
you, it is a mere Imagination, a cursed Invention of the Devil's finding out,
that sinks many thousands into endless perdition.

Be no longer deceived, God will not be mocked: you cannot live the life of the
Wicked, and dye the death, or have the Reward of the Righteous: Mortify
therefore your members which are on the Earth, all Uncleanness, inordinate
Affections, Lusts, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry. You have but one thing
in your which is your friend and that is the Righteous Seed, which has ever
suffered by you, and been suppressed in you, but does not resist you, only as
an innocent Lamb, it bears its Testimony against you, that your deeds are evil,
and that is the reason why it is not regarded by you. Is not he a Friend that in
love and meekness lays your infirmities before you, and not only so, but
sweetly gives good counsel to you, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon
you? This is Gods living Witness, which he has placed in you, to be a Light to
shine within you, a Guide and Leader of you out of the Pride, Pollutions,
Pleasures and Vanities of the World, a Staff to stay and strengthen you; It is
the Power of God unto Salvation to all that believe in it, and are faithful and
obedient to it; It is the Armor of God, wherewith the Followers of the Lamb
make war against the Dragon; By this the Saints overcome sin, resist the Devil,
and batter down his kingdom: Make trial of it, come, put it on, and wear it,
and be clothed with it: I have made proof of it, and gives this Testimony for
it, I find it the only weapon which wounds the head of the wicked in me, and
overcomes him for me; Glory, glory unto Sions King for ever who is so good and
gracious to me, that has given the Enemy of my Soul such a mortal wound within
me, that he is not able to overcome me: for Michael my Prince is with me, and
fights valiantly for me, day and night I feel his Presence with me, the riches
of his Mercies he daily showers upon me, which all the sons of Adam are not
able to take from me; This is my joy, this my comfort, The Eternal God is
within me; I fell not his frowns, no, he smiles upon me, and makes my Prison
as pleasant as a Palace to me.

And if I never speak or write word more, this is my Testimony for the Light of
Christ all your Consciences; It is the tender love of the living God unto you
(I speak what I know) to subdue and conquer sin (which is the Devils kingdom)
for you, and within you, if in your hearts you love the Light, believe in it,
be obedient to it, and are willing to be guided by it. There is no other
Antidote against the poison of Sin, but this Holy Seed; there is no other
Physician can cure you of this Leprofie, but Isreal's Light; This Balm of Gilead
is the Sovereign Cure for a Wounded Conscience; there is none can heal you but
he that smites you.

You that in any measure have got victory over some of your sins, Consider
seriously how you came by it: Did you not receive strength, zeal and power from
a principle within you? Felt you not a war in your hearts? Was not your peace
broken? That which brake your peace, began the war; That which began the war
against your wickedness, was Michael my Prince: Was it not he that wounded the
Uncircumcised One within you, who sought to lord it over you, and to keep Lust
alive in you? Felt you not the sting of sin to arise from within you? Had not
sin its root or rise from the fleshly part or principle within you, even in
your hearts? and was there not something that there wounded you, and made your
sin a heavy burden to you? Walked you not heavily under its stroke for the
sins which were committed by you? And then did you not feel a loathing of sin
begotten in you? And was not Iniquity then a Burden to you? Was there not a
secret Power which rebuked the Tempter in you? and was not this Power then
sweet and precious to you, that did thus in your distress master sin, and
overcome it for you? Was not this an inward work, and was not he your friend
who did this for you? and was he not within you? Surely Satan would not weaken
his own kingdom; It was the Spirit of the Lord within you who did that good for
you; Let him not be forgotten, but ever loved and honored by you. Look no
longer out, nor gaze no more about you, but be assured God's Kingdom is within
you, and is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, as the Scriptures
plainly testify unto you; And shall God be kept any longer out of his Kingdom
by you?

God is Light; All Sin is Darkness, and arises out of the heart of man, and
that is within you; So is the Light which shines in Darkness, and for your sins
is a Reprover of you, and so must be till sin be subdued in you: when that by
him is done, Christ is a Savior to you; but till then you must find him a
Condemner of you: And it is not your flying to the Scriptures that can save you
from the fire of his Wrath when once it is kindled in you, nor in your heaviness
take the burden from you, nor overcome the least corruption for you: No verily,
nothing then but a Christ within you can give the least dram of comfort to you.
Had you ten thousand Bibles with you in the time of your distress, they would
be nothing worth unto you, if the Presence and Comfort of a Christ be taken
from you: I appeal to your very Consciences if this be not true which is here
declared to you.

Come then, O come with boldness unto God's faithful Witness within you, and
bear with patience the sentence which that shall pass upon you; It must and
will first or last be a Condemner of you; but it will only reprove that which
is for Condemnation in you. You may believe me, it will not flatter you, nor
indeed render your condition worse than it is with you, but speak the mind of
God in plainness to you, and that is the reason why it is now so little regarded
by you; bear I say in patience its gentle Reproofs within you; it will but
purify, and not destroy you: Christ must first be known a Judge within you, a
Condemner of every idle thought, word and deed, before he be a Savior to you:
let him be your Lawgiver; what he commands you in your Consciences, that
submit and be obedient to; and he gives power, if it be to part with your
dearest Dalilah, your bosom sins; stoop unto, and live in the Cross to your
crooked wills, and take up the Crown, for then he is a Savior to you. Be you
but willing to part with that which grieves his righteous Soul, and brings a
weight upon you; so shall you never want his Power to execute his Command, to
overcome and part with, first one sin, then another. I speak my own experience.
Let but your crooked wills be subjected to Christ's Cross, and then his Yoke is
easy, and his Burden light; then will you run with cheerfulness the race of
his Commandments.

If ever man be otherwise justified by his Maker, than by believing in Gods
Covenant of Light, which in the Conscience bears its Testimony against all
Iniquity, and leads those out of sin, who are willing to forsake sin, and
believe in him, and be guided by him; then let me be for ever condemned from
the presence of the righteous God: This is the chief Cornerstone, the Rock
which every wise man builds upon: This is that which the Learned Rabbis of
this Ages, and all outside peevish Professors stumble at, and will not have to
reign over them, but make war against him, and this is that which will grind
them to powder.

This is that Holy Seed which from righteous Abel to this very day has ever
been persecuted by Cains Brood, who can do no better while they live in that
persecuting nature: This is that innocent Lamb, who now suffers by the
devouring Lions in most of the Prisons of this Nation, in the Persecuted
People, called Quakers, for not bowing to the will of man, which speaks
contrary to the Law of God; Those are they who in all these Overturning times,
since they were turned to the righteous God, who have been cried up as
Jesuitical, the Spawn of the Papists, Enemies to all Government, Plotters,
Conspirators, Rebels, Traitors; yet none of all this Trash ever was, nor ever
can be justly proved against them: Who more peaceable in the Nation than this
People, who live in obedience to that just Principle of God within them, whose
Kingdom is not of this World; and therefore with a carnal worldly weapon they
neither do nor can sight for it, Who does the Rage of the Heathen (who know not
God) sooner reach or fall upon, than this Innocent People? Who does the young
Nurseries of our English Rabbis, yea, those who should be taught better
manners, and use more manhood, rail, revile, imprison, and in many places of
this Nation unreasonably wound, abuse and persecute, so much as this innocent
harmless People, who never yet could, nor ever shall lift up a hand against
their Enemies?

Tell me now, O ye Professors of this Nation, is not Innocence now counted for
a Crime? And what have you got by warring, writing, or bending your tongues
against this People, and their Principle? Is not the Rod, which many of you in
the secret of your hearts prepared, or desired might be laid upon them, very
near to come upon your selves? Is it not just with the righteous God to let in
this Flood upon you, even for the secret malignity which lodged in many of your
hearts against this People? Have, have, I say, into the Ark of God, Else verily
I see this Deluge will overtake you, sink and drown you.

They who feared the Lord did gather and assemble themselves together, and
spoke often one to another; But this is now counted a Crime, for this Innocent
People to meet peaceably together in their own hired houses, to wait upon the
living God, and as the Lord gives utterance, to edify one another. And Christ
the Son of God said. Swear not at: and James his Apostle said, Above all
things, my Brethren, swear not. But now it is counted worthy of Imprisonment,
Confiscation of Goods, and Banishment, for the Children of God to be obedient
to God, in his fear to assemble together and wait upon him, and not to Swear at
all. Is it not a sad thing, that obedience to the living God should by the sons
of men, who would be counted Christians, be thus taken for such a heinous
Crime, little less than Treason, and so severely punished? What think you of
this? Is Caesar's Proclamation grounded upon Christ's Religion? or, were they
Christ's friends who advised Caesar to take this course? It is not a high breach
of the Privileges of Gods People? Whom shall we obey herein, God or man? judge
ye, O ye wise in heart.

Behold and see, all you that pass by! Did ever any People suffer more
innocently than we do at this day? Because a handful of rash inconsiderate men
rise up against Caesar, shall therefore the Sons of Innocence be numbered
amongst Transgressors, and thus undeservedly be proclaimed for Plotters? O the
hastiness of men, and unadvisedness of such Counselors! verily they are
Enemies to God, and to his Kingdom; the Lord forgive them, O that they may see
their Error and be ashamed.

If we now assemble together in Gods fear to wait upon him, and cannot for
Conscience Sake any Oath at all; then Bonds to be sure are like to abide us;
next Confiscation of Goods, and Imprisonment at Caesar's pleasure, if not
Banishment to boot.

And if we submit to man herein, we offend God: Do you not see the Snare which
unreasonable men have laid for the Innocent? Do you not see Vice and Vanity
abounds abroad and rants it with Impudence; and Profaneness has liberty, while
the Suns of Innocence, God's harmless Flock, are shut up in Prisons?

Were we of the World, the World would love us, for the World loves its own;
but we are not of the World, therefore the World hates us: Is it not so? let
that of God in your Consciences arise and judge between us and our Enemies.

But the little Flock are filled with an holy Resolution in this holy War
against the Beast and False Prophet, who seek to poison the King in his
Affections to this Innocent People. The Righteous Innocent Seed, though it
suffer unto Death, cannot bow to the Unrighteous Law of Man; though not a
People in the Nation more willing to submit to Just Government than they are. O
let the Sufferings of the Innocent come before you, be tenderly affected by
you, and a Warning to you, that you may hasten to the righteous God that made
you, and be faithful to his Witness within you, in whatsoever it requires of
you: And be not discouraged because Trials seem near unto you, they will not
harm you, but rather be good for you What if the Rod of the Wicked reach you,
and for a season be laid upon you, it is but to try you; It shall not always
rest upon the back of the Righteous; Sion shall not always sit in the dust.
Faint not, I say, nor be discouraged; There is a Remnant that cannot bow the
knee to Baal, yet are we no Enemies to Caesar's Person, nor good Government; for
we cannot fight with a Carnal Weapon, neither for him, nor against him, but
desire to live peaceably under him in the exercise of our Tender Consciences
toward God, and toward man; and for that end do we willingly pay Tribute to
him: But in the Kingdom of our Consciences he must not come to rule; Christ
Jesus alone, the Prince of Peace and Lord of Righteousness, must king it there,
and not King Charles; no, nor the greatest Monarch upon Earth.

Therefore let not this dark cloudy day be any discouragement at all unto you
in the exercise of your Consciences toward God. This Day must have a Night;
Cold Winter will away; The Sun of Righteousness will arise and shine gloriously
in the hearts of the People. Sufferings cannot fright the Suffering Seed, nor
Death it self, if it come, cannot daunt them: For Sions King is with them, the
God of Israel is in the midst of them, and speaks Comfort to them; their Joy
and Peace in God no mortal can take from them.

Dear Friends, yet a little while, and the Clouds will clear again; God will
plead the Cause and Innocence of his People in the Consciences of his and their
Enemies: What though they seek to weary out the Saints with Sufferings, their
expectations shall fail them; for God is the Supporter of his People in all
their Trials; for the Work is the Lords.

It Is in vain for Antichrist to make War with the Lamb, he shall find him a
Terrible Lion; It Is the last Blow that ever the Beast and False-Prophet shall
be able to give to the Royal Seed of Sions King; the Rage of the Heathen will
hasten and help forward their own Ruin: The strength of Egypt is but as straw,
the fire of the Lord shall consume it; and till then we do not expect to be
delivered from it, but are contented patiently to suffer under it, what ever
God shall suffer Man to inflict upon us. In the mean time (Friends) let not
Bitterness be in your hearts toward us, nor any prejudice rise up in you
against us, because the Decrees of Men who are now in Authority do not favor
us; The righteous God knows the innocence of our Sufferings, and that we are
neither Caesar's, yours, nor the Nations Enemies, but your harmless Friends.

Wherefore let your Moderation appear toward all men, and do no otherwise to
us, than you would have us or others do to you: That Is the Royal Law of Sions
King, whom both you and we do owe subjection to in all things. Come, O come, I
say, to Gods Witness in your Consciences, and that will teach you the Fear of
the Lord, to Depart from Iniquity, which is the beginning of Wisdom. No true
Wisdom can be possessed until the Fear of God be truly witnessed; which cannot
be, unless Iniquity be departed from. Dominion over sin you can never get,
until you come to Gods Witness, which in your Consciences declares against it,
and are willing to submit unto the Light, that it may lead you over all the
Mountains of Iniquity, and overturn all the strongholds of Satan, and destroy
his kingdom within you; For you have no other Armor to use against him, but
the Light, which if you truly love and believe in, will, like David's sling and
stones; hit the Uncircumcised Philistine in the Forehead; with the Light must
you overcome him, and mortally wound that Man of Sin: If you use any other
Weapon in this Spiritual War, you cannot prosper nor prevail against him, but
must be overcome and conquered by him. The Scriptures, nor any other outward
thing, are not able to grapple with him; you must put on the Armor of Light,
and with that resist him, or else be taken Captive by him: It Is the Power of
that righteous Spirit that must prevail against him. O let not Sin any longer
be kept alive in you, for it is that which keeps Gods blessing from you, and
hinders him from being reconciled unto you, and is the cause of all the trouble
that comes upon you; Sin brings a weight which will be too heavy for you: Have,
have, and meet the Righteous God by a true Repentance and forsaking of your
sins, that he may show mercy to you before his judgments be poured down upon
you: For verily in the Fear of the Lord I testify unto yon Gods heavy
Indignation, his hot Displeasure will speedily overtake you, if your Iniquities
be not speedily forsaken by you.

Gods dreadful Vengeance is near unto the Wicked, in the Fear of the Lord I
declare it to you, O that you may hear and fear, and sin no more against the
God that made you: O be not so vainly presumptuous as to trifle away your
precious time; O put not the day of the Lord afar off; for lo, I tell you, it
is very near unto you, it is even at the door: The time is nigh at hand when
God will visit for the Iniquities of the people, and wound the hairy scalp of
the wicked. Then shall the Drunkards Mirth be turned into Howling, and the
Oaths and Curses of the Wicked be a weight upon their Consciences too heavy for
them to bear: Then shall the Proud and Lofty be laid in the Dust, and those
that fare deliciously every Day by grinding the faces of the Poor, shall be fed
with Torment; and the Glutton in sorrow be sent into his Sepulcher: The wrath
of the Wicked against the Innocent, shall then meet with Judgment from the
Dreadful God; though his suffering Lambs do freely forgive them, yet the Fire
of the Lord shall be kindled within them, and burn in their bowels till it have
consumed them; And the Lukewarm Professors, who are neither cold nor hot, who
stand gazing at the Innocent afar off, and in the secret of their hearts do
little better than count the Cross foolishness; these will the Lord recompense
according to their Doings; He will stain the Pride of their Hearts, and spue
upon their Glory; and their Hypocrifie and mere outside Profession shall
stink, and be an ill favor to all sober people.

Ah! how Terrible will this approaching Day of the Lord be unto the Wicked?
Verily they shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God. The greedy
Priests shall then be utterly confounded; the Merchants of Babylon shall weep
and lament bitterly day and night; Sorrow and Angish shall come forcibly upon
them, the Worm in their Consciences, which never dies, shall then begin to gnaw
them; yea, that never-dying Worm shall then fearfully torment them, and never
leave till it have utterly consumed them: All the Strength of Egypt shall then
be terribly shaken, and the Pillars of Persecution shall be broken in pieces.
Then shall Sion be raised out of the Dust, and sing Hosanna's to her King. Then
shall Gods Truths, which is now so unworthily contemned in the hearts of the
Wicked, be highly honored and advanced, his suffering Seed exalted; the
garments of Mourning shall then be laid aside; Mordecai shall then be clothed
in Royal Apparel, and mischievous Haman shall receive a Reward according to his
Deeds: The Righteous shall then rejoice and be exceeding glad: Prisons then
shall not be the Portion of Gods People.

Then shall it be known how innocently we have suffered; Then will God put a
difference between the Precious and the Vile; betwixt him that swears, and
him that fears an Oath. Till then, O thou Righteous God, we commit our Cause
to Thee, and shall through thy strength, in patience bear the Yoke which our
Adversaries shall be suffered to lay upon us: Till then we are contented to be
the Sheep whom the Wicked intend for the Slaughter, and we shall not with any
carnal weapon make resistance against them, but pray for them; In the integrity
of our hearts, O Lord, we do forgive them, and desire, if it may stand with thy
good will and pleasure, thou would show mercy to them.

In thy strength, O God, are we bold to meet them, and in the patience, which
thou give us, we shall weary them who seek to weary us; Through thy
assistance we shall not bow unto them; thy Arm supporting us, Lord, we shall
overcome them: Thou art our stay, our strength, our shield, our All; Thou art
with us, Thou art good unto us, Thou fights our Battles for us, Thy living
Presence is amongst us; Thou have promised to be, yea, Lord, thou art and wilt
be the Preserver of us; Thou daily ministers thy Joy and Peace unto us, Thy
Blessing is not wanting upon us, Thy Love and Mercies cannot fail us, nor shall
ever be distrusted by us; The Dew of Heaven descends upon us, Shall we then
fear what man can do unto us? O Righteous God, let that for ever be far from
us. Glory, Glory, Hallelujahs to the God of Heaven for ever.

From the City-Gaol in Lincoln, second day, last month, 1660. Written by a
Sufferer for Righteousness sake. M. M.


