Nevvs from the Sessions; OR, A True Relation of all the PROCEEDINGS AT THE
Sessions in the Old-bayly, Sep. 9th. 1674.

Where there were Twenty One persons Cast.

With the Number and Particular Crimes of the Persons to be Executed, and all
other things there Transacted.

AND Especially the Trial and Behavior OF JOHN RANDAL That lately Killed the
Woman in Houlbourn.

Printed for Phillip Breeksby* 1674

THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions, etc.
NEwgate has not for a long time been more thronged, nor a greater
Jail-delivery been known, then at the Last Sessions: though for the most part
the Crimes were so foul, and the proofs so pregnant, that the whole business
was dispatched in three days time.

But a remarkable instance of incorrigible wickedness, appeared in another, who
but the very last Sessions was burnt in the hand, and yet took thereby so
little warning that he was now in again, and found guilty of a Felony and
Burglary.

For which crime three other Men were likewise arraigned and condemned, having
had the Brand already. And a Woman who formerly had been (an old offender in
such cases) with another her Companion were convicted also of a Burglary, but
only the former conemned to Dye, the last pleading her belly, and by a Jury of
Matrons was returned to be with child.

In brief there was in all 21 convicted of Felony, or cast, but several got
off, some by being burnt in the hand, and some by Transportation, amongst which
there were two Boys that were Brothers both by nature and in wickedness, one
not above eleven years old, but able in depth of all kind of Roguery, to supply
the want of years.

But there was none to be preferred to him, who for want of witness proved
himself guilty of a Robbery near High-gate upon a Country Higler, who being
coming to Market to London with some Poultry one morning very early was set
upon by four of the Foot-padd, who took away some of his Poultrey, for money he
had none, or very little about him, but Company coming by they were forced to
run away, and thereupon the Person robbed, and others after some time parsuing
after them, they at last took one of them, which was the Prisoner now at the
Bar, who being arraigned for the same, resolutely denied that he was any of
them, or knew any thing of or concerning the Fact charged against him; and
persisted therein for a long time with so much seeming earnestness and
obstinacy, that the prosecutor began to suspect his Eyes, and think that he
might be mistaken in the person, till at last the Prisoner desired that since
the witness had declared he was robbed by four persons, whereof two came before
his Horse, and two behind him, he would declare in which rank he then was,
whither before or behind, To which he answering that he was behind: The
Criminal suddenly and more loudly than wisely, cried out. My Lord! this is a
perjut'd Villain, and you ought not to believe a Word he says, for by -- I was
at that time one of the 2 that came up before him, whereby he confessed himself
concerned, and was accordingly found Guilty.

There was eight in all burnt in the Hand, six ordered for Transportation,
three sentenced to be whipped, and one to the Pillory for a Cheat.

But for the particularities of Petty Larcetines, and smaller Rogueries, it
would be too tedious

Amongst the Criminals, John Randal may be reckoned one of the most Notorious,
who was charged with two Indictments, one for Felony for Stealing several
pieces of Plate, and other Goods belonging to Esquire Black, and the other for
Murder, Killing his Housekeeper. The Case appeared briefly upon Evidence
thus; This Randal hav^i^g been formerly Butler to the Squire, took t^^
o^^o^tunity when he and all the rest of his Family were out of Town, to visit
this woman, and there in the Evening Murdered her, and rifle^ the ^ouse,
carrying several pieces of Plate ^^^y to his Lodging in White-Cross-Street. And
coming two days after to a R(...)-S^^p, being Next Door, he was taken upon
Susp^tion, and upon (...) his Lodging, the Plate was f^ in his (...), whereupon
he Confessed that he Knocked the woman Down with his fist, and that he committed
the Robbery, etc. Yet now at the Bar he Pleade^, Not Guilty, to both
Indictment^. But upon Reading ^is aforesaid Confession, at his Examination
before the Justice ah^ Committed him, and the Evidence that he was the last see
go into the House that Night the Murder, was Committed, and proof o^ the taking
the Stolen Plate in his Tru^k as aforesaid, he was Convicted and Sentenced to
Dye.

The next may be rankt Two others, though of a different Sex, yet Guilty of the
like Horrid sin of Murder, and that upon their own Children, whose Crimes
being so nearly resembling each other we may place them together in this
Narrative; For being both Young Wenches, they were it seems enticed to Folly,
and at last got with Child, and to cover one sin with a greater, most
Unnaturally, and Barbarously, Murdered their Infants, one of them casting hers
into an House of Office, and the other endeavoring to Bury hers in a Celler:
but being both discovered by certain Symromes usually visible in that
condition, upon ^trait search, the whole matter came to be disclosed, and they
respectively Committed. They had little to say for themselves besides the common
Plea, that their Children were Still-born, but upon Reading the Statute,
whereby it is provided in such Cases that unless the same be proved by, at
least one Credible witness, it shall be reputed and punished as Murder, and
they were both Condemned to Dye.

After them we may reckon another who was proved guilty of killing a Brewers
Servant in VVhitecross-street, but the same being found to be only
Manslaughter, and not done with any (...) malice (as Lawyers speak) upon his
earnest begging the favor of his Book, he was admitted to the benefit of his
Clergy; but after all was not capable to read, and so received sentence of
Death.

here to relate them. Let us rather conclude with hearty wishes that all would
take warning by these unhappy presidents to avoid the like evil Courses, seeing
the miseries they thereby bring upon themselves. These crooked paths of
impiety, though at first entrance they may seem strewed with Roses, and with
delight, leading infallibly in the end to ruin and destruction.

FINIS.

