To the Reverend and Learned Author.
SIR,
SInce I had the honor and satisfaction of seeing your Papers, I have blamed
your delay in the publication of them; especially being designed to recall a
Romish Proselyte that was gone from the Communion of our Church, they might (in
this unhappy and distracted Juncture) have seasonably helped toward the
recovery of others, whose temporal as well as eternal Interests make them as
eager and desirous of satisfaction. I know that Modesty is a virtue, and
Caution a very commendable thing: but Charity and Love to the Souls of men is
much more so. You have lived to see the Church forlorn and desolate, persecuted
and seemingly forsaken; and after a little respite and the hopes of settlement,
to be again threatened and menaced with a final overthrow. Down with it, Psalm.
137.7.
down with it even to the ground, cry our Modern Edomites. And when the Church
did need the Aids of those who loved her, we know she found your Zeal, and
Resolution and Courage in her service: And that now you should flag when you
are so well armed and prepared for Combat, or be backward when her Adversaries
are pecking at the very foundations with Axes and Hammers, and striving to
undermine her by Artifice or Violence; And you a Champion so tried and
experienced, and furnished to defend her; I cannot imagine, unless you are more
tender than formerly, and fear taking of harm by being exposed to the open Air.
I think I have heard that the time has been, Neh. 4.1^.
when, like Nehemiah's Builders, you wrought with one hand in the Churches
service, and with the other you h^ld a weapon for her defense and succor. You
know the Arguments that moved you then; and what hinders but they should now
prevail? I am, you see, warm in the Churches cause, nor do I believe that you
are less concerned. But if I seem to reproach or lament your remissness in
these seasonable Circumstances to send abroad your useful preparations, let me
not be thought rude or unmannerly, because I hereby not only vindicate you from
the common fault of being forward to print, but likewise show the high value I
have for your Person and Papers, and that I believe them to he very useful for
the Public benefit.

As to the Gentleman you design to reduce, I only know him upon this occasion,
and therefore can say little of his Learning or Ingenuity, or the Motives that
made him depart from us: But if after all your endeavors to convict him he
still remains hard and untractable, and refuses to hear the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely, he must be let alone in the obstinacy of the
deaf Adder, and to our Prayers to soften him, when your Arguments cannot alter
him; but when the World have seen your Papers, and know that he has done so;
They Will strain their Charity to suspect, that something else besides the
pretended advantage of Infallibility persuaded him to revolt; and till he can
answer your Arguments, they will be apt to think, that the exchange of Opinion was
not for Faith but Fancy, and that while he dreamed that he left uncertainty, it
was to be secure of nothing.

But if you should have that Friendly influence upon him by your pains and
endeavors to call him back, he will (by that Charity that is more Catholic than
the Religion he leaves) be glad, that by his fall so great an advantage has
been offered to the world, and that others may be reduced thereby to the sober
enquiry upon what bottom they trust their Salvation, and see upon what slender
and fickle grounds their Faith has been fixed; And what those Grounds are, all
men will see when they peruse your Tractate. Besides, we have reason to thank
such men as you for asserting the Churches cause in these Controversies; For
who now that is most freakish in folly and Enthusiasm, has a front to say, That
the Sons of our Church are warped from what is Primitive and truly Orthodox; or
Factors for the Romish Interest; or wish well to the promoting that Cause
amongst us, etc. Let us hear no more such outcries against the Church of
England, nor against those who are exact and punctual in the decent performance
of Gods public Worship, and the circumstances of Order and Discipline. For the
gaudy Superstitions of Rome and Italy are more contemned by such men, than the
looser and more careless dress of Amsterdam and Geneva. And you amongst many
others have freed our Church from this whining and unjust imputation, in that
you have not only shaken, but everted that fundamental Principle, upon the fall
of which all the superstructure tumbles.

As to your Quotations, they are so proper and peculiarly adapted to every
period, that you had very great luck to happen on the choice of them. And for
the Translations which your Charity suffered to be made of them, for the use of
your meaner and more unlearned Reader; they, I perceive, were done by one whose
skill in Grammar did exceed his sense in Theology and Divine Controversies,
which may excuse them to the Critics and men of brisker fancy. However,
Translating is a very tedious task, and so long as they are true and l^teral,
they are justifiable enough against the keenest and most snarling Censurers.

I am loath the Messenger should stay, and therefore only wish your Reader may
be impartial and considerative, unprejudiced and serious, and that your Papers
may convince and confirm him, that they may have their design on the Gentleman
you would recall, and advance the interest of Truth and Goodness amongst all men;
that they may help to allay that bitterness, and heal those Animosities and
w^ld Conceits that trouble the Christian World, and that all that see them may
endeavor after the things that make for Peace. Which is the Prayer of,

Sir, Your faithful Servant.
Dec. 2. 1678.
THE MIDDLE WAY OF Predetermination ASSERTED.

Between the DOMINICANS And JESUITS, CALVINISTS And ARMINIANS.

OR, A Scriptural Enquiry into the Influence and Causation of God, in and unto
Humane Actions; Especially such as are SINFUL.

Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have Destroyed thy self, but in me is thy Help.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at the
lower End of Cheapside. 1679.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
REader, When I had finished an Answer to the Author of the Court of the
Gentiles about Predetermination, this shorter Treatise came to my Hand; On the
same Subject, Plain and Easy; not Fettering or Vexing the Reader with School
Disputes; Sound and Judiciously done if I may Judge: And I hope none will like
it the worse, because the Author is a Nonconformist, or because he has gone
for an Independent. Think not that we have communicated Notions, because he
says the same that I do, for I am a Stranger to him, and never saw his Face:
But I thank God that the Church has any such, and O that they were more.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be Called the Children of God.
Seeing it has pleased God to permit Satan, and some otherwise Honest men, to
sow Tares while we slept, and to Hazard the Church and the Souls of Men, by
very dangerous Writings of Late, I think you should with Thankfulness receive
this Antidote from this Worthy Servant of Christ. I add this Notice, that he
has a Treatise of Justification new Licensed, Written with the same Healing
Spirit and Judgment, Neglect it not because there is so much Written on that
Subject; for it tells you more than is ordinarily told you, and there are few
things written thereon with equal Judgment and plainly fitted to the Edifying
of the meanest Capacity, if he understand the matter aright, who is

An earnest Desirer of Truth, Love and Concord, Rich. Baxter.
September. 19, 1678.
THE MIDDLE WAY OF PREDETERMINATION ASSERTED.
It Is not unknown to Persons soberly Inquisitive into Truth, of what
Importance, and Concernment in Religion it is, so far forth as in us lies, to
have a right Understanding, and due Conception in our Mind, touching the Notive
Power of Man, in or unto the specifying and determining, of his own Acts or
Actions: as also of the Influence and Causality of God, in and unto the
determination of the same: What is God's Interest, and what is man's, in the
Existence [especially] of those sinful motions and actions of man, which God
dehorteth from, and so severely does prohibit and punish him for. A
Misconception therein on the one hand, or the other, may expose us unto the
Charging of God foolishly, even whilst we take our selves to be pleading of
his Cause; and may occasion in us unbecomming thoughts of our selves, and hard
thoughts of him, unworthy the Revelation that he has made of himself to us,
tending to Expunge out of our Souls all due sense of Sin, and acknowledgment of
the Holiness, and of the Equity of Gods Law, and of his Righteousness in his
procedure thereupon with us.

The Thesis or Position which I maintain, in short is this, namely, That God
does not Premove, or by his Transient Influence as the first cause,
Predetermine men unto all and every of their Acts or Actions whatsoever; not in
particular to those which are sinful; such as Blasphemy, Incest, Murder, etc.
in specie.

It Is not my Design to enter the Lifts with any one in the way of Disputat^on;
nor shall I at all interest my self in the contests of other men Learned and
Pious, engaged in that Controversy about Predetermination. I shall only speak
the sense of my own Soul nakedly therein, and what has been the result of my
thoughts upon my most Sedulous enquiry for some years past into the Question;
which bordereth much upon Practice, although controversial, no man but at one
time or other will have his Thoughts exercised more or less about it. It Is a
question wherein, as well the wisest of the Heathen, as of the Christian World
have been engaged: as well Papists, as Prot^stants; and that, ^qually among
themselves, as well as each against other.

And it were earnestly to be wished that Controversies in Religion were managed
with more Candor and Moderation, without Animosities, and Personal
Reflections, that it might appear that it is the Cause of God singly, not our
own that we plead; and that it is the discovery and promotion of Truth alone
that we design; which the venting of Humane Passion may hinder, but can never
further the intertainment of.

Nor shall I trace the Schools at all in their Notions and various Exp^ications
of the matter under consideration. It Is every Souls concernment to understand
it in some measure; and they who cannot Philosophise, may for ought I know,
have as due a Conception and found Judgment therein, as to the maine, plainly
deduced from the word of God, as the most Learned. Yea I do apprehend, that
Philosophical Disputes, in conjunction with an undue Veneration of some men
whom they affect, is that which has rendered the Truth veiled unto many. For
my part, I have chosen rather to study Catechismes, next to the Bible, for my
dir^ction herein, than the Dictates of Philosophical men; rather consulted the
Conviction of Conscience, and sense of Mankind, than their Scholastical
determinations.

But to come to the Matter it self. Some things Preliminary, for the due
Stating of the Question, and ^or Explication sake, must be insisted on in our
way. Let it be noted then,

(1) The question is not touching Gods Science, Prescien^e, or Foreknowledge of
all futurities, his foresight of all the freest actions of man, one as well as
the other. For supposing that God will create man, and make him a free agent,
yet mutable, and put him under a Law, and sustain him in his opperations. It Is
granted, that by his own infinite per^^ction, he might do, and did foresee in
Eternity, what he would issue in, as future, Isa. 41, 22, 23. all his actions
good and evil, even the sin of them, In concreto and abstracto. Ye^ the formale
of it, its anomie, or irregularity (which some term a non ens) he foreknew, but
the modus or the way and manner how God foreseeth all future contingencies,
especially the Fall of man, and of Angels, is to us unknown; at least I shall
not for my part enterprise to determine it; No principle of the Ch^i^^ian
Religion rendering it necessary for us to understand. The prescience of God nil
ponit in objecto, puts nothing into the creature; it infers no more than a
logical necessity of existence in ordine dicendi, a necessity of consequence
only, Joh. 12.39. It shall be; not of consequent, or in ordine causandi,
nothing of causality, (nor is it concerned at all in the manner of the Subjects
determination of it ^elf, or of it is operation, (which is the object of his
foreknowledge) whether it be a principio dissito, from a from a Principle
^xtrinsecal to it; as when a stone moves upwards: or impetu naturali; as when
it moves downwards: or sponte; as brutes act void of coaction: or voluntary
and libere, according to a judgment of Reason, as man, freely, still God
foreseeth the even^; but his foresight causes it not.) Gods foresight, or
knowledge, what I shall or will do to morrow, (if I live) has no influence at
all into the determining me thereun^o; it leaves me equally free and
indetermined, as if he foreknew it not at all. Nor's it more difficult to me to
conceive or fathom, how God should in Eternity foresee the fr^est action of his
crea^ure, which yet he predetermineth not to, but leaves still in i^s own
nature evitable, and contingent, than it is to me to form any conception of his
Eternity, or how he came to be God: wherein I am lost. Ex nihilo nihil fit,
that of nothing, nothing is made, is as cogent an argument to me, to prove that
the world must needs be Eternal, as any that ever I met with to prove that God
cannot foresee, what he does not decree to effect, or that which he determines
not the creature to. God for^saw that Ananias would not, not that he could not,
dispose of the price of his estate as he pretended to do; that he would not,
not that he could not forbear to lie, Act. 5.3, 4. He could not ind^ed make God
ignorant; yet he co^ld have done otherwise than he did, for all Go^'s knowledge
that he would not so do. Nay, possibly it may prove no less d^fficult to make
out what some do so Peremptorily fix upon as the way in which, or manner how
God in Eternity foreseeth all things that shall ever come to pass; namely in
his own Decree, giving them a futurition in the first place, and thence taking
the Idea of them, in his own will: since that in Eternity there is no prius and
posterius one thing before an other, it consists in a Point: beside, that the
free Act of God will have no necessary connection with his Being, nor do they by
way of emanation result therefrom, Ephesians. 1.11. Who can make out these things?
Can any one define or resolve how God himself should foresee, and fore-appoint
things to come, and yet notwithstanding their Futurition, or Shall-be, still we
are to conceive of him (wherein he has not bound himself by express law, or
promise to the contrary,) as retaining a liberty pro arbitrio, whether this or
the other thing shall come to pass or not; unless we will take away and destroy
the reason and foundation of Prayer, according to that of the Poet, Desine fata
Deum flecti sperare precando, let us never think by prayer to move God to
reverse his determinations, or to alter that which he foresees, and therefore
will, and must be. We ought not to pray, only, for that it is our duty, and as
that which fell also within Gods predetermination; but we are in our addresses
to him, suppose under a national calamity, or a particular distress, to
conceive of him, as yet free at his pleasure to prosper, or blast us, in the
very instant wherein we pray to him, and accordingly as we shall demean our
selves, we may expect from him, though we have no certainty of the event. Jer.
18.7, 9. Jonah 2.9. Zeph. 2.3. Exodus 32.31, 32. 2 Cor. 12.8. And not think that
once he could help us, antecedently to his determination, or before the
contrary was future; but that now he is not at liberty as before to proceed
either way, or to be moved by any Address to him, etc. and yet to form any
adequate conception of the consistency of these things, may be to us impossible.

(2) Nor is the question touching Gods preordination, or free decree of all
actions, or events, [either efficiendo or permittendo] whether they be good or
evil: though I deny that the decree of God did enter into them after the same
way and manner. God did from Eternity predestinate, or decree some of fallen
man, (fallen I mean, ut in esse cognito, such in the foreknowledge of God) unto
salvation, and unto faith and holiness in order thereunto, Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians.
1.4, 5.2 These. 2.13. He did decree to cause it so to be; And the same does and
shall come to pass as the Effect of it. But I deny that God did so decree the
fall of man (though he did to permit it,) or that he did so predestinate any
man unto unbelief, impenitency, and rebellion, the Material of it. Thus the
learned Bishop Davenant in his Animadversions against Hoard, mihi p. 105.
Predestination is a cause effectual in the producing of all salutiferous
actions; But reprobation (or preterition) is no effectu^l cause in the
producing of any wicked actions. And, we hold not that God has d^termined to
produce any bad actions in men, as impenitency, or the like, so p. 258.
Predetermination in this sense taken, as an immanent act in God, and the same
with his decree, precisely in its self; It puts no more into his Subject than
his bare Prescience. How the event, or things decreed shall be brought about
falls within the decree too; But that belongs to the execution, and is de modo;
which may be, as well by permitting, or ordering things (so as to ascertain the
existence of what is decreed;) as by affective production, or causative
determination, and specifying the operation of the creature, in persuance of
his decree, and such a difference there is: Gods will gives Being and
Existence to the Object of his love; Not so of his hatred: but presupposes it
only there; and yet both the one and the other, are births lying in the womb of
his Eternal decree, whether they shall have a true Existence or not. Even
touching the evil, projections, and actions of men, God has predefined, which
of their contrivances shall take effect, and which not; what Weapon shall be
improsperous, and what shall prosper, Dan. 8.25. and 11.25, 27. Isa. 54.15, 17.
Jer. 47.7. Isa. 44.7. his determinate counsel and purpose is concerned
therein, Isa. 46.10. Act. 4.28. Of which more hereafter.

(3) Neither is the question touching the providence of God, either in the
sustentation or conservation of the Being of man, or of his concourse to the
en^bling him unto the production of his Acts and opera^ions in general; nor of
his i^fluence and causation as to good actions; (nor yet tou^hing his order and
government of the world,) but it is, of his precurse, or transient influence,
unto the determination of the Subject, in the exercise and specification of his
Acts, antecedently (at least in order of nature) to his own determination, and
that in relation to evil actions especially, whereof we are enquiring. Here
i^'s granted.

1. That the creature, as to all its actions in general, has its dependence
upon God the first cause, on his manutenency and supportation both in esse and
operari, as to his Being and Motion, Psalm. 104.30. Neh. 9.6. and consequently
that to all actions incommon, whether good, or evil, (so in like manner to all
operation of every creature,) such a sustentation and concourse of God there is
necessary thereunto, as whereby he preserves the order of nature, and enableth
every cause to produce its effect: and, that by his continual energetical
operation and influx (which is the same) he does concur with the reason and
free will of man, at least concomitanter, in its own election and free
determination, as that whereupon the Will in acting, the Acts of the will, and
its Actions willed, do depend, and without which the Agent could not subsist
nor move of himself at all, Act. 17.28. Romans 13.36. But it hence follows not
but that man has a self determining power, (that presupposed) as to some acts,
or actions, which he has not lost his capacity unto, 1 Cor. 7.37.

The Providence of God, whereby he upholdeth all things, Heb. 1.3. and by his
general influence does preserve, and keep alive the power, and operation of the
creature, does differ from Creation: that is the production of something out of
nothing simply, or out of the power of Nature, or of any second cause, this is
the sustentation of something already in Being, supplying it with strength for
the reduction of its Power into Act. It Is of the ordinary, and mediate
providence of God that I am speaking, in the execution whereof, he cooperateth
with the creature, yet so as that the creature has its immediate influence
i^to the specifying the effect, by virtue of its proper Form, and God acts,
but mediantibus suppositis, ac virtutibus causarum secundarum, as Ames
expresses it, mediately according to the law of the Being, or the power and
peculiar nature, or virtue of the second cause, already stamp't upon it,
(specifying the Act or operation of the first cause here, in a sense, unless he
will change or turn the course of nature, Jer. 31.35, 36.) Gods influence by
his presence and virtue reaches unto all and every operation of the creature,
yet it is according to their nature; he causes not fire to cool, or the water
to burn; It were a miracle if it should. Let but the general influence of the
Heavens, reach the Trees, and herbs, and every one will bring forth its own
kind; the Effect is already in the Cause; it is no creation.

So for man, of whose essence it is to have dominion over his own actions, or a
liberty of specification of his own acts within his sphere, by the Law of his
Creation: the Principle is preexistent in the Subject, which we call a power, (
ad actum to the act, else its no power) supposing the common providence and
assistance of God, Act. 17.28. (in whose hands our life and breath is, Genesis
2.7. James 4.14, 15.) he can determine himself this way, or the other,
according to his judgment of reason and discretion, such as it is; else he is
no man, but a mere machine, inferior to all the rest of the creation of God;
to be sure not capable of being the Subject of moral government. In such sense
as every species of creatures are said to have their different nature,
tendency, or law of operation connate to them, suited to their Being, (which
providence works,) of their own: so is the ^ctuat^on thereof consonantly
thereunto, their own, and essential to them, as well ^s the Principle; no
creative Act, but the Law of their creation. What means the plastic virtue
given to the earth, and pl^nts, Genesis 1.11. or the prolifick power of other
livi^g creatures, p. 22. or the rational faculties or active Powers wherewith
God furnished man, p. 26. if they be not a Power unto act so long as their
nature abides entire, and is sustained, and no impediment be in the way? take
away action, and you take away Life and Soul. The Nature of a stone abiding, it
will fall downwards, without any premotion extrinsecal to its self; and so will
the Fire burn, if it is quality which is essenti^l to it be conserved; and the
Beast will follow its insti^ct, so long as its nature remains, and determine
its self to, or turn to the right hand or the left at the call of its Own^r,
according as it is Dis^iplined; It is within i^s power, if no natural
Impediment hinders; and surely the same is not wanting to man suitably unto his
Nature, through the aforesaid comm^n Providence of God, (without his b^ing
Physically Predetermined therein by him:) a power to sp^cifie his acts
according to his own Inclination, in reference to his natural actions, unto
which by the Apostasy he is not disabled; and sin^ul actions, to which by it he
is vitiously preponderated and disposed. This the Sense of all Mankind does
give in its suffrage to* Gods ordi^ary Supportation and Concurse is sufficient,
to the flux of an effect, within the limits of the cause, or its power a natura
indita or insita, by God given it unto such effect.

2. As to good Actions, savingly such; It Is granted, that besides the first
Change wrought by God in the Soul rendering Potent, Hab^le, and disposed to such
Acts, new-biassing, or invincibly turning, and inclining it toward God and
Holin^ss, unto which it was before Impotent and wickedly averse, Ephesians. 2.1, 10.
and 4.22, 23. there is still necessary a continued Influx of more than ordinary
Divine Assi^tance, to keep alive, and to influence and determine the Soul unto
those Acts of true Piety or Holiness which it has the next power of, or is in
an immediate capacity unto; and that, on the account of the remaining darkness
of the m^nd, and the prevalent Counter-actings of the Law of Sin, the Relics
whereof are yet ab^ding, Romans 7. Gal. 5. and the weakness and imperfection of
Grace, Rev. 3.2. This is the (...) the Will and the Deed whereof the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 3.13. and Christ Jesus is to that end Constituted to be a Head of
vital Influx to them, Col. 2.19. Joh. 15.4. and Supplies are promised of God to
them, in waiting upon him for the same, Isa. 40.31. Ephesians. 3.16. and a^cordingly,
so far forth as the Inclinations and Actions of Gods People are regular and
gracious, so far its granted to be owing to the Grace of Christ, and the
Operation of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 9.15. but so is not the imperfection thereof,
not owing to God at all; no more than any other neglect.

A Godly man through the Divine help, 2 Pet. 1.3. may or can act, or he may
suspend his Acts in an ordinary way; there is no Saint living that does all the
good which he might or could do; or that has not cause as well to be Humbled
before God, for his Will-no^s, as his Can-nots; for his Neglects in what he had
grace sufficient for, awaiting him, 2 Pet. 5.8, 9. and he could have helped.
And, supposing him Predetermined at any time (after the manner of his first
Conversion) in his Gracious operations, in pursuance of Gods Election; when
negligent or relapsing, prevented or recovered, Luke 22.32. It follows not
that God is the Determiner of him to what is imperfect or sinful, accompanying
the Act to the which he is so Premoved, or Determined; not to the materiale of
it. Suppose a man, for Instance, to be efficaciously excited by God to give an
Alms to a Disciple, (which is good) and withal that he has an admixture of
Ostentation in his mind accompanying it, (which is sin, Mat. 6.1.) such Thought
is of himself, or of the Devils injection, not of God's: and if his Charity
were disposed to a Disciple, and not by him designed to be bestowed on him in
the name of a Disciple, Mat. 10.42. that Omission was his own, nothing of
God's; all that God caused or effected was good; and what was irregular or
sinful was de suo of his own, in concreto, both the Act, and Omission; as well
the Substrate matter of which the sin is denominated, as the sin its self in
its abstract nature adhereing thereunto.

As to the Manner of God's Operation on the Soul in its first Change, I take it
to be unto us very far unknown; nor do I think any Article of Religion to
depend on the stating of the same. Some affirm a Physical predetermination of
God, of all and every the Acts and Operations of man; such Physical precurse,
and efficient pre-exciting and determining influence they assert to accompany,
and to be necessary also to the specification of any Act whatsoever, whether
good or evil, as that without which the Creature could never act or determine
its self at all. To me it seems hard to make out, whether there be any such way
of Gods determination of man, as that termed Physical in Contradistinction to
Moral, though here, as to good I would most readily admit it; (for to evil I do
peremptorily deny it) I mean to good actions; for it is nonsense to speak of
Predetermination Physical or Moral either, to ought but the act or action,
which is good or evil, upon an account Adventitious, and Extrinsecal to its
self, as related to Law. What it is I say that God does in the Conversion of a
sinner, as to the way of working that first Turn to himself, seems to me
difficult to find out, Joh. 3.8. If such a Physical operation there be,
terminating on the entity of the Soul, (it must as well reach the body too, the
Ministerial and Organical parts; which are also said to be sanctified, 2 These.
5.23.) it may consist in the suscitation or elevation of its natural faculties,
rendering them capable of taking in a new Impression, or irradiation, from the
Word and Spirit, to which the soul was disabled before; which some understand
by Vivification or Quickening, 1 Cor. 15.45. Ephesians. 2.1. and opening the Heart,
Act. 16.14. and Understanding, Luke 24.45. Bending also, and applying the
Faculty to the Object, in order to its receiving of the Impress and stamp
thereof upon it, Job. 33.16. the Signature of Truth upon the Mind and Heart,
all which I deny not; but still, evident it is That God works not any Moral
Change on the Understanding otherwise than objectively, also by offering Reason
to it, or proposing that before it which invincibly binds it to an admittance
thereof, Hos. 11.4. and the Gospel is the deepest Reason, and Faith the most
solid Understanding, Mat. 13.44, 45. Isa. 1.18. the Word of God is the Seed of
the New Birth out of all question, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. and that as proposed
to the mind, 1 Cor. 4.15. and entertained there, Jam. 1.21. Nor does God work
on the Will or Affections, or Executive power in Conversion, otherwise than
Mediante ratione by the intervention, of Reason, 1 Cor. 2.4. not by any
Physical attingency immediately, but by Moral Suasion, and Objective Proposal,
by the Mind, the eye of the Soul. God shall persuade Japhet, Gen 9.27. By
objective Proposal, and moral Suasion, I do not intend only, that of God
Externally, in his Word Commanding, Persuading, Counselling, etc. or in and by
the Ministry of Man; but moreover his Internal application to the Soul in the
Ministry of the Word, or otherwise; where yet the Word is the Instrument in the
hand of the Spirit, working in a Moral way; efficiently too in a Sense; yet not
modo Physico after the manner of a real Impulse, or proper Physical Action or
Causation. God knows how to reach the Reason, and Elective Faculty, the main
Springs of the Soul, and how to fasten a Nail there, Eccl. 12.11. a fit Word,
spoken on his Wheels, Prove. 25.11. how to catch the Soul e're it is aware,
Luke 5.10. to allure and draw, Cant. 1.4. (not motu physico by proper physical
determination I take it, but) by convincing Reason and Teaching, Instructing
with a strong hand, Isa. 8.11. Every man that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes unto me, Joh. 6.44, 45. is made Willing, Psalm. 110.3. the Stony
Heart, all Prepossession and Aversation against God and Godliness, is removed,
Ezekiel. 36.26. and its sense of things is changed, Romans 8.5. and the new man is
put on, viz. in a Moral sense, Ephesians. 4.24. the propension and inclination of the
Subject altered and changed, and become a radicated Principle in the Soul,
disposing it unto Holiness.

If the Devil can so far overmatch the Understanding of man, when by God left
to his delusions, that an (...) an effectual working is ascribed to him, 2
These. 2 9. (Whom yet all acknowledge to work only morally and objectively, 1
King. 22.21.) Who can say but that God, who is more intimate to man than he is
to himself, can so accommodate his Word, and follow it by Internal suggestion,
so fit it as a key to the he^^t of the sinner fast lo^ked against him, as to
shoot aside the bolt, the d^ssenting power, and to overperswade and invincibly
determine him to ^^^^o^ ^osse repudiaere, an mpossi^ility of withstanding any
longer the Call of Christ, or to a free, yet certain entertainment of it,
without such a physical influx as some insist so much upon, flecting the will,
and predetermining (...) in its operation, and specification of its Acts, in a
way contradisti^ct to that we are speaking of, and wherein it is not concerned.
The Natural faculties of the soul, its powers of understanding, reasoning
assent^ng, willing; and its affections of loving, hating, etc. are out of doubt
a prima causa, from God as the first cause, who gives Being to all things; and
the exertion of those powers into act in line a physica, is from him; they are
dependent Beings, and cannot reduce themselves into act or exercise without his
influence or assistance; And that in the way of physi^al concurse and
cooperat^on, before and after conversion the same Act. 26.22. and moreover,
it is with me out of question, that the Lord does anticipate and prevent the
soul in a more than ordinary way, in its first Turn to him, Jer. 31.18. 2 Timothy
2.25. rectifying all the powers of the soul, the mind, will, affections etc.
Turning them to their right Object, and d^sposing them to their right Use, and
End; that he specifieth and determines the souls Acts and operations in
conversion, which is their modification, as well as concurreth to their Entity,
or enableth to their existence in the general as acts or actions. The question
only is, whether this determination of the natural powers of the soul (to a
beleivi^g in God, a liking, loving, willing, choosing of the things of God, or
of the Spirit, directly opposite to the channel wherein the soul in the egress
or exercise of those powers or acts ran before that, whilst it believed the
Devil rather than God, liked and preferred the world and the pleasing of the
flesh above the pleasing of God, loved sin, and hated strict piety) whether I
say God does change the course of the soul, and determine its operations as
before, I mean give to will and to do, yea effectually cause so to do by any
physical Precurse, or Predetermination, distinct or different from the power
which he lends to enable the creature to all and every its natural motions
and operations, or which himself evermore exorteth therein; or by a moral
agency only: whether he draws and turns the soul, as the Fisher does the
Fish when he has it upon his hook and line, by a physical impulse: or as the
Fisher does the Fish when he hooketh it, or in order to it, by laying the bait
before it, where the pleasure of the bait or hopes of ^ood presented in the
fancy, does allure and draw it, this way or that, till it has takn it in, or
swallowed it; which is an objective drawing, and like to that which is moral in
men? (I mean it not in the Arminian sense, so as to leave the soul indifferent,
or the Will in suspense, that what ever God does on the contrary, it still may
eventually will, or nill, choose, or refuse, cast balance this way, or the
other; but) whether Gods actual efficacious and powerful determination of the
Will of the sinner indeclinably to Good, many not be effected, and brought
about by the way of moral operation, or causation (as well as physical) where
the soul specifieth its own Act, in a way more congruous to its nature, and yet
can go no other way in its elections without offering an affront to the dictate
of its own Reason and Understanding, Psalm. 119.36, 8. Luke 15.17. First
rectified by the special Grace and help of God, Col. 3.10. Job. 33.16. Jer.
31.11. Joh. 4.10. (after the same manner) by a divine Inculcation of Truth, and
fixation thereof upon it, to a saving illumination, Mat. 5.22. Joh. 14.26. and
16.8. But that God does not either the one way or the other, predetermine men
to actions wicked and sinful, I take here for grant, and shall hereafter prove:
I mean, neither by external legal Commanding, counselling, or persuading; nor
by internal moral suasion, or Suggestion, (which is yet more powerful)
tempting, or soliciting effectually thereunto; much less by any physical
Thrust, or premotion of the Will that he should influence it inevitably and
insuperably in its election of two objects lying evenly before it; one good the
other evil, to choose and determine it self to that which is most nefariously
wicked; which at the same time he dehorteth from, and declares h^s abhorrency
of, and threatens to punish, Dut. 29.20.

Here by the way, let me take occasion to note the disadvantage, which (to my
best understa^ding) I conceive the truth of God to have received, in the
management thereof in the Point now mentioned, by those who go the way of
physical Predetermination, whil'^^ sober and wo^thy men of that persuasion, in
their popular Sermons, undertaking (as one does in print) to vindic^te the
Sovereignty of the Grace of God in the beginning and carrying on of man's
conversion, and salvation, and for the maintenance of the nec^ssi^y of
effectual grace therein, shall pitch upon such mediums as these, namely (1)
That the denial thereof, disparageth Gods providence; For that ^t breaks the
essential subordination between the second cause and the first. (2) It destroys
prescience; for how then c^n God infallibly foresee the Motions of the Will,
and the Effect^ depending on it, the ev^nt being uncertain? (3) It deifies the
Will, making it supreme and independe^t upon God himself, etc. which do as well
prove, and are the main arguments brought for the maintaining of Gods
efficacious predetermination of men in and unto their Unbelief, Rebellion and
all the most impious actions whereof the most profligate sinner is guilty; and
cuts the throat of the fourth argument; that it abolishes all prayer and
thanksgiving: for that, on the former Hypotheses, the meaning of such prayer to
God mu^t be only, that he would change his operation, and cease to premove and
determine the Will to that, which he had all along before guided and overruled
it to; that he would counterwork his own prior determination, and now turn it,
and determine the Will to good, as before to evil; which is a strange notion of
prayer. Nor can the soul in good earnest thank him for it, when done, if it be
indeed really convinced that it might not thank it self that it was done no
sooner: or that it may thank God that it so long resisted his Spirit, and
walked in the pathway of destruction, in every instance whereof, it was
effectually predetermined by a superior agent, on whom it had its dependence,
who foresaw all its motions, who had an absolute supremacy over its Will, and
unto whose effic^ent energetical Operation it could not but be obsequious. If
we had no other medium to oppose Arminianism by, in the Point of effectual
Grace, I should take our case for desperate; and the remedy to be no less
dangerous than the disease. But to proceed,

3. As to the Providence of God in the Government of the World; It Is granted,
that God does not carry it as a mere Spectator, but that his Providence is
positively active in the disposal of all Events under the Sun; even to a
sparrow falling to the ground, Mat. 10.29. or to the Lot that is cast into the
Lap, Prove. 16.33. All the Issues of Health and Sickness, Poverty and Riches,
War and Peace, Life and Death, they are in God's h^nd, Eccl. 9.11. Job 14.14. 2
King. 8.11. Jer. 10.23. Prove. 16.9. Eccl. 11.5, 6. nor are sinful men out of
the limits of his Supremacy in the order and disposal of their actions; which
of their Projections shall take Effect, or see the light, and in what
Circumstances, and which not; Psalm. 29.10. he has all wicked men upon his
hook, Ezekiel. 38.4. the Heart of the most Absolute on the Earth, at his Pleasure
and Dispose. Prove. 21.1. Isa. 10.5. and 44.28. and 45.7, 9. Psalm. 33.15, 16,
17. the Overruling Providence we acknowledge in the order of all Events,
whatever betideth us. Yet has not every Providence the same aspect with it,
though Gods hand be in it all. Suppose for i^stance, a man walking in the
Streets, the Tyles of a house, he not perceiving any danger, may slip, and fall
on him: or he seeing them ready to fall, may yet to save the wetting of h^s
foot, choose to adventure the going under them, rather than to cross the way,
and they happen to hit him: Or, one from the Roof of the house wit^ingly
throwing them down upon him; and wounding him either way, in them all, he must
acknowledge, and eye Providence: but in the first instance, though there was a
natural cause and reason of their Falling, yet he wholly resolves his
Misfortune into the Divine Providence, which could have diverted him from
coming at that instant there, but did not; or which ordered things in such a
concurrence of Circumstances, as that it should so fall out that he should not
avoid the Stroke of them. In the second, he Notes the Providence, and withal
repents him, and befools himself for his rashness and oversight that he
prevented it not, when it was in his power; God could have turned his thoughts
too, and did not; and so might he, had he considered the Danger as he should
and could have done. In the third, he acknowledges Providence also, but he
blames the Person that did it, and seeks his remedy against him, for his
Illegal act. If yet the Person that wounded him should confidently argue with
him, that he should rest satisfied in the Dominion of Providence, and not look
at him; that he was invincibly or effectually premoved and determined to it;
his Reason and Free Will was in it indeed, but he could not help it: that the
Entity of the Action was good, and for the anomie or irregularity, it was a
Privation, a non ens, had no efficient cause at all, he had no hand in that,
nor yet can tell until it be plead^d, whether any Law will take cognizance of
it or not. I doubt that the party aggrieved would hardly stand to dispute his
distinctions; but he would t^ach him better.

Gods Providence in the Government of sinful Actions is not in dispute; but the
Question is de modo, how God serves himse^f on sinful men, or determines them
in their sinful actions to serve his Providence? whether by his transient
influence upon their Minds and Wills, he pre-exciteth, premoveth, and
predetermin^th them unto such Acts or Actions: or some other way he
ascertaineth the Event only? the latter is it which I affirm; and the former,
by many asserted, is it which I oppose.

Touching the first Apostasy of Men or Angels, the Scriptures give us no
account directly relating either to the Decree of God thereof, or his Agency
therein at all. The Angels that fell had a possibility of attaining Happiness,
and a sufficiency of Divine Grace given them to have preserved them from their
Rebellion, had they not by a Voluntary Act of their own abused it; so had Adam;
no decree of God did hinder him from creating him with a sufficiency of Grace,
or with a possibility of St^nding, says Davenant, Animad. p. 282. Yet that God
foreknew their defection, is out of doubt; yea, and that his Governing
Providence was highly concerned therein, and served thereby.

For the Providence of God, or its concernment in all the future Acts of Sin,
whether of wicked Men or Devils, since the first Apostasy, therein the
Scripture does lend us more Light; in which, there is not one instance upon
Record, where God is said to Decree, Order, or Determine the Being or existence
of such or such evil actions, yea, or to do them, the which (if I be not much
mistaken) may not be made out, were it necessar^, to be with^n the reach of
Humane Reason to f^thom, and to assign how he might bring it about most
certainly; and that by no other medium but that only of Permission and
Impedition, and objective proposal or Premotion, exc^ting to Cogitations and
Actions good, and Materially agreeing to his Law. Which two former, ordinarily
insi^ted on at every turn by Divines, to solve the equ^ty of Gods Ju^tice in
his procedure with men, notwithstanding his Providence over ruling their sinful
actions: the former notion of Physical Predetermination does wholly deny, and
overturn: For, if the motus primo primi, the first sigments or thoughts of the
Heart, or machin^tions of the M^nd, Isa. 59.4, 5. and Conceptions of the Will,
Psalm. 11.2. Job. 15.35. be forged by God; if the Will cannot elicit any Act,
nor imperate the execution thereof, nor the executive power follow, otherwise
than as the obed^ential capacity of the Subject, or possibility of action
contained in the powers, in an indifferency or indetermination, must be first
reduced into Act, and also determined by God h^mself as the first cause, then
is Permission, and Impedition or hindering, a mere Chimaera; what should he
permit, or prevent in others, or what need of that, when he determines all,
and does a^l himself; or effi^iently determines the second cause to it, as is
supposed? But that such a thing there is, and that predica^ed or affirmed of
God in Scripture, innumerable Texts do plainly speak; and also accommodate to
our present Enquiry. God is said to Suffer the Nations to wa^k in their own
ways, Act. 14.16. So Luk 8.32. to Suffer the Devil to enter into the Herd of
Swine; and to permit, or to give men up to the Swing, of their own Hearts Lust,
Romans 1, 24. till he s^e what their end shall be, Deuteronomy. 32.20. And frequently
again to obstruct or h^nder what else would certainly be Eff^cted, Genesis 12.6,
7. God withheld, and suffered not Abimelech to touch Abraham's Wife, chap.
20.6. he suffered no man to do them wrong, Psalm. 105.14. none shall desire
their Land, Exodus 34.24. He makes Diviners mad, and turns Wise m^n backward,
in order to the perform^ng of the Counsel of his Messengers, and all his
Pleasure, Isa. 44.25, 28. Disappointing the devices of the Crafty, so that
their hands cannot perform their enter^rise, Job 5.12. the remainder of wrath
shall he restrain, Psalm. 76.10. and 106.46. How many ways c^n God render
abortive the Conceptions of men, prevent them, or cause them to miscarry! hence
is that Memento of the Apostle James, chapter 4.15. Ye ought to say, if the Lord
will we shall live, and do this or that. So Job. 19.11. Psalm. 64.5, 7. in like
manner by exciting to Good, may God cause, that an other evil rather than that
projected shall be effected, as Genesis 37.20, compared with v. 26. and that in
persuance of sme farther Design, chapter 45.8. Mat. 26.63, 65. or by giving a
Diversion only, etc. Wherein God's providential disposal of the Event or order
of this, rather than the other to take effect, neither di^poileth the Creature
of the liberty of specifying his own Act (in a matter wh^rein he must be
accountable to his Judge,) nor does make God the cause or determiner of it, any
more than David^ sl^^ghter of the Am^l^k^^es, 1 Samuel 30.17. lay at the door of
the Philistines, chapter 29 7. who would not let him abide any longer wi^h them: or
than my coming by on the Rode, when a Robber is about to set upon a Person, and
so preventi^g him thereby, would infer me to be the cause of his next robbery
or murder that he commits immediately i^ another place; al^hough I foresaw that
it would so prove.

Yet such is the order and Dir^ction of God's Providence, such his dominion
therein, in every in^^ance of that kind, that his d^term^nate counsel may be
affirmed to reach the most wicked actions, in a sense, Act. 4.28. Isa. 46.10.
when he has any Design to serve by them, Genesis 50.20. Yea, he is said to bid,
and to do them. The Lord has said unto him, curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10. I w^ll
do this thing openly, and before the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.12. he moved David against
them, to s^y, go number the people, chapter 24.1. even when the Devil does it, 1
Chr. 21.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. The Lord has taken, says Job. chapter 1.21. when the
Sabeans had spoiled him; and, God had smitten him he said, or he received that
Evil of his Boils, from him, chapter 2.10. when it was the Devil that had done it,
by God's permission, v. 1. and would have reached his life too, would he have
suffered him, v. 4. without any premo^ion of God's therein, or
Predeterminat^on, otherwise, as to the manner, than by a non-impedition of his
own motion and Inclination. The Eve^t is indeed in the Di^pose of God, and the
Executioner, as the Axe, Rod, or St^ffe, in his hand, Isa. 10.5. Yet so, as
that he retains a dominion over his own Act therein, (Gods sust^ntation,
concurse, and p^rmission presupposed,) he is not a mere machine, or dead
engine; nor yet his Reason and free Will carried along after the way and manner
of a vital engine, or spontaneous in^^rument, yet necess^rily: but is so
termed, from his subserviency a^ that time to God's special Providence, and
instrumental^ty in performing his Design; (though in such a way, as he he may
justly and equitably afterwa^ds be called to an account for the same; as well
for the fact, Isa. 10.12, as for the circumstances of it, v. 7.13.) otherwise
than in every other Omission of his, or every Act of Unbelief, Impenitency,
Hatred of God, and the like: men are not ordinarily styled God's instruments
therein, or compared to the Axe or staff in his hand, or to be conceived of by
us as such, with reference thereunto, Herein I subscribe to the worthy Bishop
Davenant; As for the procuring and working the impenitency or infidelity of
Reprobates, God does not (says he) at all work any vicious dispositions, or
defective and sinful actions in such men; wicked habits or dispositions are
diseases bred within men's own souls, (and yet they have an entity) not infused
into them by the Physician of our souls: wicked and sinful actions are the
productions of the^r own corrupted Free Will, and not produced by any divine
operation working in them: for it is only in holy and good actions that God
gives us both the Will and the deed, Animad. p. 120. neither does God draw any
man unto sin, by an unconquerable power, but he permiteth some men, by the
Devil and their own lusts to be drawn from sin to sin, till at last they perish
in them; of whom perditio tua ex^te, thy destruction is of thy self,
notwithstanding, is most truly verified p. 121. although the Will of God has
the determining Stroke amongst all possible evil actions or events, which shall
infallibly be, and which not: And God may be said to be the prime cause of the
substrate matter or act, in every motion, whether of the soul or body, as in
whom we live, and move, and have our Being, as the same learned Author
asserteth; Yet does it not follow, but that man still retains his
s^lf-determining power quoad speciem actus, a liberty of specifying his own
act; as the same Author maintains with St. Augustine, deus it a ordinat omnia
ut proprios motus exercere sinat. p. 154. (From whence the formal nature of
good or evil resulteth, as the same is conform, or inconform to the Law of God;
I mean from its specification, not its Entity in the general.) The Saebeans and
Chaldeans for instance, had their power and their actual Exercise thereof from
God enabling them to take goods and drive cattle, and to destroy the life of
man, or beast; but the specification of that power, in the actual Exercise
thereof, or it is modification, (which has nothing more of Entity, which way
soever it is determined) unto the Robbing of men, or slaying of the innocent,
was not of God, but of themselves: that they spoiled Job, not another man, and
slew his Servants in individuo, and not another man's, was of themselves; as and
of God too, though in a different sense: of themselves, as the immediate cause
of the action; of God, as the prime cause, or fountain of Being and Operation:
of themselves, as the specifyers of the act, according to their own free
election: of God, in that he permitted it, for the trial of his servant, (when
possibly he had hindered them from hundreds of such like exp^oits before, and
besides that, overruled its circumstances so, as that it should infallibly
light upon him, and no other man at that time. Which I cannot better express
than in the words of the aforesaid learned man; Those that derive the evil
Actions of men from their own Free Will as the proper efficient cause, and the
exsisting or coming of such actions in eventum a decreto dei permittente and
ordinante, into event, from the permitting, and disposing decree and
appointment of God, are in no error at all. p. 57. The providence of God
reaches to all Events, and actions; but forwicked actions which according to
Gods eternal determined Decree come into act at the time appointed, as the
Betraying of Christ, the murdering of him, and such like, the Devil and men's
Free Will are the only moving and determining causes unto them. p. 115 God
cannot be an Author or Producer, much less an Inforcer, in regard of any sinful
action, yet he may be a determiner in permitting it. p. 118 Gods decree in
malis, is only, as he t^rmeth it, antecessio ordinis, not causalitatis. (4) Nor
is the question yet farther, about Determination in general, or
Pred^termination simply considered, or of the compossibility, or consistency
thereof with humane fredom. For its gran^ed,

1. That an Aequilibrium or Indetermination is not man's best state. Such a
pendulous Susp^nse or Even poyse, and inclination of mind and W^ll, in the
Exerci^e and specification of its acts, ( consequenter, aft^r the object is
united with the faculty, and reason ha^h weighed the good and evil, the
convenience and ^nconveniency of things in its balance, and deliberated about
it,) is the souls sickne^s or disaster; arising from an insufficient
appl^cati^n of the Object, or defect in the Understanding, an inability to
judge of the Good or Evil of what lies before it, which should ponderate it,
and cast the Scale in its election, that it hangs in a Suspense. (which is
the freedom which Arminians seem to plead for.) True Freedom consists not in
a power or libe^ty, after the due exercise of ratioc^nation, be the evidence
what it will, to write black for white, or white for black, to judge Evil Good,
or Good Evil; or still to be undetermined about it, for fear of forestall^ng
the will: or in a power or liberty, in the will, not to follow the liberum
arbitrium the free award of Reason, or for the soul in willing not to be
confined to its own reason in what it chooses or avoideth: or pro libitu
arbitrarily or at his pleasure to elicit and imperate what it lists, though
against the sentiment of the mind; or at least, that after reason has issued
in a judgment, the Will should still be indetermined to one. Such a dominion
over its reason, or li^erty and freedom of will, cannot but be abhorrent to the
nature of man. All that can be desired is, that the soul has such a freedom of
Will, and dominion ov^r its ^wn acts, as that, in what ever it wills, it
acts as a vital and rational agent, in respect of its proper nature, and
internal principle of operation, with such a natural indifferency, in sensu
diviso, before it acts, (for quicquid est, quando est necessario est) as
whereby Reason proposing to the Elective Faculty diverse Objects, that have no
natural Connection with the Will, in determin^ng its self to eit^er, it
follows the dictate of its own judgment of D^scretion, void of all nat^ral
Necess^^y, such as when the Fire burns; or of Coaction, as when a man is
hal^d or carried without or against his own choice; neither is led by a blind
instinct, as the Beast; nor acted like a mere M^chine or E^gine, that ordere^h
not its own motion, nor knows its use, or tendency.

Its generally acknowledged, that if the Understanding has but one Object
alone proposed before it, or but one way or means to such an end; or that if
the Object be presented in all respects good, as, circa finem, that happiness
in General is to be desired; or if any particular Object be presented as
undequaque bonum, having no appear^nce of Evil in one respect, as well as of
Good and Eligibleness in another respect, the Will quoad speciem actus, if it
acts at all, must close with it, and cannot refuse the same; and so, if there
be in it omnimoda ratio mal^ an appearance of nothing but Evil in all and every
respect, it must neccessarily repudiate, or nill it, and cannot otherwise
determine its self. Yea and it is affirmed of God himself in Scripture, that he
is not at liberty in some things to determine himself, or to will, or act
otherwise than he does; its impossible for him to lie, Heb. 6.18. or not to do
that which is just and right, Genesis 18. 25. the Saints also in Heaven are
determined to good, (as was our Savior Christ even on earth, they are
invincibly inclined to it; and it is their Perfection, that it is (as well
N^turally as Morally) impossible for them to will the contrary, and that for
reasons unalterably pr^ponderating them that way, keeping the Will Habitually
fixed, and indeclinably pointed toward God, and Holiness, wherein all future
instances of Worship and acknowledgment, (being included, as the effect in its
cause) are Virtually in Act, the faculty being so far forth determined; and
it is our unhappiness that it is otherwise with us now. It Is no defect, or want
of any desirable Freedom of Will, that a man cannot obtain of himself to cut
his own throat, or feel not himself indifferent about it.

To be determined to evil only, or to be in such state and condition as that,
to do good, formally such, every way pleasing and acceptable in the sight of
God, is impossible, to be sure is a most Deplorable estate; though it be ab
intrinseco, from an innate Principle. Neither is it denied, but that such an
indetermination as some state the Freedom of man's Will to consist in, were
better, and to be preferred before determinate Fixation, in, and insuperable
propension of Will unto Sin, Jer. 13.23. 2 Pet. 2.14. But still, though lapsed
man (till restored by Grace) does not estimate aright of the things of God,
though he nauseateth the things of the Spirit, and declineth God and Holiness:
It Is not from the Enjoyment, or want of any such Freedom as is essential to
Humane nature, (nor can he plead an equitable dismission from his obligation to
Obedience; since he is disabled by his own fault:) but from a privation in his
mind, laesa facultas, a peccancy or disease therein, as to his discerning and
relish of Divine and Spiritual Objects, Ephesians. 4.18. Romans 8.5, 7. and a vicious
disinclination in his Will and Affections ballancing him another way, Genesis 6.5.
Ephesians. 2.3. Joh. 3.19. Free Will is still retained. What though a m^n cannot turn
the course of the Sun in the Firmament? yea, what though many seize, as
well Natural, as Moral, be now impossible to man, which were possible to Adam,
and of his concreated perfection, Genesis 2.19? what if he be a lover of
pleasures, more than a lover of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. and cannot obtain of himself
to do otherwise? Yet is he a man still, a rational and voluntary Agent in all
that he does; and retains a Dominion over his own Acts, and a Liberty in
their Specification too, of all within his Sphere and Compass.

The Saints in Heaven, notwithstanding that their state is no other than of a
determi^ate perfection, (not of Indifferency to Good or Evil,) yet they retain
a liberty of Competition, Contrariety, or contradiction in their Acts, with
reference to this or that particular Object, within the bounds and limits of
God's Will and Law, indel^bly engraven on their heart. The Natural or
Unregenerate man in like manner, notwithstanding his impotency to Good, and
invincible Propension determining him to Evil in General; yet reraineth the
like L^berty and Freedom, to Will or Nill, to Choose or Refuse, and consequently
to Do or not Do this or that, (in the ordinary way of Gods Providence) save in
what, by the Apostasy, or by a radicated Habit or Custom in Sinning, he has
Disabled himself, or is left of God. In his Natural and Civil Acts, or in his
Sinful Acts, he has a Self-determining power, (if God permit) he can Specify
his own acts, he can of two Objects before him, choose one, and refuse the
other, as the Cogency of his Reason shall sway him: A wicked man can choose
whether he will go to this Alehouse, or that, or to neither of them: he can pay
a Sum of Money that he has given Bond for, at the day, if he have it; or he
can let it alone: he can Hear, and Read, and Pray, (though not every way as he
ought to do) yea were he not deficient to himself, might overcome his Will to
it, (possibly he may be wagered, or by penalties be driven to it) as well as
the contrary. Every disaffection is not Invincible, Luke 11.7, 8. Jeroboam,
Baasha, and other the Kings of Israel, upon the denunciation of Wrath against
them, might and could, for ought we know, (we are sure graceless persons may)
have Humbled themselves, and caused their People to Fast, as well as Ahab, or
the King of Nineveh did, upon the like Message sent of God to them; but they
did not. Jer. 5. 21, 23. Mat. 11.23. and 12.41. Yea and the best Saints, may
and can do more Good, and forbear more Evil than they do, as has been hinted.
David might and could have forborne to make Vriah Drunk, or Murder him, and he
could have done Mephibosheth Right, against that Traitor Ziba, 2. Sam. 19.27,
but he did it not. Whose Heart is it that reproacheth him not for preventable
Miscarriages? In such things it is, (which are within man's power either way)
that God is said to Try or Prove men sometimes, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 16. Genesis 22.11, 12.2
Sam. 24.12.

The Saints in Glory are Immutably determined to to Good; or cannot sin.

The Sinn^^, or Unrenewed man or men, they are Invi^cibly de^ermined to Evil,
or bent on it in the General; or cannot do Good.

Man in Innocence, he had perfect Good, or spotl^ss Obedience; and also Sin,
and Evil, within his power both; being made Mutab^e.

Man Restored, and Manumitted by Grace, has imperfect Good, (comp^red to the
Original Law) or Sincere O^edience, within his power; and also Sin and
Disobed^ence; being on Earth defectible, or not yet Confirmed; though the
Decr^e and Efficiency of God shall prevent, that he sins not to Death.

Yet may Free Will be denominated or affirmed of them all. The one act as
freely as the other; the worst in sinning, as the best in obey^ng. He acts
freely that can act, or not act, what, when, and how he p^easeth, in things
which may be said to be (...), i. e. in our power; so does the s^rvant, at his
Masters Beck, Col. 3.23. where note by the way, that to act voluntarily or
freely, and yet necessarily are consistent, and may well stand together. The
Angels in Heaven they love God, and serve him, Voluntarily and Freely; so shall
the S^ints in Glory (and so does man in his present state, even in what has a
kind of natural Connection with the Will, determine himself Freely according to
the Dictate of his Reason and Judgment.) A Rational, a Voluntary, and a Free
Choice, are Convertible Terms. The Will acts Freely; not Necessarily, as
opposed to Volun^ary, either contrary, by Coaction or Violence, against its
Elicit Inclination; or negative, from a mere natural Necessity, without Reason:
B^t still it acts Necessarily in some sense, (as the Will evermore does, when
Reason has once cast the Scale,) with necessity of Immutability in respect of
the Event, which, opponitur possibili non esse, is opposed to a Possibility not
to be, (God's Supportation and Concurse presupposed) or eventus contrarii, of
the contrary Issue or Event, it can do no otherwise, and that from the Potency
or perfection of the Rational Faculty, and Cognation that it has with the
Obj^ct. And the contrary is as true, of Wicked and Unregenerate men; they Act
freely, following the Dictate of their Reason and Judgment, such as it is,
though Brutish, Jer. 10.8, 21. and 55.17. thoug^ Carnal, ^ensual, and Devili^h,
Jam. 3.15. Jer. 4.22. vo^d of all natural Necessity or Coaction, in their
choice of Sin, and Fl^sh-pleasing, Ephesians. 2.3. Yet do they Act Necessarily also,
so as that they cannot possibly Will or Do the Contrary, (without renewing
grace) Job. 5.44.45. Romans 2.5. and that ab intriseco, from a Privation in their
Mind, Romans 3.11. Ephesians. 4.18. and an Impotency, or contraty Propension in their
Will and Affections, preponderating them to Evil, (though not sub ratione mali)
and to a Disrelish of true Holiness, Romans 8.5, 7. which is languor and
aegritudo animi the Souls sickness, and depravation of its Faculties, the fruit
of man's first Apostasy from God, Job. 14.4. though he be still habile
subjectum, a Subject capable of the Retrivement of God's Image into his Soul,
Col. 3.10. i. e. Man still, with his natural faculties of Reason and Will; and
so, Good is yet possible to him in some sense, if God please to adapt him for
it, Ephesians. 2.10.

In and about particular Acts agible, within man's power, and unto which he is
not actually or virtually, by a previous invincible Habit, or Propension of
Mind and Will predetermined, lies the Contingency and Evitability of Humane
actions. In such actions has man a liberty of Contrariety, or Contradiction,
in the Exercise and Specification of his Acts, or of Indifferency, accordingly
as his Reason does sway him. He may and can Act, or suspend his Act; his Will
contains within its dominion a power and possibility unto contrary acts and
effects; what is future, is yet evitable; and that possible, that is not
future. Man (says the Learned Davenant) has not only potentiam in se
liberam, a facul^y in its self free, or capable of freedom; but liberum usum
potentiae, the free Use or Exercise of it. A wicked Man for instance, can upon
other Deliberation, resolve to do otherwise than he does, which freedom is
evident in Adulterers, Thieves, and all manner of Sinners, who being resolved
to Commit this or that Sin, when they perceive some great Danger, presently
choose to abstain from it till fitter opportunity. Cain, Absalom, Judas, and
others, were not under a Necessity of committing those Sins, whereof they are
noted to be Guilty; it was out of their free Election, having a power whereby
they might have abstained from them. The Angels that fell, notwithstanding the
Decree of the Divine Will, had a Possibility of Not-rebelling against God, and
a Sufficiency of Divine Grace given them to have preserved them, so had Adam,
had they not abused it. God's absolute prescience does not take away the
possibility of the contrary Action or Event; no more does his absolute decree,
to think that the decree of absolute Reprobation must leave men under a
necessity of committing their several sins, is a false Imagination, as every
man's Conscienee is able to witness, so the aforesaid Author, p.
116.199.328.344. whom I have the rather consulted, for that he is instanced in
by some, and produced for a maintainer of God's Predetermination of man's will,
in the sense by them pleaded for; Which himself terms, a controversy between
the Dominicans and Jesuits; with whose Metaphysical speculations our Protestant
Divines love not to torture their brains.

Nor yet do I take all Extrinsick Predetermination to be Inconsistent with
humane Freedom in Acting. For it has been before granted, that such
Predetermination of God is necessary unto the Conversion of any Sinner unto
him, (though the Sinner is capable of doing something that in the Order of Gods
appointment has a tendency to it, Prove. 2.3, 5. Isa. 64, 7. and it lies at
the Door of any under the call of the Gospel, that they are not converted and
healed by God, it is their own fault, Jer. 13.27. Mat. 25.29. and their heart
will one day Reproach them for it, Luke 16.28.) neither do we, when we speak of
an Irreversible, Insuperable, Irresistible Determination, (whether to good or
evil Actions,) mean any more than such as cannot, or rather shall not be
resisted; such as is efficaciously prevalent, and never fruastrate. Yet is the
Liberty and Freedom of Cooperation in the Subject in such case, no more than
that of a Rational Spontaneity; it contains in it is own nature nothing of
contingency, or possibility of the contrary Event. In Effectual calling, the
New Creation, (wherein God works something above and besides the Order and
Course of second Causes, in order to the new Biassing and Pointing the soul
toward himself, Heaven, and Holiness;) whatever the Influence or Efficiency of
God be on the soul, or its faculties of Reason and Will, or his manner of
Operation; (whether it be by way of objective Proposal, and Fixation on the
mind Demonstrating the Object, and Effectually setting home Truth, to an
immutation therein, and turn of the Will, 1 Cor. 2.4. Or by way of Physical
Precurse and Premotion besides, exciting the natural Powers into Act, and
inclining and bowing them in their Operation as the Fountain of Being, and
motion, unto a Change or Turn into a new Course, Ephesians. 2.2.4, 10. of which
before,) still, he so intimately by his Presence and Virtue reaches, and
applies himself to the Active Principle of the second cause, he so congruously
accommodateth himself to the nature of the subjecy to be wrought upon, as that
all the vital Wheels of the soul, the Reason, Elective power, Will and
Affections go along with choice and delight in their determination, without the
least Rape or Violence offered to the Innate freedom of the soul, though God
and Christ be carried into the heart, with a greater weight of Love than any
other Object can balance, to turn the scale of its Predominant Elecion an
other way, and yet it is Invincibly or Irresistibly wrought upon, and a
necessity Induced upon it in a sense. It can will no otherwise, Christ drawing,
yet the Will remains still free; for voluntary and violent, willing and
forced, do implicare; The Will cannot be forced, and for the Will to be
determined necessarily or indeclinably to Good, and what may render the soul
happy, no man that prays to God for grace, or that acknowledges God therein,
will ever recoil at it, or account himself injured thereby, or concerned to
rise up against it: nor is it at all repugnant to the Commands, Counsels,
Promises, or Threats laid before men to induce them to a Returnal unto God,
Heb. 4.1, 11. For that, the dispensation of this grace is, as to us,
contingent, and in the use of means; And the second cause has its immediate,
formal, and proper Efficiency therein. It is man that believes and repents,
(not God; yet the Effect of God's power overshadowing the soul, Psalm. 110.3.)
whose Action is not only the first cause in the presence of such a Creature,
(as in the gifts of miracles:) but is specified by the second cause, in the
virtue of its proper form suitably to its nature, as a reasonable Creature, 2
Cor. 6.1. Gods Efficiency changes not the natures of things; though he
rectifieth, and heals the Mind and Will morally, yet he alters not its
proper motion or manner of operation naturally. It inclines its self as freely
to the Act, and that upon the cogency of reason and judgment, as if there were
no such Hyperphysical determination thereof by God at all. Dut. 30.19.

3. But as to evil or sinful actions, whereof our question is, such
Predetermination is destructive to the Creature, and inconfident with God's
moral Government over him: albeit that God's decrees are infrustrable, yet does
not God premove their Wills Insuperably in and unto the Conception and
Production at such Act: more were it for the honor of God, (if sin
dishonors him,) and the good of man his Creature, that such Acts ar
Operations of his should for ever abide in their bare Potentiality, or that his
Will should remain in an Everlasting Indetermination, (which it is said that it
must, if God determine it not,) than that it is p^ssibility, should be educed
into an Actual invasion of the Government of God, and affront of his holy
Majesty; and then the creature be damned for the same, (though he could, but
sees it not meet to prevent it.) here it is necessary, not only that the Subject
has no Violence offered to it, but that it be not made free nor willing, which
is far the worse. If any man should violently snatch me out of ha^mes way, when
I was not aware of it, or rescue me from the Pit; I should have no cause to
complain of him: but in case any one could reach my Elective power, and
in^atuate and befool my Reason, (suppose it by fascination,) and should
determine me to the Contrivance and Execution of some horrid Treason, to my
destruction; He should do me more Mischief and Injury than if he had violently
or by force ass^ssinated me, and taken away my Life with h^s own hands; as is
obvious to every Understanding; m^re of Evil would cleave to me; and if he were
my Judge in such In^tance, I know what I could not but say. God himself ^ath
declared it a thing to him condecent and just, that in the matter of Offense
and Punishment, his Act should be (if I may so speak) at the Beck and
determin^tion of the Creature. Legisl^tion belongs to God alone; and
Deliverance after forfeiture belongs to his Prerogative: but that any one
becomes an Object of his rectoral Ju^tice and Wrath, God is not the first cause
of that; or the Predeterminer to those Act^ons which involve men under Guilt.
The Judge or King is and must be at the Dispose of the Subject in a sense, in
the Execution of the penalty of the Law; not to hang whom he please; nor yet to
make them culpable. Such a Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Cases, God
abhors from, Isa. 50.1. The Position directly contrary hereunto, is that
which by some is maintained; namely, That God in Eternity did Predefine or
decree all the sin^ul Actions of Angels and Men. That by his Efficiency, which
is but the Execution of his Decree and adequate to it, foregoing the Operation
of the second cause, he does in time, by his transient physical Influence,
predetermine the Creature to all such Actions; that the necessary dependence of
the second cause, or the first, and its Essential subordination to it, does so
require, that the Habit or first Act, and the Operation or second Act, is the
Product and Effect of such Influence of God the first cause, as secundary and
subordinate to it, and is ascertained by it; or that otherwise the Decree might
suffer disappointment. More particularly; that the Fall of our first Parents
was fore-dec^eed of God; and that in Execution thereof, substrahendo, by
withdraw^ng, or suspending that Light and Assistance, without which it was
imp^ssible for them eventually to stand: or efficiendo, by his Physical
precurse, he determ^ned them thereunto. They affi^m not only the concurse of
God enabling them to and in the Acts of Appetition, of Mastication, Manducation
etc. in eating of the fruit; but that the disorde^ly Modification of the Act
was primarily from God; that by his Influence and Causation, himself did cast
the Scale of their Will, to desire, and to eat of that Tree prohibited (in
which, was ye disorder) rather than any other, (before free and indifferent,
till determined the^^unto, by that Energy of his, which could not but produce
the Effect*) yet so, as that no straining or compassion can be dreamed of
t^erein; though in sensu composito considered, as in subordination to the
Immutable Decr^e and Efficiency of God, they co^ld do no o^herwise than they
did. So for all other the wickedest Actions of men; that all the ine^cations of
the flesh, the motus primo primi, all the first machinations of the Mind or
Thoughts, and conceptions of the Will, are forged by him, (as to the sub^rate
matter,) that unto all the hatred of himself, all the Lying, Cursing, Rap^ne,
Blood, Cruelty and Confusion in the World, he is the first ^over, the reducer
of it out of its bare potentiality into Act, its Specifier, and Predeterminer,
as to its Existence, and mode of Being; not only the Assyrians spoiling and
taking the Prey, Isa. 10.6. but all his evil meaning, 20.7. and his saying,
that by his Strength and Wisdom he had done it, v. 13. both Habit and Act: all
that had any thing of Entity in it, that not only the Power of Herod, and the
exercise thereof unto the taking of a Wife was from God; But in specie and
individuo, that he took his Brother Philip's Wife, rather than an other Woman
he was indeclinably premoved of God, and Efficien^ly Predetermined by him; and
so in all instances of natural Action. This is it which I oppose, and the which
now comes more directly to be Considered and Argued.

1. The First Argument which I shall insist on, for the confut^tion of the
Doctrine aforesaid, and in maintenance of the Position by me before laid down,
which is diametrically opposite to it, is this. It makes God to be the
Efficient cause, or the Author of sin; (not a sinner; for that he is above Law,
say some, but) of all that is so in man. The consequence I know is denied by
them whom I oppose, yea and the thing disowned; they will not affirm, nor grant
God to be the Author of sin, nor do think, that from what they assert, it will
unavoidably follow; whatever odious Consequences we fasten upon an opinion in
the way of Argumentation, we take for grant the contrary. Namely, that they who
do hold that Opinion, do not hold that which we connect with it, or, that which
we tell them will follow thereupon. When I endeavor to convince a man of his
error, by reducing him ad incommodum or absurdum, to an inconveniency, or
absurdity: I take it for Grant that himself accounts it an absurdity which I
would fasten upon him; Or my Argument is to him lost. If he agrees not with me
in that which I make Use of a^ my medium to convince him, (and there is no man
so perfect, but he holds contradictions, though he sees it not;) or if he
does not with me more firmly adhere to the Truth which I take to be
contradictory to his Error, my Argument, (which proceeds ex concessis) will
not pinch him at all.

Here therefore they distinguish of the Physical Action, and the Morality of
it; the Acti^n they say is of God, and its Existence; He it is that premoveth,
and by his transient Physical influence causes, and efficiently predetermineth
men in and unto all their sinful Actions; (and is the first cause, and
determiner in all their Omissions) that he specifieth, and gives its
particular Individuation to every such numerical Action: but for the anomie or
a^axie of it, it is Irregularity (wherein the formal nature of Sin consists,
its inco^formity to Law) that is a privation, it is a non ens, or nihil, it h^th
no Author or Efficient cause at all, (only a deficient cause, or subject
rather,) nor is caused. The Action they say, the substrate matter of Sin, God
causes or effects; not the Obliquity of it; the Act, not the sinfulness; the
former, i. e. the Act, they say is ens, it has an Entity or Being, and ens and
bonum convertuntur, it must necessarily therefore be good, and have God for its
Author, who is so of all that is good, etc. But surely ens, and bonum morale,
are not convertible terms: every thing that is, is not morally good; and of
Metaphysics we are not disputing.

Laying aside therefore all Philosophical and Scholastical subtilties, let us
attend to the Scriptures, and see whether we can find out what is Sin; and
whether it may be said to have any Author of it, or no; and if so, what it is
that denominateth any one such in the Language of the Holy Ghost.

Sin is either Orginal, or Actual. Original, is either that of Adam, or of all
mankind in him, Romans 5.12. which was Origo, the first beginning, and
Springhead of all sin: Or the immediate Product thereof, that which though it
be not the first S^n or Transgression, yet is ab origin congenite, or of the
same Original with us; and that is either private, The loss or Want of
something in debito subjecto, that de jure ought to be in the Subject, termed
the Image of God, Genesis 1.26. Ecc. 7.29. Col. 3.10. Or positive, an Alienation,
or Dis-inclination to what the Law of God requires; and a bi^ss and propension
to what it prohibiteth, Job. 14.4. Psalm. 51.5. and 58.3. Genesis 6 5. Romans 3.10.
(which is heightened by continued Acts, Jer. 13.23.) and this is the Source and
Fountain of all other Sin.

Actual Sin, is either of Omission or Commission. The former, is the subject's
not exerting, or not coming up to some particular Act, which by the Law he
stood obliged to. The latter, the Perpetration of some Act, or the Doing of
some thing, which the Law of God forbids to be committed or done, Luke 11.42.
The formal nature of Sin in abstracto, is a Repugnancy to Law or Rule; so the
Apostle defines it, a Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. All Sin, however
Distinguished, is such, and for the same reason is Sin; because Inconform to
the Law of God, (...), an Illegality; it is not the Object, or Circumstance of
an Act, or Intention of the Agent in Acting, that is the Rule or Measure of its
Morality; but the Act or Action so modified, is Good or Evil, as Conform or
Inconform to Rule, Romans 4.15.

Sin in concreto, is a Peccant Habit, Act, or Omission, against Law or Rule. In
it there is nothing more nor less to be considered, but the Habit or Privation,
Act or Omission of the Law; and the Habitude of the former to it. The Law, that
is Good and Holy, Romans 7.12. it is also index recti and obliqui, the Rule and
Standard of what is Right, and what Not. God is the Author of That, Man of the
Habit or Act Deviant from it; the Habitude or Relation of Sinfulness, stante
lege, results from the former Act. The Formality God is the Author of, in some
Sense, he Constituteth the Law; what Action shall be Good, what Evil, his
Nature and Will gives it so to be, it is of Him; but the Existence of the Act
or Action discrepant to Law, is of Man; God is not the Author or Predeterminer
of That; he might not do it, or was not Necessitated so to have done it.

Sin is sometimes in Scripture predicated of the Soul now depraved; sometimes of
its Faculties; of the Understanding, Will, and Affections; and sometimes of the
Body its Instrument, as the Subject and Efficient of it; so it is of the Habit
or Propension to Evil; and Privation of Light, and of the contrary Inclination
to Good, (whereof the Soul it self, and its natural Faculties, is the
substratum, the prime Subject of such Depravation, and vicious Inclination, and
in like manner of all sinful Omissions or Non-agencies) and of actual sinful
Commissions, (the substratum or materiale, the matter whereof is the act it
self) yea, it is denominated of them all in the Abstract, Ephesians. 5.8. Romans 8.7.
chapter 1.29. Let now this irregular warping of the Faculties, this crookedness of
the habitual Frame and Inclinations of the Soul, and disconformity of its
actions, Isa. 59.8. let it, I say, be what it will be, in its precise nature,
ens reale rationis, modus entis or modus modi entis; still it cleaves to, and
is affirmed of the Faculty, Habit, or Act whereof it is the Mode, the
Scriptures throughou^; and he that determines, or is determined to an Act
forbidden, does, or is so also, to the Sin or Evil of it, in the Judgment of
God; or to the evil Action in concreto; as well to its irregularity, as to the
Entity of the action: which whilst the Law abides, it can never really (only
by a ment^l Precision or Abstraction,) be separated from. Put but the
Fundamentum and terminus, and the relation results. If a Man begets a Child,
the relation of Paternity cannot but ^ollow. If the Soldiers do not keep their
R^nks, or ob^erve not t^eir due and proper Motions; the disorder of the Army
re^^l^s, and no^e can help it. The Winding up or loosing of a string, or
Physical undue Touch or motion of it, will cause an Irregularity or Discord in
Music^; and that by Resultancy from it. So, let the Habits and Propensi^ns ^f
the Soul be wrong pointed, and its natural Actions determ^ned, as to the Entity
of them, and manner of Being, cross to the Law of God, (w^encesoever it be) and
its Harmony is de^troyed; Sin results, neither can the Guilt of it come any
other way. He that so acts, does (...), make S^n, Joh. 8.34.

Sin, it is (...) a Transgression, besides or against the Law, 2 Pet. 2.16.
(...) Imp^ety, 2 Timothy 2.16. and (...), a Deflection from a straight Line, Romans
5.14. and (...) an Aberration, or Lapse, v. 15. and (...) Disobedience, v. 19.
and (...) Pravity, Act. 3.26. and (...) ^^edity or Impurit^, Mat. 23.27. and
(...) Wickedness, Act. 8.22. and (...), all Inju^tice, or Deviation from the
Rule of Righteousn^ss, is Sin, 1 J^h. 5.17. The Question is, of what all this
is Denominated? what it is, that whoever can justly be ch^rged therewith, the
G^ilt of all that cleaves to him? Surely it is someth^ng Re^l, not Imaginary
only that it is spoken of; it is as well of Habits, as Privations; of Act^, as
Omissions; and has an Efficient Cause, and Real Foundation, with the Entity
whereof; those Relative Respects are Identified, and he that Causes one,
Causes both.

That (...) u^br^dled Concupiscence, Romans 7.8. or the Habitual Inclination of
the Whole Man to what is Prohibited, and D^sclination to what is Commanded.
It Is termed in Scripture, Sin; the Body of Sin, and Law of it, Romans 7.23.
something Present, Dwelling, and Moving in the Subject, v. 5.17. chapter 8.3.
Sometimes it is said to War, sometimes (...) to Reign, or to Lord it; (this
Non-ens, as some will have it,) Let not Sin Reign in your Mortal Body, that ye
should obey it in the Lusts thereof, Romans 6.12. This our Catechizes teach to be
a Corrupt Nature Inhering or Dwelling in us, pondus a weight, and an Operative,
Effective Principle; an anomalous thing; yet the fomes peccati, the Source and
Fountain of all Actual Tran^gression. The Natural Habit or Incl^nation, is quid
reale, something Real and Existent an Active Quality. It Is the Soul, the Form,
that Acts; but by the Habit it is disposed to Act; its Faculties, and Habits
or Dispositions, are its Instruments of Action, and concur subord^nately
thereunto.

If it Inclines, stands Bent, or Determined toward what the Law forbids, or
be pointed repugnantly to Rule, It Is (...) an Evil Complexion, Habit or
Co^^^itution of Soul; a Leprosy, Isa. 1.6. a Running sore upon it, Ps. 38.5.
it is more than a Privat^on, it is a contrary Habit to Good, a Plag^e on ^he
Heart, Hos. 11.7. Inclinatio ad malum and prohibitum reciprocanter, to incl^ne
to any Act or Object that God Prohibits, is to Incline to Moral Ev^l, or
Wickedn^ss; and such Inclination (of Mind, Will or Afflections,) or so
mod^fied, and determined, is Wicked and Sinful; the Entity of it is so
mo^ally, (not Physically,) so is the Mi^d its self so Affected, Act. 14.2. the
Will, Ephesians. 2.3. and Affections, Romans 1.26. as well as that which proceeds or
comes our of them: For, from within, out of the Heart of Men, proceed Evil
Thoughts, Adulteries, etc. says our Savior: all these Evil things; and defile
the Man, Mark. 7.21, 23. having Eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14.

So for Omissions and Commissions. Omissions; There is none that calls upon
thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. There is
none that Understands, none that seeks after God, none that does Good, Romans
3.11, 12. (...) Ungrateful, 2 Timothy 3.2. (...) without Natural Affect^on, v. 3.
I was an Hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; In Prison, and ye visited me not,
Mat. 25.42. All this is Impiety, Sin, or Unrighteousness. By what th^n does a
Man Contract the Guilt of all, but by a non agency nor non-exertion of some
Physical Act, which the Law of God, some affirmative Precept requires? it
results from it.

In like manner for Commissions; They are all gone out of the way, Romans 3.12.
Their Throat is an open Sepulcher; With their Tongues they have used deceit,
etc. v. 13. this is Sin and Wickedness. The Question is whether Sin has an^
Efficient, or Author, or not? Or if so, what it is to be the Author of it? Sin
is the Transgression of the Law, says the Apostle* 1 John 3.4. But he that
lies carnally with another man's Wife, or that tak^th away the Life of an
Innocent Person, or uncondemned, etc. Transgresses the Law, Jam. 2.11. Ergo,
So to do is Sin. The very natural Act is such: Put but the Law, and the Act,
and it results; If ye have respect of Persons, ye commit Sin, and are convinced
of the Law as Transg^essors, v. 9. You are the Authors of it. Hence such
Actions receive a new denomination, when Illegal. The Natural Use of Woman is
lawful, but that is not called Adultery; So, to take away the Life of man in
some case; but that is not termed Murder as before. Jam. 2.11. All Eating and
Drinking, is not Surfeiting and Drunkenness; nor every taking of a Purse,
Theft; nor saying Yea or Nay, Ly^ng; but as the question is put, Act. 5.8. the
modification then of these natural Acts, (the Power whereof is from God, Act.
17.28.) the Specifying and Determining them this or the other way, with their
Relation to God's Law, is that which gives them both Name and Thing. If a man
^ayeth Yea, when by the Law of God he ought to say Nay, it is Lying, and the
physical Act Sin, or Transgression. To pour water, and to Baptize in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is no Sin, (yea may be Righteousness;) but
so to do, and say, over a Beast, can never be but Sin: To Name the Word Devil,
is is not always Sin; But to Baptize a Chri^tian in^o his Name, has a moral
Malignity in it, that can never by the Wit of Man be separated from it; but
that he that determines to the Act, does also to the Obliquity of it.

Hence it is that Men are said to hatch and contrive Mischief, Isa. 59.4. to do
Wickedness, Genesis 39.9. or Unrighteousness, Lev. 19.15. Romans 1.29. and to commit
Sin, Ja. 2.9. (the Abstract for the Concrete,) this, though it may not be Good
Metaphysics, is found Divinity I am sure It Is meant of Acts oblique, and
thwarting Gods Law; Termed a Working of Wi^kedness, 2 King. 21.6. It Is the Act
or Substratum only that is meant, or that Man does, when he is said to be the
Author or Worker of Sin; and that he pleases himself in, when he is said to
take Pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12. or that his Members are
Serviceable to, when he is said to yield them as Instruments of
Unrighteousness, Romans 6.13. or that he repents him of, when he is said to
repent him of his Wickedness, Act. 8.22. and beg pardon for it, Psalm. 32.2, 5.
or that Men are Damned for, when they are said to Receive the Wages of
Unrighteousness; And yet surely that is Sin, Romans 6.20, 23. these things have
thou done, Psalm. 50.21. And diverse Affection: Sin has predicated of it;
(whereas non entis nulla est affectio) It Is said to be Intended, and Remitted;
some to be greater, some less^r Sins, and Sinners, Genesis 15.16. a Wonderful and
Horrible thing is Committed. Jer. 5.30. and 23.14. it is said also to leaven, 1
Cor. 5.6. and its self to be purged out, 2 Pet. 1.9. some to be overcome of it,
2 Pet. 2.19. and others to overcome it, Romans 12.21. being aware of its deceit,
Heb. 3.13. What can all this and the like be affirmed of: but of somewhat that
has Entity? It Is the Material, the Substrate matter, or Subject, the Illegal
Habits, or Operations of the Soul, that is called Sin, and the Body of it, Romans
6.6.

Yet farther, If sin be a non-ens, Nothing, Or has no Efficient; neither is
Grace any thing, nor has it God for its Author, nor yet man: This appears
from the Rule of Contraries; contrariorum eadem est ratio. Sin and Grace,
Righteousness and Unrighteousness are opposed contrarily, (not privatively in
Morals) Sub habitu, vel action morali. They are two Contraries meeting
sometimes in the same Subject, and combating there, Gal. 5.17. As Grace, or
Holiness is an Elective habit of the Mind and Will, or an Act Imperated of it,
commensurate to the Law of God: So is Vice or Sin, in the Mind or Will, a Habit
or Act deflecting from the same Rule; And in the Abstract the deflection
(opposed to commensuration) is its Vitiocity or Sinfulness; and the Will of man
is the Efficient cause of it, of Evil equally as of Good. Error has its
Radication in the Mind, as well as Truth; and to be Wise to do Ev^l, h^th as
much of Entity in it, as to do Good, Jer. 4.22. Blindness, Darkness, or
Ignorance is indeed nothing Positive. If it be of what the Nature of man is
Incapable of, or was never Endowed with; It Is but Simple Nescience, a Negation
only: If of Natural things only, the loss of an Endowment of Mind in the
discerning of, and Knowledge in and about things not Relating to Religion,
wherein yet Manonce had Understanding, and was capable of; It Is a Privation;
but no Sin, or Moral Evil. If a Man becomes Ignorant or Nescient in or unto
the compassing of what is by the Law of God forbidden; It Is Metaphysical Evil,
(if I may so term it,) a Privation of something that has an Entity, and with
which transcendental Good (the common Affection of Entity) is Convertible; but
it is Moral good, Jam. 3.15. let not my Soul come into their Secret, Genesis 49.6.
Ignorance or Darkness in and abo^t the things of God, and of the Spirit, be it
juris or facti, of the Law, or of the Adequation of the Act to it, 1 Timothy 6.5.
Isa, 5.20. if of that which is due and was connate to man to know and
Understand, it is a Privation (viz.) of that, the Habit or Power whereof was
once an Humane Endowment: (and the which he is a Subject capable of having
again retrived, by a Supernatural and Divine power) and Perfective of man: and
its Moral Evil. The Soul or Mind of Man is the Substratum or Subject of it, or
that that is so deprived: and being destitute of Light and Truth, it is ens
moraliter Malum, a Being ethically Evil, a depraved Faculty, Ephesians, 4.18. and he
that extinguisheth the Habit, causes the Privation, and all the Evil that
^nsueth, Romans 1.28. 2 Pet. 3.5. The Pravity or Sinfulness of the Soul, or its
Faculties, by reason of that Privation, is from the Law requiring the contrary
Habit. The Formal Nature thereof, is its discrepancy and repugnancy to Law or
Rule; and has as much of Entity in it, as when the fundamentum, the Foundation
of that relative Respect, is quid positivum something positive, as a Habit. And
the reason of Sin is the same, in Omissions, and Commissions; the Will is
culpable in both alike, either Efficiently or Deficiently; and the Obliquity or
Illegality of the one, has as much of positivity in it, as of the other.

Neither has Righteousness or Holiness, the contrary Mode of Being, any thing
more of Entity, (as has been said) than Sin or Unrighteousness; or is there
any more of Efficiency to the one than the other. Neither Sin, nor Grace,
Piety, or Impiety can subsist out of any Subject, or hang in the Air;
inconcreto, and abstracto in that agree. Harmony na Discord, Order and
Disorder, Conformity and Disconformity, Rectitude and Obiquity, Righteousness
and Unrighteousness, have an Efficient Cause; and Men are said as well to do
one, as the other, if we may Credit the Scriptures, 1 John 3. 7, 10. Lev.
19.15. Romans 6.23. (...) Uncorruptness, or (...) Sincerity, Tit. 2.7. which is
as Salt, that rendereth every Instance or Obedience Savoury; has no more of
Positivity in it, than the Contrary Deceit, Corruptness, Prevarication, or
Hypocrisy, of which the former is the Negation; without Hypocrisy, Isa. 3.17.
1 Pet. 3.4. that is, Upright, in the Affirmative. Yea, one and the same Act or
Action, every way alike Circumstantiated, may and have received either
Denomination; sometimes, that of Good or Righteous, and then again of Sinful or
Unrighteous; upon the Alteration of the Law, the Standard of Righteousness,
Josh. 7. 20, 21. and chap. 8.2. So it was with reference to the Ceremonial and
Judicial Law, after the Coming of Christ. If in linea Physica the Jews kept
their course, Acted and did, what before that they practiced; those same
Actions were now Impious and Sinful, that before were Pious and Good. Shall we
then think that the Goodness and Rectitude of the same natural Habits and Acts,
was ens, and had an Efficient Cause, (when the Law was in force) but yet that
the Malignity and Obliquity of them was nihil, (after its Repeal,) and had no
Cause at all? what did they more in the One, than in the Other? its too Subtle
for me to understand. The Truth is, he that is the Author or Efficient of the
Act, is the Author or Efficient of both. Righteousness, or Unrighteousness
(straight, or oblique,) is but the (...); or Habitude of the Act, and all its
Circumstances to Law; and he that Does or Causes the Act, Does or Causes
Righteousn^ss or Unrighteousness, (accordingly as the same Act is Conform or
Inconform and Cross to the Law of God) and that in a proper Sense; or the
Scriptures do never treat-of the one or the other properly at all. Did not
Sol^mon King' of* Israel sin by these things? Neb. 13.26.

What has been said may suffice for the Explication of the Scriptural Notion
of Sin. To reassume then our former Argument, and reduce what has been before
i^sisted on to the Case in hand.

(1) As to Original Sin, originans I mean, that of Adam, and ours in Him. If
our first Parents Inadvertency, or Om^ssion of a due Exercise of Reason and
Understanding; if their Eating of the Forbidden Fruit; if their Los^ and
Depravation of the Image of God in Knowledge and Light necessary to Conduct
them unto God and Holiness; or their Declining from God, and Inclination and
Propension to the Flesh-pleasing, contrary to the Law of God, was Sin; then
accordingly it follows from our Adversaries hyyothesis, that God must be the
Author of Sin: But the Antecedent is true: Ergo the Consequent.

The Antecedent is proved, Genesis 3.6. what is this that thou have done? says
God, v. 13, 17. 1 Timothy 2.14 Romans 5.12. Col. 3.10. Nor can it be denied to be
Sin.

The Consequent is evident, in that they make God to be the first Cause, and
Predeterminer of Man unto all, in every Branch thereof. That Adam did not
Advert, Weigh, and better Consider the Evil and Danger of Complying with the
Temptation, was they say from Gods withdrawing his Influence, and Causation
from him, as often as man does not Will or Act; he therefore does it not, say
they, because God does not determine him to it; and that None-determination, or
Suspensation of God, merely of its self, without any positive action inureth to
the preventing of all Operation of the Creature. They affirm, that God did
subtract or take away from Adam before his Fall, that spotless Light, and
Primogenial Perfection of his Understanding, wherein he was at first Created,
and and left him so denuded or stripped to shift for himself: that moreover God
did Predefine his Lapse or Fall, and that in Execution of his Decree, he did
Premove, and Efficiently, by his Physical Influx, Predetermine his Will to the
Eating of the Tree, whereof he Commanded him not to Eat; to choose that rather
than the other, and that Indeclinably, so as that it was Inevitable to him,
considered as he stood in Subordination to the aforesaid Decree, and Efficiency
of God, and his nec^ssary Dependence on him: (though in sensu diviso,
considering him, or his furure Act, without the Consideration of the Decree and
Efficiency of God, or his Dependence upon him in esse and operari, or secluding
the Foreknowledge of God of all future Contingencies, etc. which is impossible:
they deny not but that he might possibly have stood, and not have been so
Predetermined by him, or Caused to Fall;) either I say all that was not Sin,
nor Culpable; or according to them God was the Author of his Sin or
Transgression.

So in like manner, (2) For our Personal Original Sin, ortum I mean, or
originatum, that which ab origin we bring into the World with us, Job 14.4. if
God be the Author and Efficient of our Habits or Inclinations in the General,
and their Specifier and Determiner, giving them their Biass that way they
propend or go, namely, contrary to his Law, then is he the Author of Sin: But
according to them who go the way of Physical Predetermination he, does the
former; Ergo according to them he does the latter also.

The Minor is their own assertion, they say that not only the power of
Willing, and the radical affections of Love and Hatred; but their alienation
from the Life of God, the Habitual Pointing and Determining them Oblique and
Cross to his Law, to the Love of the Word and Flesh-pleasing, and to the Hatred
of Himself, and Enmity to his Law, both their Entity and Modification, God is
the prime Cause and Efficient of. He from Etern^ty foresaw it, and that in his
Decree, with which his Efficiency runs Parallel and Even, in all and every
Creature-effect; all that has Entity.

The Connection or Consequence of the Major Proposition, will not I suppose be
Denied, namely, that the Habitual Dis-inclination of the Soul to Holiness, or
Propension and Incl^nation to Acts Discrepant to the Law of God, (such as the
Hatred of God, and avers^tion unto his Commands) is indeed Sin, or the Law of
Sin, Romans 8.3.5. I^ then God be the Author and Determiner of, or unto that, he
is so of Sin.

The Case is still the some, as to Actual Sin, whether of Omission, or
Commission. If God be the Cause of men's not Hearing the Word, Reading, Praying,
Omitting, or not Exercising of this and the other act which his Law Commands
and O^ligeth them unto, causa prohibens, by his Suspending or Denying that
Influence of his, without which the Creature cannot move or act at all, but is
Determined to a Non-agency; then is the Author, or is wholly in Cause of all
S^n against the affirmative Commands of his Law: but according to our
Adversaries in this point, he is so: Ergo.

That the Omission of many Physical acts is Sin cannot be denied, Mat. 5.42.
But that God by his Non-operation does Predetermine the C^eature Un^versally to
a Not-acting, is their constant Doctrine, as ^o all Natural Acts, (nor only as
to Gracious or truly Pious acts, the which we grant in a Sense, since Man has
disabled himself) Then by undeniable Consequence is God the Cause, yea the Sole
Cause of such Sins; for Man does nothing at all therein, neither (according to
them) can do, nor ever could: and that Common assertion of Divines, wherewith
they have been wont to stop the Mouths of Objectors against the Equity of Gods
procedure with Man, for that he cannot do this and that; namely that Man once
had Power; is by them Exploded as Heterodox, and of no Use, if this be true.
Again, If God Premoveth and Efficaciously by his Influence and Causation
Predetermineth men unto the Perp^tration of Acts Repugnant to the Negative
Precepts of his Law, such as Gluttony, and Drunkenness (not bare Eating and
Drinking) Fornication, Adu^tery, Incest, and the like; then is he the Author
or Predeterminer of Sin; or else those Acts are no Sins: But God causes those
Acts, according to them. Man they would have to be the Deficient Cause, and God
the prime Efficient. All such Acts say they were from Eternity future: and that
could not be without a Cause; If Gods Will then, were not it, there must be an
Effect without a Cause; This they term an Insoluble demonstration, that such
Effects have God for their Cause. Thence they proceed to Argue, that the
Operation of the second Cause, is the Effect of the Precurse of the first
Cause, as l^ss Worthy, Dependent, and Subordinate to it, etc. Now let any one
show me, how God for Instance should Premove or Excite Achan to covet the
Babylonish Garment, the Silver and the Gold, Josh. 7.21. How he should
Predetermine him by his Physical Influence, to Will and to Do, to take them,
and to hide them in the Earth, (which himself acknowledges to be Sin, v. 20.
add for the which doing, or for the passing of which Act out of its
potentiality into Existence, and determination, he died,) and yet not be the
Author or Cause of that Sin of his: how God should Effectually cause that
Numerical Act, but not the Ob^iquity of it, the Law abiding; Or what Achan the
Secondary Instrument did more; If it be Granted but that he was the Subordinate
Author of that Wickedness, (though Inevitable to him.) But enough of that.

Arg. 2. The aforesaid Hypothesis of Gods Predetermining all sinful Actions,
reflecteth on the Attributes of God; and therefore is not to be admitted.

(1) It asperseth the Essential Holiness of God, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. whilst he is
made to predetermine to, and by his energetical Operation to give a Shall-be,
or determinate Existence to all the Impious Actions Conceived, and Committed in
the World; Yea to Actions intrinsecally Evil; not only contrary to the Light of
our Nature, the (...), to the Fundamental Principle of Reason relating to
Morals; But Repugnant to its own Nature, (which is regula regulans,) such as
are not so, from the bare Will or Pleasure of God prohibiting them; But by
Resultancy from his Nature, and from the Eternal Reason of the thing, in
Conjunction with the Habitude or Relation that we stand in to him) and which
himself cannot alter not change: As, to hate his Blessed self, and to Lie and
Blaspheme his Holy Name, to say in the Heart that there is no God, or to Curse
him. As to such Acts or Actions, God himself cannot alter the Standard which
they run cross to, nor can separate their Entity from their Obliquity, or make
them not to be Wickedness. And yet this he is said, by those whom I Oppose, to
Predetermine men to, even to those very Acts, (but not to the Sinfulness they
say.) More tolerable is the Opinion of the Manichees, who feigned two Gods, one
to be the Author of Evil, and the other of Good; than so to affirm, or to
Father such Actions on the true God.

(2) It Impeacheth the Legislative Righteousness of God, and the Equity of his
Law. It has been Generally taken for Granted, that God not only made Man with
the Faculties of Reason and free Will, without which he had not been a Being of
such a species or kind as had been capable of any Law; But that also he was
furnished with whatever might adapt him to the keeping of that Law he should be
put under: and that the same was due to him from Gods Justice or Righteousness
of Condecency, (as due to his Soul, in Case he Expected Obedience from him,)
and that he should be no ways necessitated to transgress, or Obedience be
rendered impossible to him, from any Cause Extrinsecal to himself. Now all this
the former Hypothesis overturneth. Where then is the Equity of ^he Law? or by
what shall the Righteousness of God be vindicat^d? If it be true, which is by
them maintained, that God never gave to a Man a self-determining Power:
(through his Assistance,) that he never made, nor could make such a Creature as
might or could possibly specify his own Acts; that could Choose or Refuse, but
as himself first determines him: That it were a Contradiction to suppose it;
For that he must be a God, (not made after his Image) that does it: Nor could
God foresee if it were so, what he would Issue in; Nor his Supremacy he
Retained over such a Subject* what Reason then that man should be Obliged by
any Law, when he can neither Will nor Choose in any Instance of Action, whether
this or that shall be or not be? which is Essenti^l to the Idea of a Subject
capable of Moral Government, and Obnoxious to an Enquiry about it. Yet farther,
If Man cannot but Omit what God Efficaciously determines him not to, but must
abide in an Everlasting Indetermination, why should he by Law be Obliged to a
Natural Impossibility? And if God Inv^ncibly determines him unto every Action
that he does, by what Righteous Law should he be Ob^iged to be above God, or to
be Stronger than he? Thus to r^solve all Man's Wickedness into Necessity, is to
justify him, and to Condemn God. Nemo tenetur ad impossible.

(3) It reflecteth on the Wisdom and Counsel of God in the Constitution of his
Law. The Law must be rather for himself, than for them, if Man cannot nor never
could ever put in Act the least Thought or Motion conform, nor inconform to it,
but as he Predetermineth him. A Man might as Rationally make a Law for his Axe,
Hammer or Saw; for, though his Elective Power goes along they say with Gods
Precurse or Premotion: Yet in no Instance can he turn this way or the other,
but as he is first Inclined by the Lawgiver, and Predetermined anteceden^er
therein. Let the Law Speak what it will for it, or against it, still the
Instrument can neither Move, nor Act otherwise than it does; what then means
the solemnity of a Law? or to what End should it be designed?

(4) It Impeacheth the Fidelity and Sincerity of God in his Expostulations with
Men, if nothing be within the Verge of their Power. Why will you die says he?
Ezekiel. ^8. signifying his being agrieved at their Sin, and Ruin thereby. What
shall we think of his Upbraiding Men for it, and protesting he willed the
contrary? O that my People would Consider, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 32.29. Isa.
48.18. Jer. 44.4. Psalm. 18.13. Mat. 11.20. and 12.41. If he himself
Indeclinably Predetermineth them to the very thing which he dehorteth them
from, and Works in them both to will and to do, so as that they can do no
otherwise; No Man can form a Conception of God, more repugnant to the Notions
that the Scripture has given us of his Nature and Properties, If I mistake
not; Amos 2, 11, 12, 13.

Arg. 3. The former Hypothesis of Physical Predetermination, It over-turneth
the Doctrine of Original Sin; And of its Traduction. If on the one Hand God did
substract his Gift from Adam before he Sinned, and deprive him of that Light
and Ability which he once had, and without which he could no longer stand,
before any fault or forfeiture of his, (and so determined him to fall in
Execution of his Decree, as is sometimes said:) by what Rule should his
Posterity be Obliged still to have that, (which though the Nature of Man was
capable of it, yet was never due to it, and) which God h^mself took away? or
why should it be termed Sin to want it? when it is by no fault of his that it is
wanting, nor was it ever by God intended to be continued? It must be a mere
Negation, no Privation; Since there could not be debitum inessendi, any due
Obligation of having it, if their Supposition be true: No more than is on a
Beast to Reason; Shall the Lord and Master of the Family take the Candle out of
the Room, (not the Servants Extinguish it,) and then make it an Offense that
they are in the dark, and challenge them for their not working? or will it
solve the matter to tell them that it is a Privation, Darkness, a Nonentity,
and therefore he could not cause it? So on the other Hand, If that which is
termed the Corrupt Nature dwelling in Man, be ens as it is a Quality or Habit,
and all that has Entity be the Workmanship of God, (as they say it is; or else
Man must have a Creative Power, and also good: why then do we call it sin, and
Original sin? or if it be nihil, a Nonentity, how then does it descend? How is
it Traduced, Joh. 3.6. and said to be ours by real Inhesion and Contagion, as
the whole Church consesseth? says Davenant.

Arg. 4. It staineth the Glory of free Grace in the Pardon of Sin, and casts
a Blemish upon the Whole of the Meditation of Christ. Wha^ Conviction can
possibly possess the Mind of Man of the Riches of Gods Grace in the Pardoning
of sin, whilst it is maintained that the abounding of sinful Actions (not to say
sin) is as well from God, (the Efficient and Predeterminer unto them,) as the
Superabounding of Grace in the Remission of them? Romans 3.7. and 5.20? What
sense can abide upon the Soul, of the Grace of Christ, in his being made Flesh,
and bearing the Wrath of God for those Tran^gressions, whereof himself as God
was the Prime Efficient, and the which, man by his own Influence and Causation
was Indeclinably Predetermined unto? He that shall Cause or Determine another,
(supposing him a Rational Agent, and capable of such an Impr^ss,) freely and
willingly to do that which in the Issue will prove Rottenness in his Bones, (as
Prohibited, or Illegal Actions will do, Job. 20.11. Psalm. 38.5.) will Receive
little thanks for his Cure, whatever Cost he may be at; When himself caused the
Disease, and the which, had he not done it, there had been no need of a Remedy
for it.

Arg. 5. If the Doctrine of our Adversaries be true; What means then the
Combating of the Spirit of God against sin, or Men's being said to grieve, and
to Quench the Spirit? 1 These. 5.19. it must according to th^^r Hypothesis be
God on both parts; His own Counteraction in the Subject. And if all the first
motions of the Imagination, all Distraction in Religious Duties, all the vain
Thoughts emerging out the Heart of Man in their Numberless Operations be from
God, as the first Mover and Determiner, why then should Man be r^quired at his
Peril to dislodge them? Jer. 4.14. What is it that he can do? Or should he
Enterprise the Eviction and Expulsion of the ataxie or Obliquity of them,
whilst that God himself keeps the Entity of them in possession, and in actual
Operation? Deuteronomy. 15.9.

Arg. 6. It lays the Axe to the Root of all Repentance for what is done and
past: It raseth the Foundation thereof, and Excludes the very Idea of it. A
Man may bewail Impreventable disaster; but cannot prevent him, of that which he
could never have helped, 2 Cor. 7.11. I appeal to the sense of any man living,
whether his Heart be wont to reproach him, for the doing of that wherein he was
no way wanting to himself, or for that, the which were it to do again, must be
done, and could be no otherwise, on no Account whatsoever within his Power,
now, nor ever before. If Man by the Necessity of his Being, and from the
Exigency of his Condition, as a dependent Being, cannot move, save that way he
is premoved; and cannot but act that way that he is Predetermined or acted; why
then, when he sees the Event, should he wish it were Undone, and Repent him
that he did it; or not rather that God did it, if that be true? Repentance is
not founded in the Obediential Subjection of the Creature, namely, that God
could have caused him to do otherwise; or barely in the Capacity of the Subject
to receive such an Impress from the first Cause; but on the Evitability of the
Fact, or Possibility of the contrary, from a Principle Intrinsic and Connate
to himself. Yea, who or where is the man, that dare go to God in Prayer, with
such a Notion in his head, and hold to it, that he is not to Confess that he
could have done more Good, and omitted more Evil, than Eventually he has? Neh.
9.16, 17, 26, 29. Ezra. 9.10, 14. had not David just Cause to Repent him of his
Lie that he told to Abimelech, 1 Samuel 21.2. and to acknowledge it a preventable
Act, (which is the Sole aggravation of S^n, and true Reason of it, though all
Sin is not now Preventable, as some is:) though I know not why or how he should
so do, were it true which is by some Affirmed, that in linea physica to the
Entity of the Act he was Predetermined of God, to speak every Word and Syllable
that he did, (whereof there was never a one true,) equally as in the using of
his Tongue in the pra^sing of his name.

Arg. 7. It leaves not the least Foundation, whereupon to bottom Gods Judicial
Process against Man in the Day of Judgment. To resolve man's Damnation into mere
Dominion and Sovereignty, is abhorrent to God, and Cross to all Scripture. Nor
is there any thing more Repugnant to the Notions of Justice and Righteousness,
(which are the Attributes of God to be Displaied toward all that shall then be
Cast, or Peri^h, Romans 3.5. 2 These. 1.5.) than that he should be thought to
Adjudge his Creature to Endless Torment, for that which it could never Help; or
that he should make that a Crime, which himself was the Author or Cause of, or
Predet^rmined it to. Is God Unrighteous when he takes Vengeance? absit, God
forbid, says the Apostle: how then shall he Judge the World? Romans 3.6. God may
bestow freely his Mercy and special Favor where he pleases: but not so the
Effects of his Vindictive Justice and Wrath; there must be Cause for it, or it
were not becoming his Righteousness, and Holiness; it were a Wrong and
Injustice to the Creature, as himself does adm^t, and is willing to render
accountable to any one that shall Challenge him therein, Ezekiel 18.25, 29. Isa.
5.3. Now, it is matter of Fact that the Inquest shall be about, in the day of
our Account, Mat. 25.25, 30, 35. Romans 3.6. 1 Pet. 1.17. the substratum of Sin,
(the same, as in all Humane Courts of Judicature.) If then God be the Efficient
Cause of the Fact, if he Premoveth men, and Predetermineth them to the Entity,
and gives a Futurition, and Existence to their Acts of Murder, Adultery, etc.
rendering them necessary necessitate causali and motiva: on what foot of
Account then shall we fix the Equity of his tak^ng vengeance on them for the
same? Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Should a Judge so
proceeding, be like unto God? What color of Justice were there? or of
meerness in the Recompense? Heb. 2.2.

Arg. 8. The Predeterminant Hypothesis, It shakes the Foundation of
Revelation, the Authority of the Scriptures, the Rule of Gods Judgment. It
makes God the Suggester of Lies, as well as of Truth: Then did not the false
Prophets deceive the People, when they said, Thus says the Lord, Jer. 23.17.
(for it was ens,) and yet God himself says, that it was the Vision of their
own Heart, and not from him, v. 16. The Question is, what according to them,
God did more in the Inspiration of the true Prophets, than in the false, in
linea Physica as they speak?

Arg. 9. If God Predetermineth all the Operations of Man, as is affrmed, there
is no Reason nor Foundation left for Civil Government, Oeconomical or
Political. It were not only Ludicrous; but highly Injurious. It were a horrid
thing for Man not to be aware of it, (whatever God might do, as they say)
Humane Laws do presuppose the Lapse, or Disablement of Man, and with one
consent it is agreed, that no man shall be put to the loss of his Life, or
Member penally for Omitting, or doing ought, that is not within reach of humane
Power to determine concerning; If all the World be not cheated therein. What
Man should be so Irrational as to Reprove or Correct Child or Servant, (yea his
Beast,) for that which in good Earnest he stands convinced that he could not
prevent? The Fact, or Omition I mean, not the anomie only, which results from
the same? plain People understand well enough what I say, Mat. 21.29, 30.

Arg. 10. It denies to man his Essential Nature, and specific form, (the
Natural Image of God, in genere physico, wherein he was made, Genesis 9.6.) which
is to have Dominion over his own Acts; A Power of Willing, or Nilling, this, or
the contrary (in such sense as has been opened.) What is a Natural Faculty or
Active power, but an Ability connate to the Subject, (founded in nature,)
rendering it potent to such an Effect? Actually so, or, that it may and can
reduce into Act? Voluntas nostra, nec voluntas esset, nisi esset in nostra
potestate; Porro quia est in nostra potestate libera est, says Augustine. Yea
the former Hypothesis debaseth Man beneath the whole creation of God. It Is not
denied but that in the virtue of their first Qualities, and active Principles,
(supposing the General concurse of God,) other Creatures can Operate; The fire
can heat, and Water cool, and they specify their Operation also by virtue of
their proper forms, (not that the first Cause is hot, or makes hot in the
presence of the one, and cold in the presence of the other.) By Ingrafture, or
Inoculation, Man may specify the active Influence of the first cause, of what
Nature it shall give the fruit of such a Stock to be; Never to be altered
without a Miracle. And better were it to move necessarily as the Stone
downwards, or Fire upwards, than to be moved universally like a clock or an
Engine, (not in all points; but as to the Effect, without an Intrinsic Power
unto the contrary Event,) especially in a matter of Offense and Punishment, (of
which our question is, and) with which a natural necessity is by all men
granted inconsistent, and would totally excuse. But what needs to add any
more?

Finally, the aforesaid notion is not only subversive of all Religion, Policy
and humanity, in its genuine consequents, as is before proved, if I be able to
judge; But it is Expressly repugnant to several plain Texts of Scripture; As, to
Name no more, 1 John. 2.16. All that is in this World, (as the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life,) is not of the Father, (not
the existence of them,) but is of this World; or of the Devil, John 8.44. who
is a Liar, and when he speaks a Lie, says our Savior, speaks de suo of
his own, is the Author of it. So Jam. 1.13, 14. Let no man say that he is
tempted of God to Evil. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his
own Lust; That is an Entity yet Sin, and the Conceiver of it, both Father and
Mother of that which when it has finished, brings forth Death: Opposed to
Grace, which is from above, v. 17. chap. 3.15, 17. Psalm. 7.14. Jer. 7.31. The
Lord give us Understanding herein, and a due sense thereof upon our Souls.

W.M.
FINIS.

