A LETTER FROM LEGHORN, March the Twenty Foureh, 1690/1. FROM On Board the
Brittania.
SIR,
AFter my most hearty Thanks for the Present of those Delicious Wines of
Monte-Christo you sent me, with which several Friends of yours, and my self,
frequently drink your Health. I know you will be not a little sollicitous, to
know the present State of our Ship, which according to my little Knowledge of
so great a Body, is at present thus:

You remember after our late Captain had deserted us, and went over to the
Algerines, by unanimous Consent of the Ships Crew, (a few Mohammedan Tarpaulins
only excepted) we chose the Master of the Batavia to succeed him, who has given
us all the Assurances of a Brave and Generous Commander: You have heard of his
last Summers Actions on Board the Hibernia, who is now almost forced to her
Obedience, and to stri^e Sail to the Britania, though some few Mahometans, who
lie skulking in hole, of the Ship, do sometimes appear upon Deck, but our Men
do often kill 'em, and throw 'em overboard: the Lieutenant was killed last
Summer, by a Shot in the Neck, and our Captain himself received a slight Wound
on the shoulder, but we hope in a little time, to give a very good Account of
that Ship, the Round house, the Great Cabin, the Steerage and Gun Room being
entirely in the Christians Hands; and the Ships Crew are continually between
Decks, to find out the lurking Mahometans.

Our Captain, in January last, went on Board the Batavia, a Vessel lying at
Anchor, some few Leagues from our Ship, to discourse with several other
Captains and Lieutenants (who there make their Rendezvous) about the State of
the War with the Algerines, this approaching Summer, who are now grown to a
very considerable degree of Insolence, and bid desiance to all the Ships in the
Mediterranean; but their several Breaches of Faith, and their frequent
Cruelties, have rendered them very odious to all the Christian Vessels, now
riding in these Seas: It must yet be confessed, they are a very politic sort of
People, and by Means of their Barbary Gold, get Intelligence of almost all the
Actions and Intentions of the Christians, who have a numerous Company of
Renegades amongst them; who, though they do not openly profess the Mohammedan
Creed, yet are believed to be Musselmen in their Hearts; besides, their fixed
Belief of Fatality emboldens the Algerines in their Barbarities, and
interpreting every Action by its Success, they upon every prosperous Event,
push their good Fortune on, and are the more Resolute and Daring, because they
believe every Man's Fate to be wrote in his Forehead.

You have heard, I presume, Sir, of the Villainous Actions of one of our
Eore-mast, Men (a Fellow that used to fell Brandy to some of the Sailers) who
was seen to swim on Board the Algerine Fleet when near this Port; he was taken
and Tried, and making but a pitiful Defense for himself, a convenient Halter
soon finished the Life of poor Godfrey.

The most Remarkable Occurrence that lately happened, was of three of our
Passengers, the one of Quality, and the two other Gentlemen of Fortune, who
being Well-wishers to the Algerine Interest, contrived in a little Feluca they
had hired for that Purpose, to go to Algiers in the Night; their Design
succeeded so far, that they got off, and were gone some Miles at Sea, but our
Secretary soon smoked the Design, and sent one or two of our ablest Sailers in
the Long Boat after 'em; they quickly found 'em, and searching the Sparks,
found a Bundle of Letters, with Lead affixt to the Bag that kept them; upon the
Seizure of which, they endeavored by large Promises, and insinuating Wheedles,
to have persuaded our Boys to have thrown them overboard, but being honest
trusty Ladds they refused it, and bringing them back they were committed to the
Fore Castle, and examined; two of them received sentence of death, and one of
them was hanged at the Yard Arm, to the great grief of those in our Ship, who
are favorers of the Mahumetan Interest; the Copy of his Speech they got
printed at the port, and value it as highly as the Alc ran, and what ever
esteem he may have with others, with them he passes for a true believer, and is
believed to be gone directly to paradise.

The Captains Lady (who by Consent) Governs the Vessel in his Absence; is a
Woman of Extraordinary Conduct; Nature has furnished Her with a Thousand Charms,
both of body and mind; so that Her very Enemies are forced to own Her to be a
Lady fit to Rule; and which is yet more strange, so wisely does She Steer the
Ship, that all the Mariners on Board, confess with an Unanimous Consent that
She has a Soul purely Masculine, and justly Claims the most exalted Respect
from all, who are spectators of her wise Management.

The Mahometans on Board, though not countenanced, nor put into places of trust,
yet while they behave themselves quietly, enjoy the private Exercise of their
Religion, but the most pernicious Creatures amongst us are a sort of Mongrill
Christians, who bear an equal respect both to the Cross, and the Half Moon;
they are continually in some private places of the Ship, forming projects to
restore our late Captain to his post again, and frequently drink his health,
and to his safe return to the Brittania, but in such odd, and Ambiguous Terms,
that their words have a double meaning, and since the knowledge of the
intention is hid from Humane Cognizance, by their ingenuous salvo's, they keep
themselves within the intrenchments of their own thoughts, the want of which
Equivocation, would often expose them to the ill Usage of the Bilboes, or the
severe Discipline of the Capstern.

We have a Numerous Company of the Clergy on Board, who have the charge of the
Souls Health of those in the Ship; yet the Chief Head of their number with some
few others, refuse in their public Devotions to pray for the present
Governors of our Ship; yet take it for a most Abusive Affront, if any one
should but express a thought that they were friends to the Algerines,
nevertheless their Actions plainly tend to that interest; some of the
Tarpaulins likewise (influenced by them) appear friends to their persuasion;
but their number is so inconsiderable, that the Wiser Heads at the Helm are no
ways afraid of them.

We just now received advice, that the Algerines in great Numbers had Attacq'd
a large Vessel of the Spaniards, called the Montania, now in Confederacy with
the rest in this Harbor; they made some show of a Vigorous Onset, but the
Vessel, though not half Manned, it is believed will make a very bold defense, by
reason their Lieutenant is a very Stout Commander: It Is reported our Captain
will go from the Batavia, to Oppose the Enemy; and there are some whispers,
that the Infidels have already quitted their pretenses; but the certainty of
this report with some other Remarkable passages of our Ship, you may expect to
hear suddenly, from,

SIR, Your Servant W. M.

Licensed March the Ninteenth, 1690/1

LONDON, Printed for L. C. 1691.


