THE CONFESSION OF Francis Nicholson,
(Who committed that most barbarous Murder upon the Body of John Dimbleby,
Servant to Mr. Marriot) at the Place of Execution, which was upon the Green
over against Hampton Court, and near the Place where he did the Murder, on
Wednesday last, it being the 27th of October 1680, who was afterward carried
to Hounslow-Heath, and there hanged up in Chains.

AS soon as he came under the Gibbet, looking up, he said, Oh Lord! what have I
brought my self to! the Lord pity my poor Soul. One being in the Cart, asked
him, Francis, how is it with you? have you make your peace with God, and got an
assurance of the pardon of your sins? He answered, I hope it is well with me,
the Lord be merciful to my poor Soul. Then a worthy Minister spoke to him, and
said, Francis, the Lord has now given you a long time of Repentance to make
your peace with God in, and I hope you have made a good use of it. I desire you
now, as well in charity to your own Soul, as in justice to others, to make an
honest and ingenuous Confession, and that you would neither accuse the
Innocent, or excuse the Guilty, but clear your Conscience now you are entering
upon the borders of Eternity; you have but a few minutes to live, do not
deceive your Soul, but speak the truth, and let us know what did induce you to
this great wickedness for which you are now to die within a few minutes. The
Coachman being then by, says Francis, This man is an innocent man, I freely
acquit him, grasping him by the hand. He further said, he is as innocent of the
Fact as the Child unborn; and I desire all persons to take notice of it, for I
have done him a great deal of wrong. Oh Lord! that I should accuse an innocent
person! Says he to the Coachman, I clear thee with all my heart, and I
earnestly beg your pardon. Then the Coachman replied, I freely forgive thee
with all my heart. The Lord forgive thee, and the Lord Jesus Christ forgive
thee, says the Minister, Which I hope he will. Then says Francis, None set me
on to do this most barbarous murder but the Devil; it was he that instigated
me, and set me on to do it: For I had made a Vow to kill a man before I went
from Hampton Court, and the Devil appeared to me and told me, I was damned if I
did not perform my Vow. Whereupon I was never at quiet or rest till I had acted
that most inhumane Murder. Then the Minister asked him, What papers or Moneys
did you take from him, for there is several Bonds and Writings, and other
things, besides Moneys, that is wanting? Francis then answered, I took no
papers nor Writings, but only twenty Shillings in Moneys, which I took out of
his pocket, and a Watch; as I am a dying man I took nothing else. Then the
Minister asked him this, Did ever any person set you on to do this Murder, or
induce you with the hopes of a pardon to impeach any person? Francis answered,
No. Then says the Minister, Why did you Impeach the Coachman, and charge him
as the Author of the Murder, and that he should hire you to do it? Says
Francis, Mr. Stephenson at the Toy asked me (when I was before the Justice who
committed me) whether any one did not set me on to do it, and whether the
Coachman had not hired me? and this is all I know of it, as I am now entering
into Eternity; and that put me in mind to accuse the Coachman, and this is all
I know of it; and so the Lord forgive me. Oh that I should be the murderer of
an Innocent person! Oh that I should take away a poor man's life, and that in
such a barbarous manner! The Lord be merciful to my poor Soul. Oh how gracious
God has been to mypoor soul! that has given me so long time of Repentance He
might have snatched me away in my younger days, but Oh what would have become of
my poor soul, if I had died before I had made my peace with God, or if I had
died immediately upon the murder! I care not for my Body, so my Soul may be
saved; for the death of the Body is nothing, but the eternal death and
damnation of the Soul is terrible.

The says the Minister, pray make some Confession to the people. Which Francis
did to this effect, Oh you that are here come to see me a poor young man die a
most shameful death, in the prime of my youth. I do declare before you all, as
I shall answer it before my God and Judge within a few minutes, that I took
neither Box now Writings, nor any thing else, but only 20 Shillings in moneys,
and a Watch, and I clear the Coachman before you all, for he is innocent of it,
the Lord forgive me for it. Then the Minister made a most excellent Prayer;
which ended the Young Man spoke to the people, (as he was going to ascend the
Ladder) and said, The Lord forgive me, the Lord forgive me; Oh that you all
would take warning by my Death; and pray take heed of breaking the Sabbath, and
ill company, and drinking; for it was Sabbath-breaking first, and then ill
company, and drinking, which brought me to do this great wickedness, and to
cause me to run headlong to the Devil: The Lord be merciful to my poor Soul.
Lord! I am going out of this world; the Lord forgive my Soul; the Lord pardon
my sins, and receive my Soul. I beseech thee, good Lord, grant me an Interest
in Jesus Christ, and that I may sit at thy Right Hand in Heaven when I depart
this life. Oh! that I should commit such a horrid fact, which should cause me
now to dye like a dog, and to suffer such a shameful death: If I had been taken
away before now, I might have been in Hells everlasting burnings; but God has
been merciful to my Soul. Oh that you all would take notice by my shameful
death, and not break the Sabbath: Oh that you all would take notice by me, and
that God would pardon all your sins; for it was Sabbath-breaking that brought
me to my ruin. Oh Eternity! Eternity! Oh improve well your time, and consider
your latter end, and often think of Eternity: I am now going into Eternity, the
Lord be merciful to my poor Soul now and for evermore. Oh Lord receive my Soul
at thy Right hand in Heaven to all Eternity: Oh Lord! thou who did dye for
sins, receive my poor Soul, and that I may have benefit by thy death, and that
my Soul may be received into the Kingdom of Heaven: The death of the body is
nothing, but the Eternal damnation of the Soul is sad: Oh who can live in Hells
eternal torments: But Oh Lord! take me into a better World now I am going out
of this wicked World, Oh Lord receive me into thy Paradise, and pardon my sins.
Then he said the Lords Prayer, and afterward said, The Lord lift up my heart
to Heaven: Oh the Devil, it was the Devil that lead my heart away; the Lord
treat him down, that deceives so many poor Souls, and which has deceived my
Soul: Oh that I may make my peace with God now, before I go hence: Oh that all
these good people would put up their prayers for me. Then said the Minister,
the Lord receive your Soul into eternal life; then says Francis, the Lord save
me, and receive me into thine everlasting Arm; the Lord receive a poor wicked
sinner as I have been. Oh Death! Oh Lord God look upon me in mercy: Then one
standing by said, Oh Remember him that saved the Thief upon the Cross; upon
which he said, Oh the Devil that has tormented me! Oh the Lord be with me, and
the Lord be with thee, says he to the Coachman, for I clear you; and the Lord
forgive thee, says the Coachman to him again, for I forgive thee.

One being desired by some persons, asked him this Question, Whether any one
did induce him to Impeach the Coachman upon the promise of life, or out of a
grudg and disgust to the Coachman, or to the Person of Quality whom he served?
Oh! says the young man, None but the Devil. Then just before he was turned off
the Ladder, he said, Lord Jesus Christ Remember me now, Lord Jesus Christ
Remember me now, take me into thy paradise, take me into thy paradise: Then he
called out for Goody Heart; whereupon she was called, but could not be found:
Oh, says he, Goody Heart is a good Woman, the Lord bless her; the Lord Jesus
Christ forgive me, and be with me. Then he said the Lords Prayer again, which
done, he said, the Lord bless every soul, and my Soul: but seeing Goody Hearts
daughter, he said fare you well Betty, fare you well, I am going out of this
World, Oh pray for me: the I ord (says she) forgive you, and receive your
Soul: Oh says he, the Lord Jesus Christ receive my Soul: Oh all good people
take notice by me; Lord be with my Soul. And so was turned off the Ladder.

Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queenshead Albey in
Paternoster. Row. 1680.


