News from the Sessions House IN THE Old-Bayly, Being a true Account of the
Notorious Principles and Wicked Practices OF THAT Grand Impostor Lodowick
Muggleton, Who has the Impudence to Style himself one of the Two last
Commissionated Witnesses and Prophets OF THE Most High God Christ Jesus.

Collected out of his own VVritings, For which Damnable Heresies being bound
over, he made his Appearance at the Sessions, this 14th, of December. And gave
fresh security in order to his future Trial;

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for B. H. 1676.

A Brief and True Account of the notorious Principles, and wicked Practices of
that Grand Impostor Lodowick Muggleton, etc.
TO Trace this impious Impostor from his Original, who ever takes pains but to
go into Cloak Lane, will there be informed by the Generallity of the
Inhabitants, that this Lodowick Muggleton was at first no other than a factious
Journiman- Tailor, whose Extravagances being too large for the compitent
allowance of about 10 s. p. week, began in the year 1651. to consult with one
John Reeve (a brother both in Trade and necessity) how they might betake them
to some more profitable employment, whose lurded Incomes might more kindly
indulge their Lukury; to this end they made some small inspection and progress
into all sorts of Heresies (as he has since confessed to J. C. and others) but
finding those Chair^ already taken up, they resolved to be beholding to no
body, but to contract such a competent measure of impudence and impiety, as
should enable them to stifle all the oppositions of Religion, on Conscience,
and set up for themselves. And that which gave them no small encouragement
hereunto was the wonderful success and almost infinite Riches, two precedent
impostors John To ^bins and Joh* Tauny, had lately gained by the same damnable
practice. The prosperity of these two rendered the private conditions of Reeve
and Muggleton more unsufferable; so that the former being the more impudent,
and having with some curiosity perused the Revelations of St. John, and found
to his extreem sorrow that the Holy Ghost had never so much as dreampt of him
throughout the whole Book, he resolves by the help of a feigned Enthusiasm or
pretended Revelation, to force in the minds of Listening Ignorants, whose
Gaping curiosity lay always open for the reception of any Novelty, a certain
belief of a strange inspiration, and Commission then delivered unto him, whereby
(for sooth) he not only pretends a Sovereignty over Mankind, but assumes a
power to pass (upon the least contradiction of his wicked principles) a
sentence of everlasting Condemnation, even upon the blessed Angels themselves:
as is affirmed he has authority to do, in a book of Muggletons, called the
Quakers Neck broken page 20.

To exact this necessary Credulity from his Gazing admirers, he calls one
Evening of Muggleton to go with him to the Tavern, from whence after they had
Gorged their Guts with an excess of Wine, and Victuals, they resolved forthwith
to go Chew the Cud both of their discours^ and Viends upon their Pillows,
whereon Reeve had no^ long laid his shallow skul, but whether caused by fume^
arising from an undisgested Supper, or the important pre^sures of his designed
greatness, I know not, but up he gets runs to Muggleton, tells him as Muggleton
does us in his nonsensical interpretation of the 11. chap. of the Revelation
page 158. That Godspake in the night unto him, and told hi^ that he had given
him more understanding in the Scriptures th^^ all other men in the World. That
he had put the two edge^ sword in his mouth, and in the next words following,
and have Chosen thee Lodowick Muggleton to be thy mouth (...) That I have given
you power both to bless and curse, and whos^ever either of you shall bless or
curse, it shall be in the power of (...) Spirit nor Angel, No nor as Mugleton
says in page 4^ in the Almighties himself to revoke from eternal Damnation.

This falacy being blown about by some of the^^ graceless Adherents, the greedy
Vulgarity mistak^ it for a Verity, and to show their obedience, as well as
Credulity, relinquish their former principles as eronious, to list themselves
under the destructive Banners of of his forgeries and impostures.

The promising superficies of this black design at first seemed to recompense
the pains of these spiritual Engineers with a favorable progression, but
Heaven who could no longer forbear to punish their impieties, sufficiently
testified its displeasure in Beckoning Reeve to give an account in the other
World of those Damnable principles, wherewith he had tainted the minds, if not
Ruined the Souls of diverse in this; which one would have thought might have put
a stop at least to the proceedings of this Lodowick Muggleton, who now double
Gilded with Brass, pretended also to have had left him by Reeve a double
portion, both of spirit, power, and commission; enlarging his Authortiy even
beyond the prerogative of any deceased Saint, Prophet, or Apostle, as will by a
Letter he sent R. Fransworth, and the said Book of his, entitled the Quakers
Neck-broken, most obviously appear. In the Letter page 43. he writes thus;
speaking of the power he pretends God has given him to bless, curse, etc.
Neither (says he) will God give this power to any after me, neither can any man
come to the assurance of the favor of God now in these days but in believing
that God gave this power to John Reeve and my self. For there is no coming to
know God or see God, but by the faith in this commission of the spirit, for I
having the Keys of Heaven and Hell, none can get into Heaven unless the witness
of this spirit does open the Gate. Again in his Quakers Neck-broken, page. 20.
He says, Neither does any man know the Scriptures, neither can any man
interpret them truly but my self, and in the same page he goes on. God has put
the two edged sword into my mouth, that whosoever I pronounce cursed, is cursed
to Eternity. For I do not only say let him be accursed, but I have power to
curse men or Angels to Eternity. And in Page 28. Speaking of his spiritual
knowledge, how he has resolved all sorts of questions in Divinity, these are his
words.

Nay, some have gone so far as to ask who made God, and I have given answer to
that also. Again in his letter to S. H. and W. S. who in a former letter
condemned him for Cursing, to which Muggleton answers, page 17. 4s. for my
mouth being full of cursing, that is my commission. Again page. 18. Full of his
Cursing I confess my mouth is, and I do rejoice in it too, I know that God is
well pleased in the damnation of those I have cursed, and I am wondrous well
satisfied in giving Judgment upon them acccording to the Te^^^t of my
condition. In fine Reader, I am a weary, and it makes my hair stand an end to
Rake thus in the Naucious Dunghill of his horrid Blasphemies* his whole Volume
is nothing but a promiscuous composition of Heresy, Delusion, irreligion and
Blasphemy: Himself a person who for this 20 years and upwards has shaken hands
with Morality Discretion, and Pity, who for that inconsiderable Pelf, Honor
and respect, he daily receives from the hands of his poor deluded, and without
sudden conversion, I fear miserable Disciples, willingly surrenders his
interest in Heaven, and as if he had too advantageous an exchange, throws the
wretched Souls of his friends and acquaintance into the Bargain.

I would earnestly desire the Reader if he be not yet established in opinion,
to endeavor to seek a settlement therein, first by his prayers to almighty God
to that purpose, and after by the healing advice of some learned Divine, from
whom he will certainly find more sollid satisfaction than he can ever expect
from these Quacks and Empricks in Divinity; who handle the soul, as others do
their body, not so much for the patients good, as their own Interest. Who if
they can make aseasonable approach to a Death bed, and there by a pretended
commission wheedle the departing Disciple into a belief that they have received
the Keys of Heaven; Can turn who they will into everlasting Joys, and hurry who
they please into eternal Blis^; if by the charming Rhetoricks of a Gray head,
comely Visage, demure Countenance, and plausible tongue, he can but once
persuade them to fall out with the World, and surrender these temporial
blessings, in hopes of those spiritual ones (of which these sort of men make
such large promises) there is none of them but will gladly part with, all their
pretended Keys of Heaven, for one real one which unloks to a hundred a year
upon Earth, or that would scruple to give a man a note of their hands for the
securing his eternal bliss, provided the other would requite him with a
considerabled Lease, to bestow among his sanctified children.

Whether Muggleton and his Brethren have* ever received any of these soul
feeling blessings, I leave it to his and their consciences, and did I know it
to be true I should scarcely put my self to the charges of a Tear to bemoan the
cheat, for indeed, who can seriously pity those persons who having been
Educated in the wholesome principles of the Church of England, when he shall see
them like Bastards and not Sons, forsake those Teats whereout they often have,
and still might, suck such nourishing milk; when he beholds them running after a
nonsensical Impostor, frought up with nothing but interest and Impudence; a
kid-napper of Souls, who would sell them for less money to the Devil, than the
other do Children to Barbados; a fellow who if a man can find any connextion in
his writings; it runs directly Diamiter to those of the Holy Scriptures, a
wretch so arragant, that he dares to pretend a greater power than ever was
delivered to any of the Prophets or Apostles, that denies both the real
existance and absolute, and by all undoubted ubiquity of his Creator, page 34.
page 23. That Nulls the Vallidity of several Texts of Scripture, and
particularly denies Solomon to be endued with the Spirit of God, when he writ
the Book of Proverbs. And in short, is so rediculous both in Divinity and
Philosophy, as to define God to be a corporeal Essence exactly in the shape of
man, that his influence is confined within the narrow circuit of the upper
Heavens only. And lastly which is enough to give any intelligible Reader a
surfeit both of him and his Doctrine, he affirms his writings are in themselves
more excellent, and ought to be by all men more respected and regarded than the
Holy Scriptures.

The said Notorious Blasphemer being of late taken notice of by authority, has
been prosecuted in the Ecclesiastical Court, and also committed to Newgate,
but after some days imprisonment, got bail for his Appearance at the Sessions
in the Old-Bayly, 14 th. December. and gave fresh security, and we doubt not but
will shortly be brought to Condign punishment according to his demerits.

FINIS.

