Published with Allowance.

The Dissenters JUBILEE: As it was Sounded in the Audience of A SOLEMN ASSEMBLY
AT The Public Meeting Place in Spittle-Fields near London, on Tuesday May 17.
1687.

BEING A Day of Thanksgiving to praise the Lord for his Wonderful Appearance
and Overruling Providence, in the Present Dispensation of Liberty of
Conscience,

By Charles Nicholets, Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Congregation
there.

Judge. 10.16. -- And his Soul was Grieved for the Misery of sIrael.

Psalm 12.5. -- For the Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy,
now will I arise says the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that Puffs
at him.

LONDON, Printed by G. Larkin, without Bishopsgate; and are to be Sold by most
Booksellers. 1687.

To the most August And Justly-Renowned-Monarch, James the Second, By the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
Dread Sovereign!
AMongst the Numerous Returns of Gratitude, that flow from great Bodies of Your
People in all Parts of Your Dominions; for Your Majesty's Gracious and most
Healing Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; Vouchsafe to admit this mean
Discourse to be humbly Dedicated to Your Immortal Name.

For which, if any censure me as highly presumptuous, I must (with Submission)
allege that it was Your Gracious Clemency that not only Encouraged, but in a
manner Enforced me thereunto: For since Your Majesty has been the Glorious
Instrument in the Hand of God, of Delivering us from those Shackles upon
Conscience, and the many Insupportable Rigors whereunto the Penal Laws, and
their severe Prosecution, had long exposed us; I could not think we should
fully discharge our Duty to the Almighty in that respect, without some
particular Expression of Thankfulness to Your Majesty his Vicegerent: And
withal, to Evidence the Sincerity of our Hearts, I was not unwilling to declare
publicly what Doctrine and Sentiments we Endeavor to Impress upon our Hearers
on this happy Occasion.

For however Dissenters may have been Misrepresented, It has always been my
Principle unfeignedly to Obey that Precept of our Blessed Savior, To give unto
God, and unto Caesar each their due. Thus as I Preached the following Sermon to
demonstrate that I fear God, and desire to improve all his Providence to the
great Ends of Christianity; so I offer these poor Papers as a standing
Testimony that I sincerely Honor the King.

In which Application, I forget not your Majesty's Grandeur, nor my own
Grovelling Condition: Yet I cannot induce my self to apprehend a Frown from that
Face which has spread such Irradiating Smiles throughout more than three
Kingdoms; or that Your Majesty can be Angry, tho the meanest of your Subjects
thank you for those Favors they can never be enough sensible of. He that would
not a Beggar should bow to him, must withold his Hands from giving Alms. Had
Your Majesty restrained your Goodness, Your Throne had been too Dreadful for
the Approach of such a Shrub as I. But now that You have dilated Your Clemency
in so extraordinary a manner to every Corner of Your Territories, whilst the
Lofty Hills are Ecchoing Your Just Praises, You cannot (for the Harmony's sake)
be offended that the Humble Valleys bear a part in the joyful Chore.

It Is (Great Sir!) on these Considerations that I humbly beg leave by this
Dedication to Express my own Thankful Acknowledgments, together with those of
that Little Flock whereunto I am more peculiarly ^elated, for the Invaluable
Happiness we enjoy through Your Majesty's Benignity.

Now that that Great GOD (who inclined Your Royal Heart to this Blessed Work)
may be a Glorious Canopy of Protection over You, and bless You with the Dew of
Heaven, and Fatness of the Earth And that as He has given You (to the Joy of
Great Britain) a Crown here, He may fit You (by His Grace) for a Better, an
Immarcessible Crown hereafter; Is and shall always be the daily and most
Fervent Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Dutiful, most, Obedient, and most Thankful Subject,
CHARLES NICHOLETS.

THE Dissenters Iubilee,
PSALM. CXXVI. 3. The LORD has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.


WHat our blessed Lord said to his Hearers concerning another Text relating to
Himself, I may say to you, with respect to the first Verse of this Psalm --
When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, we were like them that
dreamed -- This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: God has
strangely, wonderfully, unexpectedly, turned back our Captivity, and we verily
are even as those that dream: Our hearts (like the Babe in Elizabeth's Womb)
leaping for joy, and skipping like the young Unicorns on Lebanon, or dancing
like David before the Ark, in the sense of this amazing and stupendous
Providence. Now is the time that our Mouths are filled with Laughter, and our
Tongues with Singing; for those that wish not well to us, are forced to say
among themselves -- The Lord has done great things for them; And if they say
so, much more reason have we to answer with the Church here by way of
Concession -- The Lord indeed has done great things for us, whereof we are
Gald.

The words are very plain, and without much help of Logic or Grammar, we may
easily see through them, as containing an Historical account of GOD's Acting in
way of Mercy, and his Peoples Rejoicing in way of Gratitude and exultation of
Spirit. My work is (with respect to the occasion of our Meeting here this day)
to show you how obvious the one is, and how congruous the other would be: There
can be no such stranger in our Israel, as to be unacquainted with what great
things the Lord has done for us: Oh! that there were never a Son or Daughter
in our Zion, backward in their Humble thankful and joyful acknowledgment of
it, crying out from the very bottom of their Hearts -- Whereof we are glad.

Gaudia, quae multo parta dolor, placent. Method obliges me to speak in order
unto Four Things, which lie before us in the Text.

1. The Agent, or Person acting, and that is the Eternal God, -- The Lord has
done. 2. The Object for whom he acts, -- for us. 3. The Predicate, with its
Amplification concerning his acting, -- He has done great things. 4. The
Influential Operation that this has upon all that fear the Lord, -- Whereof we
are Glad.
I begin with the first of these:

1. The Lord, Jehovah the Great and Powerful God, the Creator of the ends of
the Earth, who can, and does all things in Heaven above, and on earth below,
according to the good pleasure of his own will; That God, who by his
all-commanding Power, brought Light out of Darkness, extracted Order out of
Confusion, and dashed back the Waters from the naked Land. That God who made
Almonds flourish upon Aarons sapless Rod; That God, who supplied his People
with Water, out of the hard Rock: In a word; that God who is glorious in
Holiness, Fearful in Praises, and one that works Wonders, in and among the
Children of Men; he it is, that has done great things for us, that in the Ages
to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his Power, in his kindness
toward us, in rescuing us from the jaws of Death, and keeping us, from going
down into the Pit; and by his glorious Omnipotence, turning our Captivity as
the streams of the South. And this Almighty Power of his, has been of old
exerted for the deliverance of his poor distressed People, as we may see in the
Churches appeal to it, upon her Invocation, in time of trouble. Isa. 51.9, 10,
11. Awake, Awake! put on strength, O Arm of the Lord; as in the Ancient days,
in the Generations of Old: Art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the
Dragon; art thou not it which has dried the Sea, the Waters of the great deep;
that has made the depths of the Sea a way for the Ransomed to pass over;
therefore the Redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with Singing unto
Zion, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain Gladness
and Joy, and Sorrow and Mourning shall flee away. As if she had said, Thou have
formerly shined forth in the Glory of thy Power, in cutting Rahab, that is, in
plaguing Egypt; in wounding the Dragon, that is, in destroying Pharaoh, and in
drying up the Waters of the Red Sea: Oh put forth that power now, in Freeing
and redeeming us from our present troubles, that we with them may sing those
Hosannahs of Joy on Earth, which will be perfected in Hallelujahs when we come
to Heaven. Tantum gaudebimus quam tum amabimus, tantum amabimus quantum
cognoscemus, says the devout Austin, We shall Rejoice as much as we shall Love,
and we shall Love, as much as we shall know. Our knowledge of the glorious
Attribute of Gods Power, will then be perfect, and our rejoicing at it will be
in perfection also; we find the Prophet in a dark and gloomy day, when things
looked black upon the People of God, had recourse to this great Power of God,
for his support and bearing up under the pressures of those sad and heavy
things he saw a coming upon Jerusalem; as you may see in that solemn and
serious Prayer of his, Jerimiah 32. verse 17, etc. Ah! Lord God, behold thou
have made the Heaven and the Earth by thy great Power, and stretchedout Arm;
and there is nothing too hard for thee; Thou show Loving kindness unto
Thousands, and recompensest the Iniquity of the Fathers, into the bosom of
their Children after them: the Great the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, great in Council, and mighty in Work, (for thine Eyes are open upon all
the ways of the Sons of Men, to give every one according to his ways, and
every one according to the fruit of his doings) which have set Signs and
Wonders, in the Land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and amongst
other men, and have made thee a name, as at this day, and have brought forth
thy People Israel out of the Land of Egypt, with Signs, and with Wonders and
with a strong hand, and with a stretched-out Arm, and with great terror. This
prayer is very argumentative and conclusive concerning the Power of God, that
it is able to effect all things, since by it the vast globe of the World was
made out of nothing, the Lords Might anb his Mercy are the good Soul's Jachin
and Boaz, the names of the two main Pillars in Solomon's Temple, the one
signifying Stabllity, the other Strength, to note the Saints are safe and
established in the the Power and Mercy of God. Thus the great Lord has done
great things for us.

Secondly, The Lord, the good and gracious God, the Tender and Merciful God,
who has proclaimed himself before Heaven and Earth, before Angels and Men. --
The Lord, The Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, abundant in
goodness, and Truth; the Lord who is good, yea exceeding good, whose Mercy
endures for ever. The Lord, whose thoughts concercing Mercy, are not as our
thoughts; nor his ways (with respect to doing good) as our ways, but as the
Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are his Thoughts higher than our
Thoughts, and his Ways than our Ways: The Lord, that is as ready to Grant, as
his People can be to Ask; who is nigh to all that call upon him in sincerity,
when Troubles and Calamities do Surround them, as you may see in his most
tender affectionate answer, to bemoaning Ephraim, as soon as he came upon his
knees before him; Jeremiah, 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant
Child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still;
therefore my Bowels are Troubled for him, and I will surely have Mercy upon
him, says the Lord. God may seem a great while as one unconcerned at the
troubles of his People, but when they are so high, as to overwhelm their
Spirits, and their Hearts are bowing and bending, yea breaking under them; he
then has Pity and Compassion upon them in their Distresses: As Croesus's dumb
Son, who never spoke in his Life before, when he saw one attempting to
Assassinate his Father, violently cried out -- (...). -- O Man! Do not kill
Croesus: So the blessed God cannot hold coming in with supplies of Mercy, when
his People are ready to be swallowed up in the gulf of Misery. Mercy is his
Name, and Mercy is his Nature, there is nothing he delights in so much, for
Mercy pleases him, as much as it pleasures us; and as he is great in Mercy, so
he is rich in it, and free in it, without any previous condition or
qualification in the Creature: He is a most free Agent in the distribution of
Mercy, Romans 9.15. for he says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will
have Mercy, and I will have Compassion on on whom I will have Compassion. No
other reason can be assigned, no other motive (by the Wisdom of Men and Angels)
could be produced, why God should show any Mercy to any of the Sons of Adam,
but his own free will to it, and his gracious Complacency in it. When he is
angry with his People, and visiting them with some Judgments, as Tokens of his
Displeasure, he is said to come out of his place; importing that when he is
doing good and showing mercy, he is then in his own proper place, the place he
would for ever be in, did not our Sins too often occasion his removal: We
likewise read of his delighting in mercy, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto
thee! That pardonest iniquity, and passest by the transgressions of the Remnant
of his Heritage; he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy: O Admiration! Admiration! That a dishonored, provoked, and
highly-incensed God should keep in the Vials of his wrath, and show so much
Love, and so much Mercy to his distressed ones; yea in his Love, and in his
Mercy, to do such great things for them: Indeed when God strikes, he strikes to
purpose, and that wound cannot be small, which is of his making:

A Jove percussus non leve vulnus habet. He may (and many time does) lay his
Hand on his People, and that hand must needs be heavy, and the blows very
terrible, such as will make the stoutest heart to quake, and the most
courageous Spirit to faint away. When thou (says David) with rebukes do
correct man for Iniquity thou make his beauty to consume away like a Moth.
God in his Anger does great and dreadful things to a sinning, a provoking
People: Oh! but when he arises to have Mercy upon Zion, he will do greater
things for them, than ever he did against them; and such are the great things
the Church speaks of here in the Text. The Lord, the Merciful Lord has done
great things for us, whereof (as we have great reason for it) we are glad.

Thirdly, the Lord, The true and faithful God, keeping Covenant with his
People, and will do according to every Promise of his; and this is the thing he
has promised in his Covenant, Joel 2.21. Fear not, O Land! rejoice and be
glad, for the Lord will do great things. And this Promise he has, does, and
will make good to his People even unto the End of the World. Our Miseries are
our Advocate to Plead the Truth and Faithfulness of his Covenant with him. So
we find it, Exodus 2.24. And God heard their Groaning, and God remembered his
Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. Which was to bring them out
of that place. They had been there a great while under cruel Bondage and
Oppression. God was engaged in his Covenant to their Fathers, to deliver them.
And their Sighs, their Sobbs, their Groans, through their hard Usage (to speak
by an Anthropopathie) did put him in remembrance of his Covenant. Oh! it is a
great advantage then to belong to the Covenant. Externa foederis gratiae
Communio est, qua Vocati pro foederatis, and Dei populo censentur, says a
Judicious Author; and upon how much higher ground do such stand, then all
others in the World? for they can plead Covenant-promises, and
Covenant-priviledges, Covenant-Engagements, and Covevenant-Encouragements from
that god, who would not have his People strangers to him, nor think that he is
a stranger to them. He owns himself his Peoples God, and hence it is that he
does and will help them, 20 Exodus 2. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. The Lord is pleased
to own himself his Peoples God, and gives therefore encouragement to all his to
cry out with the Church -- Thou art our Father, though Abraham be Ignorant of
us. What God does for his People, he does as their God, as God in Covenant with
them. And as this makes delivering Mercy the greater, so it raises the
Obligation to praises and thankfulness much the higher. Covenant Interest is
the sweetest part in any mercy we can enjoy, whether privitive or positive.
Moses that Blessed Servant of God, was very sensible of this, demonstrated in
that Song of his upon Isreal's deliverance from the hand of Pharaoh, which you
will find Recorded, Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my strength and Song; he is become
my Salvation; he is my God, and I will Exalt him. Q. d. This deliverance shows
God to be our God, our Fathers God, and mindful of the Covenant he made with
them. We have great reason therefore to exalt him in our Hearts and Lives, and
to sing aloud of his Righteousness, that has given such a Glorious Instance
this day of his being a God keeping Covenant with his Chosen Ones. Not a
strange God, but the Lord Our God, our own God, keeping Covenant inviolably
with all that Fear him and put their Trust in him. It is HE, even HE, that has
done great things for us.

Fourthly, The Lord; the Lord that is a present help in time of Trouble; the
Lord that staid the Knife just at Isaac's Throat, which gave occasion to
Abraham to call him Jehovah-Jereh Deus providebit, God will provide; or as our
Translators render it, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. The Saints
Extremity is his Opportunity. He is the Lord that of old has come in with
succor most seasonable, when Miseries have been looked upon by his People as
inevitable. The Light of his help has been always rising, when the Star of his
Saints hope has been setting. He is then nearest to his People, when all other
expectation is farthest from them; The Scripture is not barren of instances of
this great Truth, to buoy up the Anchor of Christians Faith, in most imminent
times of danger; God will appear in one way or other for them, according to His
old wont: He steps in, in the nick of time, Psalm 124.1. If it had not been the
Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say: If it had not been the Lord who
was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the Waters had overwhelmed
us, the Stream had gone over our Soul: Blessed be the Lord, who has not given
us as a Prey to their teeth. Our Soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler; the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of
the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. This If has spoiled many a cunning
project of the Devil, and his Instruments, to ruin the Church of God: They
would certainly many times prevail in their cursed designs of crushing the poor
Saints, if God did not arise; Ay, but He does arise, and that spoils all: He
does come to deliver at seasonable times, which blasts all the Enemies
purposes, and fills their faces with Confusion.

We have a notable Emblematical confirmation of this thing, in the story of the
Disciples being in a Ship with our Lord, and ready to Perish (even in the
judgment of the Mariners themselves) through the fury of the Storm, Matthew
8.25, 26. And his Disciples came to Him, and awoke Him, saying, Lord, save us,
we Perish. And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith?
Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great Calm. --
(...). This word is more significant then the English word Calm, some derive it
from a word that signifies Milk, to note that the Air was as white and clear,
as that in a Winter Night, which is called Via lactea, the milky way; but I
rather conclude (with Piscator, Scapula, and some others) that it comes from a
Theme in the Greek signifying to laugh, or to look marvelous cheerful: The word
then imports, that there was upon Christ's rebuking the Winds and the Seas, not
only a great Calmness, Stillness and Quietness, but also a wonderful Serenity,
the Heavens and the Sea, did (as it were) Smile and Laugh upon them, which
before did so Frown and Threaten to devour them: So when Men's Spirits and
Speeches, are so full of venom against the Saints, and their Passions so
heightened, that they are ready to fall down right on them; then God arises, and
rebukes their Passions, And -- Behold there is a great Calm. Now as the
Mariners cried out -- What manner of Man is this, that even the Winds and the
Seas obey Him! Oh! that all the Churches of Christ in England, would be
Adoring, and Admiring, and breaking forth in this Ecstasy -- What manner of God
is this, that even the enraged Passions of men are subjected to Him! Thus the
Lord, who is a present help in time of Trouble, has done great things for us.

Fifthly, The Lord, the God that is affected with, and concerned at his Peoples
troubles; we read, his Soul was grieved for the misery of Israel: He is pleased
to call his People the Apple of his Eye; and who cannot but be deeply sensible
when that part is touched? So near, so greatly near, is the Relation between
God and his People, as all that is done to them, is in his account as done to
Himself. -- Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? was his word to him, that
then, as a malicious Informer, went up and down (like his Master the Devil)
seeking where and whom of the Saints, he might devour. And upon his enquiry --
Who art thou Lord? he was sharply answered, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou
Persecutest; and at the last Judgment he will tell the hard-hearted World, --
I was Hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; I was Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink.
The Saints wants are His wants, the Saints troubles are His troubles. Isa.
63.9. In all their Afflictions He was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence
saved them: in his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and
carried them all the days of old. The former verse tells us, -- He said, Surely
they are my People; and being his People, he could not but be concerned at
their troubles; yea so greatly, that he did (as it were) take part with them in
their Afflictions -- And in their Afflictions he was Afflicted. The expression
is very strange and hardly to be paralleled.

What the Poet said of Augustus, we may more truly say of God:

Est placidus, facilisquae parens, veniaeque paratus
Et qui fulminio sepe sine igne tonat
Qui cum triste aliquid statuit sit tristis et ipse
Cuique far poenam sumere, poena sua est.
And herein he glorifies, and magnifies the riches of his Love, in being so
concerned at, and affected with, the troubles of his People: Oh! He is moved,
He is touched with the sense of our Infirmities: And hence he cannot hold from
coming to his Peoples Assistance, when their pressures and Calamities are
great, and their Sorrows many; when the floods of Persecutions are over
whelming them; the enraged passions of wicked men, engages the Compassion of a
gracious God to appear for their help, and that right early; hear himself
speaking fully as to this, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the Poor, for the
sighing of the Needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in
safety, from him that pusseth at him. When the World are doing great things
against the People of God, he will arise and do great things for them, as God
said of Sodom -- Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorra is great, and because
their Sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the Cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I
will know. So he says of Zion -- Because the cry of Zion is great, and their
Calamity is very grievous -- I will go down now, and see whether it be
altogether according to the cry of it, from their Sighs, and Groans, which is
come unto me, and if not I will know: Thus the Sympathizing Lord has done for
us great things.

Sixthly, The Lord, the only God, He has done, and indeed none but he could
have done Great Things: For there is none besides Him; all the Gods of the
Heathens are Idols, Mouths have they, but they speak not; Feet have they, but
they walk not; Hands have they, but they act not: But the Lord our God, is the
Living God, the only True God, whose Glory is above the Heavens, and whose
Power is extended to the utmost confines of the Earth, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me
and be Saved, all the ends of the Earth, for I am God, and there is none else.

There may be many false Gods, many pretended Gods, but there is no God the
Savior, but me; none whose Arm has wrought out Salvation, but mine. Judas
Machabaeus had these words written on his Ensign, as his Motto -- Mi Camoca
Belohim Jehovah; Who is like unto thee among the Gods, O Lord? Who can act as
he acts? For he does great things, and unsearchable, mavelous things without
number: And as he (so only he) does great things. There is none can do like
him; expectation from any other Agent will be miserably frustrated: Jer. 3.23.
Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for, from the Hills, and from he multitude of
Mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel. By the Hills
and multitude of Mountains here, we are Tropologically to understand great
powers, great capacities, great abilities, and how great soever they may be in
the Creature, vain is the help expected from them: God will have no Partner, no
Rival, in this great work of saving his poor distressed People; he will have
the sole Honor and Glory of it himself; that Praises may be resounded and
re-echoed in all the Churches millitant -- O sing to the Lord, a new Song, for
he has done mavelous things, His Right Hand, and His holy Arm, has gotten
him the Victory: The Lord has made known his Salvation, his Righteousness has
he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen: He has remembered his Mercy and
his Truth toward the House of Israel, and the ends of the Earth have seen the
Salvation of our God: Thus the great Lord, the Gracious Lord, the Faithful
Lord, the present helping Lord, the Compassionate Lord, the only Lord, has done
great things. And so I pass from the Agent, to the Object; For Us:

First, For Us; poor, low, mean, insignificant Greatures; whose Original was
Dust and Clay, and whose dissolution will be in the same matter; for dust we
are, and to dust we shall return: The highest Honor we can pretend to, is
(with Job) to claim Kindred with the inhabitants below, saying to Corruption
Thou art our Father, and to the Worm, Thou art our Mother, and our Sister; Our
Bodies are called Houses of Clay, -- Behold he put no trust in his Servant; and
his Angels he charge with Folly: How much less on them that dwell in Houses
of Clay, whose foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed before the Moth.

We are fit Creatures indeed for the Almighty to do such great things for, who
are not able to stand against the weakest Creature, but waste insensibly, and
by degrees, as a Garment that is Moth-eaten. -- Man in his best state, in his
best dress, under his best circumstances, is al together Vanity, and this makes
him truly nothing to be accounted of: The Prophet David, could not but break
forth with a Quid est Homo? (after contemplating the rest of Gods Creatures)
Psalm 8.4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that
thou do visit him? Q. d. Man is verily nothing at all; O what a wonder of
wonders is it then, that the Blessed and Glorious God, should take such notice
of him, and be so concerned for him! In like manner we may be thus reflecting,
What are we? O what are all the Dissenters in England, abstractly considered,
but a company of very low mean Creatures, unable to duty, incapable of Mercy!
And yet that God should appear for us, and do such great things for us at this
day, this is verily the Lords doings, and Oh that it could be mavelous in our
Eyes! That we might break forth into admiration at it; Jacob on this account,
thus reflected upon himself, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all
thy Mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy Servant, for
with my Staff, I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands. Even
so let us be bowing down our Heads, and worshipping the Lord our God this day,
crying out -- We are not worthy of the least of thy Favors and of thy Truth,
for we are the wretched offspring of fallen man, and yet thou have showred
floods of Mercy upon us; Thou have lifted us up out of the Horrible Pit of
Tribulation and Persecution, which we were so miserably sunk into, and have set
our feet upon a Rock, filling our Mouths with Praises and Gladness; therefore,
Oh! Glory, Glory, Glory, be to thy Name for Ever.

Secondly, For Us, poor distressed Creatures, who are in a miserable condition,
yea as miserable, as miserable could be; not only Persecuted (almost to the
utmost extremity) by our open Enemies; but forsaken (and looked a squint at) by
our quodam Friends; who (through pusilanimity) were ready (with Peter) to swear
they never knew us. It Is rare for man to keep close to (much less to choose) a
Friend in Misery; as the Poet well observed.

Nulla fides unquam miseros elegit Amicos. Ay but God does; he fixed on Us, for
the objects of his signal Favor, when we were burning in the hottest Fire of
Persecution; when we were so like our dear Redeemer, who said of himself -- The
Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has
not where to lay his Head. Oh how great was our Misery in this respect! -- The
Drunkards and Debauchees of this Age, were in their Cieled Houses, and the
Contemners of Religion dwelled secure in their Habitations; but the Saints of
the most High, knew not where to fly for refuge: But then, O then, God looked
upon us in Mercy, 136 Psalm, 23, 24. Who remembers us in our low estate, for
his Mercy endures for Ever; and has redeemed us from our Enemies, for his
Mercy endures for Ever. I shall not make any recapitulation of the particulars
of our Sufferings, least the design of this day be changed from the seasonable
duty of Rejoicing, into the unseasonable work of Sighing and Sobbing. It would
be -- Infandum renovare dolorem; and the reflecting on never so few instances
would make the yet-scarce-healed wounds to bleed afresh, and extort tears of
Lamentation from the greatest part of this Assembly: -- Quis talia fando
temperet alachrimis: I confess I could not keep in my self, as being able to
say with AEneas -- Quaeque ipse misserima vidi et Quorum pars magna fui. But
this calamity was not personal but epidemical: The cry of all the dissenting
People of God, seemed to be that of the Church, Psalm 79.8, 9. O remember not
against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercy speedily prevent us, for we
are brought very low: Help us, O God of our Salvation! for the Glory of thy
Name, and deliver us, and purge away our Sins, for thy Name sake. And this
bitter cry has at length pierced the Heavens, and come up before the Holy One,
who has heard us, and helped us, and delivered us in the day of our great
Trouble, and in the day of the vexation of our Souls, when we were so low, that
never any People surely were lower then we were; Having from without this only
thing to comfort us, that whilst it pleased God to defer the altering our
condition for the better, we might bid defiance to the Devil to make it worse
-- Qui jacet in terris non habet unde cadet.

But now, Oh now! in the midst of this low and deplorable state, God has done
great things for us.

Thirdly, For us, Sinful Unworthy Creatures; whose deportment has been such in
all our sufferings, that we may truly (and without complement) cry out with
the Church -- Thou have punished us, O Lord, less then our iniquities have
deserved: we have Tempted him as at Missah, and Provoaked him as at the waters
of Meribah, we have Sinned in our Hearts, and in our Lives, in our words, and
in all our Actions. There have been found among us, (even among us) Spots, that
have hardly been the Spots of Gods Children. We have Sinned away our Mercies,
and thereby justly provoked the Lord to forsake his Tabernacle that was in our
Shiloh, and the Tent which he had placed among us men: And as our Sins have
justly brought down Judgments upon us, so have they continued them to us; We
have Sinned in, as well as before our Sufferings: We have been as that AHAZ,
Who trespassed yet more and more in his Afflictions. What was said of them of
Old, may well be applied to us in this Generation, Jer. 17.1. The Sin of Judah
is written with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond, it is graven upon
the table of their hearts, and upon the horns of their Altars. Their Sins lay
there where the Law should have lain, even in their hearts; and so it has been
with us: Ay, and on the Horns of their Altars too; where they should have
Offered up their pure and unblemisht Sacrifices: And have not we done the very
same? Yea verily; we have sinned, even in our Worshipping, our Hearing, our
Praying: Oh! what corruptions, what horrid Iniquities have accompanied our most
solemn Duties, and thereby rendered us the most impious and impudent of
Sinners? Oh! that God should then do such great things for such as we! Oh! that
ever we should come into His Heart for delivering Mercy, who with our own
hands, have brought down upon our own heads, the flood of all Misery! In
looking back on our former ways, we cannot but join with the Church in
condemning our selves, as justly forfeiting all those precious and pleasant
things, the loss of which we so much deplore: Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen
from our head, woe unto us that we have Sinned! for this our heart is faint, for
these things our eyes are dim, because of the Mountain of Zion, which is
desolate, the Foxes walk upon it.

-- Ponit symbolum verae contritionis. And Oh! that we were as hearty, and as
violent, in bemoaning of Sin, the true cause; as ever we were in complaining of
Sorrow, the genuine effect: But we have sinned, and behold we are delivered:
Oh! what a miracle of Mercy, that the Almighty should appear in any way for us
Sinners! Were there any real manifestations of Repentance among us, or any
beginnings of turning from the evil of our ways; the admiration of this day
would not be so great: But as we have Sinned, we do yet Sin, and are going on
farther and farther in the paths of Sin, without any remorse or reluctance,
without any Humiliation, or Contrition; and yet that God, the Holy God, the
Sin-hating* God, should do such great things, for us great Sinners; Oh! wonder!
wonder!

Fourthly, For Us, despised and contemptible creatures, who were low and vile
in the sight of the whole World; and so far following the steps of our; dear
Lord in his Sufferings, that we were verily rejected of men, a People of
Sorrow, and acquainted with Grief; We were the Drunkards Song, the Atheist
Scorn, and a scoff to all the Profane Ones: So that the complaint of the Church
was exactly true of us, Psalm 79.4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors,
a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. -- What flouts what jears
were the sons of Belial making at us, because (and merely because) we defended
the Kingly Office of Christ in his Church; and in the defense of that, (with
Moses) esteemed the reproaches of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of
the World? How odious has the name of a Dissenter been in this Land? How
miserably have we been misrepresented in all our ways, in all our actions, in
all our circumstances? What artificial tricks have been used to make us
despicable even among them that never knew us? What contempt has been poured
upon us, by the men of this Generation? What villainous base things have been
told of us, from one end of the Land to the other? How have the Pulpits, and
the Benches been full (yea running over) with these vile and most untrue
suggestions, -- As if our Ministers were men without Learning, our People
without Sense, and all of us a company of mad distracted creatures, scarce fit
to live. -- How have we been Be-rebell'd, and Be-traytor'd? How many times have
we been confidently accused, to be no friends to Caesar; implacable Enemies to
all Government, hatching of Plots, contriving of mischiefs continually? These
with a thousand other shams have been industriously managed to render us Odious
and Loathsome in the Eyes of our Sovereign. Like the dealings the Prophet
speaks of, Jer. 20.10, 11. For I heard the defaming of man, fear on very side;
Report, say they, and we well Report it: All my Familiars watched for my
Halting, saying, Peradventure he will be Enticed, and we shall prevail against
him, and we shall take our Revenge on him. But the Lord is with me as a mighty
terrible One; therefore my Persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper, their
everlasting Confusion shall never be forgotten. The Practice of our Adversaries
these late Years past, has been much like this, they have Reported the worst
they could invent: Calumniari audacter and fortiter -- aliquid Hoerebit, has
been their avouched Principle; and indeed by their art of Lying, they have keep
us a long time under their hatches. But now for us, thus Abused and Slandered
Creatures, the Lord has rouzed up himself to do great things; for our
Persecutors are now stumbling, they can no longer prevail, they are now greatly
ashamed, and confusion of Face is inevitably come upon them.

Fifthly, For us, distrustful unbelieving Creatures; we were so worn out with
Persecutions and bitter Sufferings, that as we had almost forgot what a quiet
comfortable State was, so we had left it out of our Creed, to believe that such
a State should ever be our Portion again. Oh! How much down and flagg'd was our
Faith! We were ready to conclude with Zion -- The Lord had forsaken us, and our
God had forgotten us; and that he had quite shut up the tender Bowels of his
Mercy, and would be gracious no more to us. Nay, our distrustfulness of the
possibility of deliverance, and the All Sufficiency of God to bring it about,
came up parallel with that high Provocation of Israel, we find mentioned, Psalm.
78.19. Yea they spoke against God, they said, Can God Furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? -- Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wrath; so a Fire was
kindle against Jacob, and Anger also came up against Israel. Oh! Have we not
tempted God in the very same kind? Have not we made reflections on his Power?
Have we not thought it impossible Deliverance should be wrought cut for us, and
thereby highly dishonored the Lord our God in the wilderness of our Troubles,
by disponding in his Goodness, and by distrusting of his Power? Our Hearts grew
faint, and our Spirits failed within us; so that we gave up all for lost. And
(through the extreme sinking of our Faith) we looked upon our selves as a People
wholly marked out for destruction. In so much as we were ready to say with the
Prophet, Oh that we had in the Wilderness a Lodging place of Wayfaring men!
That we might go and live solitarily alone; or that we might hide our selves in
the Deserts of the Earth, till the bitter Calamity were over past. Indeed we
knew not where to go, or what to do, so great was our Fear, and so little was
our Faith. Oh! what an unexpected change of Providence is now come upon us,
even upon us, who were putting this great and glorious day of Mercy so far from
us in our thoughts and apprehensions! It was with us as with that Lord we read
of, on whom the King leaned, 2 Kings 7.12. Then Elisha said, Hear the Word of
the Lord, Thus says the Lord, To morrow about this time shall a Measure of
fine Flower be sold for a Sheckle in the Gates of Samaria. Then a Lord on whose
hand the King leaned, answered the man of God, and said, Behold, if the Lord
would make Windows in Heaven, might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou
shall see it with thine Eyes, but shall not Eat thereof. There requires more
Faith then I doubt most of us were ever possessors of, to see the Plenty of
Deliverance, in the midst of the pinching Scarcity of Persecution.

Tarda solet magnis rebus in esse fides. Well, but though our Faith could not
behold it, God has graciously vouchsafed it. -- He has done great things for
us, who were great Unbelievers.

Sixthly, For us, quarreling and disagreeing Creatures, who have delighted to
warm our Exuberant Fancies in the long kindled Flame of Contention; and instead
of Water to quench, have poured in Oil to enrage the burning. Who have been
lifting up every one his hand against his Brother, to smite him openly; or
(which is worse) his unruly Tongue to slander him privily. And by our thus
Butchering one another good Names with our Lies and detracting Stories (as
Simeon and Levi did the Shechemites with their drawn Swords) we have made
Religion stink in the Nostrils of all without. It Is said -- For the divisions
of Reuben that were great thoughts of Heart. And really, when I have seriously
thought of the many and sad divisions amongst us, it has made my Heart ache to
think what would become of the Professors, and Professions of this Age. Such
things fore-bode no good, if we may believe Christ, 12 Math. 25. And Jesus knew
their Thoughts, and said to them, Every Kingdom divided against it self, is
brought to Disolation, and every City or House divided against it self shall
not stand. A Kingdom cut and hewn into diverse Factions, so is the Emphasis of
the Original word,

Scinditur incertum Studia incontraria vulgus. And when these various Opinions
engender Alienation in Affection, setting up of Parties to oppose one another,
Oh! this is very sad and tremendous. And yet so, Oh! so it has been with us,
the Professors of Religion in this Land: Oh! what Divisions, Dissentions,
Animosities, Emulations, and Heart-burnings have there been found amongst us,
to the grief of the Godly, the derision of the Wicked, and to the astonishment
of all. I have somewhere Read, there were some Christian Slaves in Turkey, who
upon some difference in Points of Faith, fell to so great feuds, that they
built up a Mud-wall in the Dungeon, to prevent intercourse one with the other.
We have verily been doing somewhat not unlike this, even under our
Persecutions. And I fear our jarrings are not to this day ceased; there is the
same leven of Malice and Prejudice still boiling in the Spirits of too many
turbulent Ones.

Well, This Spirit (though it be abhorred of God, and abundantly born witness
against in the Holy Scripture) is kept up and indulged by a Generation that are
pure in their own Eyes, but yet I fear are not washed from their Filthiness.
Hear what Paul says of this Spirit of division, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. Now this I
say, That every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ; is Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were
you Baptized in the Name of Paul? Ah thou meek and peaceable Apostle! did
thou blame the divisions of the Church of Corinth? what would thou say, were
thou alive at this day, to see what is too plain to be seen amongst us? Oh!
that then God should do such great things for us, who have not a good word, or
a good thought to bestow upon our fellow Members! That we should be raising up,
and not rather quite pulled down, is astonishing mercy! -- I have now done with
reflecting on the Object here, For Us; He has done great things for Us, poor,
low, mean Creatures; For Us, poor distressed Creatures; For Us, poor sinful
Creatures; For Us, poor despised Creatures; For Us, poor distrustful poor
despised Creatures; For Us, poor distrustful Creatures; For Us, poor quarreling
Creatures.

I now come to the third thing, Namely the Predicate, with the amplification of
it: He has done Great Things; or (as it is in the Original) he has magnified
to do. He is a great God, and he has done (like himself) greatly. He has done
marvelous things, as in the Land of Ham, and terrible things, as by the red
Sea. So great things has he done, that the Mouths and Hearts of all his People
are full of them; yea so full, that they may better adore then express them:
Now may all cry out this day with Balaam, as he was convincing Balak of his
folly (through the mighty influence of the divine Spirit then upon him) in
endeavoring to bring the People of God under the Power of a Curse, Number. 23.23.
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is their any divination
against Israel. Men may set themselves to curse and rave against the Saints,
yet still they shall be preserved. That even Atheists may be forced, adoringly
to break forth, Oh! what has God done? What Preservations has he vouchsafed?
What Deliverancs has he wrought out for his chosen Ones? And in spite of the
malice of Men and Devils to the contrary: The Church is very much enlarged, in
speaking of these great things. Psalm 46.7, 8, 9. The Lord of Hosts is with us,
the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Selah! Come behold the works of the Lord, What
Desolations he has made on the Earth. He makes Wars to cease to the end of
the Earth: He breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in sunder, He burns the
Chariot in the Fire. By Bow, we may understand the Strength and Power of the
Churches Enemies, and this he has broken: by Spear, the war of Persecution
that was raised against them; and this he has cut. By Chariots, the eagerness
of men's Spirits in prosecuting the work, and these he has burnt in the Fire.
These are Great, yea very Great Things. Where is the adversaryes Power to
suppress us? Alas that is broken. Where is the Adversaries Authority to threaten
us with Bonds and Prisons, and Constables-Staves? Alas that is cut in pieces.
Where Is the Adversaries Rage and Malice against us? Alas that is burnt in the
Fire. There is now Peace to him that goes out, and Peace to him that comes in;
and among the swarm of our Adversaries, there is none to make us afraid. These
are great things, good things, things of an inestimable value!

-- Magis illa Juvant quae pluris emuntur. Oh Beloved! It would astonish
Angels, and daunt the hearts of Devils; it would make the Morning-Stars sing
together, and all the Sons of God shout for joy, to tell you what great things
God has done for us: Oh! that my Tongue were touched with a Coal from the holy
Altar, that in a Seraphick strain, I might be repeating some of those great
things that God has done: Help me with your Prayers, Raise me with your
Devotion; that I may raise your Spirits to Joy and Thankfulness in the hearing
of them.

First, He has stopped the Mouths of our malicious Adversaryes, who in their
reviling language took an unaccountable liberty to upbraid and abuse us at
their will and pleasures: But God has put a Hook in the Nostrils of the
Senacharibs, and stopped the mouths of our railing Rabshekaes. He has tamed the
roaring Bulls of Bashan, and quelled the wild Boars of the Forest. Those that
were foaming at the mouth for madness, at the very appearance of a Religious
Assembly, where God was worshipped in the Gospel of his Son; Those that were
once raging and taring at a Meeting, as though the Town were on Fire, that were
making such a horible hubbub, with Clamours and Outcries, as though some
Treason of the first Magnitude were a committing: Those who were a Profaning
the Sabbath, Blaspheming God and his Ways, that were indeed perfectly Drunk
with Fury and Madness: Where are they now?

Fortis ubi est Ajax? ubi sunt ingentia magni verba Viri -- Alas! altum
silentium, they are ashamed of their craft: Their Huffing and Hectoring, their
Raving and Swearing; their Threatening, and Exclaiming; is now forcibly quelled,
and they are become as mute, as the Idiot, who keeps silent because he knows
not how to speak: Now verily is fulfilled that great word Psalm 3.7. Arise O
Lord, save me, O my God! for thou have smitten all mine Enemies upon the
Cheek-bone; Thou have broken the Teeth of the Ungodly. That is, Thou have
brought them to great Disgrace and Reproach; and who can expect a better end,
then that of Shame and Contempt, who run in ways of so great abomination? The
Enmity, and Inveteracy in some Men's Spirits, has been beyond former presidents
or examples. What a Spirit of Madness was there against the poor Dissenters? I
remember what Laocoon said to the Trojans.

Quis furor O Cives quae tanta insania mentem occupat? -- One would wonder (in
a Christian Land especially) the very Idea of modesty and sobriety should be so
wholly razed out of Men's Mouths and Hearts, in speaking and acting in so plain
a way of Inhumanity, as scarce any Heathen, but would have blushed at it; But
now God has checked this Hellish Spirit, and has sent it to the Bottomless
Pit from whence it came, and I hope it will never have a resurrection more in
England. We may say of it, as Jacob did of Simeon and Levi. -- Cursed be their
Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was cruel; for in their
wrath, they killed a Man; and in their Self-will they dug down a Wall. Oh!
how true is that great word, 76 Plalm 10. Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise
Thee, and the remainder of wrath shall Thou restrain. We had Sinned, and God
in Judgment let loose these Savages to worry us for a Season: But now His
Pleasure is performed concerning us, He has muzled and chained them in their
places again. God made use of as much of their wrath, as served his own will,
and now he has restrained the rest; though they may have the same will and
inclinations, yet they have not the same Power and Opportunity, and the God of
Heaven grant they never may. Oh Sirs! what a great thing is this, that God has
done for us? He has stayed the rough Wind, in the day of the East Wind. He
has ceased the chilling full-mouthed blasts of Boreas, and has made the
gentle Zephirus speak peace in our Horizon: So that in grateful remembering the
Lord our Maker that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations
of the Earth; we may triumphantly say. (...) And where is the Fury of the
Oppressor?

Secondly He has opened a way for the Ambassadors of Christ to walk abroad
without danger, and Appear in the Streets without fear of Apprehending: what a
terrible time has it been with poor Ministers? How have they been driven from
their Families, as not able to live at peace (or with any safety) in their
Habitations? And when they went abroad, in what strange habits were they
compelled to go, lest they should have fallen, into the hands of unreasonable
Men, men of no Faith, no Conscience, no Christianity, no Humanity? But now they
may show themselves, and appear (as they are) The faithful Servants of God, and
the King's dutiful Subjects: There is now no need of uncouth Garments to
obscure them, no need of flanting Periwigs to disguise them, no need of
changing their names, to keep them from the Cognizance of the Sons of Belial:
Methinks I cannot reflect on the time past, without observing how the
Messengers of the Lord, were much in the like condition with Elijah, 1 Kings
1910. And he came thither unto a Cave, and Lodged there, and behold the word of
the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What do thou here Elijah? And he
said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts: for the Children of
Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy
Prophets with the Sword: and I, even I only am left, and thy seek my Life to
take it away. Oh! London, London, how will it remain as an Indelible mark of
reproach upon thee, that those Men, who were once thy Beauty, more then any of
thy stately Structures; who were once thy Glory, more then any of thy Indian
Spices, or far-fetcht Treasures, should yet be thought unworthy to live within
thy Walls; but were Hunted into Holes and Corners, and searched for, from House
to House, as tho they were Fellons, or some horrid Flagitious Persons: But God
has at length looked in Mercy on the Sons of Levi, and lifted up their Heads,
in our Israel, yea to so great an height, that they may not only walk the
Streets in safety, but appear in their Pulpits publicly, before the face of
the World; discharging the Duty of their Places, which they were solemnly set
apart for. Now the People may behold their dear Pastors that were rent and torn
from them, which enforced so much Heartbreaking Sorrow and Lamentation; now
the Blessed God is making good that Promise Isa. 30.19, 20. For the people
shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem; thou shall Weep no more: He will be very
gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy Cry; when he shall hear it, he will
answer thee: And though the Lord give you the bread of Adversity, and the Water
of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more:
But thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers. Ay they do see them, and they are
Rejoicing in the sight of them. As there can be no greater Sorrow, then when
Minister and People parts, so there is no greater Joy, then when Ministers and
People Meets: and we have good ground to hope, they will be removed into
corners no more. Non alis se induent, they shall not fly away, they shall not
be forced from their Congregations and Families any more: Our Dread Sovereign
(whose word is Inviolable) has graciously Promised there shall no such havoc
be made in this Nation (during His happy Reign) as there has been on this
account. Oh Sirs! Is not this a great thing that God has done for us, even far
beyond our expectation?

Thirdly, He has made way for People to live quietly in their Habitations.
Those peaceable Inhabitants who were so inoffensive in their Conversations,
that Malice it self could have nothing to say against them, but (as it was with
Daniel) in the matter of their God. These I say (by this great Revolution of
Providence) may now live securely and quietly, without being pulled and halled
out of their Dwellings, without having their Houses Plundered and Pillaged,
without having their Goods wasted and destroyed, without being ruined and
undone in their Trades and Callings; and that for no other cause than their
Conscientious fearing to offend God, in complying with those terms of worship,
which according to the discerning God had given them (after use of Prayer and
other means) were really sinful. Without being a Prey to wicked and ungodly
Ones, who rejoiced in nothing more then in Ravage and Devastation; 'Twas an
awful Judgment the Lords own People lay under, that he should give them up to
these Savage Men's Lusts, whose tender mercies they so woefully experienced to be
Cruel. And indeed he was the Efficient cause in it. -- Who gave Jacob to the
Spoil, and Israel to the Robber? Did not I, says the Lord? Yes he did: But tho
he did so, for the glorifying his Justice; he has at length, for the greater
glorifying of his Mercy, rescued them again from these Spoilers, and taken the
Power out of their hands; as he promised of old, Ezekiel. 34.38. And they shall no
more be a Prey to the Heathen, neither shall the Beasts of the Land devour
them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid. Whatever
men may think of themselves, the Spirit of God calls them no better then
Beasts, for devouring his Heritage. But now lift up your Heads and rejoice, ye
Sons and Daughters of the most High, ye shall be devoured no more. Ye shall now
live in quiet, and enjoy the Mercy the Pagan accounted so great.

-- Optat
Fumum de patriis posse videre focis.
Return ye scattered Ones into your Habitations again, for now the King of
Kings will be a Wall of Fire round about you, and the Glory in the midst of
you. Oh! Beloved, this is a great thing, this is a pleasant thing, that God
has done for you. Now the Shops may be opened again that have been so long
shut up; now the Houses may be furnished again that have been so long desolate;
and now you may all visit one another again with comfort and delight, who have
been so long dispersed by a Storm so full of Terror and Amazement. Now you may
sit down every one under his own Fig Tree, and eat the Labor of your own
hands, without danger of the hungry Canibal to snatch it out of your Mouths. As
God said his own People should do, Jerem. 23.8. But the Lord lives, which
brought up, and which led the Seed of the House of Israel out of the North
Country, and from all Countries whether I had driven them, and they shall
dwell in their own Land. God has now made our Land Peaceable, and has
restored our Cities to dwell in. -- Verily this is a great thing. -- This is
that whereby God has made himself known in our Judah, and whereby his Name is
become great in our Israel. Whereby also he has manifested his Tabernacle to
be in our Salem, and his Dewlling Place, in the midst of our Zion. Oh! what
shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?

Fourthly, He has given us just Liberty of Conscience, to Serve Him, and
Worship in that way which we are absolutely convinced to be the truest and
nearest the Rule; So that every one has now the Liberty and glorious Freedom
of his own Conscience, in matters of Religion; which has been so much opposed
and Tyrannized over by the Men of this Generation. Oh! unparalled Tyranny!
Had We and our little Ones been sold for Bond Slaves, our oppressions had not
been so great. We might have had recourse to God in Prayer and hearing his
Word, which would have alleviated our Sorrows (though never so great) and eased
our burdens (though never so heavy) But to be denied this Liberty, is so great
a piece of inhumanity, that nothing can be greater: No Slavery like that of
having the Conscience manacled, and fettered by the impious will of Man; which
(as our most Excellent Sovereign has declared) is not to be Constrained or any
way Forced: Man has nothing so near to him or so dear to him, as his
Conscience; hence Compulsion and Coertion as to that, is both against the Law
of God, and the very Light of Nature; Heathens have abhorred it. 'Twas the
glory of Ahashuerus his Feast, that there was no compelling any man to do
beyond what he had a mind to, or saw in himself cause for; every man was left
to his own freedom; Esther 1.8. And the drinking was according to the Law, none
did compel, for so the King had appointed to all the Officers of the house,
that they should do according to every man's Pleasure. And shall there be more
imposing in a Christian Church, then there was in the Persian Court? Shall a
Heathen King be more tender then Protestant Magistrates? Truly this is little
for the honor of Christianity. Well, how ever Conscience has been bound, it is
now free; this Glorious and Golden Liberty is once more restored again.

Aurea Libertas auro pretiosior omni. Oh! what a great thing is this, that God
has wrought out for us! Rejoice O Land, and break forth into Shouting, Oh
England; for thy Inhabitants are now indeed made a free People. The Iron Yoke
of the worst sort of Bondage and Captivity (which has so long and so greatly
galled them) is taken off their necks, and every man is at ease; Nothing so
welcome to all Christians, as this thing. As Aristotle says of the Hand, it is
Organon Organoon, the Instrument of Instruments; so we may say of Liberty of
Conscience, it is the Mercy of Mercies. Indeed it is a a Mercy that makes all
other enjoyments to be Mercy; without this, our Bread is mingled with Gaul, how
fine soever; and our drink with Wormwood, how rich soever: without this, our
health would do us little good, yea Life (...) self is but a protracted Misery:
And as this Liberty is so pleasing to every Creature, so it is no less
consonant to the mind and will of the Great Creator; and hence those that have
the Spirit of God, cannot, dare not, be against it. 2 Cor. 3.17. Now the Lord
is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty.
VVhereever the Spirit of the Lord dwells in Power and Life, that Soul is for
Liberty; that Soul having tasted the sweetness of Liberty, is as willing to
allow it to his fellow Creatures, as to take it himself. Whilst men are tying
the Consciences of others up to the hard mead of their humors, they are doing
the Devils work and not Gods. Oh Sirs! God has done this great thing for us,
he has given us Liberty of Conscience: Oh! that we might be so glad of it, as
to use it to his Glory, and not as an occasion of farther provoking him, for
this would be sad and dreadful indeed.

Fifthly, He has enlarged the Preaching of the Gospel, of that Gospel which
brings the Glad-tidings of Salvation to poor lost Man; of that Gospel that
proclaims Liberty to the Captive, and the opening the Prison-doors to them that
are in Bondage, and lets the Prisoners go free; of that Gospel that shows poor
Creatures the way to Life, and how to be made happy for ever; which has so
unreasonably and spitefully been hindered by all the hellish Craft and Subtilty
that could be used. Oh! how have men Stretched their Wits, and Tenterhookt
their Power, to stop the shining light of the Glorious Gospel? Though God has
commanded it to be Preached, and spread to the utmost confines of the Earth;
though he has Promised, it shall be so spread in the last days, when the Earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as the Waters cover
the Seas, and though he has demonstrated, it shall be so in the Vision which
John saw, Rev. 2.14.6. And I saw another Angel in the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to Preach unto them that dwell in the Earth, and to
every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People. Had this Angel stood upon
Earth (as he was to fly in Heaven) in our Climate; we lately had a sort of
People would have been ready to have clapped a Warrant on his Back, and
apprehended him as a disturber of the Peace (though he was to Preach no other
than the Gospel of Peace,) So eager were they to cross the Almighty (Oh!
Impudent Presumption) in his purposes and decrees. But now, Blessed be God,
there is a large door set open, that all that are gifted and spirited for the
work, may apply themselves thereunto without any fear of Opposition. Illmen may
threaten and repine at it, but they cannot hinder it. Happy! Blessed! Glorious
day! This Door has a long time been shut to the great Grief and Trouble of
many poor Souls. How many poor Creatures have been hungry for the Bread of
Life, but there was none to break it to them? How many were thirsty for the
Water of the Sanctuary, but there was none to draw it for them? There has been
a great Famine of Bread (of Heavenly Bread I mean) in our Land. Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who has visited his People and given them this Bread, and
that in abundance. Who has brought forth his Ministers from their Prisons,
from their hiding places, and has given them liberty and oppertunity to open
their Mouths in the great Congregations, and to act according to the Tenor of
the Prophets Commission, Esaiah 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice
like a Trumpet, show my People their Transgressions, and the Sons of Jacob
their Sin. Don't speak in a low flattering way; don't read in a dull sleepy
cold manner, as though you were rehearsing a story out of a Book, but cry, and
cry aloud; speak, and speak out with a lifted up voice, Plenis faucibus, voce
sonora and quasi Tubali; and what a mercy it is that we have such Golden
Trumpets sounding in the Gates of our Zion. such glorious Lights shining in our
Horizon: Oh! this is a great thing. Our Meetings which of late were confined,
to the most private and retired rooms (and that not withot a great deal of
danger) are now brought forth in open view, in the sight of all Israel, and
before the Sun, Who can think of this, and not break forth into Admiration?

Sixthly, He has given opportunity to the worst, to sit under the best means,
to their Souls good. The Ignorant and Profane Persons who had most need to
hear, were (for cogent reasons) in most places shut out from the word. People
were afraid to admit them into their Private Meetings, lest they should be
betrayed by them: and every one that knows the worth of a Soul, will own this a
great Mercy indeed, that such may now come freely into the Public Assemblyes,
and none have any suspicion of them. The Net is now largely and extensively
spread over all; and blessed be God, there is a Spirit in such to come in the
Nets way: I have always observed that the worst men have a hankering after the
best means: This our Savior hinted at in his answer to John, Mat. 11.4, 5.
Jesus answared and said unto them, Go, and show John again those things which
you do hear and see: The Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the
Leapers are Cleansed, and the Deaf Hear, the Dead are raised up, and the Poor
have the Gospel Preached to them. -- The word in the Original is Emphatical,
and the Poor are Gospelliz'd; not only poor in respect to the World, but poor
in respect of Grace. That are in a Natural unregenerated Estate. what a vast
injury to the Souls of thousands of such, has this late Persecution been: Oh!
that all concerned in it may seriously lay it to heart, and I am confident it
will be small ease to them to reflect upon it; that so many, by the heat of
their Spirits, have been kept from that word, that might have been the Savor
of Life to them; but now they may come and be pertakers of it: Take notice, you
Drunkards, you Swearers, you Worldlings, you Atheists, henceforth you can have
no excuse, for you may now come and hear from the Messengers of the Lord of
Hosts, the misery of your Condition; of the dreadfullness of Living and Dying
in the state you are; of the manner of True Conversion, of the freeness of
Grace, of the Fullness of Love, and of the infinite Virtue, and Value of the
Blood of Christ; the closing with which by faith must be your happiness if ever
you are made happy: These glorious Divine Truths are not now spoken of in a
private Chamber, but publicly Proclaimed as on the House top, Prove. 20.21, 22.
Wisdom cries without, She utters her Voice in the Streets: She cries in
the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the Gates, in the City, She
utters her words saying, How long ye simple Ones will ye love Simplicity? and
the Scorners delight in their Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Oh! what a
great thing is this!

Seventhly, (And which is none of the least of these great things) He has
turned the Heart of our Royal and Dread Sovereign to us, as the Heart of a
Father to his Children. We are told, Pouv. 21.11. The Kings Heart is in the
Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water he turns it wheresoever he will. Oh!
Blessed be God for this Turn, how welcome, how refreshing is it, even as the
breaking forth of the Sun after a tedious Night. We may now go home to our
Tents, Rejoice and Triumphing, that we, even we, have a Portion in our David;
and that we, even we, have an Inheritance in the Son of Jesse. Through the
Interposition of some shaddowing Clouds, we have not had for some years the
Smiles of Caesar's Face, being continually portrayed before him, as some
Monstrous Creatures unworthy his Protection. There have not been wanting Hamans
in the Court, suggesting to the Prince, that his Crown could not set fast upon
his Head while such Disloyal Ones as we were at Peace in the Land. But we now
stand right in our Sovereigns Favor, he has been pleased to spread the Wings
of his Clemency over us, and this we humbly Acknowledge to be a great thing God
has done for us. Now then, If stopping the Mouths of our Adversaries which
were so open; if lifting up the Head of our Ministers which were so low; if
securing our Inhabitants which were so uneasy; if giving Liberty of Conscience
which was so tyrrannyzed over; if enlarging the Gospel which was so opposed; if
making way for the worst to hear the Word, who were so miserably kept from it;
if turning the Heart of our Sovereign To Us, who suffered so much by that Fatal
Eclips. If these are great things, then God has done great things for us.

I come now to the last part of the words, Namely, The Influence that this has
upon all that fear God -- Whereof we are glad.

The word says -- Light is Sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the
Upright in Heart. And this seems to be the Harvest time, for our God is
returning (after so long withdrawing) and repenting concerning us his
Servants. He is satisfying us also with his Mercy, and making our Hearts glad
in this day. Yea he is making us Joyful according to the days wherein he has
afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil; his Work is appearing
unto us, and his Glory upon our Children. Oh! That we could therefore make a
Joyful Noise unto the Lord, that we could serve the Lord with Gladness, and
come before his Presence this day with Singing. Oh! That we could enter his
Gates with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise, and be thankful unto
him and bless his Name. The Preacher says, There is a time to Weep, and a time
to Laugh; a time to Mourn, and a time to Dance. We have had our days of
Weeping and of Mourning; we have been in the Wilderness of Sin, and as in the
Vale of Siddim; with Jeremy we have even had Furrows on our Faces, and Isickles
from our Eye lids with continual Weeping; with Origin we have almost been dead
with Grief; with Chrysystome we have been consuming our days in Sorrow; with
Basil we have been even old before our time; and with Rebeckah we have been
weary of our Lives; but now (Gaudia post luctus veniunt) the Laughing time, the
Dancing time is come; our Lord is now saying to us as to his Church -- 2 of the
Cant. 10.11, 12, 13. My Beloved speak; and said unto me, Rise up my Love, my
Fair One, and come away, for lo the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone;
the Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and
the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; the Fig Tree puts forth her
green Figs, and the Vine with tender Grapes gives a good smell. Arise my Love,
my Fair One, and come away. From whence should she come? Why, from setting in
her Mourning-Chamber, and giving up her self to Sorrow and Lamentation; for
though it had been a blustering and stormy Winter with her, yet it is now past;
though it had been a time of great and dismal Rain, yet it is now over and
gone, and the Pleasant Spring time is come; for the Flowers appear on the
Earth, and the Birds begin to Sing; So it has been with us -- The ways of our
Zion have Mourned, because none did come to the Solemn-Feast; all her Gates
were desolate, her Priests sighed, her Virgins were afflicted, and she was in
Bitterness. But now our Condition is changed, and we are called to Rejoicing,
and we shall Sin greatly if we do not Rejoice, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou
servest not the Lord thy God with Joyfulness and with gladness of Heart, for
the abundance of all things. This was a great and a provoking Sin, pray let it
not be our Sin. But let us Rejoice in the Lord, our righteousness, and glory in
the Rock of our Salvation; who has done this great thing for us. Give me leave
very briefly to show you how we should be glad.

First, As it is an Answer of Prayer, God has manifested himself a God,
hearing Prayer, in doing these great things, for they are the very things we
have been long Praying for; as Hannah said to Eli. 1 Samuel 1.27. For this Child
I Prayed, and the Lord has given me my Petition which I asked of him. So for
this day, for this Change, for this time of Liberty the People of God have been
Weeping and Praying, and Crying aloud; Oh! what floods of Tears have been
poured out; Oh! what volleys of Sighs and Sobs have been sent up in the
Exhalations of the Spirits of the Saints unto the great God, that he would do
what he has now done for them; as it is of God that we are not destroyed, so
it is of God that we are delivered; and shall we not be glad that he has at
length heard our Prayers and answered our Request?

Secondly, We should be glad in respect to the Time of it: He has done great
things for us at this time, when we least expected it. This Inhanced the value
of deliverance of the Jews, 7 Ezra 12. Artaxerxes King of Kings, unto Ezra a
Priest, a Scribe of the Law of the God of H^aven, perfect Peace, and at such a
time. Our King has sent the blessed Message of Peace to the poor Ministers of
the Gospel, and to all the Churches of Christ in this Land, and at such a time,
when we looked for nothing but Sorrow and Trouble; and surely for this we
should be glad.

Thirdly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Union. Bondage and Oppression
has not driven us together. Oh! That Deliverance might, since it has pleased
God to open a Door of Liberty for us all, of what persuasion soever. Oh! That
we might heedfully attend to the Apostles pressing Exhortation, Ephe. 4.3.4.
Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. There is one
Body and one Spirt, even as you are called in one hope of your calling. I could
heartily wish that all the unhappy Names of distinction (which have kept up the
feud so long among us) might be now laid aside; and that we might live together
in Love, and be sincerely loving one another as the fellow Citizens of the New
Jerusalem. Oh! This would be a great thing, a glorious manifestation of our
Gladness.

Fourthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Reformation. There is a voice
in Mercies as well as in Afflictions; in Deliverance as well as in Persecution;
God has been a long time speaking to us from the Fulminations of Mount Sinai,
and now is speaking to us from the sweet Irradiations of Mount Sion, and his
voice is that you will find mentioned, Jere. 7.2.3. Stand in the Gate of the
Lords House, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the Word of the Lord,
all ye of Judah, that enter in at these Gates to Worship the Lord. Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I
will cause you to dwell in this place. Ah! Sirs, if we desire the continuance
of this great Mercy of entering the Gates to worship the Lord, for Gods sake let
us be reforming our Lives, and turning every one from the Evil of his ways;
that we may provoke the Lord no more to hate the Palaces of our Jacob, or
forsake the Assemblys in our Israel; for hereby indeed can we only show that we
are glad of these great things that God has done for us.

Fifthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our satisfaction and contentedness
of Spirit, with what God has done; laying aside all needless fears and
jealousies, which tend only to disquiet the mind, and render us incapable of
worshipping God as we should do. Oh hear and tremble at the Apostles solemn
Admonition, 1 Exo. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and
were destroyed of the Destroyer. God has influenced our Sovereign to do such
great things for us, which none of his Predecessors ever did, largly expressed
in his unparalleld Declaration. A Declaration so full of Princely Love and
Affection, so full of Amazing Candor and Condescension, that it deserves to be
writ in Letters of Gold. Behold! Majesty on the The One, veyling the Scepter, and
darting the Rays of his Royal Favor into the poorest Cottage. Behold a
Crowned King Compassionating and Commiserating the Calamities of his meanest
Subjects. What shall I say? Behold an Index pointing to the rich graces and
virtues in the large Folio of the Royal Breast. And shall we be yet murmuring,
and indulge discontents and fears? Oh! this would be a very ungrateful
Requital, both to God and the King. Oh Beloved! I earnestly beg you, that we
may Eat our Bread with Joyfulness, and dwell in our Habitations with Gladness,
with what God and the King has done for us.

Sixthly, We should be glad demonstrated in our Dutiful Deportment toward our
Sovereign: God is the Efficient, he is the Instrument of these great things;
let us therefore be like those of old, who blessed the King, and went unto
their Tents joyful and glad of Heart, for all the goodness he had done for
David his Servant, and for Israel his People. We are now under the
indispensible Duty of Gratitude (as well as of Law and Gospel) to be a quiet
and peaceable People. Oh! that the King may never see any thing in our
Carriages to make him Repent of the kindness he has shown to us. I will leave
that word with you, and I cannot but earnestly press it upon you, which Solomon
the wisest of men left in charge to his Son, 24 Prove. 21.22. My Son, fear thou
the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for
their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both? Oh!
let us make good our Sovereigns good Opinion, that good Christians will be good
Subjects; and herein shall we show our selves glad in a right gladness.

I shall now in a few words show you what a kind of gladness this should be,
and I have done.

First, It should be a forgetful gladness: I do not mean forgetful of the
Mercies we receive, but of the Miseries we have felt. Oh! let them be Buried in
the Grave of Oblivion; let them be as though they never were; and to that end I
would commend the Spiritual Improvement of those words, Prove. 31.6, 7. Give
strong Drink unto those that are ready to Perish, and Wine unto those that be
of heavy Hearts; let him drink and forget his Poverty, and remember his Misery
no more. Who ever has been pincht by the late Persecution, Oh! let him come
and drink of the waters that are running in our Sanctuaries, so will he forget
his Poverty and remember his Miseries no more. God did not depress us so low,
but he has now raised us again.

Dejicit ut relevei, premit ut solatie praestet,
Denecat ut possit vivificare Deus.
He covered the head of our Zion with a Cloud in the day of his Anger, that the
Light of his Countenance and the Glory of his Presence might be now more sweet
and precious. He over-whalmed us with Sorrow, that the Table he has now spread
for us, and the Oil wherewith he is Anointing our Heads, might be the more
fragrant and odiriferous. He brought us down into the Valley of Death, that
after two days he might revive us; and that in the third day he might raise us
up that we may live in his sight, that we may know if we follow on to know the
Lord; his going forth is prepared as the Morning, and that his coming to us is
as the Rain, as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth. Oh then! whatever
hardships we have undergone, let them all be forgotten.

Secondly, It should be a Charitable gladness: We should so be glad for these
great things, as to put away all Anger and Malice, and thoughts of Revenge
against those that have done us wrong; for so is the Gospel command, 5 Math.
44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, do good
to them that Hate you, and Pray for them which Dispitefully use you, and
Persecute you. Oh! Remember that a Forgiving Spirit is a Gospel Spirit.

Thirdly, It should be a Profitable gladness: We should labor to be so glad
for these great things, as to get good by them, improving the means of Grace we
now enjoy for our Souls good; saying with David, 112 Psa. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. I
was glad when they said unto me, Let us go unto the House of the Lord. Our Feet
shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem; Jerusalem is builded as a City that
is compact together; whether the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the
Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord; for there are
set Thrones of Judgment; the Thrones of the House of David. Pray for the Peace
of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Oh Sirs! This gladness will
turn to a good account at the last day.

Fourthly, It should be a Spiritual gladness: Not in a Carnal way of Rejoicing
as the World do, nor upon the account of any Carnal or VVorldly Intrest, but
purely on a Spiritual account. As our Savior admonished his Disciples, Luke
10.20. Notwithstanding, In this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject to
you, but rather rejoice, that your Names are written in Heaven. I have not now
time to apply it, but so should our gladness be.

Fifthly, It should be an Eucharistical gladness: Oh! how should we be
Blessing, Praising, Adoring, and Magnifying the Lord our God in the Sense of
these great things he has done for us? How should we be stiring up our selves
to the Praise of him, as David did? 108 Psa. 1.2, 3, 4. O God, my Heart is
fixed; I will Sing and give Praise even with my Glory. Awake Psaltery and Harp,
I my self will awake early; and I will sing Praises to thee among the Nations;
for thy Mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy Truth reaches unto the
Clouds. This will be a gladness truly becoming the Professors of the Gospel.

Sixthly, It should be an Influential gladness: Oh! what an Influence should
these great things have upon our whole Man to serve our God more purely, to
live to him more holily, and to walk before him more humbly then ever we have
done; as the Apostle urges the Romans, Chap. 12.1. I beseech you therefore
Brethren, by the Mercy of God, that you present your Body a living Sacrifice
holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable Service. If this
Exhortation were well practiced by all that profess the Name of God in England;
Oh! How would Peace Triumph over Dissension in the Nation? How would Plenty
Triumph over Poverty in the City? And (that which is best of all) how would
Religion Triumph over Profaneness in every Corner of the Land? And thereby how
would God have the Glory, and we the solid lasting Comfort of these great
things he has done for us? Amen. Amen. Hallelujah, Hallelujah.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere will very shortly be Published (for the gratifying the Desires of many)
another Sermon of this Reverend Authors; the very first he Preached at the
opening of the Meeting House in Spittle-fields, being a most Seasonable
Discourse of Gods hearing Prayer.


