A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSEPH ALEINE, BY Mr. GEORGE NEWTON
late Minister of Taunton in Somersetshire.

Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do
follow them. LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Nevil Simmons, at the
Princes-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1672.

Luke 23. 28. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your Children.
WHat Subject fitter for this sad Occasion then a Theme of Weeping? what
Language can we better speak, or more agreeable to the dark Providence that we
are under, then Sighs, and Cries, and Lamentations? how merciful was God to
him, whom he has taken to himself, and how severe to us, in this Stroke? and
oh what hard and stupid hearts have we? should we be so insensible of Gods
heavy Indignation, and our irreparable Loss, as to give him just occasion to
Complain, as in Jeremiah 5. 3. I have smitten them and they have not grieved.
You of this Congregation have reason to sit down in bitterness, because the
Almighty has dealt very bitterly with you. And to cry out as sometimes Joash
did, over Elisha, 2 Kings 13. 14. My Father, my Father, the Charists of Israel
and the Horsemen thereof: And as Rachel once to weep, and hardly to be
comforted, because he is not: And for my own part I shall take up David's
Lamentation over Jonathan, with David's Affection 2. Sam. 1. 26. I am
distressed for thee, my brother, very pleasant have thou been unto me.

But methinks I over-hear him, who being dead yet speaks, calling upon us in
our Saviors Words, Weep not for me. As for my own part, I have Rest for
Labor, Joy for Sorrow, Peace for Trouble, Ease for Pain; I feel no aching
Bones, no falling Fits, no strained Sinews, no Distortions, no Convulsions in
the Grave. And for what I find in heaven you shall know when you come thither.
My refreshing time is come, God has now wiped clean away every Tear from my
Eyes, and every drop of Sweat from my Face, and every sad thought from my
Heart; And therefore I forbid your tears for me, Weep not for me. But if your
swelling Passions must have vent, Consider whose the Loss is. Alas, it is not
mine, but yours; And therefore turn the Stream into the right Channel, Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves and for your children.

These were our Saviors words sometimes, in which he puts a stop upon the
sorrow and the tears of those, who wept too much even at the Death of Christ
himself. Dead he was in Law already, condemned by Pilate, delivered to the
Roman Band, to guard him to the Place of Execution. Such tragical appearances
are usually attended with a Multitude of Lookers on, and by how much the
greater, and more remarkable the person is who is to suffer, so much the
greater is the Concourse. And hence it was that such a heap of people followed
Christ, on whom the eyes of the whole Nation of the Jews were fixed though with
different affections; Some to secure him from a rescue, some to mock him and
deride him, some to gaze upon the Prisoner, and to observe his carriage in his
dead March, and some to see the Execution. Among the rest, there were a sort of
people that bewailed his Death, of whom it is observed that they expressed their
grief in tears. I make no question there were men that wept, but because women
usually have moister brains, and less command upon their passions, and so are
more inclinable to vent their sorrow in a flood of tears then men, especially,
because their passions are not much regarded neither; so that there was no fear
or danger though they were free and open in their sorrow. Hence it is that
there is no notice taken of any other tears but theirs, in the Verse before the
Text, and that our Savior turns himself, and directs his Speech to them in the
words that have been read, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for
your selves, and for your children.

Now in this Speech of Jesus Christ we have especially to be considered two
things, a prohibition and a permission. In the first place we have the
prohibition of our Savior, in which he forbids them to weep, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me. And in the second place we have his permission in
which he allows them to weep; but weep for your selves, and for your
children. And yet you see he does not cross himself neither, he does not here
command and forbid the same things in the same respect but in relation to a
diverse object. In relation to himself he forbids them to weep, weep not for
me. In relation to themselves, he allows them to weep, but weep for your
Selves, and for your Children.

The total final and irreparable ruin of Jerusalem was near at hand, our
Savior had it in his eye when he spoke these words. He wept apace for this
himself but a little while before, as you may see, Luke 19. 41. He beheld the
City and wept over it. First he beholds it with his eye, and then his eye
affects his heart, Woe and alas! says he, (while in a pang of holy pity and
compassion, the tears come flowing down his cheeks) If thou badst known even
thou at least in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace, but now
they are hid from thine eyes. And therefore he allows them to weep for this,
who were to have a share and portion in that dreadful desolation. But for
himself who willingly submitted to the death which he was leading to, and all
the other circumstances of his passion who was beloved of him who had appointed
and designed him to it, who was God as well as Man; and therefore able to
endure it, and to overcome it too; and who was shortly to be rescued from the
jaws of death, and so triumphantly to enter into Glory: He forbids them to
weep, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for, etc.

So that the purpose of our Savior is not wholly to suppress, but to rectify
their sorrow. They wept for him out of a childish kind of pity, but they wept
not for their sins, nor the unseen calamities that were about to come upon
them. And therefore Christ endeavors to withdraw their sorrow from the wrong,
and fix it on the right object. And to this end he sh^ws them why they should
not weep, and why they should. Weep not for me, but for your selves, and for
your children. Two Observations lie before us in the Text. The first, That it
is not unlawful nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in tears. The second,
That we are very subject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the ground and
object of our sorrow. I shall speak to these in order beginning with the first.

Doct. That it is not unlawful nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in
tears.

We have our Saviors warrant for it in the Text, weep for your selves, and for
your children. There weep and weep on. How often are we called upon to weep in
Scripture? Oh what a cloud of weepers shall we find there, who are all
witnesses to this great truth! And some of them the wisest and the holiest
mentioned in the Book of God, without exception. Our Savior Christ himself the
holy One, and the Wisdom of God. was a very great Weeper. He was a man of
sorrows, not of a few, but many sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. You never read he laughed
in all his Story, but you find he wept often. In the days of his flesh he
offered up strong cries and tears to God, Heb. 5. 7. He wept for his beloved
Lazarus, John 11. 35. And if we do the like on this occasion we have a great
Example in our eye. He melted over poor undone Jerusalem with many tears, who
had over-pass'd the day of her gracious Visitation.

Look up and down among the poor afflicted and distressed people of the Lord,
and you shall find that tears have been as ordinary with them, as their daily
food. Thou feedest them, says Asaph, Psalm. 80. 5. with the bread of tears, and
give them tears to drink. Tears were both their meat and drink, and it seems
they had their fill of this Diet. This was the Legacy our Savior left to his
Disciples, ye shall weep, John 16. 20. It is observed of the Saints, they sow
in tears, they go forth weeping, bearing precious Seed, Psalm 126. 5. Their
time of sowing, is a time to weeping. They sow in showry weather, in a rainy
time, the Seed they sow most commonly is steeped in tears. Mine eye (says holy
David) is consumed with grief, Psalm. 6. 7: He wept so much that he was shrivled
up to nothing like a bottle in the smoke, as his own expression is, Psalm. 119.
83.

You see then it is not unlawful, nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in
tears. But you will ask me what those times are. I will tell you in a word.
Sinning times, and suffering times, are weeping times. A word or two of these
in order.

1. Sinning times, are weeping times. And that whether they be sinning times,
with others, or our selves.

1. Sinning times with others, must be sorrowing times, with us. Our Saviors
bowels rolled within him, when he looked about, and saw the hardness of the
peoples hearts, Mark 3. 5. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes (says holy
David to the Lord. Psalm. 119. 136.) because men keep not thy Law. If they will
not hear says Jeremiah, Chap. 13. 17. My soul shall weep in secret places for
their pride, and mine eyes shall vveep sore and run down with tears. My Soul
and Eye shall weep together. You shall observe that those whom God appointed to
be marked and singled out for preservation, in a common desolation, were such
as sighed and cried for the abominations of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. They did not
only keep themselves from the abominations of the time and place on which the
providence of God had cast them, but they mourned for them in others. They were
not mere abstainers, but they were mourners weepers too, and so were snatched
as firebrarnds out of the burnings, and set as monuments of the mercy of God.

Brethren, if you desire to be preserved in times of common desolation, when
the Judgments of the Lord are abroad upon the earth, and on the places of your
habitation, and to be safe in the day of his anger, work your hearts to this
temper, while other men are sinning, be you mourning; While others are
committing horrible abominations; be you lamenting and bewailing them, sighing
and crying for those abominations. That when God comes to visit, he may find
the sighs breathing from your hearts, the drops running down your cheeks, and
all about you wet with tears.

2. And as sinning times with others so our own sinning times especially, must
be our weeping times. Though David were a good man, yet he was a great sinner,
and so he was a great weeper. In Psalm 6. 6. we find him even drowned in tears.
All the night long (says he) I make my bed to swim, and water my Couch with my
tears. An Hyperbolical expression of unmeasurable weeping. So, Mary Magdalen
had much forgiven her, and thereupon she loved much, and wept much. Yea she
made a bath of tears, in which she washed the feet of Christ, Luke 7. 37. It is
observed of the people of the Jews, that when they had surveyed their monstrous
sins, they drew forth water (out of the Fountains of their guilty eyes) and
poured it before the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 6. When once their hard and rockie hearts
were smitten with remorse, they melted into tears. They wept by Buckets, not by
Drops. It is a woeful frame of heart, when men can sin, but cannot sorrow.

2. As sinning times are weeping times, so suffering times are weeping times.
And that whether they be suffering times with others or our selves.

1. Suffering times with others, must be sorrowing times with us. We must weep
with them that weep. The Holy Ghost himself takes notice of it, as remarkable,
in Nehemiah Chap. 1. 4. that when he heard of the distresses of his brethren,
he sat down (as one astonished) and wept and mourned certa^n days. And Jeremiah
cries out in such a case, Oh that my head were waters (nothing else) and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, (both eyes one fountain) that I might weep day and
night (without cessation) for the slain of the Daughters of my people. It is
our duty, to remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them that
are distresed, and broken and undone, as if we our selves were broken and
undone with them. Oh let it not be said of any of us, that we swim in
pleasures, while our brethren swim in tears. That we have lain upon our costly
beds, and stretched our selves upon our couches, that we have eaten the Lambs
out of the flock, and the Calves out of the stall, that we have chanted to the
Viol and invented instruments of music to our selves, that we drink Wine in
bowls, but are not greived for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.

2. And as when others are afflicted, so when we our selves are so, it is a
proper time to weep. The poor distressed Church draws up a catologue of all her
troubles, Lamentations 1. 12. etc and then concludes at the 16. Verse, for
these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye, runeth down with water. Yea she
complains that she had wept so much, that her eyes did fail with tears, Lam.
2. 11. I might give you other Scriptures, where you shall find them flowing
abundantly on such occasions. But this may satisfy to show you, that it is not
unlawful, nor unfit, sometimes to express our grief in tears. And what those
weeping times are? times of sinning, and times of suffering, either with
others, or with our selves.

Use 1. They are mistaken then, who think it an unworthy and unmanly thing to
weep, to to drop a tear at any time, as if it argued feebleness of mind, and
imbecility of spirit. How many dareing Galants are there in the world, who
despise Gods mourners, and look on such as weep, for the abominations, or the
desolations of the times; as a company of poor weak low souls. And yet Hezekiah
wept, and David wept, even till he drowned himself in tears; who
notwithstanding was as gallant and as brave a man, as ever lived. The wise man
tells us, that there a time to weep, Ecles. 3. 4. And where says he of mourning
thou art mad, and of sorrow, what is it that thou do? as he does of joy and
laughter. Where, do you find a blessing poured out on laughter, as you do on
tears and mourning? There are but nine Beatitudes and this is one, Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5. 4. And therefore they
deceive themselves, who scorn mourners, and labor to put on that Apathie and
Indolence, which is so much commended by the Stoics; Who think it is their
Patience, and insuperable Fortitude of mind, to be disquieted with nothing,
neither sins, nor sufferings, so far at least, as to shed tears. There Patience
is it? No, it is their senslesness. I have smitten them and they have not
greived, says God of hardened Israel, Jer. 5. 3. It is not Patieuce but
Stupidity, that he bewaileth there in that people.

Use 2. What shall we think of those who have no time for tears, or sorrows:
They spend their days in mirth, and pleasure, and chase away all sad thonghts
from their hearts be the occasion what it will, or what it can; These are merry
men indeed, I wish they would but sadly lay to heart these few Considerations,
and I shall pass on to a third Use.

1. It is a foollish thing, to melt away in mirth and laughter, especially at
such a time, when there is nothing upon every side but cause of sorrow. No
question they conceive it is their wisdom to be lively still, however matters
go, and to drive away sorrow from their hearts. But what says Solomon, the
wisest man that ever lived, Eccles. 7. 4. The wise man's heart is in the house
of mourning. If his body be not there, yet his heart at least, is there: But on
the other side, the heart of Fools is in the house of mirth. You know they use
to paint Fools laughing, and Wise Men, with a serious grace composed look. And
surely there is something in it, but the Fool has not the wit to pick it out.

2. And as it is a foolish thing, so it is a sinful thing, to give onr selves
to mirth and laughter when God calls us to sorrow. It is a sin which God does
hardly, (if at all forgive,) we find that he has sealed the Committers of it
up to wrath, and bound the guilt of this Iniquity upon their souls never to be
removed again. That is a flameing sentence which we find, Isa. 22. 12. They
were formidable Judgments which the Lord had threatened, and actually inflicted
on the Jews. And thereupon he looked they should have carried and demeaned
themselves like Mourners, like men that were extremely sensible of his
displeasure, and much affected with his hand upon them. But they despised and
slighted all, and gave themselves to mirth and pleasure, and swaggered in a
braving way. And what was the event and issue of it? Surely this Iniquity shall
not be purged from you till you die.

3. And as it is a foolish, and a sinful thing, so it is a dangerous thing.
There is a fearful woe denounced to such as laugh; for they shall mourn. The
Lord will one day turn their vain and foolish mirth, to weeping and
lamentation. It will be Gall and Wormwood in the latter end. They that are
always making merry, and never grieve at the distress of the Church, they shall
go captive with the first, as God denounces, Amos 6. 7. Whoever escape they
shall be sure to have their portion. The Lord Will set them in the front to
undergo the sharpest brunt, and the most fierce encounter of his vengeance. And
though they bear it out a while, the Lord will surely meet with them another
day, when they shall have their portion there, where there is nothing else but
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. They that do nothing else but laugh
in this world, shall do nothing else but weep in that to come. And all their
carnal joy will prove like crackling of thorns under a pot, soon in and soon
out, and flashes of lightning before eternal fire.

Use 3. And therefore in the third place, since there are times to grieve, and
to express our grief in tears, let this be a Caveat to us not to look for too
much joy in this world. Let us not cast too much upon it, lest we be
disappointed and deceived. It Is that we are very apt to cozen and delude our
selves about, when we are on a merry pin, and flourish in a prosperous estate,
it is our manner to conclude that we shall never have a storm again, and that
this happy time will never end. And so we run upon a double inconvenience, we
grow remiss in making preparation for a time of sorrow; and when it comes upon
us unexpected it cuts the deeper, and disquiets us the more. How often shall
you hear it from the mouths of some, when any heavy Cross befalls them, alas
they never dreamed of this, they never looked to see this dolesul day. The
weaker and unwiser they. Did they not know what they are, born to trouble, as
the sparks fly upward, so that they have a natural tendency to it? that they
are wandering in a vale of tears; In which they must look out for many storms.
It was a pretty Speech of Seneca, Dolor and voluptas invicem cedunt, brevior
voluptas; Joy and sorrow have still their turns and entercourses here, but joy
(most commonly) has the speediest dispatch. And therefore in the midst of joy,
let us be wisely casting upon times of sorrow, and making preparation and
provision for them. And that you may not faint either in the sense and feeling,
or in the apprehension and expectation of them; I shall drop down a few
Cordials.

1. The times of tears and sorrow, are better for us then the times of mirth
and laughter. And hence says Solomon, in the fore-alledged Scripture, Eccles.
7. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning then to the house of
feasting. It is not a more pleasing good, but it is a more profitable good;
though it be not more delightful, yet it is more beneficial to be where there
are tears and lamentations, then to be where there is nothing else but
laughter. And that upon these two Accounts.

1. Times of grief and tears, prepare for grace. They sit us for the work of
holiness upon our souls. They settle us, and fix us, and make us capable of
good impressions. When there is nothing else but mirth, we have light and
frothy spirits, our fancies rove, our thoughts and our imaginations wander: But
when the Lord presents nothing else before our eyes but tears and
lamentations, this calls home our thoughts, it renders us unto our selves,
and makes us fit for holy motions. We see it by experierience, that the very
men, who when they are upon a merry pin, are senseless and incapable of any
good, they have such vain and foolish hearts: when they are brought into a
melting frame, then they are mild and tame as lambs, then they are pliable and
flexible, and tractable; so that a little child may lead them, If you visit
them, if you counsel and advise them for their good, then you shall have their
ears, and hearts too.

2. And as the times of grief and tears prepare for grace, so they increase and
further grace. Grace will spring and grow the more for such showers as these
are. It prospers better in a moist and watered then in a dry and barren soil.
And if you search the sacred Story, you will find the greatest Weepers to have
been the greatest Saints. As David, Peter, yea, our Savior Christ himself.
Indeed this precious Seed delights to have such dews as these; the Seed of
Prayer, of Repentance; yea, that Immortal Seed, the Word of God, does best when
it is sown in tears. When we repent in tears, our hearts relent and melt most.
When we preach and pray in tears, we move our selves and others most; -- Si vis
me flere dolendum, -- Est prius ipse tibi. This Seed when it is watered thus
springs up the faster, and brings forth the more plentiful increase.

2. These times of grief and tears will end at last, and end in joy. You shall
weep (says Christ to his Apostles,) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; and he that goes forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him. There is no doubt no question to be made of that, and
therefore it is bound with an Asseveration, which takes away all scruple from
it, he shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him. It is the custom every where to have good cheer, and to be merry when
they reap. So it was among the Jews, as you may see Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14. And
therefore this is used in Scripture to express the greatest joy, Isa. 9. 3.
They shall rejoice before thee according to the joy of harvest. So though the
Christian sows in rainy weather, in a weeping time, all shall be sweet and
calm, and fair, when the reaping time comes. He shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, feeding on the hidden Manna, and
drinking of the pure and crystal River of Water of Life, proceeding from the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and there they shall be merry altogether. When
once he comes to Gods immediate presence, he shall have joy, full joy, yea, the
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. last. In his presence is fullness of joy and pleasures
for evermore.

3. The joy that is to come will pay for all. It will be such, so plentiful and
overflowing, that it will make a full amends for all your present tears and
sorrow; It will quite overcome the sense, and the remembrance of them. Alas,
our trouble here is nothing, in comparison, it is a light and easy Burden.
Our affliction is but short, it continues but a moment; but the time is drawing
nigh, when this little light sorrow, shall be wholly swallowed up in endless
and unutterable joy. This short affliction which lasts but a moment, shall
end in everlasting and unmixed pleasures, 2 Cor. 4. 17. It works for us, a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Oh what transporting comfort is
there many times, in reaping the first fruits of the Spirit, that we are ready
to cry out! if the first fruits be so sweet, what will the Harvest be? If the
earnest be so great, what will the Possession be? When we shall be filled and
satisfied, with the delights that heaven yields to all eternity. I could say as
Peter once, It is good to be here, let us build Tabernacles here. But I must
hasten to another Observation.

Doct. That we are very subject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the
Ground and Object of our sorrow.

So did these Daughters of Jerusalem you see, they wept where they should not,
and they wept not where they should. And therefore Christ corrects their sorrow
in the Text; Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves,
and for your children. A great part of the sin, and corruption that has
invaded humane nature, consists in the disorder and distemper of our passions
and affections; and lies especially in two things either when we miss the right
object, or transgress the just measure: when they are either ill placed, or ill
proportioned: When we mistake in either of them, When we are troubled where we
should not, or too much troubled where we should; we are much to be condemned:
And both of these we are very subject to. The first is pertinent to our
purpose, we are extremely apt to grieve and to be troubled where we should not.

It is no wonder that we find Esau faulty here, mistaking in the object of his
sorrow: He sought Repentance, and sought it carefully with tears; as you may
see, Heb. 12. 17. But what Repentance did he seek with tears? Alas he missed
his mark, he sought not his own, but his Fathers Repentance; feign he would
have his Father to Repent of his pouring out the blessing on his younger
brother Jacob, and consequently to revoke it, and to call it back again: But
when he saw that was not to be done, and heard his Father say, I have blessed
him, and he shall be blessed, he lifted up his voice and wept, Genesis 27. 38, Yea
the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior Christ himself mistook in this, that
they misapplyed their sorrow. They were extremely grieved and troubled that
Christ was ready to depart, and to withdraw his fleshly presence from them:
whereas he tells them plainly, It is expedient for you that I go away, John 16.
7. It is not only expedient for me, but it is expedient for you; so that here
was no real cause of grief and sorrow. And hence our Savior puts a stop upon
it, John 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, q. d. I see that you misplace
your grief, Come it must not be so; I will not have it to be so; let not your
hearts be troubled.

Poor Mary was greatly at a loss in this particular, she stood beside the
sepulcher of Christ weeping, John 20. 11. Why what is the matter? The Body of
the Lord is gone. Had she found him dead there, it seems she had been very well
content: So that her grief and so row was indeed (although she did not
understand it, and intend it so) that Christ was Risen. She should have wept
over an unbelieving heart, (that doubted of the Resurrection of her Savior)
and not over an empty Grave, from which his Body was delivered; God having
loosed the pains of Death, because it was not possible that he should he holden
of it, Acts 2. 24.

I might add other instances, but these may satisfy to clear the point; That
we are very subject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the ground and object
of our sorrow: And there are two especial causes of it. viz. Either because our
understanding is misled, or our Affections are mislaid.

Reas. 1. Sometimes we are very Subject to misplace our grief, because our
understanding is misled. We do not Judge aright of that, which is Indeed the
only, or the greatest cause of trouble. Some apprehend their tears are fitter
to be spent on their Afflictions, then their sins: They see no great hurt in
sin, but they feel much in Affliction; Affliction is a grievous thing to them;
but corruption is not so. There is a principle in Nature which makes a man
averse from penal evil, but there is none at all, that makes him averse from
sinful evil: So that a man needs nothing else but Nature to make him sensible
of penal evils of Afflictions, but he needs more then Nature, to make him
sensible of sin: And h^^^e it is, because the greater part of men have nothing
else but Nature in them, that they are so exceedingly affected with the one,
and so regardless of the other.

Now these Affections follow apprehensions, as they always do; They are
mistaken in their judgments, and so they misapply their passions: They look
upon their sins as small matters, but they amplify their troubles and
afflictions, as he in the Poet, I am ten times, twenty times, an hundred times
miserable; And hence they weep for their Afflictions and will not be comforted;
while they have not a tear to spend upon their sins; And this in probability
was Isreal's case, Jer. 30. 15. They were extremely troubled at the miseries
that were upon them, but they were little troubled at their sins; They cried
because of their Afflictions; they did not only sigh and mourn and grieve and
weep, but more then so they cried aloud; which shows extemity of sorrow: But we
hear nothing of any sorrow sor their sins. And therefore God comes in and
interrupts them, why what is the matter with you, can you tell why you take on
in this fashion? Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is inourable,
for the mulitude of thine Iniquity: because thy sins are increased.

And so for penal evils, they mistake there too; They think that temporal
Judgments, are greater and heavier then spiritual Judgments: They take the
bodily plague, to be worse then the plague of the heart: a famine of corn, then
the famine of the word; and so they grieve more for the one, then for they
other; and they had rather lose their Savior, then their Hogs: That is the
first reason then, why we misplace our grief, Because our understanding is
misled.

2. The second is, Because our Affection is mislaid, I mean our love; For love
is the commander of our other passions: It is the first and great wheel of the
soul, that carries all the rest about, and governs them as it pleases. Love is
the strongest of the passions and Affections, and therefore all the rest yield
to it, and are greatly swayed by it: And by this means it comes to pass, that
if we misplace our Love, we are in danger to misplace our sorrow: For we shall
surely grieve for that most, which we love best, whether it be best or not. Oh
what a deal of vain unnecessary sorrow, do many throw themselves into, by
misapplying this Affection! Their love is settled where it should not be, or it
is stronger then it ought to be, to such a friend, to such a comfort, to such a
relation, and when they find a disappointment by the removal, or the chang of
that which they have set their hearts too much upon, their grief is answerable
to their love. Strong affections (especially when they miscarry in the object
of them) do cast men into strong Afflictions.

Oh how was David overcome with the death of Absalom! though yet indeed, the
cutting of him off, was a great and signal mercy, to himself, and to his
people. And therefore Joab even rates him for it 2 Samuel 19. 5. and following
verses. Says he, Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy servants who
have saved thy life, and the life of thy Sons, and of thy Daughters, and thy
Wves: Since thou have loved thine Enemies, and hated thy Friends, and have
declared this day, that thou regardest neither Princes nor Servants: And I
perceive that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, it would have
pleased theewell. You see the reason of his immoderate and overflowing sorrow
for him, was his inordinate Affection to him: Which was so out of measure
great, that when he heard the news, his passion wrought, and he was hasting to
a room to give it vent. But alas, he cannot hold till he come thither, but
discharges at the stayrs as he is going up, 2 Samuel 18. 33. He wept as he went
and said, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had died for
thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son. You see then both that, and, why, we are so
ready to misplace our grief, and to misapply our sorrow.

Use. The application of the point shall be for Caution, and Direction, both
together; To watch our hearts against it, that so we lay not out our tears
amiss: Be circumspect that you do not misplace your grief, and that you do not
mistake the ground and object of your sorrow; like these poor Daughters of
Jerusalem, who wept where they should not, and wept not where they should. Oh
what a deal of grief do some men waste away, when there is no cause at all! How
do many men take on, when they are crossed in prosecution of their lusts, and
hindered in their sins, which is indeed a great mercy? Oh what floods of tears
do some men pour out upon a petty slight occasion, at a trifling accident!

Beloved, tears if they be shed aright, are precious things; God puts them up
into his Bottle, as if they were of great value; And yet some lay them out on
nothing: How will they weep, and grieve, at any disappointment in their small
affairs, any miscarriage in their business, any little petty loss, any
unkindness from their friends, or neighbors, any affront or provocation in the
least degree; nay if they be but crossed of their wills; though it be best
indeed they should: All their sorrow is bestowed on little trifling
inconsiderable things. Why, my beloved, have ye not other manner of things then
these to grieve for? what think you of your own sins, with all their bloody
aggravations? what think you of the horrible Abominations, and woeful
desolations of the Land? and of all the wrath of God, that has been lately
manifested and revealed from Heaven against us, more ways then I am able to
express? I might be very large in showing you particularly and distinctly, both
what you should, and what you should not grieve for; and giving you directions
from the word of God about it. But because the time spends, and I would not be
prevented of that which I have principally in my eye, I shall pass over many
other things that so I may apply my self to the occasion.

Methinks I see the clouds gather, and return after the Rain: And out of
question many of you are come hither with a sufficient stock of sorrow: your
hearts are full of grief, and your souls full of trouble, and your bottles full
of tears, brim full. You have drawn water, and are ready to pour it out before
the Lord this day. My work shall be to guide you, and direct you (with our
Savior in the Text) how to bestow these tears and how to spend this sorrow,
that you may not weep in vain, I say to you as Christ does to the Daughters of
Jerusalem (with a little alteration) weeep not for him, whom the Lord has
taken from you, but weep for your selves; and for your children.

1. Weep not for him. I know the loss of such an Able, Faithful, Painful,
Zealous Minister of Christ, as he was; ought to be very much bewailed; Men of
such hidden worth as he had in him, and of such public use and service in the
Church, should not be raked up in their Graves, without tears, and
lamentations: Joash a wicked King wept for a good Prophet, and that with very
great affection, 2 Kings 13. 14. He wept over his face and said, My Father, my
Father the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof. And if you mark the
carriage of the Saints, when such as he (I mean our dear and worthy Brother)
have been taken from them, it would warrant all the tears you have to spend on
this occasion. In the first of Kings 13. 30. you find a Prophet, burying a
Prophet, and melting over him when he Interred him; He laid his Carcass in the
Grave and mourned over him, and said Alas my Brother! How solemnly did Israel
lament the death of Samuel, and made their grief as remarkable and public as
their loss, 1 Samuel 25. 1. It is observed of Stephen that he was carried by
devout men to his burial with great lamentatiou, Acts. 8. 2. And God forbid
that such an one as we have lost, should die away, as if he were not desired;
that he should steal into his Grave, as if there were no notice taken of his
Death. No my Beloved, weep, and weep on; sit down and weep till you can weep no
more; yet still I say, weep not for him.

Your loss is unaccomptable indeed, and time perhaps will show it to be greater
then as yet you see. But tell me my Beloved, is he a loser any way? Nay, is he
not an infinite gainer? Is not this best of all for him? Indeed to have
continued in the flesh was better for you; as the Apostle states the case, when
he was straightened, Phil. 1. 24. But for him it was far better to be dissolved
and to be with Christ. Now he enjoys a full deliverance from all Corruptions,
all Temptations, all Afflictions: A full return of all his prayers, and
breathings after God and Christ, in which he was transported, when he was
drawing near his glory: A full reward of all his tiring and incessant labors.
Oh blessed soul! you know a voice from heaven has said, Blessed are the dead,
that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. Therefore I say weep not for him.

There is one thing I must confess that makes this providence the sadder to us.
You know it is the Prophet David's Prayer, Psalm 102. 24. O my God take me not
away in the midst of my days. The Lord indeed has taken him away in the midst
of his days, and in the midst of his Ministry. But is he gone to heaven too
soon? too soon indeed for you, but not for him. Is he got home to his Fathers
house too soon? Is he with God and Christ and Angels and glorified Saints too
soon? What, does he wish that he were back again with you? Has he his
everlasting Rest too soon? His glorious recompense too soon? Brethren, he
wrought apace you know, while he had strength, and finished the work that God
had given him to do, betime. So that it is no wonder though he has his wages
early, sooner then such dull heavy slugs as we are. His life was short indeed,
though filled up with grace and duty, and God has made but an exchange of an
eternal one for it. He was a burning and a shining light; burning with enflamed
affections, till the oil was spent, and shining in an exemplary conversation.
But this lamp is not extinguished, but only lighted up, to flame and shine in a
more glorious place. And there he shall shine forth as the Sun, for ever and
ever. So that I must say still, weep not for him.

2. But you will ask me, for whom shall we weep then? I answer, for your
selves, and for your children.

1. Weep for your selves. The Lord you see has made a woeful breach upon you,
as it is said of Uzzah, 1 Samuel 6. 8. And that your hearts remain unbroken, they
are unsuitable to this heavy dispensation. God has removed his holy faithful
servant, not into a blind corner, but into a dark pit. The grave has newly
shut her mouth upon him, he is gone hence to be no more in this world: You
shall behold him now no more in the Land of the living: Your eyes shall see
your teacher here no more for ever: You shall now be no more enlightened with
his clear instructions: No more enlivened with his zealous exhortations: No
more quickened with his fervent prayers: No more warmed with his heavenly
discourses: No more ehear'd with his sweet consolations: No more guided by his
holy Example. The Lord has made him up among his Jewels, because indeed we
were not worthy of such a precious Gemme as he was: He has in anger and
displeasure plucked away one of our Pillars, as if he meant the house should
fall. And shall we be insensible of such a stroke? Shall we have tears enough
to wast upon our petty losses, and not have a tear to spend on this inestimable
and irreparable one? Brethren, you are allowed to weep here, though not for
him, yet for your selves: And that especially in two respects.

1. For the sins that you have done, for they have made this sad work. They are
the true and real cause of all your losses. They are your sins that hinder good
things that they come not to you; or take them quite away when they are come.
If God carry you aside into a Wilderness and strip you naked there of any
mercy; as if he meant to Iash you to the purpose; your ways and your doings
have procured you these things; such is your wickedness. Believe it you have
sinned, some way or other, against the mercy which the Lord takes from you:
They are our sins against the Ordinances of the Lord, that cause the Lord to
take away our Ordinances from us. They are our sins against the Ministers of
Christ (in that capacity as Ministers) that provoke him to remove our Ministers
from us, Yea many times to take away the Candlestick and Light together. You
may take up the Lamentation of the Church this day; The Crown is fallen from our
heads; woe to us for we have sinned. They are our sins that Weaken, and impair
and kill our Ministers, who are indeed the Churches Crown, and the glory of
Christ.

Sometimes we overvalue them, and then we kill them with kindness. Sometimes we
undervalue them, and then we kill them with neglect, and make them do their
work with grief: Sometimes we are untractable, and unthankful, and unfruitful;
and God calls away his workmen out of the Vineyard that will yield no better
fruit. Nay sometimes we decline, and grow remiss, and cold, and flat, we lose
our love to God and Christ, and then he takes away our Beloved comforts from
us. And let me tell you, some of you have backslidden grievously, and sonsibly
abated of your former zeal and holiness and strictness in the ways of God. Yea,
sinned scandalously to the dishonor of Religion and the Gospel: This greived
our dear Brother, who will grieve no more now; I had it from his mouth and pen,
how tenderly he took some late miscarriages, and how near they went to him:
These things brought him low among you, who was low enough before; and made him
to bewail many who have manifestly sinned, and have not repented, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 12. 21. Oh how it wounded him, after so many labors and
so many sufferings, for your establishment and confirmation; to see such
declinations and backslidings. He might have said with the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3.
8. Now I live if you stand fast in the Lord, If not I die; and dead he is.

Oh my dear friends, what have your sins done? what has your barrenness, and
your unfruitfulness, and your Backsliding done? I know you loved him with a
very high affection, and have made it to appear in many outward declarations to
your great praise. But the best way to show your love to the true Ministers of
Christ, who seek not yours, but you; who seek not profit and applause, but
Fruit; is to bear their just reproofs and to be amended by them; to hear and
obey them in their regular directions; to follow all their good Examples: for
the Ministers of Christ are Samplers to the flock, and Samplers must be wrought
after. And in a word, to bring them in the return of all their labors, in
holiness and holy walking; that they may see the travel of their souls and be
satisfied. Nothing but this will satisfy them, and make them do their work
with Joy. I know you loved him, as there was cause enough you should; but say
in truth, have you Improved him? I am assured that many of you (a considerable
number) have Improved him to the utmost of your power. That you have made the
most you could, of his indefagatible and incessant pains among you. That you
have gathered up the very Fragments of the Bread of life, and pik'd up the very
Crumbs, that nothing might be lost. That you have eyed his exemplary
Conversation, and walked according to your pattern. And this I make no question
is no small comfort to you in this doleful day. But have you all done this? Are
there no secret Stitches at the hearts of any of you, upon this consideration?
He spent his strength indeed among you, he wasted and consumed himself, that
you might flourish. But tell me have there been answerable fruits among you, of
holiness and obedience? when he fed you, have you prosper'd? he got a poor lean
withered Body, that you might have fat Souls. And are you all fat and well
likeing? Oh what lean souls have some of you, who have attended on his
Ministry, even to his dying day? How has your rich and fat pasture been cast
away upon you? So that our Brother might have said (in reference to many) as
the Prophet did, I have spent my strength in vain. However he is glorious with
his God. But I am very much afraid that many of you, will find this holy
Witness who is now ascended, Witnessing against you, when the day of trial
comes.

Dear friends: Be not offended if I tell you, that your sins have had a stroke
in the sickness, and the weakness, and the death of your deservedly beloved
Minister. They were our sins that killed Christ; he was bruised for our
iniquities, and broken for our sins: He bare our sins in his Body on the Tree.
And so they are our sins, that kill the Ministers of Christ. You have often
seen your Savior slain before you, by and for your sins. Now you have seen a
holy Minister of his, slain by the same hands. And yet your sins have still to
do more such work, and the Lord knows where it will end. There is no Execution
done upon them, who have done such dreadful Execution in our view. Oh let your
hearts break, and your tears run down, till your lusts be broken, mortified and
destroyed; or else they will break you, and destroy you. If you have any love
to Christ, to the Ministers of Christ, or to your selves, you may see cause
enough to weep, though not for our deceased Brother; yet for your selves, and
for your sins. That Is the first thing then, weep for the sins that you have
done.

2. For the Judgments that now you may be like to suffer. To this our Savior
referth in the Text, Weep for your selves and for your children; That is, for
the extremity of wrath and deletery vengeance, that is about to come on you and
them. Even so say I to you my Brethren, with the Apostle James 5. 1. Go to now,
weep and howl, for your miseris that shall come upon you. Oh let not that
complaint of the Prophet Isaiah 57. 1. be renewed against you, The Righteous
perishes and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the Righteous is taken away from the evil to come. Our dear
Brother now deceased was a Righteous man, yea a Preacher of Righteousness. The
Lord you see has taken him away; oh what evil is to come! When such as he are
housed, what dreadful storms may there be like to fall? Brethren, the holy
Ministers of God, are the peoples lifeguard, The Chariots of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof, 2 Kings 13. 14. They are anointed Cherubs that Cover. They are
a Shelter and a Covering from the storm and from the rain. Sometimes they are
called Shepherds; and the business of a Shepherd is to keep and save the flock.
Sometimes they are called Angels; and Angels are the Guardians of the Lords
people: They Guard, and Cover, and Protect a people.

Now this they do while they instruct them so to walk, that wrath may not come
upon them while they Intercede with God, and stand up in the breach, to keep
out the indignation that is flowing in upon it. A praying Minister (and such a
one have you lost) one that bare you on his heart continually before the Lord,
(as Aaron did the names of Israel on his Breast Plate) I say a praying
Minister, is a protection to the people. Its true, the fervent prayers of the
meanest Saint are an Incredible defense to any place, to save it from the
strokes of God. And therefore even they are styled Intercessors, Isaiah 59. 16:
Because they mediate with God when he is Angry, and by their zealous
Supplications hold his hands. But yet however, though it be a certain truth
that God has much respect to the Petitions of his weakest Servants, yea though
perhaps some private Christians may Excel a holy Minister in prayer; yet God
has more regard to the Entreaties of his faithful Ministers, who have a
special charge, and Commission to be his Remembrancers for the good of that
people, which he commits to their charge; and their Petitions are of more
avail and power with God both to procure his Blessings, and avert his
Judgments. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call
on his name; They called upon the Lord, and he answered them, Psalm 99. 6. Why
doubtless, so he heard the prayers of his other Saints. But these his holy
Priests and Prophets had the Ear of God (as special favorites have their
Princes Ears) and could be heard and Answered, when others were denied Access
and Audience. And this is not obscurely Intimated in that protestation of the
Lord to Israel, concerning their approaching Desolation, Ezekiel. 14. 14. Though
these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver but
their own souls. By which, he insinuates, that when the absolute decree is once
gone forth, it can by no means be revoked, so he suggests withal, that if it
had been feasible, these holy Prophets would have done it ( q. d.) were those
three men in Israel, they would put me to it hard, and try me shrewdly to
forbear the Land, I should be hardly able to deny them. He said he would
destroy them, had not his chosen Moses stood before him in the breach, to turn
away his warth, Psalm 106. 23. Oh how did Moses stand against him, and bind the
hands of the Almighty, when he was about to strike. So that the Lord entreats
and flatters with him to let him alone, Exodus 32. 10. While such as Moses are
Intercessors for a people, God forbears, he holds his hands, and restrains his
indignation; as he that means to strike, observes what strength there will be
likely to oppose him: And when he looks and sees, that there is no Intercessor,
then he goes on with his design, Isaiah, 59 16. Then his Arm brings salvation
to him, and he puts on the Garments of vengeance.

Brethren you are in greater danger then you are aware, by the removal of your
praying Minister: For you have lost one Intercessor, if any breach should
happen between God and you. Yea you have lost your Covering, if a storm of
wrath should fall. So that it may be said of you, as it was once of Israel when
Moses was away, that you are naked; And what, are you in Laodicea's case
indeed? do you not know that you are naked? Are you naked and are you not
afraid? Are you naked and not ashamed? This would become a state of Innocence
indeed; in which it was observed of Adam and his Wife, that they were both
naked, and were not ashamed, Genesis 2. 5. But will it suit with such a state
of sin and danger, as the best of you are in? do you not find your selves
uncovered? Have you no sense and feeling of it? especially at such a time as
this, when the Judgments of the Lord are abroad upon the Earth, upon the Land,
upon this very place in which you live, more ways then I am able to express.
Alas, alas, you are uncovered, whether you know it: yea or no. And it is
perhaps some mercy, that you are not quite uncovered. Here spend your tears,
and you shall not misplace your sorrow. That is the first branch of Direction;
Weep for your selves: For the sins that you have done, and for the Judgments
that you may

2. There is a second yet behind, and I have done. Weep for your children. Weep
not for me, says Christ, but weep for your selves, and for your children. And
why for them? Because their children were to bear a share, and suffer with them
in the wrath that was about to come upon them, as you may see Luke 19. 43. For
the days shall come upon thee (says our Savior) that thine enemies shall
cast a Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee.
Brethren if you have any tears lest, drop a few upon your Children: you are not
able to foresee what miseries your little ones may be reserved for: and verily
their danger is increased as well as yours, by this stroke, For you have lost a
Catechiser, as well as a Preacher; you know what care and pains he took, and
what a gift and faculty he had in instilling holy knowledge into your children,
and your little ones, while he had liberty in Public, and strength with
opportunity in Private. He took a very great delight to tamper with them, and
to tole them on to the holy ways of God, by all the means that he was able to
devise. It was his very last design (as he was always full of holy projects)
to take some Course, that children might be more generally Principled in the
grounds and Fundamentals of Religion then they are. And I am very well assured,
that many of your children, have such Liquor poured into them by his means,
that they will relish of it as long as they have a day to live, and it may be
bless the Lord and him for it, to all Eternity. And therefore you have cause
enough to weep that you have lost a Minister that was fit and apt to teach, not
your selves only, but your children too, and make them know the way of the
Lord. Not to feed the Sheep only, but to lead the Lambs too, and to bear them
in his Bosom, as the expression is, Isaiah 40. 11. I have done with the
Directions, Weep for your selves, and for your children.

And now for the close of all, I say again Weep not for him, his sorrow
certainly, is turned into Joy, and therefore so let yours be also. He has
received that blessed Sentence, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into
thy Masters Joy. And let me tell you (I speak it upon good assurance) he went
Triumphantly to Glory: an Entrance was ministered to him abundantly into the
Heavenly Kingdom. As he drew nearer Heaven (till his Disease prevailed against
his Reason) he grew still more Heavenly. When Grace and Glory were about to
Join, Grace in him was most Glorious. Oh with what Ecstasies, and Ravishments of
spirit did he fly away into the Bosom of his Savior!

I have but one word to add, and it is that of the Apostle Hebrews 13. Remember
him that had sometimes the Rule over you, who has spoken to you the word of
the Lord, whose faith follow, considering the end of his conversation. And that
was a blessed end indeed. Remember him, to follow him in all that was exemplary
in him, whether concerning Faith, or Life, that walking in the holy way that he
did, you may at last come to the happy end and place where he is.

FINIS.

