A Burning yet Unconsumed Bush, Exemplified.

IN THE Dolorous Life, and Glorious Death, Of that Young Convert, And Most
Excellent SAINT, Mrs. MARY HARRISON, Who Departed this Life June the 21st, in
the 23d Year of her Age.

OR, A Brief and Faithful Narrative, Of the Effectualness of her Conviction,
The Painfulness of her Conversion, The Dreadfulness of her Temptation, The
Deplorableness of her Condition, And the Triumphant Joyfulness of her
Dissolution.

Together with the Author's Speech to the Inhabitants of Havant, at the close
of her Funeral Sermon.

Published in General for Common Good, but particularly at the Request of some
of the New gathered Church at Chichester, of which she was a Member: And
especially to satisfy a Worthy Friend far off, who by Letters importuned the
Author thereunto.

By C. NICHOLETTS, Minister of the Gospel in HAVANT.

LONDON Printed and Sold by B. Harris, at the Golden Boars-Head in
Grace Church Street, 1700.

To the Reverend Mr. Richard Robins, Pastor of a Congregation in London.
My very Dear, and much Esteemed Brother,
WHEN I Reflect on the blessed Providence that opened so wide a Door, for the
Occupation of your Talent the last Winter, at Chichester, and the strange, and
amazing Success that attended your Labors there, I cannot but hope the
Glorious Day which Zion's Converts have so long Mourned, Prayed and Waited for,
is nigh at Hand, even a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit, upon all the
Followers of the Lamb; of which, more than a Taste was given in the mighty
Portion that rested upon you, whilst you were delivering your Masters Errand in
that Place. Your Face like Moses) did eminently Shine (during your
Commemoration on that Mount of Vision) to the Observation, and Admiration of
all the Beholders, none but your self was ignorant of it, so that the Multitude
was ready to Hosanna you, (as they did your Master before you) and in the same
Language too, -- Never Man spoke, like this Man: And so strange a Consternation
was there in the Minds of all, and so wonderful a Conviction in the Hearts of
many, as quite confounded the Opposers of Gospel Light, and Truth, and made
them even gnash their Teeth for Madness; Oh! how did the Dukes of Palestina
tremble, and the Inhabitants of Canaan melt away: How did the Formal and Legal
Rabbis Vex and Fume, that a Nehemiah so suddenly, so unexpectedly, stood on
the Wall with undaunted Courage, and they could not pluck him down; That there
appeared a Man, whom, with all their Machinations, they could not hinder to
seek in good Earnest, the Welfare of Immortal Souls, by Preaching the Truth
fully and clearly, as it is in Jesus; so that the People which before sat in
Darkness, saw great Light; and to those who were, and a long time had been in
the Regions of the Shadow of Death, Light sprung up: But though the Enemies of
Free Grace were grieved exceedingly, by your so powerful, and spiritual
Preaching, the Children of the Bride-chamber were as much Comforted, Enlivened,
Refreshed, and many poor Dead Sinners Awakened, Convinced, and Persuaded to
Embrace the Everlasting Gospel, which was Sounded in their Ears in such a
Strain, that many (though Old Hearers) to my Knowledge, did Profess, they never
heard the Gospel before: And, Oh! What an Astonishing Change was visibly
Observed in the Faces of the Inhabitants of Chichester: Such Crowding and
Thronging, to hear the Word dropping, as sweet smelling Myrrh, from your Lips,
the Oldest Man Alive never saw the like: The Walls of the Meeting House (though
in the coldest Season of the Winter) Sweated with Heat, (a true Emblem of the
Warmth, many Frozen Hearth felt, by the reflective Rays of Zion's Glory) and
the Spirits of the most Ignorant were strangely Revived, with the fragrant
odoriferous Savor of Aaron's sweet Perfume, so Plentifully, and in a Theop-must
Manner, disfus'd amongst them: Concerning this Perfume (which I take to be an
eminent Type of the Riches of Free Grace) there was a Law Enacted in the Court
of Heaven, Whoever made any Thing like it, should be put to Death: If that
Statute was still in Force, few Preachers in our Day, would be in danger of its
Penalty, -- Alas! they don't come near it, their Preaching is far enough wide
from it: They are either bellowing Bulls of Sinai, thundering out the Terrors
of the Law, and belching forth the Flames of Hell, to affrighten and distract
poor Creatures, and make them run Mad; or else they are for putting them to
Earn their expected Happiness (as Adam was doomed to Eat his Bread) with the
Sweat of their Brow: This they must do, and that they must do, to get an
Interest in Christ: And then we have a Learned Receipt, so many Pints of
Repentance that must be extracted from the Limbeck of their moist Brains, so
many Pounds of Duties, that must be weighed at the Beam of their own
Intellects, to make them capable of God's Acceptance; and they must be sure to
come full Loaded with a Bundle of Qualifications, at their Backs, if they would
have Christ to be their Savior. Oh! What pitiful Trash is this; how far from
that Gospel which the Lord Jesus sends his Ambassadors (whom he anoints with
the Unction of the Holy One) to Preach, and Hold forth to poor Sinners: That
sounds forth a free Offer, and Tender of Mercy, to all that Look to, and
Believe in a Crucified Jesus; of which Ambassadors, Sir, you apparently, and
beyond Contradiction, manifested your self to be One, (and a chief One too)
when you first lifted up your Voice, as a Trumpet, in the Audience of the
Inhabitants of Chichester: Oh! how Beautiful were your Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Glorious Gospel, for that you brought good Tidings to them
that were ready to Perish; you Published Peace, (even that Peace which the
World cannot give, and which the Devil cannot take away) you brought good
Tidings of Good, the Goodness of Free Grace, the Immense Ocean of Divine Love;
You Published Salvation, and that with a Gospel Spirit, and in a Gospel
Dialect, as it was Published by the Lord Jesus himself, and all his Apostles:
You said unto Zion, thy God Reigns on the Throne of Mercy, dispencing Grace
and Favor to the worst of Sinners: For this were your Labors Accepted, for
this was your Person Honored, for this was your Ministry in very high Esteem,
among all sorts of Persons. How many will have cause to Bless God to all
Eternity, they ever saw your Face! Oh! How many visible Seals of your
Apostleship did you leave behind you, when you left the Place. You never
Preached a Sermon there in Vain; but many Eyes were Opened, many Hearts
Affected, and deeply Touched; many Consciences Awakened, whenever you opened
your Mouth; which made a worthy Person, well Versed in Gospel Affairs, Write me
Word, (then at London) he verily Believed, you did more Good Two or Three
Sabbath Days in Chichester, than any Minister, yea, than all the Ministers in
Sussex had done Seven Years before: This was very refreshing News to my Soul;
it made my Heart, (which as yet is none of the softest) like the Babe in
Elisabeth's Womb, leap within me for Joy: This, indeed, indeared you very much
to me, and set me a Longing to be partaker of your Heavenly Gift; and though I
had several Letters from several Persons that spoke very largely of you, and
the wonderful Things God did by you, and that at such a Rate, if I had not
known them to be Men of Sobriety, Faithfulness, and eminent Piety, I should
certainly have Judged, they had flown in their Language, above the Capacity of
an Hyperbole, to bring 'em safely off; yet, early at my Return, when I went my
self to Chichester, and saw the unusual Seriousness of the vast Auditory, and
the extraordinary Going forth of your Spirit, both in Prayer and Preaching, I
was strangely amazed, and forced to say, with the Queen of Sheba, The half of
your deserved Fame was not told me; and made this Remark in my own Breast,
There was no such Sight to be seen any where in our Israel, and therefore left
others to consider of it, and speak their Minds. And if the Lord goes on, as he
has graciously and wonderfully begun, Chichester will be the Place of Religion
in the South of England, and we may take in the rest of the Points of the
Compass. Verily you have (or rather the Great Jehovah by you) lighted such a
Candle there, that the Enemies of Free Grace, with all their Tricks and
Artifices, with all their Growling and Grumbling, with all their Lying and
Slandering, with all their Noise and Clamor, yea, with all their Cunning and
Priestcraft, will never be able to put out; for, Magna est veritas, and
prevalebit, Dagon must and shall fall before the Ark of the Living God.

Dear Brother, I am in a large Field, whilst I have your noble Chichesterian
Acts under review (which will be for ever your Praise in the Gates of the
Daughter of Zion, and your Eternal Rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus) and
so very large is this Field, that I despair of finding the way out, and
therefore must be forced to stand still, breaking forth in the Apostle's
Admiration, O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God,
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and how are his Ways past finding out. Or
taking up the Dictates of the Holy Spirit in the Mouth of Balaam, According to
this time it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, (Ay, and now of Chichester
too) what has God wrought.

And, though you did good even beyond Conception, very much good, even beyond
Parallel, whilst these Parts were Blessed with your Presence, yet really, the
Good, by way of Emphasis, (and which will be the most Sparkling Jewel in the
Crown, wherewith your Master will crown you in the Day of his Appearing) was
your speaking Peace to this Blessed Saint; whose Sad Life is the Subject of the
following Tract. You were chosen out by the Lord of the Harvest, and preferred
before any of his Laborers, to bring a Message of Peace and Comfort to her
drooping Soul; great Pains were used, and many Essays made, to effect a Cure
upon her, but alas! all in vain; No Words were wanting, no Labor was spared,
no Gospel ways untryed, for the easing her distressed Mind, but all to no
purpose: If Prayers and Tears, if public and private Wrestlings with God, if
setting apart Solemn Days, if the spending part of many Nights, if
communicating of Experiences, if opening and inculcating of the Promises, if
frequent Visits, and laboring all manner of ways with her: What shall I say?
If imparting the very Secrets of my Soul, and all the Mysteries and Wonders of
Grace, my Gracious God ever made known to me in his Christ, had any thing
availed, she had not been in those Shades of Horrid Darkness you found her: For
I can say in all Sincerity, as Paul to the Corinthians, My Mouth was opened, my
Heart was enlarged toward her. Oh! how often did my Soul Mourn in Secret,
because I could not help her: How many Tears did I shed in private, because no
words I spoke could take hold on her: I was too unworthy of such an Honor: My
Poor Labors (through the Influence of a Divine Blessing) awakened her out of a
Natural State, but Success was denied to my Endeavors, how great soever, to
Administer any Ease or Comfort: That was your allotted Task, by him with whom is
the Residue of the Spirit: Oh! to this end were you Born, and for this cause
came you unto Chichester, to bear Witness unto the Truth, to Gospel Truth,
Light, and special Grace, for the lifting up this Dear Languishing Soul, who
would not see, who could not believe, there was any Love, or Redeeming Mercy
for her, till it was confirmed to her from your Lips, then she saw the Beauty
of the Lord, as the Morning, and the Glory of Jehovah, her Righteousness, as
the Noonday: There was indeed before a Wind, a Gale of Gospel Truths, that
continually blew upon her, but the Lord was not in the Wind: There was a Fire
of Zeal kindled in the Breasts of Ministers, and many others, always flaming in
her Bosom, but the Lord was not in the Fire; and therefore, though there was
Balm enough fetched from Gilead, and applied to her Wounds, yet this Sorrowful
Daughter of Jerusalem was not Healed, till you came (and God came with you) as
a Welcome Messenger of Salvation: Then, Oh! then the Son of Righteousness arose
with Healing in his Wings, in the Horizon of her Soul. Then did the day break,
and the Shadows began to fly away; and then did her Beloved come leaping over
the Mountains, and skipping over the Hills unto her. Oh! Happy was the time
wherein you first saw her, and Blessed was the day in which it was told her,
Behold, there is a Watchman of the Lord's sending, a Workman of the Lord's
preparing, go and hear what he has to say to you. As the Lord's way of
Judgment, so his ways of Mercy are in the Deep, and his Footsteps coming
toward a Poor Creature, for Good and Comfort, are not known. So far am I from
the Mode of this Generation, to envy you, or repine that you should do that in
a few days, which I could not do in many Months, that the Lord knows, I Love,
Honor, Prize, and Value you the more for it, and you are much dearer to me
since, than ever you were before. To you therefore I dedicate this short
History of her Life and Death, as that which of right belongs to you: You knew
her, and was well known to her: You pitied her in her doleful Agonies, and
took a great deal of Pains with her, to help her out of the Deep Pit, into
which she was so horribly sunk. The Lord reward you (yea, he will abundantly
reward you) for all your great Labor of Love to her precious Soul: You were
very high in her Esteem, and exceeding Dear, she never spoke of you but with
wonderful Respect, heartily blessing God for you: You had the Satisfaction to
see her in her latest Hours, the very night she died, which was a great Comfort
to her Friends; and though she was under a Cloud at that Moment, yet a little
after you left her, the Cloud was dispelled, and she was in a Transport of
Glory, and went to Heaven in a Chariot of Triumph. She had Beauty for Ashes,
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness,
and she is now a Tree of Righteousness, the Planting of the Lord, that he may
be for ever Glorified in the abundant Riches of his Grace and Mercy toward
her, and with whom she is, and ever will be, glorified to all Eternity.

And now my Dear, my very Dear Brother, I hope your Candid Eye will overlook
the many Imperfections of these Scribbling Lines, and cover with the Mantle of
Charity what you see amiss in the subsequent Tract: And I hope also, none will
be so unjust, to entitle you to the Weaknesses and Impertinencies appearing
therein, because your Name is inscribed to it. The good Lord increase your
eminent Gifts, add to your Matchless Zeal, inflame your ardent Love, that you
may Shine more and more in Doctrine and Conversation, till you are called to
Shine in the Celestial Constellation above, and till after all your Pious
Endeavors, and Faithful Labors in your Lord's Vineyard, you hear that Blessed
Sound from your Lord's Lips, (whose Mouth is most comfortably Sweet in the day
of Grace, and will be ravishingly so in the day of Glory,) Well done Good and
Faithful Servant, thou have been Faithful over a few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things, enter thou into thy Master's Joy. Go on as you have
begun (through the good Hand of your God upon you) in the Power and Spirit of
Elias, to turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children; that is, to inflame
the Hearts of Parents, with a Desire and Longing after the Salvation of their
Children: And the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just; that is, Those who
have stood out against Gospel Light and Truth. Now to see, that closing with
Christ in a Gospel-way, and to seek to be made Righteous by an imputed
Righteousness, is the only Spiritual Wisdom: And to make ready a People
prepared for the Lord; that is, To Convince People, that they are Lost and
Undone in themselves; and to persuade them, without looking for any previous
Qualifications, to cast their naked Souls before the Lord Jesus, to be clothed
upon with his Righteousness, which only must be their Happiness, if ever they
are made Happy. So committing you to the Protection of our Dear Redeemer, in
whom I desire to be esteemed, as unfeignedly I am,

Your most Affectionate, though unworthy Brother, C. Nicholetts.

TO THE New-gather'd Church of Christ, according to the Gospel Order, in
Chichester, Grace, Mercy and Peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
Beloved Friends,
AS I (with all the People of God in these Parts) did Rejoice in, and heartily
Congratulate your Associating together in the Bond and Fellowship of the
Gospel; so we fervently Pray, this lively Beginning, with such ardent Zeal,
Courage and Faithfulness, to the Interest of your, and our, Lord and Master,
may have a Prosperous Progression in your building up in the way of Holiness
and Righteousness, that you may abound more and more in every Good Work, and be
to the Praise of his Grace who has called you out of Darkness into this
marvelous Light. It was very delightful to us, to hear that you, the Children
of Judah, did go in good earnest, Weeping as you went to seek the Lord your
God, with your whole Heart, and with your whole Soul, and that you did ask the
way to Zion with your Faces thither-ward, and did unanimously say one to
another, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten. And accordingly did enter into a Solemn Covenant,
to live and walk together as Brethren, in the Rule and Order of the Gospel, and
that under the strictest Obligation, to obey all the Precepts, and to rely upon
all the Promises thereof. You gave your selves first unto the Lord, and then to
one another by the Will of God; which Coalition, I think, was of God* Did I
say, I think so; Pray give me that word back again, and I will give you a
better in the room of it. I know, and am well assured, it was of God; and have
stronger Reasons to produce (when called thereunto) for my Confidence, than the
fiercest of your Opposers (how Learned soever they may think themselves) can
answer. One reason is this (and it is such an one, as all but Atheists will
acknowledge to have weight in it) God so far owning you, and so signally
honoring you in your first waiting upon the Lord at his Table in a
Church State, as to shine down from between the Cherubims amongst you on this
Precious (I had almost said Peerless) Saint, this young Daughter of Abraham
(whose Life is under review) who was one of you, giving up her self to God in
the same Covenant with you; at the very time of which, she saw that Light she
never beheld before. It was on your Shore, this fluttering Dove first found a
place to rest the Sole of her Foot; it was from the Mount of your Moriah, this
abject Daughter of Zion first plucked an Olive Branch of Peace, and brought it
in her Mouth: She departed from us to you a Mara, she came back from you to us
a Naomi; she went out empty, but returned full; and at her return, she had
Peace in the inward, and Joy did shine in the Face of her outward Man; whilst
she was with us, she was Sowing in Tears; with you was her Harvest of Comfort,
and she returned with great Rejoicing, bringing her Sheaves with her. Now as
Manoah's Wife argued in another Case, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he
would not have received a Burnt-offering, and a Meat Offering, at our Hands;
neither would he have showed us all these things; nor would, as at this time,
have told us such things as these. So I, may argue in this, If God was
displeased with you, or if you were out of God's way: If the Fervor of your
Zeal, was mingled with the Leaven of Spleen and Prejudice; if you were
influenced to this Imbodying by Church-dividing Principles; I say, if any of
these things, much more if all these things, were so, as your Adversaries (with
more Spite than Reason, with more Malice than show of Truth) do allege against
you; Would God have so filled your first Assembling with the Glory of his
Presence, as to bruise Satan under the Feet of this dejected Damsel, that had
been so long Rampant in her, and to speak effectual Peace to her down-cast
Soul, who, since the hour of her first Conviction, never knew what a Moments
Peace was before. Now he that can infer a wrong way, or God's being displeased
with that way, from such an unusual Manifestation of his special Grace and
Favor, has an Art beyond what I desire to be acquainted with: Oh! that every
Congregation in England, that call themselves a Church, had so full and clear a
Testimony from Heaven, of God's owning them, and his reflecting so on them with
the Rays of his Beauty, and the Beams of his Glory, our Land would be in a far
better State, as to Religion, than now it is.

To you also, my dear Friends, do I therefore Dedicate the following Narrative,
Of the Life and Death of this sweet Lamb, who was of your Fold: When she first
heard of the Breathings amongst you, and the Spirit of Judgment, and of Burning
with the Lord of Hosts, had poured forth upon you, she could not be satisfied,
till she went to see you, and seeing you, she liked, and liking you, she joined
with you, and joining with you, she met with the Comfort which before in vain
she sought after: The time to Favor her, yea the set time was come, when she
entered her self a Member of your Society, and became as one of your Infant
Congregation: Oh! then she found the overflowing Fullness to her, of those Words
spoke about Temple-work: That God will not despise the Day of small Things, in
which there is a Meiosis, that is, something more Intended than Expressed; God
will not despise the Day of small Things; No, he will eminently appear in, and
Gloriously Honor the Day of small Things, when those Things have a Tendency to
his Glory. 'Twas a Day of small Things with you, when this (then Militant now
Triumphant) Saint, became acquainted with you; but as mean as you were in
outward Appearances, as despisable as you were in the Eyes of the World, you
were Precious in God's Sight, who put this great Honorarium upon you, in
casting this unvaluable Jewel into your Bosom, whom, I am more than Confident,
the most Famous Church in the Nation would have been Glad of, and Thankful for,
as a more than common Blessing. Certainly, you would not be more Honored in a
State of Mortality, than to have such a Darling of Heaven take her last Step in
the Borders of your Sanctuary, immediately before her Translation unto Glory.

And now, my dear Friends, having this Opportunity of speaking to you from the
Press, which I may never have again, I will make bold (as a real Lover of you,
and the Cause you are engaged in) to commend a few Words of serious Advice,
which I pray take as the result of my Dying Thoughts, (for I am not like to
trouble the World long) and I hope they may have some Impression on you.

First, Be much affected with the Footsteps of God toward you, and his
wonderful Appearance for you in your Church State. We are told, The Works of
the Lord are Great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His Work
is Honorable and Glorious, and his Righteousness endures for ever. If ever
People had cause to ^ook back, with Admiration, upon the Works of the Lord, and
to take Pleasure therein, surely you have, who have so abundantly experienced
the Truth of what Bildad told Job, Though thy beginning be but small, thy
latter-end shall greatly Increase. Your beginning was but small, and you are
not yet come to your latter-end, yet your Progression, and the Accession to you
is already very Great; so that you are apparently in the most thriving Way of
any Church I know, or hear of. And should you not remember, even to Admiration,
the Divine Wisdom that has led you, and the Divine Power that has helped you,
though the many Briars and Thorns that ^ay in your Way. Give me leave therefore
(though very briefly) to make a Rehearsal (and that ab initio) of the many
Difficulties you have met with, and yet have been borne up (as upon Eagle's
Wings) above them, and how you have been carried on in your (or rather God's)
Way, in spite of them, so that you may now say with David, By thee we have run
thorough a Troop, and by your God we have leaped over a Wall. When the House,
where you now meet to Worship God, was begun, what Flouts and Jeers were there
at it, how did the Sanballats Mock and Scoff, with a, -- What do these feeble
Jews; some cried, where will they have Money, others cried, where will they
have Company: And indeed, they took what Course they could, to prevent any
Company, by Engaging all they had any Interest in, from hearing a Sermon in
that place: What Lies and Shams did they make, to Discourage poor People from
attending on the Word there: I know some of you Breathed unto God, in the Words
of Nehemiah, Hear, O our God, for we are Despised, and turn their Reproach upon
their own Head; which Prayer, in an astonishing and terrible Manner, (you know
what I mean) has been already answered* and that so visibly, as was (I am
confident) as much beyond your Expectation as Desire. But the Sheet Anchor of
your Adversaries Hope, for a Blas^ on your Undertaking, was want of Money, It
seems they took Measure of the Spirit of God by their own Genius, and so
thoughts he would not, nor could not Work without Money; and where Money was
necessary, 'twas above his Power to provide it: But in this they found
themselves woefully Mistaken; for the Place was Finished, and made Commodious to
meet in, and no complaint of the Workmen heard, that they lacked their Pay: Ay,
But though there was Money procured for the Place, how should you do for Money
to maintain a Minister? This was another Refuge they sled to, as a comfortable
Hope of the Works miscarrying: But in this they have been as Successless as the
former; for that God, whose is the Earth, and the Fullness thereof, has
prevented, even to Astonishment, their Hopes, and your Fears, by opening such
an effectual Door, through the Key of his special Providence, that there is,
though in a secret and unknown Way, not only a comfortable, but a plentiful and
honorable Maintenance secured, to your present worthy Minister: And will you
not now look up, and admire! will you not now look up, and adore the
interposing Goodness of God! who has a Wheel within the Wheel, who can do, who
does do, and who for you has done, Great Things, and unsearchable, mavelous
Things, without Number. I have so much Charity for the worst of your Opposers,
as to Believe, that if they realy did know how strangely the Lord appeared,
with respect to Supply, they would have so much Christianity as to confess,
with that Cavelier Captain, in the Civil Wars between the King and Parliament,
God does not stand Neuter: But I must put you farther in Mind, of God's
exerting his Power for you, not only in setting you, as he has done, above the
Scoffs of your Enemies; but in Reviving the Work, after a fatal Damp had almost
been put upon it, by your Friends; for though you cried to the great Watchmen
of our Israel, and that in the Words sounding in Paul's Ears, Come over to
Macedonia, and help us: Though you appealed to the Reverend Fund in London, and
they owned your Cause, (some of them at least very heartily too, to my
Knowledge) and frequently some from among them, came to your Assistance; yet I
know not by what means there was an unaccountable Delay, in sending one to be
constant with you, which was like to have been of pernicious Consequence; Oh!
how like the Troops of Tema you looked! How like the Companies of Sheba you
waited for them; you were Confounded, because you had Hoped; you Sent, and
Went, you Wrote, and Begged, till at last, by repeated Frustrations, you were
Ashamed: And now, after all, that God alone may have the Glory of the whole
Work, and that nothing of Man may be in it: He (the Great and Mighty Jehovah,
and none but he) has sent you a Man of his own providing, whom he has made
strong for himself, and richly stored with the precious Gifts and Graces of his
Holy Spirit, whereby he abounds with all the necessary Qualifications of a
Gospel-Minister; and whom I unfeignedly think (since you could not get him who
first broke the Ice amongst you, I mean the Excellent Mr. Robbins) to be every
way the fittest Man for you the Nation does afford: And will you not now again,
look up, and behold the Wonders great Elohim has wrought for you, and be
affected therewith, so as to Praise him who remembered you in your low State, in
your desolate State, for his Mercy endures for Ever: When you, as a poor
forsaken cast off People, were seeking for Water, even the running Streams of
the Sanctuary, but could find none; and your Tongues were ready to fail for
Thirst, he the Lord did hear you; yea, he the God of Israel did not forsake
you; but did open Rivers in high Places, and Fountains in the midst of the
Valleys; and made the Wilderness Pools of Water, and the dry Land Springs of
Water, for you: Yea, When you were ready to conclude your selves Destitute; and
indeed, when we were ready to say bemoaningly of you, We have a little Sister,
but she has no Breasts: God brought an help-meet for you, (as he did Eve to
Adam) and a mighty Voice, as from the Lord, cried in all your Ears, Behold the
Man! And your Hearts were presently inclined to him, and his to you, so that
there was an immediate Closing.

Now the Lord, of his abundant Mercy, Bless you together, that he may go in and
out before you as a Shepherd, and lead you beside the still Waters: That he may
take the Two Staves, one called Beauty, (the Word of Life, the Gospel of
Salvation) the other called Bands, (Church Discipline, in the Truth and Purity
of it) and with them may plentifully feed the Flock of God; over which, the
Holy Ghost has made him Overseer: That he may at last give up his Account with
Joy, saying, Lord, Here am I, and the Children thou have given me, and those
not Dead, but Alive: And the Lord help you to know him who has the Oversight
over you, and to Esteem him highly for his Works sake: That you may have
Everlasting Consolation, and Good Hope through Grace, and be Comforted in your
Hearts, and Stablished in every good Word and Work, by his Fruitful and Holy
Ministry.

Secondly, My Second Advice to you is, That as you are fixed upon a
Congregational Bottom, so you would acquaint your selves by Studying and
Reading, with the true Notion of the Congregational Way; for the more you know
of it, the better you will like it, and the more you will be in Love with it: I
am past doubt, after long search and enquiring, it comes nearest to the Rule of
any other Way: And this as Learned a Prelate as ever England Bred, lately
Deceased, did Ingeniously confess, I am sure, whoever Reads the Scriptures with
a single and unprejudiced Eye, cannot but see it. Christ never designed his
People, in a Church State, should be under the Lordly Government, or
Domineering of any one Man whatsoever: No, his People, as they are are a
Redeemed, so they are a Free People, and have the Right of Government in
themselves. The other way does but puff up Ministers, who are naturally Proud
enough; every such Minister Fancies he is, Papa alterius orbis, hence he Struts
and Vapors as a little King, none must Preach in his Pulpit, but whom he
pleases; his Word is a Law, and no Body must control him in any thing he does:
But Blessed be God your Eyes are Opened, you see a better Way, a Way that makes
Religion more Amiable, and the Paths of it more Delightful to the Sons and
Daughters of Men. It Is a strange Complaint God made of Old, and yet it is too
much Verified in our Days; The Prophets Prophecy Falsely, and the Priests bear
Rule by their Means, and my People Love to have it so, and what will you do in
the end thereof? Ah! Priests Tyranny is the worst sort of Tyranny, but I hope
it is near at an End, the good Lord hasten the total Overthrow of it; I am sure
Religion will never kindly Thrive till then: When Christ alone sits King at his
Table, (or, as the Hebrew is, Round Table) then the Spikenard sends forth the
smell thereof. It Is the Congregational Way that shows the Beauty and Glory of
Religion to the World; for when a Church is so fixedand so Principled, then is
She Beautiful as Tizzah, Comely as Jerusalem, and Terrible as an Army with
Banners. Where are the most Spiritual-minded Christians? where are the most
Heavenly Saints, where are the most Visible Children of the Living God, whose
Hearts are most Yearning after Christ, whose Lives are most Shining in
Holiness, and Gospel-Righteousness, but in the Walls of the Congregational
Churches? I know some of you have not Time to Read; and perhaps some of you
have not Money to Buy many Books, I would therefore commend to you that little
yet excellent Book (as Instar omnium) of the Reverend Dr. Chancy's, lately
Published, which will give you considerable Light, and establish you in the
Congregational Way.

Thirdly, My Third Advice to you is, That you would not be frightened with the
Bugbear Term of Antinomianism, of which the Blades of this Generation, do
Brand the Asserters and Propugnators of the Doctrine of Free Grace. It Is true,
Antinomianism, in its proper and true Notion, is as Odious to me as to any Man
alive, but in that way which our high-flown Sparks call Antinomianism, so have
I, and so I hope shall I, Worship the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are Written in the Law, and in the Prophets. What Antinomianism truly is,
is little known by most. And I am persuaded, the Generality (especially the
young Fry of Levites) who bawl and yawl most against it, do no more know what
it is, than I know what Person the next Pope of Rome will be. If the Eternal
Love of God, if the Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness, if the Absoluteness of
the Covenant of Grace, if believing Justification to be an immanent and
instaneous Act, if the excluding Works, and all other Concauses whatever, with
the Merits of Christ in the matter of our Justification, be Antinomianism, the
Lord keep me an Antinomian whilst I live; for in the firm Truth of these great
Points, I desire to be found believing when I dye.

Oh! my Dear Friends and Brethren, hold fast the Form of sound Words, keep
close to the Blessed and Glorious Truths of the Gospel; do not give heed to the
Seducing Fables of Men, who cry up Inherent Righteousness, and previous
Qualifications, in order to a Regenerate State, making an Idol of them, Singing
Songs of Triumph to them, as Israel did about the Golden Calf, These be thy
Gods, O Israel, that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. It Is the Honor
of your Pulpit, that no other Sound, but that of Aaron's Golden Bells, no other
Melody but Grace, Grace, has as yet been heard there. No Trash of Legal
Righteousness, or Humane Glittering Performances, as Antecedaneous to a closing
with Christ, have been bellowed forth within your Virgin-Walls, that are yet
undefiled (and God of his Mercy still keep them so) with the Language of the
Beast. For though you have had many Preachers, yet they have been all acted by
the same Spirit, spoke the same thing, borne Witness to the same Truth, even
Salvation by the Blood of Jesus; without any Hay or Stubble of Man's
Endeavors: And if the Opposers of the everlasting Gospel, gratify their
Luxuriant Fancies, by Nick-naming it Antinomianism, Oh! let not that discourage
or disturb you.

Fourthly, My last Advice to you is, That you would have a special care of your
Walking, you have the Light, Oh! Walk as Children of the Light: You are
Foundation Stones, I heartily with none of you may prove rotten or unsound
ones, for that will prove very pernicious to your future Building, and most
dreadful to your own Souls in a dying Hour. Remember, Oh! Remember, Holiness
becomes the House of our God for ever. Holiness is the Crown of the
Church-Militant, and it will be for ever the Glory of the Church-Triumphant:
You have many Eyes upon you, many envious ones, that are impatiently watching
for your halting. Oh! therefore I beseech you, I most humbly and earnestly beg
you for the Lord's sake, for your Souls sake, for the Gospel's sake, for your
Friends sake, take special heed to your Steps, and that in every respect. Oh!
do not fill Gath with Joy, or the Streets of Askelon with Triumph; put no
occasion of insulting in the Mouths of the Uncircumcised, by any Failing or
Miscarriage. Grieve not the Spirits of your Friends, by giving your Enemies any
just cause to upbraid you. But walk in all things, in all cases, according to
the Rule of the Gospel. Loath Sin, and leave it; yea, hate the very Appearance
of Evil: Remember the Son of God walks up and down among you, to observe you
with his Eyes as Flames of Fire; you are not now in the wide World, but in the
Sacred Boundaries of Mount Zion, and therefore you cannot Sin at so cheap a
Rate as you did before. Oh! that you would follow the Footsteps of your Dear
and Precious Sister; She has left you a Copy; Oh! that you would Write after
it: Oh! that you may so live, Oh! that you may so dye, as she did; Then
comfortable will it be for you here, and happy will it be with you hereafter:
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted
and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith; as ye have been taught,
abounding therein with Thanksgiving. And we will not cease to Pray for you, and
incessantly to desire, That ye might be all filled with the Knowledge of the
Will of God, in all Wisdom, and Spiritual Understanding: That ye might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being Fruitful in every good Work,
and increasing in the Knowledge of God, Strengthened with all Might, according
to his Glorious Power, unto all Patience, and Long-suffering, with Joyfulness.
Giving Thanks to the Father, who has made you meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Who has delivered you from the Powers of
Darkness, and has translated you into the Kingdom of his Dear Son.

My Dear Friends, Excuse my Plainness, bear with my Earnestness, for my Soul
loves you, and you are very near my Heart, I would not have you in the least
miscarry, or fall short in any thing of the Hopes we have of you, for the whole
World: But as you have begun, so hold out; hold on, and you will certainly Reap
at last, if you faint not: It is but a little while, and you shall he where
your Heavenly Sister is gone before you; even in the Mansions of Eternal Glory,
with the ever-blessed God, In whose Presence there is fullness of Joy, and at
whose right hand there are Pleasures for ever-more. Now the God of Peace, that
brought again from the Dead the Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep,
through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
Work, to do his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. And I beseech
you, Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation, for I have written a Letter unto
you in few words; with which I bid you heartily Farewell in the Lord: Sincerely
Subscribing my self,

Your Truly Affectionate Servant, and Brother in our Dearest Jesus, C.
Nicholetts.

TO HIS Worthy and much valued Friend, Mr. R. W.
SIR,
I Received yours, wherein you pressingly desire an Account of that young
Gentlewoman, Mrs. Mary Harrison, who lately went to Heaven from amongst us
(whose Fame, I perceive, has reached your Ears.) Really, Sir, the Person you
enquire after, deserves to be known by the whole World; For I sincerely think,
considering every thing, and all Circumstances, as to the manner of her
Conversion, and the Fruitful Consequence of it, together with the Agonies of
her Soul in yearning after Christ, and her prodigious aspiring Heavenward, she
has hardly left her Fellow behind her. It Is pity the Pencil was not in an
abler Artist's Hand, that her Picture might be drawn to the best Advantage,
according to the Truth of those lively Colors, the many Passages of her Life
would afford to set it off; for then I am sure it would be as valuable (at
least in the Eyes of the Serious) as any Life, whose History has passed the
Press these many Years; and so universally satisfactory, that the Censures of
the severest Critics would be turned into Astonishment and Admiration. You are
pleased to tell me, I am the fittest Person to write the Narrative of her Case:
I confess, in respect of my intimate Knowledge of her, and frequent Converse
both day and night with her; and as one to whom she imparted the Secrets of her
Soul more fully, more freely, than to any one in the World besides: I say, in
this respect, it is true, none can be more fit, because none knew so much of her
as I did; but for the proper and methodical wording it, and making it palatable
for this nice Age we live in, none is, or can be, more unfit. For besides, as
at best, I always was far from an Orator, the many Troubles I have met with in
the Series of my Life, (some of which are not unknown to you, to whom I have
been, for many Years, so well known) have so blunted the edge of my Fancy, that
I am scarce capable of Writing in a common Style. However, to let you see what
power you have over me, I will expose my Weakness, and lay my Breast open to
every carping Zoilus, (and there be more than a few of them in every Corner) to
give you what Satisfaction I can, in what you so passionately desire. I had it
in my Thoughts, at the time of her Expiring, to do something of this kind (as
far as my Abilities would reach) for Public Good, but a very Melancholy Affair
happening in my Church (of which I have given you an account) so took up my
Time and Thoughts, and had such an Ascendant on my Genius, as quite damped my
Spirit for this, or, indeed, any other Work; so I laid it aside, and should
have meddled no more in it, had not your pathetical Letter awakened me, out of
the deep Slumber of Indifferency, and Laodicean Temper, that Tragical Business
had cast me into. And no sooner was I awake, (as I instantly was, upon reading
your Serious Lines) but I took Pen in Hand, and hastily drew up what you will
see in the subsequent Leaves; in which, as you will find no Flourishes of
Wanton Rhetoric to make this Tract look fine and gaudy, so I promise you, you
shall meet with no Additions, or Luxuriant Excressencies, that may justly
subject it to the odious Name of Romantic: You may depend on my word as a
Christian, as a Minister, every Passage recorded in the following Narrative,
relating to this Heavenly Creature, is really true, and that to my own
knowledge, as I shall answer it at the Great Day: And therefore I shall make
bold to use the Apostle's words, That which we have seen with our Eyes; that
which we have looked upon; that which we have both seen and heard, declare we
unto you. I have this great Advantage, (amongst many Disadvantages,) and it is
such an Encouragement, without which, I think, I should not have dared to
undertake the Task you enjoin me: Most of the People of God in these Parts,
very well knew the Person of whom I write, and frequently discoursed with her,
and much admired the great Work of God in her: To them I can, and do,
cheerfully appeal, concerning my Faithfulness and Integrity in this Work; and I
dare say, they will blame me for under, not overspeaking; and accuse me for
being too low in the Character I give of her: And that I fall short, of what
might honestly, and with Truth, be said on this subject. And it is on this
hand, that I desire always to be found erring. Many things have slipped my
Memory (for I kept no Diary) and some things, that to many would appear
incredible, I have purposely omitted. If therefore diminutive Truth, without
straining, or indeed, using an Hyperbole; if naked Truth, without any
Ornamental Imbroidery, will satisfy you, I have no reason to despair your
accepting my Performance, notwithstanding it is accompanied and clogged with so
much obvious Weakness.

As to the Person of Mrs. Mary Harrison, (which you seem in the first place
inquisitive about) she was one of an amiable Countenance, though something
pale, very slender, of a middle Stature, neither too tall, nor short, curiously
shaped in the Proportion of her Body, but Sickly and Weekly in her
Constitution. The Earthly Tabernacle her Soul so-journ'd in, was very brittle
and infirm, and quickly (with a little Fit of Sickness) dissolved, to her
unspeakable gain; for now she has a far better, a much stronger, Building of
God, an House not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens. She was of a quick
Understanding, and had excellent Parts both Natural and Acquired, fit almost
for any Business proper to her Sex, of a mild and sweet Nature, exceeding
Courteous and Obliging in her Carriage. But for the Frame of her Spirit before
Conversion, which you also desire some account of, I should in this wholly
disobey you, and draw a shadowing Curtain over it. But for the magnifying of
Free Grace extended to so Poor a Creature, I will tell you the Truth, and the
whole Truth of her, without hiding any part of her dark side, or extenuating
that Deformity too obvious to all that knew her. She was a mere lump of Pride
and Vanity; very Carnal and Ignorant, as to any thing of Soul-concerns;
delighting in nothing more than to satisfy the Pride of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and to uphold the Pride of a Vain Life: Hence she affected, with too
great an eagerness, fine Clothes, and the newest Fashions; and being Heiress of
a competent Estate, she never thought she was Gaudy enough in her Attire; of
which her Mother often, and with great Sadness of Heart, complained to me. Her
chiefest Diversion was, to be in vain and frothy Company, at Weddings, and
Merry-meetings, or going to Feasts, as young People use to do. It Is true, she
was a constant Hearer ever since I came to the Place, but 'twas only in a
formal customary way, or because her Parents came, or to see who was finest, or
to be seen in her finery her self; It could not be out of any love to the Word,
for alas, she never relished it, nor tasted the Savor of it; nor for any regard
to her poor Soul, for alas, she had no sense of its Worth and Preciousness; nor
for any desire to be brought unto Christ, for alas, she was wholly Ignorant of
him, and might say truly, what Peter said falsely, She knew not the Man: She was
in the Flesh, and did mind the things of the Flesh, and not at all the things
of the Spirit: She looked not at the things that are not seen, but only at the
things that are seen: She knew no higher End than the pleasing a wanton Fancy;
nor desired any greater Good, than the sinful Pleasures that a vain World
affords. In a word, She walked as other Gentiles (yea, as all the Unconverted
walk) in the Vanity of their mind: Having her Understanding darkened, being
alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that was in her, because
of the Blindness of her Heart. On this account she was a perfect Stranger to
me, for though I had lived in the Town many Years, I had no manner of Knowledge
of her, or Acquaintance with her, any farther than seeing her at Meeting, or
being sometimes, accidentally in her company among others: She never came to my
House, but in the way of a complemental Visit, and that seldom or never alone;
so that I never had opportunity, of serious discoursing with her: I always
beheld her (as our Savior did Jerusalem) with a Mournful Eye, even ready to
Weep over her, as looking upon her in the broad way to Ruin and Destruction;
and one, to whom the Judgments threatened in the Third of Isaiah, did as
properly belong, as to any Person that ever I knew: She was well versed in
worldly things, in worldly Fashions, in worldly Customs, in worldly Pastimes;
but in the things of God, she was as ignorant as a Ninevite; she knew not her
right hand from her left; and as little likely to be wrought upon by the Word,
as any Person that ever sat under it; for her Eyes were rolling about, to spy
who was in the finest Dress, or who had the newest-fashion'd Clothes. But that
the Efficacy of the Spirit of God is irresistible, and the Influence of Divine
Grace immensely powerful; one would think it utterly impossible that such a
sorry piece of Carnality as this young Woman was, and that in every respect did
manifest her self to be, should ever be savingly wrought upon; or that such an
amazing and most wonderful Change (as afterward to the view of all appeared)
should ever be made in her: And the old Adagy in Israel, Is Saul also among the
Prophets, was not more remarkable, than that Mrs. Mary Harrison is now among
the true Spiritual Mourners, was wonderful to all that before knew her. And
therefore you are now to prepare your Eyes to behold what you will find writ in
legible Characters, and your Ears to harken to what you will hear sounding in a
Charming Dialect, the amazing Stories of the Wonders of Grace, in the thorough
and effectual Conversion of this young Damsel, this Virgin-Daughter of Abraham,
who by the mighty Power of the Lord of Hosts, was brought out of most Horrid
Darkness, into the beautiful Light of Jehovah: And after a wearied Conflict
with the Tempter, passing through many Pains and Sorrows, through many Fears
and Doubts, through many doleful Troubles, and Heartbreaking Agonies, whilst
in the Bondage of Corruption, was at last delivered into the Glorious Liberty
of the Children of God.

The first News I heard of her awakening, was in February 1697. A Good Woman
(of my Church) came to my House late at night, with show of some more than
ordinary Tidings in the Form of her Countenance, she desired to speak with me
in my Study, where we were no sooner sat down, but she told me, in a Melancholy
Tone, Mrs. Mary Harrison was in deep Despair, and requested me immediately to
repair to her: Whether Mrs. Mary sent her, or she came of her own head, I do
not remember. I want words to tell you, how exceedingly I was surpised at this
unexpected News: I replied, It was then late, and, as I thought, unseasonable,
to give her a Visit; and the next day I was unavoidably engaged in a Journey,
which I could by no means put off, but at my return would not fail to be with
her, if the Lord pleased. With this Answer I dismis'd the Messenger, after
whose departure, I began seriously to revolve in my Mind, the Strangeness of
the Relation: What! thought I, Mrs. Mary Harrison, a proud, vain, ignorant
Creature, in Despair about her Soul; Sure this is some Mistake, for I thought
as strange of it, as Thomas did of his Master's Resurrection; and was ready to
say with him, Except I shall see in his hands the Print of the Nails, and put
my Finger into the Print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe. So thought I, except I hear it from her own Mouth, and see cause
by proper Actions, and suitable Expressions, to judge the thing real, I will
not, I cannot believe it. Indeed Ananias was not more backward to give Credit
to the Conversion of Saul, than I was to any such Change in her; for as he
argued in defense of his Incredulity, Lord, I have heard by many of this Man,
how much evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem: And here he has
Authority from the Chief Priests, to bind all that call on thy Name. And can
such a Man be so changed on a sudden. Ah! How dull are the best of Men, in
believing the Wonders of Free Grace: So was I saying to my self; I have heard
by many (yea, by her own Mother) of this young Woman, that she was mightily
puffed up with Pride, and of the things of the Gospel extremely ignorant; and I
never heard any body speak of her being inclined in the least to any thing that
is good; and now full of Horror about Eternity, now concerned even to Despair
about her Immortal Soul. How, or from whence, can this sudden, this
unaccountable Change be? I must confess, to my Shame, I did not know what to
think of it; and could scarce give this Report any Entertainment (especially
such a Welcome one, as a true one of this nature deserves) in the retiring Room
of my Heart: However, though I did not that night speak to her, I spoke for
her, and spread that unintelligible, and, indeed, almost incredible Account I
had received before the Lord, and fervently begged, if there were not, that
there might be something in it; that it might be the Lord's time to open her
blind Eyes, to break her hard Heart, to enliven her dead Soul, and breathe into
her the Breath of Life. The morrow (according to appointment) I went my
Journey, but could not get her out of my Thoughts, neither on the Road, nor at
the Place where I was, whatever Company I was in, or whatever Business I was
about, my Mind still ran on Mrs. Mary Harrison. I purposely hasted my return
home, much longing to see her, and to be satisfied how it was with her; whether
there were indeed any Breathings in her Heart, any Sense in her Soul, any
Apprehension of her present Misery, or a future Eternity, and from what ground
this Sense arose, and what Operation it had in her Inward Man. As soon,
therefore, as I came home, (even before I pulled off my Boots,) I went to her,
and found her in her Chamber alone, sitting in a very disconsolate Posture, her
Face clouded, her Eyes cast down, and her Physiognomy so miserably altered,
that I could not but call to mind that of the Poet, Qui color albus erat nunc
est contrarius albo. After Salutations, I sat down by her, and enquired into
her Case, demanding, What made her look so Melancholy, and seclude her self
from Company. She replied, She had reason enough to be Melancholy, for that
she was one of the Lost Persons from whom the Gospel was hid. I had a little
before (at the desire of a Godly Friend) preached two Sermons on 2 Cor. 4.3.
But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Which the Lord
blessed with Success to more than this Maiden-Gentlewoman; another was awakened
by it, who is since joined to our Church. But I told Mrs. Mary she argued
wrongly against her self; for if the Gospel were indeed hid from her, she would
have no manner of Sense of that judgment; for all that are Reprobates, and so
in a lost State, the Gospel being hid from them, are past feeling, having their
Consciences seared, as with an hot Iron. But you, said I, having, thorough
Mercy, such a quick Feeling, and being so awfully apprehensive of the
Dreadfulness of the Judgment, are so far from having the Gospel hid from you,
that you may be assured God is Graciously coming toward you, to reveal the
Beauty and Glory of it unto you. This did not satisfy her, but persisting in
her Despairing Language, told me, she was in a Perishing Condition, and should
be Damned. I asking a Reason of this Desperate Conclusion, she, with a Ghastly
Look, and Mournful Accent, answered, I have been a great Sinner, and there is
no Mercy or Pardon for me, What shall I do? What will become of me for ever? At
the pronouncing of these words, she Trembled, wrung her Hands, and wept
bitterly. Upon which I applied my self to her in the following Terms, Mrs.
Mary, You (through Ignorance, as yet, of the Gospel) are guilty of a great
Mistake, in inferring an Impossibility of Pardon from the Greatness of your
Sins. For this is to argue against the Nature of Free Grace, which overtakes,
and fastens hold on the very Greatest and Worst of Sinners: And against the
Compact of the Father and the Son, in the Covenant of Redemption: For as in
that Covenant, the Father, on his part, promises the sending down of his
Spirit, to bow and bend the Wills, and incline the Hearts of the most Obstinate
and Rebellious Sinners, to lay hold upon a Savior by a true and lively Faith:
So the Son, on his part, promised to give himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice upon
the Cross, sufficient to atone the greatest Sins any of the Posterity of Adam
could possibly be guilty of, whereby, to the Amazement of Men and Angels,
Pardon is not only a Gracious but a Righteous Act in God, and the Sinner may
plead for it upon account of that Everlasting Atonement made by the Son of God.
This the Apostle John, who leaned on Christ's Bosom, and thereby knew the
Secrets of his Heart, and the Wonders of Redeeming Grace flowing from his Lips:
I say, he, even he, plainly declares, and clearly holds forth this adorable
Truth in that Gospel-Apothegm, 1 Epist. 1.9. If we confess our Sins, he is
Faithful and Just (mark that) to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from
all Unrighteousness. Moreover, I farther told her, this arguing is against the
very literal meaning of many Sweet and Precious Promises made by the Lord
himself, on purpose to put such Poor Distressed Creatures as you are, out of
Doubt of his Grace and Mercy. As that in Isa. 1.18. Come now, and let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Come,
Mrs. Mary, said I, What do you think of this Reasoning from the Richness of the
Covenant of Grace, and from the Infiniteness of that Satisfaction made for Sin
by the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant? Her answer was,
This Promise belongs to those that are in Christ, but I am far enough from him,
and have no mind to him, nor no Heart to believe in him, nor can I do any thing
that is good. I told her she spoke as a Legalist, not yet acquainted with the
Way and Mystery of the Gospel, which calls Persons from themselves, and shows
them their utter Inability and Incapacity to do any thing of themselves. Then I
turned her to another Promise, Isa. 43.24. Thou have bought me no sweet Cane
with Money, neither have thou filled me with the Fat of thy Sacrifices, but
thou have made me to serve with thy Sins, thou have wearied me with thine
Iniquities. I asked her what she could say worse of her self, than God said of
this People, so full of all manner of Abominations. But yet, said I, Pray
observe the two next Verses, 25, 26. I, even I, am he, that blotted out thy
Transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. Put me in
remembrance, let us plead together: Declare thou, that thou may be
Justified. I told her from these words, that a putting God in remembrance of
his Gracious Promise, to pardon and forgive Sin (any Sin, all Sins, how great
soever) and to blot out all Iniquities (let their Magnitude or Multitude be
what it will) upon the account of Christ's infinite Satisfaction which he has
given to Divine Justice; and an humble (yet earnest) Pleading the avail of it
at the Throne of Grace, would be more pleasing and acceptable to God, and far
more Comfortable and Beneficial for her, than thus in Diffidence and Despair,
to lie down under the Sense of Guilt, and give up her self as lost, precluding
thereby, the Operation of the Spirit of God, which would work a saving
Repentance unto Life in her. The answer she made was, This Promise (how Sweet
soever in it self it was) could be of no use, nor afford any Comfort to her in
her present Condition; for that she could not Pray, or Plead, at all, and her
Heart was quite barred and bolted against any good Motion or Inclination, and
she was as one wholly destitute of the Spirit, and forsaken of God. And then
lamentably cried out, My Day is past, and I am Undone, Undone. I asked her, if
ever she was in the like Condition before: She answered, No, never in her Life.
Then I told her, What she had said, was not, could not be true, if God's Word
may be believed; for according to that, none but those who were Once enlightened
(which she never was before) and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift (which she
never before did) and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost (which did never
stir in her before) and have tasted the good Word of God* the relish and savor
of which, she never before understood) and the Powers of the World to come (to
which she had been hitherto altogether a Stranger) can possibly be in danger of
having their Day past: And therefore this being the first time of God's coming
toward her in an awakening manner, alarming her Soul with the Sense of a
Future State, though her Sins were so terribly set in order before her; yet her
distracting and terrifying Fears were without any Scriptural Ground: For (as I
farther alleged this was God's common way of dealing with those whom he
designed special Love and Mercy to; first to show them their lost and undone
Condition by Nature (as they are the wretched Offspring of Fallen Adam) and to
shake them over the Scorching Flames of Hell, and make them tremblingly
apprehensive of his deserved Wrath and Indignation, that so the Redemption
wrought out by, and made most secure in the Lord Jesus Christ, might be the
more precious and valuable to them, when they are made to see it, and have a
joyful Sense of it, by the enlightening Efficacy of God's Spirit, which she was
now believingly to be expecting of; for I assured her, in the Name of the Great
God; it was not far from her, urging, for her Support under the Burden of her
present Calamity, that sweet Promise, Hab. 2.3. For the Vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: Though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. By Vision here (I
told her) is meant the Manifestation of the Light of God's Countenance, and the
Glory of his Presence; and there is a secret appointed time in the Breast of
the Father, for reviving the drooping Spirit, and ravishing the sadned Heart of
every Elect Son and Daughter of Adam, with this great and glorious Mercy: But
she must patiently wait this appointed time for it; and this plain Word of God
assures her, she would not be deceived in her Expectation. I also (for her
Encouragement) instanced the bitter Passion of Sorrow poor Mary Magdalen was
in, from the Sense of her horrid Sins, and most vile and filthy Pollutions. And
the great and Soul-amazing Shakings the Jailer had, from the dreadful
Apprehensions of his miserable State, and the doleful Agonies of his Soul, in
the Sense of Hell and Damnation. And yet what Comfort both of them met with,
what abundant Satisfaction both of them had, by the Lord's speaking effectual
Peace to their Souls: But whatever I could say (and much more (through the good
Hand of my God upon me) to this purpose I did say) she still continued in a
lamentable manner under the Power of Despair, hideously crying out, she was
sure there was no Mercy for her. By which I perceiving, that no words, how
right soever, were, at present, forcible, so as to have any Effect upon her. It
growing late, and I much wearied with traveling and speaking, after solemn
seeking the Lord for her, I at that time left her; I cannot tell you whether
with more Joy, or Sorrow: Joy, that there was so eminent a Work begun in her,
which plainly appeared to me to be of God, for I saw a thorough Work of
Conviction wrought by the mighty Power of Jehovah, in her Soul; and I doubted
not, but designed (by him who brings forth Meat out of the Eater, and Sweet out
of the Strong) for her Eternal Good, though the Tempter, for the present, had
such an ascendant upon her. Or Sorrow, that she was grovelling in such hideous
Darkness, and left to struggle with the Horrors of a wounded Spirit, which, as
the wise Man implicitly tells us, is far more deplorable, and much less
tolerable, than any Sickness or Infirmity (how great or sore soever) of the
Body can be. It was not long, before I gave her another Visit, and then found
her under dreadful Consternation of Mind, through the violent and malicious
Assaults of Satan, who, as a roaring Lion, was seeking to devour, or rather
swallow up this distressed Damsel, by the multitude of vain, wicked, yea,
blasphemous Thoughts he cast into her; whereof she woefully complained (and that
in a lamentable and heart-melting Accent) to me: Oh Sir, says she (with dismal
black Clouds in the Horizon of her Countenance) you little think what a
prodigious, vile, wicked and abominable Wretch I am; my Heart is full of most
horrid blasphemous Thoughts against God; my Mind is running upon nothing but
what is Evil, and that of the deepest dye: Surely there is none, there can be
no such grossly wicked Person as I in the World; as there is no Sorrow, so there
is no Wickedness like mine. To which I replied, Mrs. Mary, As for the Thoughts
you complain of, with so much Bitterness of Heart, they are not yours, neither
are you chargeable with them, God will not impute them to you, they are thrown
into you by the evil one, who is doing you all the spite he can, and trying all
means to make your Life every way uncomfortable, and therefore I would have you
(and Oh! that you would harken unto me) to cast Satan's Brats (with an Holy
Scorn) at his own Door, bidding Defiance to him and all his Cursed Suggestions:
For I tell you (as from the Lord) what is your Grief, or Burden now, will not
be charged upon you, as your Sin hereafter. Then I commended to her Serious
Consideration, that pathetical Scripture, 1 Jo^n 3.20. For if our Heart condemn
us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all things. From whence I told
her, yea, thus argued with her, Though your trembling Heart does indeed condemn
you, and your very Soul is perplexed in the abhorring Sense of these horrid
Thoughts, and you are in extreme Bitterness and Sorrow therefore, yet God who
is greater than your Heart, and who knows all things, very well knows the
Source and Spring from whence these abominable evil Thoughts flow, and the
Power by which they are injected into you; and though you are laying your self
so low even as Hell, abhorring your self in Dust and Ashes, and condemning your
self so grievously for them; this Righteous, this All-seeing, this All-knowing
God, is so far from Condemning you, that he is pitying you in this great
Distress and Anguish you are: You in this your deep Affliction, Jehovah, the
Lord of your Righteousness, is afflicted; and the Angel of his Presence shall
save you: And in his Love, and in his Pity, he will (I question not) in his
own way, which you must submit to, and in his own time, which you must wait
for, redeem you from the Snares of the Deceiver, and he will bare you, and
carry you (as he did all his Tempted ones in the Days of Old) even as upon
Eagles Wings, above the reach of this, or any other Delusion whatsoever. But
whatever I said of this nature, took no hold upon her, so as to administer any
Comfort or Satisfaction to her, for the Ephah of her Sorrow was not yet filled
up: No, she was to be plunged yet deeper in the Furnace of Tribulation; she was
yet to pass thorough hotter and more scorching Fiery Trials; she was yet to
drink a much larger Draught of that bitter Cup her Redeemer drank of before
her, and in a more dolorous manner to be Baptized with that Baptism he was
Baptized with: She was yet to be more dreadfully and terribly shaken, and to be
exempted from Vessel to Vessel, that she might at last know the Righteousness
of the Lord: And therefore after a little more Conference with her, and going
to the Throne of Grace for her, I again took leave of her, with an akeing Heart
for her, and yearning Bowels toward her. By this time her Fame began to spread
abroad, and she was talked of far and near, the general Subject of most Peoples
Discourse; and their Discourse about her, was according to their various
Apprehensions and Inclinations; the Vain and Carnal ones thought she was in
Love, and upon that Theme the Spicket of their Tongues were loosned, to vent
the Froth of their Hearts. Indeed their thoughts about Love was not amiss, only
they were miserably mistaken both in the Nature, and in the Object of it; the
Bias of her Affections ran toward an unseen Jesus, whom the World never knew,
and (as a Chaos of Darkness) cannot comprehend: Her deep Care and Concern, was
for her Immortal Soul, which all that are in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity (and all of the World are so) have no Thought or Anxiety
about. It Is present not future Happiness that they are in the eager pursuit of.
But the People of God, in these Parts, who had passed through the Pangs of the
New Birth themselves, (and therefore capable of judging her Condition) very
well knew the Nature of her Distemper, and the unexpressibleness of her Woe,
according to Sol mon's Apothegm, The Spirit of a Man may sustain his Infirmity,
but a wounded Spirit who can bear. These I say pitied her, and heartily
sympathized with her in her Spiritual Dolours; and they arose every one from
his own place, (like Job's Friends) and came to bemoan her, and to comfort her,
for they saw the Grief of her Soul was very great. And indeed she had a very
large room (beyond whatever I knew of one under her Circumstances) in the
Hearts and Affections of the best Saints amongst us; abundantly manifested in
their frequent Visiting her, and inviting her to their Houses, taking no small
Pains with her, to strengthen her feeble Knees, to support her fainting
Spirits, and to refresh her wearied Soul, pined away almost to Death, by
communicating their Experiences of God's working upon their Hearts in the day
of his first appearing to them, when he opened their Eyes, and turned them from
Darkness unto Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; and gave them a
joyful Sense of the Forgiveness of their Sins, and a comfortable Taste of the
Inheritance which they shall for ever have among them that are Sanctified by
Faith which is in Christ Jesus. And what Refreshments (after many sad and sore
Conflicts) they particularly found from the Presence of the Lord, reflecting on
them with the Rays of his Beauty, and the Beams of his Glory; and what
Comfortable Dawnings, yea, Ravishing Shinings, they very often had, after a
dark stormy night. And this every one did, according to the Measure of their
Attainment and Experience. They all as Fliphaz, Bildad, and Zophaz) spoke unto
her by turns, and then they all returned to speak unto her; but though in their
reiterated speaking they said all this (yea, more than this) yet it had little
or no Effect upon her, she remained (notwithstanding all possible Endeavors
used, and unwearied Pains taken, by many Precious Sons and Daughters of Zion)
in a very distressed and disconsolate State, even Mourning as one without hope:
She seemed in her mournful Gesture, and doleful Behavior, to speak in the Sad
and Melancholy Language of the Church, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass
by? Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce Anger:
From above has he sent Fire into my Bones, and it prevailed against them: He
has spread a Net for my Feet, he has turned me back, he has made me Desolate
and Faint all the day. For these things I Weep, mine Eye runs down with
Water, because the Comforter that should relieve my Soul, is far from me. And
again, I am that Maid that has seen Affliction by the Rod of his Wrath. He
has led me, and brought me into Darkness, but not into Light. Surely against
me is he turned, he has turned his Hand against me all the day. My Flesh and
my Skin has he made old, he has broken my Bones. He has budded against me,
and compassed me with Gall and Travel. He has set me in dark places, as they
that be dead of old. He has hedged me about, that I cannot get out; he has
made my Chain heavy. Also when I cry and shout, he shuts out my Prayer.
These, Oh! these, were the Hierogliphick Bemoanings of her Soul, in every
minute Circumstance of her Carriage: Indeed her watery Eyes, her pale Cheeks,
her ghastly Countenance, her trembling Joints, the great Disorder and Confusion
of her outward and inward Man, mournfully spoke in a silent yet pathetical
Dialect, what Job spoke with his Lips, Have pity upon me, O ye my Friends,
have pity upon me, for the Hand of God has touched me. Though this was the
Language of her mournful Gesture to all that were near her, yet was not her
Mouth closed, she articulately spoke many bitter and doleful things. Truly it
would have melted an Heart of Stone (I am sure it did mine) to have heard her
daily Bemoanings, and her nightly Lamentations: And that in a Tone, as I have
sometimes verily thought scarcely Humane. She had no delight in any thing, no
ease in her Spirit, no Satisfaction in her Mind, no Comfort alone or in
Company: Her Harp was turned into Mourning, and her Organ into the Voice of
them that Weep: She was made to possess Months of Vanity, and wearisome nights
were appointed for her. She was full of tossings to and fro to the dawning of
the day. Hence it was she could not refrain her Mouth, but did grievously speak
in the Anguish of her Spirit, and lamentably complain in the Bitterness of her
Soul. How often would she cry out, there was none in the World so bad as she,
my Heart is harder than any Body can conceive, or possibly imagine; I do not, I
cannot love Christ, or have any desire after him: I am as dry as a Stick, as
Sapless as a Stone, I cannot believe, I cannot repent, I cannot Pray, I have
not one good thought, and therefore it cannot otherwise be, but I must Perish
for ever. In these dolorous Bemoanings she even wasted and pined away: She was
weary with her Groaning; all the night she made her Bed to swim, yea, she
watered her Couch with her Tears. Her Eye was consumed because of Grief, it
waxed old because of the Enemy of her Salvation, who provoked her to
Despondency, and to a roaring out for Sorrow, because the Lord had hid his Face
from her, and left her to struggle with those Temptations of Horror, that (like
the Sons of Zerviah) were too hard for her. And though many excellent Saints,
and experienced Christians (as the Sons and Daughters of Jacob, upon Joseph's
supposed Death) arose to comfort her, and left no means unessay'd in order
thereunto; yet she (like Jacob) refused to be comforted, and seemed (with him)
resolved to go to the Grave Mourning* Thus he wept, thus she mourned, as one
that had no hope, and that continually. Her Chamber was a perfect Rama, where
no other Voice, but that of Woe, Lamentation, and bitter Bewailing, was day and
night to be heard. Insomuch that she was an Heartbreaking Grief to her
Friends, a Burden to her self, and an amazing Spectacle of Astonishment to all
that looked upon her. The Lord Pardon the Hardness of my Heart, that having
these things under review, I am no more affected. Never did I see such a
Mournful Sight, never did I hear such a doleful Sound; and I think, never was
there a Creature more exactly like in Sorrow to her Redeemer, in the day of his
Humiliation, when he said of himself, My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful, and heavy
unto Death. I had great Thoughts and Akeings of Heart about her, what the Issue
of these things would be; my very Soul traveled in Birth, till Christ was
formed in her; till she was made (through the up-lifting of the Spirit) to
arise and shine, as seeing Light to be come, and the Glory of the Lord to be
risen upon her. I prayed for her, I prayed with her, I cried day and night to
the mighty God of Jacob in her behalf. I wept, I sighed, I sobb'd, my Heart was
ready to break, my Soul mourned in secret places, because the Chariot-wheels of
Deliverance drove so heavily on. I chose suitable Subjects (as I thought) for
her Condition, to Preach upon in public, and did many times apply what I
delivered, particularly to her. She sat just against me, in the next Pew to
the Pulpit. Her Eyes were continually fixed on me, but with so ghastly and
pitiful a look, which had such an Impression on me, that I could scarce
refrain Tears whenever I cast my Eyes upon her. She always repaired after
Evening Sermon to the Repetition Lecture in the middle of the Town, carried on
by a Godly Zealous Brother of our Church, who never failed to pour out his Soul
in Prayer to God for her, and that in a most affectionate melting manner: I was
many times (as often as my Weakness would permit) there my self; and when all was
over, I used to take her by the Hand, and smilingly ask her, Come Dear Mrs.
Mary, how is it with you, has God spoken any thing to your Soul to day? Have
you relished and savor'd any thing you have heard? Her answer (I very well
remember) was always the same: No; my Heart is too hard; I have not been in the
least sensible of any thing you have delivered this day, you had as good have
Preached to a Stone as to me. And then pulling her Hood over her Eyes, to hide
her Tears, would pensively go away, for she could never bear to be long in any
Company. This, Oh! this, filled my Heart with unexpressible Sadness, that no
word (how suitable soever) would fasten; that no Truth (how Pertinent soever)
would take hold on her; that one Sabbath came successively after another, but
she never the better, her Soul was not at all refreshed by any Waters flowing
from the Sanctuary. I want words to tell you how my wounded Spirit was upon the
Rack; how my disturbed Mind was in a Flame, for this young disconsolate
Gentlewoman, who was so miserably walking in Darkness, that she could see no
Light; who was so woefully under the Gripings of Satan, that she could by no
means be persuaded to trust in the Name of the Lord, or stay her self upon her
God. In this deplorable State (lying among the Pots) she continued many Weeks,
without any sensible Alteration, unless for the worse: That she was in a lost
undone Condition, having an hard unbelieving Heart, without any Interest in
Christ (or like to have any) was the Versus intercularis, or the Burden of the
Song, in her continued uninterrupted dolorous Complaint. At last (in the midst
of some serious Discourse) she desired me to keep a day with her, to seek the
Lord for her, to which I willingly consented (as very glad of the Motion) she
desired some other Minister might be also assistant in the Work; to which I
freely gave way. She then asked me, what Minister would be most acceptable to
me. I answered, I was very indifferent, and desired her to please her self, and
she would not, nor could not, displease me. She propounded Mr. Earl of Gospert,
who, I think, was some Relation to her. I told her, with all my Heart.
Accordingly we met at a Private House in the Town, with several Christian
Friends. Mr. Earl began with Prayer, and I with Preaching, from these words,
Psalm. 43.5. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet Praise him, who is the Health of my
Countenance, and my God. I directed my Discourse wholly to her, and spoke all
(as far as God helped me) that I could judge proper for her to hear (under the
Circumstances she at that time was) she sat at the Table just against me,
fixing her Eyes constantly on me, with a doleful and pitty-commanding look. But
nothing I said (as I could by after-discourse perceive) made any Impression on
her. After I concluded with Prayer, Mr. Earl then Preached, his Text was, John
14.27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the World
gives, give I unto you. She was in appearance, a great deal worse after this
day, than she was before: Her Temptations were more rampant, her Breakings-out
in bitter and dismal Complaints, were more violent, and her Sorrow (great
enough before) did every way more abundantly increase; which made my Soul mourn
in secret, breathing forth the sad words of the Church, O Lord God of Hosts,
how long will thou be angry against the Prayer of thy People. Thou feedest this
poor Creature with the Bread of Tears, and give her Tears to drink in great
measure. One night very late (I cannot forget it) I was sent for in all haste
to her; when I came, I found her in the most dreadful Agonies, under the most
horrible Consternation of Spirit, as 'twas possible for any, of the Children of
Men on this side the Lake of Burning to be possessed with: She cried, she
roared out in a most terrible manner (even beyond an humane Accent) as if she
had been at the brink of Hell, ready to be swallowed up in the bottomless Gulf,
The Sorows of Death compassed her, and the Pains of Hell took hold upon her,
yea, she found Trouble (and to the Amazement) and Sorrow (even to the
Astonishment) of all that were in the Chamber with her: I was at my Wits end
what to do, to speak any thing, I too evidently saw was but in vain, and yet I
could not, I dared not be silent: She took no notice of any words, upon what
Topic soever enforced, nor in the least minded the Sluices of Consolation (how
Sweet and Pleasant soever) that were opened to her: I prayed and entreated her,
I begged and beseeched her, I spoke to her in the most moving and melting
Language I was capable to utter, and that with Tears in my Eyes, with
Contrition in my Heart, with Compunction in my bleeding Soul, that she would
compose her self, and fix her mind to look up to the Lord, and with her Eyes to
have respect to the Holy one of Israel, who would help her (and that with the
saving Aid of his right hand) if she would believe in him; who would comfort
her (and that with the ravishing Comforts of his blessed Spirit) if she would
cast her self upon him: Minding her in way of Paraphrase, what Moses said to
Israel, There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven
in thy help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. The Eternal God is thy refuse,
and underneath are the everlasting Arms, and he shall thrust out the Enemy from
before thee, and shall say, destroy them. That Enemy, said I, who is now so
exceeding rampant in you, who is now so maliciously affrightning and terrifying
you with the Sense of Hell and Wrath (which yet will never be your Portion)
this very Enemy God will thrust out from you; yea, this envious Satan (that
does you now so much Mischief) the God of Peace will most assuredly bruise
under your Feet shortly; and then you shall dwell in Safety alone, the Enemy
shall no more trouble you, nor be perplexing of you: And your Fountain shall be
upon a Land of Corn and Wine. Also his Heavens shall drop down Dew; that is,
the Doctrine and Graces of the Gospel, the Spirit of the Lord Jesus breathing
therein, shall drop down in a Soul-reviving, Soul-refreshing, yea, in a
Soul-ravishing manner upon you: And then, You shall grow as the Lilly, and cast
forth your Root as Lebanon; your Branches shall spread, and your Beauty shall
be as the Olive Tree, and your Smell as Lebanon. And then thus dwelling under
his Shadow, you shall return, you shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the
Vine; and your Scent shall be as the Wine of Lebanon. And then, Oh then, you
will be an happy, a thrice happy Virgin in our Israel; And who will be like
unto you, though now a distressed Maid, yet then, Saved by the Lord. Who will
awake for you, as one awaketh out of sleep, and as a mighty Man that shouteth
by reason of Wine: And will deliver you out of the hand of your present
Tormentor, who will be the Shield of your help, and the Sword of your
Excellency. And the Enemy of your Salvation, who is now Suggesting many
uncomfortable and most false things to you, whereby you are so lamentably
disquieted in your Spirit (even to Distraction) will then be found (as he is,
and as from the beginning he has been) a Liar to you. And you shall tread upon
high places, and so be infinitely above the reach of all his fiery Darts, that
not one of them shall sting or hurt you any more for ever. But alas, all that I
spoke (or all that any could speak) to this purpose, was (but like the weak
Trajans casting their feeble Arrows at the Conquering Grecians) wholly in vain:
I could not in the least allay her Grief, or assuage the Torrent of her violent
Passion, which was at the greatest height I ever beheld in any Creature before.
I knew not how to leave her (in the horrible Pit, in the miry Clay of such
Soul-tormenting Distress) and yet I plainly discerned, it was to no purpose to
stay with her; so outrageous was her Grief, and so beyond all bounds of
Moderation was her Sorrow; Horror and most dreadful Despair had such a powerful
Ascendant on her, that her poor Heart was like to break, yea, she was even
ready to dye, for fear of Eternal dying. Oh! how was this tender Lamb in Zion
rufully afraid because of her Sins, which were set in order before her, and
continually staring her in the Face: How did amazing Fearfulness lamentably
surprise her, in the awful sense of dwelling with the devouring Fire, that can
never be put out, and in the doleful Apprehension of rolling upon those Pillars
of everlasting Flames, that never will cease burning. Verily, had she seen with
her Eyes, the Sulphurous Torches; had she heard with her Ears, the dismal
Groans of the Damned; yea, had she actually felt the very Torments those
endure, who are surrounded with horrid Mists of Darkness in the Eternal Shades
below, she could hardly express her self in a more dolorous, in a more grievous
manner than she did; such Heart-melting, such Soul-piercing Complaints; such a
mournful crying our of a lost State, of a barren Mind, of a Certainty of being
Damned, never sounded (at least in my Ears) before. I had much ado to persuade
her to a Composedness till I went to Prayer with her; in which Duty I pleaded
with the Lord (according to the measure of the Spirit given me) for her, that
the sounding of his Bowels of Pity and Compassion, might be moved toward her;
that he would Graciously hear this Dejected Creature (as he did Ephraim)
bemoaning of her self in his very words; I am ashamed, yea, even Confounded, to
bear the Reproach of my Youth. And that he would say of her, as he did of him;
Is Ephraim, my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child; for since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him,
and I will surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord. When I concluded Prayer,
I took a very sorrowful leave of her, being toward Morning. It Is said, For the
Divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. And again, For the
Divisions of Reuben there were great Searchings of heart. I am sure for the
Spiritual Troubles, for the Despairing Sorrow of this young Gentlewoman, there
were great Thoughts and Searchings of Heart; great Distress and Anxiety of
Mind, both by me and many others. And truly we were (and we could not but be)
between Hope and Fear about her: We would fain hope the Lord designed Love and
Mercy to her precious Soul, notwithstanding the many bitter and grievous things
he wrote against her, and the great and fearful Trials she was exercised with;
but then the strangeness, the unparallell'dness of her Grief, the intolerable
Heaviness and Weight of that Burden she groaned under; the apparent Prevalency
of the Tempter over her, (for she seemed to be wholly in his Clutches) and
above all, the woeful and most horrible uninterrupted Despairingness of her
Language (for I know not how long time together) gave a little Check to those
Hopes we were willing to retain, and made too much room for Fear and Doubts in
our Thoughts concerning her. Indeed we were all at our Wits end, and could not
tell what to think or say of her. For my part I can truly say, her Case took up
my whole time; I could hardly mind any thing else; Day and Night were my
Thoughts busily employed, what course to take for her, or what means to use,
that might be of avail to her. And after many Wrestlings, with Sighs and Groans
unto God in her behalf; and revolving many things in my perplexed Mind about
her sad Condition, I at last called to mind the words of our Lord Jesus, This
kind of Devil goes not out, but by Prayer and Fasting. It came therefore into
my Thoughts, to try once more that way, that never-failing way, when managed
rightly, and in good earnest. And being not very well satisfied with the manner
of keeping the First day, upon several Accounts not proper here to mention, I
resolved to take another (and, as I judged, a more effectual) course; that is,
to desire the Church to set apart a Solemn day of Humiliation, to cry mightily
unto God on her behalf: And I was mightily encouraged to this way, by what I
found recorded in Sacred Writ, in which there was an overflowing Fullness as to
me, and a very Incentive to a Proceeding in my intended Design, In Judah is God
known, his Name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling place in Zion. There brake he the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and
the Sword. And the Battle Selah. And a little farther we find these words, When
God arose to Judgment, to save all the Meek of the Earth: Surely the Wrath of
Man shall Praise thee; the remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain. Now, thought
I (musing on this Sweet Portion of Scripture) as the Wrath of Man, so the Wrath
of Satan shall Praise God; and the ramainder of that Wrath (how fierce or
boisterous soever) God will most certainly restrain: And this restraining is
chiefly to be expected and looked for in the Sacred Boundaries of Zion, For
there he breaks the Shield; that is, the Carnal yet Obstinate Defense poor
tempted ones make (through the cunning Delusions of the Devil) against the
Saving Comforts of the Gospel, when tendered to them in the day of their
Conflicts. There he breaks the Sword; that is, the Arguments poor tempted ones
(according to the Logic they have learned of Satan) do form, as it were, in
Mood and Figure, to wound and gall themselves with Horror and Despair. There he
breaks the Battle; that is, the long and tedious War poor tempted ones are
engaged in with Satan, in the fatal Course of which, they are spoiled of all
their precious and pleasant things; and by Satan's too prosperous Success, they
are miserably held down under the Hatches, and cannot help themselves; and
pitifully a long time kept in horrid Darkness, and can-see no manner of Light;
and lamentably made to walk in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and cannot in
the least find any Comfort. Oh! but when Prayers are made in and by a
Gospel Church, for such tempted worried Persons, God will (in answer to those
Prayers) Arise to Judgment, to save such meek ones of the Earth: And then and
there, he will Graciously break the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle. My
Thoughts ripening upon this comfortable Subject, I forthwith repaired to Mrs.
Mary, and acquainted her with what was upon my Spirit, and what I had in my
Thoughts resolved upon, as to the calling my Church together, to keep a Solemn
day of Wrestling with God for her, and asked her if she was willing to it. She
answered, I might if I pleased, but was something cold in the matter, seeming
to suggest, it would be of little avail as to her, nothing being likely to do
her any good, for she looked upon her Disease as past Cure, and her self as
past Remedy. I replied, God had (among other his Glorious Attributes) entitled
himself, A God hearing Prayer. And therefore upon this account, and for this
most Gracious Manifestation of himself, Praise always waits for him in Zion,
and there the Vow shall be performed And there Prayers shall be answered, and
seasonable Mercies shall be bestowed. Moreover (as I farther alleged) we are
told, The effectual (or working) Prayer of the Righteous, avail much. And if
the Prayers of God's People, solemnly met together, would so far reach the Ears
of God (which I doubted not but they would) according to his own word, Where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.
And had such Prevalency with him to awake for her, and to visit her with the
special Favor he bears unto all his. Her despairing Language would soon be
turned into another Tone, for then, She would see the Good of God's Chosen,
then she would rejoice in the Gladness of God's Nation; yea, then she would
Glory with God's Inheritance. And then a new Song would be put into her mouth,
even of Praise unto her God. So leaving her (pretty well satisfied) I took the
first Opportunity of propounding it to my People, who very willingly and
readily embraced the Motion: We agreed upon Friday the twentieth of May School.
and accordingly met in the Morning at a Private House in the Town, after a
little while being together, Mrs. Mary Harrison come to us, with a mournful
dejected Countenance, her Hood over her Face, she sat down over against me at
the Table. I then addressed my self to the Company in a few words, declaring
the cause of our meeting at that time, and opening (as well as I could) Mrs.
Mary's Case to them, begging their assistance and concurrence with me, in
laying close siege to the Throne of Grace for her. I began in Prayer, and then
called forth some of the Brethren, who prayed very meltingly and affectionately
for her. Indeed the Lord opened their mouths, and mightily helped them with apt
suitable and pathetical Expressions, which was no small Comfort and Refreshing
to me; for I plainly perceived the Cause was the Lord's (and he would own it)
since he enabled his Servants to plead it so notably with him: And I could not
but comfortably infer a pleasing Presage, that God was not far from appearing,
since the Grace of Prayer and Supplication was so eminently poured forth by
himself for it. For, thought I, with a Transport of Joy (little below an
Assurance of the thing) he never did yet say to the House of Jacob, and surely
he will not now assist any of the House of Jacob, to seek his Face in vain.
After the Brethren had concluded, I spoke from those words of Jonah, Chap. 2.4.
Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy Holy
Temple. I took notice of the first Verse, Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his
God out of the Fishes Belly. And I began with the word Then, as noting the
time: From whence I remarked these things,

First, It was a time of very great and amazing Surprise to Jonah, to be in the
State he was; poor Creatures are often plunged into those Soul-troubles they
never dreamed of: But notwithstanding the Greatness and Amazingness of their
Sorrows, it is then an especial time of going to God, as Jonah here did; and of
crying out with David, Psalm 39.7. And now Lord what wait I for? my hope is in
thee. Ah! God should be the Object of hope, in never so hopeless a Condition:

Secondly, It was a time of horrid and unheard of Temptation with poor Jonah:
Oh! what could he think (and to be sure the Devil was not wanting to push him
on to such Thoughts) but that he was a Castaway, since God, in his great
Displeasure, had imprisoned him in the bulky Walls of such an horrid Dungeon,
as never any Humane Creature was in before him. Surely for this his Heart must
needs be grieved, for this he must needs be pricked in the Reins: As Asaph said
of himself, Psalm 73.21. Yet notwithstanding this dreadful Temptation, his
Mouth was enlarged in Supplication, for even then he prayed.

Thirdly, This Then implies a time of some Glimpses of Gospel Light: For alas,
if he had not had some Rays of Redeeming Love in that dark hideous hole, he
would not, he could not, with such Fervency, have prayed unto God: For in Death
(Ay, and in despairing Darkness too) there is no remembrance of God; and in the
Grave (or in the horrible Pit of Despondency) who can give him Thanks, Psalm
6.5. So that Jonah, in the Darksome Cavities of the Whales Belly, through some
little Cranny, saw the dawning Light of Divine Favor.

Fourthly, This Then also implies, that Jonah had some Sense and Apprehension
of his being safe in the main, however dangerous his present State seemed to
be. And it is more than probable, his being miraculously preserved so long a
space of time, as three days and three nights, in such a gloomy Prison, did not
a little contribute to his so conceiving; For he did not Pray as a Stranger,
but as one that knew God, and had some dependence on his Mercy; and therefore
might breathe in David's Language, Psalm 116.16. O Lord, truly (for all thou
have dealt so strangely with me) I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the
Son of thy Handmaid: thou will loose my Bonds. Persons may be under very sad
and dismal Circumstances, and yet be safe in the main.

From the time I passed to the Act, He prayed, and showed what he prayed for.

First, He breathed after Freedom and Deliverance from his miserable Condition:
So Israel, in their Anguish, begged Moses to Pray to the Lord, to take away the
Serpents from them, Numb. 21.7. So Paul besought the Lord thrice, that the
Temptation might depart from him, 2. Cor. 12.8. When any poor Soul is
surrounded with Affliction, either outward or inward, it is his Interest, as
well as Duty, to be Praying hard for Deliverance. The Apostolical Rule is, If
any Man be afflicted, let him Pray.

Secondly, Jonah prayed for Strength, to bear that Weight and Pressure of
Grief, under which he was then groaning. Thus David prayed in the Bitterness of
his Soul, when under the Scorching of the Fiery Furnace, Psalm 25.16. Turn thee
unto me, and have Mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted. This turning
includes God's coming toward him with help and assistance, to enable him to
bear what he was pleased to lay upon him. Till God does deliver, we should Pray
for supporting Grace, that we may not dishonor him in the Hour of Temptation.

Thirdly, Jonah Prayed; that is, he humbly expostulated with his God,
concerning the present and unparalleled Dispensation. Thus we find Job often
expostulating under his sore and severe Trials: So also Heman, Psalm 77.7. Will
the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favorable no more? q. d. Thou love
thy People with an everlasting Love, and is there a Termination of this Love to
me. Oh! Clear up the meaning of this awful Providence of bringing my Soul into
such Shades of hideous Darkness, as to make me question the Continuance of thy
Favor: We may plead upon Gospel-Topicks, we may expostu ate upon
Gospel-grounds in an humble debased manner (it is our Privilege so to do) when
God's Hand is hard upon us.

Fourthly, Jonah prayed for Faith, for operative Faith, in the Power and
Goodness of God, in this time, and under this Dispensation. Thus the Father of
the Child prayed with Tears in his Eyes, Lord, I believe, help thou my
Unbelief. Oh! in time of Trouble we should Pray for the Faith the Leper had; of
whom we find it recorded, Matt. 8.2, 3. And behold there came a Leper, and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. And Jesus
put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will, be thou clean: and
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. Ah! what Encouragement have we to Pray
for Faith in God's Power, for that there is no Leprous State, but he can heal.

I next viewed the second Verse, which runs thus, And said, I cried by reason
of mine Affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; cut of the Belly of Hell
cried I, and thou heardest my voice. From whence I took notice of two words
here, which Jonah made use of, to set forth his present State, Affliction and
Hell.

First, Affliction: I cried by reason of mine Affliction. On which I grounded
the following Conclusions.

First, God knows every thing, and every Circumstance belonging to the
Affliction of poor Creatures. It had been in vain for Jonah to have cried to
the Lord in his Affliction, if God had not known his Affliction, yea, all and
every part of it. Leah called the first Son she bare Jacob, Reuben, Genesis 29.32.
which signifies, the Vision of the Son, or the Son of Vision: For he the Lord
saw and knew her Affliction, in being less esteemed by her Husband than Rachel.
We also read Exodus 3.7. And the Lord said, I have surely seen the Affliction of
my People which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, by reason of their
Taskmasters, for I know their Sorrows. Oh! what a mighty Encouragement is it,
to cry to that God in our Affliction, who knows every thing of our Affliction.

Secondly, God hears the groaning Cries, and bemoaning Lamentations of poor
Souls, under the heavy weight and pressure of Affliction. Jonah here
acknowledges God heard his Cry; so he heard Hagar's Sighing and Sobbing, in the
Sense of her great Affliction, when she, wholly disconsolate, and full of
Heart-perplexing Grief, was wandering in the Wilderness, Genesis 16.11. And
observe what he says of bemoaning Ephraim, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh: I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded; because I did bear the Reproach of my Youth. Is
Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord. Ah! this is Comfort indeed, to
the greatest Mourners, upon what account soever they are in a mourning State,
that God knows their Sorrows.

Thirdly, God has a gracious End and Design toward all that are his, in their
greatest and severest Affliction: And it is more than implied, that Jonah
apprehended this, when he thus cried to him: The Israelites were to eat no
Leavened Bread with the Sacrifice of their Passover, but the unleavened Bread
of Affliction, Deuteronomy. 16.3. That they might remember what they were once in
Egypt, and the gracious Design God had toward them, even in that Bondage
State. Oh! a Belief of this glorious Truth, would allay the tempestuous Sea of
Sorrow, when our Souls are bowed down with Anguish.

Fourthly, God will appear as answering of Prayer in the greatest Affliction:
When Jonah was crying, he heard by an Ear of Faith, God answering: And so we
find Israel acknowledging, Deuteronomy. 26.7. And when we cried unto the Lord God of
our Fathers, the Lord heard our voice, and looked on our Affliction, and our
Labor, and our Oppression. He is a Prayer-hearing God, and then especially,
when Prayer comes from the Anguish and Bitterness of the Soul: And we have not
only the Experience of his afflicted People, in all Ages, to witness this
Truth, but his own express word for it, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Oh! who would not beg
hard for a Praying Heart, and a Crying Tongue, when the blessed God has such an
hearing Ear.

Secondly, The other word that Jonah here sets forth the Misery of his
Condition by, is Hell, Out of the belly of Hell cried I: From whence I remarked
these Observations.

First, Poor Creatures (and yet Elect Vessels) may be in very dreadful
Torments, their Souls may be in very doleful Agonies: Hell is a place of
Torment; it is said of the rich Man, Luke 16.23. In Hell he lift up his Eyes
being in Torments. Hence great and grievous Soul-troubles are Metaphorically
called Hell: David speaks in the same Language, Psalm 18.5. The Sorrows of Hell
compassed me about. Now then when Jonah said here, Out of the belly of Hel^
cried I; It is as if he had said, In the midst of dreadful Torments and anguish
of Soul, I cried to my God.

Secondly, Poor Creatures may be surrounded with Sorrows every way, from above,
from below, from without, from within; thus David speaks of his case, Psalm
116.3. The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Pains of Hell gat hold upon
me, I found Trouble and Sorrow. That is, he was compassed about every way with
Woe and Misery: As Job's Messengers came from every Corner, sinking his Spirits
with ill News, and piercing his Soul with the Darts of disconsolate Tidings,
Job 1.16. So many chosen Vessels of the Lord, may be beset with Troubles and
Sorrows of every kind, which may make them roar and cry out, as those without
hope.

Thirdly, Poor Creatures may be worried and hurried by the Temptations of the
Devil, which is a Species of Hells Torture: As the Tongue is said to be set on
Fire of Hell, James 3.6. So, the Spirits of tempted ones, may be, and too often
are, borne down, and kept under the Hatches, by the Tyranny of Hells Monarch.
We find Paul complaining of a Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan
buffeting him, 2 Cor. 12.7. Oh! it is an Hell upon Earth, to be in the Claws of
Hells roaring Lion.

Fourthly, Poor Creatures may be, for a time, conquered and overcome by Hells
Sorrows; though The Gates of Hell shall not (absolutely) prevail, Matt. 16.18.
yet they may a great while, and in a great measure, prevail over many precious
Children of Zion; though God's chosen ones shall not be left to remain always
in Hell, as David, personating Christ, spoke with respect to the Grave, Psalm
16.10. Yet they may be left a long time under the power of Hell, to be crying
out as though they were for ever lost.

Then I took notice of the Dolefulness of Jonah's Complaint, as we have it in
the third Verse, For thou had cast me into the Deep, in the midst of the
Seas, and the Floods compassed me about, all thy Billows and thy Waves passed
over me. Wherein there is Metaphorically set forth,

First, The Sense he had of Sin, as the deserving Cause of what he now so
lamentably groaned under: Thou had cast me into the Deep, and that
deservedly, for my horrid and crying Sin of Disobedience, of which mention is
made Chap. 1.1, 2, 3. Now the Word of the Lord came unto Jonah the Son of
Amittai, saying, Arise, go to Nineveh, that great City, and cry against it; for
their Wickedness is come up before me: But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish
from the presence of the Lord. Here we find him shamefully turning his Back
upon the Commands of his God, and now in the Deep, he is sadly sensible of it,
and broken in Heart for it: So in like manner we find the Church acknowledging,
and that in a Soul-humbled and debased way, Lam. 5.15, 16. The Joy of our Heart
is ceased, our Dance is turned into Mourning: The Crown is fallen from our
head; Woe unto us that we have sinned. Ah! happy, if under the weight of Grief,
we have a Sense of the Evil of Sin.

Secondly, He was under Terrors of Conscience, and miserable Confusion in his
Spirit; this is implied in the word Seas, In the midst of the Seas. That he
was literally cast into the Seas, we read Chap. 1.15. So they took up Jonah,
and cast him forth into the Sea. But besides this, he was in a mystical Sense
in the Sea, that is, under the Rackings of a vvounded Spirit, under the Bitings
of a stinging Conscience: So that he was, as the Prophet told Pashur he should
be, Jer. 20.3. Magor Missabib, even a Terror to himself. Oh! Terrors of
Conscience, are the vvorst of Sea-storms.

Thirdly, He was overwhelmed with Sorrow; and this is implied in the word
Floods; And the Floods compassed me about: So that his Spirit, as well as his
Body, sunk as Lead in the mighty Waters: As it was said of Pharaoh and his
Host, when they were drowned in the Red Sea, Exodus 15.10. Our Savior thus
expresses the Misery that shall come upon all incorrigible Sinners, Matt. 18.6.
It were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Oh! who can be sensible of the
Troubles and Miseries, wherewith poor Jonah was overwhelmed when he was in the
Sea.

Fourthly, He was closely confined, not only as to his Body, but narrowly pent
up as to his Spirit: This is included in the word Billows, All thy Billows, and
thy Waves, passed over me. We read indeed of his being in the Whales Belly,
Chap. 1.17. And as that miserably confined his Body, so his Spirit was worse
restrained, through the awful Sense of Divine Displeasure. As David's once was,
Psalm 42.7. Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of thy Water-spouts: All thy
Waves, and thy Billows, are gone over me. Ah! how sad it is when the Soul is
depressed, grovelling in the Dust, and cannot look up for want of Strength and
Faith.

And so I came to the words of the Text, Then I said, I am cast out of thy
sight; yet I will look again toward thy Holy Temple: Which after I had opened,
by showing in what Sense Jonah was cast out of God's ^ight, and what was the
meaning of his looking again toward the holy Temple; I ^hewed what may befall
many, that God may yet be working Grace in, and have designs of eminent Good
unto.

First, They may be in a State of Blindness and Darkness, yea, thick and gross
Darkness may be a great while upon them. We read in the Gospel, of a Man that
was stark Blind, that was born so, and lived so all his days, yet by the Power
of Jesus, he immediately received his sight, Mark 10.51, 52. Ah! present
Darkness is no ground of Despair; you may see what God in his Word says to
such, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that ^eyeth the voice
of his Servant, that walks (...) Darkness, and has no light! Let him ^ust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon ^s God. Here is a certain Remedy for nose
that are in Darkness, to stay upon their God; and here is a Duty that God
requires even in a dark State, to trust in his Name.

Secondly, They may be (as to their own Apprehension) in a very hopeless and
helpless Condition, but yet even then, there is both Hope and Help for them, by
looking toward the holy Temple; that is, by looking to Christ, and believing
what he is, and what he says: Oh! hear that sweet word flowing from his Lips,
Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel to the Poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to
preach Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the Blind; to
set at liberty them that are bruised. Oh! What can be more fully and plainly
expressed? What can Christ speak more comfortably, and more encouragingly, to
poor wounded Souls to look unto him? Thus the Church, by Faith, looked to God
in a sad State, Lam. 3.55. I called upon thy Name, O Lord, out of the low
Dungeon. And did she call or believe in vain? Oh! No. Pray mark the next words,
Verse 56, 57, 58. Thou have heard my voice, hide not thine Ear at my breathing,
at my Cry. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: Thou said,
Fear not. O Lord, thou have pleaded the cause of my Soul, thou have Redeemed my
Life. And what the Church did here experience, all afflicted ones in like
manner shall experience to their unspeakable Joy, if they take the same course
of looking to the Lord in the day of Trouble.

Thirdly, They may have no Sense of God's Work in their Hearts, which yet for
all that may be really carrying on. We read of the Peoples smiting their
Breasts, upon the doleful sight of Christ's Agony on the Cross, Luke 23.48. But
many poor Souls are smiting their Breasts with Sorrow, because they can find no
effect of Christ's Death in their Hearts. They have not yet Ta^ed that the Lord
is Gracious, 1 Pet. 2.8. And therefore they are breaking forth into hideous
Lamentations, and giving up themselves as lost Creatures. Oh! but this is
through a great Mistake, there may be a blessed Work, a glorious Work begun,
and yet you not at present sensible of it.

Fourthly, They may be in their own Thoughts, without the in^^ential Motion of
God's Spirit: And hence they are day and night ^ourning, though still preserved
and not consumed, as the built was, Exodus 3.3. Oh! how many do look upon
themselves in no better a Condition, than those dry Bones which God showed the
Prophet, and asked him whether they could live, Ezekiel. 37.3, 4. But as these
Bones (the forsaken Jews) will live, when the Spirit of the Lord blows upon
them, so those Creatures, that are at present dry, and without Sap, and
therefore are mourning in secret, and crying out bitterly because of their
desolate State, shall most certainly (if they look toward the holy Temple, as
Jonah here did) find and feel, after a little time, the vivifying Influences of
God's Spirit, to their exceeding Joy and Comfort.

I then drew some Inferences from all this, which I will make a brief Rehearsal
of, and so proceed.

First, Then even in such a State, we are not really out of God's sight: Jonah
was obvious to God, when he was shut up in the Whales Belly; and so is every
Mourning Soul, though under the blackest Circumstances: Hear the Apostle as to
this, Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his
sight, but all things are naked, and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we
have to do. Not a Tear flows from our Eyes, not a Sigh or Sob comes from our
Hearts, though in never so secret a manner, in never so retired a place, but is
naked and open unto God. Christ told Nathaniel, John 1.48. When thou wast under
the Fig Tree, I saw thee. Ah! When any poor Creature is Weeping, Lamenting and
Bemoaning himself in Holes and Corners, even then and there God sees him.

Secondly, Oh! Then this State is the Will of God, which must be submitted to,
Is there any Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it. Jonah being in the
Whales Belly, was the Act of God, God put him there. So whatever Mourning State
thou art in, it is the Lord's doing. As Christ speaking of God's Gracious
Revelation of Gospel Light and Knowledge, rather to Babes, than to the Wise and
Learned, resolves it into God's Free Will and distinguishing Goodness, as the
only moving cause thereof, Matt. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good
in thy sight. So should every poor Creature, under the pressure of Temptation,
under Spiritual Conflict and Soul-trouble say, Even so Father, it is thy Will
it should be so; It has seemed good unto thee, thus to lay thy hand upon me;
and therefore come to this ^^sult (under such a Dispensation) with (...) dear
Redeemer, John 18.11. The Cap which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it. So, this stroke that my Father has laid upon me, shall I not bear it.

Thirdly, Then such a State is very dreadful to poor Creatures: To be under the
hiding of God's Face, and left to the Hurries of the Tempter, is sadly
terrifying and affrightning: The Spirit of a Man may sustain his Infirmity, but
a wounded Spirit who can bear. If it was a grievous thing to Abraham, to send
away his Son, and the Bondwoman, out of his House, Genesis 21.11, 12. Oh! How
much more grievous is it to poor Creatures, when their Rest is gone, Peace is
gone, and all Quietness is gone from them: In such a Perplexity was Jonah here,
in the Whales Belly: And thus David mournfully complained, Psalm 30.7. Thou
did hide thy Face, and I was troubled. It Is not a small, but a very sore,
great, tormenting Trouble, when a Soul is left in the Dark, and cannot see any
Rays of Divine Light.

Fourthly, Oh! Then, even in such a State, God is with poor Creatures, though
they may not know it: As he was with Jonah in the Whales Belly. Joseph was in a
sad Condition (and without doubt not a little dejected in Spirit) when he was
put in Prison in a strange Land, among a strange People, far from his Father's
House. But the Lord was with Joseph, Genesis 39.21. And so he is with all his
Suffering ones; He is with them to uphold them, that they may not be wholly
crushed by Satan's Assaults, and to help them to quench all the fiery Darts of
the evil one; which he will most certainly do in his own time: We have his
positive word for it, Isa. 41.14. Fear not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of
Israel: I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of
Israel. Though you find no help at present, yet God will help you (if you look
to him) according to his Promise, for he is with you.

Fifthly, Then God can open a Door of Comfort, even in such a State, as he did
to Jonah here in the Whales Belly: For his looking toward the Holy Temple,
implies no less: As it was said of Ezra, Neh. 8.5. And Ezra opened the Book in
the sight of all the People (for he was above all the People) and when he
opened it, all the People stood up. So, when the blessed God, who is over all,
and above all, shall open a Door of Hope, (and such a Door he will open to
every Mourner in Zion) all his dejected ones, that are now grovelling in the
Dust, shall stand up, yea, they shall lift up, their languishing Eyes, as
knowing, and plainly seeing, their Redemption draws nigh. See, Oh! see, what
an overflowing Fullness there is in the Promise as to this, H^s. 2.14, 15.
Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and
speak comfortably unto her: And I will give her her Vineyards from thence, and
the Valley of Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing there, as in the
days of her Youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the Land of Egypt.
You see what God has promised to do, and he has promised no more than he can
do, than he has done, than he will do, to all that are in Bitterness of Soul,
and do with patience wait for him.

Sixthly, Oh! Then such a State may be in order to the fitting us more for God,
more for his Will and Pleasure; as Jonah's being in the Whales Belly, was in
order to a better fitting and disposing him, to deliver that Message he at
first declined. We are told Psalm 5.5. The Foolish shall not stand in thy
sight. We are all Fools by Nature, and we cannot stand in God's sight, nor do
him any Service, till our Folly be purged out by the Fire of some Spiritual
Trial. We have a famous Story in the Gospel, of a Woman of Canaan, Matt. 5.22,
etc. who was frowned upon in her approach to Jesus, called Dog, put off a great
while, with many other Discouragements, and kept in the dark, without being
taken notice of, to the Wonder of the Disciples. But 'twas all the more to fit
her for that Mercy our Lord Jesus designed to bestow upon her. Oh! that all in
Spiritual Trouble, would believe that God is in, and by that Trouble, the more
preparing them for himself, and the Reception of his special Grace and Favor.

Seventhly, Then in such a State, God may be working for us, even whilst he is
laying his heavy Hand upon us. As God was working Deliverance for Jonah, even
then when he cast him into the Whales Belly: God was with David whithersoever
he went, 2 Samuel 7.9. and was working for him in the lowest Ebb of his Affairs;
yea, when he was crying out, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. So in
like manner he was working for Jacob, when the good old Man thought his
Condition most deplorable, Genesis 42.36. And Jocob their Father said unto them,
me have ye bereaved of my Children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye
will take Benjamin away: Ad these things are against me. Whereas the Event
shows, that every one of these things, did wonderfully make for him. Ah! How
much would the Belief of this Truth, lighten the Load of Spiritual Trouble, how
heavy soever it seems to be.

Eighthly, and lastly. Oh! Then such a State may be, and yet no real Anger in
God toward the Creature. It was in Love not Anger, that God put Jonah in the
Whales Belly: God was not angry with Abraham, when he took away his Wife from
him, Genesis 23.4. No more is he with those many poor Souls under the Oppression
of Spiritual Grief, whom he wounds with the Wounds of an Enemy, and with the
Chastisements of a cruel one, hed^ing up their way with Thorns, and filling
them for a time with Woe and Bitterness. And he sufficiently manifests, that he
is not angry, by the Conclusion of his Work upon all such, which is excellently
set forth in Zech. 13.9. And I will bring the third part through the Fire, and
will refine (...) as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried;
they shall call on my name, and I will he^r them: I will say, it is my People:
and they shall say, the Lord is my God. Though you are in the Fire, if the Lord
will (as nothing more sure than that he will) refine you by the Fire: Though
you are in Darkness (and walk as in the Shadow of Death) for the present; And
if the Lord will (as most certainly he will) ever long, say, Thou art my Child:
And if God will make you (as all that you now endure is in order to it) ever
long, say, The Lord is my God; yea, The Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my
Song, he also is become my Salvation. Then there is no Anger in the present
Dispensation, how grievous and lamentable soever it may seem to be. And this I
verily believe, and that upon good grounds (even Scripture-grounds) will be the
Event. Wait but a little, have Patience for a while, and you will joyfully find
it so to be. Amen and Amen.

Thus I have given you a brief Account of what was that day more largely
insisted upon, and more particularly applied to her, for whose sake it was
studied, and to whom, in a more especial manner, it was delivered. After all
was over, I had some private Discourse with her, much longing to know how it
was with her, whither any thing had affected her. And to my no little
refreshing, I found her in a more calm composed Frame, than I had ever seen her
before, since the beginning of her Troubles. And at that time, or a very little
after, she told me, with some Pleasingness of Aspect (which I observed in her
Countenance) S^e believed she should believe, though she could not yet. I do
not remember she had any more such extreme Fits of Agony after this day; or
that she broke forth into such direful Exclamations and Lamentations, as she
did before: Which made me heartily bless God both publicly and privately, for
the beginning of his Appearance, though it was but in a restraining way; that
though she had not that solid Comfort, and inward Peace, which I did
unfeignedly wish her, and sincerely, without ceasing, begged for her; yet she
had much greater ease, with respect to her Burden, under which she had so long
a time groaned, and was not tortured with those griping, and Soul-tormenting
Pangs, as frequently in days and months past, she had been. In this middle
State (as I may say) which as to her was neither clear nor dark, neither day
nor night but something between both, she remained several Weeks; in which time
I frequently went to her, (as my other occasions would admit) but she very
often came to me, earnestly desiring me to pity her, and pray for her, but
would never go away till I had prayed with her. Her Discourse was grave and
moderate, yet always in a complaining Strain, Lamenting (...) absence of God,
and bitterly crying out of her hard deceitful Heart. As Winter came on, she
grew more and more Melancholy; yet the Fire of her Sorrow was confined to, and
pent up in the Hearth of her own Breast, and burned inwardly, to the great
decaying both of her outward and inward Man; and manifested it self only by the
Sparkles of some woeful Sighs and Sobs arising from her Heart, that could not
possibly be kept down. Oh! With what languishing and pitty-bespeaking Eyes did
she look upon me: How mournfully, and in a low still Voice, would she say to
me, Ah! Sir, you know not how it is with me, I am a great deal worse, and in a
much sadder Condition than you can imagine. This doubled my Concernedness for
her, and put my Spirit upon the Rack in musing for her. What, thought I, come
into the Harbor, ready to drop Anchor, and yet forced again to Sea upon the
main Ocean, to be tossed with these impetuous Waves. I spoke as the Lord
enabled me, (whatever words he put in my Mouth) unto ^er, I prayed again and
again, from time to time, with her, I Wept, and made Supplication to my God for
her, but no Alteration for the better could I see in her, for the Comforter was
not yet come. Therefore was she again Weeping, and her Eyes running down with
Tears, therefore was she crying in the Morning, and bemoaning her self in the
Evening, because he that alone could relieve her Soul, was far from her, and
because the things that belonged to her Peace, were (as yet) hid from her Eyes.

Two things I confess in this interim run in my mind, that were a great Support
to me under my unfeigned Trouble and Anxiety for her. The one was, that the
Holy God, who is above the reach of Angels in his doings, who gives no account
to Creatures in Heaven or Earth of any of his Matters, for Reasons and Ends
best known to himself, would convey Comfort to her from some other hand, I was
not to be the Person. The other was, That this might be the last Effort of the
Tempter, and that he was come down in the greater Wrath, because he knew he had
but a short time, to be Disquieting and Perplexing the Soul of this tender
Lamb. And I was not deceived in either of them, as the sequel will show; For my
Occasions calling me about that time to London, where (as soon as I came)
meeting with that truly eminent, and excellent Servant of the Lord Jesus, Mr.
Richard Robins, he told me he had received a pressing Invitation, to begin the
Work of God, in the new Erected Meeting House at Chichester, and was
accordingly preparing for his Journey, and earnestly importuned me to supply
his place in his absence: I yielded on this Condition, that he would go one
Sabbath to Havant, that so my own dear People might not be wholly destitute
during my stay at London, which I foresaw would be two or three Weeks; to which
he consenting, on these terms we parted. And after he had been one Lord's Day
at Chichester, he (according to his Promise) went the next to Havant, and a
blessed going it was for (now no longer poor but rich) Mrs. Mary Harrison: For
then (by his Ministry, through the Gracious Concurrence of the Spirit of God)
what was said of old to Israel, was abundantly made good to her, in full
measure, yea, running over, Ezekiel. 16.6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee
polluted in thy own Blood; I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, Live:
Yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, Live. God now so saw her,
as to pity her; and so pitied her, as to speak; yea, he spoke loud and home
by his Servant to her, and by the Power of that Word, not only sounding in her
Ears, but through the mighty Efficacy of it, reaching her Heart, and piercing
into her very Soul, he made her Live. He at that time ( For the time to favor
this Captive Daughter of Zion, yea, the set time was come) breathed into her
that Life, which in the Inchoation of it was Spiritual, and in the Perfection
of it, is now Eternal. So again v. 7. I have caused thee to multiply, as the
bud of the Field; and thou have increased, and waxen great, and thou art come
to excellent Ornaments; thy Breasts are fashioned, and thy Hair is grown,
whereas thou wast naked and bare. Oh! verily, she that was as a dry Plant, as a
withered and dead Tree, began now to bring forth Fruit, as A Tree planted by
the Rivers of Waters, even the Tree that is full of Sap, one of those Cedars of
Lebanon which God has planted. She that was so little, so nothing in her own
Eyes, received now (thorough the Golden Pipes of Grace, emptying themselves
into her Soul) some Life and Strength, and began to increase in that Strength.
She that before could not in the least taste or savor any word, that one and
another of the Servants of the living God was continually speaking to her, had
now her Breasts fashioned, to receive and let in the sincere Milk of the Word,
which now was precious to her, and more esteemed by her, than her necessary
food. She whose Thoughts before were desperate, being of nothing but
Destruction and Perdition, and of being miserable for ever, could now joyfully
think of the Love of God in Christ, and apply it to her self. Thus (through the
infinite Riches of Free Grace to her) her Hair began to grow; she who before
savv (and could see nothing else) and therefore deeply bevvail'd her self as
naked and bare; now began (the Scales falling from her Eyes) to apprehend the
Righteousness of a Mediator, and to have a comfortable Sense thereof, as most
excellent Ornaments for her reviving Soul. And now she savv, and seeing
believed, that being Clothed upon with that House which is from Heaven, she
should not be found naked. Yet again, V. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and
looked upon thee, Behold! thy time was the time of Love, and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: Yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a
Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. Oh! verily!
Now was the time of Love, as to her Soul: Now was the Holy Jesus coming
toward her (his Face shining with the resplendent Beauty of Gospel Grace and
Love) saying to her, I am thy Savior, and thou art in the number of my
Redeemed ones, I will cover thee with the Glorious Robe of my Everlasting
Righteousness, and thou shall appear therein without Spot or Wrinkle before my
Father, and before the Holy Angels. Therefore cease thy Grief, dry up thy
Tears; For though thou have lien among the Pots; yet now thou shall be as the
Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold. And
now thou shall know, that I have loved thee with an everlasting Love, for
with loving kindness will I draw thee. Mr. Robins, as though he had been (as I
doubt not but he was) specially directed from above; preached that day from
these words, Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold! Satan
has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat. But I have prayed for
thee, that thy Faith fail not. Which he so managed (through the assistance of
God's Spirit) and brought so many Gospel-Cordials and Comforts from it, as gave
abundant satisfaction to this languishing Mourner; insomuch that her Sorrovvs
(like the Waters of the Flood) apparently were abated, and her long Captivity
seemed to be turning about as the Rivers of the South. She was so sensible
that this Holy Man was a Messenger sent of God to her, an Interpreter, one
among a thousand, to show unto her the Ransom God has found and accepted for
poor Sinners, and for her in particular; and to declare the glad Tidings of
Salvation to her Soul, resulting from therein, that she immediately repaired to
Chichester, and attended upon the Word dropping from Mr. Robins his Lips,
during his stay there. Mr. Robins, after a little time, planted a Church there
(such an amazing Change was wrought on many, by the mighty Power of God
accompanying his Ministerial Labors) and this Plant God has since abundantly
watered with the Dew of his Blessing, so that it is now as the Garden of God,
the pleasant Field which the Lord of Hosts delights to bless. Mrs. Mary
Harrison (after frequent Conferences with Mr. Robins, and being enlightened by
him in the Mystery of Gospel Grace and Love) joined her self with the Church,
and sat down at the Table with them at their first Solemnity of breaking
Bread; yet on this Condition, to be redismiss'd to the Church at Havant, when
they were Organically completed, and so in a Capacity to do it. But before
this could be effected, she was translated to a better Church than either, even
To the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are in Possession
of the Glorious Mansions of Heaven: And to the Spirits of Just Men made
Perfect, among whom she is, (and ever will be) with her God: In whose presence
there is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand there are Pleasures for
evermore. Glad was I (yea my very Soul rejoiced) at my return from London, to
find such an amazing Change in her, for now she could speak in the Language of
Canaan, now she could discourse in the Dialect of the new Jerusalem, praising
the Lord for his Redeeming Goodness: Now she could tell (her Lips being opened
in a wonderful manner) the delightful Stories of God's marvelous Dispensations
toward her, in a way of special Grace and Favor; for now she saw in part (and
that part filled her with inexpressible Comfort) The Good of God's Chosen: Now
(in spite of all Satan's Suggestions, and Hellish Machinations) she could
rejoice in the Gladness of God's Nation: And now, (notwithstanding the late
Cloud that was upon her, the late darkening Eclipse that quite overspread her)
she could Glory with God's Inheritance. For now she heard the Voice of her
Beloved speaking to her, Cant. 2.10, 11, 12. Rise up my Love, my fair one, and
come away: For lo, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone: The Flowers
appear on the Earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come, and the voice of
the Turtle is heard in our Land. Oh! then, Arise my Love, my fair one, and come
away. Again Verse 14. O my Dove that art in the Clefts of the Rock (that is,
hid in the Eternal Electing Love of God) in the secret places of the Stairs
(that is, kept secretly from sinking, though woefully tossed with the Waves and
Billows of Temptation) Let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice, for
sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely. And therefore Now, we that
were mournfully bemoaning of her, rejoiced with her; yea, with loud Peals of
Joy, blessed and praised God for her. Yet she had her Ebbings, as well as
Flowings; and Fears as well as Comforts, after this: And her Discourses were
very often mixed with Mistrustings and Doubtings of her self: She had now and
then the dark side, as well as the bright side, of the Cloud; to show that she
was not yet beyond the reach of Satan's Snarlings, though above the force of
his rampant Power. Hence, to her dying hour, she served the Lord with Fear, and
rejoiced before him with Trembling. She always had a Dread upon her Spirit of
miscarrying, under which I labored what I could to support her.

A little after Mr. Robins left Chichester, came down that Sweet and most
Spiritual Preacher Mr. Hammond, to the new Meeting House; at which juncture of
time I was confined to my Bed by a severe Fit of Sickness, which I (and so did
others) thought had been unto Death: But my Gracious God (in whose Hands our
times are) ordered it otherwise: Now by reason I was wholly incapable of
Preaching, most of my People that had Horses, went to Chichester to hear Mr.
Hammond, among whom precious Mrs. Mary Harrison was none of the backwardest:
But, Oh! with what wonderful Refreshing, and enlivening in her Inward Man did
she return: She presently come to my Bedside, and told me what a rich Cordial
she had that day, which was so Comforting, so Ravishing to her, she was even
ready to break forth into the Virgin Mary's Ecstasy, My Soul does magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. For verily Jehovah
regarded the low Estate of this Hand-maiden, and he that is mighty, did great
things to her that day, in putting such a Word of Comfort and Support, in the
Mouth of his dear Servant for her: Oh! Holy is his Name. Mr. Hammond was upon
that Text, Jer. 31.3. The Lord has appeared of old unto me, saying, yea, I
have loved thee, with an Everlasting Love; therefore with Loving Kindness have
I drawn thee. Oh! the Sweet and Soul-charming Doctrine of the Eternal Love of
God to poor Sinners, did mightily affect her; and she melted under it, as being
overcome therewith. This silenced all her Objections, this resolved all her
Doubts, this expelled all her Fears, so that now she could (as ever after she
did) lie down in Peace, and the Enemy no more made her afraid, for now she was
hid in the hollow of God's hand, and even beyond Conception supported in the
Joyful Sense of his Everlasting Love. Thus she continued a few Weeks, in an
Holy, Humble Frame, amazingly Growing, yea, gloriously Shining, in Grace, and
in the Knowledge of her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And then took her Flight
into the upper Regions, as being one of whom, this every-day perishing and
decaying World was not worthy. We read Genesis 47.29. And the time drew nigh, that
Israel must dye. So now, the time drew nigh, very nigh, that this Heavenly
Saint, this Celestial Bride, every way fitted and prepared by the Efficacy of
Grace, for the Royal Bridegroom, must dye, and go into the Arms of her Beloved
Jesus. Her Sickness, (if we may call it Sickness) was very short, and hardly
discernable: She was at Meeting June the 18th in the Morning, I observing her
Countenance very pale; and missing her in the Afternoon, I went on Monday to
see her, and found her in the Kitchen: She complained of an inward Fever, and
told me, she was a great deal worse than her Mother, or any about her, did
imagine. I discoursed a while with her, laboring to divert her from the
Thoughts of her Sickness; which I confess I had as low thoughts of, as any body
else: And so for that time was taking my leave of her (little thinking it was
the last time that ever I should see her) but she putting her hand upon mine,
desired me, with a Sigh, to go up into her Chamber, which I immediately did,
her Mother and Sister following us; as soon as we were sat down, she begged me
to seek the Lord for her: She spoke very inward, which I have since very often
reflected on, but then did not mind it. After Prayer I earnestly admonished
her, not to give way to Melancholy, poring upon her supposed Illness, (for
indeed my very Soul loved her, and she was beyond what I can express dear to
me) and so I left her, to my unexpressible Grief, never, (Oh! that is a Cutting
word) never more to behold her in this World. I am very sure (if I may be
thought to have any competent knowledge of my own Inclination had I known
how near she had been to her end, I should not, I could not, have stirred day
or night from her. But God, who knevv my Weakness, cast a Vail before my Eyes,
and by a special, though avvful Providence, blocked up my way, so that I could
not give her another Visit: For thus it was, The next day I was sent for in
all haste, to a very precious and eminently-Godly dying Sister of our Church,
about a Mile out of Town, who, before I could get to her (though I made all
speed imaginable was Speechless, and almost Breathless, which was no small
Affliction to me; so that I had nothing to do, but very briefly (for she
survived not many Moments after I come in) to recommend her departing Soul into
the Arms of her Redeemer, (whose Arms were opened to receive her.) As soon as
I had done, she gave up the Ghost, and was, I doubt not, carried by the Angels
into Abraham's Bosom, for she was a very Holy Woman. I immediately retired
home, and though I passed by Mrs. Mary Harrison's Door, I had not power to go
in, my Grief was so exceeding great, but hastened to my Closet to give some
vent to my over-burthened Heart: Indeed our poor Church had a great loss in
her. The next day my Thoughts were taken up about the Funeral Sermon I was to
Preach for that dear deceased Sister. In the Evening of that day, my very
valuable Friend and Brother, Mr. Robins, called to see me, as he come from
Portsmouth: He told me, he had been with Mrs. Mary Harrison, which I was
extremely glad of, acquainting him with the reason I had not seen her, neither
that day, nor the day before; I earnestly enquired about her, and he told me
she was out of order, but he apprehended no great danger, at least for the
present, for that she was up, and went with him into another Chamber (company
being in hers) to have some private Discourse with him; only she was something
down in her Spirits, and seemed to be a little under a Cloud: For she was
(though nobody knevv it) near landing, and upon the breach of the Shore. Mr.
Robins and I sat together very late, and Purged him to stay with me that
night, but he would go to Chichester, though it was past Nine when he went
away. Then I prepared for Bed, yet not forgetting dear Mrs. Mary then (nor
never before) neither in my Family, nor by my self. The next Morning early, a
Gentleman came to see me, and as we were walking in the Hall together, my Boy
came running in with a frightful look, and told me, Mrs. Harrison was dead.

Here I must be silent, for it is in vain to attempt doing that by words, which
words cannot do: And I am sure, to set forth the great Surprise and Amazement I
was in at this sudden and unexpected News, is much beyond the power of any
words that ever flowed out of a Cicero's Mouth* Indeed the Confusion I was in
was such, and so predominant, as much unfitted me for that solemn Funeral Work,
I was a few Hours after to be engaged in: But my Gracious God notwithstanding
carried me thorough it: For I always (as then) found the most assistance from
him, when I had the greatest Diversion by intervening Obstacles. And thus, Sir,
I have a great while entertained you with a very Melancholy Theme, I mean, the
Tragical Passages of this young Gentlewomans Life, from the day of her first
awakening: Yet not without Intermixtures of Comfort and Pleasure in God's (at
length) appearing for her, and speaking out of the infinite Riches of his Free
Grace, Peace unto her, after a wearied Conflict with the Tempter, after a long
passing through the Valley of Bacha, and rolling on the Floor of Bochim, though
checkered with many Obumbrations, and interposing Clouds. But the best Wine was
reserved to the last Act and Period of her Life, for in the very last Hour
(that great Hour, which is the Horizon between Time and Eternity) God fully
opened her Eyes (as he did Hagar's in the Wilderness) and made her see a Well
of Water, even the Water of Everlasting Life. And now was she Abundantly
satisfied with the Fatness of God's, and made to drink of the Rivers of his
Pleasure. Now a rich Table was spread for her, in the presence (and in spite)
of her envious Adversary, who had been so long haunting her, and vexing her
righteous Soul from day to day: Now was her Head anointed with the Oil of Joy
and Gladness, above most of her Fellow-Saints in such a State: Now she was made
to lie down in green Pastures, and led beside the still Waters: And now, Oh!
now, after so much Fearfulness and Trembling had come upon her, after such
great and dreadful Horror had so long overwhelmed her, her Soul was fully and
perfectly restored, and she set at liberty, and that not only from the
Suggestions of Satan, whereby she was plunged for a time into a Gulf of
Misery, but from all the Evils, Perils and Dangers, in the Regions of
Mortality, which she had been so long burdened, and lamentably afflicted with:
For Now, was given to her, the Wings of a Dove, wherewith, in a wonderful
Swiftness and Celerity, she flew up into the Mansions of Everlasting Glory. At
night, when the Room was cleared, her Relations departed, leaving her to her
Repose, (little thinking or imagining her end had been so near) she said to a
sober Maid that staid and watched with her, in an Ecstasy of Joy, though with a
quivering Voice, I see my Savior, I have him in my Arms:
I know that my Redeemer Lives.


With which words she sweetly closed her Life, and so shall I the Account of
it, with this earnest and unfeigned Wish, Sic mihi contingat vivere. Sicque
mori.
Lord let me live in this Saints high degree,
And let my Death (like hers) Triumphant be.


I will now give you her Picture (drawn according to my weak Ability) with a
Sacred regard to Truth, as to every Feature in it; and though Strangers may
not, I am sure all the Household of Faith hereabouts will, believe me, because
they knew her, and therefore know that every thing I say of her is really true.

First, She was under a thorough and most effectual Conviction, her Wound was
not Skin-deep, but reached and pierced her very Heart, yea, her whole Heart was
deeply afflicted: I have rational Grounds for my Confidence in a erting, that
the Jailer, when He called for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and
fell down before Paul and Silas, Acts 16.29. Nor Mary Magdalen, when she lay
prostrate at her Savior's Feet, bitterly Weeping and Lamenting her self in the
woeful Sense of her Sinful State, Luke 7.37. No, nor Manasseh, when his proud
Heart was broken, and his Soul bowed down with Pain and Anguish, so that He
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. Were
either of them (for surely they could not be) more thoroughly, more effectually
struck, than this young Maiden was: I have been with many (very many) in my
time, under very sharp Convictions, in dreadful Soul-pain and Anguish, under
the woeful Apprehension of their Lost State. But I must leave this Solemn
Testimony upon Record, I never saw the like of her before. She was, and that
for many Months together, in the same Passion of Sorrow as Peter was, at his
Master's looking upon him on the Cock's Crowing, when he went out, and wept
bitterly, Luke 22.62. That is, Abundantly, out of great Grief, and Anguish of
Spirit.

God's look (like Lightning) terrified; as Thunder
His Voice did roar, and broke her Heart in sunder;
Temptations great, a long time she lay under,
Till Grace that Conquest made, which truly was a Wonder.
Secondly, Her Conviction was Operative, and very effective to the gracious end
God designed it: She was in the Fire, in the scorching flaming Fire, but God,
for his Names-sake, did defer his Anger; yea, for his Praise he did refrain for
her, that he might not cut her off; but, Beh^ld, he refined her, but not with
Silver, he chose her in the Furnace of Affliction, Isa. 48.19. The heavy Rod
upon her, had a Voice laudable and intelligible to some round about her, though
not at present to her self: And it spoke the Language we find, V. 17. Thus
says the Lord thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, I am the Lord thy God,
which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou
should go* Oh! this way of Temptation, of Soul tribulation, was the way, the
very way, she must go, God had so appointed and determined for her, and he
wonderfully made her to profit in, and by this way. It Is true, she too often,
and too much (whilst she was in this way) spoke in the despairing Language of
Cain, My Punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4.13. And as Judas, I have
sinned, Matt. 27.4. And lamentably roaring out with Francis Spira, that she was
a lost Creature, and must perish for ever: Yet God secretly upheld her, and
kept her from sinking to the bottom. Though her Pangs and Pains were very
violent, even beyond what most ever knew; yet they were kindly, and in the
Judgment of the Judicious, helping forward the Birth, which was last happily
effected, to the Praise of God, her Comfort, and the exceeding Joy of all that
knew her.

Ah, happy Damsel, though thy Pains were great,
Angels were waiting to whipe off the Sweat,
Whilst that their Greatness did the Cure complete,
Thy wounded Soul was healing in the burning Heat.
Thirdly, Her Conviction was lasting and abiding; there was no occasion (as to
her) of that Complaint which God made of Ephraim and of Judah, Hos. 6.4, 5. O
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for
your Goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.
Therefore have I hewed them by the words of my mouth, and thy Judgments are as
the light that goes forth. After her first Throws came upon her, they never
left her till she had passed the New Birth; and therefore there was no need of
the Prophets hewing: No, we were forced to use and apply all the Comforts and
Cordials we could, to support her under her continued and uninterrupted
Agonies. She never (like Lot's Wife) gave one look back, after her alarming
call to come out of the Streets of Sodom. Above twenty Months she remained day
and night (without Intermission) in a very disconsolate and mournful
Condition, yet in all this time she never went to the Assyrian, or sent to King
Jareb, for help; though she saw her Sickness, and her Wound was very smarting,
she never sought Comfort by any indirect vvays, according to the Inclination of
the Flesh: But did patiently (though vvofully lamenting her self, with a
broken Heart and vvounded Soul) abide at the Pool of Bethesda, John 5.2. That
is, attended upon God's Word, discourse with God's People, wholy sequestring
her self from the World, and all vain Company, till the blessed Angel was sent
to stir the Waters for her.

Poor Mourning Dove, thy Grief did never cease,
From Sorrow's Bondage thou had no release,
Till Heaven was pleased to speak effectual Peace:
Oh! then, and not before, thy tortured Soul had ease.
Fourthly, As she was a constant Mourner under Conviction, so she was a secret
Mourner, always bemoaning her self, by her self. She would not Sit in any
Assembly, nor Rejoice in any Company, but sat in her Chamber pensive alone,
because of the Lord's Hand, that was upon her; and because he had filled her
with Indignation. Hence her Pain was Perpetual, and her Wound seemed to be
incurable, Jer. 15.17, 18. What the Poet speaks extravagantly of Niobe's
Weeping, was in a great measure true of her; from Weeks end to Weeks end, her
Eyes were seldom dry: As it was said of Joseph at the sight of his Brother
Benjamin, Genesis 43.30. And he sought where to weep, and he entered into his
Chamber, and wept there. She was almost always in her Chamber, still Weeping
there. Indeed 'twas no easy matter (at least some particular times) to get her
out of her Chamber, though many Godly People, out of Love and Pity to her, did
often attempt it. Her Chamber was as the Valley of Tears, in which (even with
an eagerness of Mind) she immured her self; and I am persuaded would have lived
there, and died there, if she had been left to her self. She could not bear
much Company, nor endure to be where any thing of Mirth (though never so
innocent) was. One Instance among many I will give you; I very well remember
(and shall do while I live) that one day, Baptizing Mr. Millerd's Child (a
Brother of our Church) there was Provision made ready, and several Christian
Friends invited to partake of it, among whom was Mrs. Mary's Father and Mother:
As we were sitting down to Table, I asked her Mother, why her Daughter was not
with her: She told me she could not persuade her to come: Whereupon I desired
the People of the House to stop serving up of Dinner, and I would try what I
could do, which they willingly agreed to: I immediately repaired to her, and
found a Gentlewoman in the Chamber with her. As soon as I acquainted her with
the occasion of my coming, Oh! how much dissatisfied* she seemed to be, and
earnestly begged me to desist any farther talking about it. I told her plainly,
I would have no denial; and so renewed my pressing her going with me, the
Gentlewoman also backed the Motion with her earnest Persuasion; but we both of
us found Work enough to prevail with her, and were so long about it, that
Dinner was almost spoiled: At last, rather wearied than overcome, by violent
Importunity, she gave me her Hand, and away I brought her, but she walked like
a Shadow, and sat at the Table like a Ghost; she spoke nothing, eat very
little, and nobody durst speak to her, for they saw the Bitterness of her Heart
was very great, and the Dolours of her Soul were very grievous: As soon as I
had returned Thanks, she slipped from the Company, and forthwith retired to her
beloved Privacy. Where her Head was constantly as Waters, and her Eyes as a
Fountain of Tears.

This pi^ing Saint, whilst living seemed as dead,
In darksome Chambers hanging down her Head,
Refusing Comfort, or to taste of Bread,
She, she at last, was to the living Fountain led.
Fifthly, As after Conviction, she was a secret Mourner, so she was a secret
Wrestler with God. Private Prayer was her daily, and her nightly Work: Though
she would often tell me, (and that with bitter Sighs and Sobs) in a bemoaning
way, she could not Pray, her Mouth was closed, and her Heart was barred, but by
what I gathered out of her Answers to my Questions, I plainly found she did
little else but Pray; indeed, her Praying was, for the most part, like
Hannah's, She spoke in her heart; only her Lips moved, but her Voice was not
heard, 1 Samuel 1.13. And in this Praying, according to our Savior's Rule, Mat.
6.6. She entered into her Closet, and shut the Door, and prayed to her Father
in secret, who saw the prostrate debased posture she was in, who heard the deep
Sobs and Groans of her dejected Soul, and graciously vouchsafed his Ear unto
her. So that after long offering up of Prayers and Supplications; (like her
dear Redeemer before her) with strong Crying and Tears unto him who was able to
save her from spiritual and eternal Death, was at last heared, in that she
feared. She never thought I Prayed too often in secret with her; and she never
thought she Prayed too often in secret by her self: And now her mournful
Praying is turned into joyful Praising; now her doleful Sighing, is turned into
melodious Singing; now her heart breaking Groans, are turned into loud
Acclamations of Halelujahs: For now she is on the top of Mount Zion, in the
Presence of the Lamb, having her Father's Name written in her Forehead, among
the hundred forty four thousand, playing with them on their harps, and singing
with them the new Song, before the Throne for ever.

This new born Saint unto her God did cry,
And crying Wept, her Eyes were never dry,
Both Day and Night lamenting bitterly;
But now she is singing Praise with heavenly M^t^ly.
Sixthly, After Conviction, to her dying Hour, she had a very tender Conscience
And the greatest dread of Sin was the most visibly manifest in her, that ever I
saw in any Creature in my Life: She did not only hate Evil, but the very
appearance of it: That blessed Promise was eminently and most effectually
fulfilled in her, of God's taking away the heart of Stone, and giving an heart
of Flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. I could give you an Instance that would put this out of
all doubt, but it is so amazing, and having some cause to question whether ever
she acquainted any in the World with it besides my self, I will omit it; but
two other Stories, that are very well known, I will tell you; the one is, a
young Man in Chichester, Converted by Mr. Robbins his Ministry, and joined to
the Church there: Soon after his Conversion was brought into a Strait on this
Account: A great part of his Livelihood came in by attending on Weddings, as a
Musicianer, having an excellent Faculty that way. A Marriage was then coming
on, at which (as he told me himself) he had a prospect of getting near Five
Pounds; but thinking it scandalous to the Gospel, any longer to continue in
that Practice, he advised with his Brethren about his going, assuring them
without their consent he would not give his Attendance; they, in Consideration
of his low Circumstances as to the World, and that being part of his Calling,
were not forward to discourage him, but left him to his Liberty; he not
satisfied, came to me for Advice: I confess I was put to a stand, and the more
for that his Wife being then in a Carnal State, (tho since God has wrought upon
her) I knew not how her Spirit might be raised to exclaim against Religion, and
the Possessors of it, for hindering them of their Maintenance, I therefore
desired to be excused from giving my Opinion in it; but told him, to advise him
to go, I could not, and to dissuade him from going, I durst not; he then
requested me to ask my People about it, and he would acquiess in their
Judgment. To give him Satisfaction next time I preached on the Weekday, several
Members coming into my House after Sermon, as also Mrs. Mary Harrison, I then
broke the business to them, and desired them to give me their Thoughts upon it:
Every one spoke his Mind, some were violent against it, others more moderate on
the foregoing Considerations; but in short, they went away without coming to
any Result: After they were gone, precious Mrs. Mary (I shall never forget it)
took me by the Hand, and with Tears in her Eyes, very earnestly spoke the
following words, Good Dear Sir, beat off my Brother Betsworth from going to the
Wedding, and I will do what I can to make up his loss. These were her very
words, but the manner of speaking them, and the Agony of her Spirit in speaking
them, is above the power of a far better Pen than mine, lively to set forth.
The other Story is, In the days of her Vanity (before God touched her Heart)
seeing the Key in her Father's Desk or Trunk, she took thence some Money (under
twenty Shillings) to buy her some fine things, on which her Mind was wholly set
with the greatest eagerness that could be: But Oh! what an unspeakable Horror
had she in her Conscience for this in the day of her Conviction; she often
complained (or rather roared) about it to me, that she was a Thief, and had
stolen Money from her Father. The Devil was not wanting to aggravate the matter
for the farther perplexing her already too much disturbed Soul: At last she
told me she must tell her Father of it, and ask him Forgiveness for it: I
confess I labored to dissuade her from it; fearing (he being her
Father-in-Law) it might be of bad Consequence: Telling her, that though it was
very ill done, yet being several Years since, and she one of the Family, I
thought a thorough Sense of the Evil of it, which 'twas plain she had, and
seeking Pardon o^ God in the Blood of Christ was sufficient; for though
Confession of Wrong done in other cases was necessary, yet Prudence forbade it
in this case under her Circumstances, and the state of the Family: Several
knowing Christians to whom she communicated this Affair, concurred with my
Judgment; but this did not Satisfy her, she still persisted in her Resolution
of confessing it to her Father: And one Night as I was with her late, after
Prayer being about to leave her, she told me, she would not, nor could not keep
this thing any longer from her Father's Knowledge; she had such a Fire burning
in her Conscience, which was not to be quenched till she did it. I replied, If
that was her absolute Determination, I desired I might be by to back it, not
knowing how her Father might resent it. To which she consenting we sent down
for him, but he was either Busy with Company, or at Supper, and I not being
willing to stay longer, it was deferred till next day. But after I was gone, and
the Family with her self also in Bed, about Midnight, so powerful and
influential was her terrifying Conscience, she rose up, and as I think,
slipping on her Nightgown, ran to her Father's Chamber, and approaching his
Bedside, in a penitential heart-moving Tone, confessed her Guilt to him; upon
hearing of it, He to his honor like a generous, honest, tenderhearted Man,
freely forgave her, to her no small Comfort: The next day after Dinner, at the
Hour appointed, I went to her, expecting the performance of what she had been
so long harping upon, but when she told me, she had already done it, and where,
and in what manner, Oh! how was my Soul struck with Amazement; I presently
thought on Solomon's words, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows his own Bitterness,
and a Stranger does not intermeddle with his Joy. O blessed God, thought I, how
does this young Convert outstrip those of the highest Form in thy House! I
confess, I had much higher thoughts of her, and much lower thoughts of my self,
ever after that Day: But stay, I am called to Hearken (and Oh! that you, and
all that read this Tract would Hearken with me) to what John heard, Rev. 14.17.
And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the Dead
which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Ah! this holy Virgin
is One of the blessed Dead, that do rest from her Labors of Sorrow and Anguish
for Sin, and her Works of Faith, Repentance, and Love, do follow her.

This heavenly Lamb, when she escaped the Gin,
That Satan laid, and after was let in
Jehovah's Courts, Oh! how she dreaded Sin,
Its Fear did pierce her Soul, and made her Body thin.
Seventhly, As after Conviction she had a dread of Sin, of any Sin, so more
especially of her own Sin, of her former beloved Sin Pride: Certainly never was
any Creature (below a Glorified State) more Mortified to that particular Sin
than she was. Oh, with what Loathing, Abhorrence, and Disdain, would She speak
of it! David accounted it an undeceivable mark of Sincerity, that he was got
above his darling Lust, Psalm 18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept
my self from mine Iniquity. What David's Iniquity was, I may Guess, but not
Conclude; but this I am sure, Pride was hers. And she through the mighty power
of Grace, kept her self from it. It was her right Eye, and she was enabled to
pluck it out; it was her right Hand, and she had power from God to cut it off,
that she might be fit for the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.29, 30. From the day of
her Conviction (when the terrors of the Almighty took hold of her) off went her
Top-Knots, and all superfluous Finery, and never put on more; what was her
Glory before, was her Shame now; Her adorning was no longer the outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, the wearing of Gold, or putting on of Apparel;
but the hidden Man of the heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the
Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God, of great
Price. Oh, that all the young Ladies and Gentlewomen in England, had seen her
ghastly Looks, and heard how dolefully she bemoaned her self for her horrid
Pride, which was once so Rampant in her! It could not (I think) but be an
effectual Antidote against their staying so long at the Glass; and being so
curiously exact in decking and adorning the outside of their decaying Bodies:
Oh! if they had beheld (as I and many others did) how dear and costly this Sin
was to this young Damsel, they would sure be more afraid of it: She was
weeping, and Crying, and continually Lamenting the pride of her vain heart: But
as it is said of the Church, she had the Moon (that is the World) under her
feet; so this precious Saint had at last the Sin of Pride under her feet; and,
Oh! how did she trample upon it, how did she contemn and despise it!

In musing on this matchless Saint, I cried,
Thou being so wholly dreined from all Pride,
As one not fit here longer to abide,
Go to thy Bridegroom, go, thou true celestial Bride.
Eighthly, As after Conviction she was Mortified to all Pride, so she did in a
wonderful manner, beyond any President I ever saw, shine forth in the contrary
Grace Humility. She had learned of her Savior, to be meek and lowly in heart
Mat. 11.29. And so excellent well she learned, that none tabernacled in a Body
of Flesh, could have a more Debasing thought of Self, than she had; She sat
with Job in the Ashes, and with Hezekiah, counted all her Prayers and the best
of her Performances, but as the chattering of a Crane, or Swallow, Isa. 38.14.
The Vilest of Creatures was her constant Motto; That no body was Worse, that
every body was better than she, was the undissembled Thought of her Heart. When
she was most Lovely in the Eyes of others, she was even then most Mean in her
own; she could not bear to be in the least praised, nor endure that any should
speak well of her, though she was enabled to Sing the Lord's Song on the
Borders of Canaan after her return from a long Captivity: Indeed in her
languishing Condition, she was made Humble by God's Providence, but when she
was Healed, she was kept Humble by his blessed Spirit.

This Saint beholding great Jehovah's Face,
Her self as low as Hell she did debase,
Hence 'twas she flourished so, and grew apace,
She was the humble one, replenished with all Grace.
Ninthly, After Conviction she was in a Gospel Frame, wholly molded into the
Spirit of the Gospel. These Two eminent Servants of the Lord Jesus, Mr. Robins,
and Mr. Hammond, led her into the Paths of Gospel Light and Truth, (in which
she was extremely delighted) so that the extolled, and much magnified Mountain
of Man's Righteousness, and Legal Performances, became (...) a Plain; and by
their Ministry the He^^^^stone (the Lord Jesus Christ) was presented to her,
and she was enabled (by the Spirit's Breathing in her) to cry out, Grace, Grace
unto it, Zech. 4.7. Hence, though Interest and Relation, with some other
Obligations had entangled her with another sort of Men, yet after her
Acquaintance with those 'foresaid great Gospel Luminaries, they were very
little in her Eye; for She was convinced, not Doing, but Believing was the way
of the Gospel; and that not by any Works of Righteousness she had done, or
could do, but by the Free Grace of God in Christ, she was made what she was.
And therefore the breathing of her Soul was, to be found in him, not having her
own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith: That thereby she might know
Christ, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Sufferings, being made conformable to his death, Phil. 3.9.10. Oh! how her very
Soul rejoiced in the glad Tidings of the Gospel.

This glorious Saint, admiring Gospel Light,
Whose most corruscant Beams did shine so Bright,
Whereby her Darkness was expelled quite,
The Gospel brought a Day, a Day that had no Night.
Tenthly, After Conviction she was inflamed with Love to her dearest Jesus;
yea, with the Spouse she was Sick of Love, Cant. 5.8. As she had a Sense of the
Forgiveness of Sins as Mary had, she verily Loved much as Mary did, Luke 7.47.
She had a large Share of Gospel Grace, as the choice Blessing of Heaven; for
she loved the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. Tho she saw not
Jesus with her Bodily Eyes, yet she dearly Loved him, and that Love has brought
her to him, so that now She sees Him, and is Glorified with him, Rejoicing with
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory; for she has now received the end of her
Faith, even the Salvation of her Soul, 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. What things were formerly
her Gain, those she counted Loss for Christ; yea, doubtless, she counted all
things but Loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, her Lord;
for whom she suffered the Loss of all things, and did count them but Dung (or
Dog's-meat,) that she might win Christ. 3 Phil. 7.8. Oh Love was the ruling
Star in the Firmament of her Soul!

Though Satan for a while did cast a Mist
Over this Saint, at length she saw the Christ,
And seeing loved him as her precious Priest,
Now with his glorious Mouth her precious Soul is Kissed.
Eleventhly, As after Conviction she Loved Christ, so she loved the Ways of
Christ the Ordinances of Christ, the Members of Christ, the Ministers of
Christ, and that with a pure Heart, fervently: If our Savior's Character of a
true Disciple holds good, John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have Love one to another: And, if John's Evidence of the new
Birth, be any thing valid, 1 Epist. 3.14. We know that we are passed from Death
unto Life, because we love the Brethren. She was as visible a Disciple, as real
a Regenerate Person, and that to the apparent view of all, as 'twas possible
for any Creature to be. For I sincerely think, never any, especially in these
last days, possessed more of the Grace of Love than she did. Her very Soul was
wrapped up in the Saints Society; with them was her greatest, yea, her only
Delight. She had David's Spirit, and therefore could say with him Psalm 26.8.
Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells. I the least, and most unworthy of Saints, may say of her as David did
of Jonathan. Her love to me was wonderful, passing the love of Women.

This Saint, who Heaven ward so fast did move,
That She a Saint in every thing might prove,
As actuated from a Spirit above,
Most gloriously did shine within the Sphere of Love.
Twelfthly, After her Conviction, that she had tasted of the Love of Christ,
she was extraordinarily Solicitous, even with a burning Zeal, for the
Conversion of Sinners, especially of her own carnal Relations. Her warm
Discourses on this Subject, put me in mind of our Lord's Charge to Peter, Luke
22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. She was wholly of
Paul's Spirit, when he spoke so affectionately of the Jews, Romans 10.1.
Brethren, my Hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
Saved. Her Soul pitied such as were running headlong to Hell; her Bowels
yearned toward those that had no Sense of their own Condition: She could not
speak of any of her near Acquaintance, in an Unconverted State, without Weeping
for them, as our Savior did for Jerusalem, and with the same Pathetical Wish,
Oh! that they did truly know in this their day, the things that belong unto
their peace. The Night before She Dyed, or rather Translated, she expressed her
self to a Godly Woman, passionately Concerned for the Soul of her only
Surviving Sister, with these and more such Words, I am going to Heaven, but,
Ah! my poor Sister, -- [I hope it may have an Impression upon her, and the
Reading of this may be of Use unto her.]

This lovely Saint, who plainly did appear
A Lamb of God, possessed with holy Fear,
For the Souls of those that unto her were near,
Especially for all her own Relations Dear.
Thirteenthly, After Conviction she was full, very full of heavenly Discourse,
indeed her Discourse was nothing but Heavenly. She was then only in her proper
Element, when she was speaking of the Things of God, and the Wonders of
Free Grace. I have sometimes to try her, propounded some alien Subject to talk
of, but I could not forbear Smiling, to observe what a Loss always she was at,
in speaking of any thing but Spiritual Matters: She was as a Fish out of the
Water, or as a Man in the Water, nothing but Dashing and Plunging; every thing
but Heaven, was the Shibboleth which she could not frame her self to
pronounce, Judge. 12.6. And therefore after a little Faltring, she must and
would return to Heaven, which only was the Sibboleth she could plainly, and
with freedom speak. It was most clear and visible to all, that she was of
Christ, and belonged to Christ, for the continuedness, and the unaffectedness
of her Speech bewrayed her, Mat. 26.73. She believed in Christ, and out of her
Belly daily flowed forth Rivers of living Water. Her Speech, her whole Speech
was always seasoned with Salt, and very Edifying. I cannot but make this remark
on the Substance of her most excellent and serious Discourses. Though all she
spoke was not good for every thing, yet really every thing she spoke, was good
for something.

This Orient Star, this most resplendent Jem
A follower of Jesse's happy Stein,
Among the Saints, and praising, still with them,
She spoke the Language of the new Jerusalem.
Fourteenthly, After Conviction she was of an exact, and exemplary
Conversation; not one dead fly was ever discerned in this Box of precious
Ointment. I do not say she was soluta Legibus, in a perfect State, absolutely
freed from Sin; but this I may say, this I can say, and therefore this I will
say, (her excessive Love to, and causeless Value for, unworthy Me excepted) in
the Frame of her Spirit, and in the whole Course of her short Life, there was
as little Defect, as little Failure observable, as in any of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, how powerfully soever under the Work of Grace. And I will
thank that Man or Woman who truly knew her, that will show me her Fellow in any
part of England. As for my own Experience, I must and do solemnly declare, She
was the most Grave, Serious, Composed young Gentlewoman, that in all my
Travels, which have not been small, that in all my Converse, which has not been
little, I ever saw, or was acquainted with. Like Zacharias and Elizabeth, She
was righteous before God, and walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of
the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. And as Paul, she always, and in every thing,
exercised her self, to have a Conscience void of Offense, toward God, and
toward Men, Acts 24.16. Yea, the settled Frame of her Spirit was bent to the
exercising her self to Godliness, and that in all the parts of it; insomuch,
that I verily think (and I am not alone in my thoughts) the most eminent
Christians, the most famous Ministers in the Nation, without any Disparagement
to their Graces, might have Learned something of her: Every Step of her Life
was Teaching. And, Oh! that She had had more Scholars, and better Scholars,
than many of us, (and I especially) that were daily with her.

When 'twixt her Soul and Sin, Grace made a Breach,
She Shined in a manner to Impeach
The best of Saints, as well as Sinners teach,
How loudly unto both, her Holy Life did Preach.
Fifteenthly, After Conviction She did amazingly grow in Grace, her mighty
Progression Heavenward, is beyond what I or any Mortal can express. What David
said of himself, with respect to his Outward, was eminently true with respect
to her Inward Man; She praised God, yea in the Night she Sang his Praise, for
She was fearfully and wonderfully made (a Saint of the highest Form, a Star of
the first Magnitude in the Firmament of the Church Militant) mavelous were
God's Works in her (whereby as the Kings Daughter, she was all glorious within,
her Clothing was of wrought Gold) aad that her Soul knew right well. Though
none more Debased and Low in their own Esteem than She was. Solomon tells us,
Prove. 4.18. The path of the Just is as the shining Light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect Day: She shined in Grace, even to the dazzling the Eyes of
all that beheld her here, and now She is shining in the Perfection of Glory
above. Again, we are told, Psalm 92.12.13, 14. The righteous shall flourish
like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Those that be
planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They
shall bring forth Fruit in old Age, they shall be Fat and Flourishing. The
Palm Tree, as Naturalists observe, grows and ascends Higher in spite of all
Pressures and Weights: So did She, notwithstanding all her Afflictions; (and no
Mortal could be under greater than She was) She was planted in the House of the
Lord, and Wonderfully, even to the Admiration of all, flourished in the Courts
of our God. And tho she had not arrived to Old Age, she brought forth fruit in
abundance in her young Age, in the very Prime and Flower of her Years; She was
a Young, a very Young Maid, but an Old, and through-experienc'd Saint, so that
She went to the Grave in a full Age, like a Shock of Corn comes in, in its
Season. She had (tho in a very short time) fought a good Fight; She had (in the
compass of a few Days) finished her Course; She had (and that in Spite of all
the Devils Assaults) kept the Faith; and now, Oh! now, She is gone to receive
the Crown of Righteousness: She is gone to Heaven, to the Mansions of Glory in
her Father's House, whither her dearest Savior went before her, to prepare a
place for her, and there She is, sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of her Father: They wanted her Company, and
could no longer be without it, indeed She was fitter, much fitter for them than
for such sinful Creatures as we.

Ah! peerless Saint, whilst others are, so slow,
And how to creep along do scarcely know,
Thou, like a winged Arrow, from the Bow,
Mounted aloft by Grace, thou up to Heaven did go.
Sixteenthly, And Lastly, In a Word, After Conviction She was altogether
Heavenly; Heavenly in her Looks, Heavenly in her Speech, Heavenly in her
Carriage, yea, Heavenly in all, and every part of her Life. Heaven possessed her
Soul, long before her Soul possessed Heaven: I may, without the least Hyperbole
say of her, what Paul said of himself, Phil. 3. v. 20, 21. Her Conversation, or
Trading and Commerce, was in Heaven, from whence also she looked for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; Who will (in the day of the Resurrection)
Change her vile Body, (or body of Vileness) that it may be Fashioned like unto
his Glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able to Subdue all
things unto himself: And where her Conversation was, there her Commoration now
is, and will be so for ever: What was once so delightful to her Soul, during
her abode on Earth, She is now in the everlasting Possession of in Heaven, in
the New Jerusalem, where she will be no more Tossed in the Tempestuous Sea,
where the Waves and Billovvs of Temptation will no more pass over her; for
she now dwells with God, and God dwells with her, and therefore, all Tears are
wiped from her eyes, and she now will be no more Assaulted* with the fear of
Death: Nor Racked with the Sense of Sorrow; nor have any more cause of Crying
out for ever: For all these former things are passed away: And she is seated
and settled in that Kingdom which cannot be moved; in that City which has
Foundations whose Builder and maker is God. Now, Farevvel, Farewell thou
Triumphant Saint; no more, shall I be blessed with thy heart Reviving Company;
no more, shall my Ears be charmed with thy heavenly Language; no more, will my
Soul be delighted with thy divine Breathings, thy Seraphick raptures; no more
will my study be perfumed with the Savor of that far richer, that more
Fragrant and Odoriferous Ointment than thy elder Sister Mary brought to Anoint
her Saviors Body against his Burial; no more, shall thee and I go to
Bethlehem, to the mount of Vision; no more, shall I hear the Harmonious Melody
of thy Sighs, and Sobs, when we were at the Throne of Grace together; no more,
will my Frozen heart be warmed with the Sparkling Flame of thy ardent Zeal: Oh!
Wretch that I am, that I minded no more, that I Prized no more, that I improved
no more those invaluable hours I sometimes had with thee! A Price was verily
put into my Hands, a rich Price, a great Price, an Unparellel'd Price, to get
and increase in true Wisdom, to be thoroughly Spiritualized, to be above all
Carnalty, to have before I was aware, my Soul even made like the Chariots of
Aminadib -- by vievving the Transcript of Heaven, by beholding that Ray of
divine Beauty, that Beam of Celestial Glory wonderfully displayed, both in
thy outvvard and in thy inward Man: But I, like a Fool had no heart to it: I
was not intense upon it. But now (Ah! too late) my Eyes are opened (as the
Disciples were after their Lord was vvithdrawn) now I look back with
Sadness; now I call to mind what heart breaking Grief. How more like an Angel
than an humane Creature, How more like one Inspired of God, then Instructed by
Man, thou always speak of the things of Heaven; How more like one in a
glorified State, than in a body of Clay, thy whole Carriage and Demeanor was.
But now, Oh! now, thou art gone, and the Eyes of we that have seen thee, will
see thee no more: Thou in a Moment was taken out of our Sight, and left no
Mantle behind thee, only the svveet Perfume of thy immortal Name; But I must
and will follow thee, with Elisha's cry after Elijah, My Sister, Oh! my
Precious Sister, my heavenly Sister, the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen
thereof! How do all the Children of the Bride-chamher take up a Wailing for
thee? How do the habitations of our Zion mourn! Yea how do the top of our
Carmels wither, because thou the beauty of them art fallen, and sunk into the
pit of Corruption? Because thy Eyes, (Oh thou delightful Creature, thou admired
Saint) are closed in the Dust, and thy mouth is filled with cold Clay? As for
me, I cannot forbear breaking forth into David's Lamentation for his beloved
Jonathan -- I am distressed for thee, Oh! my Sister, my Sister, very pleasant
have thou been to me; But woe, Alas, Alas! Alas! She that was once the Object
of my Love and Delight, is now (and I think, whilst I am on this side heaven,
will be, for I shall never forget her) the sad Subject of my Sighs, and Tears:
I may! Her Fathers house may! The Town of Havant may! The Church may! Yea, the
whole Country may Write on all our Assemblies, on all our Solemn meetings,
Ichabod! Ichabod! The glory is departed from our Israel! But here the Pen is
dropping out of my hand, Loads of Grief do block up my way, that I cannot go
on; an in^ndation of sorrovv quite overpovvers me, this is such a renewing my
grief that I am not able to bear it, I can scarce Repress a Flood of Tears
ready to break forth; I Write with a Trembling hand, with watery Eyes, with
a mourning Soul, and therefore I must break off, Considering with the Words
which Solomon spoke of Bathsheba, as properly applicable to this young
Triumphant, (I dare avouch it) as to any of the Female-Sex in our Day, or in
the Age before it, Prove. 31.29. Many Daughters have done Virtuously, but thou
(Oh, thou Virgin Angel) excellest them all.

Rest, blessed Saint, within thy peaceful Grave;
Whilst I no Peace, because of her, can have,
For thy sweet Converse, which was once so brave;
But Death, ah! too too soon, did me of it bereave;
Too soon we parted were, and neither farewell gave.
I have been exceedingly importuned to Print the Sermon I Preached, at the
Funeral of this precious Lamb; but for two Reasons I forbear.

The One is, It would make this Tract too big, which is already swelled under
my Hand, beyond what I first Intended:

But if this Reason be not Cogent, I have another, which is this, I do not, for
indeed I cannot Print it, because I have it not to Print; for so it is, as soon
as I had Preached the Funeral Sermon for another, on the day this Saint Died,
(as I before hinted) I immediately fixed my Thoughts on a Subject for her
Funeral, which I judged suitable, and it was, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the Man
that endures Temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
Life, which the Lord has promised to them that Love him. But the very Day she
was Buried her Mother sent to desire me to Preach on these Words, with which
she closed her life;

Job, 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives.

The warning being so short, I had no time for Study, but upon my Knees,
begging the Assistance of my heavenly Father, who graciously vouchsafed it in
such a way, as I think no Sermon I ever Preached, was more Acceptable to
others, though it was wholly lost as to me; for, through Grief, and Disturbance
of Mind, I could not recall it; only I remember the Two Generals I insisted on,
viz.

The Excellency of the saving Knowledge of
Christ, as a Redeemer: And,
The exceeding Vtility of this Knowledge in
a dying Hour.
I was so long in opening those Two Heads, that I had no time for Application,
only addressed my self to the Auditory, which was then the most Numerous I ever
before, or since saw in Havant; and I will (because I can) give you some brief
Account of that, for I took some Notes of it, which are as follows:

I shall, instead of the several Uses that might be made of this Doctrine I
have been discoursing of, apply my self in a few Words?

1st, To Young Ones.

2dly, To the Relations of this deceased Person.

3dly, To this Society.

4thly, To all, and every one of this great Congregation.

1st, To you that are Young. -- You are come this Evening to the Funeral of a
young Gentlewoman, who was called away by Death in the Flower of her time. She
was fit to die, and therefore she died to live: But how is it with you? I
beseech you consider, you may die even now in your youth, as well as she: Ay!
But are you as well prepared for it as she was? Oh! Dreadful dying without an
Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ! You had better never have been Born, then
die to go to Hell for ever, which will most certainly be your Portion if you
die in a Christless State: Oh, that you would take example by this blessed
Virgin, to Fly youthful Lusts; To remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth: And now, Oh! now, in the Morning of your Age, to look Heavenward. I may
say of the deceased, as Simeon said of the Lord Jesus in his Infant-state,
Luke, 2.24. Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising of many in
Israel, and for a Sign which shall he spoken against: Oh! So, verily this young
Saint as a glorious Star was shining in this Horizon, for the fall and rising
of many; that is, both in Judgment and in Mercy to many in these parts: In
Judgment, to be a greater and more Terrible Condemnation to those Obstinate
young ones, that will still keep on in their Lusts, still continue in their
Sins, still slight and Contemn the Tenderness of Grace in the Gospel, after so
great and amazing an instance of the Riches of free Grace, the fullness of
divine Love extended unto her: In Mercy, to you who will be affected with what
God did abundantly for her, in a way of special Grace; and therefore will be
looking unto Christ, as Believing there is the same Free Grace, the same rich
Love, the same bottomless Ocean of Pardoning, Healing, and Soul-saving Mercy
for you, as she found, as she tasted, as she Ravishingly Experienced in the day
of her Distress: Oh! hear this dead Saint speaking to you in David's words;
Psalm. 66.16, 17. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my Soul: I Cried unto him with my Mouth, and he was Extolled with
my Tongue. Oh! hear her thus speaking to every Soul of you.

You young Men and Maids, that are yet in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity; that are minding nothing but the satisfying your Lusts, that
have no sense of Heaven and Eternity, or what will become of your Immortal
Souls for ever. I was once in the same condition, and running on in the same
excess of Riot: I was once as dead, as Carnal, as Vain, as Frothy as you are:
But God broke my heart, and Melted my Soul, with Trembling and Affrightning
Shakings, under the woeful Apprehension of a lost Condition, and a Flaming Hell
that I looked every Moment to be plunged into: And then he comforted and
Revived me with a Sensible Manifestation of redeeming Love; then he made known
to me the Wonders of Sovereign Grace, in fully Revealing and discovering Christ
(with the avail of his Pretensions, Death and Sufferings) to my Soul: I Cried
to him in the day of Distress, and he Graciously Vouchsafed his Ear: He brought
me up out of the Horrible Pit, out of the Miry Clay, and set my Feet upon a
Rock (even the Rock of Ages) with whom I am now in Glory, and shall be so for
ever. Oh! Therefore you my former Carnal Companions, be entreated to seek the
Lord whilst he may be found, and to call upon him while he is yet near: Do not
let a Dalilah's Lap deprive you of an Abraham's Bosom: Do not for the fading
Pleasures of a Transitory Life, Subject your precious Souls to eternal Ruin.
Oh! Let my Case, the unexpressible Sorrows I have gone through for Sin, and the
true pleasures I have found in the ways of Grace and Holiness, have a powerful
convincing and persuading Effect upon you. -- The good Lord help all you young
ones, to hear this dead Saint thus speaking to you.

2dly, My next word is to you that are the Relations of this blessed Person;
and it is what our Savior said to the Mourners about the Damsel we read of:
Matt. 9.24. The Maid is not dead but Sleeps -- So, your Daughter, your
Sister, your Relation, for whom you are in so much Bitterness, and because of
whom your hearts are ready to break with sorrovv, Oh! She is not dead, but
Sleeps: Indeed, as to you she is dead, and you will see her no more, with a
mortal Eye, but unto God she is alive, and with him w^ll live for evermore. Oh!
Therefore Assuage your Grief, dry up your Tears, make no Bevvailing for her,
for she is better, and in a far better State than you. Oh! therefore turn your
Lamentation for her, into Imitation of her; think not of her Immature death,
but of her holy, and examplary Life; and be ye followers of her, who through
the abundant increase of Faith, and exercise of Patience, was fitted for the
Kingdom above, and is now (with the triumphant) inheriting the Promises; being
in Possession of that Inheritance which is Incorruptible, Undefiled, which
fades not away: And as to her outward Man, she is but fallen asleep, and will
be awakened again, at the joyful Morning of the Resurrection. Though she be now
(with Job) saying to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm, thou art
my Mother, and my Sister; though after her Skin, Worms will destroy her Body,
yet in her Flesh shall she see God. I will therefore commend the Apostle's
Words to your serious Consideration, which I hope may afford you some matter of
Consolation, at least be a rational Ground, for the alleviation of your present
Sorrow, on this sad Occasion; 1 These. 4.13.14. But I would not have you to be
Ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye Sorrow not, even
as others which have no hope; for if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Again
v. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall
rise first. On which sweet Conclusion, and most comfortable truth, I would
ground my pressing Exhortation, to you, that are now Mourning; To you that are
now Weeping; To you, that are now so full of Sadness for this great and
irreparable loss, and that in the words of the same Apostle, in the same
Chapter verse 18. Wherefore, comfort one another with these words

3dly, To you also of this Society, my Brethren and Sisters of this Church, I
would next address my self on this awful Occasion: And it is to beg you to have
a deep sense of the Lords hand upon us, in diminishing our number, in Housing
our little Flock apace: But the last night we were in this place, Solemnizing
the Funeral of a precious and beloved Sister; and now we are here, at the
Funeral of this triumphant Damsel. It Is true, she was not actually a Member of
ours, but virtually and intentionally she was, she walked with us, sat down
with us, and really designed, if the Lord had spared her life to be dismissed
to us, and so to be wholly ours. She extremely delighted in this Society, and
dearly loved every one of you. But we have now left her, with several others,
(of emminent use and worth) which calls for no small Lamentation, and therefore
I may here justly make use of the Prophets words by way of Exhortation to you:
Jerem. 9. v. 17, 18. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider ye, and call for
the Mourning-women, that they may come, and send for Cunning Women, that they
may come: And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our Eyes
may run down with Tears, and our Eyelids gush out with Waters. Why; what is the
matter! What is it that calls for so much Mourning: verse 21. For death is come
up into our Windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off the Children
from without, and the young Men in the Streets: Oh! How many lovely Children of
God have of late been cut off in this place, and now this young Flourishing
Branch, is so suddenly, and so unexpectedly cut down from amongst us, and we
shall never see her more: Oh: How then for this sad and irreparable loss should
we lament with Tears, how should our Eyes be gushing out with Water, for the
Immature fading of so sweet a Flower: Oh! Therefore, from the sense of Gods
displeasure, in taking such Unvaluable Jewels from us: Be afflicted, mourn and
Weep, let your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into heaviness:
Though as to this Saint her self, there is no need of it, death is to her an
unspeakable Gain. And therefore Christ's words to the Bewailing Women are
applicable unto you. -- Ye daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but for
your selves, and the Miseries that are coming upon You. Oh: Methinks I hear her
speaking aloud to all and every one of us. in David's Language: Psalm. 34. v.
2.3.4. My Soul shall make her Boast in the Lord: The humble shall hear thereof
and be glad: O Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together: I
sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my Fears: But for
our own sakes, there is cause enough of Mourning, especially from this awful
consideration, -- Accession to us, does not answer the decession from us.

4thly, and lastly, A word to all of you in this Congregation, the Inhabitants
of this Town, and the parts adjacent. And I will Preface what I have to say to
you, in the Words of Jotham, to the Men of Shechem Judge. 9.7. Hearken (I
beseech you) unto me, that God may hearken unto you. Some of you have seen, all
of you have heard, what this deceased young Gentlewoman underwent for Heaven;
What Oceans of Troubles she was plunged in, and what Fires of
Soul-tribulations she was a long time burning in. Now, as Christ said to his
Disciples, Math. 18.2.3. And Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set him
in the midst of them: And said, verily I say unto you, except ye be Converted,
and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
So say I to all, and every one here, Old and Young, Rich and Poor, High and
Low; except ye go thorough the Pangs of the New Birth, as this young Damsel
did; I do not say, in that same degree of Horror and Agony, for that few do;
but except you be as really Converted, Changed, Renewed, and Born again, as she
was, you will not; nay, you cannot enter into the Joys of Heaven when you Die;
for they are our Lord's own Words, and spoke as plain as plain can be, Joh.
3.3. Except a Man, (any Man, every Man) be Born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Now, this deserves your most deep and serious Consideration;
for there is a Kingdom of God to be enjoyed, and a kingdom of darkness to be
avoided: And believe it Sirs, Heaven is no Feigned Elysium, Hell and Eternty is
no dream, the worm that never dies is no fond Conceit* And you will shortly
know what the one or the other means: You will er'e long be summoned to spend
the Ages of Eternity, amongst the blessed or damned, and that in a very little
time. And so I shall close the whole (alluding to the words of my Lord and
Master) with an earnest Exhortation to, and fervent Supplication for, each, and
every Soul of you here present: Oh! That you would therefore know, even you, in
this your day, the things that belong to your everlasting peace, before (even
before) they be hid from your eyes: And that for ever.

Two Hymns composed for her Funeral; the former of which, was publicly sung,
at the close of her Funeral.
I Sought the Lord, and him I found:
He did regard my Tears.
When I lay prostrate on the Ground,
He freed me from my fears.
I wept with Sorrow, Grief, and Woe.
('It Is God that Mercy gives)
God made me cry out, Oh! I know
That my Redeemer Lives.
And lives to comfort my poor Heart,
Who did my State condole,
As finding such an horrid smart
Within my wounded Soul.
But now I Am eased, I feel no pain;
Oh! then, rejoice with me,
That have found Death so sweet a Gain:
My Savior now I see.
When I, through Weakness, pined away,
And fetched my latest Groan,
Christ sent his Angels, to convey
My Soul unto his Throne.
Oh! Halelujah! Lord, I am
Ravished with Joy and Love,
In Bosom of blessed Abraham,
With all the Saints above.
The other.
A Person young, late dwelt among
Us Militants below,
Oppressed with Fears, immerg'd in Tears,
Which from her Eyes did flow.
Her Spirit sad, with Sable clad,
To think upon her Soul:
The Storm was great, the Billows beat,
And Deeps did on her roll.
So fierce the Stroke, her Heart was broke,
Her inward Man deprest:
Both Night and Day she pined away,
And had not any Rest.
Till God did please t'afford her ease;
It Is he that Comfort gives:
Then, in her Woe, she cried, I know
My dear Redeemer Lives.
With this sweet Breath, in view of Death,
She did her Life resign;
Now, wrapped in Love, with those above,
She gloriously does shine.
Rest, holy Saint, where no complaint
Shall vex thee any more;
Possess that Peace, which never will cease,
On Canaan's blessed shore.
Oh! Halelu-Jah he is true;
At length he will surely come;
He Will come away, without delay,
And take his Mourners home.
FINIS.

