NEWS FROM TYBOURN: OR, THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION OF THE Three Bailiffs And
the rest of the MALEFACTORS that Died with them.

And also a true account of their deportment bfore several Godly Ministers in
NEWGATE Who came to visit them there.

With Allowance.



LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1675.

A true Account of several Malefactors that received sentence of Death the last
Sessions at Justice-hall in the Old-bayly.
THe pleasures of sin are but for a season; and after some numbers of years
spent in lewd and dissolute Courses, the time of Reckoning comes, and the
secure sinner is called to an unthought-of account for his past Crimes; how
quick and sudden then, though sad and gloomy, are the periods and dispatches of
that poor life, that must terminate in a deserved punishment! To the end
therefore that the Looser sort of people may beware by the dreadful Examples of
these that have already deservedly suffered, let them take this following
account of their Confessions in Newgate.

J. W. for Burglary and Felony, for stealing seven pieces of Broad cloth, which
were all found in his Chamber. The hainousness of his Crime was Burglary, upon
which, if there were not a strict hand of Justice, no person could be safe in
his Dwelling: As he was in the flower of his Youth, a better fate might have
attended him; but his own was so great, that he could not be pardoned. He
confessed the lewdness of his Youth, that he had been bred to a good Trade; but
Vanity and ill Company overcoming him, had brought him to that evil End. He
took very patiently the Exhortations of the Ministers that visited him, and
showed very great marks of Penitence at his death, desiring all the standers by
to pray for him.

L. O. and L. T. for breaking into a house at Kentish town, and Feloniously
taking away several pieces of Cloth. The Crime which these committed was the
same with the former: but as they had been longer at the trade, so these were
the more hardened; the former being of a good Family, had drawn on the latter to
his Confederate. As they had been accustomed to lewd Courses, they were the
more hardened in their ends; neither is it possible that without erring from
the Truth, that we should give a good accoount of all that die for their
Crimes. However, they seemed to be both very penitent all the time they were in
Prison, and is hoped continued so to the last; the former of them two had a
great Love, and that for the Maintenance of the Mother and the Child he took
these evil Courses, his idleness not permitting him to take any better. He
desires his Friends to see her and bid her be careful of the Infant, and to
betake her self to some honest Labor, wherein she would find more comfort
than in those ways to which the Trade seduced him. Of the latter, we can only
say, that he continued with that seeming repentance which was most suitable for
a dying Man.

J. D. R. O. and W. N. for committing a Murder upon Richard Allen a Sea
Chyrurgeon; as there is no Crime in the world that cries louder to Heaven than
the sin of Murder, so had these the horror of it in their Conscience. The
Evidence at their Trials was plain, which made their Condemnation easily
follow; but though they could not make satisfaction to the party slain, they
did their endeavor to satisfy Heaven.

During their continuance in Newgate, they were visited by several Ministers,
who with most pathetical Exhortations laid before them the Hainousness of their
Offenses, advising them to repent, for that it was high time, they being upon
the very brink of Eternity.

They remembered them of the sad condition they were in, as being doomed to die
by the severe Sentence of Justice; that there was no hopes of longer life in
this world, yet that there was a means left to serve them an Everlasting life
in the next, and that it was an unspeakable Mercy that they had so much time
spared them to make their peace with Heaven.

These pious Exhortations wrought much upon R. O. and he continued very
penitent confessing that he was as free to dye as to live, were it not for his
wife and Children, lamenting more them, that they should be the offspring of
such a Parent, desiring his friends to take care so to Instruct them, that
their Fathers end might not hereafter be a reproach to them.

J. D. Confessed the sin ulness of his Life, but more particularly bewayl'd hi^
sin of Sa^ b^thbreaking, of which he had been very Guilty, that he had been no
less a profane heare^, he was deeply sensible of the Injury he had done the
person, whose Life he had taken away; and was willing to satisfy blood for
blood, since no other satisfaction could be given.

W. N. Confessed that he had been a great oppressor of the poor in his Office,
whom he had very much wronged by Extortion. That he had been a very great
scoffer at the miscarriages of other men, and too much Guilty of that huffing
pride and insolency, which is too common among men of their Condition, he
exhorted therefore all those that had the same Employment to take warning by
him, not to exceed the b^unds of Mercy, nor to stand upon the utmost points of
Rigor and Justice but above all to beware of being false to their trusts and
of extortion, by which he had undone many poor people.

Yet as mercy is not denied the worst of sinners, they went not without hopes
of mercy to the place of Execution, being all extremely penitent and freely
resigning themselves into the hand of Justice.

J. D. a little boy about 14 years of age, for murdering a Citizen and Silk
man in Milk-street, which he confessed: Young in years but old in wickedness:
yet had he been older he could not have been more sensible of his fact, nor
more apprehensive of his approaching death, nothing more troubled him in the
Prison, than that he was so dye so early, and that he had so soon imbrued his
hands in blood, this youth had not many words to express himself, but he
supplied that defect with his tears, weeping continually, especially when his
friends or the Minister came to prepare him for another Life, to whom he wept
bitterly, acknowledging the small Follies that his you^h had been guilty of,
more especially, he confessed to his Father how he had been used to spend his
money at play with his Companions, when he was sent to receive any parcel of
money: and that he had several times taken his money for that purpose, his
carriage to his death was the same, though not with any great preparation,
which could not be expected from his years.

G. F. for robbing upon the High way, and firing a Pistol at a Watch man, when
he was takens which did no execution, he afterward threw the Pistol away; but
the Robbery being proved, and for several other faults he was condemned to die.
He was a stout Robber, and as he had committed many Crimes, which deserved the
utmost severity of the Law, he showed no great Remorse, neither at his Trial
nor at his death.

W. V. was taken with a bag of Gilts about him, which are great and small
Picklock-keyes and other Instruments fit for that purpose: the Fact being
proved by a woman that came in against him, that he was the man that broke open
her Chest, and had taken away a parcel of money to a considerable value; and he
being burnt in the hand before and these Instruments being found about him, he
was found guilty and condemned to die. He robbed the man at the Wool-sack in
Hounds-ditch, an Ale house keeper, of twelve pounds in money, and two
Silvertankards, often frequenting the house, and taking an opportunity to slip
into the man of the house his Bed chamber.

Another time he came into the Bull-head near St. Dunstan's church, called for
a double Silver Tankard of Ale, and when the Drawer was gone he threw the Drink
in the Chimny and went away with the Tankard. He was a person of an obscure
Birth, and confessed himself to be a Thief, which was no more than was well
known before.

R. C. for Felony and Burglary committed by him and some others in White
chapel, and others making their escape, and he only taken; the Fact being
proved against him, he is likewise to die. If it were true that he confessed he
deserved some pity, for he said he had not been long at the trade, it being the
third time that he had been an offender, though not taken till the third time;
and it seems probably because he was the only person left in the lurch, he
pretended that being a Button mould-maker, his Work-master broke, which drove
him to necessity, that necessity into ill Company, and ill Company to his
untimely end; for which he was very penitent.

FINIS.

