AN ESSAY Upon the Change of MANNERS. BEING A SECOND PART OF THE True
Protestants Appeal TO THE CITY and COUNTRY.
IT has been observed, that all Arts, Sciences, Customs, and the several
Dispositions of Mankind, have acted their Parts by Turns in this World,
sometimes One being most in Vogue and Request in such a Country, where, after
having Reigned some Time, it was forced to give ground, and quit the Throne to
some other new Humor of the Age, which having had its Turn, was likewise
obliged to retire, and make place for another: And all this Remark will reach,
I suppose, to Points of Religion it self; or at least, to those of Heresy. But
I believe; it has hardly ever been known, that any one Humor in one and the
same Country, has come twice upon the Stage by the same Methods and Paces the
second time as it did the former, within the space of Forty Years; which makes
it seem strange, that the present, at least, seeming Designs upon the Church of
England, and its Head, next under God, the King, should have that full Carrier;
and meet with that kind Reception as they now do; by Numbers of People: Indeed
the difference is, that the late sad Times were ushered in by a pretended
Popish Plot, and the present by a hellish, true and real one; but its Neck
being, I hope, broken, I know not why it should be allowed to be made use of
for the carrying on the same Designs as brought us so lately into Ruin and
Destruction, and made us groan under the heaviest Yoke, and Arbitrary
Government, that ever any Nation was oppressed with. I say, I cannot imagine
how People can be so insensible as to be lured, and blinded by the same Paint
and Pretexts, as drew them, and but so lately, into the extremest misery and
Desolation. Was not a pretended Conspiracy of the Papists, a Prologue to those
sad Catastrophees? Was not there as full a Cry then as there is now against
Arbitrary Government, and the Promoters of it? Were not the Chiefest Ministers,
and Pillars of the Royal Authority, first, maliciously and falsely accused, and
then pulled down, before they struck at the Crown it self; nay, had the Rebels
not, or at least, did they not pretend to have, in the greatest Heat and Fury
of the War, that Veneration, Respect and Care for his Late Majesty, as to
insert in all their Generals Commissions, the Clause of endeavoring to save
his Sacred Person from Danger? And did they not give out, that they only aimed
at securing, and recovering his Person out of the Hands of such as abused his
Authority; and that they had no other Prospect, than Reforming the State? But
did we not sadly find their Reformation, to be what a Famous Author of this
Time, says in one of his Pieces; That it is only lest to Princes to mend the
World* whose Commands find general Obedience, and Examples Imitation. For all
other Men, they must take it as they find it, and good Men enter into Commerce
with it, rather upon Caution of not being spoiled themselves, than upon hopes
of mending others. At least, this Opinion becomes Men of my Level, amongst whom
I have observed all Set Quarrels with the Age, and Pretenses of Reforming it
by their own Models, to end commonly like the pains of a Man in a Little Boat,
who tuggs at a Rope that is fast to a Ship: it looks as if he resolved to draw
the Ship to him; but the Truth, and his Meaning, is, to draw himself to the
Ship, where he gets in when he can, and does like the rest of the Crew when he
is there. And what a sad Crew they were, and what horrid Tragedies they acted,
to our Misery and Shame, we are but too well acquainted. I blush to think that
we whose Ancestors were the most famous People in the World, and whose Heroic
Actions, perhaps, no other Nation ever did, or can parallel, should so
degenerate from their Bravery, as to lay the whole Scene of our Honor, in
nursing and ushering in Rebellion. The main Cry, is against Arbitrary
Government, and at the same time, those who bawl so loud against it, take the
right Course to bring in the rankest Tyranny. They would have, or at least,
they say, they would, the Religion and Laws of the Nation preserved; but they
do not mention, as they are now established. I am apt to think, that those who
make all this Bustle, are not People of Quality, Estates, or Sense, but such,
whose Fortunes being desperate, hope to mend them by a Change, and are seconded
in it by Pamphleteers, who are maintained, and get a Livelihood by dispersing
all manner of ill Reports, Principles, and every thing that tends, and is
capable to help on their Designs, by infusing Jealousies and Distractions into
the People, by irritating and drawing upon us the Fury of some of our
Neighbour-Nations, and rendering us contemptible, neglected and despised by the
others, by defaming all those who seem Loyal, and able to assist the Crown; and
by elevating to the Skies, and making even Gods of those who are thought to
favor their Designs, and by a thousand other Arts and Means, alienate the
Peoples minds from the Government, and insinuate into them Disgusts,
Dissaffection and Fears of those at the Helm. Such People as take, or favor
these Courses, I cannot imagine to be Persons of Estates and Prudence, since,
should they take Effect, they would run the Risque of losing what they have,
without any probability or prospect of bettering themselves; the Truth of
which, we have but too late and deplorable Examples of: For did not even the so
called Parliament it self, serve for a Stalking Horse to some Dissaffected
People and Upstarts who, when by its means they had got into the Saddle, how
they rid and harassed both it, and generally the Three Kingdoms, is so well
known, that, methinks, we should all be so sensible of it, as not to be drawn
into the same Snares again. Did any of those Great Men, who were Promoters of
the Late Troubles compass or enjoy long that Splendour and Greatness they aimed
at? Were they not put by, and turned out, by people that rose from nothing, or
at least, if some were kept in, it was in Places, that were of no Profit to
them; and only because their Names were advantageous to their Party. It is this
that hinders me from giving Credit to those Reports which say, that all this
now is the Sense of the Nation, and that it is influenced by several Grandees.
Perhaps indeed, there may be some few, whose too greedy Ambition having met
with Checks, and being new spirited with Revenge, are glad to find the Nation
in a Fever, and its Pulse beat so high; and who instead of seeking Remedies,
feed the Disease, and inflame the Humors, not caring to bring the Kingdom into
utter Ruin and Desolation, so they may but have the Opportunities of
satisfying their Irregular Appetites and Passions: and perhaps these may have
drawn in amongst the rest, several well-meaning People, who having things shown
them in false Lights, are content to go along with the Stream, ignorantly
thinking, it is for the Public Good. It is these, and such like Circumstances
of this Juncture, that make me lament my Misfortune of being born in an Age,
wherein Loyalty is run down, the True Protestant Religion, that is the Church
of England, as by Law established, is trodden under foot, and its Ministers
reviled and bespattered by every Fiery Dissenter; and each Faithful Subject is
branded with all the Infamous Names and Epithites they are capable of inventing.

Affairs being in this sad and deplorable Posture, I appeal to the whole World,
if every True English Man has not reason to be grieved to the very Heart, to
see so many endeavoring to sow the Seed of Dissension and Jealousies, instead
of procuring Union and a good Understanding between the King and his People,
especially in a Juncture, when every Day brings us fresh Tidings of the great
Preparations, both by Sea and Land, of some of our Neighbors, whose Ambition,
Interest and Revenge, will certainly prompt them to lay hold of all
Opportunities; at the least, of humbling us, who have been such Obstacles and
Opposers of their great Aims and Designs, as they cannot but highly resent it;
and will doubtless embrace all Occasions they can meet with of procuring our
Ruin. I say, in such a time, to foster, nourish, and spread abroad, Fears,
Distractions, and Discontents, can never be the Part of a True English Man, a
Loyal Subject, and a Real and Religious Protestant.

London, Printed for H. Rodes near Bride Lane in Fleet Street, 1681.


