Nevvs from the Sessions. Or, The Whole TRIAL OF GEORGE ALLEN THE BUTCHER Who
Murdered his Wife in the Fields behind Islington, On Friday the 5 th. of this
Instant February, And the manner how the same came to be Discovered.

As also the Full Trial of John Harter the Oastler, for stealing an Horse, and
an Hundred and Twenty Pounds of Money. For which he is Convicted of Felony.

With the Trials of several other Malefactors, for diverse Notorious Crimes, and
other remarkable passages at the Sessions begun at Justice-Hall in the Old
Bailey, the 19 th. of Febr. 1674/5.

Printed for George Smith, 1675.

News from the Sessions, etc.
AT this Sessions for London and Middlesex, and Jail-delivery of Newgate,
amongst many other Criminals of diverse kinds, George Allen for the heinousness
of his barbarous crime, was sadly remarkable above others: Having not only
committed a bloody murder, but such as was aggravated to the highest degree,
by being perpetrated on a poor innocent of the weaker sex, and the nearest
Relation in the World: This inhumane Fact was done on Friday the 5 th. of this
instant February in the Evening. In the Fields behind Islington (lately the
bloody scene of several lamentable Tragedies, as that of the eminent Quaker who
drowned himself in VVheelers-pond on Friday night the 12 th. instant whose
corpse was not found till Thursday last, and another person since killed in a
fray not far from thence. The manner how this Allen came to be suspected and
discovered was thus. The murdered party his wife, and he had for a long time
lived at difference; insomuch that she was forced to leave him, and return home
to Uxbridge her native place, to live with her friends, and had lived from him
there for about Two years: During which time he being by trade a Butcher, workt
as journy-man with one of that profession in an Alley in Turn-Mill-Street; but
the week before the murder committed he went down thither, and seeming very
willing to be reconciled by fair words prevailed with the woman's credulity and
good nature to live with him again, promising for to use her far more kindly
for the future; and accordingly on Friday the fifth instant they came up
together from thence to London, and arrived at Gray's Inn Lane just as it began
to be dark, but he pretending that his Lodging was a great way off, led her
from thence round through Hatton-Garden, and so again into the fields, where he
inveigled her along till they came as aforesaid behind Islington, near the
Gravel-pits, and there carrying her pattins for her with one of them he knocked
her on the head, and leaving her dead went home to his Lodging in
Turn-Mill-street: next morning her body was found, and coming to strip her, in
her stocking they found her wedding ring, which it is more than probable she had
hid there, that he might not take it away from her, it being his usual custom
formerly to plunder her of every thing of any value to supply his
extravagencies. The rumor of a woman so found, who by all circumstances
appeared to have been murdered, spreading about the country, soon came to
Uxbridge where her Father and Uncle were living, who no sooner heard it but
they were struck with a kind of prophetical apprehension, that it might be this
person murdered by her unnatural Husband. And therefore ordered a friend that
was coming to London to inquire after it, who coming to Islington knew the
slain persons clothes, and thence concluding on violent presumptions that her
husband must indeed have a hand in it, immediately procures a Warrant and
apprehends him in Newgate Market, before the Justice of Peace, he absolutely
denied all, and affirmed he parted with his Wife at Grays-Inn-Lane end, and
since had neither seen nor known what was become of her. But being committed to
Newgate, and forced (for he was very unwilling) to go to hear the Sermon there
the next Lords day. It seems the same made some impression on his spirit, for
the next Day being closely examined, he confessed he did K^ll her, and that the
intention of the murder first entered into his heart as they were passing over
Hatton-Garden, and that he did it with one of her Pattins, which was
sufficiently proved now in Court, for notwithstanding such his acknowledgement
at the Bar, he pleaded, Not Guilty: It was also proved by several persons from
Uxbridge, that he had formerly attempted to Poysen her, and to that purpose had
sent her several times Poison, which once before had like to have cost her her
life, and also that here in London he kept company, and was in League with
another woman, whom he had promised Marriage, and appointed a day for that
purpose: telling her, his wife in the Country had married another man; and
therefore he was free to dispose of himself: yet being questioned, he now
cleared that person, and affirmed that she neither instigated him, nor was
privy to this Murder. There was likewise a letter produced and read, which he
owned to be of his writeing, it was dated on the Monday after the Fact,
directed to his Wives Father (contrived on purpose to conceal his Guilt) for
therein he acquainted them his wife was very well, and that he had taken a
little house, beyond London, at Stratford, etc. All which making his Murtherous
intention so apparent he could not at last deny that he Killed her, but said
it, on provocation of ill Language, and that she tore him by the Hair,
whereupon he did indeed strike her a blow with her Pattin, and left her on the
ground, but did not think to have Killed her; but being not able to give any
account why he led her that way, at that time o'th night, his design was
evident: Being asked what he had to say for himself, one of the Honorable
Judges, no less Gravely then Religiously told him his Condition, required him
rather to say much against himself, as being Guilty of so great and horrible a
sin, of which he feared he was not sufficiently sensible: To which the Prisoner
replied that indeed he was not sensible of it, and that he hoped that the Court
would pity him: and so desired Transportation. But was told, that our Laws are
more Just then to allow that favor to such bloody Criminals: so he was left to
the Jury, who Immediately brought him in Guilty of Murder.

There was also one John Harter, Endicted for Felony, his Case appeared on
proof to be thus: a Gentleman of Barkshire usually lying at an Inn in
Old-Fish-street, where this John was Oastler, being to go forth o'th Town early
on Monday Morning, the 15 th. instant, desired him to get his Horse ready,
which being done, he having One hundred and Twenty pounds to carry down with
him, lays it on the Saddle, and then steps into his Chamber, or the Kitchen to
fetch his Coat: Whilst he was gone, John having notice of the Money, mounrs the
Steed, and rides away with the Money directly to Cain-wood, where taking out so
much of the Money as he thought fit far his present Occasion, which was to buy
him a Perriwigg and new Suit, that he might pass undiscovered, he hides the
rest there, and brings the horse into a By-Lane near Holloway, and there leaves
him tied, and comes back to Lon^on: in the mean time a friend of the
Country-mans that dwelt in Drury Lane that was very well acquainted at the Inn,
comes thither, hears the sad story of his Loss, and goes homeward, where near
Drury Lane he spies this fellow already disguised in a Gentile Wigg, yet not so
much but that he knew him, and caused him to be Apprehended; before the Justice
he forthwith confessed the fact, and told how he had disposed of the horse and
money, which were recovered all but about 10 l. which he had spent. The Jury at
first brought him in, Not Guilty, as supposing it could not be Felony, because
the Horse was delivered by the Owner into the Oastlers Custody, But upon the
advice of the Court, that he had no such special custody committed to him, and
the Witnesses better explaining his former Testimony, they amended their
Verdict, and found him Guilty.

A person was indicted for robbing a Woman in the Evening near Thistle worth;
who tes^ified that as she was walking two men came behind her and one of them
clapping his hands over her eyes plucked her to the ground whilst the other
robbed her, and then muffling her Hood over her face, fled. A Shepherd hearing
her cry out, making to her rescue, savv them at a distance and pursued one of
them near half a mile, of whom he gave a description so like the prisoner at
Bar that he was apprehended and presented upon suspicion. But no direct or
sufficient proof appearing, and the fellow producing several to speak in his
behlf, he was acquitted, so also was another, upon the same score that stood
indicted for stealing of broad cloth out of a West Country Carryers VVagon.

There were three more arraigned for Murder: That Is to say, A Soldier for
killing a man in a fray in St. Gilese's, and two women for destroying their
Bastard Children, with several others for fellonies, petty Larcernies, and
other offenses too tedious here to relate.

FINIS.

