THE Dying Man's Destiny, AND THE Living Man's Duty, OPENED.

And Applied in a SERMON PREACHED On Board the Loyal-Eagle, upon the Coast of
Cormodell in the East Indies.

At the Solemn Obsequies of Mr. Richard Bernard, Chyrurgeon, Who, at the
Conclusion of it, was (with universal Sorrow) thrown into the SEA, Feb. 1. 1680.

Together, with an ELEGY on his Death.

By C. N. Minister of the same SHIP.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the King ^^rm^ in the Poultrey, MDCLXXXII.

Ecclesiast. the 12th. ver. the 5th. Because Man goes to his Long Home, and
the Mourners go about the Street.
SO woeful is the Corruption of Man, by Original Apostasy; that the whole of him
is vitiated, and he totally incapacitated, either for prosecuting the great end
of his Creation, or for enjoying the great good, unto which he was Created. The
end of his Making was the honor of his Maker; whose Will was the first of
Causes, and whose Glory was the last of Ends. And for the accomplishing so
great an End, he was endued with faculties which truly enobled him, with an
understanding that highly advanced him, even to a degree a little below Angels;
with a Majestick-Soveraignty, which crowned him with glory and dignity above
all the other Inhabitants of the Universe. But the Current of these Faculties
is now changed, the strength of this Understanding is now weakened, the glory of
this Majesty is now eclipsed, and Man is become a poor abject, inconsiderable,
nothing; nothing Creature, unable to serve God, his highest End; and to enjoy
God, his chiefest Good. He can do nothing now, but commit iniquity; nor
pleasure himself with the Possession of any thing, but Vanity. The poison of
Sin has so envenomed, enfeebled, and wholly altered him; that he can neither
perform any duty to God, or (with any satisfaction) receive mercy from God. Oh!
How bitter were the greatest Comforts to him in the day of his fall, when he
could no longer shine in that sphere he was created in, nor be doing that work
he was created for: Then, Oh then, the pleasant walks of Edens Garden were too
hot to hold him; and the fragrant Roses of that Terrestial Paradise were too
prickly for him. And no wonder the Creature could afford him no Comfort, when
his Sin-sick-soul was incapable of receiving any from the Creator. The Fountain
of Light was more terrible to him, than the blackest Mists of Darkness; the
Father of Mercies more affrightning, than the Complication of all Miseries; for
so we are told, he was Afraid of God, and went and hid himself in the Garden.
In this forlorn condition is all the Posterity of Man, till they come to the
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; who, as a Brother, was born for the day of
Adversity to them? by whom they must be formed into the New Birth, and so be
brought spiritually to serve God, and to enjoy God in the State of
Regeneration, whom they could never know in a natural condition.

But that which renders Man yet more despicable; more contemptible, is, that
since the Fall, he not only fails, and pitifully falls short of Theologicals;
but he is maimed, and extremely erroneous, even in Naturals: that is, he cannot
keep from extremes in any vicissitudes and changes he may go through, in any
circumstances he may be under, though contrary to the dictates of his own
Reason. Hence, he cannot enjoy Mercies without slighting them, or placing his
whole happiness in them. He cannot feel Judgments without being hardened, as
Pharaoh was; or filled with despair, as Cain was. He cannot love objects that
safely and innocently may be beloved, without being weary of them, or too much
over-prizing them. He cannot Mourn at objects that really call for Mourning,
without Stupidity, or an immoderate fluctuation of Sorrow. Now the golden Mean
between the extreme of the latter, as it is that implicit design of the words I
have read unto you; so it shall be the main scope and drift of my following
Discourse among you; and I doubt not, but to make it evident, that the
practical Part of this, is no less the Duty, than the Glory of every wise Man:
which although it cannot, be attained to without some difficulty, yet it ought
to be studiously endeavored after, by every one of us that pretend to
Christianity; that when we see Men go to their Long Home, we may with Religious
Prudence, know how to act the part of Mourners in the Street.

I shall not trouble you with any Relative Consideration of these words, or any
Analitical Explication of the Chapter in which they are. Though the Preachers
most elegant, and tropical Remarks on the Organical parts of Man's life, highly
deserve a serious review. If I had time (or were spirited) to make inspection
into them. But alas! I can better sigh than speak, and far more easily pour out
floods of tears, than express any fluency of words. I never Preached upon a
more sad occasion, nor never was so wholly indisposed for an Orator as now. My
Harp is turned into Mourning, and my Organ into the Voice of them that Weep.
And therefore I hope you will pardon my impoliteness, and excuse my absurd
transition from the Context, to the Text: In which (without any farther
Preface) be pleased to observe.

First, The Dying Man's Destiny, expressed, -- Because Man goes to his Long
Home. Secondly, The Living Man's Duty, employed, -- And the Mourners go about
the Street.
From both these I shall infer this Conclusion.

Doct. When Man goes to his Long Home; (that is, when he dies, and is put in
the Grave) there is a Mourning due from his Survivers, and ought, especially,
to be paid by those that are near to him, and do behold him.

It will not be incongruous, if we take a little notice of the Periphrasis here
in the Text, of Man's Dying, it is called a going to his Long Home. In locum
seculi sui, unto the place of his time; So Junius reads the words, that is, He
goes to the Grave, where he must remain a great deal of time; which is all one
with our Translation, that calls it, His Long Home. Now, the Grave is a Long
Home.

First, Comparatively; or with respect to our sojourning, and abiding here in
this World. The time of the Bodies being in the Soul (for so our modern and
best Philosophers have chose rather to express it, than to say the Soul is in
the Body) is but a very short space. One of the Ancients was so affected with
the shortness of Man's abode, in this vale of Tears, that he was at a stand,
whether he should call his life, Vitam morientem aut mortem viventem; A dying
Life, or a living Death. Indeed the Arithmetic of Man's time, in Scripture, is
very small: If we consider his Years, they seldom exceed Fourscore; yet then,
is his strength labor and sorrow; he is soon cut off, and he flies away. If we
reduce these years into days, we are told, Man that is Born of a Woman, is of
few days, and full of trouble. Oh! But when the Marriageknot between the Soul
and Body is dissolved, when there is a Writ of Divorce issued from the Court of
Heaven to separate them; then the Body is laid up in the Grave, and there it
remains a long, long time, even till the day of the Resurrection. The Apostle
speaks of an Home in this World, 2 Cor. 5. ver. 6. Therefore we are always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at Home in the Body, we are absent from
the Lord, (...): The Preposition (...) here, I conceive, might be better
rendered with, than in, and so the Sense will be (supposing it, as indeed we
must, the Breathings of the Spirit of Man) we are here as strangers, sojourning
or dwelling with the Body, as though we were at Home for a small time. The
Supersicies of the Earth, is Man's Short Home; the Bowels of it, is his Long
Home. Now, if we compare the time of the longest-lived-man that ever was upon
the Earth (which was Methuselah, whose days amounted to Nine Hundred, Sixty,
and Nine Years) with the time that he has since lived in the Grave; we shall
find the Grave to be his Long Home, in comparison of the Earth, notwithstanding
his days were lengthened so exceedingly upon it. Thus you see, the Grave is a
Long Home, Comparatively. But,

Secondly, The Grave is a Long Home, Really and Positivily. The Time of Man's
commoration in this dark Mansion, is not for days, or years, but ages; yea, for
many ages: So that, we may call it a small Branch of the vast Ocean of
Eternity. If we look at Abel, the first Lord of this Manor; the first that
took Possession of this retired Place; how many Thousand Years has he kept
house in this gloomy Tabernacle of the Grave: It has been a long, a very Long
Home to him. The Grave has been an inhabited Tennament by Adam's posterity,
above Five Thousand Years. And we that are yet alive, waiting to go down into
it; how long our abode may be in it, we are uncertain; because, We know not in
what day or hour the Son of Man shall come to break open the Prison Doors of
the Grave, and to set us at liberty, that are in the Prisonhouse. Job speaks
of the Grave, as the House he was most certain to go unto, and take up his
dwelling in, Chap. 30. vor. 23. For I know that thou will bring me to Death,
and to the House appointed for all Living. It is an House of a long standing,
and will be of long duration, even as long as time it self; it runs parallel
with it. The Creation of the World, and the Resurrection of Man out of the
Grave, are the two Tropicks of time; or the sacred boundaries that Heaven has
put to it; A part post and a part ante, as the Philosopher speaks: For, as
before the former it had no Existence; so, after the latter, it shall have no
longer continuance, but be swallowed up in the fathomless Gulf of Eternity.
Time that now is always running. Mob^li cursu, with a swift pace, will then be
stopped in its motion, and be no more. But there are several things that must
precede this: Great and weighty Matters must be brought about by the hand of
Divine Power, before the End comes; as we may plainly see, if we consult the
sacred Oracles. Antichrist must be brought down, with all his Usurpations and
Idolatrys. The Jews must be converted. The number of the Gentiles must be
brought in; and the House of the Lord must be set upon the Mountains, and
exalted above the Hills, that all Nations may flow unto it: For out of Zion
shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. But till this
be done, the Grave is the appointed house for all Living; and therefore it is a
Long Home.

Having thus considered the Grave, as to its Duration; It is a Long Home: We
will now speak a little of the Grave, with respect to its Qualification, what
kind of Home it is: In the general, it is Man's designed and appointed Home. In
the Text but now quoted out of Job, it is said, to be the House appointed for
all Living. God has appointed (by a decree like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, which never can be changed or revoked) that the Grave shall be the
one Repository for all the Carcasses of Adams Children, to be laid up in, and
kept till the day of the Resurrection. The Apostle speaks of the appointment of
Death, ( Heb. 9. ver. 27) And as it is appointed unto Men, once to Dye, but
after this, the Judgment. Men are appointed to Dye, that they may go to their
appointed home, the Grave. God has appointed Man's being, and the time of his
being in this World, as Job steadfastly believed. All the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come. And he has appointed Man a place of
resting, after he goes out of this World, and that is the Grave: Oh! How should
this suppress Fears, and banish Cowardice from the Hearts of all timorous
Christians, that are slavishly afraid of the Paleness of Death, and tremble to
think of going down into the darkness of the Grave: Why, Sirs, though it be
never so dark and gloomy; though it be an house of Rotterness, a place of
Putrefaction; it is the home prepared and appointed by our Heavenly Father for
us. And therefore, Why should we scruple to lie down in it? Or, why should we
have any fearful apprehensions about it? Such persons and lose all the comfort
of their lives, as an Heathen well observed,

Qui metuit Mortem, quod vivit perdit id ipsum. Oh! We should be always
remembering it, and rest satisfied in it, that the Wise, the Righteous, the
Holy, the blessed GOD has appointed the Grave for our Long Home.

First, God has appointed die Grave, as Man's proper, suitable home; the home
that does naturally suite with his Complexion and Constitution. When Adam (by
his Rebellion) had shaken off the glorious Theocrasy he was under, which would
assuredly have protected him from the power of Death; however Homogeneal to his
body, by reason of the contrariety of qualities in it; God left him (and that
justly) to Fall, to Dye, according to the perishing nature of that matter of
which his Body was composed, ( Genesis 3. ver. 19.) In the sweat of thy Face shall
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou
taken: for dust thou art and unto dust shall thou return. As if he had said;
Had thou continued in thy Obedience, and had kept thy self in thy
Innocence, sitting under the shadow of my immediate Government; I would (by my
Almighty Power) have preserved thy Body (notwithstanding its Materiality) from
ever seeing corruption, or being in the least tainted with putrefaction. But
now I Will leave thee to go down to the caverns of the Earth (where thy Body,
being dust, naturally inclines) with as much propensity, as the Stone to its
Center, or the touched Needle to the North Pole. What place so mete, what home,
so proper for the earthly Tabernacle of of Man's body, as the earthly Apartments
in the Grave: Indeed the Grave is no proper Home for the Soul (the better part)
of Man; because it is immaterial, incorporeal; not subject to deaths
Soveraignity, aiming at a future being; and capable of being crowned with the
glorious Diadem of everlasting Honor; according to the Sense of that famous
Pagan.

Terra Domus non est animis accomoda nostris,
Alrius it nostrae conditionis honor.
The Grave is also a proper Home for the Body, by reason of the great change
Death makes in the Body; which renders it wholly unfit to continue upon the
Earth, without intolerable and insupportable offense to the Living. When Death
has served his Writ of Arrest, and fixed the Impession of his cold hand; Oh!
how miserably is the fairest Face then disfigured, how pitifully is the
sweetest Countenance then changed; how horridly is the compleatest Body then
corrupted, and become a noisome spectacle to its nearest Relations? Insomuch,
that the fondest Husband then abominates the presence of his most amiable Wife;
the tenderest Father then loathes the sight of his most beloved Child; the
dearest and most intimate Friend, then stands aloof off from him, whose company
was once truly precious, and acceptable to him. Therefore the Grave is the
properest home for the breathless-body of Man; for there it sleeps, and rests
without offense to any.

Secondly, God has appointed the Grave, as Man's fixed settled home; a place of
rest after his tossings, and hurryings to and fro in the World. We are born to
Dye; yea, we begin to Dye as soon as we are delivered out of our Mothers Womb:

Nascentes Morimur, finisque ab origin pendet. And we must expect no quiet,
till Death concludes the play of our lives. The Apostle tells us, that here we
have no continuing City, but we seek one to come. Indeed (like Noah's Dove) we
scarce know where to rest the Sole of our Foot in peace. Here we are often
forced to be moving, and removing, from one habitation, to another, from one
country to another; yea from one end of the earth to the other; we are never
fixed, nor thoroughly settled till we come to the Grave; and then there will be
an end, for ever, of all our Wanderings, and weary some Pilgrimages. Man (whilst
traveling in the Regions of Mortallity, under the circumstances of being
obnoxious to diverse contingencies) may, not unfitly, be compared to a Ship,
under sail, in the wide Ocean; for that he is always rolling and tumbling,
beaten up and down with Winds, and Waves of various providencies, and fatal
accidentalities that do attend him; and so continually upon the Surfe of
Motion; that he never drops Anchor, never is at quiet till warped into the
Harbor of the Grave: And then, Oh then he is fast, and rides secure from all
Storms and Tempests! For there the wicked cease from troubling. and there the
wearied are at rest.

Thirdly, God has appointed the Grave, as Man's bounded, confined home. The
place where all his desires after, and all his endeavors for the enlargement
of worldly possessions, will have their termination. Whilst Man is upon the
Earth, he is unsatiable in his coveting earth, and thinks he has never enough
of it. His heart is like the daughter of the Horse-leech, still crying, Give,
give; and is never satisfied. As Juvenal speaks of Alexander:

P^l^o juveni vix totus sufficit orbis. The whole World was not enough to
quench the thirst of his ambitious Humor; yea some say, he Wept, because there
were no more worlds to Conquer. Oh! But when he comes to the Grave, he is then
confined to his breadth and length, and incapable of desiring any more; he is
then bounded in his dimentions, without a thought of any enlargement. When we
see the most covetous, or ambitious Man, going to the Grave; we may see, in
tanto, a fulfilling of that Prophesy, That the loftiness of Man shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of Man shall be brought low: (Though I know as to the
full completion of it, it has another tendency) for then his high Aspirations,
and all his vain Expectations are at a Ne plus ultra; and he confined to a
narrow scantling of room in this Long Home. Oh! consider this, you, whose
greedy minds are never satisfied with terrene fruitions; but are always craving
and grasping after more; that are contriving how to add house to house, and lay
field to field, till there be no place; that are sweating and toyling,
journying and traveling, and taking a world of pains to increase the Store of
your so much adored earthly Treasure. Remember, I beseech you, there is no
buying or selling, no trading or traffiquing in the Grave: No bettering, or
making finer or larger your accomodations there: The poorest Codrus has as
much room, as much convenience in this dark Region, as the richest (Cresus.)
For this is the Home where every Man has enough to serve him, and is confined
to the dimentions of it.

Fourthly, God has appointed the Grave, as Man's common, epidemical home. The
place where all the Sons and Daughters of Adam must lie down together, of what
nation or language, of what degree or quality soever they are. The small and
the great, the good and the bad are there: There is no distinction of persons
or conditions of men in that Climate. The most glorious Saint has no more
privilege, or better entertainment in the Grave, than the worst of Sinners.
Job, though he was a good Man, one that put his whole trust and confidence in
God, and one that was beloved of his God; and therefore ascertained of his
Souls possessing the Mansion of eternal Glory: yet as to his Body, he knew that
must fare as the rest of the world did. Hence we find him claiming kindred with
the natives of that Country below, whither he was going: I have said to
corruption, thou art my Father, and to the worm, thou art my Mother and my
Sister. And again, Though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God. Though he was so excellent a Saint, and had so pure a
Soul; yet his Body was corruptible, and must become food for worms. We read of
two (and but two) bodies of Adam's Line, that were carried immediately from
Earth to Heaven, without stopping at the Grave with the rest of their Brethren:
The one was Encch, of whom it is said, He was not, for God took him: The other
was Elijah, who who in a Chariot of Fire, with Fiery-horses, was drawn up from
beside the River Jordan, to the New Jerusalem, the holy Hill of Zion, to be for
ever with God, and With the Spirits of just Men made perfect. The very Body of
our Lord Jesus (for the absolute conquering of Death, and full completing the
work of our Redemption) was necessitated to go down into the Grave; though not
to corrupt and perish there. For David personating him, thus prophetically
spoke -- Thou will not leave my Soul (taken here figuratively for the outward
Man) in Hell, (that is the Grave for so Sheol signifies) Neither will Thou
suffer thy holy One to see Corruption. Implying, that all other bodies must see
corruption; under whatever circumstances, they may be considered; when they
come to this common home, this general receptacle of the Grave. For, as all
must lie down, and take up their dwelling there together; so all must perish,
and rot, and be consumed there; and that from the same cause, and after the
same manner. The Grave is a common home for the wicked in Judgment, it is their
Jail, where they are kept safe till the great and general Assizes of the Day of
Judgment; when the last Trumpet will sound, and the Echo of it will be heard
from the one end of the Earth to the other, with this doleful Summons; Arise ye
Dead, and come to Judgment. When the Vision of John will be made good to a
tittle; And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
Face the Earth and Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. And
I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, and the books were opened;
and another book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead were
judged out of those things that were written in the Book according to their
Works. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell (that
is the Grave) delivered up the Dead which were in them, and thy were Judged
every Man according to their Works. And the effect of this great Trial, and
dreadful Appearance, will be, the Bodies of the wicked shall be sent to Hell,
as well as their Souls, and be Tormented there for ever: God can, and for the
glorifying of his Justice, he will Condemn both Body and Soul to Hellfire at
last. Those Ears that have been always open to let in the Air of obscenity, and
tickled with delight in the hellish music of profane Language, shall then be
terrified with the doleful Howlings, and Cryings, and Gnashing of Teeth, that
will there be in an horrible manner among the wreached Miscreants. Those Eyes
that have been as Windows to let in Lust, and all manner of wantonness, and
filthiness into the Soul, shall then be punished with beholding the ghastly
Looks of affrightning Devils, that will be continually staring the damned in
the Face. Those Tongues that have been the Bellows of the Devil, blown into
from Hell, always employed in belching forth horrid Oaths, blaspheming their
Creator; or thundering out direful Execrations, cursing the Creature; and that
without either shame or remorse shall then be miserably scorched in that
inextinquishable Fire, which there burns Day and Night. In a word, those
Bodies that here have been vessels of uncleaness, members of an harlot,
recepticles of all profaneness, shall then be rolling on fiery Pillars in those
everlasting Burnings, in those devouring Flames, which the Breath of the Lord
has kindled; when that amazing, and soul-confounding Sentence is pronounced
upon them, by the Month of the righteous Judge himself, Depart from me ye
Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But now
the Grave is a common home to the Saints, and People of God in Mercy; it is the
place where their Bodies are clarified, and refined from all dross and
corruption, and so made fit for Glory. Oh! what a glorious Morning, what a
joyful blessed day will that of the Resurrection be, to All that sleep in
Christ: For then, with their bodily Eyes, shall they behold their Savior, and
in the reunion of their Bodies, with their Souls, shall they be for ever with
him; hearing him speaking in that soul-reviving, soul-refreshing, yea,
soul-ravishing Language to them; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World. Then the Body, that
is now (...) a body of meanness; or a low abject vile Body, by reason of its
corruption; shall in that day become (...) a Body of Glory; for it will be
changed, and made like unto the glorious Body of the Lord Jesus, and in
conformity to that Glory put on, Stolam immortalitatis* the Garment of
immortality. The dead bodies of Saints shall live; yea, together with the dead
Body of Christ shall they arise: They shall awake, and sing, though now they
dwell in the Dust; for their Dew, is as the Dew of Herbs; and the Earth shall
give them up as the Lord's Dead. Now then, if the Grave be Man's proper home,
his seltled home, his confined home, and his common home: Ah! How should all of
us, whether rich or poor, high or low, old or young, be familiarizing this home
to our selves, as that which we must all come to. Oh Sirs! Methinks you should
have serious and awful thoughts of your ghastly paleness, your loathsome
blackness, and your habitations in the dark. And so I pass from the Dying Mar's
Destiny -- He goes to his Long Home: To the Living Man's Duty -- He ought to be
a Mourner in the Street: I told you, in the Doctrine, there was a Mourning, due
from the Survivers, to the Deceased; I shall now labor to make it appear; and
that upon a four-fould account.

First, Naturally, There is a natural Obligation to Mourn, when any Man goes to
his Long Home; and surely they are very unnatural, that do not pay it.

First, For that, they that Live, are of the same Mould with them that Dye. All
are made, and composed of the same perishing Earth. Hence David speaks not only
of himself, but of all Men, when he inscribes Vanity on them, Psalm. 39. ver.
5, 6. Behold thou have made my Days as an hand's breath, and my Age is as
nothing before Thee, verily every Man at his best estate is altogether Vanity.
Surely every Man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain; He
heapeth up Riches, and knows not who shall enjoy them. Here is a general Rule
without any exception, that every Man, be he never so great, or high, or rich,
or wise, or learned in the world; and that in his best estate, take him under
what circumstances you will, is Vanity; yea, altogether Vanity: a poor crazy,
empty, evanid thing. Now, when Man, that is so vain, so perishing in his own
Nature, sees one of the same Mould, with himself, carrying to the Grave, to be
placed in his Long Home; the Law of Nature exacts a tribute of Tears from him
(though he had no particular acquaintance with, or obligation to the person
deceased) because he beholds a crumbling away, and a fading of that Earth,
whereof himself is made; at which, Nature cannot but have a reluctance, and
vent its sympathetical Passion. But as the Apostle speaks of some Monsters in
filthiness, and uncleaness, that they did that which is against Nature; so we
may see many so hardened in stupidity, that contrary unto nature, they are not
affected with, or concerned at the Death, or going to the Grave, of almost any
person.

Secondly, There is a natural Obligation on the Living to Mourn for the Dead;
for that Death is the thing which every Man in the world has deserved; as
being lineally descended from Adam, who brought Death into the World, and
inslaved not only himself, but all his posterity unto its power. So says the
Apostle, Romans 5. ver. 12. Wherefore, as by one Man, Sin entered into the World,
and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have Sinned.
Had Adam never sinned, Adam had never dyed; but in illo die (says God) in that
day thou eatest the Fruit thereof, thou shall surely dye; or (as it is in the
Original) dying, thou shall dye. And indeed, as he devolved Guilt, so he
entailed death (the sad consequence of that Guilt) upon all that should come
after him unto the end of the World. Oh! therefore, how natural would such a
reflection as this be, at the news of any Mortals fall by the stroke of Death,
or at the sight of any deceased person, going to his Long Home. -- I am a Child
of Adam as well as he, and in the guilt and pollution of his original
Disobedience was I shaped, and subjected, to all the Miseries that attended
that iniquity, did my Mother conceive me, and bring me forth: And surely I have
added to the stock of original Corruption, multitudes, innumerable multitudes
of actual Transgressions; and therefore I have every way merited Death, and
deserved to be imprisoned in the Dungeon of the Grave, as much as he that has
past through it, and is gone down before me into it. Should not I then be
concerned at, and deeply affected with what has befallen him. The extremity of
pain that he was in, the weary some nights that he enjoyed, the tumblings and
tossings that he under-went, the bitter distress and anguish that possessed his
Soul, which enforced those doleful sighs and sobs, those heart-fetcht-groans
and shrikes from his dying Breast, are all things that I, in the same (if not
in a greater) measure have deserved. Oh! then that my Head were Waters, and my
Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I could mourn and weep, and truly lament at this
Mournful Spectacle; and that from this consideration, that as he (the object of
Mortality before my Eyes) is deprived of life, and all the comforts of it; as
he is snatched away from all his Friends and Relations; as he (of a living Man)
is become a lump of dead Clay, a piece of rotten putrefying Flesh, fit for
nothing but to feed worms in the Grave, even so have I most justly merited in
the like manner to be; nothing has befallen him, but what is due to me.

Thirdly, There is a natural Obligation on the Living to Mourn for the Dead,
for that there is no living person, but must come to it himself. Death is a
debt we must all pay to Nature. Job speaks of Man indefinitely, thereby
including every Man in what capacity so ever he is, Chap. 14. ver. 2. He comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not. And we are elsewhere told, that, All flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof as the flower of the field; the grass withers, the flower
fladeth; even so, when the Hand of God is upon Man, upon any Man; he makes his
Beauty to consume away like a Moth; for that every Man is Vanity, Selah. We
have an Interrogation concerning this, which implies a vehement Negation (for
so the Scripture often expresses it self) Psalm. 89. ver. 48. What Man is he
that lives, and shall not see Death, shall he deliver his Soul from the hand
of the Grave, Selah. That is, there is no Man living, but must see Death, and
come into the dominion of the Grave. Now, if Death be thus common to every Man,
then every Man ought certainly to be affected, when he sees another under the
power of it. Would it not I pray you, argue more than ordinary stupidity and
sencelesness, in that Malefactor, that beholding a Partner in Guilt, and
Condemnation with himself, dying a shameful painful Death, according to the
Sentence of the Law; the which Death he himself must undergo the day following;
and yet not to be concerned at such a spectacle, so much as to shed a Tear, or
manifest any meltings of Heart at so doleful a sight. Oh! How unnaturally
hard-hearted would you say this Man was. Why, Sirs, this is our very case; we
are all real Malefactors before God, condemned by him to death, to the same
death, and sooner or later we must be laid on our sick Beds, the common place
of Execution; and when we see any in pain and misery there before us: Oh! we
should remember it will be our turn ere long. Do we see a dying Man in a
languishing departing condition, fetching his last sigh, heaving for his last
groan, and giving up his last breath: Oh! we should sadly reflect upon our
selves, as that Father of whom I have read, did at the sight of any Coffin --
Ille hedie, ego cras. He is gone to day, and so may I to morrow, or to be sure
must go one day or other; then which, nothing is more certain.

Fourthly, It is not corrupted, but refined Nature, that especially enforces
this duty of Mourning for the Dead; and the more Nature is purged, the more it
is enlivened in the regular performance of this Work. We find the Spirit of God
inciting, and calling upon Men solemnly to do it, Jer. 9. ver. 17, 18. Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning Women, that
they may come, and send for cunning Women, that they may come. And let them
make have, and take up a wailing for us, that our Eyes may run down with Tears,
and our Eyelids gush out with Water* Why, What is the matter? what is the
cause there should be such a great general Mourning? ver. 21. For Death is come
up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off the Children
from without, and the young Men from the streets. Oh! When Death is taking its
range about the streets, it is an especial time for Mourners to be there; to
manifest a real Mourning, under such a dispensation; to put on Ashes for
Beauty, and instead of the Garment of Joy, to be clothed with the Spirit of
Heaviness. Religion does not hinder any natural act, it only regulates the
mode, and refines the end of the performance. It does not hinder natural love,
it only teaches us how to love innocently; nor does it hinder natural sorrow,
it only guides us how to sorrow profitably. As Divines say, Though Religion be
above reason, yet it is not contrary to reason; so though it be an enemy to all
vicious, corrupt motions of nature, yet it obliges no person to be unnatural:
that is, to fail in doing those things which the principals of natural being do
require, as necessary to the demonstration of its being; but rather provokes to
a lively, and regular doing of them. And surely this duty, under our present
consideration, is that which the spirit of a Man dictates to him, though in a
dark mistaken way; and the Spirit of God suggests to him, in a right, safe,
justifiable way. That there is a time to Mourn, is past dispute, since the Word
of Truth speaks it; and that a Funeral Solemnity (or seeing Man go to his Long
Home) is such a time, is also out of doubt, since the Word of Truth enjoins it.
Hence we may warrantably, and not uncharitably conclude, That Man, void of
Reason or Religion, of Nature or Grace, yea of Love to God or Man, that brings
not a Mourning-heart along with him to the House of Mourning.

Secondly, Relatively; There is a relative obligation upon the living, to Mourn
for the dead; which Relation, either in a more large or strict sense, takes in
the whole Race of Mankind.

First, For that all men are related in Adam, as springing from his Loins.
Though men are now distinguished into many sorts of Nations, and diverse Kinds
and Manners of persons; yet they all come from the same Root, the same
Offspring; all Children of the same Father, of the same Mother: So we are
told, Genesis 3. ver. 20. And Adam called his Wives name Eve, because she was the
Mother of all Living. All the vast numberless multitudes of People throughout
the Universe, that have been, or still are in the World, came originally from
her Womb. She is the Parent from whence so many Millions of Souls may derive
their pedigree. The highest, and most certain degree of Relation in natures
Climax. Methinks then we should not be so unmindful of our primitive
Extraction, as to be wholly unconcerned at the departure of one of the same
Race with our selves. There is none so remote from us in Country or
Acquaintance, but he is near to us; yea, related to us, Secundum esse, as he is
a Son of Adam. And can we afford never a tear, never a sigh, never a
compassionate sob to accompany such an one (be he who he will, or what he will)
to his Long Home: Ah! It Is sign we are hardened against our own Flesh; and that
we shamefully forget the Father that begat us, and the Mother of whom we are
all Born. Oh! what a debauched, abominable Age do we live in; wherein Men are
so senceless, and horridly stupid; so intoxicated with Lusts and Vanities, so
bewitched to the Allurements of the World, and so feared in their evil ways and
courses; that Death (though it be even at their doors) is disregarded by them;
and the going to the Grave of others (though their very Neighbors) is a thing
they take no notice of, nor in the least Mourn for; so long as they have their
strength and health, to drink and swear, and indulge themselves in their lusts
and pleasures; they care not who are Sick, or who Dye, or who go to the Grave,
it is all one to them. Truly such persons are so far from being like
Christians, that they are ten thousand times worse than Heathens. Oh! how will
the Egyptians rise up in Judgment against the Men of this Generation, and
condemn them for their melting and mourning Deportment at the Funeral of good
old Jacob (notwithstanding he was of another Nation and Religion) when they
came to the Threshing-floor of Arad, which is beyond Jordan; it is said, they
Mourned with a very great and sore Lamentation: insomuch, that the place was
called Abel-Mizraim, the Mourning of the Egyptians. But ah! How little Mourning
is there found amongst us, upon such occasions!

Secondly, As there is a Relation in the first Adam, wherein all are concerned;
so there is a Relation in the second Adam, wherein not a few are tied, and
obliged to be concerned one for another, especially at so great a change, as
that of Death. Now this Relation, is either more Large, or more Strict: More
Large; and so all, that own Jesus Christ the Son of God, to be come in the
Flesh, are within the reach of it, who are therefore called by one general and
Catholic name, Christians. But more Strictly; and so it is restrained peculiar
to Believers; who by the same work of Grace, are made true Members of the
Church-militant, and by the same act of Faith, are expecting the glory of the
Church-triumphant: Who are engaged in the same cause, Soldiers under the same
Banner, Wrestlers against the same Enemy, even Principalities and Powers, and
spiritual Wickednesses in high places: Who are sighting the same Battle,
Runners of the same Race, Pursuers after the same Crown, even that which is
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away: Who are Inheritors of the same
Promise, Fellow-heirs of the same Kingdom, Waiters for the same Adoption, to
wit, the Redemption of the Body: Who are Professors of the same Faith,
Believers in the same Christ; Experiencers of the same happiness in the
glimpses of Zion's glory, and the fore-taste of the Joys, of the Life to come.
In a word, who are under the same Tie, confirmed by the same Seals, bound by
the same Covenant to live according to the Rule, and in the Fellowship of the
Gospel. This Relation is so near, so great, so obligatory, that the Apostle
calls it (...), the Brotherhood, or a company of Brothers. As all Men are
Brothers in Adam, naturally; so Believers are Brothers in Christ, spiritually;
and this nearness in Relation, should certainly cause a Mourning, when Death
makes a Separation. Oh! when a Godly Man goes to his Long Home, then
Godly-Mourning should Go about the Streets; for that there is a great Loss, and
will be a real want of his Prayers, his Tears, his Holy Converse, and the good
he might farther have done in the World. Upon this account, Elishah Mourned for
Elijah, and sent his loud Acclamations of Sorrow to Heaven after him, when he
was taken up from him -- My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof. This made the Ephesians Mourn so dolefully at Paul's
departure, because they were never to see him again. So says the Text -- And
they all wept sore, and fellon Paul's Neck and kissed him. Sorrowing most of all
for the words that he spoke, that they should See his Face no more: Paul was
their spiritual Father, that had begotten them to God; and therefore they could
not but Mourn, to think of parting with so dear a Relation; especially since it
was to be an eternal Farewell. How! must they never see his Face more; never
hear the sound of that golden Trumpet more, that had been so charming to their
Ears; yea, so ravishing to their Souls. Oh! This strained up their Sorrow to
the highest Peg; this made them Mourn, with a Mourning truly Mournful. And we
read, Acts 8. ver. 2. And devout Men carried Stephen to his Burial, and made
great Lamentation over him. Steven was their brother, and companion in the
Faith, Patience, and Tribulation of the Gospel; and therefore they looked on
themselves obliged to Mourn bitterly, and Lament sorely, when he went to his
Long Home. But alas! there is little of this Sorrow in these days; wherein
Iniquity does so much abound, and the Love of so many waxes cold to every good
Work. There is no Mourning in the Streets of our Jerusalem, no Lamenting in the
City of our Zion, when the Godly Man cease, when the Faithful fail from among
the Children of Men. The Prophets complaint was, verily never more just and
pertinent, than now -- The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to heart,
and Merciful Men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken
away from the Evil to come.

Thirdly, There is a Relation by Affinity, which obliges Men to Mourn at the
Departure (or going to their Long Home) of any so Related to them. This
Relation is by Marriage; or joining Families that were remote, and wholly
unacquainted by Hymen's bands together. Thus Hamor and Shechem desired, That
themselves and all their Citizens, might be Related to the Family of Jacob,
when they communed with him in the Gate -- These Men are peaceable with us,
therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, --
Behold, it is large enough for them, let us take their Daughters to us for
Wives, and let us give them our Daughters. As if they had said, Let us contract
a Relation by making interchangeable Marriages; that so we may be near to them,
and better acquainted with them. And surely in the compass of this Relation, it
ought to be a sensible Affliction, when Death is Marring the Glory of their
Society, and breaking the Hedge of their Unity, by taking one away. This was
the cause of the Mourning of Orpah, and Ruth, at the parting with their Mother
Naomy, who was indeed their Mother but by Marriage, Ruth 1. ver. 14. And they
lift up their voice, and wept again; and Orpah kissed her Mother, but Ruth
clave unto her. They could not think of a Farewell, without powering out floods
of Tears. Nay, so strong were Ruth's Affections, that when it came to the
pinch, she would not leave her; But was resolved to accompany her in all her
Travels and Troubles, whatever she should undergo, or meet with for it; and
therefore she told her -- Thy God shall be my God, and thy People shall be my
People, where thou go, I will go, where thou dyest, I will dye, and there
will I be buried. Now, as Solomon says -- Go to the Aut thou sluggard,
consider her ways, and be wise. So I say in this case, Go to this
Moabitish-Woman, thou hard-hearted Christian (that can with dry Eyes, and a
sottish Spirit, behold a Relation entombed in the Earth) consider the depth of
her Affection, the pureness of her Love, the tenderness of her Heart, and be
Religiously Wise in knowing how to carry it under a parting-dispensation. Oh!
remember that as there may be an innocent and lawful Mirth, when Relations
first meet, to begin their acquaintance, or contract their proximity together;
so there ought to be a Mourning in a moderate way, when there is any parting or
separation by the hand of Death.

Fourthly, There is a Relation by Consanguinity, which not only obliges, but
enforces Tears from the Eyes of all persons (unless unnatural bruits)
accompanying any so related to them, to their Long Home. This Relation comes
not only by a general deduction from Adam, but by a more near and immediate
alliance, and conjunction in Blood; whereby they become Bone of one Bone, and
Flesh of one Flesh. Such is the Relation between Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Brothers and Sisters, etc. Now what Husband can forbear Tears, when
his dear Wife is snatched out of his Arms, by Death; when the delight of his
Eyes is taken away with a stroke. Who can then but imitate affectionate Abram,
of whom it is said, Genesis 23. ver. 2. And Sarah dyed in Kiriath-Arba; the same
is Hebron, in the land of Canaan, and Abram came to Mourn for Sarah, and to
Weep for her. She was the companion of his youth, the wife of his delights; the
mother of his Isaac, yea the better half of himself; and therefore he could not
but Weep, when she was gone from him. What Wife can refrain Mourning, when her
beloved Husband is going down into the shades of Death, and she to be left a
poor desolate, disconsolate Widow, as Naomi and her two Daughters in the land
of Moab were: And how can poor Parents keep in Sorrow, when they see Death
preying upon the Children of their Bowels, and confining their tender Limbs to
the cold Grave. Hence we find David giving vent to his passion, for the Death
of Absalom, in this pathetical Exclamation, 2 Samuel 18. ver. 33. And the King
was much moved, and went up to the Chamber over the Gate, and wept: and as he
went, thus he said, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had
dyed for thee: O Absalom my Son, my Son. Indeed Divines conjecture the reason
of David's so great Mourning, was the fear of Alsolom's miscarrying, as to his
eternal State; his doubt that it was not well with his Soul; he dying in a
state of Rebellion, both against his earthly and heavenly Father. Though this
might have some impression on David's Heart, yet questionless 'twas Nature it
self drew out his Sorrow, from this very consideration, that he was his Son,
and there needs no other to enforce a Mourning. From this sprung that Voice of
Lamentation, and Weeping, and great Mourning, which was heard in Ramah, poor
Rachels pitifully Weeping for their Children, and refusing to be Comforted,
Because they were not. And then reciprocally, what Children can be so
hard-hearted, so stony-spirited, as not to wait upon their Parents Coffins with
Tears to the Grave. When Jacob was gathered to his Fathers, and had yielded up
the Ghost in a good old Age, we read that his Son Joseph fell upon his Face,
and wept upon him, and kissed him. And truly this Mourning is but an expression
of Love; and where it is not, we may safely infer, that those persons had no
love, no affection at all for their Relations, when alive.

Thirdly, Morally; There is an obligation (which none that pretend to any
principles of Morality will disown) upon the Living to Mourn for the Dead.

First, For that a Man is lost by Death. As to the enjoyment of him, and
society with him, he is perished from among Men. Now Man being a sociable,
delightful Creature, the Loss of him is considerable, and ought to be laid to
heart, by all that survive him. Man is to be looked upon as the chief piece of
Workmanship in the Creation; the glory of all the Works of God in the lower
Region. So wonderfully was he made, so strangely was he fashioned, so
excellently was he adorned, that the good Angels admired him, and the Bad
envyed him; which was the occasion of their Fall, as some learned Writers have
supposed. And what God speaks of forming the World in general, we way apply to
the Creating of Man in particular; with respect to the excellency of the Work,
when he was presented on the Theater of the World. How did the Morning Stars,
in that day, sing together, and how did all the Sons of God shout for joy. And
surely the Dissolution of Man affords as much cause of sorrow, as his Making
did of gladness; especially considering that it is in Scripture, called, a
destroying of him. Thou turnest Man into destruction, and then thou say,
Return again ye Children of Men. When Man is in the midst of his honor, in the
height of his glory, in the greatest of his power; in a moment, in the
twinkling of an Eye, he may be dashed in pieces, and be destroyed from off the
Earth; for by the blast of God he perishes, and by the breath of his Nostrils
he is consumed. One small puff blows him away, and he is no more to be heard
of, as though he had never been. And should not this be matter of grief and
lamentation to the Living, to see so excellent a Creature as Man, deprived of
his Being, bereaved of his Breath, stripped of his Enjoyments, and all his Glory
to be laid in the Dust. Ah! What Eye can behold such a sight, what Ear can hear
of such a thing, and not be deeply affected with it, and Heart-pricked with
sorrow at it. Oh! How was our blessed Lord Jesus concerned, how Mournfully was
he touched, when he heard the tidings of Lazarus decease, though he was
determined, and very well knew how to raise him up, and bring him to Life
again. Pray hear what is said of him, John 11. ver. 33. When Jesus therefore
saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in
the Spirit, and was troubled. Here are two words in the Greek, and both
emphatical, (...); he roared, or cried out in the Spirit. That is, he Mourned
inwardly, and Lamentably, at the loss of Lazarus. Again, (...), He vehemently
troubled or disturbed himself. He was mightily affected with the change Death
had made in that Family, which he had so great and peculiar a Love for. Our
Savior showed this great example of Morality, that he might modestly, and
moderately express the sentiments of Grief, which we ought to have at the
departure of Man, from the Land of the Living.

Secondly, For that when a Man goes to his Long Home, all the pleasure in his
society is dead with him; nothing remains of it, but the remembrance which
serves only to aggravate, and heighten the Grief of the Surviver. 'Twas a true
saying of one -- Aura secunda bonus socius. A good companion is as a prosperous
Gale, carrying a Man pleasantly, and with comfort, through the Tempestuous Sea
of this World. And again -- Bonum sodalitium optimum solatium. Good Company is
the best solace: Indeed, suitable society is the comfort of Life, the
improvement of parts, the joy of the Intellect, the only distinguishing
Privilege that gives the Preference to Men above Beasts. Take away this, and
what happiness is it to be a Man, or what is humane Life any thing to be
accounted of. But when Man is dead, there can be no more delight in him, or
comfort received by society with him. There is no converse in the shades below,
no interlocution in those gloomy Regions. The Grave is a silent house, where
the Eyes of all the Inhabitants are closed in the Dust, and their Mouths filled
with cold Clay. And therefore this should cause Mourning in the Streets, when
we see a Man going to his Long Home (especially such a Man whom we have had any
intimacy with) because we shall never have the opportunity of enjoying any
pleasant hours with him, or delighting our selves in the Spiknard of his
friendship, which was wont to send forth so fragrant a smell. We must then bid
farewell to all discoursing upon any subject, to all advising about any
difficulties, to all profiting by any Polemick Notions started and improved in
an amicable way. In a word, we must bid an eternal Adieu to any pleasure or
satisfaction we received in communing with him, for we shall enjoy no more of
it for ever. Oh! surely this cannot but cut deep in a generous Soul; this
cannot but greatly wound a spirit, whose thoughts are drained from the dross of
Plebeian conversation, that has any esteem at all for the advantages of a
rational Life. Upon this account it was, that the old Prophet in Bethel,
Lamented over the Man of God which came from Judah, who was slain by a Lion, as
he rode upon an Ass in the Highway. He bitterly Bewailed, and Mourned for his
Death, crying out -- Ah! alas my Brother. As if he had said, I have been
extremely refreshed by thy company, in hearing the Word of the Lord from thy
Mouth, concerning the destruction of the Priests that burn Incense upon the
Altar, and the pulling down the House of Jereboam. Oh! How have I been
strengthened in my Courage, confirmed in my Faith, and the more resolved in the
Ways of God, by this thy Prophesy. But now thou art gone, I shall never have
any more of this profitable and spiritual Discourse with thee. This made him
Weep over his torn Carcass, and bitterly Lament his untimely Fall, and to give
a solemn Charge to his Sons, that when he was Dead, they should Bury him in the
Sepulcher wherein this Man of God was Buried, and lay his Bones close by the
Bones of this Prophet.

Thirdly, For that when a Man Dies, and goes to his Long Home, he is past doing
any more good; or being any farther serviceable in his Generation. There is no
praising or praying in the Grave, or any remembrance of God or Man. As the Tree
falls by Death, it will lie till Judgment, without bringing forth any fruit at
all. Whilst Man is in the Land of the Living, he is capable of doing some good;
or being useful in that place and condition wherein God has set him. But when
Death cuts him off; his day of opportunity is at an end, and the night is come
upon him, in which he cannot work, nor do any more as he has done. And
therefore there is just cause of Mourning and Lamenting at his Decease. Thus
the Widows of Joppa Bewailed the Death of Tabitha, a Woman full of good Works,
and Alms-deeds, which she had done, Acts 9. ver. 39. Then Peter arose and went
with them; when he was come, they brought him into the upper Chamber; and all
the Widows stood by him Weeping, and showing the Coats and Garments which
Dorcas made while she was with them. By which they commended her Charity, and
bitterly Bewailed her fatal Exit. The thoughts of parting with such a Woman,
who was so charitable, so useful; even broke their Hearts with Sorrow, and
dissolved their Eyes with Tears. They brought the Garments to view (which she
had made to cloth the Backs of the Naked with) and set them before Peter, and
the rest that accompanied him, to justify the ground of their Mourning; or
rather, to heighten the Passion of their Sorrow, from this sadning
consideration, that she was ever incapable of making any more; that the Poor
were never like to be the better for her again; They could not but Mourn, that
she was so soon taken off from prosecuting the many good projects she had in
her Head arid Heart, of being useful to the Poor, and them that were in
Distress. Ah, Sirs! when we see a Man going to his Grave, we may sadly cry out,
He will never, he can never do any more good; His opportunity of glorifying his
Creator, or of serving his Fellow Creature, is past and gone, and will never
return again. It is impossible he should be any farther serviceable in Church
or Commonwealth. And surely this should enforce a Mourning from all, who take
delight in, or are capable of receiving Comfort from the doing good of others.
But it may be, you will say, there are many Men that do no good at all while
they Live, but a great deal of harm; who are so far from being useful, that
they are wholly unprofitable; yea, very prejudicial to God's honor, and Man's
welfare in their Generation; That are a Plague to the place where their abode
is, and a Curse to all, whose unhappiness it is to be near them. Now, should we
Mourn for them, should we Grieve when they are taken out of the World; should
we go as Mourners about the Streets, when such barren Trees are cut down, and
carried to their Long Home? Yes, verily, we should; because, while a wicked Man
is alive, there is hope, or at least, a possibility of his Recovery from his
wicked State; of his being washed and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God. But when he dies, there is no possibility of his
reclaiming, or being renewed to Repentance -- for there is no work, no device,
no invention (and I may add, no reformation) in the Grave, whither we are going.

Fourthly, For that when a Man Dies, and goes to his Long Home, we shall never
see him more: he vanishes (as it were) out of our sight, and we are never more
to behold him, or cast our Eyes upon him. He is both actively and passively in
an invisible state. So Job Mournfully speaks of himself, chap. 7. ver. 7, 8. Oh
remember that my Life is wind, my Eyes shall no more see good. The Eye of him
that has seen me, shall see me no more; thy Eyes are upon me, and I am not.
What more cutting Expression, what more sadning Inculcation, what more
provoking Incitation to Mourning, can there be, than the Sense of this; that we
shall behold the Face of our beloved Friend (after his departure from us) no
more! Were Man to Return, though after never so many Years absence from his
home, or continuance in the Grave: Were he to visit his habitation again, and
become the objective delight of his poor Mourning Friends and Relations, it
might be some alleviation to their Grief, when he takes his journey to his Long
Home. But Oh! What a prick to the Heart, what a stab to the Soul, what a
deadning to the Spirits, what an inundation of Sorrow (like the opening of
Pandora's Box) is this lamentable Thought to an ingenious Man, that he must
never, never, never more behold the Face of this or that Relation in this
Region of Mortality; nor have any converse with him on this side the Bank of
Eternity! What Husband can think so of his Wife, and not melt? what Wife can
have such a thought of her Husband, and not faint? what Parent can consider
this, with respect to his Child, and not mourn? what Child can reflect upon the
impossibility of ever seeing his Father or Mother more, and not be overwhelmed
with grief? In a word, What Friend or Relation can ponder on such an eternal
Farewell, as is then given, and not be dissolved into Tears; yea, and not to
Mourning like the Mourning of Hada-drimmon, when Cloystered up in Megiddo's
Vale? It is the opinion of Divines, That the chiefest of the Saints happiness,
consists in Vision, or in the use of the visive faculty, which will then be
enlarged, and made glorious to perfection; for they shall see the Face of God
in Righteousness, and be satisfied with his likeness; they shall be for ever
with open Face, beholding (as in a Glass) the Glory of the Lord, and be changed
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Sure I am, the Saints greatest comfort in this World, consists in Vision, or
beholding God's Image in his People; and that not only the work of his Power in
their comely Features, but the work of his Grace in the divine Characters of
Wisdom, engraven in their Souls, and immediately reflected upon in all their
Actions. Therefore it cannot but cause Mourning, when such delightful Objects
are removed out of sight, and never more to be beheld.

Fourthly, Modifically; There is a modifick Obligation upon the Living, to
Mourn for the Dead; in respect of the manner of Men's Dying, or the
circumstances they are under, in that great Hour.

First, For that Sickness is the Prologue of it; the Paleness of Death, is
generally ushered in with the Pains and Sorrows of Sickness. Thus it was with
the Child of the great Shunamite, that had so courteously entertained Elisha,
and built a Chamber for him; Furnishing it with those Utensils, which she knew
were most acceptable to a contemplative Man: In requital of which kindness, he
promised her from God, a Child; and a Child she had, but it Dyed; but before it
Dyed, it fell Sick, and was tormented with Pains. So we are told, 2 King. chap.
4. ver. 18, 19. And when the Child was grown, it fell on a day that he went out
to his Father, to the Reapers: And he said unto his Father, my Head, my head;
and he said to a Lad, carry him to his Mother. And when he had taken him, and
brought him to his Mother, he sat on her Knees till Noon, and then Dyed. His
Head first Aked, before his Breath Departed. And this is the usual way of Men's
Dying; first to complain of some Disease in their Bodies, before there is a
separation between that, and their Souls: One cries out of his Head, another of
his Bowels; one is Sore-pained, another is Heart-sick upon his taking his leave
of the World. And as the Apostle Peter speaks of the last times, The Sun shall
be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before the great and notable
Day of the Lord comes. So it is most true in this case; Health shall be turned
into Sickness, Strength into Weakness, Pleasure into Pain, Delight into
Sadness, before the great and notable Day of Death comes. Which indeed (in it
self considered, abstracted from the hopes of a future Being) is a day of
Wrath; a day of Trouble and Distress, a day of Wastness and Desolation; a day
of Darkness and Gloomyness; a day of Clouds and thick Darkness; a day of the
Trumpet, and Alarm against the senced Cities, and against the high Tower. Now
who can behold a Friend in any pain, or under the power of any Distemper upon a
sick Bed, and not Grieve at it? What Object calls more for Pity and
Commiseration, yea for Grief and Lamentation, than a pained Heart-sick-man, who
cannot help himself, or receive Ease from any Application; especially of that
pain that precedes his Dissolution; for

Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis. And as Distempers are coroding
and tormenting in their Natures, so they are Multitudinous in their number.
There are innumerable Diseases that go before Death, that are as pursivants in
the same Livery, warning the Sons of Men to be ready at Deaths approach
according to the Poet,

Mill modis lethi miseros mors una fatigat. And as another well expresses it,

Mill modis Morimur miseri sed Nascimur uno. There is but one way of our
coming into the World; but a Thousand, of our going out. 'Twas a Curse upon Man
after his Fall, that he should live by the Sweat of his Brow, and the same
Curse has entailed this misery upon him, that he must Dye in the Anguish of
his Soul. As he Lives in Sweat, so he Dies in Pain; and this Pain cannot but
enforce Mourning from all tenderhearted Spectators that are about him.

Secondly, For that a Dying-man, is really himself a Mourning-man. When Man is
going to his Long Home, his Soul is clad with Cypress; his Spirits are
drooping, and in a sorrowful trembling posture, he is waiting the finishing of
Deaths last stroke: He lies groaning, and pitifully crying out on his sickbed;
and with rowling-eyes, lifted-up hands, and panting breasts; he sighs, he sobs,
he dies. And from this condition, good Men are no more exempted, than wicked,
at their deaths; nay, we find the best of Men, even buried in Sorrow, in the
day of his humiliation, when he was going to his Death, Matthew. 26. ver. 38.
Then says he unto them, my Soul is exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death, tarry
ye here, and watch with me. (...). The word signifies, Fear on every side. The
faculties of his Soul were (as it were) beset, and besieged with Grief: Sorrow
went round about him. Indeed, Aristotle would not own, that a Man of Spirit
could be capable of such a Sorrow; but 'twas his ignorance in the things of
God, which made him think so: And our Savior's sorrowful posture, is a
sufficient confutation of that Notion. Verily Sirs, when the terrors of Death
(notwithstanding the Sting of it is taken away) takes hold upon the most
Heroick-spirited; yea, upon the most gracious qualified among the Sons of Men,
it makes him presently hang his Harp upon the Willow-tree, and hide his Face
within the drawn Curtains; converting his Songs into Sighs, his Laughing into
Mourning; and all his Rejoicing into heavy Groans; Emblematically be speaking
to all that are round about him, with a shaking head, and ghastly look, what
Job did so passionately -- Have pity upon me, Oh ye my Friends, have pity upon
me; for the Hand of God (yea, the hand of Death) has touched mt. Help, help! O
Wife! O Children! What shall I do; my Spirits are fainting, my Breath is going,
my Soul is departing, and I must leave you all! And then turning, sighs and
sobs to that sorrowful Note of Jobs, Oh that I were as in Months past, as in
the day when God preserved me: When his Candle shined upon my Head; and when by
his Light I walked through Darkness: as I was in the days of my Youth, when
the Secret of God was upon my Tabernacle. Thus poor Man concludes the
Tragick-Scene of his troublesome Life, inbreathing out such doleful Epicediums.
He came into the World, Crying, and he goes out, Sighing. He Cries the first
thing he does, after he is Born, and he Sobs the last thing he does, before he
Dies. Now what Heart can be so obdurate, to behold Man expiring in the midst of
his Sigh, and not say, as Thomas said of Lazarus -- Lord let its go, that we
may Dye with him: So let me go and Sob with him, and bear him company in the
bitter Agony he is now in.

Thirdly, For the great change Death makes in the person Deceased; of an active
lively Man, he is become a dead lump of Clay; so changed, and wholly altered in
the Physiognomy, and outward appearance of the Body: that we may say with the
Poet,

Qui color albus erat nunc est contrarius albo: The Man that a day or two ago,
looked so fresh and fair, Oh how pale, how wan, how ghastly, how affrightning
does he look now! The Man that was so pleasant, so every way desirable in his
conversation a little while ago; how loathsome and detestable does he appear
now; That it makes his dearest Relations say of him, as Abraham said of Sarah,
Genesis 23. ver. 4. I am a stranger and a sojourner with you, give me a possession
of a Burying place with you, that I may Bury my Dead out of my sight. Sad was
the Change death made in Sarah, which enforced this so seeming unnatural
Resolution in Abraham, to put her out of his sight. He could no longer look
upon her, as his delightful Wife to sleep in his Bosom; but as a rotten piece
of Flesh, that must be removed away. Man in his Coffin, is like a growing
flower; how splendidly does it look, how fragrantly does it smell, whilst upon
the stalk; but no sooner cropped, but it presently fades, and in a few hours is
trodden under foot, as dirt. So that we may say of him, as the Nations said of
the King of Babylon -- His Pomp is brought down to the Grave, and the noise of
his Viols; the Worm is spread under him, and the Worms cover him: Oh! Sirs, All
Man's Pomp, his Beauty, his Glory is then withered away. And as it was said of
our Redeemer (in his state of humiliation) There is no from or comeliness to
look upon him, nor no beauty in him, that we should desire him. His Body is
then a contemptible, despicable, abominable thing: Hence the Apostle makes use
of these expressions of meanness, and contemptibleness, concerning man's going
to his Long Home; elegantly showing thereby, what his Body (under those
circumstances) is; It is sown in corruption (...), in a state of filthiness and
contamination: Again, It is sown in dishonor (...), in a state of ignominy and
contempt: Again, It is sown in weakness, (...), in a state of inability to
withstand the Power of Death. Once more, It is sown a natural Body, (...), A
Body subjected to all the miseries appertaining to, and entailed upon Apostate
Nature. From all this, we may gather the proper description of the Body, when
it is prepared for, and carrying to the Grave. It is a filthy polluted, a base
ignominious, a frail impotent, a rotting perishing Body. This is the outward
state of every man, when Death has mowed him down. And therefore we should
Mourn at so great and sudden a Change: Though I confess our Mourning should be
in hope, with respect to the departure of the Godly: For though their Bodies be
Sown in corruption, they will be Raised in incorruption; though Sown in
dishonor, they will be Raised in glory; though Sown in weakness, they will be
Raised in Power; though Sown natural, they will be Raised spiritual Bodies. For
their corruptible must put on incorruption, and their mortal must put on
immortality; and then Death it self shall be swallowed up in Victory. But the
present change in their Bodies by Death, calls for a due Mourning from their
Survivors.

Fourthly, For the great change and alteration Death makes in the place of the
Deceased; the great Vacuum there is, when Man is removed, and carried away to
his Long Home: Concerning which, Job excellently speaks, chap. 7. v. 9, 10, 11.
As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the
Grave, shall come up no more. He shall return no more to his house, neither
shall his place know him any more. Therefore I will not refrain my Mouth, I
will speak in the anguish of my Spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my
Soul. Oh! It is very sad to consider what a great change one stroke of Death
may make. A Wife Husbandless, poor Children Fatherless, Servants Masterless,
and many Friends Comfortless: And so great is the alteration in the Family,
that the whole House resents it; and seems silently to Mourn for it. There is
(as it were) a Face of sadness in every place he was wont to be conversant in:
Look in his Parlour, where he used to sit with his Wife, and Children about
him, and there is nothing but a profound silence; his voice is not to be heard:
Look at his Table, where he used to sit with cheerfulness, eating his Bread
with joy among his Relations, and the dull demeaner, and sorrowful posture of
all the assessors, do plainly, yet dolefully speak; Behold, he is not here:
Look in his Shop, where he used to be about his occasions; and the disorder and
confusion there, proclaims aloud his being gone, and not to be heard of: In a
word, Look in every place where he used to be, and you will find one mourning
circumstance or other, a legible Historian of his departure, and being no more
among them. So that, if you seek him, you will not find him; if you ask for
him, you will hear no news. Now surely, methinks, the very miss of a Man in his
Family, the want of him in his place, the great change immediately following
his Departure in all his Affairs and Concerns, should be cause enough to
enforce a Mourning from his Survivors, if there were no other consideration.

Thus I have shown you in what respects there is a Mourning due from the
Surviving, to the Deceased; and why we ought to be Mourners in the Street, when
we see a Man going to his Long Home; even from a Natural, Relative, Moral,
Modifical consideration, obliging us thereunto.

I now pass from the Doctrinal, to the Applicatory part of this sad and solemn
Truth: And the only use I shall make of it, shall be a word of Exhortation, to
put this Duty in practice, now in the day and season thereof. Never was an
occasion more doleful, than that which has brought us hither this day: Never
was a Text more suitable than this, which is now to be applied to the Occasion.
So that, what Application is to be made, will be, Verbum diei in die suo, A
word of day in its proper day. Look Sirs, in yonder Coffin lies a Man known
unto us, and beloved by us, ready to go (when we shall put our hands to carry
him) to his Long Home. Oh! should not we this day be as Mourners in the Street.
Oh! that we could, our selves, as really evidence the Truth of the latter part
of the words, in being Mourners; as our deceased Brother before us, has done of
the former part, in going to his Long Home. Verily Sirs, This is the day, the
very day, in which the Lord God of Hosts, calls to Weeping, and to Mourning, to
Baldness, and to Girding with Sackcloth. And therefore, I shall make use of
the Apostles words, for the pressing this Exhortation, James 4. ver. 9. Be
Afflicted, ana Mourn, and Weep; let your Laughter be turned, to Mourning, and
your Joy to Heaviness. Not a word here but has its Emphasis, and deservies a
special Notation (...): Be touched with a sense of misery, and that in your
Hearts, (...). Mourn in an exceeding great measure, expressed in some outward,
Overt Act, (...). Weep from a broken and tender Heath This Weeping is Natures
privilege, forbiddon by none; as the Poet intimates,

Quis matrem nisi mentis inops in funore nati flere vet at. Again, (...). Let
you Laughter, or loud Acclamations of Mirth and Jollity, (...), be turned into
Mourning, or into a Funeral Elegy or Lamentation. (...). Your Joy, or the
greatest Delight and Contentment, (...), into Heaviness, or into a Sorrow, that
dejects the Countenance, and makes Men look down-ward upon the Earth. Now Sirs,
put all this together, and that is it which I would press you to this day. Oh!
Be so Afflicted, as to be touched with a sense of this awful dispensation of
divine Providence, in visiting us so sorely in this the day of his Anger. And
then Mourn in a visible real manner. And Weep till your Hearts are even broken
with Sorrow. Let your Laughter or outward expressions of Mirth, be turned into
Mourning, or grievous bursting forth into Tears. And let your Joy, or any thing
of delight, be turned into Heaviness; or into a real dejectedness, or calling
down: And the reason is very obvious; this Coffin herd before us, does justly
call for it, as containing one, who was lately the Object of our Love and
Esteem; but now the deserved Subject of our Sighs and Tears. It is not my
principle, nor usual practice, to speak much on such occasions of the Person
deceased. The custom of some Predicants, is rather to be bewailed, than
imitated, who are inconsiderately Studious to hoise up the Names of those, who
they would stutter as high as Heaven, when perhaps at the same time, their
Souls are roaring in the hottest Hell. It Is also of dangerous consequence to
the Auditors. Funeral Encomiasticks of the Dead, prove often confections of
poison to the Living. People may well grow careless of their Lives, when custom
lays an obligation upon the Preacher, to Hackney them to Heaven in his Sermon,
when they Dye. But here is something extraordinary in this Funeral, that may be
my Apology, for speaking something concerning him, who is going to his Long
Home this day. He Dying here in a strange Country, far from his Relations,
where none of his Fathers ever were; and that befalling him, which the Poet
accounting a great misery,

(...): It Is true, he was not drowned, and so did not Dye in the Waters in that
sense; but he Dyed upon the Waters, and is now to be Buried in the Waters: And
therefore I think it but highly just, to strew some deserved Flowers on his
Hearse, that we may all carry home the Fragrancy of his Name in our Memories,
since we cannot carry home his Body to his dear Mourning Relations. Besides, I
look upon my self as obliged to speak, because I knew more of him, than any, I
believe, in the World, did. He was pleased to make my Breast die Repository,
where he locked the very Secrets of his Soul: Never two were more intimate; we
were pleasant to each other in our Lives: Oh! that in our Deaths we had not
been divided. However, my love to him, and intimacy with him, shall not trappan
me into any thing of Flattery, which I ever abhorred. And hence I will not
insist upon what I wish I could do more (viz) his exemplariness in Piety;
Although I am more than confident, the Root of the matter was in him. I know
his unavoidable Association with all sorts of Company betrayed him to some
tinctures of vanity, which himself was sensible of, and most deeply bewailed
upon his dying Bed. But for an example of Morality, a modle of Civility, a
platform of all Humanity; I dare presume to present you with as exact an one,
as has been seen in this Latter-Age. I remember what the Orator says; Frigida
laudatio mera vituperatio. A cold kind of praising, is no better than a
dispraising. Hence, what I shall say, shall be in the words of Truth, Sobriety,
and (I think) justifiable Fervency. I will begin with his Extraction. His Birth
was truly honorable; for he was Born of the race of the Firstborn, being
immediately descended from the Loins of the Prophets, and such (as in their
day) were Stars of the first Magnitude, enrowled in the Catalogue of those
Worthyes, of whom the World was not worthy. His Grandfather, Mr. Richard
Bernard of Batcomb, a most famous elabourate Divine, whose Name is as Ointment
poured forth; whose Works praise him in the Gate, and whose Memory will never
dye, so long as Religion lives in England. His Father also an able eminent
Minister, the Husband of one Wife, by whom he had (I think) One and Twenty
Children, of whom this, our deceased Friend, was the youngest: So that he was
their Benjamin, the Staff of their Old Age; they were careful of his Education,
and infused those great principles of Truth into his Infant-years; the savor of
which, he retained to the last; so true is that,

Quo Yemel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa Diu: Or, as Solomon
Englishes it, Train up a Child in the way wherein he should walk, and when he
is old, he will not depart from it: He was Filius Fidelium and Precum; A Child
of the Covenant, and a Child of Prayers. There was a great stock of Prayers
laid up for him; and I am persuaded they were not lost. After he had past his
impuberous days under his Parents Wings in the Country; he was sent up to
London to his Brother, Mr. John Bernard, a pious holy Man, in great esteem
amongst the Godly; who was more than a Brother, yea a Father to him (as I have
often heard him acknowledge, with a great sense of Gratitude) he took great
care about disposing of him, in order to his future Settlement. At length he
placed him with an honest Master, whom he faithfully and truly Served: I have
heard his Master say this of him, He never had such a Servant. His Calling
obliged him to use the Seas, which he was as unfit for, as the Sea was unworthy
of him. He had a reach at higher things, and his Heroic Spirit hardly brooked
the Conversation genuine to this Element; he had an exceeding good Natural Wit,
a Ripe Invention, a Quick Fancy, a Logical Head, a Strong Memory; and (as a
Crown to all) a Great Judgment: He was an universal accomplished Man, able to
carry himself Aptly, and to speak Congruously in all Companys, from the King's
Court, to the Beggars Cottage. He was endued with that Humility and Modesty,
which very well became his Young years; and yet with that Depth and Judgment,
that was a great deal above his Years. He was unsatiable after Knowledge,
especially in the best things. He would often bring me some of the hardest
Scriptures to explain, and propose some of the abstrucest Points in Divinity,
to be resolved. Indeed he had Notions of a very high Birth, and Conceptions far
above one under his Circumstances: Insomuch, that I have often admired him, and
said of him, as the Multitude, of our Savior, From whence has this Man this
Wisdom? He was a constant hearer of the Word, and a great Honourer of those
that delivered it: He dearly Loved a Learned Ministry, and by such was he
Beloved. Several eminent Divines in London had an high Respect for him. The
truth is, I knew not any (whose Judgments was worth a minding) that were
acquainted with him, but very deeply affected him, and esteemed him, as one of
a more than ordinary Capacity. He greatly delighted in reading good Books,
especially Dr. Bates, Of the Existence of God; His Harmony of the Divine
Attributes: and Mr. Baxters Directory: which he mightily prized, and would
often say, he looked upon it as the next Book to the Bible. In his Match, he
preferred Virtue before Money; contrary to the Genius of this corrupt Age. He
advised with me, and indeed gave himself up wholly to me, to choose a Wife for
him. In order to which, I brought him acquainted with an honest Religious
Family, to which he was soon Related, by espousing a Wife, that Heaven in
Mercy, had every way prepared an Help meet for him: In whom he took great
Delight; as also in the Piety, and Ingenuity of her Relations; with whose
Society he promised himself a great deal of Comfort and Satisfaction, at his
return from this Voyage: But poor Gentleman, he is now gone, Death has
frustrated all his Expectations of that kind. Labitur Savo Rapiente Fato (to
use Senecas words) he is taken away by the overruling Powers above; never to
be among his poor Relations, or to be seen by them any more for ever. He had an
admirable mixture and mediocrity in the whole of his Deportment; he was
Facetious, and yet Solid; Affable, and yet Reserved; Courteous to all, and yet
Familiar with very few: He was a most Just Upright Man in all his Dealings: I
never knew him guilty of the least dirty or disingenuous Action: He was a
faithful and true Friend: Vsque ad aras. I found him so in my three years
acquaintance with him, and constant abode with him, both at Sea, and a Shore.
And I have reason to know him; for in all that time, we were very rarely a
whole day asunder. The truth is, no Change but this of Death could ever have
parted us in this World. I Experienced such a Transcendency, Peculiarity,
Constancy in his Friendship, that I despair of ever meeting with such another
Friend here below. He was a Credit to his Friends, an Honor to his Family; and
the Glory of all his Relations. To Conclude, I do with all imaginable
seriousness, solemnly profess (without the least Flattery, or sinister
Respects) according to my best knowledge of him (which was as great as was
possible for one Man to have of another) upon a long, and critical observing
the whole Course of his Life (the greatest Secrets of which, were not hid from
me). He was the most Cordate, Innocent, Faithful, Ingenious, and every way
Obliging Man, that (in all my Travels through the World, which have been much,
or in my Converse with Men of all sorts, which has been great) I ever saw, or
was acquainted with. He wanted no Quality of a Man to make him Amiable, nor no
Property of a Friend to make him Desirable. For my part, I may truly take up
the Lamentation of David over Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. ver. 26. I am distressed for
thee my Brother Richard, very pleasant have thou been unto me; thy Love to me
was wonderful, passing the Love of Women. And therefore I cannot but Mourn my
self, and invite you to Mourn with me: And though my Loss is more particular,
more peculiar than any of yours; yet there is never an one here, but has a
Loss, a great Loss in this Worthy Man; and ought deeply to lay it to Heart, and
manifest the sense of it, by a due and regular Mourning. And that I may
Methodically, and Gradually lead you into the Valley of Baca; Consider I
beseech you.

First, We have Lost a Man -- one of our Society is gone, and so our number is
lessened. Now, if the Loss of a Man ought to be taken notice of in a Nation, or
in a City, when there are Thousands still left, how much more considerable is
such a Loss to us, who have so few in this our Wooden World. Besides, this is
not the first (though indeed the greatest) Loss we have had of this kind. Death
has been no stranger to us, from the beginning of the Voyage. You know, before
we were clear from Graves-End (a very suitable name, for it is so to many a
parting Friend) Death sat threatening of us in a Terrible manner upon the
Mison-Mast, from whence he sent a Man (to the endangering of his own Life) on
his dismal Errand, to Summon a poor Boy to his Long Home, who outlived not two
days, the Blow he received by the others Fall upon him. And by that time we
were got to the Downs, Death was upon the Catharpins; from whence, in the
twinkling of an Eye, he tumbled one of our Men dead upon the Deck. And he has
been since rainging up and down the Ship, every now and then taking one away
from us, which ought to be laid to Heart by us. But behold, now he is come up
to the Quarter Deck, and has smitten one of our chiefest and choicest Men with
his fatal Dart. Oh! should not we then be affected with such a dreadful Stroke
as this. I am sure in the Preachers Opinion we should, and that not only in the
Text, but elsewhere, Eccles. 7. ver. 2. It is better to go to the House of
Mourning, than to the House of Feasting; for that is the End of all Men, and
the Living will lay it to Heart. That is, the Living ought to lay it to Heart,
and so Mourn, and be Troubled at it.

Secondly, Consider, we have Lost a Friend, a true Friend, according to the
strictest Notions of Friendship, which is a Jewel not common, nor of little
value now a days: We may now, more than ever, take up that old Complaint,

Illud amicitiae Quondam venerabile nomen,
Prostat and in Questu pro meritrice solet.
Friendship is now exposed to Sale, and become a painted Strumpet, to serve the
turns a little while of those that will give most Money for her. But our
Deceased Brother, was one of a Thousand, a Friend indeed: His Friendship was
real and pure, without any mixture of drossy self ends: So that what Christ
said to his Disciples, John 11. ver. 11. These things said he, and after that,
he says unto them, Our Friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him
out of sleep. We may all of us apply to him in the Coffin, now before us, our
Friend Richard sleepth, he is laid down upon on his everlasting Pillar, never
to be awakned till the day of the Resurrection. He Loved us all with a tender
Love, and served us all with a faithful Care. Oh! how ready, and willing was he
to do good to the meanest amongst us. How did he pity, and commiserate any poor
Man in Pain or Distress. How have I seen him Weep when he could not Cure. And
how Charitable was he to his poor Patients; never sparing, but plentifully
spending of his own, to make things good and comfortable for them: And he would
often tell me, he could not but in Conscience do it. And for the truth of this,
I do, and can appeal to most of you that hear me this day; you know it as well
as I: Who then can deny him this Golden Title of a Friend? And he gave
sufficient proofs of his Friendship in the very last act of his Life, when he
desired me to send for the Officers. Oh! with what uncommon Marks of Affection,
with what Transport of Passion, with what Heartmelting Compellations did he
take his Dying Farewell of us, even then, when his Cheeks were Pale, when his
Lips were Cold, when his Eyes were ready to be closed. Ah! can we reflect upon
the Living Marks of his Friendship, and the Dying Tokens of his Love, and not
be as Mourners about his Hearse, now he is going to his Long Home.

Thirdly, Consider we have Lost a Skilful Man, one that was a perfect Master of
his Profession; a complete Artist in every thing that belonged thereunto. He
was well Read, and Studied in the best Physical Authors; the Sense of all
which, in any difficult point, he had ad unguem: Besides, his great Experience,
and Practice of all Sorts, which made him every way fit to undertake so great a
Charge as he had upon him. I heard an Eminent and Learned Physician in London,
say of him, That considering his Years and Circumstances, he never discoursed
with his fellow, able to give so rational an Account of the Nature of any
Distemper, and to prescribe such proper Applications for the Expelling it. He
was very Skilful in Timing all that he did to his Patients: whatever he did,
was in the proper day and season thereof, well knowing that to be a great
truth, which the Poet tells us,

In recto medecina valent data Tempore prosunt,
Et data non apto Tempore vina nocent.
The truth is, he was Skilful in every thing that conduced to his Patients
Good. So that, great is our Loss in this respect. Indeed, the whole of that
Judgment is come upon us, which God threatened his ancient People with, in the
days of old, Isa. 3. ver. 1, 2, 3. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does
take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whale
stay of Bread, and the whole staff of Water: The Mighty Man, and the Man of
War; the Judge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient* The Captain
of Fifty, and the Honorable Man, and the Counselor, and the Cunning
Artificer, and the Eloquent Orator. Ah! verily our stay and our staff is gone;
He that was the stay of our Strength, and the staff of our Lives: He that was a
cunning artificer,, and a skilful Operator in the concerns of our Bodies, is
now taken away; therefore we ought to be Mourners about his Hearse.

Fourthly, Consider, we have Lost an Useful Man; yea, a Man of the greatest Use
amongst us. The variety of Distempers Men are afflicted with, and subject to,
in these Hot Climates, do sufficiently infer the Usefulness; yea, the Necessity
of an able Physician. I know you look upon your Minister as a needless Person,
because you are unsensible of the worth of your Souls; if he had gone, you
would not have accounted it any great loss: Ah! but now Sirs, God knew how to
take that Mercy from you, which you are most sensible of the worth and use of;
He knew where to prick the Vein that will most Bleed; and therefore he has
taken away the Physician of your Bodies, whom you may most dearly miss, before
you go home. And surely this bespeaks your Mourning in a grievous and bitter
manner, for this so sharp a Stroke: What Paul told the Colossians, chap. 4 ver.
14. Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas greet you: May be truly applied to
him, who was indeed a beloved Physician; and he deserved no other, for his
diligent care and pains toward the meanest Patient. He was seldom sent for to
any sick Person, being so forward of himself to go, as soon as he heard of it.
Most Applications he made use of, went through his own hands, though the
Disease was never so loathsome, or the Person never so mean. How then may I
bespeak your Mourning over his Hearse this day, us David did the Mourning of
Israel, over Saul: Ye Daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in
Scarlet, and either delights; who put on ornaments of Gold on your Apparel: So,
O ye Seamen and Officers of this Ship, Weep over this Painful, Diligent,
Affectionate Physician, who refreshed you with Cordials, and other delights:
Who was day and night serviceable to you, and Dyed in that service amongst you.
He is now gone to his Long Home, who retrieved many of us, when we were almost
there. He helped us, but we could not help him. Ah! how can we think of parting
with such an Useful, Faithful, Affectionate Friend, and not Mourn. How can we
think of throwing him (who was the very delight of our Souls) Overboard into
the wide Ocean, to be made a Prey to the devouring Fishes, and not break forth
into doleful Cries and Lamentations.

Thus you see the cause we have to Mourn, from the Consideration of the
greatness of our present Loss: But the many aggravating circumstances of this
Loss, do yet call for our Farther Mourning, and the scruing up our Sorrow one
Peg higher. Hence consider,

First, He is taken away before our Voyage is done: It would have been a very
considerable Loss, if he had Lived with us to England, and then have been
removed by Death: It would then have called for Mourning at our hands. I, but
it would not have been so dismal a providence, so afflictive a stroke, as now
it is, having so long a way to run, and so many difficulties to go through,
before we see our several Homes. This was the cause of Israel's so long, and so
great Mourning for Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. ver. 8. And the Children of Israel wept for
Moses, in the Plains of Moab, Thirty days. So the days of Weeping and Mourning
for Moses were ended. Mark it, they were yet in the Plains of Moab; had they
been in quiet, and full possession of the Land of Canaan; the present
dispensation of Moses his Death (though at any time bitter enough) had not been
so dreadful, and dismal to them. But this highly heightened their Misery, and
consequently their Sorrow, that he was taken from them, before he had brought
them to the promised Rest: So now in this case, Oh! what cause have we to Mourn
in an exceeding great measure; for that Death has removed our Physician, so
long before the conclusion of the Voyage.

Secondly, Consider, he is taken away whilst the Judgment of God is upon us, in
retarding our Passage, and threatening no less than a Winter Voyage. We have
staid so long in the Indies, that there is little likelihood of our going Home
this Year. And at present, we are here scorching in an hot sultry Climate; the
Winds so cross to us, that we can neither go backward or forward; and what will
become of us, the Lord knows: But sure I am, the hand of his Displeasure is
stretched out against us; and we feel in part, that terrible Word threatened,
Mat. 26. ver. 31. Then said Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because
of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the Sheapherd, and the Sheep
of the Flock shall be scattered abroad. Ah! Sirs, Death has smitten our
Physician, and we arc like to be scattered abroad: God Almighty knows where we
may be forced to Winter; where we may be driven for shelter from the Furious
Ocean, we cannot as yet tell: But the great, yea certain likelihood of our
being Tossed up and down the World for several Months, before we can get about
Cape of good Hope, makes this Loss the more considerable, and our Condition the
more lamentable.

Thirdly, Consider, he is taken away in his Youthful days, yea, in the very
flower of his Youth, in the height and excellency of his Strength. We ought to
be Mourners in the Street, when we see any Man go to his Long Home; but to see
a Young Man go there, that is newly come into the World: That is beginning (as
it were) to live; that is, but blossoming in the early Spring of his Years --
to see such an one so immaturely seized upon by the griping paw of Death: Oh!
this must needs aggravate Sorrow very greatly. Upon this account it was, that
there was made such an heavy Lamentation for the Death of Josiah, that Famous:
King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 35. ver. 24, 25. His servants therefore took him out of
that Chariot, and put him in the second Chariot that he had, and they brought
him to Jerusalem, and he Dyed, and was Buried in one of the Sepulchers of his
Fathers; and all Judah, and Jerusalem Mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah Lamented
for Josiah, and all the Singing Men, and the Singing Women, spoke of Josiah in
their Lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel; and
behold they are written in the Lamentations. He had not Lived out half his
days, but was unexspectedly taken off from farther doing of Good; and this made
them Lament so sorely over him: And the same cause have we to Lament this day,
for this our Deceased Friend, who, contrary to the thoughts and expectations of
us all, was on a sudden snatched from us, before he had arrived to the
Thirtyeth Year of his Age. He was an healthy strong Man. I remember not above
two days before he sickned, he was Jocosely telling me, he looked upon himself
as the most healthy and likeliest Man to Live in the Ship. Indeed I thought he
was: But Ah! how soon was he gone! A little sickness carried him away. Lord,
How vain a thing is Man! How subject to Fade and Perish in his strongest, and
most advantageous state. I will not say of our Friend, as Virgil said of his
Mecenas,

Longius annoso vivere dignus avo. But 'twas pity (had it been the Will of God)
that a few Years more had not been added to his Life: And his being so untimely
removed, bespake our greater Lamentation.

Fourthly, Consider, he is taken away in the midst of desires, and wishes for
his Life. If Prayers, if Tears, if Endeavors of all sorts, could have laved his
Life, this Sorrowful and Mournful day had not been. It Is a great Judgment for
a Man to Live undesired, and to Dye unlamented: And hence, when the Lord would
express his Anger to Jchoiakim for his wickedness, he threatens him with this
Judgment, Jer. 22. ver. 18, 19. Therefore thus says the Lord converning
Jchoiakim the Son of Josiah King of Judah, they shall not Lament for him,
saying, Ah! my Brother; or Ah! my Sister; they shall not Lament for him,
saying, Ah! Lord; or Ah! his Glory. He shall be buried with the Eurial of an
Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem. But it is not so with
our Friend. I am consident not a Person here, but does really Lament his Death.
I see the Characters of Sorrow engraven in all your Faces. I know you Loved him
Living, and now Dead, you are Mourners for him And I ^a^e farther (...), had
your Sorrow been as Effectual, as it was Cordial, you had prevented his
Decease. So that, Hand opus est Calearibus. There Is no need of any Spurs to
your Lamentation, that Labor is happily obviated. I have indeed been showing
you, for your Satisfaction and Consolation, the just grounds of your Sorrow, to
secure you from the imputation of Irrational. I shall now conclude, only with a
few words, to put your Sorrow in the right Channel; that you may sorrow (as the
Apostle phrases it) after a Godly sort.

First, Mourn for this Loss by way of Reflection; That is, Reflect on the
condition you might have been in, if God had called you to an account for your
manifold Sins. Is a Man of such Use and Worth taken away so suddenly by Death
from us; Oh! How should we Fear and Tremble, to think what will become of us,
who are of so little Use in the World, who have lived unprositably, and
unfruitfully all our days; who have done little or no good, in the several
Capacities we have been. How should it also incite us to a speedy and unfeigned
Repentance, lest a worse Death come upon us; according to the advice of our
blessed Lord, Luke 13. ver. 2, 3. And Jesus answering, said unto them, Suppose
ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things? I tell ye nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Oh! Sirs, do you think, that this our dear and worthy Brother
was a Sinner above all of us; because he is gone down into the shades of Death
before us? I tell you nay, but except you and I repent, we shall all likewise
perish. Oh! Therefore I beseech you, let this sad providence be a loud call to
Repentance and Reformation; and to say with the Church -- Come, let us turn to
the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will
bind us up.

Secondly, Mourn for this Loss by way of Humiliation. Oh! labor to be so
sensible of this sad Stroke, as to be humbled under it; and to lie low before
the Lord, who has so sorely visited us in this most grievous manner.
Humiliation is the great expected, and designed End of Correction. God led his
ancient People through the Wilderness, and exercised them with manifold
Temptations, that he might humble them, and consequently do them good in their
latter end. It Is sign of an hardened, and obdurate Heart induced, when there is
no humbling under the mighty Hand of God: And Reprobate-Silver shall Men call
them, that are not Resined in the Fu^^^ce of Affliction. 'Twas spoken as an
horrid Aggravation of Isreal's Iniquity, and Impenitency, that after all the
Lashes and Scourges of God's Rod, and all his proceedings in way of Judgment
against them: Yet (says the Text) they are not humbled even unto this day. Ah!
Sirs, How Lamentably would our Sins be heightened, how exceedingly would our
Souls be ripened for Destruction; if we should not be humbled under this
present awful Dispensation! For verily, the Lord is risen up, as in Mount
Perizim: He is Wroth, as in the Valley of Gideon; and is doing his Work, his
strange Work; and is bringing to pass his Act, his strange Act; in visiting our
Transgressions with this smarting Rod; and our Iniquities with this wounding
Stripe! And shall we say, the Shadow of the Mountain; and make but a light
thing of it? Oh! God forbid! But rather I beseech you, let us (whilst our
Spirits are dejected by this Loss) endeavor to have our hearts humbled in the
Sense of the Lord's anger, that he may not farther be provoked to bring worse
evils and calamities upon us. How was David humbled, and melted at the News of
the Death of Saul and Jonathan? How did he brake forth into this bitter
Lamentation, 2 Samuel 1. ver. 19. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high
places, how are the mighty fallen. Truly we may justly take up the same
Complaint, in the same words, The beauty of our society, the glory of our
company, the excellency of our community, is fallen and perished from among us
this day; which bespeaks not only Heart-contrition, but Soul-humiliation.

Thirdly, Mourn for this Loss, by way of submission, and resignation of your
Wills, to the good Will and Pleasure of Almighty God; and ceasing to murmur or
complain, because that he has done it. We should say of this Dispensation, as
the Magicians said of the Lice, Exodus 8. ver. 19. Then the Magicians said unto
Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had said. Oh! Sirs, we should say, this is
the handy work of God, of that God, Whose Judgments are unsearchable, and whose
Ways are past finding out: and therefore we ought, with all holy filial
Reverence, to submit to what he has done.

Fourthly, Oh! Mourn for this Loss, by way of preparations, for your own turn,
whenever it shall please God to call you to it. This was Moses his wish for
Israel; and it is mine for you, Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 29. O that they were wise, that
they knew this, that they would consider their Latter End. So to consider of
it, as to prepare for it. And especially to consider of it, when we see others
taken away from among us. Oh! How should Objects of Mortality before us, be as
pressing Lectures of Divinity to us, to put us in mind of the certainty of our
own Dying, and the necessary prae-requisites to a Dying State; that when we
come to the Borders of Death, instead of fearing it, we may sarcasmally triumph
over it in the words of the blessed Apostle, O Death, where is thy Sting,? O
Grave, where is thy Victory? And when (like Aaron upon Mount Hor) we are
stripped of the Robes of Mortality, we may be invested with the more beauteous
and transcendent Garment of everlasting Glory in our Fathers House, where are
many Mansions, to enjoy the Soul-ravishing Communion of blessed Saints and
Angels in the highest Heaven; to sit under the shadow of our Glorified Lord
Jesus with great delight, and to have his Fruit for ever pleasant to our Taste,
wrapped up in the Joys and Consolations of the Spirit, waiting for that one only
additional Happiness, even the Adoption; to wit, the Redemption of the Body. In
a word, to be with our own God; the God of all Peace and Comfort, in whose
Presence there is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures
for evermore.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY On the Death of the before-Named Mr. Rich, Bernard, Consecrated to
his MEMORY, BY ONE Who Loved him Dearly, Prized him Highly, And Laments him
Greatly.
CAN Grief be silent! Rather, can Grief speak!
A Top-full Vessel scarce finds vent to Leak.
Hearts that are charged, and over-press'd with Sorrow,
Deny to lend what Mourning Tongues would borrow.
Words may be formed in saddest case, no doubt;
But Sighs and Groans will stop their passage out.
Wonder not then we are so Mute, even now,
Our Souls to Grief's most rigid Laws we bow.
And in the Dust seem liveless as we lie,
True Hieroglyphics of our Misery;
Sense of our Loss, deprives us of all Sense,
We more than Masters in Griefs-School Commence:
Like Weeping Niobes we are become,
Grief makes us sad, but Horror strikes us dumb!
Our Tongues cannot Accent, what our Hearts direct,
Deep Groans and Sobs must be our Dialect!
We'll Sob his Death, and with an Heart-fetch'd Groan,
That Loss (which never can be repaired) make known.
A Loss indeed, beyond a Vulgar Loss,
As far, as Ophir purest Gold's from Dross:
Death has not snatched one of our common Friends,
But one, in whom the Life of Friendship ends.
The Soul of Love, the Quintescence of Mirth,
Whose presence mid-wiv'd Joy into a Birth;
Who Loved, and knew to blow (where e're he came)
The Sparks of Pleasure to an open Flame:
So Apprehensive, half-Ey'd Men might see,
He was ingenious to a Prodigy.
His rare and great Accomplishments inhanc'd
His Price, above all Value; and Advanced
The admired Capacity of his known Name,
To cope the glory of Machaons Fame:
In all the Rules of Physic he excelled,
And very hardly to be Paralleled.
Diseases owned his Power, and Heaven did Bless
His Skill to most, with wonderful Success.
Besides all this, he had a greater Art,
To feel the Pulse of a Distempered Heart;
And by his Candid Carriage to unty,
The Gordian-Knot of inward Misery:
His Wit and Parts, dispelled the Clouds of Sadness,
And changed Sorrow into peals of Gladness.
Judge, judge how Mournful now is our Condition,
That thus have lost a Duplicate-Physitian.
Well might the Cannons roar when he was gone,
The fittest Emblem of our general Moan;
They were our Organs, thorough which we broke
Griefs deadly silence, and in Thunder spoke:
We sent (by them) our loud-mouthed doleful Cries,
Resounding Woe and Horror to the Skies.
The Air was black with Smoke, to let us see,
That Element did Mourn as well as we:
The Sea did Foam, Neptune was full of Fears,
Lest he should shake his Kingdom 'bout his Ears.
And in our Fury rise to such a pass,
As to attempt the wresting of his Mace;
For having robbed us of so rich a Jem,
More-priz'd by us, than all his Diadem.
We needed not his Water for a Grave
Unto our Friend, each Tear more than a Wave
Would soon have swelled into a Sea for him,
And been enough for the Coffin in it to Swim:
Or rather sink true Sorrow's such a freight
To poize down more, than many Thousand Weight
I now despise great Aeolus, and his storms,
Though represented in tremendious forms.
The raging of the Seas henceforth no more,
Shall fright my Soul, thought Winds and Waves do roar;
Now he is there whose influencing charms,
Keep back their fury from inflicting harms;
And by his Art and Skill right Chemical,
Makes all their Waters more than Med'cinal
'Twas often said, The Sea abounds in Store
More than the Earth, I nere believed before;
But now I shall, and readily submit
With all my heart, unto the Truth of it;
Since so much Learning, Parts, and Worth, is in it,
What can it be less, than a peerless Mint?
Here stop my Pen, no farther 'tempt to build
Statues of Mourning in this sable Field:
Call for the Epilogue, draw out the Screene,
And put Conclusion to this doleful Scene.
The Floods of Tears which from our Eyes have run,
With Sighs he is wafted to Elisium.
The Epitaph.
Farewell dear Heart, thy absence makes me sad,
The truest Friend that ever Mortal had.
My pleasant Sea-Consort, the very Soul,
Of that delight, which Sadness does Control:
My Bosom-Friend, to whom I could dispense,
The greatest Secrets with safe-Confidence.
My Counselor, with whom I could advise,
And learn by Imitation, to be Wise:
A Brother dearer, than by Nature can,
In Life and Death, to me a Jonathan.
Rest, rest in Peace within thy Watry-Urn,
Whilst I tossed up and down, shall Sigh and Mourn,
To think of my great Loss, in losing Thee,
Once happy in thy sweet Society.
What! Art thou Dead? My thought my Dream was so.
Ah! it is too true a Dream: the more the Woe.
Thou had thy Plea, though came unto thy Trial;
Death was thy Judge, and would have no Denial.
Charles Nicholettes.


