The Penitent Recognition of Joseph's Brethren: A SERMON Occasioned by
Elizabeth Ridgeway.

Who for the Petit Treason of POISONING HER HUSBAND, Was, on March 24. 1683/4.
according to the Sentence of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Street, one of His
Majesty's Judges of Assize for the Midland Circuit, Burnt at Leicester: When
and where were also Executed William Tannesly and Edward Orton, for Burglary;
Sons of one Woman.

To which is prefixed a full Relation of the Woman's Fact, Trial, Carriage, and
Death.

By John Newton, A.M. Sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge, and now Vicar
of St. Martins, Leicester.

Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel,
at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard. 1684.

To the Right Worshipful ANDREW FREEMAN, Esquire MAYOR of the Borough of LEICESTER.
SIR,
I Should fearce have appeared an Author of such an Express from Leicester, as
I now send abroad in a style too near of kin to that of the Monthly News from
the Old Bailey, had not the Earnest Request of Your Worthy Self, and of many
other Good Men, obliged me thereto.

The Subject, however remarkable, goes low; nor can the streams, by so mean an
Artist as my self, be raised above the Fountain Head. But if any shall draw
benefit therefrom, it will ease me of all regret, as having exposed my obscure
Name, in the observance of Your Commands, by whom, in this Your Second
Mayoralty, under God and the King, we enjoy great Quietness, and by whose
Providence, very worthy Deeds are done unto our Corporation. To which, both in
its Head and Members, (as for above Twenty Years already past, I have been
highly Obliged) I shall study always to approve my self

A very Faithful Humble Servant whilst J. NEWTON.


A TRUE RELATION OF THE FACT, TRIAL, CARRIAGE and DEATH OF Elizabeth Ridgeway.
ELizabeth, the late Wife of the late Thomas Ridgeway, was born at Ibstock in
the County of Leicester, and there educated in the knowledge of the ordinary
Duties of Christianity, so far as concern a Woman in her station. Being arrived
at Maturity, she was, at the instigation, and through the practices of a
pragmatical Fellow servant, utterly against her Father's declared Will (He
forbidding the Banns) married to the abovenamed Thomas Ridgeway of Ibstock,
Tailor. They were married (if I mistake not) on Friday, Febr. 1. 1683/4.
Thenceforward they lived together in all seeming mutual Love, without the least
jarr, until the Sunday three weeks after. On that Sunday morning Tho. Ridgeway
went to Church, and his Wife staid at home to prepare Dinner. At his coming
home she gave him a Dish of Broth; of which he ate the greater quantity, but
left part; there being seen in it something like to Gritt or Lime. In less than
half an hour he was taken with a violent vomiting and purging, and held
therewith 'till past midnight; when in great torment he died, not suspecting
(as is said) any thing of Poison.

A day or two after he had been buried, an Apprentice of his, about Sixteen
years of Age, declared to his Masters Relations, that, he feared his Master was
poisoned, because of that stuff, that was seen in the bottom of his dish, which
his Wife took from him, and conveyed away. This Information being taken by a
Justice of Peace, a Gentleman of great Judgment and Prudence, an Inquest was
ordered by him to be taken by the Coroner: Upon whose Inquest the Wife was
found Guilty of Poisoning her Husband, and by the Coroner's Mittimus sent to
the Gaol at Leicester.

On Friday, March 14. She was by the Grand Jury put upon her Trial before my
Lord Judge Street. Upon her Arraignment she pleaded Not Guilty, and put her
self upon her Country for her Trial. Upon a Full Hearing, she was at first by
Eight thought Guilty, and after some Debate found Guilty by the whole Twelve,
and according to the Verdict Sentence past.

The Proof depending principally upon the Testimony of a Youth of Sixteen years
old, and she all along protesting her Innocence, some tender People were
willing to hope favorably of her; whereupon some Applications were made on
Saturday morning for some Respite, or a Reprieve. But his Lordship having by
his great Sagacity clearly discerned, how well his Sentence was grounded, and
how necessary it was, it should be executed, according to his signal Wisdom and
Justice, rejected all such Addresses, leaving her to the Mercy of God, and the
Care of her Friends; and particularly recommending of her to my poor Advice and
Prayers.

Not to stand to give you any account of the Prayers preferred to God by my
self and others, publicly and privately, for and with her, I shall proceed to
relate the Occurrences of each day, from her Condemnation, to her Execution.

On Friday night she only asserted her Innocence, and begged, that Application
might be made for her Reprieve.

On Saturday evening I, visiting of her, inquired of her Guilt, but she
asserted her Innocence. I desired her thereupon to recollect, whether she had
not committed some other heinous Offense of the like or some other nature, for
which God might be provoked to suffer such a grievous unusual Calamity to
befall her. At that she sighed, and said, Ay, There it is, There Is the cause of
my Woe; or words of the like Import: And so upon fair Inducements, she
proceeded to acknowledge, that she feared she was too far concerned in the
Death of another Man: which (as she then freely related) came to pass as
follows.

Having left her Father's House, and betaken her self to a Service in the Town,
and her Master being often from home, several young Men frequented the House,
with whom she was wont to discourse of Love and Marriage; professing often more
Love to any of them all, than was at any one time meet to pretend to any more
than one. One above the rest she for several Months entertained, not only with
fair expressions of Affection, but also with promises of Marriage. After all,
on a sudden, she utterly rejects him, without any just cause assigned. Not long
after, he on the Friday falls into a violent Distemper, whereof (after he had
sent importunate Entreaties for a Visit from her, which she utterly denied) the
next Week he dies. Now, although there was then nothing of foul Practice
suspected, yet, upon recollection, it is well remembered, that he, in his last
illness, fared very strangely. That upon his sudden Fall his blood settled (as
they apprehended) and turned black, he burned intolerably, all ease of Nature
was utterly obstructed, his Stomach was violently gnawed: But, above all, he
all along complained of the last draught of Beer he drank (after his coming
from out of the Field) in his Masters house; where, that day, (as his Wife a
little before her death affirmed) Thomas Ridgeway aforesaid was at work: And
here, by the way, it is something remarkable, that she should so early observe,
and so lately remember, that her Husband wrought the same day in the same
house, wherein the other Person fell so suddenly and so violently into a mortal
Disease.

She further told me, that just before her Husband breathed his last, he, in
horror, cried out, That God's hand was just upon him, for the wrong he had done
to that person so deceased; for as much as having had time afforded him to
repent of it, he neglected to improve it, and now being just dying he could not
repent. I asked her what the wrong was: She answered that she had no time to
enquire of him particularly what it was. I asked her whether she had not at any
time heard Tho. Ridgeway threaten the Person deceased? She answered no; nor was
she at all privy to any violence practiced or intended: Yet she said that she
feared Thomas Ridgeway had played some foul play, and that she her self was to
blame; and that she had been often haunted, both making and sleeping, with
frightful apprehensions of the appearing of the deceased Person to her. All
this while I could draw no more from her, touching any murderous design or
attempt, than that she suspected her false and cruel carriage toward him,
might occasion his Sickness and death.

I then inquired of her, Who the deceased Person was? She refused to tell me
either his Name or Place of Living, or Time of Dying; and all, lest the noise
of such a discovery, should revive much grief to his Relations; which I told
her might easily be prevented. At last she told me, that his Mother lived at a
Neighboring Town called Norton: I gave her my sense of all, and left her.

On Sunday, as she came from Church in the morning, I examined her again
strictly and seriously; but she advanced not one step. Within two hours, after
she had denied all knowledge of any evil will of Thomas Ridgeway against the
Person deceased, a Brother and a Sister of hers came to my House, and told me,
that she freely confessed to them, that Thomas Ridgeway had long and often
threatened the Person deceased with Revenge, and Cutting of him off: That for a
time she endeavored to dissuade him; but at last permitted him by saying these
words, [Do what you will with him.] I inquired the Name of the Person: They
said, they knew it not: I told 'em, His Mother lived at Norton: They answered,
it must certainly be one John King who had lived in their Town, and died about
Midsummer last. Whereupon I apprehended that her Brother and Sister became very
suspicious of some heinous guilt of them both: I mean both of her Husband and
her self.

At night, I questioning of her of what has past, received this short and
reserved answer: I suppose my Brother has told you all. I asked her what she
said to Thomas Ridgeway, when he first came to her with professions of Love,
after the death of John King. She said, she used these words: So, have you not
now made good your threatening words against John King? I here set my self to
display and aggravate the black crimes of Thomas Ridgeway and her self. She
answered me after this canting manner, Truly I dare not judge my Husband for
any thing further than for some rash and harsh words; nor my self, for
intending any hurt by speaking the forementioned words of consent.

Hereupon I left her, not without astonishment, that she should go so far
toward the Confession of a bloody Fact, the guilt whereof I could render her
no further sensible of.

On Monday morning, having considered what a reserved, stupid, uncertain, yea,
and false Creature I had to deal with, I set down in writing the most material
passages, which she with her own mouth had related to me; and those in the
hearing of diverse grave Persons, I distinctly read, and questioned her upon.
She could not deny any word that I charged her withal. The Fact all along she
acknowledged, but still, as before, the Guilt she denied.

On Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, she persisted much in the same posture.

On Friday, a Neighbor of hers charged her home with buying two penniworth of
white Arsenick on the Saturday sevennight after She was married, at
Ashby-de-la-Zouch. After a while she acknowledged it, but could not assign any
use she made of it. The Person acquainting me with this, I that Evening went to
her, and applied my self very severely to her for denying so long her buying
any Poison; and concluded she had given it to her Husband. She would not
expressly confess the buying of the Poison, or that she had before confessed it
to her Neighbor; nor yet, upon my charging of her so peremptorily, did she
deny either buying or such using of the Poison.

I thereupon took leave of her, with a purpose to see her no more, until
finding her self in a better mind, she should send for me: And so I told her.

All this obstinacy and reservedness amazed me, and put me upon guessing at the
cause thereof; which I could not determine to be mere Blindness and
Senselesness, because she otherways appeared sufficiently Apprehensive and
Knowing. I was not willing to impute her shyness to an utter aversion to my
Cloth and way; because she had declared her self indifferently inclined to the
Church and Private Meetings. Sometimes I thought her silence proceeded from an
unwillingness to imprint the mark of her Infamy upon her the deeper by her own
Confession, whether she believed she was to Die, or whether she hoped for any
fruit of the endeavors of some for a Reprieve. She did indeed declare a
tenderness she had for the Credit of a Party, amongst whom she had been bred
and conversed: But I endeavored to assure her, that the Reputation of any
Party was much better provided for by the humble Confession, than by the
obstinate denial of any Criminal Member of the same; and that it argued an
intolerable Pride in her, to think that the Credit of any Party depended upon
any such obscure and vile wretch as her self. But if, after all, there were any
Person, or Persons, that advised her to any concealment of the Guilt of her
self or any other, so derogatory to the Honor of Public Justice, and so
pernicious to her Soul; let such (if any there be) repent effectually in time,
lest, at the last Judgment, they find more Blood to answer for, than yet they
think of. But to return to the Story.

On Saturday, to a very considerable Person, she began to acknowledge some
concern she had had in the Death of her Husband; and she desired him to
acquaint me, that she was very sorry she had dealt so unfaithfully with me; and
to entreat me I would make her another visit, that she might discover the whole
Truth to me.

When I came to her, she told me that she had indeed bought Poison at a Shop in
Ashby, in the presence of one Widow Brooks, who wrapped it up, (and who has
this* at least, to answer for, that she appeared not to give Evidence for God
and the King against the Criminal.) She added, that she had not made any use of
the said Poison, but that it then yet lay upon a Bed in her Fathers House. She
further added, that there was a man, who, both before and after her Marriage,
did solicit her very much for her Love; and who, to make way to his ends, came
on Sunday in Church-time to her house; and having put some poison into a dish,
slipped away; that she wittingly, at her Husbands return home, put Broth to the
Poison, and gave it to her Husband to his destruction: That she had seen the
face of this man that day in the next Room to her; that I should see him at her
Execution, for his Countenance would bewray his Guilt: That he had lived at
Ibstock, and now lives with a Gentleman at Hinckly. His Name she would by no
means declare, as being under a Vow or Oath to the contrary. I discovered to
her the wickedness of such an Oath, and that it could no ways bind her to such
an Hellish Concealment. When I had said all I could, I was constrained to leave
her, without any further satisfaction touching this pretended Person.

On Sunday, she, with the other Condemned Persons was again brought to Church
Morning and Evening: After Evening Sermon, she declared to a Gentlewoman, that
whereas before she was resolved, that all the world should not have persuaded
her to confess the very truth; She, upon hearing the Sermon (the substance
whereof is hereto annexed) declared an inviolable purpose to be free and
sincere in her Confession to me. I went up to her Chamber, and yet found her
not so forward to such Confession: Soon after, her Father and the Gentlewoman,
who had heard her make the Promise, went up to challenge her therewith. She,
laughing in their Faces, told them, that All she had said touching the man of
Hinckly, was a mere fiction; and that there was no such man in being; but that
she her self alone, and without the confederacy or privity of any other
creature, had poisoned her Husband. Nor did she express any desire of seeing me
that Night, as I could then hear.

I began to suspect she was distracted, and so went home: And I should have
continued under that suspicion, but that at her request sent first by her
Brother and afterward by her Father, I coming to her some hours before
Execution, found her in a temper that spoke no such disorder of mind: For she
then in contemplation of approaching Death and Judgment, did with many tears
confirm her last Confession. She further told us, that three years before, upon
some discontent, she had bought other poison with a purpose to make away her
self: which happening about the time of her mothers death, occasions some
surmises touching the same; as also some whispers of the death of another young
man, and two little Children.

As to the last Poison, she said she bought it for her self being frustrated of
her expectations in her marriage: For she could not love her Husband as she
ought; and took further prejudice against him, because of a debt of twenty
pounds, which his Sister demanded of him soon after his marriage, and which was
as much as ever he had pretended to be worth. But, above a week before her
Husbands death, she converted her despair into revenge, and so took the first
opportunity for sending of him out of the world. This she constantly asserted
with seeming remorse and sorrow until her very death; which she underwent
without much apparent consternation, and yet with much seeming contrition.

And this last declaration she did earnestly entreat me to make known as the
real Truth, for the preventing all false reports that might be further raised,
and for the rectifying of all mistakes, which by means of her self or others,
had been already spread abroad.

If the real importunity of diverse of my worthy Friends, had not after a sort
enforced the Publication of this confused tedious story, the very request of
the dying Criminal, being so well grounded, might have induced me thereto;
especially when thereby I do but consult my own ease: For now I can refer many
to this Print, who would otherwise be exacting frequent relations of the matter
of me by word or writing.

I know that to some inconsiderate Persons, the Story may appear less agreeable
for the Lamentable Form, as well as Matter of it; it containing diverse
uncertainties, and contradictions about horrid Poisoning. Nevertheless, through
the use of ordinary discretion, out of such malignant Poison much sovereign
Medicine may be compounded: To give you a few Instances amongst many, that your
own Reason may collect: -- Hence,

1. His Majesty's Justice is vindicated from the imputation of Partiality,
which some have wickedly endeavored to fix thereupon, by suggesting that the
woman was dealt the more harshly with, for her supposed private Opinion or
Inclination.

2. If Virtue and Goodness be not always the Results of a careful Education,
how may we dread the wickedness of our Children, that may ensue upon our utter
neglect, or evil example?

3. The Parents, who are openly repayed in the disobedience of a Child, should
do well, humbly to reflect upon the provocation they may have given to God, and
the encouragement they have occasioned to their Child, by any visible
opposition they have made to the Sovereign Father of their Country, or by any
manifest disregard they have any ways showed to their Spiritual Mother the
Church.

4. If the Sentiments of Religion formed in Youth be once subdued or
suppressed, no wonder if the blackest of wickednesses draw on one another: Such
as Disobedience to Parents, Dissimulation with all men, Treachery and Cruelty
to Neighbors and Lovers, Bloody and Treasonous Practices against Parents and
Husbands.

5. An Hypocrite, that will not stick at the Commission of the blackest crimes,
at the check of Conscience, will sometimes refuse to acknowledge the same for
the Credit of a Party.

6. The words of condemned Criminals are not to be rashly believed, especially,
where Concealment is founded upon a mistaken religious consideration: And this
may reach beyond the present Subject to many, that have suffered condign
punishment for their Treasons for these five years last past.

7. There want not some Persons of all persuasions, who perfectly abhor, and
heartily endeavor the discovery of all wickedness in their own Adherents and
Relations.

8. All young People are warned,

Against all forsaking their Parents and Guides of their Youth, and leaning to
their own understanding, and gratifying their own sensual and vain Inclination,
especially in affairs of Marriage.

Against all wicked affectation of first Captivating, and then Rejecting the
Affections of others.

Against all making of rash and unwarrantable Promises of Marriage, as without
Leave, so without Love.

Against all unjust breaking of such Promises when they are once made, and may
in time be lawfully performed.

Lastly, Some Persons are prodigiously hardened through the deceitfulness of
Sin. Their iniquity becomes an unsearchable mystery to themselves and others.
Their Heart becomes deceitful above measure, and desperately wicked; who can
know it?

Some further useful remarks apposite to the present (...)

A SERMON UPON THE PENITENT RECOGNITION OF JOSEPH'S BRETHREN.
GENESIS xlii. 21. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning
our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and
we would not hear. Therefore is this distress come upon us.


JOseph's Brethren having conceived an inveterate Envy and Hatred against him,
as they saw him drawing near to them upon a kind Visit, conspired his death:
but, upon the mediation of Ju(...) (...) him to the (...)maelites. By them he
is sold to Potiph (...) ^gypt; where, after various Rencounters, he is (...)ed
to great Power, and in special to the Trust and Disposal of the Stores of Corn
in a time of great Dearth. His Brethren, afrer many years, being compelled by
Famine, go down into Egypt to buy Corn, and there are brought before their
Brother Joseph; who forthwith knew them, but for a season remained unknown to
them. He pretends to suspect 'em for Spies, questions 'em touching their Family
and Relations, requires 'em to fetch their little Brother Benjamin for their
Purgation; and orders first all of 'em but one, and afterward one out of 'em
all to remain in Prison by way of Pledge or Hostage, until they should have
brought little Benjamin into his presence. They, being reduced to such a
grievous strait, begin to make sad reflections upon what might provoke God to
cast them into such woeful distress. They are not long to seek, nor do they at
all differ about the Cause. It must needs be their harsh and cruel usage of
their Brother, the resentment whereof they seem unanimously to acknowledge in
the words of my Text -- where they said one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, etc.

The words speak 1. Their Guilt concerning their Brother. 2. Their Deportment
under it.


I. Of their Guilt.

Take a Particular of this in Chap. 37. there you have the Rise and Progress of
it.

It commenced in Envy and evil will, ver. 11. so long as men enjoy the love and
favor of their Neighbors and Relations, so long they remain secure of their
welfare and lives, for ought that can or will be designed against 'em: but
where either love never take root, or where it came afterward to be perverted
to malice and rancour, well might some bitter Fruit be expected from the same.

It strait advanced to a Bloody Conspiracy, ver. 19, 20. Two of these Brethren,
Simeon and Levi, had once before in another sad instance given a Specimen of
their malice, Chap. 34. when they plotted and practiced against the Sechemites
for the Rape on their Sister Dinah. The memory whereof, both in its cause and
effects, their Father Jacob cursed, as well as described, Chap. 49.7. Cursed
(says he) be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was
cruel. -- Where the spirits of men are galled and cankered, they will be
contriving revenge upon persons, whether public or private, as the occasion is
given 'em, or rather taken by them, where we may seasonably take warning to
watch over our spirits, that lust within us to envy, and boil within us to
revenge, that we nip malice in the very bud, and prevent it of all its dismal
Effects.

Having conspired against the life of their Brother, they broach their venom,
by beginning with his Coat, his Coat of many colors. -- That badge of his
Fathers special affection, and one occasion of their malice to him -- That
Ensign of special honor; And who, that robs a man of his honor, will stick at
his life? Lastly, that garment and instrument of warmth, health and life. And
it is a shrewd sign of an evil design against the latter, when men seize upon
the former. Where let all here, that have been tempted, or shall hereafter fall
into temptation to Oppression or Rapine, to Filching or Stealing, but
especially to Robbery and Burglary, let all such for Contrition, or Warning,
seriously and sadly consider the evil of such Practices. Such Practices are
wicked in themselves, as being manifest violations of the Laws of Righteousness
and Justice both Humane and Divine. Such Practices are too evident Indications
of hearts void of all love to mankind, and tenderness of humane life: For how
can a man be supposed to value that life, the means and support whereof he
violently and falsely bereaves the owner of? Such Practices full often do
necessarily engage to Murder and Bloodshed. For it frequently so falls out,
that, unless the Thief add Murder to his Robbery or Burglary, he may be like or
certain to fall into the power, custody and prosecution of the persons
assaulted or attempted: And then must the Knife or Dagger, for the preservation
of the Robber, be sheathed in the bowels of him that innocently defends
himself; as certainly as he that draws his Sword upon his Sovereign, must of
necessity throw away the Scabbard. Now happily this digression may be of some
influence upon the minds of some, yet less hardened Robbers and Rebels; who,
though they do not so much scruple the Robbery or Rebellion for their own
sakes, may, in some measure, be deterred therefrom, by the dread of Murder and
Bloodshed: For, doubtless, Thousands would never have begun with plundering
their Contrymen, or resisting their Sovereign, if they had foreseen, or
forefeared, that their unadvised Enterprises would have terminated in the blood
of one and the other.

But to return to the Cruelty of Joseph 's Brethren. They malign him, they
conspire against his Life, and in order to the taking that away, they cast him
a languishing, trembling Prisoner, into a deep Pit, Chap. 37.24. Imprisonment
of it self is severe, and yet severer, when the Prison is a Pit so like a
Grave: And, then most dreadful, when a Grave is known not to be far off.
Debtors and Malefactors may be cast into Prison without such terrible
apprehensions as innocent Persons, especially Sovereigns (as the late Royal
Martyr too truly observed in relation to his own Confinement.) Debtors are only
detained until payment made, and Malefactors are to be secured in life until
the Jail-deliver, when possibly the last day may prove such to them: But such
as with Joseph are altogether unjustly and causelessly sequestered from their
Liberty, can scarce imagine any other end of their Gaolers, than that they only
reserve 'em for a speedy, violent death. Under the horrible apprehensions of
such a Period had Joseph's Brethren in their Cruelty put him.

Nay, when by the melting Rhetoric of their Brother Judah, they were
restrained from his actual Murder, yet so far did they persevere in their
unnatural thirst of Revenge, as to sell him for a wretched Bond-slave (a
Condition worse than that of the dead) to the cruel and cursed Ishmaelites,
Chap. 37.26, 27, 28. I call the Ishmaelites cruel and cursed, as not
degenerating ('it is like) from that hopeful Father of theirs, whose hand was
against every man, and against whom was every man's hand, Genesis 16.12. Now in
this barbarous Caravan of Ishmaelites, might they behold their little tender
Brother begin to look in anguish back upon them his inhumane Hucksters. Now
might they behold him to take unwilling weary steps toward he knew not where,
nor what. If he proved unwilling to march, they might happily see him dragged
along forcibly at a Horses tail; or, if he were by the Buyers thought unable,
all the favor he was like to gain, was to be rudely packt upon a Camel's back.
Well, by this time he is out of their sight: But he and his distress will not be
always out of their mind, as will appear by the Sequel, as we now proceed to
speak.

II. Of the Deportment of these cruel men under their Guilt.

Where it is remarkable, 1. That they call it to mind. 2. That they confess it.
3. That they aggravate it. 4. That they take the present distress as the
punishment of it.


1. They call their Guilt to mind.

The apprehension of their Guilt, recovers a real existence in their Souls.

Can we imagine, that such an unnatural course as this should be taken against
an innocent Brother? That they should first conspire his Death, and afterward
so far expose his Life to extreme danger, and forthwith for all this while,
Thirteen Years, as some reckon, or Twenty two Years, as others collect,
forthwith and for so long time (I say) suppress or extinguish all memory and
sense of such a staring, crying Sin? We may rather, from what befell the
condemned Criminal in this Congregation, as she has declared, conclude that
such manifest Cruelty must be followed with Fear and Horror. If upon her
consenting to some revengeful practice by her late Husband against another
innocent man, though she understood not expressly that his Murder was intended,
she could not free her mind from dreadful impressions making nor sleeping; we
may strongly conclude that Joseph's Brethren, who had after plotting his Death,
sold him to more than probable destruction, were visited with frequent stinging
memento's of what so wickedly they performed.

However we are by the Text assured, that (when in their distress) they
recovered a lively remembrance, and entertained a deep sense of the same.

Such a remembrance may be presumed to occur to the Guilty, as from the
ordinary operations of the Soul's known Faculties, of Understanding, Judgment,
Imagination, and Remembrance; so likewise from diverse semblable occurrences in
humane affairs, sundry remarkable acts of God's providence, and above all from
an unexplicable secret Nemese, or a kind of severe Divine Instinct, that ever
and anon hunts and pursues the Conscience of the Guilty. By such kind of secret
stinging remembrances of their Cruelty, has the Peace of some been utterly
banished, the health of others miserably impaired, the hands of some drawn down
in intolerable anguish upon themselves, and the tongues of others enforced
openly to reveal the insupportable burdens of their own spirits for
experimenting this last Essay, whether the giving vent might save the v^ssel
that would otherways break.

So full of Torture is a Conscience guilty of Cruelty or Bloodshed, that no man
in his right wits, as ever he hopes for peace and quiet, would trust his own
Soul with so fatal a secret.

2. Remembering their Guilt, they confess it. They say One to another, we are
verily Guilty.

They do not (with one that ought in time to take it into serious
consideration) first intimate a foul practice, and speak a consent to it, and
acknowledge frightful impressions of it, and then go about to deny or extenuate
the matter.

They cry Guilty, and Verily Guilty.

They cry One and All.

Each accuses himself, and every one impeaches all the rest, saying in [We are
verily Guilty] I am so for my self, and every one of you for his self.

They stifle not their Guilt in whole or in part.

They stick not at any general or particular Covenant, Vow, or Oath, whereby
they might look upon themselves obliged to mutual Secrecy.

They insist not upon their Credit, neither the Credit of any one singly though
never so Religious a man, nor the Credit of All put together; though as such,
they made up the then only Godly Party in the world.

Nor indeed would any Criminal else, that is in the least truly sensible of
Guilt, and sorrowful for it, do otherwise, especially* when under sentence of
Death for it.

As for the open and free Confession of their own personal Guilt, it is an
essential Branch of Repentance and Satisfaction. Hereby Honor is given to God,
Right is done to Humane Justice, and the Persons injured have the well-meant
satisfaction of an ingenuous submission; which, when it is all that is within
the power of the Delinquent, will be accepted in lieu of adequate compensation.

As for the discovery of Confederates and Conspirators, (although some have so
far apostatized from all truth and fidelity, as not to love Life at such a
rate) yet any one that writes himself Christian, (one would think) should be of
another mind, when he considers, how by concealment he secures and hardens the
Guilty; by Confession he exposes 'em (as far as he can) to Judgment, Shame, and
Sorrow. By Confession he warns the innocent against wicked attempts; by
Concealment he leaves them in their Enemies-power, and draws their blood upon
his own head, even after his death. By Concealment he draws or leaves the
Guiltless under suspicion; by Confession he sets the Saddle on the right Horse.
By Concealment upon Oath, either ye make God to become a Party against himself,
or ye give the Devil a power of binding to Secrecy, beyond what ye allow to God
of loosing to Confession; whereas by Confession ye give honor and pre eminence
to God, and do effectually and actually break all the diabolical Bonds of
wicked Conspiracies and Associations.

I hope what has been thus briefly spoken touching the free Confession of
Joseph 's Brethren, with the grounds of all free Confessions, may serve to open
the eyes of all to the seeing of the truth, and the mouth of the Guilty to the
putting of the truth in practice.

3. Confessing their Guilt, they aggravate it.

They now consider Joseph not only as a man, but as their own dear Brother,
which reaches as far as Judah's words, Chap. 37.27. when he dissuaded them from
taking away his Life. He is our Brother, and our Flesh. This includes the
wronging of a man, yea, of an innocent or good man, and adds an aggravation
from his near Relation.

They aggravate their Guilt from their Inexorableness. They heard him (they
say) beseeching, entreating, begging, and wooing for mercy; and their Deafness,
their Obstinacy, and their Obdurateness to all such powerful language, is now
an aggravation of Guilt and Grief to 'em.

And yet there was a more melting language which now they well remember, Joseph
their dear Brother used, than that of the Tongue.

It was that of the Anguish of his Soul, which their cursed Barbarity struck him
into. It was that language of Sighs and Groans, and Shrieks, and Tears, and
convulsive Distortions, and languishing Airs, and more than dying Looks, which
now afresh concentred in their imaginations, and made up an imaginary Ghost of
their near dying, departing Brother. All the Terror of Joseph's Majesty, as an
August Prince, whilst unknown to 'em, did not so terrify 'em with the threats
of Imprisonment, until they proved themselves no Spies, or with Death, if they
could not purge themselves therefrom, as now the revival of all his Souls
anguish, when he, to the life, acted the part of a sweet, innocent,
importunate, almost for grief-expiring Child, did then so naturally perform.
[Limus ut hic durescit, and haec ut cera liquescit uno eodemque igni!] Their
alienated hearts did not then more like mud grow hard, than now like wax, they
melted and flowed before the same Fire of their little Brother Joseph's Soul in
the utmost torment of anguish, as once they saw it, and now they remember it.

Nay, yet they have not finished the Exaggeration of their Crime.

They, amongst 'em, make their Crime Murder, no less than Murder.

At least Reuben, who understood how far they had all conspired to kill Joseph;
how far at Judah*s more tender motion all the rest had consented to the selling
of him; and how far himself had concealed all these wicked purposes and
practices, I say Reuben imputes no less than his blood to them, ver. 22.
Therefore behold also his blood is required.

It may not be impertinent here to look more nearly into this their imputation
of Joseph's Blood to themselves.

Let us for a while consider, what they might have said for themselves, and yet
what they said of themselves.

They might have said f^r themselves such things (as our Criminal would be glad
and forward to say for her self) namely --

We, observing our old weak Father totally to alienate his Love from all us
elder Children, or, at least, strangely to neglect us in comparison with this
Novice of a later Venture, upon which he grew very insolent and imperious, and
contrary to the course of Nature, and right of Primogeniture, to dream forsooth
of a tyrannical Empire over us his Seniors and Superiors, did begin to think to
take him down in his Childrens shoes. One of us indeed in haste cried, Let us
kill him; and it is true we too many of us through surprise cried, Do what ye
will with him: But, no sooner did our more discreet Brother Judah essay to
allay our Passions, suddenly moved against our Brother and Flesh, as he truly
styled him, but we were all contented, Chap. 37. v. 27. very well contented at
his milder motion to have him only sold to our near Kinsmen, the direct
Descendants of our ever honored great Grandfather Abraham: And who knows, but
if he had then put the Question, touching his full liberty, we might have been
as well content with that too. -- But, after all, they scorn to palliate or
extenuate any branch or circumstance of their hideous Crime; they plead Guilty,
and Reuben tells them, they are guilty not only of the Trespass, but of the
Murder.

Judah might have alleged his own natural affection, his tenderness of Joseph
's blood, and his success in saving of his life, although with the price of his
liberty. But when all the rest plead Guilty, he also holds up his hand, or at
least holds his tongue, as surely thinking, that the adv^sing the selling of
him, was next door to the slaying of him.

But what might Reuben have said, not only in excuse, but even in commendation
of himself? And that to this tune.

Chap. 37.21, 22. When I discerned my Brethrens bloody purposes against my
Brother Joseph, I delivered him actually out of their hands; and diverting them
from killing of him, I contrived the putting of him into a Pit, that thence I
might in season have taken him, and delivered him to his Father again, without
any selling of him into slavery and danger.

Ver. 29, 30. When I returned to the Pit for the delivering of him, and found
him not, I rent my clothes, and bitterly lamented my misfortune and his, and
grew almost distracted at the missing of him.

Chap. 42.22. And now this distress is come upon us, and the wickedness of that
our unnatural sin is thereby afresh brought to our remembrance; although I do
tell you, that I abhorred and declared against such sin; yet I do not take upon
me to exempt my self from all guilt. I do conclude his Blood is required: you
must needs acknowledge your selves guilty of it, because of the murderous
conspiracy and cruel practice. Nor do I say but my concealing of the whole from
my Father to the indemnifying of you, may justly occasion share of his Blood to
be required of me amongst the rest of you.

Thus they all carry their Cruelty to the utmost height of Murder, the Murder
of a Person, whom they knew not to be dead or alive: whereas alive he was, and
even stood within their sight and hearing, a living and glorious man, and that
by occasion of their Practices, as Joseph himself acknowledged in Chap. 45.5.

After all that has been said upon the aggravation of this Misdemeanor, we may
clearly discern, that, however senseless evil men may be (and the less sensible
they are, the worse may they be judged to be) of any actions amounting to
Murder; such good men (as in the main we may hope Joseph's Brethren to have
been) are apt to be overwhelmed with apprehensions of such their attempts as
but border upon Bloodshed. They not only abominate wallowing in gore, but dread
also garments even spotted with blood.

But gross Murder it self is not so utterly unpractised amongst us, that at
this time we need to insist upon its Circumstantials, or the Tendencies
thereto. How frequently does there cry aloud in our ears, The Blood of
Innocents shed by their unnatural Mothers at their birth, the Blood of honest
men shed upon the Road, or in their Bed by Robbers and Burglarers? Not to
mention the less precious Blood of Ruffians shed in Taverns, or of Hectors shed
in Duels. Sometimes we hear of desperate Sinners shedding their own blood with
their own hands. At this time we are given to suspect that the Blood of a Lover
has been shed by his Rival, and consented to by his unconstant and treacherous
Mistress. However, this we are sure of, that we have here in view a wretched
woman sentenced to death for hating her own Flesh, and poisoning her so lately
married Husband: Nor does the horror of the Fact as yet oblige her (so far as
we can yet discern) either to the free confessing of her Murder before men, or
to the duly aggravating of it to her self.

She too tenderly huggs her sin in her own bosom. She will not take the counsel
given by Joshua to Achan, Josh. 7.19. as Achan did, ver. 20. She will not
freely and truly declare the whole of her Guilt. She does not (as she ought)
give Glory to God, by confessing to him, and telling of it to his servants.

What do you apprehend of your self and your sad condition? Can you form right
Notions of the Nature of Murder? Can you by your self sufficiently aggravate
the Crime from your destroying your Husbands Body, and also (as it is to be
feared) his very Soul? Can you aggravate your Sin from your Treachery, who when
he asked Food, did with semblance of Love, give him as bad as a Serpent or a
Scorpion? Can you enhance your Guilt, by considering how you have murdered a
Man made in the likeness of God; and how you have murdered a Husband set over
you as your Sovereign Head? Whereupon the wisdom of our Lawgivers has made
such Murder no less than Treason.

They have also ordained a punishment for it no less terrible, than its Name is
odious: even that of burning alive to ashes; which may be probably supposed to
intend amongst other, these two formidable Representations, the one of Hell
Torment, the other of everlasting Oblivion.

Yet further; Can you, during your silence and obstinacy, counsel your self in
all the methods of an effectual Repentance, and saving Faith? Can you assure
your self of the prevalence of your own Prayers, (if you pray at all) or can
you hope for the effectual fervent Prayers of the Righteous, who can discover
in you no such Contrition, as may move 'em to Compassion? Can a Soul, so
pressed down as yours ought to be, raise it self up, unless by deep
Humiliation, and free Confession, you obtain comfortable Absolution?

When Joseph's guilty Brethren came to know that they stood before him, they
could not answer him, for they were troubled and terrified at his presence. And
are you able (if you know you stand in a more dreadful presence, even that of
God himself) can you be able to think, or speak, or do any thing of a free and
noble nature, that may at all recommend you to mercy? I rather suspect, that
such a close, sullen, traiterous Murderer, must through her dark thoughts be
rackt with torture, be bound in all her Faculties, and be drowned in Despair
and Perdition.

Consider then in time, (if it be not already past) whether it be not more
advisable to make an ingenuous discovery of the whole of your Guilt, than at
last, when it is too late, to have it wrung out with the Halter, or extracted
by the Fire. Let not then your wickedness be sweet in your mouth, neither hide
it under your tongue, Job 20.12. Acknowledge your transgression, and let your
sin be ever before you; according to the language and practice of penitent
David, when involved in the guilt of blood, Psalm. 51.3. Yea, take your
punishment meekly, as justly inflicted upon you both by God and man for your
heinous sin; which leads me to the last Particular of their Deportment.

4. Having Remembered, Confessed, and Aggravated their Sin, they take their
present Distress to be as a punishment inflicted upon them for it.

Therefore is this Distress come upon us, say they all.
Therefore behold also his blood is required, says Reuben.
These men had been from their Infancy educated in the Knowledge and Fear of
the True God, who made and Governs, and Judges the World in Righteousness. And
however their Envy against their Brother Joseph, might for a season blind 'em,
to the permitting of 'em to do so foul a deed: And however their Prosperity
might of a long time infatuate 'em, to the stupifying of their hearts to the
Recognition or Sense of the same; yet they not having abjured or forgotten
their God, nor having utterly stifled their Consciences, nor having absolutely
erased past facts out of their memories; but being now cast into sudden
adversity, which makes men to consider, they begin pensively to cast about for
the Cause of their present Woe. Distress they sensibly feel: A Cause thereof
they must suppose; for they were not of the number of those, that imagine any
thing comes by a mere blind chance. They knew their affliction arose not out of
the dust, nor was blown upon them by any of the winds: Nor did they blame the
Stars for it: They understood that God orders all the affairs of men, both for
weal and woe: They knew that he does not willingly afflict nor grieve the
children of men, to crush under his feet all the Prisoners of the Earth. They
weighed that Sin is the only Mother of Misery, and that theref^re they must
certainly have sinned against their Maker and Judge; and that the grievousest
of all their Sins must be put to this account. They might judge that no sin
cries so loud in the ears of God for Vengeance, as that of Blood and Cruelty;
nor any murder so effectually, as that of our Brethren, our own Flesh and Blood.

They could not then but remember, what they had long before contrived and
executed against their dear Brother, Joseph. In the severe Treatment they now
met withal, being threatened as Spies, obliged to fetch their tender Brother
Benjamin, to the grief of their Aged Father Jacob, and the danger of his Life;
and being in danger all, or some of 'em, of being made close Prisoners, or of
being cast into the Dungeon, as they cast their Brother Joseph into the Pit,
they see much of their former Crime in their present Distress; the one proving
(as ordinarily it does) a mirror of the other. No wonder then, they feeling the
instant and urgent calamity, and recollecting their ancient provocation, and
considering the Justice of an incensed God, should in horror and anguish,
believe and acknowledge themselves to be verily guilty concerning their Brother;
and that Distress, as a punishment, was come upon them, and that his Blood was
required.

Thus have I (as many Avocations and Interruptions would give me a little time
to collect them) given you my sudden, but serious Reflections upon this
sorrowful Song of Joseph's Brethren; with some accommodation thereof to the
present sad occasion. Before I conclude, give me leave a little to exemplify
the usefulness of this remarkable passage, in the following deductions.

1. We may hence learn, to admire the inscrutable Revolutions of Divine
Providence. Paris, Romulus, and Cyrus, having been exposed to extremities (as
is storied, though without any great certainty) and afterward mounting to the
height of Power, are still spoken of as almost miracles: But here we read a
Narrative of Joseph, much more true and no less strange. In his tender years,
he hardly escapes out of the violent hands of his bloody-minded Brethren into a
calamitous and desperate Captivity: He was sold and bought, and bought and sold
over and over: He is cast into Pit and Prison, in Perils always, in Deaths
often. And after all, his Brethren, by a wonderful turn of Providence, are
brought low, when he is exalted: They seek to him whom they had sold, and bow
to him in the midst of all his Glory, whom they had trampled upon in the depth
of his misery. They behold him advanced by God himself, to be a Foster Father
to a Great King, a Patron of a vast People, and as able as willing, to be a
Preserver of their Father and themselves. By this secret Intrigue of Gods
Wisdom, the holy Seed of Israel is secured from Famishing, and the sacred Stock
is continued, from which was to spring the Messiah, the Glorious Savior of
Mankind. Thus we see the most slight and unpromising circumstances of humane
affairs, capable of being ordered by God to the most important and Noble
Purposes. Nor are there any wheels in this vast Machine of the World, how cross
soever they move to one another, that God cannot, does not overruled and
harmonize to the producing most admirable effects, as ('it is more than probable)
we shall be clearly given to comprehend at the Consummation of all things. I
cannot now stand to infer, how this should quiet and establish our fluctuating
hearts, in the midst of all cross-grained occurrences, and seemingly unequal
administrations of worldly concerns.

2. Since we read how Joseph's Brethren were thus overreached and overruled,
to the recalling to mind within themselves their Violence intended, and in part
committed against their Brother, to the confessing of it to one another in the
hearing of that Brother himself, who had then full power for the avenging of it
upon their heads, and to the seeing themselves, with all confusion of face,
made, by way of just punishment for it, Prisoners, and further obnoxious to
destruction: Since we read all this brought to pass by the secret Providence of
an All-seeing God; who, henceforward, whilst he knows and thinks of the whole,
will dare to offer any violence to his Brother, though in the secretest Recess,
or darkest Night? If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night
shall be light about me; yea the darkness hid^th not from thee, but the night
shines as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee; Psalm.
139.11, 12. We can no more evade Gods Wisdom, when he has a mind to detect us,
than we can obstruct his power, when he arms himself to punish us.

There is no security in the commission of any sin. God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, Eccl. 12.14. There is nothing hid,
which shall not be manifested, Mar. 4.22.

But then there are some Sins, that God makes himself more peculiarly concerned
to detect, such as High Treason against his own Vicegerents. And therefore we
are upon that very Consideration warned against the closest entertaining so
much as a thought of the same. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, and
curse not the Rich in thy Bed chamber: for a Bird of the air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter, Eccl. 10.20.

God is likewise very rigorous in the Scrutiny he makes after any bloody
Crimes: As if he would upon occasion take the Coroner's Inquest into his own
hand, he himself is said to make inquisition for blood, Psalm. 9.12. When Ahab
had so wickedly murdered Naboth, God commissions Elijah both as a Searcher, and
a Judge; first to hunt him out, and then to doom him to his deserved
punishment, 1 Kings 21.17, 24. It is long since that it p^st into a Proverb
[Murder will out.] And such a Vox Populi being founded upon observation of the
usual effects of Providence in the cases of blood, may in a sober sense pass
for Vox Dei. Man first says it, and God himself by his frequent wonderful
Discoveries has set his Seal to it. It would be endless, it is really
impossible to reckon up or search out the mysterious methods of the Almighty
practiced or practicable in this Process. We may from consideration had in
gross of such his Arts at the rising of every furious passion, at the stirring
of any revengeful inclination, at the offer of any cruel and bloody temptation,
take warning to stand upon our Guard, and to quell the very first of all
mutinous and boisterous motions.

3. How deeply does it concern every Creature to examine himself to the bottom
touching all crying Sins, particularly touching the Sins of Cruelty and Blood?
Diverse men may heretofore have incurred more or less guilt of this nature,
which because Providence for a while lets to sleep, Conscience is content to
bury as dead. They wipe their bloody mouths, wherewith they have sucked the
blood of their Brethren, and cry, Am I not innocent? They are as ready for a
new attempt, as ever they were for the old performance: Because sentence
against their former evil work is not executed speedily, therefore their heart
is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8.11. But let all such remember the
bloody Agag, who, after he had dreamt that the bitterness of his death was
past, came delicately unto Samuel the Lords Inquisitor for blood: who, for that
Agag's Sword had made women childless, made his mother childless among women,
by hewing of him in pieces before the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.32, 33.

In such an almost desperate Case as this of Blood is, Let a man take his
measures for averting the Shame, Horror, Confusion and Destruction that are due
to him at the hand of the Lord, from the behavior of such as discreetly
endeavor to reconcile themselves to the offended justice of man, to their
Sovereign. Let him go with a Rope about his Neck in all true humiliation, with
all frank Confession. Fearing and trembling, let him prostrate himself,
entreating the only begotten Son of his God the King of Israel to offer his
own blood once shed, even for the shedders of his own blood, as well as for the
rest of Mankind. Who knows but thereupon the Divine Sovereign may have mercy
here and hereafter: For God is King of the Kings of Israel, and the Kings of
Israel were wont to be merciful Kings.

4. Let us all exercise the utmost Compassion toward these perishing wretches;
what, though as yet they do not think us kind, because we urge them to what is
grievous to flesh and blood, but profitable to the Spirit, even voluntary and
ample Confession? What, though they do not rightly pity themselves? What,
though they cannot or will not (as they ought) pray for themselves? yet in
pitious consideration, that the end of their Journey is Eternity, the way to
their Bliss is long, the passage thereto strait, their success very dubious,
but not absolutely desperate; Let us, according to our Opportunities and
Abilities, whilst we and they breath together, with strong Cries never cease
assailing the Throne of Grace on their behalf for such measures of, Clear
Conviction, Thorough Contrition, Deep Humiliation, Free Confession, and Living
Faith, as may carry them through the Agonies of Death to a Crown of Life,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

