NEVVES FROM SIR JOHN SVCKLIN BEING A RELATION OF HIS CONVERSION FROM A PAPIST
TO A PROTESTANT.

Also, What Torments he endured by those of the Inquisition in SPAIN.

And how the Lord Lekeux his Accuser, was stricken dumb, he going to have the
Sentence of Death pass upon him.

Sent in a Letter to the Lord Conway, now being in Ireland.

Printed for M. Rookes, and are to be sold in Grubstreet, 1641.

NEWS FROM Sir John Sucklin.
IT is an old proverb, that he far runs, that never turns, as will be now made
apparent by this ensuing story, which will treat of one which was accounted a
treacherous and disloyal Subject, and not long since made an escape out of
this Kingdom, by name Sir John Suclin, who was supposed to be a Romanist, but
now will his sufferings make manifest to the contrary.

When first he flew out of this Kingdom* he took up his habitation in Roan,
belonging to the King of France: but there some discontent growing between
another Knight himself, he left Roan, and to Paris he bent his Journey, where
he had much honor attributed to him, in respect of his furnishing a hundred
men and horses, against the Scots: in the time of Dissension between both
Kingdoms.

In Paris as aforesaid, he lived in great honor where he fell in league with
the Lady Damaise nigh kinswoman to the Duchess of Sheverey, but a protestant.

This Lady bore affection to him, after the same manner that he did to her, but
upon this condition, that he should purge himself of all popish dregs
whatsoever.

To which he most willing condiscended, and thereupon renounced the Pope, with
all his Complicies.

But this is requisite to be declared, that there was a Lord in Paris, by name
Lequeux, which bore affection to the same Lady, and to have his desire,
invented a plot to take away Sir John Sucklins life: but he having notice
thereof, acquainted his Lady with the pretended purpose of the Lord Lequeux,
whereupon she desired him to fly to some other parts.

But his reply was, enjoying her society he would be ambitious to fly any
whither, but otherwise to stay the worst thing which could happen, would be but
death, and not to enjoy her company would be no less.

To whose request, she willingly granted, and in a short space, they together
took shipping and sailed to the hither parts of Spain: whereas these two
Turtles without any interception thought for to be.

But alas! Fortune did prove adverse against them, and instead of blessing
their hope with a prosperous Gale, she played the part of storming Boreas, and
split their ship against an envious Rock.

For being arrived safely, as they did think, within the Confines of Spain,
the aforementioned malicious Lord Lequeux, having notice given of their escape,
presently pursued them, and having overtaken them* complained to the great
Archpriest of Spain, how that they were both Traitors to Rome, and were
arrived in Spain for no other cause, but to conspire the death of the great
Master, and King of Spain.

To confirm and bind which accusation, he swore by the Sacrament, and sacred
body of Christ*

Whereupon the Archpriest committed Sir John Suclin to the custody of those of
the Inquis^tion, and his Lady to a close prison, command being given, that
unless Sir John Suclin did recant from any intent to do injury unto the
Church of Rome, that he should not want for torments, according to the ancient
custom of the Inquisition. Sir John made answer thus. That both his Lady and
himself were accused falsely; for although he bore no affection to the church
of Rome, yet was he far from any intent for doing the least Member of it any
wrong: much more the King of Spain himself, chief Agent to the Pope.

No^withstanding, he was committed* and suffered those torments which are
commonly inflicted upon those which are prisoners to the Inquisition, once had
he the Spanish Strapado, twice tortured by sharp needles, three times did he
lodge in a stinking Dungeon, and upon the fourth day was carried to hear the
Sentence of Death pass upon him; but was miraculously delivered, for the Lord
Lequex going to accuse him the second time, was struck down, and by signs
first, and then by writing, did confess to the whole Assembly, that he had
falsely accused Sir John Sucklin and his Lady.

Whereupon they were both delivered, and the Lord Lequex committed to tortures.

Sir John and his Lady are now living at the Hague in Holland, piously and
religiously, and grieves at nothing, but that he did the Kingdom of England
wrong.

FINIS.

