England Bought and Sold: OR, A DISCOVERY OF A HORRID DESIGN TO Destroy the
Ancient Liberty Of all the FREEHOLDERS IN ENGLAND, In the Choice of MEMBERS to
Serve IN THE Honorable House of Commons IN PARLIAMENT.

By a Late Libel Entitled, The Certain Way to Save ENGLAND, etc,

PROVE. xvi. 28. A Talebearer makes Strife, and a Whisperer separateth
chiefest Friends.

LONDON: Printed for T. O. 1681.

England bought and sold, etc.
THERE was never any Design so black and Criminous, but found some persons so
Profligate, as to become its Patrons; there wanted not an Iscariot for Thirty
pieces of Silver, to betray his Master, nor a popular pretense, saving of the
State, lest the Romans should come, and take away their Place, and Nation, to
put the better color upon the Murder of our Savior: And a nearer Instance
will abundantly refresh our Memories, without more than the trouble of
remembering Jan. 30. 1648.

The worst Surfeits are taken by the most lushious Fruits, and no Poison can be
so dangerous, as that which has the name of an Antidote written upon the Box.
There was never any mischief in State or Kingdom, but the People were first
drawn in to believe, that the Projectors were their Friends, and then those
Juglers pre-possess them with false apprehensions of things, and undertake to
redress all their Grievances. They are prodigal in their fair Promises, and
flattering Speeches, like Absalom, when they intend the foulest Enterprises.

Certainly, the happiness of a People consists in Peace, which is the Mother of
all desirables of this World, and Peace most certainly depends upon the due
Subjection, and Obedience of the People to their Sovereign, and the wise and
wholesome establishments of Laws. And therefore they who design to subvert the
one, or disturb the other, always represent the Laws uneasy, or the Sovereign
unjust, and apply their whole endeavors to create, foment, and increase
Mis-understandings between the Prince and his People.

Whoever goes about to divorce these two, whom God has joined together, ought
to be reputed an Enemy to both, a betrayer of his Country, and a most dangerous
Incendiary, a pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition.

Now, as the greatest Artifice is to conceal the Act, so I find the Author of
this Libel, by which he pretends to save England, so great a Master in the
Talent of deceiving, that he might have been Tutor, as he is, certainly the
Scholar, to that old gilded Serpent, who deceived Eve. For he has not planted
his Battery against any particular part of the Government, That would have been
too visible, but he has undermined the very Foundation, and has endeavored to
spoil the whole frame, not by open breaking the whole, but by altering the
weights, which keep the Movement right, and in due order.

He has first violated the greatest Privilege of the People of England,
endeavoring to rob them of that ancient right, liberty and freedom of Election
of persons to represent them in Parliament, imposing upon them by the specious
way of Advice, Restrictions, Limitations, Rules and Directions in their Choice.

Secondly, He has violated the privilege and honor of the Commons-House in
Parliament, who have ever endeavored to have their Reputation secured by the
freedom of the Election of their Members. And I remember, that even the Commons
of that Parliament of November the Third, 1640. who are sufficiently memorable,
and possibly, for which this Libeller has a veneration, when some great Lords
only writ a Letter Recommendatory about the Election of an inconsiderable
Borough, voted it a high breach of Privilege: And yet our pert Libeller, or
Legion, for any thing I know has had the confidence to write, and for
expedition to Print a Letter Recommendatory, and disperse it to all the
Counties, and Cities, Buroughs and Corporations of England, thereby to
forestal the Elections; One of which Letters, by mistaking his person came to
be discovered, and you shall presently see the Tenor of it.

Thirdly, He has by many false, disloyal, not to say traitorous Insinuations,
endeavored to defame His Sacred Majesty, and the established Government, and
to bring a general Odium upon both, thereby to alienate the affections of the
People from their natural Liege-Lord, to the impairing of his Honor, Justice
and Wisdom, the great supporters of his Imperial Scepter, Crown, and Dignity.

Fourthly, He has endeavored to heighten the present unhappy
mis-understandings, and to possess the People with Fears, Terrors and dismal
Apprehensions of I know not what Despotick power, Tyranny and Arbitrary
Government that is coming in upon them, and that their ALL, Lives, Liberties,
Religion, and Estates are at Stake, with such fulsomly Rebellious reflections
upon the King and Government, as may animate the People by a desperate effort
of Sedition to Rebel against their most Gracious Sovereign.

Fifthly, He has cunningly aspersed, and vilified a great number of His
Majesty's most Dutiful, and Loyal Subjects of all Orders, and Ranks as Enemies
to the Kingdom, Pentioners, Courtiers, romoters of a Popish Interest, and
Succession, and defames by Wholesale many worthy Gentlemen of most approved
Loyalty and Fidelity to their King, and sound principles in the Protestant
Religion as by Law Established, thereby to incapacitate them from being Elected
to serve their King and Country as Members of Parliament; by rendering them
suspected, and odious to the Electors: And indeed the whole drift of the Libel,
is to prevent such as are of known Integrity to the King, and the Church from
coming into the next House of Commons, and to persuade them to choose Men of
large Principles as he calls them, which I need not I think explain for he does
it himself, as you shall see hereafter.

This is a great and heavy charge, but I will make it out true to a Tittle, and
yet shall draw but a few strictures upon a Libel, for which at some times the
Author would not only have lost his Ears, but hazarded the Head, that framed
it, and let him have a care, Justice, and the Vengeance both of Heaven, and of
Kings that have long Arms.

The Letter will make good the first and second Articles, and the Book both
them, and all the rest. The Letter was superscribed, and sent by the Post, and
has the Post-mark, Feb. 5. stamped upon it, but the Contents to the Surprise of
many worthy Gentlemen, to whom they were directed were in Print, as follows,

SIR,
THere is newly published a small stitched Book well worth the serious perusal
of all your Electors, and I think if you would put your self to the small
charge of buying a parcel of them for your Country People, It may be one great
means of keeping them tight and steady in their Choice of good Protestants and
true Englishmen, for their Members in the next ensuing Parliament, whereupon
depends the Weal or Woe both of King and Kingdom, not only in this, but in
future Ages; It has comprised in it, all the material things that were in any
of the former sheets upon the same Subject, and gives you additional ones that
are at present most necessary to be considered. In this Juncture of Affairs we
are now in, it is thought (by those that have seen and examined it) that there
cannot be a more ready serviceable Book to public use and benefit, than this
that is offered you, by

Sir, A hearty well Wisher of the Prosperity and Happiness of the King and
Kingdom.


The Title of the Book is, The certain way to save England, not only now, but
in future Ages, by a prudent Choice of Members to serve in the next Parliament,
in a seasonable Address to the Freeholders, and other Electors, Sold by Richard
Baldwin in Ball-Court in the Old Baily, price Six pence.

If to Calculate the Nativity of the King, be thought so dangerous a
Presumption, as by Law to be adjudged Felony during Q. Elizabeth's Life, what
may we think of the Crime of this Conjurer, who gives so positive a Judgment of
King, Parliament and Kingdom, pronouncing Magisterially the future Fate of
England; Upon the Elections (says he) depends the Weal or Woe both of King and
Kingdom, not only in this, Vide Co. 3 Inst. f. 6. De vita Principis inquirere
presertim per astrologos capitale: neque hoc solum sed etiam de ea dubitare vel
desperare pro crimine Majestatis laesae habitum esse; si indiciis esset
aliquibus ea desperatio patefacta. scip. Gentil. lib. 1. de Conjuratione.
but future Ages; But the best on it is, He is but like the rest of that Tribe,
who being ignorant of their own Destiny, yet will pretend to Prophecy of other
Persons; And I hope England will, when he is either forgotten, or only
remembered for Infamy, see many Wise, Prudent and Loyal Parliaments.

p. 4.
He prefaces his Discourse with the popular Theme of the Horrid Popish Plot,
upon which he lays a Load, not more than it deserves, but that is not so much
to run down the Papists, as to serve a Turn, which afterward he discovers, and
is so hot upon it, that his Patience would not give him leave to tell it out,
without a necessary Parenthesis against the Bishops, whom like Traitorous Joab,
he Salutes and Stabs at the same time: For, says he, 'the Papists had a Design
to remove and deprive all Protestant Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Persons
(and God knows what a number there is of them in this Nation) from their
Offices, Benefices and Preferments, One would think this a vindication of the
Bishops, and Clergy; but lest he should do them a service, in comes a malicious
Parenthesis in a Roman Letter, and with a Romish Design, (and God knows, etc.)
Why, Sir and do not you know too? Have you never read Dr. Oates's Depositions,
he makes them all Protestant Bishops, but though you and your Party, who may
Defame the Kings Evidence, Cum Privilegio, Two years ago would but allow two
Protestant Bishops, and one you say is fallen off since; and for the Clergy,
they are all Tantivies, and Popishly affected, as you persuade the People. And
the Parenthesis in a different Letter is designed for a Remark upon them, lest
some of your Party should mistake you.

But that which surprised me, was the Impudence of the Man, who at the same
time when he justly charges those Hellish and Execrable Plotters with the guilt
of endeavoring to rob the King of his Royal Crown and Dignity, by malicious,
and unadvised speaking, writing, and otherwise, he himself was advisedly doing
the same, and with one or two more Aggravations, Printing, Publishing, and
dispersing this seditious Libel against the King and Kingdom; but because
though a man sees all other Men's Faces, but never his own without a Glass, I
present him this, which will tell him his Face as well as his Pen has been in
the Ink-pot,

In the next page he addresses himself to the People, and the more to
intimidate them, Page 5.
thereby to prepare them for his following Impressions, he paints their danger
with all the terrible Aspects, which his Art can invent to render it more
formidable; and in short, informs them, that their ALL is now in hazard, and
that Self-preservation exacts from them not to suffer any, but who he advises
them to be Elected into any places of Office or Trust within this Kingdom. Now
first I observe, that he never qualifies this principle of Self-preservation,
with any Limitation of doing what we lawfully may do in order to the
preservation either of our selves or our ALL, and indeed he is a man of large
principles, Quicquid libet licet, I suppose is one of them.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that he never tells the People, how solicitous
the King is for their Safety, how he has done all that possibly he can to
secure the Nation, turned out all the Popish Lords out of the House of Peers,
disarmed all the Papists throughout England, Married the Lady Mary to a
Protestant Prince to secure the Succession, permitted the Law to have its full
and free scope against all the Conspirators of what degree soever, has
importuned the Parliament for the vigorous and speedy Trial, and Prosecution of
the Popish Lords, and though he has not been treated with such deference as a
Prince, who never denied his Subjects any thing but one, might have expected,
yet still he continues his care of his People. But not a syllable of this must
the People hear, but on the contrary two most malicious Reflections upon the
Crown, where he tells them such Members as he is about to advise them to Elect,
will [maintain all the Kings just Honors and Prerogatives] this word just, is
a suspicious word, It is just such a word as was in the late Solemn League and
Covenant, and is to give the People to understand the King has some Honors
and Prerogatives which are not just. And for fear this Hint should not be
powerful enough; he treads upon their Toes again with another happy
Parenthesis, and tells them how they will maintain these just Honors; by
taking away our great and many (I cannot say how well or ill-grounded) fears
and jealousies of Arbitrary Government. Well then, if you cannot say how well
or ill-grounded, why do you say it at all? and if you can say, why so squeamish
all of a sudden? I tell you Sir, you will run the hazard of being more Knave
and Fool, a Knave to say a thing you cannot justify, and a Fool for so plainly
showing your self a Knave, when it was your great Interest to have passed
current for a Man of superfine Honesty. And I must assure you this flaw in your
Credit, and a Crack of your own free voluntary and uncompelled making, will
render your Reputation suspicious in whatever you say hereafter.

Then he passes on to his Qualifications, which if he had left in their
Scripture Purity, without the Glossary of an Author in his Margent, who
dedicated his Labors the sucking Usurper Richard, quondam Protector, they would
have been much better relished by Persons of Loyalty.

To pass by his limping paraphrase upon the first, Men that fear God, i.e. Halt
not between two opinions, which yet is not without its design against all those
Gentlemen, who are zealous for the present Establishment in the Church, who are
ever represented to the People as halting between God and Baal, Popery and
Protestantism, and in that sense incapacitated by this Gentleman for
Representatives of the Commons of England: His Second Comment is stolen from
the late Rebel-Parliament, who are very ill Patterns for the People to choose
by. Loving Truth, i. e. Such as the King and Kingdom may trust. All they did in
the late Rebellion was for the good of the King and Kingdom; they chose into
the Parliament all that could be picked up that had manifested any Animosity
against the King or His Government, for the good of the King and Kingdom; they
displaced all His Friends under the notion of Evil Counselors, for the good of
the King and Kingdom; and they raised an Army against the King under the Earl
of Essex for the good of the King and Kingdom; they fought against him in the
Field, and Bullets flew as thick as Hail about His Head for the good of the
King and Kingdom, and in fine, they cut off His glorious Head too for the good
of the King and Kingdom.

And for the Third, hating Covetousness, he is quite by the Cushion with his i.
e. For it clearly intimates that they should cheerfully assist their Sovereign
with necessary Aids, Subsidies, and Supplies: But he knows what has gone
abroad of late as a State-Maxim If upon any Terms we part with our Money, till
we are sure the King is ours, the Nation is betrayed. And yet Cicero a better
Orator, I cannot say a greater Commonwealths Man, positively affirms Imperium
sine vectigalibus retineri nullo modo potest: which it is to be feared is the
true foundation of the fore-recited Maxim.

And because this Adviser, like the Jesuits, does not think the Scripture a
sufficient Rule: He proceeds to lay down Truths and Counsels as plain as
possible he can, and by his Recommendatory Letter he would have his Traditions
make out the Insuffciency and Obscurity of Old Jethro's Rules, who being a
Priest or a Prince, or both, may be thought too much inclining to the Court
Party, as I suppose Solomon and St. Peter for the same Reasons are quite
omitted, or otherwise those who (Fear God, and Honor the King, and meddle not
with such as are given to change, whose Calamity arises suddenly, and who
knows the Ruin of them both?) might have bid fairly to have been admitted for
such Counselors in whose multitude the safety of King and People too consists.

And now this Quack State-Doctor begins to talk learnedly of Critical Days, and
times, and I pray consider, says he, this is a Critical Time, upon your well or
ill choosing depends your well or ill Being: and you had need to do that well
which you do not know, whether ever you may do again. Your Fate may not suffer
you to offend twice in this one Particular. Indeed this is an Amazing
Paragraph: This Fellow is the very Epitome of the Consult of the Jesuits at
Wild-House, as Doctor Oats in his Narrative Deposes, That they intended to
effect their wicked Plot Page 67. by disaffecting the Kings best Friends, and
Subjects. First, Charging him with Tyranny and Designs of Oppressing, Governing
by the Sword, and without Parliaments. Secondly, By aspersing, Deriding,
Exposing, and Declaiming against His Person, Councils and Actions in
Parliament, and elsewhere. Nothing but the Impudence of a Plotter, such a one
as the Doctor describes, could give the Lie to Majesty. The King assures His
People he will meet them in frequent Parliaments, and here comes an Adviser to
tell the People they do not know, whether they may ever choose Members for
Parliaments again, that their Fate may not suffer them to offend twice in that
one Particular; which is only in softer words the better to deceive the People,
to promote the Popish Plot by persuading the Nation they are like to have no
more Parliaments.

These two Paragraphs of Doctor Oats which I have mentioned, are in truth the
Contents of his whole Book, and the Libel is only an culargement upon these two
heads of the Plot: And if that be the way to Save England, God deliver all good
Protestants from such Savers and such Salvation. And I desire the Reader to
carry these Expositors in his mind, for he shall find him all along
endeavoring to traduce either the King or the Government or both; upon which
he is so violently bent that he persuades the People to whom for their
Edification the Discourse is addressed: That Kings have been their Constant
Enemies; for, says he, Liberty and Property were rescued by Inches out of the
hands of incroaching Violence; and this is another of his stabbing parentheses.
When in truth the People owe all their Liberties, Franchises, Charters and
Immunities, and even that great one of Commons to represent them in Parliament,
to the Bounty, and Goodness of former Kings, and never any King either did or
attempted to deprive the People of the Grants of their Predecessors. Let the
Charter of London now publicly Printed and Sold be looked into, and it will
show from William the Conqueror, to His most August Majesty King Charles the
Second, what vast favors the Kings of England have con-ferred upon that City,
which it is to be hoped will incline them to Loyalty and Gratitude to His
Majesty, and to stop their Ears against such Charming Seducers, as this and
other Libellers; especially if they remember that the first violaters of their
Charter, and the great Charter of England were the late Usurpers, who dethroned
and murdered their Lawful King, by the very same popular Arts, the Fears and
Jealousies of Evil-Counsellors, and Arbitrary Government.

Consider, says he, you trust the Parliament with your Estates, Liberties,
Religion, and Lives. And do the People choose the Parliament too or only the
House of Commons? Are not the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to be
trusted? A late Libel has indeed said we want a King and a Government that we
may trust, etc. And now comes in our Commentator, and obtrudes the word
Parliament, as if it only consisted of the Lower House, and the whole trust
were in them, as presently after he adds; they have the Interest and Charge of
us all upon them. For, says he, should you be undone in any of these, when
it is too late, you may lament, that you are undone by making such a choice as
has undone you by Law. A fair prosecution of the Design and Plot mentioned by
Doctor Oats, but that will not satisfy him, the man is for speaking plain
Truths and Counsels, and therefore he does it to purpose in the next page. How
your Expectations have been frustrated, your hopes blasted, you feelingly
bewail; Page 9.
exactly as the Doctor says, Exposing and Declaiming against His Majesty's
Person, Counsels, and Actions in Parlliament. For adds he, by what Counsels you
have been defeated in the Dissolution of Parliaments, you cannot be ignorant.
And upon this, like Gavan at a Quakers Meeting, or Whitebread at a Conventicle,
he falls a Canting, of what an excellent spirit was poured upon them in their
last Elections; Even such a spirit as fell upon the Jews Exorcists, Acts xix.
16. which in some places inspired the Dissenters with such Fury as to beat,
wound, and kill those, who opposed their Choice of such as were in the Opinion
of Dissenters, particular Friends to their Opinions and Practices, or had been
in Actual Arms against the late King and His present Majesty.

But he proceeds, and I must keep pace with him in his dirty Road, tho we
travel to different Quarters: In his second Qualification, They must be men
thoroughly principled in the Protestant Religion; very good! and why could it
not be added, as now by Law Established; are the Lawless Protestants the best
Protestants, and they who obey the Laws the worst? We must come to distinction
then I find, since the very word Portestant admits of Ambiguity. All lay claim
to it, Quakers, who are no Christians, and Anabaptists who are very ill ones,
and all others by what names soever dignified, or distinguished, will all
challenge the Name of Protestants; which of these does he mean, and what
Protestant Principles those of the Law Protestants, or Lawless Protestants: We
shall not need to go far for a Resolution, They are the large Principles that
he means, such as will not sacrifice his Neighbors Property to the frowardness
of his own Party in Religion. Now tho this is plainly levelled at such Gentlemen
as have in obedience to the Law, and discharge of their Consciences prosecuted
Dissenters, not out of frowardness but necessity, as considering what a
dangerous influence their pretenses of Religion have had upon the State; yet in
the next page, to clear his Counsel and Truth, and make it plain, you shall see
a double portion of the excellent spirit of Ned Coleman, and of the late Lord
Stafford poured upon him, when he tells the People, Page 10.
That the great Interest of England at this day is to tolerate the tolerable,
to bear with the weak, to encourage the conscientious, and to restrain none but
such as would restrain all besides themselves. Lo! here Toleration and
Persecution both in a breath: The Church of England because by the help of the
Secular Laws, she endeavors to restrain men from running to damnation, must be
restrained her self: This is so large a Gospel-Principle as I am sure Christ
never taught. I would ask this vir quidam, whether he thinks Schism a damnable
Sin or not? If not, then he has neither Principles nor Religion; If he does
believe it so, let him read Doctor Stilling fleet's late Book, which has
sufficiently convinced all Dissenters to be Guilty of Schism. Would it not be
great honor then for a Parliament to Establish Iniquity by a Law, and is it
then the great Interest of England, that the People should have an Act of
Parliament, to damn themselves by Authority. Sure this is Doctrine and Advice
fit for none but Jesuits and Devils to Preach. Good God! What will not some men
do, to make a Party?

His Third Qualification is, Men of Courage, who will not be Hectored out of
their Duty by the Frouns and Scouls of Men. Let him be who he will, he deserves
a severe Castigation for two things: First, For want of due Respect, and
Manners to his Superiors. Secondly, For Charging them with such Actions as they
are not Guilty of. Why there is not the littlest Fop about the Town but would
think himself affronted with the name of Hector, and yet this piece of
Insolence fears not to pin it indefinitely upon the Highest Characters in the
Nation.

His Fourth is, Men of Resolution that will stand by and maintain the Power and
Privileges of Parliament (for they are the Heart-string of the Nation) Then
Mr. Parenthesis you have broke the Heart Strings of the Nation; for the
Fundamental Privilege of the House of Commons is Freedom of Choice of the
Members, of which Fraud and Force are equally destructive, and which both by
your Letter and your Book, you have endeavored to violate.

Fifthly, Men that will prosecute the Plot, and search into the bottom of it.
With all my heart; for by Dr. Oats's Narrative, your Worship Sir, and all that
are like you will be found there, and the Nation will never be at quiet, till
such fellows as you, who lie sculking there be found out, and severely punished.

Sixthly, such as will remove and bring to Justice Evil Counselors. Corrupt
and Arbitrary Ministers of State, that have been so Industrious to give the
King wrong Measures, to turn things out of their Ancient and Legal Channel of
Administration, and Alienate His Affections from His People. Sure the Man is
besides himself, did ever one take such pains to make a silken Cravat for
himself? Are you in serious Earnest Sir? Would you have all that endeavor to
breed misunderstandings between the King and His People severely punished? Then
are you in exceeding danger of the Fate of Haman, who built a pair of Gallows
of fifty Cubits high for Mordecai; no man I will say that for you, has taken
more pains or endeavored with more Art to alienate the Affections of the
People from the King and vice versa, than you have done, and by your own Law
you know what you deserve. As for any other who have done as you say, His
Majesty who hates all thoughts of Arbitrary Government, has told you, He will
leave them to the Law, and you should have acquainted the People with that Just
and Honorable Resolution of His Majesty, accordding to Magna Charta, Nec
ibimus super eum nisi per Legale Judicium parium suorum. He will neither
displace nor disgrace any Person, but by the Legal Trial of his Peers, which is
the true Legal Channel, and ancient Fence against Arbitrary Government.

Seventhly, Men of improvement, That Is agreed with him for I am not for picking
knots in Rushes.

And now having showed the positive Qualifications, he comes unto the
Negatives: And

First, Not those who with as much Defiance as Error assert the Honorable
House of Commons began by Rebellion, 49. H. 3. And that they were not till then
an Essential or Constituent part of the Legislative Power of the Kingdom. For
my part I know none that have done it more or in better terms than this Person
in the words just recited. I perceive this Gentleman is a mere whiffler; for
without Reflection, It being no dishonor to know the true Original either of
things or persons, had he been conversant with Seldom, Cambden, or any other
Antiquary, he would have found them no vilifiers of the House of Commons, and
yet they allow that House no higher a pedigree than H. 3. and Mr. Prinn, who
was the most violent Assertor even of the Sovereignty of Parliaments, in his
Book which bears that Title, and who ransacked all the Records in the Tower,
and in the Cotton Library, and all other places; yet could not raise the water
a hairs breadth higher than the spring; and if he could have produced any
Evidence of the Commons being a Constituent Part of the Parliament before Hen.
3. he would not have been sparing to acquaint us with it.

But for his Certain Note, that is so worthy a particular Observation, that
such men only aim at the Destruction and Ruin of both, etc. I think it is
beyond Aiming, and worthy a particular Observation, That they who cried up the
House of Commons as the Parliament, as I have observed to you this Libeller
does, Page 13. where he talks of not considering to choose a Parliament, making
that part the people choose indefinitely the Parliament, I say they were such as
he that voted the Honorable House of Lords useless and dangerous, turned them
out of Doors, depriving the Nation of their supreme Court of Judicature, and
setting up the most Arbitrary and Despotical power under the name of Parliament
that England ever saw, thereby ruining the famous Constitution of Parliaments.

Certainly, they are the true Lovers of the Government, who give to every
Degree and Order among us their proper due, not diminishing one to augment the
other, which is the true healthful Temperament of the Body Politic.

Then he falls into a great fit of Modesty, Page 12.
he will not with Effrontery conclude, but he tells the people of some that cry
up an absolutely absolute power in the Prince, that we are all Slaves, or
Vassals, that voluntas Regis is Lex Populi; why does he not name them, that
they may receive their deserved punishment? if he cannot do it, and I am sure
he would if he could, He is the Author, and publisher of this Arbitrary
Doctrine, and the disperser of a Defamation of his Sovereign: And if Malice and
Art were not mingled in him to perfection, why could he not as well have told
the people that his present Majesty says the same as his Royal Father did, that
he that will Preach more than he can prove, let him suffer: And certainly had
there been as loyal Preaching in Schismatical Conventicles, of which with his
large principles he is so great a Patron, and Advocate, as there has
constantly for Twenty years last past been in all the Churches of England, and
more particularly in White Hall Chapel, we should have had no need of his
Advice to save England.

His second and third Head are Co-incident, Page 13,
a Declamation against Cakes and Ale, and would you think, that Cakes and Ale,
and roast Beef should be such dangerous unqualifying things in an Election?
why, I will unfold the Mystery, the zeal of his party, and the underhand
bearing their Charges he knows will carry them to Elections; And indeed they
dare not offend their Teachers, who have them in as much awe as the Jesuits
have their Missioners. But the other party of whom they are afraid, who do not
love the Trouble, and the rudeness of their Opponants at Elections, and had
rather be minding their Affairs, do by the prevalency of Custom expect to have
their Charges defrayed; And methinks this crosses one of his former
Qualifications of such as will propagate the Improvement, and Consumption of
the Growth of their Country; I assure you the Manufacture of good English Ale,
Beef and Bread are strangely helped off at all Elections, and the good Towns
rejoice as much at a Dissolution in hopes of the Advantages of Elections, as he
seems to Lament.

His fourth, is a Satyr against Pensioners; But least that should not hold
water, in comes Reputed Pensioners: like Papists and Popishly affected; This
sweeps all, how many worthy Gentlemen have their Reputation blasted with this
scandal. It is the hardest case in the World sure, that such Loyal Gentlemen as
spent their Estates in defense of their King, Country, Laws, Liberties and
Religion cannot receive the favor of their Prince, but they must be branded
with the Infamous name of Pensioners, and Enemies to their Country. I think
indigent persons as unqualified as he does, but I have learnt to distinguish
between Indigent by Loyalty, and Indigent by Prodigality, the last I abominate,
the first I pity.

But by no means chose a Courtier, or Durante beneplacito Man, and why I pray
Sir? It is a Crime to be a Courtier? in former Parliaments those who were
Courtiers had the Honor to sit always near Mr. Speakers Chair. And if he were
as well acquainted with Parliamentary Records as he pretends to be with
Qualifications, he would find many Orders even in 40. and 41. wherein the
honorable Gentlemen that sit next the Chair, are desired to represent the
Affairs of the House to His Majesty. Cannot a Man serve his King and his
Country too, are their Interests so opposite as you make People believe? It
was never good World since this was Preached for good Doctrine, nor ever will
be till this State Heresy is condemned by a Parliament, which I will not
despair to live to see; but the wonder to me is to see the Confidence of the
Jugler, first to topp upon us that this is no Reflection upon the King, and at
the same cast of his hand to slur the old Quicksilver Die of Coordinacy of
Power. The King being One Part of the Government should leave the other free:
But the Sophister never tells the People what part he is; but to supply his
defect, I will from the great Oracle of the Law the Lord Coke inform them, That
the King is Caput, Finis, and Principium Parliamenti, the Alpha, and Omega, the
Head, the End and Beginning of Parliaments; He is their Fountain from whence
they spring, and the Sea of Power, into which they run and devolve themselves.
As for His Admonition about Non Residents; I believe there are some who live
about the Town who will give him little thanks for his Caution, especially the
Gentlemen of the Long Robe upon whom this is a sour and severe Reflection.

As few Minors as he can hinder, tho the House of Commons has formerly had the
Reputation of a great School of Wisdom, which he seems to lessen by this
Reflection: And he might have added no bis Pueris if he had pleased, I should
not have quarreled him for it.

The same I say as to Prodigals and Voluptuous Persons.

No Zealots for a Popish Successor, I am none, nor know any such, and wish he
would distinguish between Successor, and Popish Successor, I do not find, that
Christ or His Successors the Apostles, were branded for Zealots for Heathen
Successors, because they never endeavored to exclude them, but Taught,
Commanded and Practiced all Obedience to them. And certainly we should have had
none but State-Martyrs, if this Doctrine had been known to Tertullian, to Julian
the Apostate's Soldiers, or the Primitive Christians. I have learnt to obey,
and not dispute the Determinations of Kings and Parliaments, and can acquiesce
in their definitive Sentence. But because this Gentleman has so recommended
Queen Elizabeth in his Postscript, and there as in his whole Libel, with design
to reflect upon His Majesty, I will show him the Pourtraict of that Queens
demeanor in a parallel Case of Succession, by which the People shall see, it is
no such Tragical Thing for a Protestant Prince to deny the Importunities of a
Parliament in the point of Succession.

Whereas Princes words do enter more deeply into Men's ears and minds, Cambd.
Eliz. An. 1566.
take these things from our Mouth. I that am a lover of the simple Truth, have
ever thought you likewise to be ingenious Lovers of the same, But I have been
deceived; For I have found that in this Parliament, Dissimulation has walked
up and down masked under the vizard of Liberty, and Succession; of your number,
some there are, which have thought that Liberty to dispute of the Succession,
and to establish the same, is forthwith, either to be granted or denied. If we
had granted it, these Men had had their desire, and had Triumphed over us. And
if we had denied it, they thought to have moved the hatred of our People
against us, which our mortallest Enemies could never yet do. But their wisdom
was unseasonable, and their Counsels were hasty, neither did they foresee the
Event. Yet hereby we have easily perceived who incline toward us, and who are
adverse unto us. And we see, that your whole House may be divided into four
sorts. For some have been Plotters, and Authors, some Actors; which with smooth
words have persuaded, some which have consented being seduced with smooth
words, and some which have been silent, admiring such Boldness; And these
certainly are the more excusable. Do ye think that we neglect your Safety, and
security by the Succession? or that we have a will to infringe your Liberty? Be
it far from us, we never thought it. But indeed we thought good to call you
back, when ye were running into the Pit. Every thing has its fit season; ye
may peradventure after us have a wiser Prince; but a more loving toward you,
ye shall never have. For our part, whether we may see such a Parliament again,
we know not: But for you, take ye heed, lest you provoke your Princes Patience;
nevertheless, of this be assured, that we think very well of most of you, and
do embrace every one of you, with our former kindness, even from our Heart.

But to proceed, Not such, says he, as play the Protestants in design, p. 17.
but are indeed disguised Papists. They have industriously fixed the names of
Masqueraders, and disguised Papists upon all such Gentlemen as are zealous for
the Church of England as now by Law established, both against Papists, and
Schismatics, who according to Dr. Oats his Evidence, were to be assistant to
the carrying on the Plot, Ibid. p. 67. by seditious Preachers set up, sent out,
maintained and directed what to Preach in their own or other private or public
Conventicles; And it is such Masquerade Jesuits as this Libeller, that laugh at
the Plot, disgrace, and dis-believe the Kings Evidence, in this so evident, and
considerable a particular; That if ever Popery comes into England, it must come
in like the Trojan Horse by him mentioned Milite Plenus, by breaking down the
Walls of the Church by Toleration, the Gates being too narrow to let it in.

But he goes on, and is not content to blast a few, but like a Contagion or
Pestilence, endeavors to sweep away a whole Nation, with the Impudent Brand of
Irish understanding, and Tories. A Tory is a Rebel, an Outlaw, a Robber, and
Murderer, and is a Name and Character that exactly fits himself, who is so
notorious a Robber of his Prince, and Murderer of the Reputation of so many
worthy and innocent Gentlemen as he has endeavored to Defame.

Whoever have been Neutrals in the grand Contest between Popery and Protestant
Religion, and particularly in that Branch of it before recited, let them be
rejected, for I join with him in opinion; That they, who are not with the
Church of England, and the Government as now by Law established, are against
us, and that these only wait the good Hour, when they may safely show their
Teeth, and bite, which now like this Libeller, in Policy they hide with all the
Artifice Imaginable.

For his last Qualification of such as have obstructed Parliamentary
proceedings, by unseasonable and unreasonable insisting upon un-Parliamentary
Privileges, he must unriddle it, for it is un-understandable by the People,
and therefore he might have left it unwrit, unprinted, unpublished, and
unrecommended by his Letter which has another UN in it, viz. To Undo the
Nation.

His Conclusion is like his Premises, Canting, and Cunning, without either
Truth or Honesty, p. 18.
and so I leave him to the more just Animadversion of the Laws, and his
Superiors, with this Recommendation that no man has more artificially
endeavored to ruin the freedom of Elections, more maliciously Calumniated His
Majesty and the Government, nor more wickedly labored to alienate the
Affections of the People from their Sovereigns and by Seditious Forgeries to
bring all the Calamities of a Civil War and Ruin upon the Nation.

For his Postscript, I could give him some hints of the Courage of Q. Eliz.
mentioned by Cambden, Lord Coke, and others, but I am not for making or
enlarging Breaches, and I wish he were of the same mind. I will only recommend
to him by way of supplicant what our Law supposes the most excellent
Qualification for persons to be Elected Representatives of the Commons, for the
Preservation of His Majesty's Person, the Security of the Protestant Religion,
and the Government, which would have spared him all his pains, and carries the
stamp of Authority with it; It is the Proem of the Act of Parliament of the
Thirteenth of Car. 2. cap. 1. An Act for Preservation of His Majesty's Person,
etc.

THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament deeply weighing and considering
the Miseries and Calamities of well nigh twenty years, before your Majesty's
Happy Return, and withal reflecting upon the Causes and Occasions of so great,
and deplorable Confusions, do in all Humility and Thankfulness Acknowledge your
Majesty's Incomparable Grace, and Goodness to your People, in your Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion, by which your Majesty has been
pleased to deliver your Subjects not only from the Punishment, but also from
the Reproach of their former Miscarriages; which unexemplacy Piety and Clemenry
of your Majesty has inflamed the Hearts of us your Subjects with an ardent
desire to express all possible zeal, and duty in the Care and Preservation of
your Majesty's Person (in whose Honor and Happiness consists the Good and
Welfare of your People) and in preventing (as much as may be) all Treasonable
add Seditions Practices, and Attempts for the time to come. And because the
Growth and Increase of the late Troubles and Disorders did in a very great
Measure proceed from a Multitude of Seditious Sermons, Pamphlets, and Speeches
daily Preached, Printed, and Published, with a transcendent Boldness defaming
the Person and Government of your Majesty and your Royal Father, wherein men
were too much encouraged and (above all) from a wilful mistake of the Supreme
and Lawful Authority, whilst men were forward to cry up and maintain those
Orders and Ordinances, Oaths and Covenants, to be Acts legal and warrantable,
which in themselves had not the least Color of law or Justice to support them,
of which kind of Distempers, as the present Age is not wholly freed, so
Posterity may be apt to relapse into them, if a timely Remedy be not provided.
We Therefore, etc.

Now whether this Libeller does not fall within the descriptions of this Proem
as well as many others have done of late, and whether they will not all come
within the compass of the Act in point of Punishment is not my business to
determine, I will only recommend to his and all honest men's Consideration a
piece of Solomon's Wisdom to close with all in English as he has fronted his
with Latin.

These six things does the Lord hate, yea seven are an abomination to him, a
proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood; an heart that
devises wicked immaginations, feet that be swift in running into mischief, a
false witness, that seaketh lies; and him that sows discord among Brethren.

FINIS.

