THE Great Work OF GOD In This Present Dispensation of Peace, Considered,
Opened, and Applied IN A SERMON, PREACHED At Havant in Hampshire, on Thursday
December. 2d. 1697.

Being the Day of Public Thanksgiving.

By Charles Nicholetts Minister of the Gospel there.

London, Printed by Hugh Newman, and Sold at his Shop at the Grasshopper in the
Poultry. School.

To His very much HONORED FRIEND Grimbaldus Pancforth, Esquire
Sir,
IT is my knowledge of you, and your entire Affection to the best Interest,
that emboldens me to this Presumption of inscribing your Name to the following
Discourse, drawn up in have, Preached in much pain, and now at a venture
exposed to the World. Not for any thing of worth in it, but only the
suitableness of it to the present dispensation. I confess I might well blush at
the apprehension of your Sagacious Eye, were I not secured in the sweetness of
your Temper; And that you are too great to pass censure on what is so much
beneath you, and too well inclined to the great work of God, now on the wheel,
then Critically to fasten on the weakness of any attempt to display it.

Dear Sir,

I have here a fair opportunity to let the world know, how much stand obliged
to you. What a refreshing shade you have been to me, my disconsolate Wife, and
poor Children* but I know your modesty will not bear my running any farther
this way, and therefore I shall stop. Only beseeching the God of Recompense, to
return all your undeserved kindness treble-fold into your own besome; And you
that have given more then a cup of cold Water, to me a poor unworthy Creature,
yet to me as a Prophet. Oh may you receive a Prophet's Reward. Thus committing
you, your Virtuous Lady, and your hopeful Branches to the Divine Protection of
the Holy One, in whom* I desire to be esteemed, as I am,

SIR. Your most Affectionate and Humbly devoted Servant, Charles Nicholetts.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 5. later part of the line, for Intermission read Intervention.
Page 12. (...) for Aiding read Ordering.

A Thanksgving-Sermon
PSALM XLVI, Verse 9. He makes Wars to Cease unto the End of the Earth; he
breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in Sunder; he burns the Chariot in
the Fire.


I Will sing of Mercy and of Judgment, unto thee O Lord will I sing; says the
Sweet-Singer of Israel. Here we have mention of both, and from God's Eminent
Appearing, and Wonderful Working as to both; the Church Glories in him as her
Strength and Refuge, and a very present help in Trouble. Luther was so Affected
with this Psalm, that upon any Eminent Occasion, or under any Gloomy
Dispensation, he would cry out, Come let us Sing the 46th Psalm. It seems to be
Penned upon some Remarkable Mercy vouchsafed to the Church in time of War,
whether we refer it to the Victory David got over the Philistines, as some
think; or to the Deliverance of Jerusalem from Rezin King of Syria, as others
think; I shall not enquire, much less determinate; for the matter is not much
whether we look to either of them. But, certain it is, the Psalm is a Song of
Triumph for a Great and Mighty Deliverance of the Church from her Enemies,
destroyed by the Lord's Assistance; thereby giving her Peace, that she, without
control, might Serve and Praise him according to his Word. In this Verse she
Triumphs in God's putting an end to her Troubles, by causing Wars to cease. --
Wherein you have,

First. Her Acknowledging God the Author of this so Great and Glorious a Mercy
-- He makes Wars to cease unto the ends of the Earth.

Secondly. Her declaring how, and which way he does it. -- He breaks the Bow,
be cuts the Spear in sunder, and be burns the Chariot in the fire..

For the First of these, that God is the Author of this Mercy, these Three
things offer themselves to our Consideration.

First. The Lord is pleased to Entitle Himself as Related to War, and hence the
Church speaks of him as a Warrior, Exodus 15. v. 3. Jehovah is a man of War,
Jehovah is his Name. How many Titles does the Lord assume; and this one amongst
the rest, A man of War? The Great General of all the Forces in Heaven and
Earth. And by this Name he makes his Glory manifest unto all. We Read of his
Army, and that his Camp is very great, Joel 2. v. 11. And in his Warlike Power
and Majesty lie will be glorified among the Sons of Men.

Secondly. The Lord orders and manages War as he pleases, and according to his
Will. When he bids go to War, there must be no staying at home; and when he
Commands to kill, there must be no quarter given. As soon as he had set Saul
upon the Throne, he sent him to War against a Nation that had been long and
malicious Enemies to his People; with a strict Command to carry on the War very
Vigorously, 1 Samuel 15. v. 2.3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I remember that
which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way when he came up
from Egypt. Now go and smite Amaleck, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox and
Sheep, Camel and Ass. The word Amalek in the Hebrew, denotes them to be great
Sinners, and God gave Saul Commission to make War upon them as such; but. his
Ill-management of that War, lost him his Crown and his Soul too. God called
Assyria the Rod of his Anger, the Staff of his Indignation, and he sent him
against an Hypocritical Nation, against a People of his Wrath, Isa. 10. v. 5,
6. Thus you see God orders and disposes of War, and woe unto those Warriors
that obey not the Command of this Great General.

Thirdly. The Lord puts an end to War in his own time, and when he thinks most
fit. When his Work is finished, his present Design accomplished; he then says
to the Enraged Warriors, as he said to the Angel over Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 24. v.
16. It is enough, stay your hands, and stop the torrent of your fury. Or as he
said to Peter, when he cut off Malchus his Ear, John 18. v. 11. Put up thy
sword into the Sheath -- He commands the Swords to be put up, and then they are
Padlock'd till he gives a New Commission to unsheath them. Thus, according to
the Phrase of the Text; He makes Wars to cease.

And it Notes Three things.

First. He causes an Intermission of War, by an Intermission of Peace for a
time. So the term is used, Lam. 3. v. 49. Mine eye trickleth down, and cease
not, without any intermission. But where there is an Intermission, there is a
present Cessation. We find Judah had some Intervals of Peace, upon their
seeking the Lord with their whole desire. For it is said, He gave them rest
round about, 2 Chro. 15. v. 15. And therefore how long Peace may last no body
can tell, for it is wholly at God's, will. He that permits Peace to be concluded
to day, may cause War to be Proclaimed to morrow. He does but take off the Rod
for a time, and so long a time as he pleases; he can soon lay it on again. How
many times in the days of the Judges, did God procure Peace for his People?
but, upon their Provocations, renewed the War. And hence it is the utmost folly
and madness to Triumph in the thoughts of a Settled Peace, whilst we continue in
Sin; for we may soon see a sad Change. Oh remember it is but an Intermission.

Secondly. He causes the Calamities of War to be forgotten, through the comfort
of Peace and Plenty. Thus the word is used, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 26. I will make the
remembrance of them cease from among men. To cease, is to cause a
forgetfulness. So we are to understand those words, Prove. 31. v. 7. Let him
drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more: That is, the
Sweetness of the Wine shall stifle the sense of his Affliction. Now then the
meaning of these words, He makes Wars to cease (according to this) is; he
Graciously procures Peace, and with it such a Confluence of outward Blessings,
that the Want, Scarcity, and Misery of War is forgotten and out of Mind.

Thirdly. He makes it manifest he has for the present done with War; and will
use it no farther for Reforming Work; and so it may be in Judgment as well as
Mercy there is a ceasing of it. As Sampson said to the Philistines, Judge. 15.
v. 7. -- Yet will I be avenged of you, and after that will I cease. So the
Great God may execute this or that particular act of Vengeance, and then cease.
The end of War is to awaken, to reform a sinning and a Sinful People; but if
this end be not attained, Why should the War be continued. Thus the Lord
expostulates with Israel, Isa. 1. v. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye
will revolt more and more; the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
By Head and Heart here, some understand the Body of the, Magistracy, and the
Clergy, that were so miserably out of order. Oh, may not God say, I have kept
up a War, a Bloody War; Nine years have I sent a Sword amongst you, to cut off
your Children from without, and your young Men from the Streets; but ye have
not been humbled, nor turned to me for all this. Therefore I will now cease the
War, and ye shall be stricken with it no more.

But how does God make Wars to cease? The Text tells us -- by breaking the Bow,
by cutting the Spear in sunder, and by burning the Chariot in the Fire.

First. He breaks the Bow. By which we may understand.

First. The whole Furniture and Appurtenances of War. How great and how many
soever they are; which of themselves are weak and very vain; and therefore we
find David disclaiming them as useless in an abstract sense, Psalm 44. v. 6.
For I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword save me. By Bow here is
meant Great Puissance, and Great Strength, such as is in a well appointed Army.
Q. D. All my Preparations for War, and all my Men of War, shall be no
Temptation to me to put confidence therein, or depend thereupon. Warlike
Utensills are also called Artillery, 1 Samuel 20. v. 40. Any thing that
appertains to, or is used in War, is comprehended in this word Bow.

Secondly. Bow signifies the continuance, and lengthning out of War. It Is said
of Joseph, Genesis 49. v. 24. His Bow abode in strength, and the Arms of hit hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Though Joseph's
Brethren made long War against him; yet Joseph was preserved in, kept above,
and carried comfortably through it, by the help of the mighty God of Jacob. And
we read of a long War between Rehoboam and Jeroboam which lasted all their
days, 1 Kings 14. v. 30. And the Bow is an Emblem of such a long War.

Thirdly. Bow signifies aptness and earnestness in prosecuting War; or the
keenness of Men's Spirits, and sharpness of their appetitites to killing work.
It is said of God's coming against the Wicked, Psalm. 7. v. 12. If he turn not,
he will whet his Sword; he has bent his Bow, and made it ready. This Bow is,
Framea aeternae mortis, the Javelin of Death. And in these words is painted the
Wrath and Vindictive Justice of God against the workers of Iniquity; and they
shall most certainly be destroyed thereby. And as God is thus in earnest
against wicked Men, so are Men against one another in time of War. Oh how ready
was Jehosaphat to close with Ahab in going to Battle against Ramoth-Gilead, 1
Kings 22. v. 4. -- And Jehosaphat said unto the King of Israel, I am as thou
art, my People as thy People, and my Horses as thy Horses. Q. D. I am as much
for Fighting-work as you can be, and as willing to go to it. Men's Spirits when
once inflamed, need no Grindstone to sharpen them for acts of Cruelty.

Fourthly. Bow signifies the dreadful end and design of War, which is
miserable Destruction and Devastation; each party aiming at the Ruin of the
other, and using their utmost effort to accomplish it, Psalm. 11. v. 2. For lo
the Wicked bend their Bow, they make ready their Arrow upon the String; that
they may privily Shoot at the upright in Heart. I may difference the Bow and
the Sword thus; the Bow is an Emblem of Crafriness and Slyness, the Sword of
open Enmity; but the end of both is to do what mischief car be done; and when
War is once begun, none knows how Terrible and Smarting the effects of it may
be. Proclaiming War, is as the opening of Pandora's Box sending out all manner
of pestiferous Miseries and Calamities; and that from the intent and design of
the Authors of it. And therefore Job to inhance the greatness of his Troubles,
and sadness of his State, makes use of the word War as the most genuine
comprehensive term, Chap. 10. v. 17. Thou renewest thy Witnesses against me,
and increassest thine Indignation upon me; changes and War are against me. By
changes he means alternate Sorrows; he had renewed, and changeable Trouble,
such as attend the fate of War. The design of War is doing the utmost damages,
and commiting the most Barbarous Cruelties. Hence Towns are not only taken and
sacked, but consumed in Flame, Standing Corn trod down and destroyed, yea
Innocent Women most horridly Massacred; these and a thousand other Mischeifs
are not only the accidental Effects, but the real Design of War.

Fifthly. Bow signifies the Threatenings and Denunciations of War. When men
bend their Bow, they loudly proclaim; their resolution to shoot. Thus we read
of our Lord Jesus, Rev. 6. v. 2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse: and he
that sat on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
Conquering, and to Conquer. By Bow here some understand the word in his
Ambassadors mouths, Denouncing Vengance to his Enemies, and Wrath and Judgment
to those that submit not to his will. Oh Sirs, our work and business is to tell
you, that the Lord is at hand, and that he will be veveal'd in flaming Fire,
taking Vengance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and that they shall be punished with evevlasting destruction,
from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. Thus do Men
menace one another upon their falling out. How proudly and insultingly did,
Benhadad threaten War against Ahab, 1 Kings 20. v. 10.11. And Benhadad sent
unto him, and said, the Gods do so unto me and more also, if the dust of
Samaria shall suffice for handfulls for all the People that follow me. But Ahab
answered him well in the next words: And the King of Israel answered and said,
tell him, let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast himself, as he that
puts it off. And indeed the event showed that Benhadad boasted of more then
he was able to perform; but boasting and threatening are natural products of
wageing War.

Sixthly. Bow, Signifies the Wrath and Fury that is used in War. Men engaged in
War do not only Fight, but Spit their Venom and Choler one against another,
and that in an hideous manner. Hence when the Church would express the anger of
God toward Jerusalem, she uses this word, and likens it to the Wrath and Fury
of enraged Men, Lam. 2. v. 4. He has bent his Bow like an Enemy, he stood with
his Right hand as an Adversary; and slew all that were pleasant to the Eye, in
the Tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he powered forth his fury like Fire. Q.
D. God came inflamed with Anger, and not in his Indignation toward poor
Jerrusalem; a Fire devoured before him, and it was very tempestuous round about
him. The Bow then imports the most vehement Wrath, the most invetirate hatred,
such as boiled in the Stomachs of Simeon and Levi, when they went against the
men of Shechem; which Jacob bore a Testimony against by way of Execration, Genesis
49. v. 7. Cursed be their Anger, for was Fierce; and their Wrath, for it was
Cruel: I Will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Oh how Feirce
and Fiery is the Wrath of Man; how Mad and Furious is he when he goes against
his Enemy in Bellona's Camp. How enraged and heigthned to the utmost Choler
were Caesar and Pompey in the Pharsalian Feilds. The Nieghing of the Horses,
the clashing of the Armor, the trampling on the Slain, with many other Black
and horrible Actions, were sensible Evidences of their mutual Rage. The Passion
of Hatred has as violent and rapid a Torment as that of Love: and is as
restless in its Motion, and as effectual in its Operation. Thus you see what
the Bow Signifies; I am next to show you how God breaks the Bow.

First. We told you Bow signifies all the Furniture of War. Now God breaks the
Bow by rendering this Furniture useless; he orders it so by his Providence, that
the vast Preparations for War are to no purpose; there is no more occasion for
the Stores and Magazines for the Armor and Ammunition; for now there is Peace,
and so no farther need of these things. Thus breaking is taken, Exodus 32. v.
19. And it came to pass as soon as he came nigh unto the Camp, that he saw the
Calf, and the dancing: and Moses anger waxed hot, and he cast the Tables out of
his hands, and brake them beneath the Mount. He saw the People running apace
into Idolatry, and so casting off God, that he thought there was no farther
need of the Law, and therefore he broke the Tables in which the Law was wrote.
So the breaking the Bow here is the making useless all the Provisions for
another Campain. The Prophet speaking of the glory of the last days, speaks
thus of God's breaking the Bow with respect to War, Micah 4 v. 3. And he shall
judge among many People, and rebuke strong Nations affar off, and they shall
beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation
shall not lift up a-Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more. When there is no open War, there is no occasion of Swords and Spears, they
are useless Weapons, and of no service unto those that have them, unless to
make Plow-shears and Pruning Hooks. Thus God breaks the Bow by making useless
any thing that belongs to War.

Secondly. We told you Bow signifies the continuance or lengthning out of War;
now God breaks this Bow by putting an end to it. He makes Wars to cease, and
so he breaks the Bow. When Gideon and his men brake the Pitchers, Judge. 7. v.
19. The controversy between them and the Midianites was soon ended. That
breaking was a comfortable omen of the easy conclusion of the War. God may
suffer War to continue for a time, but he will not always let it rage; and that
in Compassion to many poor Families that suffer by it, upon which consideration
Abner does pathetically expostulate with Joab about the Melancholy and Tragical
theme of War, 2 Samuel 2. v. 26. Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the
Sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the
latter end? How long shall it be then ere thou bid the People return form
following their Brethren? Oh, the Sword is very devouring, and the effects of
War are very bitter; and therefore God will not suffer such a devouring
Judgment always to continue; No, he will stay the rough Wind in the day of the
East Wind; and put a stop to that which has caused so great a Devastation. The
cries of Oppressed Families, the Groans of Wounded Creatures, and the doleful
complaints of all sorts of People, will reach the Ears of so Compassionate a
God, who retains not his Anger for ever, but in the midst of Judgment will
remember Mercy, and damm up the fountain of War, from whence has flowed so many
Streams of Misery. Thus he breaks the Bow.

Thirdly. We told you that Bow signifies aptness and earnestness in prosecuting
War; now God breaks this Bow by blunting the edge, and taking away the appetite
in men to it. The Hearts of all are in his hands, and he can turn them as
Rivers of Water. He can make the most Fierce Tiger to become meek and mild as a
Lamb. We read of the he-Goat breaking the horns of the Ram, and then the Ram
was quiet, Dan. 8. v. 7. So when God breaks the Bow; How are the boisterong
Passions of Men allayed? How calm are their Spirits, and how Serene their
Temper? The Son of Mars unknits his brow, and looks forward with a pleasing
aspect; and the rough skinned Esau then has Jacob's Voice. How exasperated and
enraged were Ahab and Benhadad one against another; and yet when the Fray was
over, there was nothing but smooth and oily words between them. Ahab begins
first enquiring, after the others Welfare -- Is he yet alive? he is my Brother,
1 Kings 20. v. 32. -- Quantum mutatus ab illo. God broake the Bow, and the
Spirits of these two great Warriors were mightily come down. If God did not
alter the Warlike Temper in great ones, there would never be any Peace. But, --
Aspera turn positis mitescent saecula bellis. When the pugnatious humor
sometimes predominant is a little abated, then Men's minds are composed, and
they so far in a Sedate frame, as to hearken to overtures or Peace; and
complement one another as Ahab and Benhadad did in the Chariot. Thus God breaks
the Bow, and the aspiring Spirit falls.

Fourthly. We told you Bow signifies the dreadful end and design of War. Now
God breaks this Bow by wholly frustrating it; and in his Wise Providence so
aiding it, that neither side shall have what they aimed at; and therefore both
will be forced to think of terms of Peace. God is said, Psalm. 105. v. 16. -- To
break the whole. Staff of Bread. That is, he dissappointed those that looked
for plenty of Bread. He crushed the rod of Bread, so the Hebrew. Bread that was
promisingly coming as the Twig is budding forth in the forward Spring, and
people were flushed with hopes of reaping a Joyful Harvest. But God blasted it,
and so disappointed their expectation. -- When Men engage in War, oh how bigg
with hopes are they of Succeeding and Prevailing, and having their end
accomplished in the Destruction of their Adversaries. But the wise God cuts
them short of what they vainly thought to attain; and the reason is from God's
gracious mixing the Cup of Anger with some drops of Mercy; hence he tells his
People he will correct them in measure, and in Mercy, and will not leave them
altogether unpunished. Jer. 30. v. 11. The Effects of War are bad enough, but
if some Men had their wills they would be much worse, and far more
intolerable; and because they cannot have their Wills, they grow weary of War,
and incline to Peace. Thus God breaks the Bow.

Fifthly. We told you Bow signifies threatenings and denunciations of War. Now
God breaks, his Bow, by stopping the mouths of these threatners and denouncers;
so that they who were full of, and abounded with menacing Language, foaming out
direful threatenings, and hectoring bravado's are now forced to be as mute as a
Fish; so that that of the Poet may be applied to them -- Fortis ubi est Ajax,
ubi sunt ingentia magni -- verba viri. -- And this because God has smitten them
on the Cheek-bone, he has broaken out their vapouring Teeth. The Prophet speaks
of cutting the Staff, that he might break the Brotherhood between Judah and
Israel, Zach. 11. v. 14. But God breaks the Bow, that there might be a Union
between Nations that were at Variance. He stops their mouths, that their hands
might be quiet; he makes them forbear Threatening, that they might cease
Fighting, and begin to live in Peace. When God thus breaks the Bow, that
promise is in tanto fulfilled, Isa. 11. v. 6. The Wolf also shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid: and the Calf, and the
young. Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them.
Contrary Natures shall agree together, when the God of Nature breaks the Bow of
Strife between them.

Sixthly. We told you Bow signifies the Wrath and Fury that is used in War. Now
God breaks this Bow by curbing and depressing the Wrath that was so predominant
in Warriors; by sweetning their Natures, and making them pliable and willing to
put up former resentments, or by taking away and cutting off those that were
indomitable, and the chiefest incendiaries. Thus he brake the Bow for Israel,
Psalm. 74. v. 13.14. Thou did divide the Sea by thy Strength: thou brakest the
heads of the Dragons in the Waters. Thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in
pieces, and gave him to be meat to the People inhabiting the Wilderness. That
is, he drowned the Egyptians in the Arabic Sea, and thereby prevented a War
that Pharaoh intended to make upon his People. Oh, with what fury did proud
Pharaoh pursue them, and gloried that he should overtake them, and take his
revenge on them; and then divide the Spoil among his followers. But God hoof'd
his Horses, overthrew his Chariots, and destroyed his whole Host in the mighty
Waters; and so broke all the measures he had taken; and thereby procured rest
and quietness to his poor disconsolate People; and so made good what his word
tells us, Psalm. 76. v. 10. Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee: the
remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain. Pharoah's designing Wrath praised God;
in that it gave him an oppertunity of manifesting his Power and Glory: but the
finishing part, oh, that he restrained. -- And so I pass from the breaking the
Bow, to the cutting of the Spear in sunder.

First. The Spear signifies a formidable weapon of War; such as strikes
Terror. Hence we read the Philistines were afraid of the Hebrews having Spears,
1 Samuel 13. v. 19. They thought if they had no Spears they might be able to deal
with them; and therefore they did what they could to keep them from having any;
that they might not be encouraged to enter into a War. There is a Terror in
Carnal Weapons, as well as in Spiritualls, 2 Cor. 10. v. 4. And both are made
mighty through the concurrence of a Divine Blessing to the doing great things.
It Is the Weapons that are astonishing, and cause of consternation, when the
Enemy draws near. We are not afraid of an Arm of Flesh, but it is the Sword of
Steel that strikes the Terror. The sharpness of the Spear creates a dread,
when brandished in the hands of an implacable adversary. Hence the Poet brings
in Ajax as jeering Ulysses, for his Cowardice in fearing the Trojans Weapons,
and flying to him for shelter -- Sub clypeoque late et meeum contend Sub illo.
-- And the Dumb Child that never spoke before, when he saw a drawn Sword at his
Fathers breast, broke the chains of silence, and in spite of his natural
Infirmity cried out, Oh, do not kill my Father. So formidable is a weapon of
War.

Secondly. The Spear signifies a restrained Weapon, peculiar to some. We read
that none among the People had a Spear but Saul and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 13. v. 22.
All are not in love with War; no truly, the generality of people had rather
live in Peace; and as all are not in love with it, so all are not fit for it.
Most Men are fitter for their Shops, and about their Employments, then to be in
the Field following the Camp -- Equovis lingo non fit merourius -- It Is only
some particular masculine Spirits, that are martially disposed, and have a
peculiar genius adapted for it. Themistocles going to War against the
Barbarians, seeing two Cocks fighting most keenly, took occasion from thence to
encourage his Soldiers, and animate them to War. Hi neque pro patria, neque
pro paenatibus, neque pro Sepulchris majorum, neque pro liberate aut filliis
pugnant, Sed tantum ne vincantur neuter caedit alteri. these poor Creatures
neither strive for their Country, nor for their Gods, nor for their Fathers
Sepulchers, nor for their Liberty, or their Children, but they strive only for
Victory. All Fowls are not Cocks of the Game; nor all Men spirited to march
under displayed Colors; it is great Spirits only that affect this kind of work.
We find in the Parable of Solomon's Worthies, that their Spirits were dreined
from worldly Affections, and so quickened to the greatest and most generous
employment, Cant. 3. v. 7.8. Behold, his Bed, which is Solomon's, Threescore
Valiant Men are about it, of the Valiant of Israel. They all hold Swords, being
expert in War: every man has his Sword upon his Thigh, because of fear in the
night. This Combat was Spiritual not Carnal; and these combatants were sacred
not military. By valiant Men therefore here are meant Ministers, zealous for
God, and courageous in their Ministerial Work; and by their Sword uyon their
Thigh, is meant their eminent Skill in word and Doctrine; and their being always
upon the watch, to countermine the designs of evil ones who lie in wait to
deceive. Now as all men are not Spirited to be Ministers; no, the most like
Gallio care for none of these things; they trouble not their selves about Soul
concerns. So all men are not fit to be Soldiers; the most Busy not their
minds with public affairs; they are not ambitious of honor, nor curiously
diving into the intreagues of States and Kingdoms. It is but some certain men,
skrewed above the strain of vulgar inclination, who care to draw a Sword in the
quarrel of uneasy Princes. The Spear therefore notes -- The peculiar Man for
War.

Thirdly. The Spear signifies a Weapon kept for, and destined to some eminent
use. God has extraordinary work to be done in the World, and he has
extraordinary Instruments for it; such as Swords and Spears. And therefore we
find them kept very charily, yea sometimes laid up in the holy Temple. As when
Athaliah usurped the Crown after Ahaziah's death, and young Joash kept from his
Right, by her impious Tyranny; when the time came that he was to be restored,
then there was use of Spears; but where were they to be had, why we find a
supply from a sacred repository, 2 Kings 11. v. 10. And to the Captains over
hundreds, did the Priest give King David's Spears and Sheilds, that were in the
Temple of the Lord. They were there kept against such a time. As the Earth
shall help the Woman, so those instruments which the worst of men use for their
Lusts, shall help the cause of God, and he will be glorified in the use of
them; and therefore the Temple it self (though a consecrated place) was not too
good to hold them. Every thing in Nature is of some use, and the God of Nature
knows how to get himself glory in the use of what is most commonly employed to
the greatest hurt and Destruction. Hence we find the Sword is called the Sword
of the Lord, as well as of Gide n, Judge. 7. v. 20. When God has a work for the
Sword, he will provide a Sword for that work. When he is angry with a People
that departs from him, he threatens to bring a Sword upon them, that shall
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. And when he has no more work to do, he will
then cause the Sword to be sheathed again. There is a consecrated as well as a
common Spear. And though it is generally in the hands of the worst of Men, yet
God will accomplish his end by it. Hence as we are not to be too much frightened
by the Spear, so we are not to set too light by it; but when ever it is drawn
to remember God's hand is in it, and that he designs some notable work by it.
Hear the language of God in his word -- If I whet my glittering Sword, and my
hand take hold on Judgment, I will render vengance to my enemies, and will
reward them that hate me. Thus he keeps the Spear till he has occasion for it.

Fourthly. The Spear signifies a very sharp weapon of War; fit for piercing and
goring, and every War answering the end of the Warrior. Hence David speaks
metaphorically of his implacable Enemies, Psalm. 57. v. 4. My Soul is among
Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the Sons of men,
whose teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword. By Teeth and
Tongue here, he means the Slanders and pestilent Accusations of malicious
Backbiters, which he likens to sharp Spears and Swords; for as they Stab and
kill the Body, so do these the Name and Reputation of honest Men. We read of
sharp Arrows -- Thine Arrows are sharp in the Heart of the Kings Enemies;
whereby the People fall under thee. And of a sharp Rasor -- Thy Tongue devises
mischiefs: like a sharp Rasor, working deceitfully. And of a sharp threshing
Instrument; thus God speaks to Ifrael -- Behold, I will make thee a new sharp
threshing Instrument having teeth: thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat
them small, and shall make the Hills as Chaff. And so here, of the sharp Spear,
which does so much mischief in War. Oh how dismal are the effects of furious
Battle, not only multitudes of men destroyed, but Towns and Cities rased even
to the Ground. We find the Church sadly complaining of the lamentable havoc
War had made, Isa. 64. v. 11 Our holy and our beautiful house, where our
Fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire: and all our pleasant things are
laid wast. The Spear cuts deep, and War consumes at a strange rate. Hear the
Prophet, how mournfully and pathetically he expresses the sad case of poor
Jerusalem, after she had felt the sharpness of the Babylonian Spears -- How
does the City sit solitary, that was full of People? How is she become as a
Widow? She that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces,
how is she become tributary? She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are
on her Cheeks: among all her Lovers she has none to comfort her, all her
friends have dealt treachously with her, they are become her enemies. Judah is
gone into Captivity, because of affliction, and because of great Servitude: She
dwells among the Heathen, she finds no rest: all her Persecutors overtook
her between the Straits. And have not both Nations enough to complain of the
desolating effects of the sharp Spear. How many Merchants are drooping for lost
goods, how many Women are mourning for dead Husbands, how many Mothers are
crying for Slaughtered Children, and how many People are bewailing desolate
places.

Fifthly. The Spear signifies a Weapon for Guard and Defense; or such a Weapon
with which a man may not only wound his Enemy, but defend himself. When Saul
lay sleeping in his Trench, his Spear was stuck in the ground at his Boulster,
1 Samuel 26. v. 7. For his defense in case of an alarm. Defensive, is as good and
as needful a property in a Weapon as Offensive. Hence promises of defense are
equivolent to those of positive mercies. As when God says -- I will defend this
City to save it, for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake. Is all one as
if he had said; I will bestow eminent and special favors upon this City. Again
-- In that day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that
is feeble among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of David
shall be as God, and the Angel of the Lord before them. Mark it, The great and
glorious promise to the feeble ones, that they shall be as David, that is, have
a large portion of the sure Mercies of David; and that the Angel of the Lord
should be before them, ministering from the Lord abundantly to them; is all
comprehended is this, that God will Defend them. And so he tells Abraham that
he should not fear, for he would be his Shield, to defend him from all ill; and
in being so he would be also his exceeding great reward. When David was going
against Goliath, Saul took great care of his preservation; and therefore it is
said, 1 Samuel 17. v. 38. And Saul armed David with his Armor, and he put an
Helmet of brass upon his head, also he armed him with a coat of Mail. That he
might not be wounded by the Philistines weapon; though at that time, and upon
that occasion David had no need of it; for God designed to give him the Victory
before he came within reach of the Enemy; and it is more then probable David was
not ignorant of it, and that God had revealed it to him, which made him so
willing to put off the Armor, and refuse any other Weapons but the Sling, and a
bag of Stones. But in ordinary cases, defensive weapons are necessary. Skill to
defend is as profitable, and every way advantageous, as dexterity in offending.
For he that looks not well to himself, will be very little (or at least but a
very little) capable to hurt his Enemy. Knowing how to guard, turns to as good
an account, as apprehending when to strike. And hence that Soldier does his
King and Country as much service in the day of battle, in preserving his own
Life, as in taking away the Life of his Adversary. As therefore there is a
double use of the Spear, one of Offense, and the other of Defense; so there
should be a double skill in the management of it. He is an expert and valiant
Warrior, that can say (under God) his Spear saved his Life. Thus you see what
the Spear is; I must now show you how God cuts this Spear, in making Wars to
cease.

First. We told you the Spear signifies a formidable weapon of War. Now God
cuts this Spear, by making such a change as the Spear is no longer feared.
Hence to cut, or shut up, are used as terms Synonimous, Job 11. v. 10. The
Spear is now shut up, and there is no body afraid of it. Swords are now
ornamental by Gentlemen's Sides, and not terrible in Warriors hands. The Spear
is now no more affrightning then the glittring of any other metal. And what a
mercy it is to be freed from tear, both as to our selves, our Friends and
Relations. What a joyful frame was David in when he could say -- I sough the
Lord and he heard me, and delivered vie from all my fears. It Is a great mercy
to be delivered, not only from evil, but from the fear of evil. This mercy is
the effect of Peace, and God has promi'd it to his people. -- And I will give
peace unto the Land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid. You
shall meet those that were once your Enemies, and though they have Spears in
their hands, you shall not be afraid of them. Fear shall be quite banished fron
your minds, and lodge no more in your breasts. And this is solemnly born
wittness to by the Lord* as what he will do for his People in the latter days.
-- But they shall sit every one under his Vine, and under his Fig tree, and
none shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.
Oh what a Mercy it is to live free from the fear of the Sword. When there was a
cessation of Aams between the house of David and the house of Saul; Abner was
not afraid of Joab, but came back at the call of the messengers to him, and
went aside to speak with him, without any suspicion of harm; though Joab most
basely and treacherously killed him, 2 Samuel 3 v. 27. Fear disquiets the mind,
disturbs the Spirit, and keeps us continually in a state of bondage. Oh what a
comfort (to be prized and thankfully received) that the Spear of fear is now
cut, and all people may be at ease in their Habitations. Now the Merchants may
send their Ships abroad, without racking and tormenting thoughts of the
Pirates, now people may go voyages without fear of being made Prisoners in
another Land, and now all men may be out of pain about the dubious success of
War. In a word, that which crowns this great Mercy and makes it valuable
indeed; now our endeared Sovereign may stay at home among his loving Subjects
without exposing (as he has too often done) his Royal Person to the danger of
the Enemies efforts. Oh what English Man's heart could forbear bleeding? What
English man's Soul could forbear trembling, to think what Dangers our King has
been in, what Hazards he has gone through among the thundering Cannon? But now
blessed be God the danger is over, the Spear is cut, and our Sovereign is
safely returned to his own house.

Secondly. We told you, the Spear signifies a restrained weapon, fit only for
some. Now God cuts this Spear, by turning the minds of those who took so much
pleasure in it, and making them weary of it. We read of some that are cut off
from the Gospel, Zach. 11. v. 16. That is, they have no love or affection to
the good things of it; or as the Apostle phrases it, they are alienated from
the life of God. If some Men (especially great ones) did always retain the
pleasure they take in the Field, we should never have any peace in our
Dwellings. But God (when his time is) so changes their hearts, and alters their
dispositions, that they are as much against War, as ever they were for it, and
as willing to have Peace, and be at quiet as the rest of Mankind. How enraged
was Esau once against Jacob, and how dreadfully did he threaten him? and yet
when it was in his power to do him harm (being at the head of a great Company)
God changed his heart, and quite turned his Mind, so that he met his Brother
very peaceably. If God had not here cut the Spear, in all probabity Jacob, with
his whole Family, had been destroyed. And before this, Jacob experienced the
comfort of God's cutting the Spear, with respect to Laban, who pursued him with
many Followers; and if God had not stepped in without doubt had done him a
Mischief. This cutting the Spear shows both God's Mercy, and God's Majesty; his
Mercy in thereby procuring Peace and Comfort to his people, that they might
live at rest in their habitations. His Majesty, in giving a check to the proud
and ambitious spirits of Men, and making them see their vanity and madness, in
sacrificing Kingdoms to their Lusts. God has special regard to that Prayer of
the Church, and often answers it, Psalm. 68. v. 30. Rebuke the company of
Spear-men, the multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the People, till
every one submit himself with pieces of Silver: Scatter thou the People that
deli^^^ in War The company of (...) be great very great, in respect of quality
as well as number; but they are not so great, but God can and will rebuke them.
By Bulls and Calves, are meant the Potentates of this World; who are all at
God's beck, and he can deal with them as he pleases; and though for a time they
may delight in War, God will give them enough of it; that notwithstanding their
Honors, their Places of Profit, and their living at so high a rate, they shall
be as sick of War, as those that have been Taxed, Oppressed, and Groaned under
the Burden of it. And this is an unspeakable comfort to the People of God, that
both Peace and War are in his hands, and at his dispose. When the sins of a
Nation provoke him, he can bring War (with all the Calamities of it) upon them;
and when his Will is accomplished, he can restore Peace again unto them; and
that by cutting the Spear.

Thirdly. We told you Spear signifies a Weapon destined to, and kept for some
eminent use; now God cuts this Spear by inverting the use of it to a contrary
thing. The Spear is an Instrument of War, but God can change its property, and
make it serviceable in the time of Peace. Thu^ God speaks of cutting off the
Wine from the Drunkards Mouths, Joel 1. v. 5. And give it to those that would
make a better use of it; refresh their Spirits without Intoxicating their
Brains. So in this case; he will put Spears into the hands of such, as will
employ them in a better way, then wounding and slaying their Fellow Creatures,
even to a Cultivating and Manuring the Earth. These are the very words of the
Promise, Isa. 2. v. 4. And he shall Judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke
many People: and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their
Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more. Oh what a great change is this, when
Spears instead of being run into the sides of Men, shall be thrust into the
Furrows of the Earth; instead of taking away life, shall become remote
Instruments of prolonging it. This is now in a great-part fulfilled, but shall
be most perfectly Accomplished in the day of the final Cessation of War. Thus
God has cut the Spear; he has so brought it about by his Providence, that
Spears are now good for nothing, but to be Hammered out into more pleasing
Tools.

Fourthly. We told you Spear signifies a very sharp Weapon of War. Now God cuts
this Spear, by blasting the glory of it, and making it of little esteem; so
that the Warrior sets light by it; as Hezekiah did by the Brazen Serpent, when
he called it, Nebustan, a piece of Brass. Thus Christ was humbled, in that he
was said to be cut out of the Mountains, Dan. 2. v. 45. That is, Born of the
Virgin Mary; though it is added, without hands; to show that 'twas effected by
the Overshaddowing of the Holy Ghost, without the Concurrence of Man. Oh how
will God humble the high Spirits of those Military Champions, who gloried in
nothing more (and perhaps had nothing else to glory in) then the dextrous using
the Spear; so that they now see, and are convinced, it is more praiseworthy to
have a hand in Peace, then all the Exploits they ever did in War. As our
Savior has said, Matthew. 5. v. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall
be called the children of God. Those on Prancing Steeds with Javelins in their
hands, breathing forth nothing but War and Desolation, may be called the Sons
of Mars, but the procurers of Peace are termed the Children of God. Thus God
cuts the Spear, by making it little in the eye of the Manager.

Fifthly. We told you, Spear signifies a Weapon for Guard and Defense. Now God
cuts this Spear, by making way (through his gracious Providence) for Men to
dwell in safety, without need of defense; so that they shall have no occasion
to gird their Swords on their Thighs, or have any other Weapons to defend them
from the assault of their Enemies, Thus God has promised for the safety of his
People, Psalm. 101. v. 5. Whosoever privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut
off: him that has an high look, and a proud heart will I not suffer. High
look, by a Metalepsis, signifies Men of a Proud Imperious Spirit, and those God
will cut off; that is, bring down; for the quiet and safety of his People; so
that his People shall have no cause to fear them. It Is said, Jerusalem shall be
Inhabited without Walls; that is, there shall be no need of Walls to defend
them from any Enemies coming against them; for God will be a Wall of Fire round
about them, and the glory in the midst of them. We find his word very full as
to this, Isa. 26. v. 1. In that day shall this Song be Sung in the Land of
Judah, We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and
Bulwarks. That City is strong enough indeed, and needs no other Defense, when
the Salvation of God encompasses it about; and therefore there is great cause
of Singing, where no Defensive Weapons are wanting, but people under the Divine
Protection may live securely without them. And that City may well be called a
strong City, or the City of Strength, which God secures from Enemies, and is
himself a safety to it. And so I pass from cutting the Spear in Sunder, to the
Burning of the Chariot in the Fire.

First. Chariot signifies that which makes War dubious and uncertain; or the
strength of both sides; so that it is hard to judge which shall have the better;
and therefore the War like to hang on an even poise a great while. So we are to
understand that of David, Psalm. 20. v. 7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in
Horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. That is, some have
such great strength that they depend upon it, and fear not to be overthrown;
though it is very weak and sinful to trust in any arm of Flesh, how strong
soever. Christians have a better foundation for their trust, even the Name and
Power of God. An Horse is a vain thing to confide in, in the day of Battle; but
where there are many Horses and Chariots people are too apt to confide in them;
which makes the Issue of War many times uncertain. This made the Spies afraid
of the success of invading Canaan, Numb. 13. v. 38. Nevertheless, the people be
strong that dwell in the Land, and the Cities are walled, and very great: and
moreover, we saw the Children of Anak there. Q. D.; the Land indeed is a good
Land, and very fruitful and pleasant, but we are like to have a long War, if we
attempt to win it by the Sword; for the people are Strong and Valiant, and have
every thing fit for War; and therefore 'twill not be an easy thing to subdue
them. Thus Chariots make War doubtful.

Secondly. Chariot signifies the ground of men's Stoutness and hardiness, and
unwillingness to yield; and also of their likelihood in Humane probability to
be Successful and Victorious. And this is the reason the Holy Ghost gives, why
the Enemies for the present could not be overcome. Judge. 1. v. 19. And the Lord
was with Judah, and he drove out the Inhabitants of the Mountain, but could not
drive out the Inhabitants of the Valley, because they had Chariots of Iron.
That was it which the Inhabitants of the Valley relied on; they thought
themselves safe and secure from any assault because they had Chariots of Iron.
This made proud Benhadad so confident of success, that when he heard of the
young Men's coming out of Samaria, he vauntingly cried out, 1 Kings. 20. v. 18
-- Whether they be come out for Peace, take them alive; or whether they be come
out for War, take them alive. Q. D; let them be what they will I do not fear
them, or in the least doubt prevailing over them; for I have Men enough, Horses
enough, and Chariots enough, to deal with a far stronger company; but the event
showed the rediculousness of his confident boasting. Men are willing and
exceeding fond to Found their vain hopes upon the least Twigg of
Creature-power, and more especially upon so appearing and promising a Strength
as the multitude of Chariots; and they are apt fondly to think they cannot be
conquered, when to a Carnal eye the strength of their defensive grandeur seems
so great; and this makes them Stout and vapouring, and not ready to hearken to
terms of accommodation.

Thirdly. Chariot signifies the Renown and Glory of Warriors; and so is not
only the ground of their Security, but of their Pride and Ambition. Hence it is
said of Elam (a Country in Persia) he bare the Quiver, with Chariots of Men and
Horsemen, and Kir uncovered the Shield, and the number of Chariots was his
glory. But hear what God says, Isa. 22. v. 18. He will surely violently turn
and toss thee, like a Ball into a large Country: there shall thou die, and
there the Chariots of thy glory* shall be the shame of thy Lords house. There
is a Syllepsis in the words; for by dying is meant the consummation of his
glory, in the consumption of his Chariots; so that Chariots are the glory of an
Army. Thus Moses Speaks of Gods spoiling the glory of Egypt by one stroke,
Exodus 15. v. 4. Pharoahs Chariots and his Host has he cast into the Sea: his
chosen Captains also are drowned in the Red Sea. The Chariots of Pharaoh were
Pharoahs glory, and here he and all his glory, was overwhelmed in the Waters.
The Angels, though Seraphick beings, that so eminently display the glory of
God, are called Chariots -- The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even
thousand of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, the holy place. And
Elisha called Elijah -- The Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof.
Because he was the glory of Israel. I now come to the burning of the Chariot.

First. We told you Chariot signifies the strength on both sides, which makes
War dubious and uncertain. Now God burns this Chariot by enlightening men into
the expediency of Peace, and convincing them that Peace (if it may be
honorably had) is far more eligible then War. Thus God commanded the pure
Oil-Olive beaten, to be brought for the light, to cause the Lamps to burn
always, Exodus, 27. v. 20. These Lamps were to give light in the Tabernacle of
the Congregation. Oh, when God by his Wisdom enlightens men's understandings
that before were given to Martial exploits, and feats of Arms; then they have
lower thoughts of War, and higher thoughts of Peace; then corrupt Sense gives
place, and Reason sways in them. Hence the Welfare and Prosperity of a Place,
is the result of true enlightening, Isa. 62. v. 1. For Zions sake will I not
hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that
burns. The Prophet could not rest, till men were enlightened as by the bright
light of a Lamp, to see the Welfare and Peace of Jerusalem; and that is by the
ceasing from all Wars, and putting an end to all broyls (though I know the
words will admit of a more Spiritual meaning.) Oh when Men come to see this to
be the best and most comfortable thing; they will then seek Peace and pursue
it; and will not be easily irritated and provoked to blow up the coals of
Contention. Thus the great God burns the Chariot, by making even Martial Men
see the excellency of Peace.

Secondly. We told you Chariot signifies the ground of men's stoutness and
hardiness, and obstinate presisting in War. Now God burns this Chariot by
convincing Men thoroughly of the vanity of their confidence in an Arm of Flesh,
or in any Humane Power. When David and his Men came to Baal-perazim, they burnt
the Images the people had left there, 2. Sam. 5. v. 21. This they did,
detesting them, and to convince the Heathens of their folly in putting trust in
them, or paying any respect to them. So God will convince Men of their extreme
madness in depending on any created strength, how firm and secure soever it may
be. And then they will do what the word says shall be done, Isa. 2. v. 20. In
that day a man shall cast his Idols of Silver, and his Idols of Gold, which
they made each one for himself to Worship, to the Moles, and to the Bats. Oh
how many men Idolize their Strength and their Power, but when God enlightens
them they shall throw this Idol aside; or according to the Anadiplosis in the
Text, with vehemence and earnestness cast it away; and this they will do in
revenge of their former-folly, in being so much bewitched by it. Oh, what cause
have we to bless God for any of this enlightening this day, that he has
enlightened so many Nations and Provinces, to see the vanity of depending on
Arms and Armies though never so great and powerful; which if they had still put
confidence in; we had been farther plung,d into the miseries of War. Thus God
burns the Chariot.

Thirdly. We told you Chariot signifies the Renown and Glory of Warriors. Now
God burns this Chariot by making Men see a contemptibleness in what was once
their Glory, and causing them to look down upon what they once so admired, and
were so much taken with, Thus we find the Prophet breaking into Lamentation,
for the sad condition he foresaw Palestina would be in, Jer. 9. v. 10. For the
Mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the Inhabitants of the
Wilderness a Lamentation, because they are burnt up, so that none can pass
through them, neither can men hear the voice of the Cattle, both the Fowl of
the Heavens and the Beast are fled, they are all gone. That is, the Land should
be stripped bare and naked of Cattle, and Pasture which was once its Glory; and
then it should be contemptible in the eyes of all. So when men come once to see
their greatest glory to be in Peace, not in War; as it is said of Melchezideck
he was King of Salem, that is, King of Peace, Heb. 7. v. 2. And so an eminent
Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace. I say when Men come to see
this, they will then have very low thoughts of what was once their Pride and
Glory. The Nieghing of the Horses, the clashing of the Armor, the rattling
peals of the Drum, and the delightful sound of the Trumpets will then be
disrelished and disregarded by them, in comparison of the much better and more
charming sound of Peace, Peace in every corner of the Land; and of the true
lasting Honor, every one shall be crowned with who had a hand in procuring it.
Thus you see how God burns the Chariot in the Fire. But it is time to make some
Application of these things.

First. Then stand off Sinners. -- You have nothing to do with this Work, nor
no part or portion in the comfort of it. The breaking the Bow, the cutting the
Spear in sunder, and the burning the Chariot in the fire, will rebound nothing
to your advantage. None of the Enemies of God (as such as live in Sin are)
shall fare the better for any of these things. And therefore I may say to you,
as Jehu said to the Messenger that Joram sent to enquire about Peace -- What
have thou to do with Peace? 2 Kings 9. v. 18. Thou Swearer, Drunkard,
Sabboth-breaker, Ah, what have thou to do with Peace? 'Twill be small comfort
for thee, that there is Peace on Earth, as long as the God of Heaven is
denouncing War against thee -- God is angry with the Wicked every day. Oh hear
that and tremble; And upon the Wicked he will rain Snares, Fire, Brimstone, and
an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion (and that for ever) of their
Cup. Hear how plainly, how positively the Prophet declares, as from the Lord of
Hosts, Isa. 57. v. 21. There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked Mark that
Chapter; it begins with Peace, and ends with no Peace. Of the good Man it is
said -- He shall enter into Peace: they fall rest in their Beds, each one
walking in his uprightness. But here in the close he avers -- there is no Peace
to the Wicked. The great God (notwithstanding outward Peace) will have ways
enough to deal with, and bring Judgments upon them; and therefore they have
small cause to rejoice at this Peace.

Secondly. Oh then it is Saints only that have cause to rejoice at this
dispensation of peace, it is they and only they shall have the good of it. It Is
for their sakes, that God makes Wars to cease, that he breaks the Bow, cuts the
Spear in sunder, and burns the Chariot in the Fire. Indeed Saints have cause to
Rejoice at any thing, at every thing; for all things shall work together for
good to them that Love God. It Is said, Psalm. 97. v. 8. Zion heard and was glad,
and the Daughters of judah rejoiced; because of thy Judgments, O Lord. Any
news, any tidings is matter of Joy to the Children of Zion, for they are sure
to reap Benefit and Comfort from all God's Dispensations, whether of Mercy or
Judgment. Hence they are meditating day and night on the Works of God, and
continually enquiring about them. So we are told, Psalm. 111. v. 2, 3, 4. The
Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
His work is honorable and glorious: and his Righteousness endures for ever.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and full
of Compassion. When he makes War, that is a glorious work to the Saints, for
they are expecting the Issue of it; and when he makes Peace that is a gracious
work to the Saints, for they are sure to reap Comfort by it; and in War and
Peace, he will make his Works to be remembered by the Saints, for in both he is
full of Compassion to them. Oh therefore they have ground to rejoice, because
their Father is in all things at work for them, and they may conclude that from
his love to them he has turned about the face of affairs, putting an end to a
long bloody and terrible War, and made the Sun of Peace to shine forth with
refreshing rays in the Horizon of Europe.

Thirdly. Then we should cast back our eyes upon the effects of this War, and
see what lamentable havoc has been made, in the one and the other Nation. How
many goodly Towns have been laid in Ashes? How many stately Ships of War have
been destroyed? How many Thousand Lives have been lost? And how many poor
Families have been ruined and undone? For the more we consider this, the more
we shall be affected with the Mercy of Peace. And this we are called to do in
the words before the Text, Psalm. 46. v. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord,
that desolations he has made in the earth. And when we dwell awhile, on the
Melancholy thought of the sad Desolations, that have been every where made by
the raging War; Oh how comfortable and refreshing will this News be to us --
That he has now made Wars to cease, to the end of our Land, that he has
broken the Bow, that he has cut the Spear in sunder, and that he has burned
the Chariot in the Fire. How Mournful was the Churches Complaint of the effect
of the Babylonian War, Lam. 2. v. 2. The Lord has swallowed up all the
habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied: he has thrown down in his wrath the
strong holds of the Daughter of Judah: he has brought them down to the ground:
he has polluted the Kingdom, and the Princes thereof. Such, Oh such have been
the cries in several places of late years. Oh therefore let us look back and
(...) in* And how doleful were the resounding Eccho's of want and misery; and
then we shall the more prize the present dispensation of Peace.

Fourthly. Oh then we should be looking for, and expecting of another War;
wherein the work will be perfectly done, and the great controversy fully
determined between Zion and Babylon. Our Savior tells us toward the latter
days, there will be Wars, and rumors of Wars. And indeed all the Wars among
Men are but rumors of Wars, in comparison of that great War, that shall be
waged against Antechrist; which the Saints only shall have the sole Management
of. And Oh what a War will that be! Alas, the Men of the World are but
Bunglers, and Boglers at the Art of War; like Mastiff Dogs, fight till they are
weary, and then leave off; but when the Saints come to take up the Sword,
they will make a clear riddance, and carry all before them. This Nation have had a
Taste, what Work the Saints can make when they are called forth by the Trumpet
of the Archangel, and Spirited by the Lord of Hosts for Fighting-Work. And it
will most certainly come to that Exodus 17. v. 15, 16. And Moses built an Altar,
and called the name of it, Jehovahnissi. For he said, because the Lord has
sworn that the Lord will have War with Amaleck from generation to generation.
He will publicly declare War, and set his Saints in Battle Array against all
that take part with Babylon when the time comes. Hear what the Prophet says,
Jer. 51. v. 10, 11. -- The Lord has brought forth our righteousness: come and
let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God. Make bright the Arrows:
gather the shields: the Lord has raised up the Spirit of the Kings of the
Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the
vengance of the Lord, the vengance of his Temple. And as Litteral Babylon was
destroyed by the Sword, so must Mystical Babylon; and verily the day of her
destruction is drawing near. Though God does now break the Bow, cut the Spear,
and burn the Chariots of Men; yet I must tell you, there is a Bow bending, that
cannot be broken; there is a Spear drawing, that will not be cut asunder, and
there is a Chariot preparing, that shall not be burnt with fire. Oh mark I
beseech you.

First. A Bow.

1. God's will and purpose shall be accomplished, and what he has determined
concerning Babylon, shall surely be brought to pass. -- He has set his Bow in
the Clouds. Genesis 9. v. 13. Importing his purpose, that Seed-time, and
Harvest-time, Summer and Winter should not cease while the World endures; As he
Covenanted with Noah; and as a Token of the unalterableness of this purpose --
He has set his Bow in the Clouds. So unalteterable is his decree against
Babylon, Jer. 51. v. 29. And the Land shall tremble and sorrow: for every
purpose, of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon, to make the Land of
Babylon, a desolation without an Inhabitant. And therefore there is no
preserving Babylon, or warding off the Blow from her, let all the Sons of Men
do what they can. Tho (...) of Hosts concerning her, that the Day of her
Calamity shall hasten, and she shall come down from the height of her glory,
and be sunk as a Millstone in the Sea; and all that have taken part with her, or
have partaken of her sins, shall receive of her Plagues, and be hurled into the
same pit of Misery.

II. God's Word that he has spoken, must and shall be performed; and this is
the Bow that cannot be broken, Hab. 3. v. 9. Thy Bow was made quite naked,
according to the Oaths of the Tribes, even thy word, Selah. Thou did cleave
the Earth with Rivers. That is, the word which thou speak concerning thy
People was made very plain; and every word about his People, and relating to
the Kingdom of his Son, Isa. 45. v. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is
gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every
knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. When he has performed his purpose
against Babylon, he will make the Nations Bow unto his Son -- He shall have
dominion also from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the Earth.
They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him: and his enemies shall
lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents: The
Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts. Yea, all Kings shall fall down
before him: all Nations shall serve him. For this is the word of the great God
that changes not -- I will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he comes whose
right it is, and I will give it him. And because of this word, which is gone
out of God's Mouth; we find the Holy Ghost expostulating with the Great Ones of
the World, as a Pack of Fools, in thinking to hinder the performance of it --
Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the
earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord,
and against his Anointed, saying. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast
away their cords from us. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh: the Lord
shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them ln his wrath, and
vex them in his sore displeasure. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of
Zion. Oh there is no breaking of this Bow, there is no hindering the
accomplishing this word.

III. God's People which he has Spirited to do his Work, they shall prevail
and be successful in it; They are called a Bow, Zech. 9. v. 13. When I have
bent Judah for me, filled the Bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy Sons, O Zion,
against thy Sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a Mighty Man. He will
bend Judah as a Bow, and join Ephraim with him; that is, he will unite his
Saints together, and Spirit them to fly in the Faces of their Enemies, with
this Triumph flowing from their Mouths -- Faith and Revenge. And this Motto
Engraven on their Breasts -- Holiness to the Lord. Oh then will they be made as
the Sword of a Mighty Man, and none shall be able to stand before them. And
then will that Promise in toto (as it has many times already in tanto) be
fulfilled, Lev. 26. v. 7, 8. And ye shall chase, your Enemies, and shall fall
before you by the Sword. And five of you shall (...) your enemies shall fall
before you by the Sword. Oh Sirs, the day is coming, and it is approaching
apace, when the Enemies of God and of his Christ, shall be driven by the Saints
as the Dust before the Wind. And then the Saints Mouths, as so many Silver
Trumpets, shall make the Earth Ring with this Glorious Echo -- The Lord of
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Selah.

Secondly. There is a Spear drawing out which will not be cut in sunder. That
is, the great and dreadful Appearance of God for his People; in the day when he
shall make bare his Arm for their defense; when he shall ride upon the Heavens
by his Name JAH, and in his Excellency on the Clouds; when he comes to render
his Anger with Fury, and his Rebukes with Flames of Fire; when he shall thresh
the Mountains so that they Smoke, and make the everlasting Hills to bow. Oh
this is likened, to a Spear, Hab. 3. v. 11, 12, 13. The Sun and Moon stood
still in their habitation: at the light of thine Arrows they went, and at the
shining of thy glittering Spear. Thou did march through the Land in
indignation, thou did thresh the Heathen in anger. Thou wentest forth for the
Salvation of thy People, even for Salvation with thine Anointed; thou woundedst
the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the
Neek, Selah. Now, with Balaam, we may take up our Parable, and say -- Alas, who
among the Nations shall live when God does this. When this Spear is drawn
forth, Oh what a terrible time will it be to all that are unacquainted with the
Lord Jesus Christ? How will they be surpised with fear, and how will
Astonishment take hold on them? -- How will they go into the holes of the
Rocks, and into the corners of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth, Isa. 2. v.
19. This Elegant Macrology sets forth the miserable state of Wicked Men. And
the Epiphonema shows the dreadfulness of God's appearing; when he arises to
shake terribly the Earth; that is, the Men of the Earth, who are called Earth,
because their hearts are swallowed up in the Earth.

Thirdly. There is a Chariot preparing which shall not be burnt with fire; and
that is Zion, or the visible Church in her full and complete Glory, when she is
upon the ascendant in her Meridian Splendour; shining forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of her Father. This Chariot we read of, Cant. 3. v. 9. 10. 11. King
Solomon made himself a Chariot of the Wood of Lebanon. He made the Pillars
thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of Gold, the covering of it of Purple;
the midst thereof being paved with Love, for the Daughters of Jerusalem. Go
forth, O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith
his Mother crowned him in the day of his espousal, and in the day of the
gladness of his heart. By Solomon is meant Christ, and by the Chariot is meant
the Church. And Oh how beautiful and glorious will the Church be, when She gets
above the reach of persecution, and is divested of the robes of corruption. Oh
what a Sight will it be to see her thus arrayed in Glory, going forth to meet
the (...) Majesty, so that the greatest Potentate will be afraid of her. Cant:
6. v. 4. Thou art beautiful, O my love as Tirrah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible
as an Army with banners. God has promised to make Jerusalem a burdensome Stone,
Ah Sirs this chariot cannot be burnt. Fifthly, Then how foolish is it to
rejoice for this peace on any carnal account, Ah; how many look no farther
then the present advantage of Trade, or easing of Taxes; but there eyes are not
on God, or the hand he has in it, or what he designs by it, or that he has a
wheel within the wheel, and a work going on in peace, as well as in war. And Oh
how sad it is not to mind the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of
his hands. And as it is a foolish thing thus to ground your Joy, on some
carnal respect; So it is a wicked thing to rejoice after a Vain and wanton
manner, as by drinking and Guzling, by feasting and rioting, by Carding and
Gaming. Is this the Joy that becoms Christians. I am Sure Heathens would blush
at it, if you will feast, let the Widows and Fatherless feast with you; Oh that
is the best feasting, when we deal our bread to the hungry; and if you will
rejoice, and rejoice in the Lord, give thanks praise to him, the Author and
Donor of this peace. But alas men are become intoxicated, they have so long,
And so much followed the cursed fashions of Rome, that they are wholly
incapable of doing any thing right. As the Lord complained of old. Jerm. 51. v
7. -- The nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the nations are mad.
Verily the generality of People are so mad that they make days of rejoicing,
more then ordinary days of Sinning, Oh remember I beseech you, it is Grace, and
no other abstracted consideration whatsoever, that is a ground of Joy, As our
Lord said to his Disciples Luke. 10. v. 20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice
not, that the Spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoice, because your
names are Written in Heaven. Oh this is the cause (and the only cause) that
will bear Joy.

Sixthly. Oh then how should Saints he looking and longing for this time of
Gods bending his Bow, drawing his Spear, and preparing his Chariot; and
beleiving every Dispensation to be making way thereto. This advice our Lord
gives. Luke: 21 v. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your beads, for your redemption draws nigh. Resupinato collo,
qui gestus est eorunt Qui avide Sursum, etc. Is a note of Beza's on the place.
Oh we should eagerly and greedily look up; we have Seen many things in our
days, that are comfortable presages of Christ's near approach. The womb of time
is very bigg, and the end of all things is at hand. Oh therefore let us wait
for the day of Zions Salvation, and the coming of her King. Oh let us look up
with an eye of faith, and with an eye of Joy. Could an Heathen say -- Aspice
venturo letentur ut omnia Saclo. -- O mihi tam long mancat pars ultima vitoe.
-- And shall not we more clearly See this day, and rejoice in the Sight of it.
Oh yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
Let our earnest fervent Prayer be that of the Church, Cant. 2. v. 17 Until the
day break, and the shadows flee away; turn my beloved, and be thou like a Roe,
or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether. Even so come Lord Jesus come
quickly, Amen. (...)


