BAPTISM Discovered Plainly and Faithfully, According to the WORD of GOD.

WHEREIN Is set forth the Glorious Pattern of Our Blessed Savior JESUS Christ,
the Pattern of all Believers in his Subjection to Baptism. Together, with the
Example of Thousands who were Baptized after they Believed.

By JOHN NORCOTT. Late Servant of Jesus Christ, and of his Church.

The Third Edition, Corrected by Will. Kiffin, and Rich. Claridge.

With an Appendix by another Hand.

Jer. 6.4. Ask for the Old and the Good Way, and walk therein, and you shall
find rest for your souls. Isa. 30.21. This is the Way, walk in it. 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. Mat. 3.20. And when Jesus was
Baptized or dipped, he came up out of the Water. Luc. 7.30. But the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, not being Baptized or
dipped. Printed at Rotterdam, and now Reprinted at London, by the Assigns of
Widow Norcott, and Sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1694.

To All that Love the LORD JESUS CHRIST, And His Holy Ordinances in the Truth,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be Multiplied.
Dearly Beloved!
AS the Lord Jesus Christ is most precious to your Souls, his Name being as
Ointment poured forth, and His Love better than Wine, Song 1.2, 3. So has
every Truth of his, a due Value and Esteem with you. Whatsoever has the Divine
Impress upon it, ye readily embrace; but not that, which is (...) Tradition of
Man. Hence it is, that ye are for a Church of Christ's (...) Erection, for a
Ministry of his own Calling, and for Ordinances of his own Appointing. It Is
both your Desire and Endeavor to follow Christ fully, and therefore cannot
admit of any thing in Doctrine, or Worship, that is not exactly consonant to
his revealed will. Ye are so tender of Christ's Honor, which shines in all his
Commands, that ye cannot deviate knowingly the least tittle from any one of
them. O what an Awe Christ's Authority carrys with it! Ye are the sheep that
hear his Voice, the servants that do his will, and the People that are obedient
in the Day of his Power. Blessed are ye that make his word your Rule, and
resolvedly do practice according thereunto!

The Author of this Short and Plain Discourse, was a True Lover of our Lord
Jesus, and his Holy Appointments, he Steered his whole course, by the Compass
of the Word, making Scripture-Precept, or Example, his constant Rule in Matters
of Religion: Other Men's Opinions or Interpretations were not the Standard by
which he went; but through the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, he labored to
find out what the Lord himself had said in his Word. And therefore throughout
this Little Book, he still keeps close to the Scriptures, Vouching no Authority
for what he delivers, but from thence.

What Approbation this Piece has found, may appear from hence; that since the
First Edition of it here in England, it has been Reprinted in Holland, was
also lately Translated into Welsh, and now growing scarce, and much asked for,
the Bookseller has been Advised to give it another Impression. In which there
are few material Alterations or Additions, the Author's own Phrase, and Method
being generally preserved.

The Lord, who is able to give seed to the Sower, and to bless the seed Sown,
Prosper this Plain Discourse to every soul that shall read it, which is the
hearty Desire of,

Yours in the Lord, Will. Kiffin, Rich. Claridge.

To his Truly Beloved Friends and Brethren in and about Wapping, who Love our
Lord JESUS in Sincerity, Children of one Father, Partakers of the Glorious
Spirit of Grace.
Beloved Brethren,
IT was Joseph's Lot to be separated from his Brethren, but God meant it for
good; though it was not for the present seen, yet in due time it appeared Joseph's
Dreams were fulfilled; and though the Archers shot sorely at him, and grieved
him, yet his Bow abode in strength: Oh how good it is to be upright with the
Lord! It is one of the sad evils of the Times, Brethren shoot at Brethren: But
this will be a Mercy indeed, if all our Aim might (...) to enjoy, and be
conformable to Christ one part of Conformity to our Lord Jesus, is Obedience to
the Preciou^ Ordinance of Baptism, judging yo^ are such as press after Christ
you Head, together with a Testimonial of my unfeigned Love to you, I have
presented these few Thoughts to your serious Consideration. I have read of Two
Loving Friends, who having spent a great part of the day in a matter of
Difference between them, could not be reconciled, and so parted; One of them
bethinking himself of that Text, Ephesians. 4.26. ran to the other, saying, The Sun
is going down, by which they were both immediately reconciled. My Brethren, our
Sun is going down, Eternity is upon us, and shall we not consider the Work we
have to do for the Lord? I beseech you be like the Noble Bereans, search
whether these things be so; and if you find these things not mine, but the
Lords, then give him the glory due to his Name. Beloved, as I have, so I shall
yet appeal in the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath, like Elijah; Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be seen this day that thou art God in
Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy
Word, 1 Kings 18.36. Now Lord let Fire come down from Heaven on this Sacrifice,
that may drink up all the waters of strife: And that you may all cry, The Lord
he is God, the Lord he is God ver. 39. Which is the unfeigned desire of him
that is unworthy (...) serve you; yet your loving Brothe in Jesus Christ,

John Norcott

The Contents of the Book.
The Introduction Page 1. CHAP. I. Christ was Baptized in the River of Jordan,
P. 2. II. Of the great Commission for Believers Baptism. P. 7. III. Examples.
P. 11. IV. Baptism is dipping or covering under Water. P. 17. V. Proving
Water Baptism to continue till the second coming of Jesus Christ, p. 21. VI.
That no Measures of Grace or of the Spirit are a sufficient ground to keep any
from Water Baptism. P. 23. VII. Believers Baptism a great Ordinance, P. 25.
VIII. Answers to the common Objections, p. 28. IX. Believers Baptism and
Infant Baptism compared. P. 48. X. Plain Scriptures concerning Baptism without
any Human Consequence from man's Wisdom P. 4^. XI. Considerations by way of
Conclusion, P. 50. An Appendix. P. 57.
Baptism Discovered.
The Introduction.
WHEN thou by reading go to search out the mind of God, let thy Cry be, Lord
anoint mine eyes with eye salve, that I may see; and if it has been the day of
Gods Power with thy soul, I fear not but thou will bid Truth welcome, in
whatever dress it comes; and more think on what is comprised in the Letter,
than be affrighted at the poor Clothing of the Messenger; especially, knowing
it comes from one whose Name is the Great God. Therefore in handling this
Truth, viz. Believers Baptism, as it was practiced by Christ and the Primitive
Churches, my great Request to thee, is, That thou will read what is said
without prejudice: And whatever thou find according to Truth, receive as
that which is more precious than thy Life, and judge of it according to the
Holy Scriptures; for when all is said that can be, they (...) be Judge in all
Controversies of (...) And as Christ is the Foundation, 1 Cor. 2.11 upon which
whoever builds, shall never be confounded. I shall therefore take a few
Observations concerning Christ his being baptized; and herein you may take
notice how exact the Holy Scriptures are, to set down the Circumstances of his
Baptism.

CHAP. I. Christ was Baptized in the River of Jordan.
COncerning the Baptism of Jesus Christ you may read it at large, Mat. 3.13,
etc. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be Baptized of him.
Every word has Emphasis (then) before he entered upon his public Ministry, as
you see in Mat. 4.17. From that time Jesus began to preach, (comes) he might
have commanded John to have attended him; but in token of his subjection he
comes (from Galilee) many miles, and it is likely on foot; every step we take
for God is acceptable, and one day shall have a Glorious Reward (to Jordan)
where there was a River where Thousands had been Baptized, and was a suitable
place for John to dip Christ in as will be seen hereafter. Now I shall take
notice of eight things concern- the Baptism of Christ.

First, Concerning his Age, it is said, Luke 3.21. Jesus being baptized, ver.
23. began to be about thirty years of Age; here you see that Christ himself was
baptized at Grown Years; if any might be baptized in Infancy, why not Christ?
Christians be not ashamed, your Captain is gone before you, he was thirty years
old when baptized. Christ is not ashamed to call you Brethren, Heb. 2.11.

Secondly, Another thing to be observed in the Baptism of Christ, is the
Administrator of this holy Ordinance, John, who confesses of himself he was
not worthy to unloose the latchets of his shoes, Mark, 1.7. Now if Christ
would receive Baptism from such an unworthy Instrument; never slight the
Ordinance, because of the unworthiness of the Administrators, let your eye be
on Christ your Example.

Thirdly, Note the Repulse, John forbad him, Mat. 3.14. Difficultly in duty
must be no excuse; we must take no denial in following God, Strive to enter in
at the strait gate, Mat. 7.13.

Fourthly, Note, John's Argument, Mat. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of
thee, (...) come thou to me? Some will not be baptized but of need; their
carnal Argument is, May I not go to Heaven though I be not baptized? Is it of
necessity to salvation? Is this like your Lord and Master? Was not he a perfect
Savior? Was not the Spirit poured on him without measure? He had no sin to be
washed away, wherefore see your example, he does it not of need, but of
obedience to his Fathers will.

Fifthly, Note the excellent Terms he gives to this Ordinance of Baptism. 1. He
calls it Righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. It Is righteous and just that I should be
about my Fathers business. 2. It is a comely thing, it becomes us: Oh it is a
very comely thing in God's Children, to have respect to all the Commandments of
God. 3. The Conjunction (us) thee and me, and all my Followers, John 12.26. If
any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my
servant be. 4. A Completion, it is a fulfilling, 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of
our warfare are not carnal but spiritual, ver. 5. bringing every thought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ, ver. 6. having in readiness to revenge
all disobedience, when your obedience shall be fulfilled. Obedience must be
fulfilled. 5. The universal Term (all) Baptism is one of the all. Christ
reckons it so, Thou can not walk in all the Commands, if this be omitted,

6. Note, Concerning Christ's Baptism the form of Administration, Mat. 3. And
straitway he went up out of the water (straitway) because Baptism is once
Dipping; (up) had he not been down, 'twould not have been said he went up; (he
went) was not carried in Arms as Infants are, (out) if he went out of the water
then he had been in: We never say one goes out of the house when he never was
in. So Christ could not be said to come out of the water, had he not been in;
(he went up out) had a little water been brought to him in a Basin, he had not
been said to go up out (of the water) this water was the River of Jordan:
Christ stoops to small things because an Ordinance.

7. Note, Concerning Christ's Baptism, the Father's Acceptance, Mat. 3.16, 17.
( the Heavens were opened:) Some of Christ's Followers have found glorious
openings of Heaven in Baptism; (the spirit descended) the very same that is
promised to Believers in their Baptism, Act. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every
one of you, and you shall receive the Holy Ghost. Obj. But does every one
receive the Holy Ghost that is bapt^^^^ Ans. The defect lies not in Baptism,
^^t in Faith and Repentance; without which no Ordinance is effectual: (And lo,
a voice from Heaven, This is my beloved Son) Christ as Head was sealed, and in
Baptism is held forth the Sonship of his Members (in him I am well pleased) not
only in all he has and does do, but in this very Act of Baptism, as an Act of
Obedience to my glorious Will. I am well pleased, and so is the Lord well
pleased in the Act of Obedience, wherein from the heart we obey the form of
Doctrine delivered to us, Romans 6.17. The same Voice the blessed Son of God has
in the Mount, Luke 9.35. This is my beloved Son; hear him. Hear him in his
Commands and Appointments; hear him now in his Baptism: Oh, says Christ, thus
it becomes us; you that have my Father for your Father, you that have my God
for your God: Thus it becomes us to be baptized, and to fulfill all
righteousness; Oh he is a beloved Son, hear him.

8. Note, How in Christ's Baptism the Trinity does as it were meet; the Father
with a Voice, the Son baptized in Person, the Holy Ghost descends like a Dove:
And surely it is one Reason, why Baptism in special is is to be administered in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; because he who does sincerely
believe, and is baptized, the whole Trinity, the Father, Son and Spirit is his
portion; and that glorious Union of the Trinity in Christ's Baptism, is in
every Believers Baptism commemorated.

CHAP. II. Of the great Commission for Believers Baptism.
AS you have heard something concerning your great Pattern, the Lord Jesus: so
now I shall show something concerning his Command, Mat. 28.19. And I pray note
what is said of our Lord Jesus, Act. 1.1. Christ is said both to do and teach;
it is good for Teachers to imitate their Lord both to do and teach; and ver. 2.
He was taken up, after that he through the Spirit had given Commandments, to
his Apostles; of which Commandments, this of Believers Baptism is certainly
one; and as you see in Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. The great God gave him to be a
Commander and Leader to his People, Isa. 55.4. Christ is a Gift as a Commander;
Oh what Mercy it is to have such a wise Commander, whose Commandments to
Believers are not grievous; in keeping his Commandments there is great reward,
Psalm. 19.11. Now in this Command there are Eight Things very notable.

First, Note whence Christ came, why? He came out of the Grave, A Risen Jesus;
And God raised him from the dead, and sent him to bless us, Act. 3.26. Surely
this blessed Jesus would not appoint any thing but what is good for his People;
he is a blessed Jesus, and he gives blessed Commands; Blessed are they that do
his Commandments, that they may have a right to the Tree of Life, and may enter
in through the Gates into the City, Rev. 22.14.

Secondly, Note, Christ appeared and came to them; now should an Angel appear
and command men to be baptized, who would stand against it? But here you have
the glorious Son of God in his own Person appearing, and says, Go teach and
baptize.

Thirdly, Note what Authority he comes with, Mat. 28.18. All power in Heaven
and Earth is given to me; all Power to command both in Heaven and Earth is
given to me; all power to dispose of Heaven and Earth, all power to protect. I
have Angels and Men at my Command; I am able to protect you, to stand by you,
and to be with you, both in the fire and in the water: I have all power, Go
therefore, teach and baptize; fear no enemies:

Go teach and baptize.

Fourthly, Note the Command it self, Mat. 28.19. says Christ, Go therefore
teach and baptize. Christ said but to Legion, Go, Mat. 8.32. and they ran
violently, and shall not Believers be as willing People in the day of his
power? The Centurion did but say Go, to his servants, and they did go; and he
did but say Come, and they came; and he did but say, Do this, and they did it:
And shall Christ's servants be worse to him than the Centurions servants were?
It Is Christ says, Go.

Go teach and baptize.

Fifthly, Note, what is precedent to Baptism: Go teach, there must be teaching;
God is a Spirit, and he seeks such to worship him, that worship him in spirit
and truth, Joh. 4.24. therefore there must go Teaching before Baptism, or else
they will never worship him in spirit and truth. Go teach and baptize. I
confess many men do say the word Teach in the Greek, is, Make disciples, and I
dare not say against it; for I find it the very practice of Jesus Christ, he
did first make Disciples, and then baptized them, Joh. 4.1. Jesus made and
baptized more disciples than John; here was first a making Disciples, and then
a baptizing them; b^^ how many poor souls Ignorantly bapti^^ those who never
were made Disciples but, Christ says, teach and baptize them.

Sixthly, Note, The Extent of the Command, Teach all Nations and baptize them.
Go into all Nations, whether it be a hot or a cold Climate, Jews and Gentiles,
Male and Female; when you have taught them, then baptize them. Now the middle
Wall of Partition is broken down. Now God is no Respecter of Persons, now let
none think to boast that they have Abraham for their Father; No, no, go into
all Nations, publish the glad tidings of the Gospel to every Creature, Mark
16.15, 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; Go, teach all
Nations, baptizing them; when you have taught them, then baptize them.

Seventhly, Note the words of Institution, Mat. 28.19. Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, such as receive the Lord Jesus on Gospel-terms, God will be
a Father to them, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Go give them a Call; come out from amongst
Unbelievers, etc. and be separate, and I will be a Father to you, and you shall
be my sons and daughters: Stand a while, and wonder here you that make nothing
of the blessed Ordinance of Baptism; here below things done in the King's Name,
carries power; but here is the Great GOD'S Name: Yea, here is the Name of the
Mysterious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and do thou think Baptism
has nothing in it, that has that glorious Name to be adored and admired? Go,
baptize them in the glorious Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Eighthly, Note the glorious Promise annexed, Go baptize, and I will be with
you; Christ is a good Companion, you that love his Company, seek it where he
promises it; Ask for the old and the good way, and walk therein, and you shall
find rest for your souls: Is there any Soul rest short of Christ? No, no, in
his presence is fullness of joy: would you have his Presence, do like Zacheus,
Get into the way, Believe and be baptized, for he comes this way, (baptize) and
I will be with you always to the end of the World, (Amen,) an Amen follows,
they are the farewell words of the best Friend, Baptize, I will be with you,
Amen.

CHAP. III. EXAMPLES.
OF many thousands who were baptized in Rivers, all of them Persons who
professed, Faith and Repentance; and were of years able to answer for
themselves.

First Example: Those that Christ said to baptize, Joh. 4.1, 2. it is said, H^
made them Disciples, and baptized them First, they are Disciples, then
baptized, they are made Disciples, not born Disciples (that is) they are made
Disciples by the preaching of God's Word, and then they were baptized.

Second Example: You have an Example, Act. 2.41. Then they who gladly received
his Word were baptized; the occasion of this you have, ver. 37. They were
pricked at the heart, they knew not what to do; the sense of sin lay heavy upon
them. The Apostle tells them, That they should repent and be baptized, then
they should receive the Holy Ghost; then they who gladly received the Word were
baptized. Mercy is sweet to a wounded soul, and such a soul sticks at no duty,
now he can be plunged in water at Christ's Command, ver. 41. And the same day
there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

Third Example: another Example you have, Act. 8.12. But when they believed
Philip, preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus, Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women: When they believed, ver.
5. They of Samaria, and for ought we know, some of those whom the Disciples
would a little while ago have called for fire from Heaven upon, Luke 9.52, 54.
yet when these believed, they were baptized both Men and Women. Oh, if never so
near Hell, yet believe and be baptized, there is Mercy for thee.

Fourth Example: You have another Example of the baptizing of believers in Act.
8.35. Philip preached unto the Eunuch Jesus, ver. 36. They came to a certain
water and the Eunuch said, see, here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized; and ver. 37. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thy heart,
thou may: This If, is the If we stand upon; be never so poor, so vile, if God
once make thee to believe, then thou may be baptized; 'twas not his godly
Parents, 'twas not his reading, 'twas not his coming to Jerusalem to worship,
'twas not his willingness to be baptized; but if thou believe thou may:
says the Greek, it is lawful; it is according to Christ's Law. ver. 38. They
went both down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him:
Oh behold a Man, the great Treasurer of the Queen of Ethiopia, a Rich Man, an
Honorable Man, a Religious Man; a Man, it is like, having many Attendants at
his Chari^^ he stops all, commands all to stand st^^^ till he yields obedience
to his Lord and M^ster in Water Baptism, he can now g^ down into the water for
Him, who had come down from Heaven for him; he county it no disgrace to obey
Christ by his poor servant Philip: Oh the condescension of truly gracious
souls: No Argument works like Love, Therefore if you love me keep my
Commandments: Here Is going down, and coming up, like the glorious ways of
Christ; he first casts down, then he raises up; first brings to the Grave, and
then says, Return ye sons of men, ver. 39. And he went on his way rejoicing:
Oh what Triumph is in Christ's ways, in keeping, though not for keeping his
Commands; there is, as well as shall be great Reward (he went on his way) the
Righteous shall hold on in his way, and he that has clean hands shall be
stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9. How many have stuck in their way, wept in
their way, droopt in their way, but when baptized, have gone on their way
rejoicing; he might have a sad heart, though a rich Treasurer: Riches would not
do, Being baptized, he went on his way rejoicing. The Jailer being baptized,
rejoiced, believing in God with all his house, Acts 16.33, 34.

5 Example, The next Example we ^ome to, is the Baptizing of the famous Apostle
Paul, Act 1.22.16. And now why tar^est thou, arise and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins; would thou have thy soul filled with joy? will thou take
Christ for thy Lord? then arise, why tarriest thou, and be baptized: He that
appeared to thee in the way when thou wast a Persecutor, and stopped thee from
going to Hell, when thou wast running, has sent me, says Ananias, Act. 9.15,
17. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, Act. 22.16. Thou have
been a Persecutor, and now I must show thee that thou must be a Preacher, and a
Sufferer; as Acts 9.15, 16. And therefore Arise, why tarriest thou? and be
baptized: Oh accept of the terms and tenders of Mercy; bid Mercy welcome, but
do not put it off a day; why do thou tarry? do think thy self unworthy, and
therefore tarryest? do not let that hinder, I tell thee from the Lord thou art
a chosen Vessel, Act. 9.15. Therefore, arise, why tarriest thou? and be
baptized. The Lord is willing to forgive all thy former sins, and to accept of
thee on Gospel-terms, and now, why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins.

6 Example: Another Example of Be^^^^ers Baptism is the Baptism of the Jailer
Acts 16.30, 31, 32. He went to bed in hi^ sins, and might have awaked in Hell;
bu^ preventing-Mercy meets him when hi^ sword was drawing; and by a Glorious
Instrument God cries, Do thy self no harm, there is hope for thee: And he
trembling cries, What must I do? That soul that trembles before the Almighty
God, will not only cry out what shall I have, but what shall I do? Believe,
says Paul, believe on the Lord Jesus: And to demonstrate his willingness to
yield Obedience to the Lord Jesus, and to accept of him on Gospel-terms, he is
baptized the same hour of the night, ver. 33. And if you note, ver. 34. all his
believed and were baptized.

7. Another Example you have of Lydia, Act. 16.14. a godly woman, a praying
woman, God opened her heart to attend his Word by Paul, and being at the River
she was baptized. When the heart is shut, how backward are souls to obey
Christ? One draw from Christ makes the Soul run, Song 1. 4. The Lord opened her
heart, and she was baptized.

8 Example, you have Acts 18.8. Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue
believed (...) ^he Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians
hearing, believed and were baptized; Crispus believed, his house believed, all
runs in their believing, and then they were baptized: Thus you have Pattern and
Precept; it Command or Example be of any force, here is both.

CHAP. IV. Baptism is Dipping or Covering under Water.
1. THe Greek Baptizo, to plunge, to overwhelm. Thus Christ was plunged in
water, Mat. 3.16. Thus he was plunged or overwhelmed in his suffering, Luke
12.50.

2. The Dutch Translation reads Mat. 3. In those days came John the Dipper,
John 3.23. John was dipping in Aenon, where there was much water, what need
much water were it not dipping?

3. They did baptize in Rivers, Mat. 3.6. They came to John, and were baptized
in the River of Jordan, John 3.23. John was baptizing in Aenon where there was
much water; what need it be in a River, and where there was much water? would
not a little in a Basin serve to Sprinkle the Face?

4. Baptism signifies the Burial of Christ, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism, Coloss. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism. Now we do not
reckon a man buried, when a little earth is Sprinkled o^ his Face; but he is
buried when Covered thus you are buried in Baptism.

5. Christ's sufferings are called a Baptism, Luke, 12.50. I have a Baptism to
be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished? when Christ
suffered, he was plunged into pains; did his sufferings lie only on his head or
on his forehead? No, no, there was not one part free; he was from head to foot
in pain; his head was crowned with piercing Thorns, his hands and feet nailed
to the Cross; so stretched out on the Cross, that a man might have told all his
bones, Ps. 22.17. There was not one part free, the man has sinned, body, soul
and spirit. Christ was baptized into pains, plunged into sorrow, not any part
free, this he calls his Baptism. Thus one baptized is plunged under water, to
show how Christ was plunged into sorrow for our sakes.

6. Baptism is a putting on Christ, As many of you as are baptized into Christ
have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. that as a servant wears his Lords Livery, a
Garment which demonstrates him to be a Servant to such a Lord: So in Baptism we
put on our Lords Livery, he clothes from head to foot: Thus by Baptism we put
on Christ.

7. When Christ was baptized, he came up out of the water, Mat. 3.16. Was it
only a little Water thrown on his Face? Then he had not been in the water; but
because he was baptized in the water, therefore being baptized he came up out
of the water. Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the water, (and being
there in the water) Philip baptized the Eunuch, and when he was baptized he
came up out of the water, Act. 8.38, 39.

Thus you see the place where they were baptized, was a River; their Action,
they went down into the Water; then being in the water, they were baptized;
this was where was much water. The end was to show forth Christ's Burial. Now if
there be not a Burial under water to show Christ's Burial, the great end of the
Ordinance is lost: but we are buried by Baptism.

Quest. But why may not Sprinkling with water serve, as well as Covering under
water? Is there any more virtue in a great deal of water, than there is in a
little water?

Answ. Sprinkling may not serve as well as Dipping under water.

1. Because God is a jealous God, and stands upon small things in matters of
Worship; it is likely Nadah and Abihu thought, if they put fire in the Censer,
it might serve, though it were not fire from the Altar; but God calls it
strange fire, and therefore he burns them with strange fire, Lev. 10.1, 2. and
Moses adds, Ver. 3. This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be
glorified. God bid Moses speak to the Rock, and Moses smote the Rock, and
therefore must dye short of Canaan, Number. 20.8, 11, 12.

2. Sprinkling may not serve, because thereby the end of the Ordinance is lost,
which is to show the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.4. We
are buried with him by Baptism, that like as Christ was raised, etc.

3. Sprinkling will not serve, because it is not that God has appointed.
Naaman the Leper did think the waters of Damascus to be of the same virtue with
(or better than) the waters of Israel, 2 Kings 5.12. May I not wash in them and
be clean? God had appointed him to dip in Jordan, not that there was more
virtue in that water; but God did appoint him to dip in Jordan, and he did, and
was clean. Dipping is God's Appointment.

4. Sprinkling will not serve, because it is not according to the Pattern.
Christ went down into the water. Philip and the Eunuch, went down into the
water, Act. 8.38. Heb. 8.5. See thou make all things according to the Pattern.

5. Sprinkling will not serve, because it is high presumption to change God's
Ordinances; Is not God wise enough to appoint his own Worship how it shall be
performed? Isa. 24.5 The Earth is defiled, because they have changed the
Ordinance.

6. Sprinkling will not serve, because Sprinkling is not Baptism; it is not the
thing intended by God; Baptism is Dipping or Plunging. Sprinkling is not
Baptism, therefore Sprinkling will not serve, Luke 7.29, 30. Gods Council is
Baptism or Dipping.

CHAP. V. Proving Water Baptism, to continue till the Second Coming of Jesus
Christ.
THat this may appear that Water Baptism is to continue, and to be practiced by
Believers till the second coming of Jesus Christ; take these six Considerations:

1. Consider that Water Baptism was once commanded, and never yet repealed, and
no power can repeal a Command of Christ, but the same power of Christ, by which
it was given forth, Jud. ver. 3. Contend for the Faith which was once delivered
to the Saints.

2. Consider, that Water Baptism was practiced before, and since the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ:

1. Before the Resurrection of Christ, Mat. 3.16. Joh. 3.23. and Joh. 4.1, 2.

2. Since the Resurrection of Christ, Act. 2.41. and 8.12, 38. and 10.47, etc.

3. Consider that Water Baptism was commanded after Christ's Resurrection, Mat.
28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them. Had Water Baptism ceased with
Christ's death, it had not been commanded and practiced after his Resurrection.

4. Consider, that the end of the Ordinance remains as at the Lords Supper; the
end of it is to show forth the Lords death till he come; and to do this in
remembrance of Christ; as long as we are to remember Christ's death, it is to be
done in remembrance of Christ even till his second coming: so Baptism is to
show the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. the End
remaining, the Ordinance remains till his second coming.

5. Consider, it has been continued by Christians in all Ages, since Jesus
Christ left his Command with the Saints.

6. Consider whether the same Argument that throws down Water Baptism, if
granted, will not throw down all Ordinances: for if you grant that when the
Spirit is come Baptism cease; may you not as well say, when the Spirit is
come? Preaching cease, Prayer cease; but this is by reason of man's corrupt
heart: Christ says, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you; And lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Mat.
28.19, 20.

CHAP. VI. That no Measures of Grace or of the Spirit are a sufficient Ground
to keep any from Water Baptism.
THAT no Measures of Grace or of the Spirit are a sufficient Ground to keep
from Baptism, may plainly appear, if you

1. Consider, that Baptism is from Heaven, as you see, Mat. 21.25. Now what
should keep from a Heavenly Command?

2. Consider the Lord Jesus had all grace, and the Spirit without Measure; as
(...) 3.34. and yet he was Baptized in (...) River of Jordan, as you may see,
Mat. ^^ 13, 14, 15. Is not Christ a good Patter^ for Believers to follow?

3. Consider, where has God thus limited Baptism to persons, having little
Grace or little of the Spirit. Nay, on the Contrary has not God promised his
Spirit that you may keep my Ordinances and do them? Ezekiel. 11.19, 20.

4. Consider, the Apostle makes receiving the Spirit, an Argument to encourage
to Baptism, Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Now if you mind,
these were so baptized with the Spirit, that they spoke with Tongues and
Prophesied; a strange work to Prophecy and speak with Tongues; such a Measure
of the Spirit is not in our days, yet he Commanded them to be baptized, ver. 48.

CHAP. VII. Believers Baptism a great Ordinance.
THE greatness of the Ordinance of B^lievers Baptism may appear, if you
^onsider these seven Particulars.

1. Consider that Baptism is an Ordi^ance which has the great Pattern, the
Captain of our Salvation himself did pra^tise it; as you see, Mat. 3.13. Then
^ometh Jesus to be baptized: If any man ^erve me, says Christ, let him follow
me; And where I am there shall my servant be, ^ohn 12.26. Christ is the great
Example.

2. Consider the great Name in which Baptism is Administered, Mat. 28.19, 20.
Baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: This Name must not
be ^lighted; it is a great Name.

3. Consider Baptisms great business, it ^s called Righteousness: Righteousness
is a great thing. Christ calls it a comely thing, Mat. 3.15. Thus it becomes
us to fulfill all Righteousness; it is a fulfilling all Righteousness.

4. Consider Baptisms great Commission; ^t is one of the last Conmands of our
blessed Savior after his Resurrection, a (...) before his Ascension, as
appears, Mat. 28 19, 20. Go Teach and Baptize.

5. Consider Baptisms great Promises Mat. 28.19, 20. Go teach and baptize, a^
lo, I am with you; here is the Promise of the glorious presence of Christ. Then
ye have the promise of the Holy Ghost, Repent and be baptized, and you shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.38.

You have also the Promise or Assuranc^ of washing away your sins, Act. 22.16
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away the sins.

Again, You shall find the promise of Sa^vation annexed to Baptism, Mark 16.1^
He that believes and is baptized, shall ^ saved; Christ's Presence, the Holy
Ghost'^ Pardon of sin, and Salvation; all these a^^ great Promises.

6. Consider the Eminency of Baptism every Word of God is pure, but Baptism is
called the Council of God, Luke 7.29, 3^ They rejected the Council of God
against themselves, not being baptized; is not the Council of God a great thing?

7. Consider, since Christ has b^^ gone to Heaven, he has commanded ^^ptism
Acts 8.29. the Spirit bid Philip jo^ himself to the Chariot, which clearly
a^pears was, that he might preach Christ, and baptize the Eunuch; And when he
was baptized, he went away rejoicing: Here Is one Call from Heaven.

Another Command from Heaven to baptize, after Christ's Ascension, you have in
the Lord Jesus's sending Ananias to Paul, Act. 9.19. The Lord called Ananias in
a Vision, and sends him to Paul; and when he comes, he says, Acts 22.16. and
now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. This Paul
tells us were the words of Ananias; here you have another Call from Heaven to
baptize.

Again you shall find, Act. 10.4, 5. Cornelius has a Call from Heaven to send
for Peter, who should tell him words whereby he should be saved. Peter has a
Call from Heaven to go to Cornelius, ver. 19.20. Go therefore, nothing
doubting; here Peter is sent from Heaven, and to speak words whereby Cornelius
might be saved; and when he came to Cornelius, you shall find ver. 48. He
commanded them to be baptized. Thus you see Baptism was commanded after
Christ's Ascension; all which may show Baptism to be a great Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII. Answer to the common Objections.
SUch is the corruption of man's heart, as he will make Objections against the
clearest Truth in the blessed Word of God; and which of the Truths of God, yea,
has not God himself been objected against? but I may say of Baptism, as once
He said, These things were not done in a Corner: I only give this
Scripture-caution, They have closed their eyes lest they should see and be
converted, and I should heal them: Take heed of closing the eyes, and then I am
sure thou will be willing in the day of God's power; but if in Conscience thou
desire satisfaction, consider the Answers to the following Objections.

Object. 1. Some Object where it is said, Mat. 28.19, 20. To the end of the
World, that is, to the end of that Age.

Answ. 1. To which I Answer, This cannot be the sense of the Text: First,
Because Christ bids the Apostles teach them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. Now do you think that all things the Apostles
were to teach them to observe, were only to the end of that Age? Christ
commands them to repent, believe, to be holy, to be baptized; and are we to
repent, believe and be holy, no longer than to the end of that Age? Secondly,
Christ promises his presence to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. Lo, I am with
you to the end of the Word. Now has Christ promised his Presence but to the
end of that Age? this would be a dreadful Doctrine, Josh. 1.5. He has said, I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee; so that the promise of his Presence is to
last in all Ages, as the word may be rendered; I will be with you in Ages, or,
to the end of the World; therefore observe, all things to the end of the World.

Object. 2. 2. But Water Baptism was John's Baptism.

I Answer. Was the Baptism of John from Heaven or of men? John's Baptism was
from Heaven, Mat. 21.25. Then further, John was but to prepare Christ's way
before him, Luke 1.76. Thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to prepare
his ways; so that John did but prepare Christ's way: This therefore was Christ's
way, not John's way: But further has not Christ commanded, and the Churches
practiced Baptism after John's Death, and Christ's Resurrection? Di^ not Christ
say, Go teach and baptize; and will thou say this is John's Baptism?

Object. 3. 3. But Circumcision and Uncircumcision avails nothing, but a New
Creature.

I Answer. Once Circumcision was something, when the Lord would have killed
Moses because of the Circumcision, as Exodus 4.24, 25, 26. and when the Lord
said, That whoever was not circumcised, he should be cut off from the people,
Genesis 17.14. Now in the Gospel it is nothing, because abolished, Gal. 5.2. If
you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: But will thou say the
Council of God is nothing? Baptism is the Council of God, Luke 7.29, 30. And is
this nothing? Baptism is a Command of the Lord Jesus, Mat. 28.19. And is his
Command nothing?

Object. 4. 4. I am baptized with the Spirit, which is the substance;
Water Baptism is but the shadow.

I Answer. Thou may as well say so of all other Ordinances, they are but
shadows; the Supper is but a shadow: Prayer, Hearing and Preaching are but
shadows; and then whither will thou run? Then further, the Question is not
whether it be a shadow; Is it a Command? If a Command, dispute not Christ's
Authority lest he be angry. But further, call Water Baptism a shadow, yet
consider Christ subjected to it, and who art thou, will thou be wiser than
Christ? And further, Acts 10.47. They were baptized with the Spirit, and spoke
with Tongues, and yet were baptized in water. Remember he that is faithful in
the least, is faithful in much.

Object. 5. 5. Does not Baptism come in the room of Circumcision?

I Answer. No surely, for there is not any Word of God for such a thing, and
thou must not be wise above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. And then consider,
Circumcision concerned only the Males; but Acts 8.12. When they believed, they
were baptized, both Men and Women.

Object. 6. 6. But are not very learned Men for Infant Baptism?

I Answer. Luke 7.29.30. The Pharisees and Lawyers (the learned men of the
times) rejected the Council of God against themselves, not being baptized. Do
not say as they said, Which of the Rulers have believed in him? Hearken to
Christ's Answer, Mat. 11.25. Jesus answered, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them to Babes, And further, If Learning were an Argument in
this case, Are there not many Cardinals and Jesuits Learned Men?

Object. 7. 7. But are not there very Godly men, Pastors of Churches, that hold
Infant Baptism?

I Answer You are not to follow an Apostle further than he follows Christ, 1
Cor. 11.1. Follow me, as I follow Christ. Again, bring no Examples of good Men
against an express word. You have an express word, Acts 8.12. When they
believed they were Baptized, both Men and Women. Elias was a good man, he
called for fire from Heaven, but we must not do so. Jehosaphat was a good King,
but the High Places were not removed; follow no Example against a word, 1 Kings
22.42, 43. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2.

Object. 8. 8. But there is not a word against Baptizing Infants?

I Answer. Nadab and Abihu were burned with fire, because they did that the
Lord commanded not, Lev. 10.2, 3. Again, if you mean by a word, an express
word, then where have you a word, Thou shall not baptize Bells, as you read in
the Book of Martyrs they did? Where have you a word, saying, Thou shall not use
Spittle, Cream or Salt in Baptism, as the Roman Catholics do? But you must
know, it is enough against Infant Baptism, it is not commanded.

Object. 9. 9. But were there not whole Families Baptized?

I Answer. That it is expressly said, They all believed, Acts 16.34. He was
baptized and all his, ver. 33. He rejoiced, beleiving in God with all his
House, ver 34. Crispus the Chief Ruler, believed in God with all his House; and
many of the Corinthians believed and were baptized Acts 18.8. Lydia and all her
House were baptized, Acts 16.15. Here Is no mention of Husband or Children,
whether she was a Maid or a Widow; only they are called Brethren, ver. 40.

Object. 10. 10* Infants were once Church^ Members, and we do not find they
were cut off.

I Answer. That the natural Branches were broken off by their Unbelief; and if
they come to believe, they may be grafted in again, but till then they are
broken off, Romans 11.20, 21. Again now in the Gospel, the Axe is laid to the
root of the Tree; and every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is cut down
and cast into the fire, Mat. 3.9, 10. Therefore you must not think to say you
have Abraham, or a Believer, for your Father; This is the sure Word of God. And
thus you may see that the Sadduces were rejected, when they came for Baptism,
thinking to say, They had Abraham for their Father, Mat. 3.7, 8, 9. And
further, Infants were Members of the National Church of the Jews: But where
were they ever Members of a particular Church under the Gospel? When Infants
were Members, then Servants that were bought with Money were all Members, Genesis
17.12. Which are not of thy seed: God now in the Gospel seeks such to Worship
him, who Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.23. And further, there was
then a middle Wall of Partition; but this middle Wall of Partition is broken
down, Ephesians. 2.14. And now God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation,
such as fear him* and work Righteousness, are accepted of him, Acts 10.34.35.

Object. 11. 11. But is the Privilege of Believers Children, less under the
Gospel than it was under the Law?

I Answer. What do thou mean by Privilege? was it a privilege to be under
the Law, or is it now a privilege to be under the Gospel? or do thou mean by
privilege to have the Promises which the Apostle tells us of, Rom 9.8. They
which are Children of the flesh, are not the Children of Promise; or do thou
mean by Privilege to partake of the visible Ordinance of Circumcision? And is
this such a privilege which the Apostle, Acts 15.10. calls a yoke, that
neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear, is this the privilege thou
meanest?

Object. 12. 12. But the Seed was in Covenant? God made a Covenant with Abraham
and his Seed.

I Answer. What do thou mean by Covenant? do thou mean the Covenant that
was made on Mount Sinai, or a Covenant of Works? do thou mean the Covenant of
Grace, wherein God promises to be their God* and do thou make this Covenant
of Grace to be Conditional? And do thou judge, that Ishmael, Saul, and
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and Ahaz, and all they, were in the Covenant of
Grace? or do thou judge they lost their Interest in the Covenant of Grace,
and so indeed make it a Covenant of Works? Therefore consider, God did make a
Covenant with Abraham and his natural Seed, to give them the Land of Canaan,
Genesis 17.7, 8. but as to the Promise of Life and Salvation, this was made to
Abraham and his spiritual Seed, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises made; he says, not unto Seeds, as of many; but as of one, to thy
Seed, which is Christ. If you will believe this Text, there is little difficulty
in the Objection, Romans 9.8. The Children of Promise are counted for the Seed.

Object. 13. 13. But they were so far in the Covenant, as to give them a Right
to the Ordinance?

I Answer. Circumcision was entailed on Abraham and his Seed, and his Servants;
but where is Baptism intailed, upon Believers natural Seed?

The Priesthood by a Covenant was entailed on the Tribe of Levi and their Seed,
as you may read, Josh. 18.7. Number. 25.13. will you now entail the Ministry on
Preachers and their natural Seed? But as to the point of Baptism, were there
not many that came to be Baptized? and John said, Think not to say you have
Abraham for your Father, Mat. 3.9. clearly showing that their Carnal Right was
cut off by the Gospel. Now the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree, every Tree
that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. And
note further, Abraham had a word for to warrant his circumcising his Seed; but
where is there a word for Baptizing Infants?

Object. 14. 14. But Christ said, suffer little Children to come to me, for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

I Answer. The Text tells you plainly, they were not brought to be baptized,
but that Christ might lay his hands on them, and pray for them, Mat. 19.13.
Mark 10.16. Here Is nothing of Baptism.

Object. 15. 15. But it is said, Acts 2.39. The Promise is to you and to your
Children.

I Answer. Do so much justice to thy own Soul ^ to read the whole Text; and you
sh^^ find, that it is said, The Promise is to y^^ and to your Children, and to
all that are ^ far off, even as many as the Lord our G^^ shall call: Here you
see it is to such as are called. Now if you say this word Call relates not to
the Children, but to them that are afar off. I Answer, it must needs relate to
the Children and their Parents, and all afar off, because it is the Promise,
ver. 16, 17. this is that which is spoken of by Joel the Prophet, I will pour
out of my Spirit on all flesh, on your Sons and Daughters, Joel 2.28. on the
Remnant whom the Lord shall call, ver. 32. Now if the Promise of the Spirit be
to Children, though not called; then either the Promise does fail; and that is a
fearful thing to think; or else all the Children of Believers do partake of
this glorious Spirit; but the contrary daily experience shows, that many of
Believers Children are Carnal, not having the Spirit; and it is fulfilld only
to such, whom the Lord our God shall call

Object. 16. 16. But I have been Baptized in my Infancy therefore what need I
be Baptized again?

I Answer. As one says of Marriage, It is not the ^ed that makes Marriage, for
then forni^ation is Marriage, but a lawful consent by Covenant, that makes
Marriage. So I say of Baptism, it is not Water thrown on the face that makes
Baptism; but it is a free consent and subjection to Christ according to the
Rule, that makes Baptism; Now when thou wast an Infant thou gave no consent,
thou can not tell of any such thing but by report; thou know not when it
was, thou had no Faith in the Act. And what ever is not of Faith is sin, so
that thou art not yet baptized. Again, consider what defects have been in thy
Infant Baptism? First, there was no Rule to baptize thee while an Infant. Then
thou wast not a right subject, for thou oughtst to believe and be baptized:
then thou wast only sprinkled, not buried in baptism, as Christ was and has
commanded; Now will thou call that baptism which was only a Tradition received
from thy Forefathers, when the Lord Jesus did shed his most precious blood to
redeem thee from the Tradition of thy Forefathers, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19?

Object. 17. 17. But many lay so much stress on Baptism, as makes us more
backward to it

I Answer. Is there more stress laid by any than Christ? who said they rejected
the Counc^^ of God against themselves, not being baptized, Luke 7.29, 30. And
is it not our duty, to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints?

Object. 18. 18. But the Children of Believers are holy, therefore they ought
to be baptized.

I Answer. As it is said the Children are holy, so it is said the unbelieving
Husband is holy, or sanctified by the believing Wife. This Holiness is wholly
to the use of Marriage, for the Apostle is in that place, (1 Cor. 7.) speaking
of Marriage, and whether those who have believed should live with unbelieving
Husbands, or put them away, as 1 Cor. 7.13. So that the Holiness here spoken
of, it is wholly to their use; it is said, Zach. 14.20. There shall be Holiness
on the Horses Bells, and every Pot in the Lords House shall be Holy. Now do you
think this was a sufficient warrant to baptize Bells, as you man read they did
in the Book of Martyrs? (...) being holy for the use of the By (...) Sanctified
by (...) ^^ayer, 1 Timothy 3.4 5. And to the Pure, all things are Pure, Tit. 1.15.
That is, to their use: Thus Children are holy, and unbelieving Husbands are
sanctified to their use; But if you think, Believers Children are inherently
holy, does not your experience tell you the contrary? do not we see good Men
have ungodly Children, and bad Men have holy Children? so that they are only
holy for their use, they are not born in uncleanness.

Object. 19. 19. When they were formerly circumcised, Men of years were
circumcised; but afterward Infants were circumcised; so in the Gospel, when
Baptism was first administered, Men and Women were baptized, but afterward
Infants were Baptized.

I Answer. When God first commanded Circumcision he commanded that it should be
administered to Children, Genesis 17.10. every Man-child; but when Christ commanded
Baptism, he commanded that persons should be taught, and that they should
believe and be baptized; and never gave a Command to baptize Children. Then
consider we have the Lives and Acts of the Apostles and Primitive Churches for
diverse years, and not one Infant baptized. Paul was converted sometime after
Christ's Ascension, and was fourteen years in Christ, Cor. 12.2. In these
fourteen years sure some Children were born, yet not one baptized that we read
of.

Object. 20. 20. They were Heathens that were baptized in the Apostles days.

I Answer. Was the Lord Jesus a Heathen? he was baptized. The Eunuch a
Worshipper of the true God. Cornelius, a man whose Prayers and Alms came to God
for a Memorial, were these Heathens? Nay, do not those who baptize Infants,
baptize Heathens? Ephesians. 2.3. We are the Children of wrath by Nature: It is you
that plead for the baptizing Heathens, we plead for the baptizing Believers.

Object. 21. 21. But Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize but
to preach.

I Answer. That Paul did baptize, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15. He baptized Crispus and
Gaius, and the Household of Stephanas, and diverse others. Now what he did, he
did by Commission or Presumption; but he did it not by Presumption, therefore
he did it by Commission; he was sent to preach. Baptism fell in as a part of
his Preaching Office; Philip was chosen a Deacon, yet he baptized the Eunuch,
Baptism fell in as part of his work, Acts 8. so that he that is called to be a
Preacher, needs no call to baptize, the other falls in as his work.

Object. 22. 22. But there were three thousand baptized in one day, how could
all these be dipped in one day? they might be sprinkled, but not dipped.

I Answer. They might well be dipped, for there were twelve Apostles, and
seventy Disciples, as Luke 10.1. that is eighty two; these might well baptize
three thousand in a day.

CHAP. IX. Believers-Baptism and Infant Baptism compared.
1. Believers Baptism has a Command, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1. Infant Baptism has
not a Command. 2. Believers baptism has many Examples, Acts 8.12. cap. 2.37,
41, 42, etc. 2. Infant Baptism has no Example. 3. Believers baptism is from
Heaven, Mat. 21.25. 3. Infant Baptism is from Men. 4. Believers baptism is the
Council of God, Luke 7.29.30 4. Infant- baptism has the Council of Men. 5.
Believers baptism has been Gloriously sealed, Matthew 3. 5. Infant Baptism
never was sealed by God. 6. In believers baptism, the person baptized acts
faith. 6. But in Infant Baptism, the Infant acts no faith. 7. In believers
baptism the person subjects in acts of obedience. 7. But in Infant Baptism the
Infant puts forth no Act of Obedience. 8. In believers baptism the person knows
when he is baptized. 8. But Infants know not any thing of their baptism. 9.
Believers remember when they were baptized. 9. Infants remember not their
baptism. 10. Believers are buried with Christ by baptism, Romans 6.4. 10. Infants
are not buried, they are only sprinkled. 11. All believers that are baptized,
are in the Covenant of Grace. 11. All Infants baptized are not in a Covenant of
grace 12. All believers baptized receive remission of sins, Act 2.37.38. 12.
But all Infants baptized do not receive the remission of sins. 13. God has
promised that all that believe and are baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.16.
13. God has not promised that all Infants that are baptized shall be saved.
14. Believers rejoice when they are baptized, Act. 8.39. and 16.34. 14. Infants
do not rejoice, but usually weep when they are sprinkled. 15. Believers baptism
has the plain Word of GOD, Mat. 28.19. 15. Infant Baptism has human
consequences only. 16. All the World may undeniably affirm, that believers were
baptized by the Apostles, Act. 8.12. 16. But all the world cannot affirm that
any Infant was baptized by the Apostles. 17. All those who baptize Infants, do
confess believers were baptized. 17. But all baptized believers do deny, that
Infants were baptized. 18. Believers baptized, do lawfully partake of the Lords
Supper. 18. Infants baptized, do not lawfully partake of the Lord 's Supper.
19. All believers baptized, are living stones fit for Gods house, 1 Pet. 2.5.
19. But all Infants baptized, the living stones^ Gods House. 20. Believers
baptized, build on Christ by their own faith. 20. But such as baptize Infants,
build on another faith. 21. Such as are baptized on their own Faith, shall
never perish, Joh. 10.28. 21. But such as are baptized on another faith may
perish. 22. Believers baptized are converted, and shall never come into
condemnation, Joh. 5.24. 22. But Infants baptized are not converted, and many
come into condemnation. 23. Believers baptized, are not the Children of wrath,
John 3.36. 23. But Infants baptized, Joh. 3.36. may be yet under wrath. 24.
Believers baptized do know Christ to be precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. 24. But Infants
baptized, do not know Christ to be precious. 25. Believers Love Christ, and
keep his Commandments, Joh. 14.15. 25. But Infants baptized do not love Christ
and keep his Commandments. 26. Believers baptized, worship God in Spirit, and
in truth, and such God seeks to Worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. 26. But Infants do
not know what to Worship. 27. Believers baptism must stand as long as God's
Word does stand, Mat. 5.18. 27. Infant Baptism must fall, because it has not
the Word of God. 28. Believers baptized may repel Satan as Christ did, saying,
it is written, They believed and were baptized. 28. But you cannot repel Satan,
saying, It is written, Infants were baptized; for it is not written.

CHAP. X. Plain Scriptures concerning Baptism without any human consequence
from Man's Wisdom.
MAT 3.13. Then comes Jesus to John to be baptized, ver. 15. And Jesus said,
Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness,
ver. 16. And Jesus when he was baptized went up straightway out of the water.
Mat. 21.25. The Baptism of John, whence was it, from Heaven or of Men? if we
say from Heaven, he will say w^^ did ye not believe in him? Luke 20.6. But if
we say of men, the people will stone us. Luke 7.29. The Publicans justified God
being baptized. Ver. 30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Council of
God against themselves not being baptized. Mat 28.19. Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ. Ver. 41. Then they that gladly received his Word were baptized. Mark
16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Acts 8.12. And when
they believed they were baptized, both men and women. Ver. 36. And the Eunuch
said, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Ver. 37. And Philip
said, if thou believe thou may. Ver. 38. And they went both down into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Acts 9.18. Saul arose
and was baptized. John 3.22. After these things came Jesus and his disciples
into the Land of Judea, and there he tarried and baptized. John 4.1. Jesus made
and baptized ^ore disciples than John. Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water
that these should not be baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost as well as
we? Ver. 48. And he commanded them ^o be baptized in the Name of the Lord.
Acts. 18.8. And Crispus the chief Ru^er of the Synagogue believed on the Lord
with all his House, and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were
baptized. Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. Romans 6.4. We are buried
with him by Baptism. Gal. 3.27. As many as have been baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ. 1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto baptism does save us. 1
Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body. Acts 16.33. And he
took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was
baptized, he and all his straightway. Ver. 34. He believing in God with his
House. Luke 3.21. Jesus being baptized, the Heavens were opened. Ver. 23. And
Jesus himself being about thirty years of Age. John 3.23. John was baptizing in
Aenon near Salim, because there was much water there. CHAP. XI. Considerations
by way of Conclusion.
1. COnsider that when souls are ashamed, then God will show them the
Ordinances and forms of his House, Ezekiel. 43 11. The Gospel Church has its
forms.

2. Consider when God gives any soul a new heart, it is to fit him for Gods
Ordinances, Ezekiel. 11 19, 20. I will give them a new spirit, and I will take
away the heart of stone, and give them a heart of flesh, that they may walk in
my Statutes, and keep my Ordinances and do them.

3. Consider what a danger it is to resist an Ordinance of God; read Romans 13.2.
Luke 7.29, 30. They rejected the Council of God, not being baptized

4. Consider what Judgments have attended the changing of Gods Ordinances, Isa.
24.1. Behold, the Lord makes the Earth empty, and turns it upside down;
there is a change, but why, ver. 5. They have changed the Ordinance; when Christ
commands to Believe and be baptized; and men baptize Infants who do not believe
whether this be a change of the Ordinance, judge ye?

5. Consider, what fell on Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron. Lev. 10.1, 2.
They offered what the Lord commanded not: it was not forbidden; but that is not
enough, 'twas not commanded; Infant Baptism is not forbidden, but it is what
the Lord commanded not.

6. Consider if what thou did receive in thy Infancy was no Baptism, and thou
have not been baptized since, then thou live in the neglect of a great Gospel
Ordinance: will thou call that Obedience which was not thy Act, and had not thy
consent, nor thou know not of, nor can remember when it was done, and thou
had no faith in? and will thou call that baptism that was not of thy
obedience, but thy Parents will?

7. Consider that the Ordinances must be kept as they were delivered, 1 Cor.
11.2. But Baptism was delivered to Believer^ and not to Infants. God did indeed
deliver Circumcision to Infants, but never d^deliver Baptism to Infants.

8. Consider, that many who have n^ been Baptized since they believed, do d^ny
Baptism to their Children: Let m^ ask such, if their own Infant Baptism wa^
sufficient to them, if they do deny it t^ their Children? why do they reckon
the own Infant Baptism sufficient? -- Ho^ long halt ye between two opinions?

9. Consider, that it is without all doubt Believers were Baptized, Acts 8.12.
The Baptizing of Infants (at the best) is by a doubt; Infant Baptism has been
often disputed, but when was Believers Baptis^ disputed? It is in very words
expre^^ They believed and were Baptized. Now is not better to go in an
undoubted way, the in a dark way?

10. Consider, there are multitudes Examples of Believers Baptism; see pa^ 11.
of this Book; but there is not one Example of Infant Baptism.

11. Consider if the salvation of thy so didly upon this question, Whether we
Believers Baptized, or were Infants bapti^ed? would thou not say, surely
Belie^ers?

12. Consider, as Birthright gave a right to Circumcision under the Law, so
Birthright gave right to the Priesthood.

Now you would entail Baptism without a word to the Believers seed, why then
will you not entail the Ministry unto the seed of Ministers? Would it not be
strange Logic, to say, the Preachers seed under the Gospel, have less privilege
than the Priest's under the Law?

13. Consider, that we are not to think of any above what is written, 1 Cor.
4.6. Now if Infant Baptism be not written as an Ordinance, do not judge it to
be an Ordinance.

14. Consider that Christ was faithful in all his House, Heb. 3.5, 6. If it had
been his Fathers Will that Infants should have been Baptized, surely he would
have been so faithful as to have left us one word in his Blessed Scriptures.

15. Consider, Moses the servant of the Lord did all according to the Pattern
showed in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. and shall not the servants of the Lord do all
according to the Pattern he has showed to us in the New Testament? the Pattern
left on record is, They believed and were Baptized, Acts 8.12.

16. Consider, whether those who do so depend on their consequences without a
plain Text, will grant Papists and others the same consequences, for Altars,
Surplices, etc. seeing all is to be done decently; And they say, Surplices are
decent, Railes about the Tables are decent, etc?

17. Consider, that seeing the Scripture is so exact, in setting down the
several circumstances of Persons Baptized, Acts 16.13, 14. the time, the
Sabbath, the place, by a River side; the Custom, Prayer was wont to be made;
the Company, Women; the Name, Lydia; the Trade, a Seller of Purple; place of
abode, as the City of Thyatira, her Religion, a Worshipper of God; her Action,
She heard Gods Word; the Lord opened her heart: the Instrument, words spoken by
Paul. So Acts 16.27, 28, 29, 30, so many circumstances, but not one word in any
place expressed, that ever any Infant was Baptized; why should it be left out,
were it Gods Will it should be done?

18. Consider, there is but one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy,
James 4.12. The Lord is our Judge, The Lord is our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. Now
where has this Lord given a Law for Baptizing Infants? This one Lawgiver has
not given one Law for the Baptizing Infants.

19. Consider, whether Baptizing Infants, Godfathers, and Godmothers, the Cross
in Baptism, the Promises and Vows made for Children, were not all brought in by
Humane Invention, at the same time or on the same Reasons?

20. Consider, whether it be safe to admit of Consequences against an express
Rule? Mat. 28.19. Teach and Baptize.

21. Consider, whether those who Baptize Infants, will not have it said to them
by the Lord one day? as in Isa. 1.12. Who has required these things at your
hands?

22. Consider, whether any of the Gospel Ordinances has so many plain words as
Believers Baptism^?

23. Consider, whether being Baptized be not a justifying God, and on thy part
thou not being Baptized, do not reject the Council of God? Luke 7.29, 30.

24. Consider, whether such as hold Infant Baptism do not Preach Baptism to be
a Sign of Regeneration, and whether all or any Infants Baptized are Regenerated?

25. Consider, whether those who have not respect to all Gods commands will not
one day be ashamed? Psalm. 119.6.

26. Consider, whether Abraham durst circumcise his child without a word of
Command, then how dare thou Baptize a child without a word?

27. Consider, whether we are not to press after the purity of Ordinances, and
whether those Ordinances which have the express Rule, are not most Pure?

28. Consider, whether they and only they shall not have the Well-done at
Christ's coming, who have done what he has commanded, and as he has commanded?

Now I beseech thee to consider what has been said in this matter; and the
glorious God of Truth give thee the Spirit of Truth, which may lead thee into
all Truth, and may build thee up, and give thee an inheritance among them that
are sanctified? and as in sincerity, with unfeigned love to God and thy soul
these things have been written: So the very God and Father of our Lord Jeus,
sanctify thee throughout, in body, soul and spirit, and give thee a heart to
search whether these things be so. An APPENDIX, containing other Objections of
the Paedo-Baptists, with Answers thereunto, By another Hand.
Object. 1. 1. INfants of Believers ought to be Baptized, because the Natural
Seed of Believers are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham.

I Answer. This is contrary to Romans 9.6, 7, 8. For they are not all Israel,
which are of Israel; neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
Children: but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; that is, they which are the
Children of the Flesh; these are not the Children of God: but the Chilren of
the Promise are counted for the Seed. And Gal. 3.7, 26, 29. They which are of
Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham. Ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus: And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and
Heirs according to the Promise. The Sum of the Apostles Argument is, that, the
Children of the Flesh, or Abraham's Natural Seed are not the Children of the
Promise: but whosoever believe, whether Jew or Gentile, they are Abraham's
spiritual seed, and none other.

Object. 2. 2. But to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made, Gal. 3.16.

I Answer. The new Covenant promises were made to Abraham and his spiritual
seed, that is, Believers; for they are the children of God, and Heirs according
to the promise. Therefore says the Apostle, He said not, and to seeds, as of
many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3.16. Many Temporal
promises were made to all the seed of Abraham, natural and spiritual; but his
spiritual seed only, that is, Believers, are entitled to the promises of the
new Covenant. For those promises being made to Christ, namely, to Christ first,
and then to all that are in Christ, none can have an Interest in them, but as
they are considered in him, because he is the great point or center of the
promises, in whom they me^^ and are established.

Object. 3. 3. But the Infants of Believers are to be baptized, because they
have Habitual Faith.

I Answer. If by Habitual Faith our Adversarys understand an Infused Habit of
Believing, and that all the Infants of Believers have this Infused Habit, then
let them produce some Argument either from plain Scripture, good Consequence or
rectified Reason for their Opinion. For to tell us of Habitual Faith in
Infants, without any manner of Proof, either Scriptural or Philosophical is
mere begging of the Question. But if by Habitual Faith they mean a Potentiality
in the soul to believe, this will no more qualify their Infants for Baptism,
than the Infants of Heathens; because there may be a Potentiality in the one,
as well as the other to believe. And seeing it is but a Potentiality they speak
of, I demand how they come to know that their Infants have this Power? is it by
Revelation, or by Observation? If by Revelation, then surely they have some
Text for it? If by Observation, then their Infants do demonstrate it by some
Act or other of Believing? but if neither of these ways, then not at all.

Further, we may not Baptize Infants upon a mere supposed power of believing,
because a bare supposition or Presumption, is a groundless bottom to go upon:
For the Scriptures do no where countenance such a practice. We do indeed
baptize Grown Persons upon presumption that they are Believers, they making to
us a profession of their Faith in Christ, and giving Testimonials of amendment
in their Lives; but Infants being not capable of professing Faith in Christ, or
testifying of Repentance from D^ad Works, we must not baptize them upon a
supposition, that, as Believers Children, they have a potentiality to believe,
which others have not.

Object. 4. Infants of Believers are capable of having the Seal of the Covenant
of Grace, which is Baptism, applied unto them.

I Answer. Baptism is no Seal of the Covenant of Grace. Christ is the Great
Blessing of the Covenant, and the Holy Spirit Seals him to the Souls of the
Faithful. In whom after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit
of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. And grieve not the holy spirit, whereby ye are sealed to
the Day of Redemption, 4.30. And as the Holy Spirit seals Christ to the Soul,
so Faith the fruit thereof, seals the Soul to Christ He that has received
his Testimony, has set to his Seal that God is true, John 3.33. But granting
for Argument sake, that Bapism is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, how come
Infants to be capable of it? Is there any Word of God in the New Testament for
the Baptizing of them? There is none. How then are they capable of Baptism?
Why, the Devisers of Will Worship have created them a Title to it against the
Express Revelation of God.

FINIS.
(...) lately Printed, (...) Will. Marshal at the Bible i^ Newgate-street.
MR. Bunyans Works, Printed in Folio, price Bound 14 s. Mr. Knowls his
Exposition on the whole Book of the Revelations, price bound 2 s. 6 d. Mr.
Collin's Vindication of Believers Baptism, price 4 d. How Is Spiritual Teaching,
price 6 d. Mr. Keeches Child's Delight, containing a Scripture Catechism,
wherein all the chief Principles of Christian Religion are clearly (though
briefly) opened, necessary to establish young People in Gods Truths, in
Opposition to Popery in perilous Times; together with many other things, both
pleasant and useful, for the Christian Education of Youth; with Letters to
Parents: Adorned with several Copper Cuts, teaching to Spell, Read, and casting
Accounts; fitted for the use of Schools, and very useful for all Families,
price bound 6 d.

