A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE First and Second EPISTLES General of PETER.

BY ALEXANDER NISBET, Minister at IRVVIN.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.

1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone Church. Anno Dom. 1658.

To the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
GOD, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, and whose way is
in the Sea, and His path in great waters, does so in all Ages order the holy
Dispensations of His Providence, as (however our eyes are soon da^led, and our
weak judgments soon confounded, in studying thereof; yet) His holy Purposes
concerning the advancement of His Kingdom, and the good of His People, are
still effectual and carried-on. In tempestuous and gloomy times, He allows
such as have fled to Him for refuge, to believe that it is He who sits at
the Helm in all Affairs, who does all things well, and will make all things
work together for good to them who love Him, although they cannot distinctly
perceive how it shall be so. When He letteth-out deluges of Afflictions and
other sharp trials upon His People, It is but to drive them to His Mercy, since
other Messengers could not prevail to bring them up to abide and delight in
Him; that He may crush, and take away fuel from those soul-destroying lusts
which they would not mo^tifie^; and may famish all their idols, that they may
worship Him. And though He do let loose many enemie^ upon His Vineyard, which
threaten to consume all; Yet not only will it he found in and, that very
enemies are but Instruments to execute His Purposes, and to do only what His
Hand and Counsel determined before to be done, and that he both can and will,
in due time, give meat out of such eaters, and make the letting-loose of errors
and troubles contribute to draw His People to love and embrace the Truth more
cordially, and lay up their treasure where neither moth nor rust can corrupt,
nor thieves break through and steal: But He can and does also carry-on His Work
in the hands of His own Servants amidst all these disadvantages, and causes
His Wall to be built, even in troublous times.

Herein the Lord has given very ample proof of His magnified mercy toward His
Church in this Island, whom though He has been, and yet is exercising with
such variety of distempers, confusion and errors, as if all the Locusts of the
bottomlesse-pit were let loose upon us; Yet we cannot but acknowledge his
singular favor, in that he not only continues his Truth among us, hiding us
and it in the hollow of his hand, and preserving a Ministry whom he is pleased
to own in the discharge of their Calling; But that he stirs up and enableth
so many, according to the Talents they have received, to lay forth themselves
for propagating of Knowledge, Truth, and the power of Godliness, in the present
and succeeding Generations. As the Lord has given us an Orthodox CONFESSION OF
FAITH, and CATECHISM, and a DIRECTORY FOR WORSHIP according to the pattern
showed in the Mount; So we may say, that no Age has had greater helps for
vindicating and clearing the Truths we profess, and for helping Christians in
the understanding of the Scriptures, and directing them in the way of Piety.
And as some have taken pains to communicate the Labors of foreign (...)

A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the first Epistle General of PETER.
The ARGUMENT.
ALthough this Apostle was in a very mean external condition before his
calling, Mat. 4, 18. and wanted not his manifold failings thereafter, Mat.
16.22. and 26.70. Gal. 2.14. Yet by the free grace of God, he was honored to
be an eyewitness of Christ's greatest glory on earth, Mat. 17.1. and of his
saddest sufferings, Mat. 26.27. to convert many thousand souls, Act. 2.41. to
write this excellent Scripture, and to die a Martyr, 2 Pet. 1.14. compared with
Joh. 21.18, 19. All which considerations of him, may serve to commend to the
Church the truths delivered by him.

The Epistle is directed to the Christian Jews, of whom he had gotten a special
charge, Gal. 2.7. and of whose conversion he had been a prime instrument, Act.
2.9, etc.

The special occasion of his writing to them, (as appears by the strain of his
Doctrine) was the rage of Persecution, the prevailing of Error, and some decay
of grace and holiness among them, together with the present opportunity of a
sin Messenger to carry the Epistle, 1 Pet. 5.12. who had a calling to
interpret, and publicly to explain the same to them, 2 Cor. 1.19.

His principal scope, is, to confirm Believers in the Truth, to stir them up to
constancy and cheerfulness under their sufferings for it, to grow in grace, and
to adorn their profession by a holy walking in their several relations, as
appears by comparing 1 Pet. 5.12. where he resumes his scope in this Epistle,
with 2 Pet. 3.1. where he expresses his scope in both.

The principal parts of this Epistle are three. In the first (after the
Preface, Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2.) the Apostle gives such a description of the
excellent spiritual condition of Believers, as might provoke them to joy under
their saddest sufferings, and engage them to these duties of holiness which he
presses in the rest of the Epistle: and this is to the 13. ver. of the 1.
chap. The second part contains several exhortations, with motives pressing
the same, to such duties of holiness, as that most excellent state does oblige
all Christians unto, whatsoever their relations or condition be in the world:
and this is to the 13. ver. of the 2. chap. In the third part, the Apostle
presses such duties of holiness as are suitable for Christians, considered
under their Civil, Domestic, or Church relations, and especially such as
belong to those who are in a condition of suffering for Christ and his Truth:
and this is to the 10. ver. of the 5. chap. After which is the close of the
whole Epistle.

CHAP. I.
THe parts of this Chapter are two. In the first (after the Preface of the
whole Epistle, containing a description of the Penman of it, and of the
parties to whom it is directed, ver. 1, 2.) the Apostle incites suffering
Christians to praise God, by raising the song before them: wherein he makes
clear how excellent their spiritual estate was; and holds forth what reasons
they had from it of cheerfulness and constancy under all their sufferings, to
wit, 1. Their regeneration, ver. 3. 2. Their matchless inheritance, ver. 4. 3.
The certainty of their perseverance, ver. 5. 4. The shortness, and 5. the
necessity of all their sufferings, ver. 6. 6. Their spiritual advantage by
them, to wit, the trial of their graces, especially of their faith, ver. 7. 7.
The happy effects of that faith, which by trials is discovered to be sound,
ver. 8, 9. 8. The excellency of the Doctrine of Salvation for which they did
suffer, which is proven by the great pains and delight of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Angels in the study thereof, ver. 10, 11, 12.

In the second part, are contained several exhortations to the study of
holiness, with motives pressing the same: As, 1. Seeing they had those excellent
privileges formerly mentioned, they should therefore study perseverance, and
growth in grace, ver. 13. 2. Considering that they were now made Children, they
should therefore study their Fathers obedience, and not live as they had done
formerly, ver. 14. 3. Seeing their Calling was to be holy. And, 4. the holiness
of God did oblige them to that study, ver. 15, 16. 5. Since their Father was to
be their Judge. And, 6. themselves were but strangers in the world, Therefore
they should live in fear of offending him, v. 17. 7. Considering that they were
bought from their former sinful courses with a most excellent price, ver. 18,
19. 8. That their Redeemer was from eternity designed for them, and more
clearly manifested in their time than formerly, ver. 20. 9. Seeing the Father
has exalted Christ after his sufferings, that Believers may be the more
confident that Justice is fully satisfied for them, ver. 21. And, 10. seeing
they had already made some good progress in mortification, therefore they
should study to grow, especially in love to the Saints, ver. 22. 11.
Considering that their spiritual original was so excellent, ver. 23. And
lastly, that their spiritual estate was not fading, as the best things in
nature are, ver. 24. but behoved to endure for ever, as the Word, which is the
principle of it, does, ver. 25. Therefore they ought to live to their Fathers
honor in the study of holiness.

Verse. 1. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.
IN this part of the Inscription, the Penman of the Epistle does first make
himself known, by that new name which Christ gave him, Joh. 1.42. and by his
Office, common to him with other Apostles, who had immediate Commission, and
extraordinary Assistance from the Son of God to preach the Gospel, and to work
Miracles for confirmation of the same, and were not fixed, as ordinary
Ministers are, to any particular Charge, Mat. 10.1. and 28.19. Next he
describes the persons to whom this Epistle was first directed, from their
afflicted external condition, to wit, that they were banished from their own
Country and wonted privileges, and scattered in many places of the world,
whereof some are here mentioned. From the Apostles description of himself, we
may Learn, 1. When the Ministers of Jesus Christ are entering upon any part of
their public Employment, it is then especially necessary for them to have in
their hearts the sensible consideration, of what honor Christ has put upon
them, what engagements to be faithful to Him, what warrant they have from Him
to go about their Employment, and what an one He is from whom they have their
Calling, that so they may carry along in their hearts some holy fear of
slighting the work of such a one as the Son of God, to whom they must give an
account, Heb. 13.17. and may have much encouragement, considering that their
Commission is from Him, who has all fullness, Col. 1.19. to furnish them, and
supply the peoples necessities: for, the Apostle, entering upon this part of his
employment, to wit, the writing of this Epistle, has had in heart the
consideration of that new name wherewith Christ honored him, and whereby He
would have him constantly mindful of his duty, that he should be according to
the signification of his name, interpreted by Christ, Joh. 1.42. steadfast as a
Rock or Stone in his Masters service; and likewise of his Commission from so
honorable and glorious a Master, as the anointed Savior of Sinners, while he
writes, Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ. 2. When the message of Christ's
Ministers is much slighted, and opposed, and their Calling much questioned, it
is necessary for them openly to avow and assert their Authority from Him; that
people, perceiving Ministers not afraid to avow themselves, and their Calling
from Christ, upon all hazards, may be encouraged to embrace and adhere to the
Truths they deliver; and having their minds raised above instruments, the
Truths delivered may have the greater weight with them: for, upon these grounds
we may safely conceive the Apostle to prefix his name to this Epistle, and to
avow his Office, even in a time of persecution; Peter an Apostle of Jesus
Christ. 3. There has never been any supremacy over the rest of the Apostles,
conferred upon Peter, neither did he ever assume any such thing to himself; and
consequently did never cast a copy to any Minister to usurp, or affect any such
thing over their fellow laborers: for, if there had been any such thing, of so
great concernment as the Church of Rome makes it, it cannot be thought, but
this Apostle would have found himself bound to assert it: which if he had done
any where, it could not be expected in a fitter place, than in the entry of his
Writings, where the Prophets and Apostles usually assert to themselves as much
dignity as the Lord allows them; And yet neither here, nor in the following
Epistle, is there any such thing, but at the most, Peter an Apostle (or,
Messenger) of Jesus Christ.

From the first branch of the description of those to whom the Epistle is
directed, we may Learn, 1. That exile, and separation from outward comforts and
privileges, may be the lot of the people who are dearest to the Lord of any on
earth besides; even those may be corrected, and humbled for the abuse of their
mercies, Psa. 89.30. and by their means, in their exile and scattering, the
Lord minds to spread the seeds of saving knowledge among strangers to Him,
Micah 5.7. Zach. 10.9. for which, and the like causes, the Christian Hebrews,
to whom the Apostle writes, were called here strangers scattered, etc. 2.
Although the Lords afflicted people, by reason of their ignorance and unbelief,
are very prone to conclude themselves forgotten and forsaken of him, Isa.
49.14. Yet those, who under their affliction are humbling themselves for sin,
and cleaving to the Truth and way of God, may be confident, that the Lord not
only takes notice of their sad condition, and of all the places of their
sufferings; but that He will provide some subsistence for them there, while He
has service for them; and will also, as i^ needful, follow them through all
those places, and all their miseries, with real testimonies of His love and
respect; whereof He gives here a proof, while by the hand of this Apostle He
sends to those Christian Jews (who, though they were justly for their sins
shut out of their own Land, yet wanted not means of subsistence in all the
places of their exile) so sweet and seasonable a message as this Epistle,
directed to the Strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia.

Verse. 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ: Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.
This last part of the Inscription, contains the second branch of the
Description of those to whom the Epistle is directed, together with the
Apostles salutation of them. They are here described from their most excellent
spiritual condition, to comfort them against their forementioned sad outward
condition, to wit, that they were wailed out from among others, as the word
Elect signifies, which may be safely understood both of the Lords eternal
purpose of love toward them, in which sense the word Elect is taken, Matthew.
20.16. as also of his actual separating of them from the rest of the world in
their effectual Calling, as the word is taken, Joh. 15.16. And that not for any
foreseen good that they were to do, but according as the Lord, in his eternal
foreknowledge, having all Adam's posterity in his eye, had freely condescended
upon them, and appointed them to come by the way of faith and holiness (which
his own Spirit was to work in them) to the full enjoyment of all that Christ
had purchased for them, by his fulfilling of the Law, and satisfying for the
breach thereof. To these, in the salutation, the Apostle wishes the proofs of
Gods favor in a continual increase of all saving graces, and true peace, with
God, with others, and with their own consciences. From this second branch of
the Description of those to whom the Epistle is directed, we may Learn, 1.
Although none, in an ordinary way, can infallibly know the election, or
effectual calling of another, Rev. 2.17. yet it is not impossible for the Elect
and Called themselves to attain to some comfortable measure of the knowledge
thereof, the Lord having taken so much pains to give the marks of such in his
Word, and to describe a saving work by the effects thereof, which are proper to
the Elect and effectually called Ones, Joh. 6.37. 2 Pet. 2.7, 9. and having
promised his Spirit to make his own know their privileges, 1 Cor. 2.12. for,
it is asserted here, as Christians chief Consolation against their sad outward
condition spoken of before, that they are Elect; Now this could be no more
consolation to them that were eternally elected, and effectually called, than
to any other Members of the Church, except they might know themselves to be
such as are here described; and there can be no question but their consolation
is mainly intended, while they are thus spoken to, Elect, according to the
foreknowledge of God.

2. Where there may be discerned in Christians a serious and constan^
profession of the Truth of Christ, and endeavors to walk suitably thereunto,
there is sufficient ground for others to esteem and deal with them, as with
those that are the Elect of God, and in time effectually called: for, though
there be no ground to think that all to whom the Apostle writes were such; Yet,
because he did intend to edify the Elect and Regenerate, and in charity did
esteem them to be serious and constant Professors of the Truth, even in a
suffering time, and to be aiming at an answerable walking thereunto, he calls
them here, Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God. 3. Those who are
powerfully drawn to believe in Jesus Christ, and are changed by his Spirit, and
have his Spirit present, manifesting their change to be such as the Word
approves for saving, have a well grounded confidence of their election or
effectual calling: for, those whom the Apostle here calls, Elect, according to
the foreknowledge of God, are afterward at large described to be such as had a
saving work of grace in them, to wit, saving faith in Christ, ver. 6. some good
degree of mortification, ver. 22. and were daily imployers of Christ for growth
in grace and holiness, chap. 2. ver. 4. and had the Spirit of Jesus resting
upon them, chap. 4.14. 4. The Lord does not choose some sinners from among
others, whether in his eternal purpose of love, or in their effectual calling,
because he did foresee them to make good use of their free will, for converting
or sanctifying of themselves; but only because his Majesty, having all persons
whom he purposed to frame unto salvation, under his all-seing eye, did out of
his free love condescend upon some in particular, while others were past by:
for, those here, who according to the foreknowledge of God, are chosen to
salvation, are also chosen to come to the profession of it through that which
the Lords Spirit works in them: and so there can be nothing foreseen in them
to proceed from the right use of their free will, which can be a motive to him
to choose them, since their sanctification is a work of his own Spirit, and
they are not elected to salvation for it, but through it to salvation, as a
mean of his own working ^ Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God, through
sanctification of the Spirit. 5. When we consider the Lord in that act of
choosing some to eternal life, we ought to consider him as a Father, both of
Christ the Mediator, and of all those whom he does elect: for, though Christ
did not merit electing love, in regard that love moved God to give Christ for
sinners, Joh. 3.16. yet we are allowed to conceive the Lord in that same act of
appointing some to everlasting blessedness, to be also appointing his own Son
to be their Redeemer, and to be the Purchaser of that blessedness for them;
and so to be putting on a fatherly affection toward them in him, Ephesians. 1.4.
That which does cost us many thoughts, and which we do, in a manner, break in
many pieces in our conception, was but one eternal act of God, whose absolute
perfection does not admit of such succession in his thoughts or purposes, as he
allows us to have in our thoughts concerning these: for, while the Apostle
speaks of Election according to the foreknowledge of God, he calls him the
Father. 6. All who are chosen to partake of that everlasting blessedness which
Christ has purchased, are appointed to come to the possession of it through
sanctification, whereby their minds are enlightened to see their woeful
condition by nature, Revel. 3.17, 18. to see the possibility and excellency of
a better estate, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. their hearts are powerfully inclined to close
with Christ, Joh. 6.44, 45. and they are enabled to foresake sin, and follow
after that which is well-pleasing in the sight of God, Jam. 1.27. and so the
whole man is separated for the Lords use, 2 Timothy 2.21. which is sanctification
in a large sense: for, these whom the Apostle affirms here to be elected to
partake of what Christ has purchased, he does clearly intimate, that they must
come to it through sanctification. 7. It is not in the power of man's free will,
or of any creature whatsoever, to work any good motion or inclination in a
sinners heart, (that is the work of the Spirit of God alone:) for,
sanctification which comprehends all gracious qualities, is here called the
work of the Spirit. 8. Jesus Christ our Mediator has both obeyed the Law
perfectly for us, that he might make up the defects of our imperfect obedience,
Col. 2.10. and cast us a perfect copy, which we are bound to aim at in
conformity, Heb. 12.2. and likewise has born all that wrath which was due to
all the Elect for their breach of the Law, that so deserved wrath might pass
over all his redeemed ones, (as the destroying Angel passed by those whose
doors were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschal Lamb, to which the Apostles
expression here alludes) for, both these, which are commonly called Christ's
active and passive obedience, are here expressed by the Apostle, while he
says, Elect, etc. unto obedience, and sprinkleing of the blood of Jesus
Christ. 9. All the Elect will certainly partake of all that Christ has
purchased by his doing and suffering for them; the first fruits whereof they
get in time, and the full harvest afterward: none of them can fall short of
what they are from eternity destinated unto: for, the Apostle says here, they
are chosen unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Christ, which is
nothing else but to be chosen to lay hold on both by faith, and at last fully
to enjoy what both has merited for them. 10. Although Christ's fulfilling of
the Law, and suffering for our breach thereof, which is here called his
obedience, and the sprinkling of his blood, be in order first imputed to us for
justification, before our sanctification, Romans 8.30. Yet our assurance and
comfort of our interest in his obedience and sufferings, is not had till after
our sanctification, See Joh. 14.21. for, to be elect through sanctification of
the Spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, is to
be from eternity chosen to come by the way of holiness to the full
participation of what Christ has purchased by his obedience and sufferings, to
wit, peace and joy in the holy Ghost here, and the full enjoyment of God
hereafter: both which are the purchase of his obedience and sufferings, to
which we are elected; Elect unto obedience, and sprinkling. 11. When we
consider that great work which concerns the salvation of lost sinners, we are
to look upon all the Persons of the blessed Trinity as concurring therein, that
so we may have the higher esteem of the work, which has such agents, and may
have our hearts raised to give equal glory to all the Persons: for, though our
Election, Redemption, Sanctification and Glorification, be each of them the
work of the whole Deity, and none of the Persons are to be excluded from any of
these; Yet the Scripture allows us to have such thoughts anent the order of
the Persons in working, as we may have anent the order of their subsistence:
for, here the Apostle sets forth the Father, out of his good pleasure electing
sinners to grace and glory; the Son, by his obedience and suffering, purchasing
the same for them; and the Spirit, by his virtue and power, working grace in
them, and so preparing them for that blessedness, which the Father has
appointed, and Christ has purchased for them: Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. From the salutation,
Learn, 1. The Ministers of Christ, while they are dealing with the Lords
People, should labor for enlarged desires after their welfare, so will they be
the more serious and affectionate in dealing with them; their pains will be the
more sweet to themselves, and the more acceptable to, and succesful with, the
people: for, the Apostles ordinarily begin their Epistles, with such ample
expressions of their desires after the good of those to whom they writ, as this
Apostle does here; Grace and peace be multiplied unto you. 2. No less than a
continual increase of the proofs of Gods favor, and of all saving graces,
together with true quietness of spirit, and every blessing of God necessary for
the same, is the Lord's allowance to his redeemed and sanctified ones: whatever
measure of this allowance any of them have received, there is still more of it
to be had; and still more of it will be given unto them, except their unbelief,
and other sins obstruct the outletting thereof: for, all this and much more the
Apostle wishes unto them, and pronounces upon them in this sal^^ation, Grace
and peace be multiplied unto you. 3. It is only those who are fled to Christ's
merits, and are begun to be changed by his Spirit, who can expect this
comfortable allowance to be letten forth to them; and those only Christ's
Ministers may in his Name certify of it: for, it is only those who are
described in the former part of the Verse, to whom this is spoken; and this is
not only a favorable wish of the Apostles, but a definitive sentence of the
Spirit of God passed in their favors, That Grace and peace shall be multiplied
unto them.

Verse. 3. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.
Here the Apostle enters upon the first part of the Chapter, wherein he sets
forth the excellency of the state of Believers in Jesus Christ, that thereby he
may confirm them in the Truth, comfort them under their sufferings, and enforce
upon them the study of holiness, which are his principal scope in the whole
Epistle: And this part he begins with a song of praise to God, which all
Believers should follow in their hearts: the reasons of which song, contains
their privileges, whereof every one does prove their state to be most
excellent, and that therefore they ought to be constant sufferers, and holy
walkers. The first reason is, That they had a new spiritual life, and nature
communicated to them in their Regeneration, whereby they were now made Children
of God; and this privilege is described, and commended, 1. From the Author
thereof, that it is God, and the Father of such a Son as Christ, who has made
us his children. 2. From the impulsive cause moving him so to do, to wit,
nothing in us, but mercy in him, which is commended from the plenty or
abundance of it. 3. This privilege of Regeneration is commended from the
effect of it, that thereby the Regenerate are made to hope for those excellent
things, spoken of in the following words. The nature of which hope is cleared,
1. From the property, or effect of it, it is lively, quickening the soul that
has it: And, 2. From the ground of it, which is the cause of its liveliness,
to wit, that our Cautioner, who died in our room, is risen to apply his
purchase, and to possess us in it. Hence we may Learn, 1. The way to make
Christians steadfast in the Truth, cheerful under their sufferings for it, and
thriving in holiness, is to have their hearts brought to a praising
disposition, from the consideration of their spiritual privileges, and the
excellency of the state of grace wherein they are, their hearts being thereby
sweetly diverted from sad reflections upon their outward afflictions, and
strongly encouraged to hold on in the way of truth and holiness,
notwithstanding of all discouragements: for, the Apostle's scope being to
confirm and comfort sufferers, and to provoke them to the study of holiness,
he labors first of all to engage their hearts to this exercise of praise, by
raising this Psalm before them, Blessed be the God and Father, etc. 2. They are
fittest to cheer up the hearts of others to spiritual joy and praise, who have
their own hearts kept so sensible of the excellent state of Believers, because
of their spiritual privileges, that they are ready to burst forth in the
praises of God themselves, and go before others in that exercise, as they have
a calling and opportunity: for, the Apostle being to comfort those heavy
hearted exiles under their sufferings, and provoke them to praise, has his own
heart so full, that he must break forth in singing before them, Blessed be the
God and Father, etc. 3. Our praise, or blessing of God, is not any addition of
blessedness to him, who is in that respect especially, above all blessing and
praise, Neh. 9.5. but it is only our acknowledgment of his praiseworthy
perfections, and of his goodness to sinners, that they may fall in love with
him, and join with us in the same acknowledgment: for, that word, which is
translated, Blessing of God, in the New Testament, signifies to speak well of
him. 4. Of all the spiritual privileges bestowed upon sinners in time, which
call them to joy and praise, the first and principal, is their Regeneration,
whereby they who are dead in sins, and trespasses, and born heirs of Gods
curse, have a new life communicated to them, Ephesians. 2.1, 3. and such heavenly
qualities stamped upon their soul, as makes them in some measure resemble their
heavenly Father, Ephesians. 4.24. for, the Apostle puts our Regeneration for the
first reason of this song, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has begotten us again. 5. This change of a sinners nature, which
is made in Regeneration, is the alone work of the omnipotent God, as the
principal and efficient cause, wherein he makes use of men as instruments in
his hand, 1 Cor. 4.15. and of the Word from them as his means, Jam. 1.18. There
being no more power in man, naturally to work this change in himself, than can
be imagined in any man to have begotten himself: Therefore is it set forth here
by such a word as may lead all the Regenerate to consider themselves as wholly
passive when first this change is made upon them: Blessed be the God, etc. who
has begotten us again. 6. It does exceedingly commend the free love of God in
making this change upon sinners, and may much highten in their hearts the
esteem of his work, that He, who has such a Son as Jesus Christ, who was, and
is his peer and equal, Philip. 2.6. the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3.
and his full delight, Prove. 8.30. should have vouchsafed upon such unworthy
things as we are, so sweet and honorable a relation to himself, and that
blessed Son of his, as is imported in this his begetting of us again! the
esteem whereof the Apostle heightens in his own heart, and in the hearts of the
Regenerate by this, That it is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has begotten us again. 7. The Lord is not moved to bestow his grace upon
sinners, by any goodness which he did foresee or find in them, seeing none can
give first to him, Romans 11.35. nor be profitable to him, Job 22.2. who needs
nothing from any, Act. 17.25. but only by his own mercy, which is that lovely
property whereby he is strongly inclined to let out of his goodness to
unworthy and miserable sinners, who deserve the contrary from him: for, here
Mercy is made the alone and sufficient motive of our regeneration, while the
Apostle says, According to his mercy he has begotten us. 8. That mercy which
moves the Lord to work a saving change upon any sinner, is both very plentiful
for the quantity of it, and most excellent for the quality of it, and it must
be so, there being so many provocations found and foreseen in sinners, which
only plentiful mercy can overcome, Isa. 48.8. and so many excellent favors to
be bestowed upon the Regenerate as never entered in their hearts to conceive, 1
Cor. 2.9. that it must be excellent mercy that does bestow them. Therefore,
that which moves the Lord to regenerate sinners, is not simply called Mercy,
but abundant mercy, which in the Original signifies, not only the plenty of it
for quantity, but also the excellency and worth of it for quality. 9. The
Regenerate come not presently to the possession of what Christ has purchased
for them, they must be first tried, whether they will glorify him, by living
in the confident expectation of what he has purchased and promised, which is
hope flowing from faith, and only differing from it in this, that faith
apprehends the thing promised as if it were present, so giving it a spiritual
kind of subsistence in the soul, Heb. 11.1. and hope makes the heart, with some
measure of cheerful patience, expect that good which it looks upon as absent
for the time, Romans 8.25. for, the want of possession for a time after
regeneration, is imported in this, that we are begotten again unto a lively
hope. 10. Before the Lord make this powerful change upon sinners in
regeneration, they are altogether without any true and well-grounded hope of a
better life than this, whatever strong and groundless presumptions thereof
they may entertain: for, so much is supposed in this, that we are begotten
again unto a lively hope. 11. All that have gotten a new life and nature from
the Lord in ^^generation, have gotten therewith this grace of hope (...) have
his allowance to keep up their hearts in the exp^^^ (...) of all that he has
promised: and, though the^cy ^^rance and unbelief does often man the exercise
(...), Lam. 3.18. yet they must again attain un^^ (...) ^easure of the exercise
thereof, Lam. 3.24. it be^ ^^cial act of the new life which is given in
regenera^^ (...) and is here made the immediate effect of it, as is ^^orted in
this, He has begotten us again unto a lively (...) 12. The hope of the
Regenerate, is a lively hope, ^ickening them in the use of all means for
attaining to that they hope for, Heb. 12.28. and for keeping of themselves free
of every thing unsuitable for them, who are born to so great hopes, 1 John 3.3.
for, it is here described from the property or effect of it; it is a lively
hope. 13. That which keeps the hope of the Regenerate in life and exercise, and
is the solid ground and cause thereof, is, that Christ their Cautioner having
once died in their room, is now risen as a conqueror over all their spiritual
enemies, Col. 2.15. in testimony that he is fully discharged of all their debt,
and they in him, Romans 1.4. and 4.25. whereby also they are certified that they
shall rise, and share with him in the possession of what he has purchased, and
possesses in their name, Job. 14.2, 3. 2 Cor. 4.14. for, the ground and cause
of this lively hope, is here made, the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for you.
The second reason of that Song of praise which all the Regenerate should keep
up in their hearts, is, that they have a matchless inheritance to look for
beyond time, which is both excellent in it self, and made very sure for them.
The excellency of it the Apostle sets forth by three properties of it, which
prove it to excel very far all earthly inheritances: 1. That it has nothing
in it self, which does incline it toward any decay. 2. That (...) admit of
nothing from without to stain the beauty (...) excellency of it: And therefore,
3. it does rema^ (...) eternity in its primitive and native luster: (...) are
sweetened by this, That it is safely kept for (...) ^egenerate, in a place
above all hazard. Hence Lea^^ The blessed state which the Regenerate have good
(...) hope for, is so matchless and excellent, that it (...) set out by any
thing here away. The best (...) here inclines to a decay, is still defiled and
fa^^^g one way or other; but this inheritance is incorruptibl^ undefiled, and
fades not away. Many words cannot commend it sufficiently: for, here are
several, and those m^taphorick and negative, to tell us that we may more easily
conceive and express, what it is not, and what it is like, than what it is. 2.
If the Lords People would keep their hearts in a praising disposition, if they
would be constant and cheerful in their adherance to the Truth of Christ,
notwithstanding of sufferings, they must have their hearts much taken up with
the consideration of the excellency of their portion, which is made sure for
them beyond time; So will they undervalue afflictions by the way, 2 Cor. 4.17,
18. and rejoice under them, Romans 5.2, 3. So will they despise the pleasures of
sin, Heb. 11.24. and sweetly digest all pains in the duties of holiness, 2
Cor. 5.8, 9. for, the Apostle, to work up the hearts of those to whom he
writes, toward this frame, does here commend and propose to their
consideration, the excellency of their inheritance, that it is incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away. 3. This inheritance, which the Regenerate
are born unto, and have good ground to hope for, is nothing else but the Lord
himself blessed for ever, to be enjoyed by them to all eternity: for, what is
here attributed to it, is elsewhere in Scripture attributed to him, He is the
Inheritance of his People, Psalm. 16.5, 6. incorruptible, Romans 1.23. undefiled,
Heb. 7.26. and that fades not away, Psalm. 102.27. 4. This heavenly inheritance
of the Saints does not come to them by their own purchase or procurement, but
by virtue of their sonship, Romans 8.17. which they have immediately upon their
closing with Christ, Joh. 1.12. as a thing purchased to them by their Father.
Ephesians. 1.14. who has left it to them in lega^^, Job. 17.24. and lives for ever
to be the Executor of his own Testament, Heb. 7.25. and is so far from being
merited by any of them, that it falls as it were by lot, as Isreal's inheritance
in Canaan did, to which the Apostle here alludes, while he sets forth
everlasting blessedness by this word Inheritance, which signifies a thing come
by heirship, left in legacy, and fallen by lot. 5. This blessed state is made
very sure for the Regenerate, being from eternity decerned unto them, Mat.
25.44. secured to them in time by the promise of the faithful God, Joh. 6.40.
and now possessed by their Surety and Head in their name, Heb. 6.19, 20. for the
Apostle says, it is reserved in Heaven for them.

Verse. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time.
The third reason of the joy and constancy of suffering Believers, is, That
their perseverance is made sure, the Almighty Power of God being employed as
their guard and safe conduct by the way, to strengthen their faith, and keep it
from failing, till they come to the possession of their inheritance which is
ready for them; and for the communication whereof, the particular time is fixed
and set. Hence Learn, 1. The Lord has a great mind that the joy and
consolation of the heirs of salvation should be strong and full, fore-knowing
that they are ready to apprehend much matter of fear and uncertainty, he guards
them on every hand, having assured them in the former words, that their
excellent inheritance was above hazard of being lost, here he certifies them
that they are no less sure, and beyond all hazard of being lost in their way
to the possession of it: An earthly inheritance may be sure enough kept for an
Heir, but who can

service, to wit, an undoubted right to the salvation of his soul through
Christ: for, the word, Receiving, here, whereby the Apostle expresses the act
of Faith, has in it a metaphor from those Wrestlers, who after the victory are
taking the prise, and carrying it; and the word, which is here translated the
end of Faith, may be also rendered the reward of it; Receiving the end of your
Faith, the salvation of your souls. 6. Whatever a Believer may lose upon his
journey, seeing he is sure to come well to the end of it, and has his better
part, the soul, beyond peril, he may rejoice in the midst of all sufferings by
the way: for, this may safely be taken for the nearest cause of that joy
unspeakable and full of glory, which Believers have, that while they did
exercise their Faith, they were receiving the end of their Faith, or, the
reward of it, even the salvation of their fouls.

Verse. 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.
In this and the two following Verses, is contained the last reason of the joy
and constancy of Believers under their sufferings, (which might be branched out
in several arguments to that purpose;) the sum whereof is, That all the
Prophets and Apostles; yea, the very Angels of Heaven, are Condisciples and
fellow-students of this way of salvation which the Gospel holds forth: and
therefore it is worthy to be rejoiced in, even under sufferings for it. This
tenth Verse holds forth how accurate and serious searchers in the nature of
this salvation; held forth in the Gospel, the Prophets were, who did foretell
of a more clear manifestation of the Doctrine concerning is, and of a more
plentiful out-letting of the graces of the Spirit upon those who live after
Christ's incarnation, than had been upon those who lived before: and this may
be taken for an argument by it self, to move those upon whom that grace is
bestowed, cheerfully to adhere to the Gospel, notwithstanding of sufferings for
it. Hence, Learn, 1. The way of salvation by Jesus Christ, which is held forth
in the New Testament, is no new light broken up since Christ's days in the
flesh; but is the very same in substance, which was known to the Prophets under
the Old Testament, and by them made known to the Church then: although the
doctrine of salvation be now clearer, and the gifts and graces of the Spirit
more plentifully dispensed, since the price of redemption is actually paid, for
which, God gave out upon trust grace and glory to the Elect before; yet the way
of salvation then, and now, is one and the same, for substance for, of that
salvation, which Believers in Christ do by Faith now under the Gospel receive,
the Apostle here speaks: Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, etc. 2.
So sweet and ravishing a study is that way of salvation through Christ
incarnate, that the more knowledge thereof any attain unto; they will still be
the more and more inquisitive and diligent after a further measure of it; so
that those can know nothing of Christ savingly, who satisfy themselves with
any measure of the knowledge of Him, that they have already attained unto: for,
even the Prophets, after some insight in that way, partly, by immediate
revelation, and partly, by their former diligence, were not taken off from the
painful use of ordinary means; such as Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and
careful prying, into the meaning of those manifold Types, which held forth
that way of salvation through the Messiah to come, and the benefits which the
Redeemed have by Him; but did renew and double their diligence, as is imported
by the several words here to one purpose; Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently. 3. All that deliver the mind of God to His
People, ought to be affectionate and serious students of it themselves, that so
they may make the Truths they are to deliver, their own, and have their hearts
affected therewith, Psalm. 45.1. So may they expect it shall be more blessed to
take impression, and have effects upon the hearers: for, the words here,
expressing the Prophets pains in the study of that way of salvation through
Christ, do import, that never did Hunters with greater eagerness and delight
pursue their game, nor those that dig in the earth, where they know some rich
treasure is to be had, more seriously apply themselves to that exercise, than
the Prophets did insist upon this study; Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied before. 4. The prime subject
both of the Old and New Testament, whereupon all the Ministers of Christ should
insist with His People, is the free grace of God, manifested in giving Christ
for sinners, in his powerful drawing of their hearts to close with him, for
pardoning grace, and for renewing of their natures by inherent grace; and so
obliging and enabling them to walk worthy of that grace of God: for, the sum of
the Prophets work (in which the Apostles concur, as the following words do make
clear) was, to prophecy of the grace that should come unto us. 5. Although
this grace was made known, and communicated to them who lived before Christ's
incarnation, Act. 10.43. Yet it is in a special manner come unto those who live
after, in regard of a clearer manifestation of the Doctrine of Gods Grace, 2
Cor. 3.18. a more plentiful communication of the gifts and graces of his
Spirit, Act. 2.16. and that both of these are extended to some of all Nations,
Col. 3.11. In which respects it is here called, The grace come unto us.

Verse. 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which
was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow.
The Apostle clears yet further the Prophets pains in the study of that way of
salvation through Christ incarnate, showing that they were exceeding desirous
and diligent to have known the particular time of his coming in the flesh, and
to have known more clearly than they did, how happy those times behoved to be,
whereof the Spirit of Christ (who was even then in an extraordinary way present
with them) did mean, when he moved them to describe, so long beforehand, the
humiliation, or sufferings of the Messiah; and his exaltation, or the glorious
effects that were to follow upon his sufferings, to himself, and his redeemed
ones: therefore they who lived after his incarnation, ought cheerfully and
constantly to adhere to the Gospel, notwithstanding of all their sufferings.
Hence Learn, 1. It is the way which the Lord usually keeps with the dearest of
his Servants, to let out his mind to them by little and little, to make plain
some things to them, and keep up other things from them, that he may humble
them, quicken them to diligence, and keep up correspondence betwixt himself and
them: for, though it was made clear to the Prophets, that Christ was to be
incarnate, that much grace should be in his days, and more blessed times, than
any they had seen; and however all of them had some intimation of the time of
his incarnation, by Jacob's prophecy, Genesis 49.10. and those of them who lived
after the Captivity, by Daniel's prophecy, Dan. 9.24. Yet they were kept dark
concerning the particular time when he should come, and the distinct quality of
His times, what form of Worship, and way of administration of Gospel Ordinances
there should be then; Therefore are they here set forth, Searching what, or
what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, etc.
2. The holy Spirit is a person subsisting, distinct from the Father and the
Son, proceeding from both, Joh. 15.26. and true God, equal to both, to whom
future events are known as if they were actually existing: for, here he is
called the Spirit of Christ, and is said to testify beforehand the sufferings
of Christ. 3. Jesus Christ the second person of the Trinity has been before
his incarnation actually exercising the Office of Mediatorship, revealing to
the Church, in all ages, the way of salvation through his sufferings: for, it
was the Spirit of the Son of God that dwelt in the Prophets, and made known to
them those things concerning the Mediator, whereof they did prophecy: The
Spirit of Christ in them testified beforehand. 4. The chief things which the
Spirit of Christ did manifest to the Prophets, and wherewith their prime study
was taken up, was the sufferings of the Mediator, and the glory that should
follow thereupon to him and his redeemed ones; it being the end of all the
discoveries of sin, and threatenings of wrath that are in the Law, to point out
the necessity of his satisfaction, Romans 10.3. and the very substance and
signification of all the Types and Sacr^fices, to point forth his sufferings,
and the glorious effects thereof, Heb. 10.1. for, the Apostle compriseth (...)
substance of that which the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did signify to
them, and testify to the Church by them, in these two, The sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow. 5. This method was kept with Christ
the head, and none of his members should expect to have it changed with them,
that he was first to suffer, and then glory was to follow; So that the Jews
have no warrant from any thing in the Prophets to expect a Messiah in worldly
glory without suffering: for, this is the compend of all that the Prophets
spoke of the Messiah, at the direction of his Spirit in them, They testified
beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.

Verse. 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that have
preached the Gospel unto you, with the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which
things the Angels desire to look into.
That the Apostle may yet further commend the truths of the Gospel, as worthy
to be rejoiced in, and suffered for; and may prove the state of Believers now,
to be in some respects more excellent than that of the ancient Prophets, he
shows, 1. what success the Prophets had of their pains: although they got
not the very thing they did so much desire, which was, not only to have known
the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, but to have lived to see it, as is
clear by comparing the former Verse, with Luke 10.24. Yet the Lord condescended
to give them such an answer of their pains as might quiet their hearts, to wit,
that they themselves were not to see the temporal accomplishment of their own
Prophecies; that was reserved for them who were to live after Christ's
incarnation: 2. He shows, that what the Prophets had foretold, was now much
cleared to the Christian Church by the Apostles, who were for that end endued
with an extraordinary measure of the holy Spirit, sent down upon them in the
day of Pentecost. And, 3. he affirms, that this way of salvation through
Christ already incarnate, as it is now cleared and administered under the
Gospel, is so ravishing a subject, that it takes up the delight and study of
the Angels of Heaven to pry in upon it. Every one of which does infer that
conclusion, which is to be understood as the Apostles scope, That therefore
Believers now ought cheerfully to adhere to the truths of the Gospel, what ever
they may suffer for so doing. Hence Learn, 1. Although the Lord do not always
answer the approven pains of his Servants with desired satisfaction, in the
particular that they aim at; Yet it is not his way to leave them without such
an answer, and fruit of their pains, as shall be more for his honor, their
true good, and the good of others also, than if they had received that
satisfaction which they so much desired: for, though the Prophets (who were
approven in their search after the time of Christ's manifestation in the flesh,
there being somewhat concerning it revealed, Genesis 49.10. Dan. 9.24. and there
being nowhere a discharge of enquiry after that time, as there is after the
time of Christ's second coming, Mat. 24.36. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1.) got not their desired
satisfaction either by seeing, or knowing particularly the time of Christ's
incarnation; Yet they were not left without an answer from their Master, but
had as much of his mind manifested to them, as might quiet their minds; Unto
whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister.
2. It ought to be no discouragement to Christ's Servants, that he put them to
much pains in his service, for the good of others, withholding from them in the
mean time, that measure of satisfaction which he minds to bestow upon others by
their pains; it being a sufficient encouragement to any of his Servants or
People, to know that he honors them to serve Him acceptably, and that He will
make up all their present loss, when He and they meets: for, to the Prophets,
who were very laborious, and assiduous, as the Bees, who make sweet Honey for
others, and taste but sparingly of it themselves, It was revealed (as a
sufficient reward of all their pains) that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister. 3. Although the fruit of Christ's death has ever been, since
the beginning of the world, forthcoming for the salvation and comfort of the
Elect, Rev. 13.8. Yet the advantage of those who live after His incarnation,
is, in some respects, greater than theirs who lived before: and that (besides
other reasons) because the truth of things revealed then, is now more evident
to those who may compare Prophecies with their accomplishment: for, it is here
set down, as some piece of disadvantage to the Prophets, That, not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things. 4. There is a complete
harmony betwixt the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, what ever seeming
contradiction may be apprehended by blind minds to be betwixt them: for, the
Apostle affirms here, that the Prophets did minister the same things, which are
now reported by them that have preached the Gospel. 5. To make the Truth lovely
to us, and to confirm us in adhering to it under sufferings. It is necessary
that the Spirit of Jesus be acknowledged to be with the Messenger, making known
to him the Truth, and enabling him to deliver it: although the way of the
Spirits presence with, and assistance of, extraordinary Messengers, was
different from his way with ordinary Ministers; Yet, if it was necessary to be
acknowledged, in order to peoples profiting by the one, it is much more
necessary for their profiting by the other: Therefore, to make the doctrine of
the Gospel lovely to people, and to confirm them in adhering to it,
notwithstanding of sufferings, the Apostle says, That the same things which
the Spirit of Christ did signify to the Prophets, were reported by them that
preached the Gospel to them, with the holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 6.
Although the glorified Angels can have no such desires as have any painful
unsatisfaction with them, seeing they live in the blessed vision and constant
fruition of God, Mat. 18.10. Yet so excellent and ravishing a mystery is this
plot of the salvation of lost sinners through Christ incarnate, which the
Gospel manifests, that they are no less humble and accurate students of it, and
no less seriously taken up with the contemplation of the way of God's
reconciling Himself to sinners, and keeping familiar correspondence with them,
in the man Christ, than if they had such desires; as is imported in this word
in the Original, which has in it an allusion to the type of the two Cherubims
that were upon the Ark, looking down into the Mercy-seat: Which things the
Angels desire to look into. 7. The more attesters of the truths of the Gospel we
have, the more worthy those have been, and the more taken up with the study
thereof, The more are we obliged to delight and adhere to the same,
notwithstanding of all sufferings: if we slight so great a salvation, or faint
in our adherance to the Gospel revealing it, for any possible sufferings from
men, great must our judgment be; many witnesses may be brought forth against us
in the day of the Lord, even this cloud of witnesses, all the Prophets, and
Apostles, and the Angels of Heaven, who have with such harmony and earnestness
delighted in this study: for, this is the force of the Apostles principal
argument in this and the two preceding Verses, which might be branched out in
many pertinent arguments, to press cheerful suffering for the truth of the
Gospel, That the Prophets were such serious and painful students thereof; the
Apostles also have agreed with them, and these same things also the Angels
desire to look into.

Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the
end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ.
In this second part of the Chapter, the Apostle draws from his former
doctrine, concerning the excellent state, and rich privileges of Believers,
several exhortations to the study of holiness, and presses the same by
several motives. The first exhortation is, That they would draw up their
affections (which are here called the loins of the mind, because they follow
the motions of the understanding) from things below, and unite them together
upon Jesus Christ, and their spiritual and eternal privileges spoken of
before. The second is, That they would study sobriety; which is not only to
keep themselves free of unlawful pleasures, but mainly to meddle sparingly
with lawful delights. The third is, That they would live constantly in the
believing expectation of that full manifestation of Gods favor, and that
perfection in holiness, which Christ will bring with him to his own, at his
last appearance: And all these the Apostle does press by the consideration of
those privileges of believers formerly mentioned, as the first motive,
comprehensive of many others. Hence Learn, 1. The consideration of our
spiritual privileges by Jesus Christ, should stir us up to the study of
holiness; our diligence in that study being the means of our perseverance, and
that which clears our right to take the comfort of those privileges, 2 Pet.
1.10, 11. So that what ever matter of joy and praise Believers have, it should
be turned by them in motives to the duties of holiness; and therefore they can
have no true comfort in their spiritual privileges, who are, by the
apprehension of them, cast over in security, and not quickened to their duty:
for, the Apostle (having in the former part of the Chapter held forth many
grounds of joy and praise to Believers, under all their sufferings, from their
election, regeneration, their right to the heavenly inheritance, the certainty
of their perseverance, and other privileges) does teach them here to turn all
these in motives to holiness, while he infers from them, these, and the
following exhortations, Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober,
etc. 2. Till the Heirs of Glory be possessed in their inheritance, they should
still think with themselves, that much of their way and work, and many
difficulties are yet betwixt them and the possession thereof, that so they may
be kept from security and defection, and may be still fitting themselves for
their journey, and their warfare: for, this ancient custom of trussing up long
garments, whence the word here is borrowed, was especially used when they were
to journey, or run a race, 2 Kings 4.29.18.46. or when they were to fight, Isa.
8.9. Gird up the loins of your mind. 3. The affections of the Children of the
Lord are oftentimes low and scattered, partly, while they are sinking under
sinful discouragement, Psalm. 42.5. and partly, while they are divided, and
spent upon base and sinful objects, Psalm. 119.36, 37. both which, as main
hindrances of Christians in their course toward their heavenly inheritance,
are supponed in this exhortation to be their too ordinary temper; Gird up the
loins of your mind. 4. It should be the great study of those who mind their
spiritual journey and warfare, to get their affections elevated above things
earthly, united together upon Jesus Christ, (See Col. 3.1. Psalm. 86.11.) and
taken up with their privileges by Him, and the duties their privileges calls
them to; otherwise they can no more make progress in their christian course,
than a man whose garments are about his feet can run or fight: Wherefore gird
up the loins of your mind. 5. They that would keep up their affections from
discouragement, or settling upon things earthly, would labor to have their
minds upward, the notions and discourses thereof, (as the word here translated,
the mind, signifies) taken up with things spiritual and heavenly, because the
affections do follow and depend upon the motions of the mind or understanding;
for which cause, they are here called the loins of the mind: Therefore, the
Apostle, having in the former part labored to draw up their minds to the
contemplation of their spiritual and eternal privileges, he here exhorts to
draw up and unite upon these their affections: Gird up the loins of your mind.
6. They that would make progress in their journey toward their heavenly
inheritance, must study sobriety, which consists in the composing of the rage
and excess of carnal passions and perturbations, Luke 8.35. in the entertaining
and expressing a mean esteem of our selves, and a high esteem of the least good
in others, Romans 12.3. in a prudent wariness to meddle with, or vent our opinion
of things above our reach or calling, Act. 26.25. in a spare meddling with all
sensible delights, though lawful in themselves; the excess whereof no less
indisposeth Christians for spiritual performances, than excess of meat or
drink does a man for his work or journey, Luke 21.34. and in a holy and strict
watchfulness, (as the word in the Original also signifies) lest we offend any
of these ways: for, as all the rest of the exhortations here, are given to fit
Believers for their journey toward their fair inheritance formerly described,
so is this, Be sober. 7. Even those for whom the heavenly inheritance is made
sure, and who have attained to some comfortable measure of assurance, that they
shall possess it, have need to be stirred up to the study of perseverance in
grace and holiness; especially, to keep their hearts still up in the confident
expectation of that blessedness which Faith closes with in the promise, which
is the exercise of the grace of hope; and to live so, as they may never mar
that confidence, whether by security, or discouragement, knowing that when we
lose our confidence, we do therewith lose our strength for all duties, Lam.
3.18. for, oven those, for whom the heavenly inheritance is made sure, ver. 4.
whose perseverance is also sure, ver. 5. and whose comfort in the believ^^^ of
both, is very great, ver. 6. are here exhorted to hope to the end. 8. That
which strengthens the Believers hope of Glory, and keeps it in life and
exercise, is the believing consideration of that complete ransom paid by
Christ, for them that fly to him, his undertaking to cause them persevere, and
their own frequent reflecting upon the evidences of his grace in themselves:
for, upon these grounds, held forth in the former part of the Chapter, does the
Apostle infer this exhortation, Wherefore gird ^p, etc. and hope to the end. 9.
The largest manifestation of the favor of God, and the highest degree of
holiness, which any attain to in time, is but small, being compared with that
measure of both, which Believers have good ground to hope for, when Christ and
they shall meet: for, these who had a good measure of both, are here exhorted
to look for a further; Hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought. 10.
Christ is now under a vail to Believers, his bodily presence being necessarily
withdrawn from them, Job. 16.7. and his spiritual glory but seen in a glass
darkly by them, who could not endure a clear sight of either; but at his second
coming, the vail shall be taken off, and we made able to behold and enjoy Him
visibly, conversant with us in our flesh for ever: for, that day, is here
called the revel^tion of Christ.

Verse. 14. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the
former lusts, in your ignorance.
Here is the second motive to the study of holiness, taken from that sweet
privilege of adoption: by the consideration whereof, the Apostle excites them,
as children, to give themselves up to their fathers obedience, and to keep
themselves free of the slavery of their lusts, wherein they had lived before
they knew Christ savingly. Hence Learn, 1. Although the best that ever lived
have reason to judge themselves unworthy to be in the rank of Servants to the
Lord, Mat. 3.11. Yet it pleases Him to advance the meanest that receive Christ
by Faith, to the dignity and privileges of His Children: for, the Apostle
designs all Believers, even the meanest, by this style, Obedient Children. 2.
Whenever the Children of the Lord do consider their dignity of sonship, they
should be thereby strongly moved to the study of obedience to their Father:
which consists in a sincere endeavor after conformity to all his Commands,
without exception of any, Psalm. 119.6. in their kindly submission to all his
corrections, Heb. 12.5. and both these out of love to Him, a now become their
Father in Christ: So shall their sonship be clearly evidenced to them, when
they devote themselves wholly to their Fathers obedience, and go about every
part of it, as obedient children, 3. The faith of this blessed relation to God
as our Father in Christ, is that frame of spirit wherewith we should labor to
go about every duty of new obedience; so will we be confident that our
infirmities shall be pitied, and our weak endeavors to obey, accepted, Psalm.
103.13. and that our wants shall be supplied as shall be necessary, Mat. 6.32.
for, as these words contain a motive to obedience, taken from our adoption; so,
they hold forth the right manner of Childrens going about every duty, to wit,
As obedient Children, in obedience, and out of love to their Father. 4. Before
that saving change, which the Lord makes upon sinners in Regeneration, they are
not only void of the saving knowledge of God in Christ, but they are also, (as
the word here does signify) incapable, and without a mind to know any thing of
that sort: for, this is one part, and the first part of that misery wherein
these who are now Children of God, are supponed to have been; in ignorance. 5.
Ignorance is the fountain and root of profanity, and of folks serving of their
lusts: they who know not the terror and sweetness of the Lord, can never be
deterred, nor drawn from delighting in the slavery of their sins: for, the
Apostle makes their ignorance, the rise of their profanity, while he dehorts
them from fashioning themselves according to their former lusts, in ignorance*
6. Not only are the unregenerate in ignorance, and therefore slaves to their
lusts; but they are voluntary slaves, giving themselves wholly away to the
satisfaction of their sinful desires, and shaping, or moulding (as the word
here signifies) their endeavors and undertakings, according to the sinful
motions of their corrupt nature: for, so were those once, who are now Children,
not only living in ignorance, and following their lusts, but fashioning
themselves according to their lusts. 7. It is necessary for the Children of the
Lord to have a clear representation of the woeful case wherein they were before
Christ did change them, that they may be kept still humble, and careful to
testify their thankfulness to Him, for making a change upon them, in all the
duties of new obedience, whereby He is honored: for, while the Apostle is
pressing these duties, he gives this clear representation of that woeful
condition wherein they had been formerly, fashioning themselves according to
their former lusts, in their ignorance. 8. Although there be no hazard, that
any of the Regenerate shall ever lose their new nature, which is the seed of
God abiding in them, 1 John 3.9. Yet, in regard their former lusts are but in
part subdued, and therefore old love to them is soon kindled, there is a great
hazard that they should become, for their present disposition and carriage,
very like unto what they were before they got a new nature: the consideration
whereof, should stir them up to diligence and progress in the study of
mortification: for, this hazard is insinuated by the Apostle, while he presses
upon the Regenerate, that they should not fashion themselves according to their
former lusts, in their ignorance. 9. Diligence in new obedience, flowing from
the faith and sense of our spiritual privileges, especially of our adoption,
i^ that which keeps the Children of the Lord from the wonted slavery of their
lusts: for, these words may be taken, as a remedy against the prevailing of
them; As obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to the former
lusts, in your ignorance.

Verse. 15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation;

16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.


The Apostle, having in the former Verse pressed the study of holiness
negatively, from that great privilege of adoption, does here press the same
positively, by two further motives: The one is, That since the Lord had
vouchsafed to call them from an estate of sin and wrath, to a state of
holiness and happiness, they ought therefore to walk answerably to their holy
calling. The other is, That there should be a conformity between the Holy Lord,
and all His Children, and therefore holiness, which is His property ought to be
studied by them, and manifested in all the particular passages of their
christian course: And this last argument, the Apostle confirms from the
Scripture, whereof though there be no particular place here cited, yet the
substance of the words are to be found in several places, Lev. 11.44.19.2. and
20.7. Mat. 5.17. Hence Learn, 1. They that would prove themselves to be truly
holy, and so to be the Children of the Lord, must not satisfy themselves with
the negative part of holiness, which consists in abstenance from what is
unsuitable to the relation of Children; but they must also labor for the
positive part of it, which consists in some measure of conformity to their
heavenly Father in His holiness: for, after the Apostle has pressed that study
negatively, that they should not conform themselves to their former lusts, in
their ignorance, he urges here the positive part thereof, But as he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy. 2. They who have found the Lord powerfully
calling them, from that estate of sin and wrath, wherein they are naturally, to
a blessed condition of grace and happiness, should think themselves thereby
strongly obliged to the study of holiness, whereby Christians in heart and
practice, are alienated and drawn from things earthly, and are set apart for
the use of their Lord, and so do evidence to themselves their effectual
calling, 2 Pet. 1.10. for, as a motive to the study of holiness, the Apostle
here suggests to Believers their calling; But as he which has called you is
holy, so be ye holy. 3. Although it be altogether impossible for any Man or
Angel to be conform in holiness unto God, who is essentially immutable, and
infinitely holy, 1 Samuel 2.2. Yet there is no absolute unerring pattern, lower
than the holy One, to be set before the eyes of the Children of the Lord, who
ought not to make the holiest on earth a sufficient copy to them; but, being
still ashamed of their defects in holiness, and unsatisfied with their present
measure thereof, must still be aiming at a nearer conformity with Christ the
Lord, and daily making use of Him, who is their sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. to
cover their defects, and to sanctify them more fully: for, this is the example
and pattern of that holiness to which all the called Children of God should
aspire; As he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy. 4. Although internal
holiness be mainly lovely to the Lord, Psalm. 51.6. and the external, without
it, be loathsome to Him, Mat. 23.27. Yet none should satisfy themselves with
that holiness, which they imagine to have within, but should labor to
manifest holiness in their external conversation, by showing themselves, in
their visible actings, mindful and respective of all the Commands of God, Lev.
20.7, 8. Psalm. 119.6. whereby they glorify Him before others, and evidence
themselves to have true holiness, Joh. 15.8. for, this conformity to our
Father in holiness, must be manifested in the conversation. 5. There is no
part of a Christian's conversation, which ought not to favor of holiness and
true piety; not only his religious, but even his common and civil actions,
ought to be done in the Lord, and for his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. And under all
the various dispensations of God with him, he ought still to prove himself a
hater of sin, and a lover of what the Lord approves, which is the thing here
pressed, to be holy in all manner of conversation. 6. The strictest of moral
precepts in the Old Testament, are binding to Believers under the New; the
substance of all of them, which is, That reasonable creatures should love their
Maker and their fellow creatures, being of perpetual equity, obliging both
Angels and Men, and nothing being required of us, in any of them, to be done by
virtue of our own strength, or that we may be justified thereby, but only what
the Regenerate are enabled to aim at, and to attain to such a measure of, as
through Christ shall be accepted, as if they had attained to what is required,
Col. 2.10. for, here one of the strictest of moral precepts that are in the Old
Testament, is pressed upon Believers; As he who has called you is holy, so be
ye holy; for it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. 7. The Ministers of
Jesus Christ, ought to have His Word so richly dwelling in them, that they may
be able to confirm what they deliver to the Lords People, from clear and
express testimonies thereof, especially when they press such Truths as
natural hearts are most averse from: for, even this extraordinary Minister, the
Apostle, whom people had less reason to suspect than any ordinary Minister,
while he presses this high pitch of holiness, to wit, the study of conformity
to the Holy One, he thus confirms his doctrine by Scripture, Because it is
written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. 8. Although it be the duty of Ministers,
sometimes to point out to people the particular place of Scripture, whereby
they do confirm their doctrine, Act. 13.33. yet ought the Lords People to be so
well acquainted with the written Word, that upon the hearing of any sentence of
it, they may acknowledge it to be the Lords mind, that so there may be no
necessity for Ministers to spend time, and burden peoples memories with
multiplied citations for every Truth they deliver; especially, where the words
of Scripture are remarkable, and frequently to be found: for, so the Apostle
citing this remarkable Scripture, which is frequently to be found in the Old
Testament, does not name any particular place, but only says, It is written,
Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Verse. 17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges, according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear.
Follows the fifth and sixth motives to the study of holiness: The one is, That
even those who take the Lord for their Father, and themselves for his Children,
will find Him an exact and impartial Judge of them, and all their actions. The
other is, That His Children are but strangers and sojourners, and so living in
the midst of many hazards and temptations; both which should move them to study
holiness, whereof this is a special part, to carry along in their hearts,
through their pilgrimage, some fear of offending their heavenly Father, who is
to be their Judge. Hence Learn, 1. The more acquaintance with the Lord, and
confidence of His fatherly affection Christians attain unto, the more are they
obliged to the study of holiness; and particularly, to walk in fear of
offending Him, who will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto Him, Lev.
10.3. and will have every one that names Him their own God and Father, to
depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. for, so does the Apostle reason here; If ye
call on the Father, (or, if ye name Him Father) pass the time of your
sojourning in fear. 2. As those who may call God their Father, will not want
their own pressing necessities, which will put them to cry to Him, as men do in
greatest extremities (as the word here signifies;) So under the greatest of
these, they should still maintain the faith of that standing relation betwixt
Him and them, and deal with Him in earnestness, and confidence of His help, as
with a Father, as is imported in this, If ye call on the Father. 3. While we
take up the Lord under this sweet relation of a Father to us in Christ, which
may beget in our hearts familiarity with Him, and confidence of obtaining
necessary help from Him, we ought also to cherish other considerations of Him,
and look upon Him as standing in other relations to us, especially, that of a
Judge, that so our hearts may be kept in awe, and fear of offending Him, and
our homliness may not mar our reverence: for, the Apostle holds forth both
these relations betwixt the Lord and his Children, to be jointly considered by
them; If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges. 4. The
Lord is both an impartial Judge, who cannot be biased either with the
expectation of any benefit, or terrified by the apprehension of any hazard from
creatures, Job 35.7, 8. and likewise so exact in judging, that neither person,
nor action, can escape his judgment: for, without respect of persons he judges
according to every man's work, says the Apostle. 5. There will be no exercise
of mercy (as it is taken for the pardoning of sin not formerly pardoned) at the
last reckoning: those that are in Christ, shall be judged according to His
obedience and works, which will be reckoned theirs, Philip. 3.9. and their good
works, done in His strength, only remembered, Rev. 14.13. As for those who never
fled to Him, they shall be judged according to the strictest rigor of the Law
of works, Romans 2.6, 8, 9. for, the Apostle looks mainly to the last judgment,
while he says, He judges every man according to his works. 6. The Children of
the Lord, are pilgrims and strangers in this world, and should esteem
themselves to be such, Heb. 11.13. and therefore should live in fear of snares
and hazards, as the Apostle here presses, never imitating the fashions of this
world, Romans 12.2. satisfying themselves with such sober entertainment, as Gods
providence brings to their hand upon their journey, Heb. 13.5. and still
hastening toward their Country, Luke 12.35. for, so much does the Apostle
import, while he thus expresses our condition here, The time of our
sojourning. 7. Although they that are fled to Christ, ought never to fear any
hazard from flesh, which may discourage them in the way of their duty, Mat.
10.28. nor yet eternal wrath, further than to stir them up to renew their
flight to Him, and to engage them to His service, who has delivered them from
it, Luke 1.74. Romans 8.1. Yet such a fear of offending their Father, (flowing
from the consideration of His excellency, Jer. 10.6, 7. and of His goodness,
Hos. 3.5. as makes them watchful against temptations, considering their own
weakness, 2 Cor. 10.12. and quickens them to their duty, Heb. 12.28.) should be
carried along in their hearts through their whole time, and cherished by the
consideration of those relations they have to God as a Father, and a Judge; If
ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges, etc. pass the
time of your sojourning here in fear.

Verse. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your fathers;

19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot.


Here is the seventh motive to the study of holiness, taken from that great
privilege of our Redemption, which is here described, 1. From the price
thereof; and this the Apostle expresses negatively, that it was not so base as
the best of corruptible things; such as have sometimes ransomed the greatest of
men from outward bondage, 2 Kings 18.14, 15. and positively, that it was the
meritorious blood of the innocent Son of God, who was typified by the Paschal
Lamb, which behoved to be without blemish, Exodus 12.5. 2. This work of
Redemption, is described from the effect of it toward the Christian Church, and
Believers in it, to wit, That they were thereby delivered from that legal
dispensation which was altogether unprofitable, as the observance thereof had
been pressed upon them by many of their fathers; and from every other sinful
course, wherein they had been hardened by their fathers example and precepts:
So the sum of this argument is, that since they themselves did take it for
granted, that they were bought with so excellent a price, from so woeful a
condition, they ought therefore to live to the honor of their Redeemer in the
study of holiness. Hence Learn, 1. All that are redeemed by Jesus Christ, were
once slaves, and in bondage to Satan, 2 Timothy 2.26* to their own lusts, Tit.
3.3. and so under subjection to the wrath of God, Ephesians. 2.3. for, Redemption
suppones captivity and bondage. 2. There could be no freedom of sinners from
this bondage, but by the paying of a price to offended Justice: Gods mercy
could not be bestowed upon any sinners (the Covenant of works being once made)
but with the safety and satisfaction of His Justice, Romans 3.25, 26. which could
not have been, except the price had been paid which Justice did require: for,
Redemption suppones also the paying of a price. 3. Believers in Jesus Christ,
are by Him brought to a state of liberty and freedom, not from their obedience
to His holy Law, Luke 1.74. but from any right Satan had over them, before
their believing in Him, Col. 2.15. from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and
from the dominion and slavery of sin, Tit. 2.14. And the whole Church under the
New Testament, is by Him delivered from the yoke of Mosaical Ceremonies, Gal.
5.1. for, this privilege of Redemption, imports a state of freedom and
liberty. 4. Not the most excellent of corruptible things, which are most valued
among men, could be sufficient to be the price of Redemption for sinners, one
soul being of more worth than all things of that sort, Psalm. 49.7, 8. Therefore
the Apostle expresses the price of Redemption negatively; Not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold. 5. It is not impossible for sinners to know
themselves to be of the number of them that are redeemed by Jesus Christ, there
being clear marks of such given in Scripture, Tit. 2.84. and the Spirit
promised that they may know the things that are freely bestowed upon them, 1
Cor. 2.12. for, the Apostle suppones this, while he says, Forasmuch as ye know
that ye were redeemed. 6. The more confident Christians be that they are of the
number of the redeemed Ones by Christ, the more should they be moved to study
holiness for the honor of their Redeemer, considering that the study thereof,
is the very end of their Redemption, Luke 1.74. and the evidence thereof, both
to themselves and to others, Isa. 62.12. for, this is brought in here by the
Apostle, as an argument to the study of holiness, and particularly, to pass
the time of our sojourning here in fear; Forasmuch as ye know that ye were
redeemed, etc. 7. The ordinary way how the Redeemed of the Lord attain to the
knowledge of their Redemption, is, by discerning in themselves a real and
gracious change made upon their heart and life by virtue of Christ's death: for,
the Apostle suppones, that those who knew themselves to be redeemed, behoved
also to know that they were liberated from their vain conversation. 8. While
men are not changed in their heart and life, by the application of the merit of
that price which Christ paid, all that they can do, whether in religious
performances, or in their ordinary practices, is altogether vain, and such as
can bring no true comfort or profit to themselves, or honor to Jesus Christ:
for, so the Apostle designs the way wherein the Redeemed walked before their
Regeneration, calling it, a vain conversation: which may comprehend, both their
religious, and common performances. 9. Although there be both a pronenes in
fathers, to transmit to their children that wickedness wherein their fathers
have rooted and hardened them; and in children, to receive, and transmit the
same to their offspring again; Yet neither is the example, nor precepts of
fathers, a sufficient warrant to their posterity, for any practice whatsoever:
for, the Apostle imports, that those to whom he writes, had received from their
fathers, what they had received from theirs before although it was vain; and
reckons it a great advantage, that they were now delivered from that vain
conversation, although it was received by tradition from their fathers. 10. No
less could be a sufficient ransom for lost sinners, than the blood of Jesus
Christ; the favors to be purchased for them, to make them eternally blessed,
being of infinite value, and the sentence of everlasting death being past upon
all Adam's posterity, either all behoved to die, or one, worth all the rest;
and such an one had never been found, if God had not given His Son to be a man,
that so man might be redeemed with the precious blood of Christ. 11. The blood
of Jesus Christ, considering the excellency of His person, the greatness and
freedom of His love, in shedding for such as we are, and the worth of the
favors merited by it to Believers, such as the favor of God and eternal life,
ought to be in high esteem with all the Redeemed: for, to work this in their
hearts, the Apostle thus commends it, The precious blood of Christ. 12. It
behoved Him who was to be our Redeemer, to be altogether free of the defilement
of sin, for which He was to satisfy in the behalf of others; as being the
truth and signification of the Paschal Lamb, to which the Apostle here relates;
and other spotless Sacrifices, which typified Him, under the Law, that so as
man He might be completely lovely and acceptable to God, and be a perfect
pattern of holiness to all His Redeemed Ones: Therefore, the Apostle thus
commends Him, As a Lamb without blemish, and without spot.

Verse. 20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but
was manifest in these last times for you.
To the end there may be yet a higher esteem of the Redeemer, wrought in the
hearts of the Redeemed, and that they may be the more engaged to the study of
holiness, that so He may be honored by them, the Apostle goes on to describe
Him further. 1. That He was from eternity, appointed by the Father, to be the
Savior of sinners. And, 2. That He was now more clearly manifested after His
incarnation, than He had been before: both which, make up the eight motive to
the study of holiness, that seeing Christ had been from eternity designed
Mediator, and now more clearly than ever manifested, with a special respect to
the good of those lost sheep of the house of Israel, to whom the Apostle
writes: Therefore they were bound to live to His honor in the study of
holiness. Hence Learn, 1. When ever we attain to any serious thoughts of that
great business of our Redemption by Christ incarnate and crucified, we should
not suffer our hearts to be soon diverted from them, but should labor to dwell
upon them, and to search out more and more considerations of that sweet
subject; every one of them being worthy to take up our affections, and to
engage us to the study of holiness: for, the Apostle, in the former words
having fallen upon the mentioning of our Redemption, as a motive to holiness,
he does in this, and the following Verse, run out in expressing the thoughts he
had of the Lords everlasting purpose about that work, of the glory that Christ
now possesses in our nature, and of the Father's intention in exalting Him, who
verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world. 2. Our Mediator
was from all eternity designed unto the office of Mediatourship, in that
everlasting Covenant of Redemption, wherein the Father gave the Elect to His
Son, Psalm. 2.8. and appointed Him to assume humane nature, therein to suffer
for their Redemption, Heb. 10.5. and Christ accordingly undertook to satisfy
His will, Psalm. 40.7, 8. So that we who have Christ offered to us in the
Gospel, are invited to feed upon those dainties, that were prepared for us from
all eternity; And who are we that the thoughts of God should have been so long
since taken up about us, while He appointed His own Son for us, who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the world? 3. Although Christ was made
known immediately after the Fall, Genesis 3.15. and ever since has been
sufficiently manifested for the salvation of the Elect in all Ages, Act. 10.43.
Yet there was a more clear manifestation of Him, reserved for the time after
His incarnation, the more to heighten the esteem of that great mystery of His
incarnation, in the hearts of all His People; Therefore the Apostle speaks of
Him here, as more clearly held forth to the Church than before; But now made
manifest in these last times for you. 4. The more clearly Christ be held forth
in any time, the more strongly are they that live in that time, and have that
clearness, obliged to live to His honor in the study of holiness, considering
that the more unanswerable men's walking be to the light they have, the greater
will their condemnation be, Joh. 3.19. and 15.22. they that live since the
incarnation of Christ, and the clearer out-breaking of the light of the Gospel
which reveals Him, should think the Lord has had a special respect to them,
and has in a peculiar manner designed Christ for them, and manifested Him to
them, that they may be more eminent in holiness and thankfulness to Him: for,
to this end the Apostle speaks thus of Christ; Manifested in these last times
for you. 5. Although experience has proven that there was a considerable part
of time to be after Christ's incarnation, yet all that, is but the last time, in
regard it is to be much shorter than the time that was before: and because,
after that time, though there be a continual increase of knowledge and grace to
be expected, Ezekiel. 47.1. etc. Yet there is no more change of that way of
Worship and Ordinances, which Christ settled before He left the world, Mat.
28.18, 19, 20. for which cause, among others, the times after Christ's
incarnation, are here called, The last times.

Verse. 21. Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and
gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God.
Having commended Christ the Redeemer, he describes those for whose sakes He
was appointed and manifested, to wit, those who do by Faith flee to God through
Him: and that they may be the more encouraged so to do, he leads them to
consider the Father as one fully satisfied with the ransom, paid for sinners by
Jesus Christ, seeing after the payment of it He has exalted and glorified Him,
for this very end, That the Faith of sinners may safely and comfortably rest
upon God, as now pacified toward all that flee to Him through Christ. Which
purpose does contain the ninth argument to the study of holiness; That since
the Father has exalted, and glorified our Cautioner in our nature, for this
very end, that we may confidently draw near to Him, as to our own reconciled
God, we ought therefore to live to the honor of the Father and the Son in the
study of holiness. Hence Learn, 1. When ever the Ministers of Christ hold forth
the ransom paid by Christ for sinners, and the benefits purchased thereby to
them, they ought also to design and describe the persons, who may appropriate
the same to themselves: and ought not to propose that which is peculiar to
some, ( Joh. 10.15.) as common to all; So shall the few that have right to
apply the benefits of His Redemption, be the more sure and comforted, and
others shall not be disappointed: for, so does the Apostle here, while, having
described Christ the Redeemer, and set forth some of the benefits of His
Redemption, he comes next to describe what manner of persons they are, who may
comfort themselves in that Redemption purchased by Him; even those, who by Him
do believe in God. 2. Although our Faith may close with any one of the blessed
Persons of the Trinity, providing we do not divide in our thoughts the Divine
Essence, which is One in all the Three, 1 John 5.7. Yet God the Father,
(considered as the fountain of the Deity, to whom we come through the Second
Person, clothed with our flesh, being helped by the holy Spirit, the Third
Person) is that full and most satisfying object, with which saving Faith
closes, when it acts most distinctly: for, such an object is here proposed,
with which the Faith of the Redeemed does close, to wit, the whole Godhead in
the Father apprehended as ours, by the Son incarnate, through the help of the
Spirit, as the next verse, compared with this, makes clear. 3. There is no
closing with God as ours, but by the Mediator Christ, in whom God trysts with
sinners, who has merited Gods favor to them, the power to believe the same;
and actually works that Faith in them, Who by Him do believe in God. 4.
Although Jesus Christ, being the same God, equal with the Father, Philip. 2.6.
did by His own proper virtue, raise Himself from the dead, Joh. 2.19. and
10.18. Yet to assure us of the Fathers full satisfaction with the price paid by
our Cautioner, and because the power of all the Three Persons is one, and the
actions ascribed to any of them, in reference to the creatures, are common to
all, His raising from the dead, and exaltation, is here, (as frequently
elsewhere in Scripture, Ephesians. 1.20. Philip. 2.9.) attributed to the Father, who
raised Him from the dead, and gave Him glory. 5. Gods justice is fully
satisfied in the behalf of all that flee to Him through Jesus Christ, because
their Cautioner is liberate; and glory is insured to all such, their Head being
already possessed in it: for, in testimony that His satisfaction for the Elect
is accepted, God has raised Him from the dead, and, as a sure pledge that His
Members shall be glorified, He has given Him glory, that your faith and hope
might be in God.

Verse. 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the Truth through the
Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren: see that ye love one another with
a pure heart fervently.
The tenth motive to press upon Believers the study of holiness, is taken from
the former progress they had made therein: whence the Apostle infers an
exhortation to that particular duty of holiness, to wit, love to the Saints.
The sum of both is, That since by the power of Christ's Spirit enabling them to
obey the Gospel; they had gotten their heart-corruptions so far purged out, as
to attain unto some sincere affection unto the rest of the Lords People;
Therefore they should study to grow in grace, particularly, in love to the
Saints; and that they should labor to have such love to them, as sloweth from
a sincere desire of their good; and by the effects of it, does prove it self to
be such. Hence Learn, 1. The fairer beginnings, and further progress any have
already made in the way of holiness, they should find themselves the more
strongly obliged to hold on in that way, lest they lose the fruit of their
former pains, 2 John 8. and prove more dishonorable to God, and offensive to
others, than if they had never entered, or made such progress in that way, 2
Pet. 2.22. for, the Apostle here makes former progress in holiness, a motive to
further progress therein: Seeing you have purified your souls, etc. see that ye
love, etc. 2. As all those, whom the Lord has savingly enlightened and
renewed, will discern in their souls many filthy and unclean roots, besides any
that have broken out; so their great work should be, to have their souls purged
from those, knowing that from the polluted fountain of the heart flows all the
pollution of the life, Mat. 15.19. and that, except the heart be in some
measure cleansed, all the purity of the outside is loathsome to God, Mat. 23.27.
for, the Apostle thus describes the Regenerate, that they have purified their
souls. 3. Although it be the alone work of God, as the principal efficient
cause, to cleanse and purify the souls of His People, both from the guilt and
dominion of sin, Ezekiel. 36.25. Yet His People, who are merely passive in the
first infusion of grace, Ephesians. 2.1. are thereafter made by Him, active
instruments in the carrying on of that work of mortification, by employing
Christ's virtue for subduing, and fighting in His strength against, their
corruptions, as is imported in this, Ye have purified your souls: 4. The Lords
mean of purging the souls of His People, from the love and power of sin, which
is naturally in them, is their obedience to His Truth: which consists, not only
in their aiming at conformity to those precepts, which enjoin purity and
holiness, such as that is, ver. 15. but principally, in their embracing by
Faith, and use-making of, the promises of the new Covenant, wherein the Lord
undertakes to work this purity, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. This is the chief part of
that obedience to the Truth, which purifieth souls: for, says the Apostle, Ye
have purified your souls, in obeying the Truth. 5. This obedience to the Truth,
which purifieth the souls of Believers, cannot be attained unto, by our own
natural strength, or the use of the fittest means of grace, without the
special working of the Spirit of Jesus, who clears to sinners the nature of
that purity, which is pleasing to God, and powerfully works the same in them:
for, so the Apostle affirms of those Believers, that they had purified their
souls in obeying the Truth, through the Spirit. 6. One special part of this
work of purging the souls of Believers, consists in the subduing of those
filthy roots, which are in their hearts, contrary to that grace of love to the
rest of the Lords People, such as pride, self-love, and the like: for, this is
here made their aim, in purifying their souls, that they might attain unto
unfeigned love of the Brethren: importing, that their pains was much bent to
purge out those evils, which are contrary to that grace. 7. Believers have need
to be seriously pressed to exercise and grow in these graces and duties,
whereof they have already attained to some approven measure: for, upon those
who had already purified their souls, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, the
Apostle presses this, See that ye love one another. 8. It is not every sort of
love to the Saints of God that evidenceth mortification, and the indwelling of
Christ's Spirit; but such only, as is without dissimulation or hypocrisy, which
is unfeigned love, such as flows from holy principles, to wit, respect to the
Command of Christ, and not from respect to our own credit or advantage only;
from desire of the true good of others, and not from love to our selves, which
is Love out of a pure heart; and such as breaks forth in real proofs, and is
continued toward others, notwithstanding of provocations from them, which is,
To love one another fervently.

Verse. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the Word of God which lives and abides for ever.
The eleventh motive, whereby the Apostle presses upon Believers the study of
holiness, (especially, that branch of it, which he was last upon, to wit, Love
to the Saints) is taken from the excellency of their spiritual original: the
sum whereof is, That since they had a new life and nature in their
regeneration, wrought in them, not by so fading a cause of principle, as that
which is the instrument of producing their natural substance, but by the Word
of God, which, in the effects it has upon the Regenerate, lives and abides
for ever; Therefore the excellency of their new nature, and permanency of their
spiritual estate, should move them to walk suitably unto it; and particularly,
to live in love with the rest of their Fathers Children. Hence Learn, 1. Every
true Believer in Jesus Christ, is in some measure acquainted with a new and
second birth, which is that work of God with sinners, whereby there is a new
spiritual life and nature communicated to them, Ephesians. 2.1. and they are brought
through some pangs and straits, arising from the sight of their own sinfulness,
and fear of deserved wrath, Act. 2.37. out of their darkness and bondage,
(which is natural to them, and is resembled by the state of the child before
the birth) into a state of light, and knowledge of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.
and freedom from the slavery of sin, and subjection to wrath, Romans 8.2. and
whereby also they are made, in some measure, to resemble their heavenly Father,
and are inclined to obey Him, and to love Him, and all His Children, 1 John
5.1. for, this the Apostle makes a description of true Believers, that they are
born again. 2. Our life and nature, that we have by virtue of this second
birth, or regeneration, is far more excellent than what we have by the first:
our natural estate is subject to corruption, and will be shortly dissolved; but
our spiritual estate can never fade: for, though all have immortal souls that
are not corruptible, yet the natural life and state of all shall be dissolved,
and the eternal being of those who are unacquainted with Regeneration, and a
second birth, will be but an eternal corruption, or perishing, which should
make all long to be acquainted with Regeneration: for, to lead us to esteem the
one above the other, the Apostle commends the one above the other from the
difference of their seeds; Not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible. 3.
Although the Word, separated from the working of the Spirit, can do nothing to
the regenerating of a sinner, Joh. 3.5. yet the Word is the ordinary instrument
of the Spirit, who makes use of all the principal parts of it in that work; of
the Law, to put the sinner in some straits of the second birth, through fear of
deserved wrath; and of the Gospel, to revive the soul, and liberate it from
those fears; and of the Law again, to direct the Regenerate how to walk
suitably to their estate: for, the Apostle explains what that incorruptible
seed is, of which we are born again, to wit, The Word of God. 4. Although there
be no life, either formally, or by way of efficiency, in the letters or sound
of the words of Scripture; and though that Word passes with the speaking, as
any other words do; Yet in regard of the effects, which through the operation
of the Spirit it has upon sinners, such as fear, and terror upon the believing
of the threatenings, Act. 2.37. comfort under crosses, and quickening for duties
upon the believing of the promises, Psalm. 119.50. It is, as the Apostle here
calls it, A Word that lives; and in regard of the execution of eternal wrath
upon them that reject it, and of the performance of those everlasting
blessings, which are promised in it, to them that receive and obey it, it is a
Word that abides for ever. 5. They who do profess, and esteem themselves to
be of the number of those who are born again, should, by the consideration of
their second birth, be strongly moved to the study of holiness, for the honor
of their Father; and especially, to live in love with the rest of their Fathers
Children: for, the Apostle brings this as a further argument to the study of
holiness, (and particularly to the study of that branch of it, which he had
pressed in the former words, concerning mutual love amongst Professors) that
they were born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of God, etc.

Verse. 24. For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of
grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away:

25. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is the Word which by
the Gospel is preached unto you.


The last motive, whereby the Apostle presses upon Believers the study of
holiness, and constancy under sufferings, is taken from a further commendation
of the excellency of their spiritual estate, which the Apostle sets out by
comparing the same with the best estate of men naturally considered, with all
their ornaments, wherein they use to glory, which is (according to the
Scripture, Isa. 40.6.) like unto withering grass, and fading flowers. In the
application of which comparison, the Apostle insists upon his former
commendation of the Word (which is the seed, whereby Believers are begotten)
from the perpetuity of it, to wit, in the effects thereof upon them, which
might easily lead them to judge of their state accordingly; and applies this
commendation of the Word to that Doctrine, which was preached to them by
himself, or others of the Lords Servants. All which does strongly press his
scope, that therefore they should live holily, and suffer cheerfully, as became
those who were in so excellent an estate. Hence Learn, 1. Although it be much
in the thoughts and desires of natural men, that they might have a perpetual
enjoyment of this life, and the comforts of it, Psalm. 49.11. Yet themselves,
and all that they can glory in, is frail and fading, like the grass, and
flowers of the grass; whereupon they should read their frailty and mortality,
and so be stirred up to provide for a better life, and a more enduring
substance than what they have here: for, all flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of grass. 2. Though every common gift of God
wherein men use to glory, whether riches, wisdom, strength, beauty, or the
like, be fading as the grass and flowers thereof; Yet, because men's credit, or
glory before the world, is that wherein they use to glory most; and of the
perpetuating whereof, they are most strongly desirous, Psalm. 49.11. The Lord
has put a special fadingness and vanity upon that, and will have it as easily
blasted as any other thing wherein men glory: for, though the glory of man,
here spoken of, may be taken largely, as comprehending every thing for which
men lift up themselves, and wherein they use to glory, as the word is used,
Mat. 4.8. Yet it seems especially to point out that honor and credit, which
men affect to have before the world; in which signification it is used, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6. the property whereof, the Lord pronounces to be fadingness or
withering; And all the glory of man, as the flower of grass. 3. Though this be
a plain Truth, taught by daily experience, and commonly acknowledged, that our
natural estate with all the ornaments thereof, is frail and fading; Yet, it is
not easy to make this Truth take due impression upon the hearts of men, who
are naturally unwilling to admit thoughts of a change, Amos 6.2. Therefore the
Spirit of God bears it in upon men's minds, under the same similitude, in very
many places of Scripture, Job 14.2. Psalm. 103.15. Isa. 40.6. Jam. 1.10. and
here by many expressions; All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. 4.
The believing consideration of this frailty and fadingness of men's natural
estate and earthly contentments, should heighten in their hearts the esteem of
that spiritual and better estate, whereunto by receiving the Gospel they may be
advanced; and should be to them a powerful motive to the study of holiness,
which will abide when other things do fade, 1 John 3.9. and especially, to the
study of mutual love among themselves, (those earthly things for which usually
they contend, Genesis 13.8. and particularly their credit, the love whereof, is
often the greatest occasion of strife among them, Luke 22.24. being so fading
and uncertain;) for, as a commendation of the state of the Regenerate, or
motive to the study of holiness, and particularly of brotherly love, is this
here brought in, All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away: But the Word
of the Lord endures for ever. 5. What ever can be spoken to the commendation
of the Word, serves also for the commendation of them who have by faith
received it, and are regenerated by it: That which is the seed and principle of
their spiritual being, their charter, and right to all their privileges and
inheritance, being excellent and worthy, their state must needs be such
likewise: for, it is clear the Apostles purpose here, is, to commend the state
of the Regenerate, as far more excellent than the best natural state; and this
he esteems to be sufficiently done, by commending the Word, from the perpetuity
of it, in opposition to the frail state of men naturally considered, All flesh
is grass, etc. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever. 6. They who have
received a new spiritual life, and so are entered in a new state, by their
receiving of the Word, ought to fix in their hearts, by frequent meditations,
the perpetuity of that Word, in the accomplishment of the good things promised
therein, which shall endure to them for all eternity, that so they may the
better see, and be the more affected with their own blessedness: for, the
Apostle, having commended the Word from this property of it before, repeats it
here again, The Word of the Lord endures for ever. 7. As Christ's own worth and
excellency, is best seen when He is compared with other things, which may seem
to have worth in them, Cant. 2.3. So the worth of our spiritual estate, is best
seen, and most esteemed of by us, when we compare it with the frailty and
fectlesness of the best state on Earth beside: for, to heighten Believers
esteem of the one, he compares it with the other: All flesh is grass, etc. but
the Word of the Lord (and consequently their state, who are begotten again by
the Word) endures for ever. 8. What ever good esteem the Lord's People have of
the Word of God in general, they ought to have the same or the particular
Messages that are brought to them from, or according to that, Word, by the
Lord's Servants, who are sent unto them; and ought not to content themselves
with a high esteem of the written Word, or of the preaching thereof in the
general, in the mean time having a slender esteem of these portions of Truth,
which God carves out to them by the Messengers whom He sends to them: for, the
Apostle leads those to whom he writes, to look upon that commendation of the
Word, which Isaiah had given out before him, as agreeing to the Word written,
and preached to them by himself, and others of the Lord's Servants in that
time: And this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. 9.
Although the precepts and threatenings of the Word, have their own efficiency as
instruments in Gods hand, to prepare the soul for the new life, by breaking and
humbling of it, Act. 2.37. Yet it is mainly the Gospel, or the glad tidings (as
the word signifies) of free salvation through Jesus Christ, to all lost
sinners, who get grace to receive the offer thereof, whereby a new life is
conveyed to, and increased, in the soul, and whereby it is brought into that
excellent state of Regeneration: for, the Apostle applies the commendation of
the Word, which is the seed of Regeneration, mainly to the Gospel; And this is
the Word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter, the Apostle goes on to press such duties of holiness, as are
most suitable for that excellent state of the Regenerate, described in the
former. In the first part of it, he exhorts to growth and progress in such
duties of holiness as concern all Christians in whatsoever relation they stand
in the world, as namely, the study of mortification, ver. 1. a hearty
indrinking of the Doctrine of the Gospel, because their so doing, is the means
of their spiritual growth, ver. 2. It is the way to prove that they had
experimentally tasted of the sweetness of Christ's grace, ver. 3. and because
by their daily use-making of Christ, offered in the Gospel, they should find an
increase of spiritual life, and fitness for every duty, ver. 4, 5. and that
because the Scripture witnesses Him to be given with the Father's good will
for a solid foundation of salvation and comfort to every soul that flies to
Him, ver. 6. Whence the Apostle infers, that Christ cannot but be very dear to
Believers, and that He shall not be the less glorious that many slight Him;
who, by their so doing, shall only ruin themselves, and prove themselves
Reprobates, ver. 7, 8. But as for those whom he has so highly honored, that
they might be forthcoming for his praise, who had made so remarkable a change
upon them, ver. 9 10. Their great study ought to be, to keep up the battle
against their inward lusts, ver. 11. and to walk so as the most wicked among
whom they converse, may be allured to fall in love with Christianity, ver. 12.

In the second part of the Chapter, the Apostle presses such duties as are
suitable for Christians, considered under some of their special relations. And
first, he exhorts them, as subjects under heathen Rulers, to respect every form
of lawful Government, whether in the person of the supreme or inferior
Magistrate: and this he presses by many arguments; First, Because they should
thereby evidence their respect to Gods Command. Secondly, Because Magistrates
are appointed of God for so good ends as he expresses, ver. 13, 14. Thirdly,
They should thereby silence their slanderers, ver. 15. Fourthly, Because
otherwise they should abuse their Christian Liberty unto licentiousness. ver.
16. And fifthly, Because other unquestionable duties did necessarily infer
this, ver. 17. Secondly, He exhorts them as servants under heathen persecuting
Masters, in which case many Christians then were, to carry themselves dutifully
toward such Masters, and patiently under wrongs from them, whether they were of
the worst or better sort, ver. 18. and this the Apostle presses to the end of
the Chapter, by several reasons. First, Because they might expect a gracious
reward from God, if they were put to unjust sufferings from men for respect to
his Commands, ver. 19. Secondly, Because it would be a disgrace for
Christianity, if Christians did deserve hard usage from Heathens for their
miscarriage, ver. 20. Thirdly, Because they were obliged to patience under the
Cross, by their Calling. Fourthly, Because Christ had suffered harder things
for them. Fifthly, Because He had cast them a sweet Copy of the right way of
suffering, ver. 21. Sixthly, Because Christ was a most innocent sufferer, ver.
22. Seventhly, Because He was the most patient. And eighthly, the most
confident, under greatest wrongs that ever was, ver. 23. Ninthly, Because by
His death He has purchased Reconciliation with God. And, tenthly, healing to
all his Peoples wounds, especially for his cause, ver. 24. Eleventhly, Since
they who were once in the way to perdition, were now brought to a state of
safety by Him, ver. last. Therefore they ought patiently to suffer wrongs in
following their duty to Him: the pressing whereof, is the Apostle's scope.

Verse. 1. Wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies, and all evil speakings.
THe Apostle's scope, in the first part of this Chapter, being to press upon
all Christians the study of progress and growth in holiness, as appears by the
second and fifth Verses, he does, in order to this, stir them up to the battle
against their unmortified corruptions, giving instances of such, as are most
contrary unto that love of the Regenerate, one toward another, which he had
pressed before, as an evidence of their Regeneration, Chap. 1. ver. 22. and to
that hearty receiving of the Word which he presses in the following Verse, as
the principal means of their growth in grace, not excluding other evils, not
here mentioned, but leading them by these to the knowledge of all the rest,
that are unbeseeming a regenerate state. Doct. 1. There does remain in the
Children of the Lord, not only after their Regeneration, but even after some
progress in mortification, many strong corruptions, and filthy frames or
spirit, which are left to humble them, Romans 7.24. and to stir them up to
earnest employment of Jesus Christ, both for mercy, and power to subdue them, 2
Cor. 12.8. for, upon those whom the Apostle supponed to be not only born again,
Chap. 1.23. but to have attained to a good degree of mortification, Chap. 1.
ver. 22. he does here press that they should lay aside malice, and guile, and
hypocrisy, etc. 2. Our corruptions ought to be renounced with detestation, as
things very noisome to be longer kept, Isa. 30.22. and with a purpose never to
meddle with them again, Hos. 14.8. for, there is a metaphor in the words, taken
from a man putting off an old suit of clothes, full of filth and vermin, which
would be both hurtful and disgraceful to be longer worn; Wherefore laying aside
all malice, etc. 3. Even the Children of the Lord are ready to cleave very
close to their unmortified corruptions; to forget the necessity of a further,
degree of mortification than what they have already attained unto; and to
entertain their corruptions as if they were necessary for them; yea, and to
account them their very ornaments: for, the metaphor in the words is taken from
a man that is unwilling to shed with his garments, which, though they be old
and full of filth and vermin, yet he keeps them close to him, as his necessary
ornaments: lay aside all malice, etc. 4. Our Regeneration, and former progress
in mortification, should be so far from making us indulgent to our lusts,
remaining yet unmortified, that the more clear we be concerning the one, and
the further advanced in the other, the more are we obliged to set against the
remaining power of those unmortified corruptions, we having now stronger
obligations to sight against them, greater strength for that effect, and being
more ready to dishonor God by their prevailing, than formerly: for, upon those
whom the Apostle supponed to be born again, to know themselves Redeemed Ones,
and to have purified their souls, in the former Chapter, he presses here the
study of mortification, with a Wherefore, laying aside, etc. 5. Our new birth
is mainly evidenced to us by our opposition of, and victory over those
corruptions which stir in us, contrary to that love and duty which we owe to
our Brethren, the rest of the Regenerate Ones; our victory over these being the
kindly effect of our victory in some measure, over our ignorance of God,
Atheism, and unbelief, and such other sins as are more directly against the
first Table, 1 John 3.2, 3. for, all the particular evils here named, are such
as relate mainly to our neighbor, as contrary to that love and duty which we
owe to him; and the mortification of them is here pressed, as that which should
evidence our Regeneration, as appears by comparing the 23. Verse of the former
Chapter, with this and the Verse following: Being born again, etc. Wherefore,
laying aside all malice, etc. as new born babes, etc. 6. Not only is the actual
hurting of our neighbor an evil, unbeseeming the Regenerate Ones, but the very
intention of the heart to harm him, is such an evil also; and therefore to be
mortified for intention to hurt out neighbor, is the first evil, which the
Apostle here disswades from; laying aside malice, etc. 7. The Lord takes notice
of folks cunning conveyances, of their plots and practices, which tend to the
prejudice of others; those being more dangerous to the party, and more
grievous, when discovered, or, felt in their effects, than more open injuries,
Psalm. 55.11, 12, 13. for, that artificial way of hurting others, which hides
the hurt intended from the party, is the next evil the Apostle exhorts to be
laid aside, as is clear from the signification of the original word, guile. 8.
As hypocrisy, in the matters of God, whereby Christians draw near Him with
their lips, while their hearts are far from Him, Mat. 15.7, 8. and give out
themselves to be much for Him, when they are nothing so, 2 Timothy 3.5. is an evil
very detestable to Him, Mat. 23.25. So hypocrisy in dealing with others,
whereby men in their words and carriage behave themselves with seeming respect
and love, in the mean time aiming at the disgrace and hurt of others, Psalm.
55.21. is a guilt unbeseeming the Regenerate, which they should study to
mortify, as they desire to prove themselves such: for, of both these sorts of
hypocrisies may this third evil be understood, which the Apostle exhorts to be
laid aside; and hypocrisies. 9. To be grieved and vexed at the good of others,
their excellencies or preference before our selves, as it is a frame of spirit
natural to all, Gal. 5.21. and incident to the Regenerate, Jam. 4.5. So it is
an evil very detestable to God, Tit. 3.3. and hurtful to the person in whom it
is, Prove. 14.30. and therefore to be opposed, and mortified, as most
unbeseeming the Regenerate, who should rejoice in the welfare one of another,
as if it were their own, 1 Cor. 12.26. for, this is the fourth particular,
which the Apostle here exhorts to mortify; and envies: which word, signifies
an evil, wasting them that have it with grief at others welfare. 10. Evil
speaking of others, is the fruit that grows upon malice, envy, and other inward
evils of that kind, which are clearly bewrayed to be prevalent in the heart,
when there is in the tongue much reviling, backbiting, contradicting, and other
sorts of evil speakings, whereby the reputation of our neighbor is hurt: for,
as this is here the last in order, so it may be safely looked upon as the
effect, or ordinary consequent of the former; laying aside all malice and
guile, and envies, and evil speakings. 11. However there may be some one sin,
to which the heart of the Regenerate is more inclined than to others, against
which one, they should mainly bend their strength, Psalm. 18.23. Yet, as they
desire to prove themselves Regenerate, they ought to oppose and mortify all
sin, considering that they are weak before every temptation, Gal. 6.1, 3. and
that the root and branch of every sin is hateful to God, and contrary to His
holy Law, as is clear by Christ's exposition of it, Mat. 5, and 6. chap. for,
the Apostle puts the note of universality to some of these evils, and puts the
rest in the plural number; laying aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies,
etc, 12. There are degrees of the strength of unmortified corruption, and
several ways how it vents it self; so that when one branch of it is cut off,
and one way how it does prevail is stopped, there are yet many other branches
of that same sin to be searched out, and foughten against: for the first two
evils here named have an all with them, importing, that when one branch, or
degree of malice and guile is laid aside, there may be yet much of them behind
unmortified: And the rest of the evils here named, are in the plural number,
importing, that there are many sorts and kinds of envies, and hypocrisies, and
evil speakings, to be mortified in every Christian; Wherefore lay aside all
malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings. 13. The
right order which Believers should keep in the mortifying of sin, is to begin
with the inward root^ there of that are in their hearts, so shall they the more
easily curb the sins of the outward man: for, in this order the Apostle
presses this study upon the Regenerate, that they should first lay aside
malice and guile, etc. and then evil speakings. 14. There is no right receiving
of the Word, so as souls may grow by it, till first they set about the
mortifying and putting off of such filthy frames of spirit as are here named:
the Truth must be received in love, both to Christ and all His People, to which
the evils here named are contrary: for, the laying aside of them is here
pressed as a mean toward the duty, held forth in the following Verse:
Wherefore, laying aside all malice, etc. desire the sincere milk of the Word.

Verse. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may
grow thereby.
The Apostle, having dissuaded from those evils which are great hindrances to
the right receiving of the Gospel, does here, in the next place, exhort the
Regenerate to labor for such a sharp edge upon their appetite after the Truths
of the Gospel, by which they were begotten, and must be nourished, as lively
infants have after the milk of the mothers breasts. And this exhortation the
Apostle bears in by three motives in this Verse, taken from the nature, and
effects of the Truths of the Gospel. 1. That those Truths are the sincere milk,
that is, most pure Truths, without any mixture of falsehood or error. 2. That
they are full of spiritual reason, and so suited to the sanctified
understandings of men and women; for, the Original may be rendered, that
rational milk. 3. That the greedy in drinking of them will prove a principal
mean of spiritual growth, and progress in grace and comfort. Hence Learn, 1.
The Truths of the Gospel are to the truly Regenerate, what the milk of the
breasts is to the young infant, those being no less necessary, and fitted for
the cherishing and entertaining of their spiritual life, no less refreshing
and strengthening through Gods blessing to them, than this is to the new born
babe: for, however the first principles, or grounds of Religion, which use to
be held forth in a Catechize, are for their plainness, and fitness for the
weak, called Milk, as contradistinguished from more profound Truths, which have
the name of strong meat, Heb. 5.13, 14. Yet, for the causes formerly mentioned,
the whole word is here called Milk, to be much thirsted-after by all the
Regenerate: As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word. 2. The
desire of a truly regenerate person after the Word, will in some measure
resemble that desire after the breasts, which is in new born babes: for, as the
best thing on earth beside the breasts, cannot be satisfactory to a lively
infant; as it is most grieved for the want thereof, most unwilling to shed with
it, and most delighted to have it of any other thing; So is it with the
Regenerate in reference to the Word, as is imported in this exhortation, As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word. 3. This desire of the
Regenerate after the Word, ought to extend it self to all the parts thereof,
every one of these having influence upon their spiritual growth: The
discovering and threatening part of it, serving them as a glass wherein to see
their defects and spots, Romans 3.20. that so they may be chased to Christ, Romans
10.4. The promises thereof being the channel through which, life, strength, and
transforming virtue to make them resemble their Lord, is conveyed to them, 2
Pet. 1.4. and the precepts and directions thereof, serving as a Lamp to direct
them in their christian course, Psalm. 119.105. for, here the Word indefinitly,
without restriction to one part of it more than another, is by the Apostle held
forth as the object of this desire of the Regenerate; desire the sincere milk
of the Word. 4. This desire of the Word, formerly described, is a clear
evidence of Regeneration, and a new nature; no sooner is a sinner born again by
the virtue of the Spirit working with the Word, but as soon is there a kindly
appetite after the Word wrought in the sinners heart, even as the infant
presently after the birth, does evidence some inclination and desire after the
breasts: for, the Apostle, having asserted their new birth, Chap. 1. ver. 23.
does here put them to evidence it: As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word. 5. There is nothing in the Word of the Lord to deceive any that get
grace to receive it by Faith, and walk by it, there being no mixture of Error
with the Truths therein delivered, or of falsehood, either in the promises,
threatenings, or predictions thereof: and therefore Ministers in handling of it,
should keep it free of the mixture of their own inventions and passions; and
People should love it, and rest upon it, because it is the sincere milk of the
Word, or, as the Original is, the Word without guile, or mixture of any thing
that deceives. 6. Although natural reason of it self, except it be elevated
above it self, and enlightened by the Lord, cannot comprehend the Truths
revealed in the Gospel, nor look upon them as reasonable, 1 Cor. 1.18, 23. and
2.14. Yet all of them are most reasonable in themselves, and cannot but be
acknowledged to be such, by all that have the use of sanctified reason, when
they consider what subjection and credit, we owe to Him of whom we have our
being; when they compare His Precepts and Commands, with His Promises of
furniture for obedience, and of a gracious reward thereof; and when they
consider how Justice and Mercy are agreed, Righteousness and Peace do kiss
each other, in that way of Salvation which is devised through Christ incarnate;
and that neither these Truths, nor any other in Scripture, are contrary to pure
natural reason, though some of them be far above the reach of it: for, this
Text may be translated (as the like word is, Romans 12. -- 1.) desire that
rational and sincere milk. 7. There are none of the Children of the Lord so far
advanced in knowledge, grace or holiness, as that they ought to be satisfied
with their measure, but ought still to aspire toward a further degree of
growth, both downward in humility, 2 Samuel 6.22. and stability, Col. 2.7. and
abroad in publick-mindedness, kything it self in real endeavors after the
salvation and comfort of others, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. and upward in joy and praise,
Psalm. 71.14. for, upon those who were already far advanced in grace, Chap. 1.
ver. 22, 23. is growth here pressed; desire the sincere milk of the Word, that
ye may grow. 8. According to the strength of our desires after, and greedy
in-drinking of the Word by application and use making thereof, so will be our
growth in grace and holiness: They cannot but be under a great decay in both,
who have lost their appetite after the Gospel: for, this desire after the Word,
is here pressed by the Apostle, as a mean of growth; desire the sincere milk,
that ye may grow thereby.

Verse. 3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.
The fourth motive to sharpen their appetite after the Word, is, That if they
did greedily drink it in, that they might grow by it, their so doing should
prove to them the reality of any experience they seemed unto themselves to have
of the graciousness or sweetness of the Lord to them: of which, whosoever gets
a taste, they cannot but thirst earnestly after more of it through the Word; and
they who do not so thirst, cannot conclude they have tasted thereof. And
therefore an eager appetite after the Word is to be labored for. Hence Learn,
1. The Lord Jesus Christ, whom Believers seek and serve, has in Him every
thing that may be useful and sweet for them, and a strong bensel in his heart
to let out the same to them; whereof he has given abundant proof, in providing
such a remedy for lost sinners, as Himself to die for them, Tit. 3.4, etc. in
His daily pardoning of their daily failings, Isa. 55.7. in His succouring of
them under their extremities, Heb. 2.18. and in His waiting the fittest
opportunity for proving Himself to be such a one to them, Isa. 50.18. for, all
these, and much more, are in this attribute of His, as the Scriptures cited,
which do express the effects of His graciousness, do make clear: and therefore
it cannot but be sweet to all that ever have tasted how gracious the Lord is.
2. Although all that are in the world, do, in some sense, taste of the goodness
of God, Psalm. 145.9. Yet only His own Elect and Regenerate Ones taste of His
graciousness, as it is manifested in the forementioned effects thereof: for, it
is only the Regenerate, who are supponed here to have tasted how gracious the
Lord is. 3. Although the way of Believers partaking and feeling of this
graciousness, or sweetness of the Lord, be spiritual, arising in their hearts
from their exercising of their Faith in God, as favorable to them through
Christ, Romans 5.1, 2. Yet it is no less real and certain, then that which is by
any of the outward senses closing with, and delighting in, their proper
objects. Therefore as it is elsewhere in Scripture set forth by smelling, Psalm.
45.8. and by seeing, Isa. 45.25. So here (as also Psalm. 34.8.) by tasting; If
so be ye have tasted how gracious the Lord is. 4. All that Believers get of
Christ in this life, is, in comparison of that full enjoyment of Him, which
they shall have in the life to come, but a taste, a sparing measure to sharpen
appetite after more: for, so it is here called a tasting how gracious the Lord
is. 5. That which proves our tastes of Christ's sweetness to be kindly, and
proper to the Regenerate, is, that thereby our inward and beloved lusts are
weakened, and we are made to lay them aside, and to loath them, and our desires
after the Word are more sharpened; by which the sweet feelings of the
Regenerate are differenced from those which hypocrites may have, which have no
such concommitants, Heb. 6.4. for, by considering the connection of this Verse
with the former two, it appears the Apostle has pressed mortification of sin,
and desire after the Word for growth, as things which could not but be in them,
if so be they had tasted how gracious the Lord is. 6. All those tastes of the
graciousness and sweetness of Christ, which the Saints may expect in this life,
are to be looked for in, and through the Word: for, while he makes their former
tastes of that kind, an argument to sharpen their desires after the Word, he
does clearly import, that both their former tastes of that sort, had been
through the Word, and that more of these tastes were to be found the same way,
and no way else: desire the sincere milk, etc. if so be ye have tasted that the
Lord is gracious: and so would desire to taste more of that sort. 7. All the
former experiences we have had of the graciousness and sweetness of Christ,
should sharpen and put an edge upon our desires after more of that sort, and
after the Word, through which those experiences are conveyed: for, to quicken
their appetite after the Word, through which the Lord's People taste of His
sweetness, he mentions their former tastes here; If so be ye have tasted than
the Lord is gracious.

Verse. 4. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious,

5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ.


Here is the fifth motive to the hearty receiving of the Word, taken from the
great advantage of daily closing with Jesus Christ offered therein: and this
advantage the Apostle sets forth in several branches; as first, That Christ
should prove Himself a living; and, secondly, a solid foundation, to such as by
Faith build themselves upon Him. Thirdly, That however the most part of men
reject Him as unworthy to be their choice, yet is He the Father's choice, and,
as our Mediator, in high esteem with Him, and therefore worthy to be our
choice, and daily to be made use of, ver. 4. Fourthly, That they who do close
with Him, as the Gospel offers Him, shall be made in some measure conform to
Him in spiritual life and stability. Fifthly, That their union with Christ, and
the rest of the Saints, should be growing more and more strait. Sixthly, That
so they should be made fit for entertaining communion with Himself, dwelling in
them by his Spirit, as in his spiritual Temple. And seventhly, That by their so
doing, they should prove themselves to be a People consecrated to the Lord (as
the Priests were of old) to offer up their prayers, praises, and other parts of
their Worship, which Christ, to whom they are daily coming, does make
well-pleasing to the Father, ver. 5. From ver. 4. Learn, 1. With how much
greater desire we do receive the Truths of the Gospel, by so much the more do
we come nearer to Jesus Christ offered therein, to enjoy a comfortable
communion with Him, and to partake of the benefits purchased by Him: for, if we
observe the current of the Apostle's speech, we may see that in stead of
showing the advantages of receiving the Gospel, he shows the advantages of
closing with Jesus Christ, offered therein, importing these two to be one; To
whom coming, as unto a living stone. 2. It is not enough that sinners once come
to Christ for life, and do close with Him, as the Word offers Him to them; but
they must make a trade, and a life of coming to Him, daily renewing and
strengthening the acts of their Faith in Him, for pardon and furniture for
every thing they have to do, there being much distance still remaining betwixt
Him and the best while they are here, 2 Cor. 5.8. Ps. 73.28. and still a nearer
communion with Him attainable, Philip. 3.13. for, coming to Christ, which in
Scripture is believing in Him, Joh. 6.35. is here pressed upon those who had
believed in Him before, and that by such a word in the present time, as
signifies the continuation and renewing of the acts of Faith: To whom coming,
etc. 3. There is no growth in grace or holiness, nor in ability to oppose our
corruptions, except we be thus coming frequently to Jesus Christ, in whom the
fullness of grace is, Col. 1.19. and who is both our righteousness, and our
strength for all we have to do, Isa. 45.24. for, this coming to Christ here
pressed, may be looked upon as the mean of growth in mortification and every
grace, as is clear by comparing this, to whom coming, etc. with what goes
before, and follows after. 4. All that come to Jesus Christ shall find Him a
solid foundation to rest upon, able to bear them and all their burdens,
constant in His love to them, and in the fulfilling of all His undertakings;
and as such, He is daily to be closed with: for, for these and the like causes,
He is here set forth, as the object of Faith, under the similitude of a stone,
5. Christ is a living foundation for sinners to build themselves upon, having
life in Himself essentially, Joh. 5.26. and communicating life spiritual and
eternal, to every soul that closes with Him, 1 John 5.12. for, so also is he
here proposed, as the object of saving Faith, to whom coming, as unto a living
stone. 6. Felt deadness should not keep any soul back from Jesus Christ, who
see need of life from Him, and hazard of eternal death without Him, it being
impossible to attain to spiritual or eternal life but by closing with Him, Joh.
6.51. for, coming to Him, as to a living stone, imports, that the desire of
life, should draw souls that do find much deadness spiritual, and do fear death
eternal to Him; To whom coming, as to a living stone. 7. There is not another
rock or foundation-stone, whereupon the Church or any true Member thereof, can
be built, but Jesus Christ himself. The Prophets and Apostles, are only called
the foundation, Ephesians. 2.20. in so far as they hold out, in their Doctrine, this
living foundation: and this Apostle, by that Rock, whereupon Christ said He
would build His Church, Mat. 16.18. did not understand himself, or his
successors, (though never so faithful Ministers) but Jesus Christ Himself,
whom he had a little before confessed to be this living stone: and therefore he
thus holds Him forth here; To whom coming, as unto a living stone. 8. Though
Christ be a solid and living foundation for sinners to rest upon, Yet is He
rejected by the most part of men, as unworthy to be their choice, He having
little outward glory to draw hearts toward Him, Isa. 53.2. and all men being
naturally blind concerning His spiritual excellency, 2 Cor. 4.4. and their own
need of Him, Rev. 3.17. and there being but a very few, in comparison of the
rest, that are given unto Him, to be saved by Him, Job. 12.39. therefore is it
that He is disallowed indeed of men. 9. Others rejecting of Christ, should be
so far from discouraging His own to close with Him, and make use of Him, that
by the contrary, it should move them to a more hearty and frequent closing with
Him, being confident that He shall deal the better with them, that they are not
hindered or discouraged by the example of rejecters, from closing with Him:
for, even this may be also looked upon, as having the strength of an argument
to move those who have hitherto been strangers to Christ, to come now to Him;
and those who are near, to come yet nearer, that He is disallowed indeed of
men. 10. Christ is disallowed, when he is not fled to, and made use of, for
that life and rest, and other advantages to be had in Him: for, in opposition
to Believers coming to Him, and use-making of Him, He is said to be disallowed
indeed of men. 11. Jesus Christ, not only as He is God, but as He is our
Mediator, is, and has been from eternity, Prove. 8.30. the Father's choice and
delight, in highest esteem with Him; which is evidenced by the Father's giving
all things into His hand for our good, Mat. 11.27. and all for that very end,
that He may be honorable in our esteem, Joh. 5.23. by His hearing of Him as
our Intercessour in all His petitions, Joh. 11.42. and hearing all our lawful
desires for His sake, Joh. 16.23. and by the unspeakable terror which He will
manifest against rejecters of Him, beyond what other sinners shall find, Heb.
10.28, 29. All which do prove, that as our Mediator, He is most dear and
precious to the Father, and worthy is He to be so, there being none in heaven
or in earth fit for that work of Redemption but He, Rev. 5.4, 5. Therefore is
He chosen of God, and precious. 12. The Father's high esteem of, and delighting
in, the Mediator Christ, should move sinners to come to Him, to choose Him for
their portion, and to delight in Him, being confident that their so doing
cannot but be well-pleasing to the Father, who has chosen Him that He may
welcome sinners, and has fitted Him to be all things to them that may
contribute for their blessedness, 1 Cor. 1.30. for, this is a motive of coming
to Him, that He is chosen of God, and precious.

From ver. 5. Learn, 1. Christ's way of engaging the hearts of His own to a
daily use-making of Him, is by proposing to them, in His Word, the sweet
advantages, and rich privileges, which they shall have by their so doing: with
the consideration whereof, he allows them to move their own hearts to
perseverance in that exercise: for, this Verse does contain a bundle of
advantages and privileges, that souls have by daily use-making of Christ,
branched out to move them thereunto, to wit, That by their coming to Him, as to
a living stone, they also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, etc.
2. Every renewed act of Faith, closing with Christ, as the Scripture holds Him
forth, does draw from Christ some new increase of spiritual life, whereby the
soul is made more sensible of sin, has more appetite after Christ and His
Truth, and more activity in duties that may honor Him; all which, are effects
of spiritual life, and resemblances betwixt it and the natural life: for, this
is here made a prevailing motive to that coming to Christ, which is recommended
to sinners in the former Verse, that they who did so, should be made lively
stones, which must be understood of an increase of spiritual life, it being
spoken to them, who are supposed before to have been born again. 3. Even as
Believers are holden throng in daily employing, and use-making of Christ, so do
they make progress in grace and holiness, so do they also become solid, and
fixed in their understanding of the Truth, that they may not be carried about
with every wind of doctrine, constant in their love to Christ, and in their
believing of His love to them, and established in their walking like unto His
Truths: for, in opposition to the unsetledness of mis-believers, and of them
who do not live in the daily employing of Christ, but rest upon their measures
received, those that are daily coming to Him, are here said to be lively
stones, built up, etc. importing, beside their progress, a state of stability
and fixedness, which they attain to by their so doing. 4. The lively and
frequent exercise of Faith, draws virtue from Christ to make the Believer
resemble Him in those communicable perfections of His, wherewith the Scripture
holds Him forth adorned, and to be closed with by sinners, so that under
whatsoever consideration of Christ held forth in Scripture, sinners do close
with Him, they are thereby in some measure changed to some likeness with Him in
that consideration: if the unclean soul close with Him, offered under the
consideration of a fountain, it becomes in some measure like Him in purity and
holiness; if the dead sinner receive Him, offered as life, he becomes to live
like Him; if the unstable soul come to Him, as the foundation-stone, it grows
stable as a stone: and so of every consideration, under which Christ offered in
the Word is closed with: for, He being before proposed under the consideration
of a living stone, as the object of Faith to be closed with, the Apostle here
affirms, that they who did so close with Him, should find that by their so
doing, they also as lively stones should be built up. 5. Those souls, who may
expect that the Lord will keep communion with them, and dwell familiarly in
them, as in His House, must labor to be made spiritual, in their minds
enlightened, and elevated to discern things spiritual, which the natural man
cannot do, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. Pro. 8.12. in their affections humbled in the sense
of their unworthiness and sinfulness, Isa. 57.15. confident of their
acceptance with God through Christ, Heb. 6.3. cheerful in Him as reconciled
to them, Psalm. 22.3. loathing sin, and loving holiness, 2 Cor. 6.16. etc. and
all persons that are holy, 1 John 4.16. All which the Scriptures cited make
clear to be parts of a spiritual frame, which is to be studied by all those who
may expect the Lord to dwell in them, as in His House: for, Believers, in order
to their enjoying of fellowship with Christ, are here said to be built up a
spiritual house. 6. The more heartily and frequently sinners flee to, and make
use of, Jesus Christ, as the Gospel offers Him, the more fit are they to be an
habitation for Him to dwell in, and the more familiarly will He converse with
them; and that because the only way to attain to, and grow in, a spiritual
frame, which makes sinners a fit habitation for the Lord to dwell in, is to be
daily flying to, and making use of Jesus Christ, who gives the Spirit for
working of that frame, 2 Cor. 3.18. for, Believers by coming to Him, ver. 4.
are here said to be built up a spiritual house. 7. Near union with Jesus Christ
and daily use-making of Him by Faith, is the best way to make the Saints one
among themselves: the division, difference of judgment, and alienation of
affection among them proves one or other, or all of them to be at a distance
from Him: for, while the Apostle says, To whom coming, etc. Ye are built up a
spiritual house, he does import, That Believers by their closing with, and
use-making of Jesus Christ, are as closely united one of them to another, as
the stones of a building are. 3. Every particular Believer should esteem
himself a part of the Church universal, which makes up one house to God, 1 Timothy 3.15. and so should seek the good thereof, Psalm. 122.9. and sympathize
with the sufferings of the whole, or any member thereof, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
seeing they are built up, (to wit, in the universal Church, with the rest of the
members thereof) a spiritual house. 9. Although the most eminent Believers may
not take upon them any part of the Ministerial Office, without a lawful and
orderly calling thereunto, Romans 10.15. Heb. 5 4. yet all Professors of
Christianity, do in some respects resemble the Priests under the Law, in so far
as they are separated by the Lord from all the rest of the world; and true
Believers among them do receive that unction from the Lord, to wit, His holy
Spirit, 1 John 2.20. which was signified by that oil wherewith the Priests were
anointed, Exodus 28.41. and have their service accepted, while others are
rejected, Prove. 15.8. in which respects they are here called, An holy
Priesthood. 10. Although internal, or real holiness be not the necessary
qualification, which makes one a member of the visible Church, Act. 8.13. Joh.
15.2. Yet is it the duty of all to study that holiness, and the mark of all the
true and lively members of the Church to be endued therewith: therefore they
are here called, A holy Priesthood. 11. The great employment of Believers in
Jesus Christ, is, to offer sacrifices to God, not typical, which are now
abolished by Christ, Heb. 10.1. etc. nor expiatory, which Christ alone has
once offered, never to be repeated, Heb. 7.27. but gratulatory, in testimony of
their thankfulness to Him, for that sacrifice of Himself for them, such as the
sacrifice of themselves for His service, Romans 12.1. their penitent and humble
supplications, Psalm. 51.17. and 141.2. their praises, Heb. 13.15. and their
charity to his Saints, Philip. 4.18. These and the like are they to ofter, who
are a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices. 12. What ever
sacrifices of this sort Believers offer up to God, they must be spiritual, done
from a spiritual principle, a new nature, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. upon spiritual
furniture, the strength of Christ, Philip. 4.13. and for a spiritual end, the
glory of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.31. In which and the like respects, they are here
called spiritual sacrifices. 13. Such spiritual sacrifices as Believers offer
up to God, are well-pleasing to Him, not for any worth that is in them, Isa.
64.6. or advantage they can be to Him, Psalm. 16.2. Act. 17.25. But because they
are presented to God by Jesus Christ, who takes away the iniquity of their
holy things, Exodus 28.38. and does perfume their service with the incense of
his merits, Rev. 8.3. Therefore are their sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.

Verse. 6. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief cornerstone, elect, precious; and be that believes on Him shall not he
confounded.
The Apostle does confirm his former Doctrine, concerning the usefulness and
excellency of Jesus Christ for the Church and Believers in Him, by a testimony
of Scripture, which (though no particular place be here cited) is to be found,
Isa. 28.16. And withal, he adds two further arguments to move them to that
hearty receiving of the Gospel, and use-making of Christ offered in it, which
he has pressed in the former words: The one is, That we have Jesus Christ, who
is the Father's choice, and highly esteemed by Him, with the Father's great
good will, laid in the Church as the foundation, and chief cornerstone
thereof, for every soul to flee to, and rest upon. The other is, That whosoever
betake themselves to Him by Faith, shall never need to be ashamed of their so
doing. Hence Learn, 1. The Ministers of Christ ought to have the written Word
so richly dwelling in them, that they may be able to confirm every Truth they
deliver from that Word; and the Lord's People ought to be so well acquainted
with the same, that though Ministers do not spend time to cite particularly
every Chapter and Verse, where every passage they bring forth is to be found,
they may notwithstanding, upon the hearing of it, faithfully and for the
substance repeated to them, acknowledge and receive the same for the Lord's
mind: for, even the Apostle here, as frequently elsewhere, does confirm his
Doctrine by Scripture; and yet, supponing those to whom he writes well
acquainted, at least with the letter thereof, he does not condescend upon the
particular place, judging it sufficient to say, Wherefore it is contained in
the Scripture, Behold, I lay, etc. 2. True Faith can have solid footing no
where but upon the written Word of God, nor should any of the Lord's People be
satisfied with the most pleasant notions about Christ Jesus, till they see them
grounded upon, and drawn from, that Word: therefore the Apostle, having in the
former words commended Christ, as the object of saving Faith, does here repeat
again the same commendation of Him from the Old Testament, that so Faith might
rest safely upon Him as such a one; Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture,
Behold, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone. etc. 3. Jesus Christ, and He alone,
is that to the Church, and to every soul that flees to Him, which the chief
corner stone, whether the lowest or the highest, is to the building: He is the
stone first laid, in regard He was and behoved to be actually exercising His
Mediatory Office, before any sinner could attain to union or communion with
God, Col. 1.18. He is the stone, laid lower than any of the rest in His
humiliation, Psalm. 22.6. He bears the weight of the whole Church, and of every
believing soul, Heb. 1.3. He is more curiously wrought than any of the rest of
the stones of the building (as the chief cornerstone uses to be) and engraven
by the art of His Father, adorning Him with all perfections suitable for the
necessities of poor sinners, Zech. 3.9. He is the bond, whereby most differing
Nations, such as Jews and Gentiles, are united in one building, Ephesians. 2.16. as
the foundation cornerstone knits the two side-walls of the building together;
He is the perfection of the whole, in whom the building, and every lively stone
thereof is complete, Col. 2.10. as the highest cornerstone, and as that also,
He is the glory and ornament of all the building, Isa. 22.24. In all which He
is resembled by that, whereby the Spirit of the Lord here sets Him forth to our
capacity, The chief cornerstone. 4. We have this great blessing, Christ for
the chief cornerstone of this spiritual building, with the Father's great good
will, who has laid Him, first, In His eternal Counsel or Decree, as the word
used by Isaiah, chap. 28.16. and here translated to lay, does signify, Psalm.
2.2. Secondly, In His actual exhibition of Him to the Church as Mediator:
first, in the promise of Him, Genesis 3.5. and next, visibly in our flesh; for, so
this word is also used, to signify the publishing or execution of things
formerly decreed, 2 Chronicles. 9.23. Prove. 3.19. And thirdly, in His exalting of
Him, when He had perfected the work of Redemption, so much of it as concerned
Him to do in the state of his humiliation: for, so this same word, (used Psalm.
8.2.) is translated, Mat. 21.16. to perfect a work. In all which respects, the
Father lays Christ the foundation or chief cornerstone, in the Church; and
calls all to behold what pleasure He has in so doing: Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief cornerstone. 5. The Father's condescendency to give His own blessed Son,
for the abovementioned uses to His Church, and Believers in Him, which this
similitude, here made use of, holds forth, is worthy of our most serious
consideration; and Christ, this chief cornerstone, is much to be admired, as
differing from all other corner-stones, He being one stone, who is both the
lowest and highest of the building, Philip. 2.6, 7. who has immediate
connection with the least stone, or meanest Believer, as well as with the
greatest or most eminent, whether Prophets, Apostles, or even the virgin Mary,
Joh. 17.20, 21. who communicates an influence of life and growth, to every
stone laid upon Him, Ephesians. 2.21. and who never suffers any that are built upon
Him to fall totally and finally off Him, Joh. 10.28. In all which respects we
are here called to admire Jesus Christ, and to give our most serious attention
and consideration to the Father in giving Him, by this word, which serves both
to draw attention and admiration; Behold, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone,
etc. 6. Though Christ be God's gift to the whole Church, made up of Jews and
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.14. which often has the name of Sion in Scripture, Obad. 17.
Yet with a special reference to the Church of the Jews, who first had that
name, He is said to be laid in Sion, being first preached publicly, and held
forth in Promises, Sacrifices, and Types to them, Psalm. 147.19, 20. being come
of them according to the flesh, Romans 9.5. and first offered to them after His
incarnation, Matthew. 10.5, 6. from whom the news of Him is come to the rest of
the world, Mica. 4.2. and by whom Christ shall yet have a great part of His
public glory in the world, Hos. 3.5. Romans 11.12, 15. All which should make us
pity their present case, and pray for their conversion: for, with a special eye
to them is this spoken, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone etc. 7.
Christ's fitness for this great work of our Redemption, evidenced by the
Father's choosing of Him for it, from among all others, as the word elect
signifies, and by His high esteem of Him as our Mediator, should strongly draw
the hearts of sinners in to Him, and move them to dwell much upon the thoughts
of His worth, and of the Father's esteem of Him, as He is the receiver of all
that come to God through Him: for, the Apostle, having commended Christ before,
from these two Epithits, that He is chosen of God, and precious, as motives to
draw sinners in to Him, repeateth them here again, as delighting to write and
think of so sweet a subject as Christ; Elect, precious. 8. That which builds
sinners upon Christ, this chief cornerstone, is that grace of believing,
which, according to the signification of the word in the Hebrew, whence the
Apostle translateth this Text, is, the fixedness, or stayedness (as this same
word is translated, Exodus 17.12.) of the soul in the expectation of salvation
through Christ, offered in the Gospel; and whereby the soul is fed and
nourished upon Him, as its necessary food, which is also in the signification
of the word in that Language: for, the Apostle, instead of insisting further
upon the metaphor of a building, which would have required him to say, he that
is built upon Him, shall not be ashamed, speaks properly, expounding what it
is to be built upon Him, to wit, to close with Him by Faith; He that believes
on Him shall not be ashamed. 9. Patient waiting on God, in the use of His
means, for the performance of His promises, without such hasting to a delivery
as makes us faint or fret under the delay thereof, or use unlawful means for
attaining to it, is the kindly effect of saving Faith, and that which keeps
off shame and confusion, which such hastiness occasioneth to the Lord's People:
for, the Apostle, translating these words of Isaiah, He that believes makes
not have, expresses the effect of not hasting in the aforesaid sense to be
this, He that believes on Him shall not be confounded.

Verse. 7. Unto you therefore which believe He is precious; but unto them which
be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the
head of the corner,

8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble
at the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.


The Apostle, having commended Christ, that sinners might be moved to make use
of Him, as the Gospel offers Him, does here hold forth the dignity and
disposition of all that believe in Him; as also the disposition, and judgment
of all that reject Him, that so none might stumble or be discouraged, when they
see Him rejected by so many. As for Believers, Christ is an honor to them, and
they have a high esteem of Him: both which readings, the original words, in the
beginning of the seventh Verse will bear. And as for others, who will not be
persuaded to believe and obey the Gospel, that stone, Jesus Christ the
Mediator, whom the Rulers of His time set at naught, is exalted by the Father
(according to the Psalmist's word, Psalm. 118.22. which the Apostle here
rehearses) to be the glorious Head of the Church and Believers, and a terror to
all, whose blind and carnal hearts, do still find out something in the Gospel,
whence they take occasion to reject Christ, and refuse to take on his yoke; and
thereby do but ruin themselves, as a mad man that dashes himself against a
stone in his way; or, foolish Mariners, that run their ship against a rock,
which are the similitudes here made use of, taken out of Isa. 8.14. and so do
prove themselves to be Reprobates. Which purpose contains three further motives
to press that hearty receiving of the Word, and use-making of Christ offered
in it, which the Apostle has recommended in the former words: every one of
which motives, serve to guard against the offense that might arise from wicked
men's rejecting of Christ. The first is, That Christ Jesus is an honor to all
that believe in Him. The second is, That his glory is nothing diminished by
others rejecting of Him, ver. 7. And the third, is, That they who continue so
to do, will but run themselves upon that ruin, to which they have been from
eternity appointed, for their rejecting of an offered Savior, ver. 8.

From ver. 7. Learn, Christ is the true honor of all that truly believe in
him; He is a great credit to all his poor kindred, who are honored by him, not
only to serve him, but to be served by him, Mat. 20.28. and by his best
Servants, Heb. 1.14. to be made Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. to have a
marriage-relation to him, 2 Cor. 11.2. to be heirs and coheirs of glory with
him, Romans 8.17. and it does not yet appear, but we shall know it afterward how
much is in this word, which in the Original is in the abstract, and runs
thus, Christ is an honor to you that believe. 2. Jesus Christ is most dear and
precious to all that truly believe in him, he being their life, Col. 3.4. their
light, Joh. 1.4. their wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. their food, Joh. 6.56. their
raiment, Romans 13.14. and every thing to them which is most necessary; and
consequently most precious to the children of men: and therefore cannot but be
in so high esteem with them, that the very thoughts of him, Psalm. 139.17. his
Ordinances, Isa. 58.13. his people, Psalm. 16.3. must be precious, and excellent
to them; and their most precious things in this world, cannot be dear to them,
for his sake, Act. 20.24. but must be dung and loss that they may gain him,
Philip. 3.8. And this esteem of Christ, where ever it is, in any real measure,
is a clear mark of true and saving Faith: for, so much is expressed in our
translation of the word, Unto you that believe he is precious. 3. It is our
clear up-taking of Christ in his excellency and usefulness for sinners, as the
Word reveals him, and some experimental feeling upon our closing with him, that
he is such a one to us, which begets this precious esteem of him in the hearts
of Believers: we can never esteem of him, till we know how excellent an one he
is, and taste in some measure how gracious he is: for, of those, whom the
Apostle supponeth to know Christ in some measure, as he is formerly described,
ver. 6, 7. and to have tasted how gracious he is, ver. 3. he affirms here, Unto
you therefore which believe he is precious. 4. They who do not believe in, and
esteem highly of Jesus Christ, they are not only guilty of neglecting and
slighting of him, (the hazard whereof is unspeakable, Heb. 2.3.) but they are
also guilty of high rebellion and disobedience to God; it being one of his
greatest and most peremptory Commands, to believe in his Son, 1 John 3.23. and
to honor him, Joh. 5.23. Without obedience to which, it is not possible to
give any acceptable obedience to any other of his Commands, Heb. 11.6. There is
no midst betwixt these two, men must either believe in Christ* and have a
precious esteem of him, or be disobedient and rebellious as the word
signifies: Therefore the Apostle thus expresses that disposition, in
opposition to believing and a precious esteem of Christ, Them which be
disobedient. 5. Although Jesus Christ, in his dealing with souls, has the
strongest reasons upon his side that ever were used with any, Pro. 8.5, etc.
and great variety of most alluring motives to gain souls to his obedience, Mat.
11.20, etc. Yet there are a great many who are so adicted to their own will and
lusts, Jer. 2.25. that they will not suffer themselves to be persuaded by him,
either to receive information to their minds from him, or to admit that he
should reform their hearts and lives: for, this description of the wicked, does
design persons that have been by strong reasons and alluring motives dealt
with, but have shown themselves a verse from all yielding or persuasion; But
unto them which be disobedient. 6. Those whom God has placed in Authority in,
or over his Church (and who are obliged to Christ for their place and power
more than others, not only to build themselves by Faith upon him, but to employ
their wit and power to draw many others in to him, and one of them to work to
another hand, like so many builders in the advancement of his work) are too
often found opposers of his work, and rejecters of himself, as if he were
unworthy to be laid as a stone in their building, or that his interest should
be minded in their designs: for, those who were in Authority in Christ's time,
are designed by this name of Builders, to which they should have been
answerable, but it was not so: Christ was the stone which the builders
disallowed. 7. The higher any be set in eminency of power or place above
others, the more does the Lord resent and take notice of their rejecting of
him, and opposing of his work: for, though many of the common people among the
Jews, did reject Christ, for which they bear their judgment, Mat. 23.38. Yet
this guilt, is mainly charged upon the Rulers: The stone which the builders
disallowed. 8. Christ, our Mediator, will not be the less honorable, nor
will his glory be any whit diminished, that many, and those the chief among
men, do reject him and slight him, But rather that will tend to his greater
glory; the Father taking occasion by their so doing, to let out the more of his
grace and love to his own Church and People that embrace him; and to illustrate
his justice the more, in the ruin of rejecters of him: for, while Christ is
disallowed of the builders, What comes of him? For the comfort and glory of his
Church, He becomes the head of the corner; and for the terror and ruin of his
enemies, a stone of stumbling, etc.

From ver. 8. Learn, 1. Although there be nothing in Christ to make any stumble
or offend at him, Jer. 2.5. but every thing that might draw the desire and
delight of all toward him, Psalm. 45.2. Hag. 2.7. yet through reason of men's
blindness, and ignorance of his worth and excellency, Luke 19.42. of their own
hazard by rejecting of him, Luke 23.34. their violent prosecution of their
lusts, Jer. 8.6. and malice against any that would hinder them in their
pursuit, Act. 13.45. and such other things as are resembled by the causes of
men's stumbling in their way, They do take occasion from the meanness and
simplicity of Christ himself in regard of his outward condition in his estate
of humiliation, Is. 53.3. Mat. 13.55, 56, 57. and of his followers, Jo. 7.48,
49. and Ordinances, 1 Cor. 1.23.26. from the unlikelihood of the way of
salvation through his death, and imputed righteousness to carnal reason, Romans
9.32, 33. Joh. 6.61. the contrariety that is in corrupt affections to the
precepts of the Gospel, Mat. 5.29. and from the many crosses that ordinarily
attend his followers, Mat. 26.31. not only to halt, and sit up in the study of
believing in him, and obedience to his Gospel, but by reason of their malice
and opposition, to dash themselves against him, and his will: for, in the
forementioned sense, He is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, to
them that stumble at the Word. 2. Christ Jesus, is not more properly the cause
of sinners rejecting of him, and ruining of themselves by their so doing, than
a stone in the way of some blind, furious, or drunken travellor, whereupon he
might rest himself, to help him in his journey, is the cause of his breaking
his neck upon it; or, a rock in the Sea, is the cause of desperate Mariners
shipwreck: for, from these, is the similitude here taken, while Christ is said
to be to misbelievers, and rejecters of him, a stone of stumbling, and a rock
of offense. 3. Those who will not suffer themselves to be persuaded to receive
the gracious offers made in the Gospel, but will run violently on in their own
sinful ways against the directions thereof; and in stead of subjection to it,
are the more incensed by it, These are they who stumble and offend at Jesus
Christ; and by their so doing, will hurt themselves, not him, as the man does
who stumbleth at a stone in his way: for, here the Apostle describes these, to
whom it is that Christ is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, Even to
them that stumble at the Word, being disobedient. 4. Although the Elect may for
a long time, before their conversion, stumble at Jesus Christ, and oppose him,
Act. 9.1. and after conversion, may for a time, under the fit of a temptation*
do the same, Mat. 26.31. Yet none will continue so to do, but those who have
been from eternity ordained for condemnation, in Gods spotless decree, which
does infuse no evil in men, Jam. 1.13. seeing they sin with no less freedom and
delight, than if there were not a decree concerning their reprobation, Act.
4.27, 28. and are not damned because of a decree, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. but either
because of their sinning against natures light, Romans 1.21. and 2.12 or for
their wilful slighting of an offered Savior, Joh. 3.20. The continuance in
which sin, is the clearest proof and evidence of reprobation, of any in the
world: for, the everlasting ruin and condemnation of souls, ordained from
eternity to the same, for their wilful slighting of Jesus Christ, is related
unto in the last words of this Verse, as being thereby most clearly evidenced;
They stumble at the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.

Verse. 9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood; an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light.
After the description of the woeful estate of them that slight Christ, the
Apostle returns again to illustrate further the excellency of the state of
true Believers, to whom these honorable titles, which the Lord vouchsafed of
old upon the visible Church of the Jews, Exodus 19.6. and Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. (and so
may yet in some sense be safely applied to all visible Professors) do most
fully and truly agree: for, speaking to all the Hebrews, who were Professors of
Christianity, he affirms, first, That they were wailed out from among the
rest of the world: which is true of all of them, in so far as they were made
Members of the christian Church; and of some of them, in a more special way, in
so far as they were made objects of his special grace and love; and so they
were a chosen Generation. Secondly, That they did partake of the benefits of
Christ's Kingly and Priestly Office, and did, in some respects, resemble him in
the exercise of both, in so far as all of them, were professed, and some of
them, true subjects of Christ, the King of the Church: all of them were by
profession, and some of them in effectual calling, separated from the world for
his service: and had spiritual privileges, answerable to these of Kings and
Priests; and so were a Royal Priesthood. Thirdly, That they were all of them
federally holy, and some of them endued with true sanctification; and so were a
holy Nation. Fourthly, That all of them, who did externally subject themselves
to Christ, were owned by him, as his propriety and prime interest, in
comparison of the rest of the world; and true Believers among them, as his
Elect and Redeemed Ones; and so were a peculiar People. And all for this end,
that they might in their practice commend and express his properties, to his
praise, who had called all of them externally, and some of them effectually,
out of the state of sin and wrath, to a state of favor and happiness. Which
purpose, contains two further arguments to press a hearty receiving of the
Gospel, and daily use-making of Christ offered in it, in order to their
spiritual growth; The one, taken from the excellency of their present estate,
in the several forementioned particulars; The other, from that wonderful
change, which God had made upon them, from so woeful, to so blessed a
condition. Hence Learn, 1. It is very safe, and suitable to Scripture Language,
to give unto the whole visible Church, and all the Professors within the same,
these styles and compellations, which do only agree in their full and best
signification to true Believers: Suppose the most part within the visible
Church, void of saving grace; yet, in respect of the rest of the world, and by
virtue of that Covenant which is betwixt the Lord and her, and all her Members,
Deuteronomy. 26.17, etc. and 29.10, etc. all Professors may, in some sense, have all
the styles that are here in the Text, and others like them: for, though these
styles be most truly verified in Believers; Yet, did the Lord of old give them
unto the whole Church of the Jews: and the Apostle here, gives them
indefinitly to all the nation of the Jews, who were professors of Christ, to
whom he writes, though with a special eye to those who were true Believers
among them; Ye are a chosen Generation, etc. 2. So excellent is that state,
whereunto sinners are advanced, by believing in Jesus Christ, that the sharpest
sighted in the world, the longer they look upon it, will still see more and
more of the excellency and privileges thereof: The discovery whereof to the
Lord's People, especially while they are under affliction, should much take up
the heart and pains of all the Ministers of Christ, it being his peoples prime
comfort under all their crosses, and their chief motive to all their duties,
that they are in so excellent a spiritual state: for, after the Apostle has
largely described it in the former Chapter, and spoken much of it in the former
part of this, he comes yet again upon the branching out of it here; But ye are
a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, etc. All which styles, do most truly
agree to true Believers. 3. They who do by Faith choose Jesus Christ for their
portion, who entertain in their hearts a high esteem of him, and do make use of
him daily for growth in grace and holiness, They have the characters and marks
of such as have been from eternity elected of God, and in time effectually
called, there being no other ordinary way to evidence the latter to us but by
the former, 2 Pet. 1.10. for, of Election and effectual calling in reference to
true Believers, may this be understood, which here the Apostle affirms of
those to whom he said before, that Christ was precious; But ye are a chosen
Generation. 4. As that dignity whereunto sinners are advanced by flying to
Jesus Christ, does, in a spiritual sense, resemble that of the Priests under
the Law (as was cleared in the tenth Doctrine upon the fifth Verse;) So are
they also thereby brought unto a kingly dignity; and in a spiritual sense, they
only are truly royal, having a new nature in some measure resembling the
divine, 2 Pet. 1.4. being coheirs with Jesus Christ, ( Romans 8.17.) of a
Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. and more than conquerors over all
their spiritual enemies, Romans 8.37. In all which, and the like respects, they
are a Royal Priesthood. 5. Our union with Jesus does not only oblige us to keep
a distance from the disposition and profane fashions of the men, whose portion
is in this earth, and to consecrate our selves wholly for the Lords use in the
study of holiness; but likewise it does really make Believers a holy People: In
so far as he is daily made use of by Faith, their hearts are purged from the
love of their lusts, Act. 15.9. and they are made to exercise other graces and
duties of holiness wherein he is honored, Gal. 5.6. for, this third branch of
the commendation of their excellent state, includes both their duty and their
privilege, They are a holy Nation. 6. As all the people on earth are the
Lords, they being all the works of his hand, and under the disposal of his
providence, Act. 17.26. and all the Members of the Church visible, are His in a
more peculiar way than others, Amos 3.2. So Believers in Jesus Christ, are in a
most special way his propriety and peculiar interest, whom he has purchased to
himself at a dear rate, Act. 20 28. and made new again by a second creation,
Ephesians. 2.10. in whom he does delight, Zeph. 3.17. and whom also he will maintain
and never forsake, Psalm. 94.14. for* this is the fourth branch of the dignity
of his People, which does in some sense agree to the whole company of
Professors, and most truly to true Believers, that they are a peculiar People.
7. That which is the Lords end in bestowing all these privileges upon
Believers, and which they should make the great end and business of their life,
is, That they may show forth the praises of the Lord, by numbering out (as the
Hebrew word, Isa. 43: 21. which the Apostle here translateth, does signify) to
the Lord himself his blessed perfections, or virtues (as the word here, rendered
praises, is in the original) or rather by their prudent and seasonable
commending to others his properties, such as his Wisdom, Power, Terror,
Sweetness, Faithfulness, manifested in his dealing, Psalm. 145.4, etc. 10, etc.
that so others may be stirred up to serve him, and praise him; but especially
by their expressing and holding forth in their practice some resemblance of his
properties to his praise, Philip. 2.15, 16. by their prudent and wise carriage,
declaring to on-lookers, that he is most wise, by whose counsel they are
guided; by their hazarding upon affliction, rather than sin; demonstrating his
terror, to be above the terror of flesh; and by their patience, and
cheerfulness under crosses and trials, proclaming to discerning beholders that
his power is great, that sustains them; and his consolations sweet, that do
refresh their hearts under such afflictions, and make up the bitterness of
them: for, this is here set down as the end of all the forementioned
privileges, and the compend of Believers duty, that they should show forth the
praises of him. 8. Even the Elect, before conversion, are living in gross
ignorance of their own miserable condition, and the remedy thereof, Ephesians. 5.8.
in the slavery of their lusts, Romans 13.12. They are under a sta^e of wrath as
well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. and so without any true comfort, Ephesians. 2.12. All
which, in Scripture, is frequently set out by this word darkness, whereby the
Apostle expresses the state of the Elect before conversion. 9. Conversion
brings sinners into a state of light, which comprehends some clear knowledge of
their own misery, Rev. 3.18. and the remedy thereof, 2 Cor. 4.6. a new and
spiritual life communicated to them, whereby they are enabled to close with
Christ and cleave unto him, Joh, 18.12. to walk in holiness of life, Mat. 5.16.
their living in his favor, Psalm. 89.15. their having a right to glory, Col.
1.12. and his allowance to rejoice and comfort themselves in their blessed
estate, Romans 5.2. All which are set forth in Scripture by this word, whereby
the Apostle expresses the excellent state of Converted Ones, Who are called
out of darkness into his light. 10. The blessed estate of true Converts, is
much to be admired by them, considering the Lords wonderful condescendency in
plucking them out of so woeful a condition as they were in before; his
mavelous loving kindness, in possessing them in such excellent privileges,
as they have in their new state; and giving them an undoubted right to so
matchless an inheritance, as cannot but surpass the power of their
understanding to comprehend, and so make them wonder at their own happiness,
which is here called mavelous light. 11. The way how the Lord brings his own
out of the state of nature, which is here called darkness, into the state of
grace, which is called light, is, by his calling of them by the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. opening their hearts to receive it, by the power of his Spirit
coming along with it, Act. 16.14. and so powerfully changing them into his own
Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light. 12. These upon whom the Lord has wrought this blessed change, ought
frequently to reflect upon their former woeful state, that they may be kept
humble, 1 Cor. 15.9. and compassionate to others, who are yet in the like, Tit.
3.2, 3. and likewise upon their present blessed condition, that they may be
provoked to praise, and to the study of holiness, 1 Timothy 1.16, 17. for which,
and the like causes, the change of Believers from the one state to the other,
is here represented to their thoughts, that they might show forth the praises
of him, who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Verse. 10. Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God:
which bad not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
Here is a further description of that happy change wrought upon these
Christian Hebrews, to whom he writes, to wit, that they, who before their
embracing of the Gospel, had not been owned, nor dealt with by the Lord as his
peculiar People in Covenant with him, neither yet had enjoyed any of his
special mercies, were how made his in a more special way than others; and had
saving and special mercies offered to all of them, and bestowed upon some of
them, So that Hosea's Prophecy, ( chap. 2.23.) concerning the restoring of the
Jewish Nation, after their rejection for a time, had now a begun accomplishment
in them; especially, in those of them who had felt the forementioned
remarkable change, whereby they should be moved to live* to the praise of him
that made it. Hence Learn, 1. When the Lord speaks to his Church in one age, or
to some particular persons in it, he does often speak also to his Church in
after-ages, and to all the rest of his People who are to live afterward. See
Mark 13.37. and Heb. 13.4. compared with Josh. 1.6. and therefore it is the
duty of all his People, to mark how far promises, made long since to the
Church, o^ particular Believers in it, have their accomplishment toward
themselves; that so, they finding what was long since spoken to others, made
good to them, they may be the more affected with that ancient and constant love
of God, whose thoughts has been upon them for good, while he was speaking to
others, who lived many ages before them: for, the Apostle cites and applies
this Scripture, spoken by Hosea, to the People in his time, as now verified
upon these Christian Hebrews to whom he writes, Which in time past were not a
people, etc. 2. They that would delight in showing forth the praises of God,
and have their hearts engaged to the study of holiness, must learn to dwell
upon the thoughts of their woeful case, wherein they were before conversion;
and upon the blessed state whereunto, through Gods mercy, they are advanced:
and often to compare the one with the other, that so they may be the more
affected with the change, and engaged to study his honor that made it: for,
after the Apostle had in the former Verse represented this to their thoughts,
as a motive to holiness, he does here insist upon, and represent the same again
by a new enlargement of it, (which is mainly verified in true Converts) Who in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God, etc. Although the
elect be the Lord's People from eternity in regard of his purpose of grace
toward them, Psalm. 90.1. 2 Timothy 1.9. Yet, in regard of any actual manifestation
of special love to them, or of his complacency in them as carrying his Image,
they are not his People; but remain slaves to Satan, Ephesians. 2.2. and to their own
lusts, Tit. 3.3. until such time as by his power, put forth with the preaching
of the Law, their woeful case be discovered to them, Luke 1.17. and by the same
power, coming along with the preaching of the Gospel, they be made willing to
accept the offer of Reconciliation through Jesus Christ, Psalm. 110.3. and
thereby also be fitted for the duties of new obedience for the honor of
Christ, Isa. 43.21. All which, as the places cited prove, are marks of them
whom he does in a special way own for his People: for, of the chosen Generation
the Apostle thus speaks, in reference to their state before and after
conversion; Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of
God. 4. Though there be not a sinner in the world, who has not many mercies of
God freely bestowed upon him, Psalm. 145.9. and many deserved strokes kept off
him, Romans 2.3. Yet, even the Elect before their conversion, have not obtained
that special mercy, whereby their sins are actually pardoned, Act. 3.19. and
whereby the Lord has complacency in them, Ezekiel. 16.8. and so they cannot be
justified actually from eternity: for, only of true Converts, is the Apostle's
speech here principally to be understood, while he says, That in time past (to
wit, before their conversion) they had not obtained mercy. 5. The closing of
sinners by Faith with Jesus Christ, as the Gospel offers him to them, does
bring them to a most sweet and excellent state, namely, to be owned and dealt
with by the Lord as his People, in a most special manner, whom he will never
forsake, Psalm. 94.14. and to obtain mercy of him for pardoning their daily
sinfulness, Mica. 7.18. for pitying, and supplying, as is fitting, all their
necessities, as the word here translated, to obtain mercy signifies; and for
bearing them through all the straits of their life, Psalm. 23, 6. and at last
crowning them with glory, 2 Timothy 1.18. All which is comprehended under this,
That they are now the people of God, and have now obtained mercy. 6. Of all
miseries that can be expressed, to live in an unconverted state under unpardoned
sin, is the greatest; And of all privileges in this world, to be brought out
of that state, and to obtain mercy, is the greatest, and the most engaging to
the study of holiness: for, the one is here held forth, as the depth of misery;
and the other, as the height of happiness; and the change from the one to the
other, as one of the strongest engagements to duty, lying upon those, who in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: who had not
obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

Verse. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.
The Apostle repeateth, and enlarges that which he pressed in the first Verse
of this Chapter, in order to their spiritual growth, to wit, That they should
keep up the battle against their inward unmortified lusts; and this is pressed by
three arguments. The first, is taken from Christ's affection and the Apostle's
toward them, as being dearly beloved of both. The second, from their hard lot
in the world, that they were strangers and pilgrims; which was verified, in a
special way, of these scattered Hebrews, to whom he writes. And the third, is,
from the hazard of the prevailing of these lusts, which is no less than the
eternal ruin of the soul. Hence Learn* 1. There does remain, even in those who
are far advanced in mortification, such swarms of sinful motions, and strong
inclinations to evils yet in a great part unmortified in them; and so prone are
they to give way to them; and to fall slack in the battle against them, that
they have great need of exhortation upon exhortation, and of one motive upon
the back of another, to stir them up to that exercise: for, even these whom the
Apostle supponed to have made some progress in mortification, Chap. 1. ver. 22.
and whom he had exhorted to further progress therein, in the first Verse of
this Chapter, he does here again exhort very earnestly to the same by several
arguments, Dearly beloved, I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts, etc. 2.
True mortification of sin, consists not only in abstenance from the outward
acts thereof, but in the weakening of the root and power of sin within, and the
inclinations and desires of the soul after the acting thereof, which are here
called fleshly lusts, in regard they tend to the gratifying and pleasing of the
flesh, and are acted by the outward man, abstain from fleshly lusts. 3. The
best way for Believers to fit themselves for the showing forth of the praises
of God in their practice, is, To set about the mortifying of those motions and
inclinations to sin that remain in their heart, these being the cause of all
the out-breakings which dishonor God in their conversation, Jam. 4.1. for,
this exhortation, may safely be taken as the mean of attaining to that which is
the great end of Christians calling, expressed in the former Verse, That they may
show forth his praise, they must abstain from fleshly lusts. 4. The love of the
Lord, manifested toward sinners, should be a very strong argument to move them
to fight against these lusts which dishonor him, and mar the sense of his
love, and the further manifestation thereof: for, this style, Dearly beloved,
may be taken as an argument to the duty pressed, and understood mainly of the
love of God to his People: because, the Apostle Paul (Romans 9.25.) citing the
place, which this Apostle cited immediately before, does find in it this style
in reference to God: and therefore this Apostle may be conceived to make use of
it here in the same sense, as a motive to the study of mortification. Dearly
beloved, abstain, etc. 5. Those who press people to the mortifying of their
beloved lusts, had need not only to entertain much love to them in their
hearts, that so they may deal earnestly with them; but likewise, by some
prudent expressions of their love to them, insinuate themselves upon their
affections, that so the stirring of their passions (which are ready to rise,
when unmortified corruptions are touched, both in good, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. and
bad, Mat. 14.4, 5.) may be prevented: Therefore, the Apostle breaths forth his
affection to this People, which may be safely taken to be also comprehended in
this compellation, as following after Christ, and moving the Apostle to much
earnestness, Dearly beloved, I beseech you abstain, etc. 6. As it may be the
lot of those, who in regard of their right to the Covenant of Grace, and the
benefits thereof, are no more strangers and foreiners, but fellow-citizens of
the Saints, and of the Household of God, to be separated from their native
Country, as these Christian Hebrews were, to whom this is spoken; So, what ever
their condition in the world be, they ought to esteem and confess themselves
(as the best of God's Saints have done, Heb. 11.13.) strangers and pilgrims,
who are absent from their own Country, 2 Cor. 5.6. and may expect hard usage in
their way, Genesis 31.15. who ought to lay aside every thing that may hinder them
in their journey, Heb. 12.1. and have their hearts still homward, Heb. 11.16.
who should take little pleasure in the delights that offer themselves in the
course of their pilgrimage. Genesis 23.4. and esteem it a great honor to get
leave to do any piece of service to God, while they are upon their journey, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. and should count much of any merciful providence they meet with,
Ruth 2.10. and make their case an argument to God for his pity and kindness,
Psalm. 119.19. and a motive to themselves to abstain from every thing that may
hinder them in their journey homward: for, this is brought in by the Apostle,
as an argument to all the duties of holiness, and especially, to the study of
mortification, that they were strangers and pilgrims. 7. The inward motions of
unmortified corruptions, which are in the Godly, do not only fight against the
welfare of their bodies, Prove. 14. 30. against that light and knowledge of God,
which is in their understandings, Romans 7.23. and against the graces and motions
of God's Spirit, which are in their hearts, Gal. 5.17. But likewise against the
everlasting wel-being of their very souls, so that these corruptions cannot be
given way to, except we would (so far as in us lies) run the hazard of the
loss of our souls: for, this is here a third motive to the mortifying of these
lusts, that they war against the soul. 8. The Lord does allow Christians to
stir up their hearts to the study of the mortification of their corruptions, by
the consideration of the hazard that cannot but follow upon their prevailing,
which is no less than the wounding of their souls by every advantage their
corruptions do get; and the eternal loss and ruin of their souls, by the
continual prevailing of them, as is imported also in this motive to the
mortification of those fleshly lusts; They war against the soul.

Verse. 12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
In this Verse, the Apostle presses the effect of his former exhortation; and
withal prescribes a special mean of showing forth the praises of God, to wit,
That Christians should labor to express holiness in their outward
conversation: and this he bears in by two arguments. The first, is, That
their lot was to converse among the enemies of the Gospel, and such as would be
glad to find occasion from their miscarriage to slander them as evil doers. The
second, is, That their holy walking among such, might prove a blessed mean, not
only to stop the mouths of their slanderous enemies; but likewise to being
about their conversion, and consequently bring much glory to God, when it
should please him to visit them with his saving grace. Hence Learn, 1. In so
far as the power of sin is weakened in the heart, there will be a beauty and
loveliness upon the outward conversation; which, if it be defiled with
out-breakings, does clearly evidence the power and prevalency of unmortified
lusts in the heart: ^or, as a necessary consequent, or effect of the former
exhortation, to abstain from fleshly lusts, the Apostle brings in this,
having your conversation honest. 2. It is not so much by a fair profession, or
good expressions, that Christians do show forth the praises of God, as by an
honest conversation, made beautiful and lovely (as the word here translated
honest signifies) to on-lookers, by the right ordering of all the parts of it
in duties to God and men, Psalm. 50.23. by the manifesting of wisdom and
meekness therein jointly, Jam. 3.13. and especially, by the faithful discharge
of the duties of their particular callings and relations, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11, 12.
Tit. 2.9, 10. for, the way of the Apostle's bringing in this exhortation,
gives ground to take this as an mean of attaining to what he had pressed before,
to wit, their showing forth of the praises of God, mentioned, ver. 9. having
your conversation honest, etc. 3. The more wicked the society be, with whom
Believers lot is to converse, the more should they be stirred up to the study
of an honest conversation, for the conviction or gaining of such: for, by this
that these Christian Hebrews were among Heathens (whom many professors of
Christianity resemble, in living like Heathens without respect to the Law of
God, Romans 2.14. pursuing strongly their Idols, as Heathens do, 1 Cor. 12.2. and
being unacquainted with the privileges and duties of the Covenant of Grace, as
Heathens are, Ephesians. 2.11. and ready to persecute all that run not their course,
1 Pet. 4.3. All which, the Scriptures cited, make characters of Heathens) the
Apostle persuades them to study holiness of life: having your conversation
honest among the Gentiles. 4. Those of whom the world is unworthy, are often
represented to the world as unworthy to live in it, by those whose dishonest
ways are reproved by their honest conversation: for, it is here supponed to be
the lot of the chosen Generation, the royal Priesthood, etc. to be spoken
against as evil doers. 5. It is one of the characters of them that are without
God in the world, to be enemies to, and slanderers of those, who will not run
with them to the same excess of riot: for, it is here a description of the
Heathens, that they speak against those who are of an honest conversation, as
evil doers. 6. The best way for Christians to stop the mouths of their
slanderers, is, by an honest conversation: without which, any other means they
can use, will readily prove ineffectual for maintaining their reputation: for,
here the Apostle prescribes to Christians the study of a holy walking, as a
mean to put their very enemies upon an exercise inconsistent with slandering of
the Godly, having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they
shall behold, glorify God. 7. Although the Word, accompanied with the
powerful blessing of God, be the principal mean of sinners conversion, Romans
10.17, 15. Yet the Lord may make use of the very carriage and visible acting of
his People, (such as, their equity in their dealings, even with their enemies;
their patient bearing of injuries from them, and continuing to express love
and respect to them notwithstanding thereof) to allure wicked men to fall in
love with his way, and to give him glory that ever sent them such a mean, and
blessed it to them, for their reclaiming from the way of perdition: for, here,
an honest conversation is pressed, as a mean of gaining the enemies of Christ
and his People, to glorify God in the day of visitation. 8. Neither the best
use of natural power of free will, that unrenewed men may attain unto, nor all
the pains that the Godly can take upon them* will be sufficient to bring about
that glorious work of their Conversion, whereby the Lord is so much glorified,
till he be pleased to visit them with his power, Psalm. 110.3. and with his
love, to make the change, Ezekiel. 168. for, here, as a necessary pre-requisit,
for the gaining of sinners to glorify God, the Apostle supponeth that there
must be a day of visitation, whereby must be understood a visitation in special
mercy, in regard it gains sinners to glorify God. 9. It is not any glory to
our selves from men, that should be our motive to an honest walking among them;
but that we may thereby bring some glory to God from them: which being honestly
aimed at by us, shall bring sufficient glory to us along with it, 1 Samuel 2.30.
for, this is here made the principal motive to an honest walking, That thereby
others might be moved to glorify God in the day of visitation. 10. The
Children of the Lord should not lose their hopes, nor quite their endeavors of
gaining the greatest enemies to God or themselves, among whom they live,
considering how soon and easily the Lord can make a change upon them: for, the
Apostle would have them looking upon those that were Heathens, and speaking
against them as evil doers, as such whom God might visit in mercy, and in whose
conversion they might be made instrumental, having your conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may
by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of
visitation.

Verse. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King, as supreme.

14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.


In this second part of the Chapter, the Apostle exhorts to those particular
duties, whereby Christians do show forth the praises of God, and commend
Religion in their several relations: And his first exhortation, in order to
these ends, is, That they should carry themselves with respect and submission,
to any form of lawful Government, established in the several Countries where
they were scattered, whether the same were exercised by the supreme Magistrate
or by the inferior: which several forms of Civil Government, he calls a
Humane Ordinance; mainly, because the Lord has not determined in his Word,
what particular kind of Government every place in the World should have,
whether Monarchy, or some other form; but has left the determination thereof
to humane prudence, walking by the general rules of his Word: And this
exhortation the Apostle infers upon the former, wherewith the first part of
the Chapter is closed, as a special mean of gaining wicked men to glorify God;
and presses the same by two reasons: The first, is taken from the respect,
which Christians owe to the Command of God, who is the Author of Magistracy:
The second, is taken from the good ends for which Magistracy is ordained, To
wit, 1. for the punishing and suppressing of wickedness; And, 2. for the
promoving and encouraging of piety and virtue. Hence Learn, 1. The Lord is
graciously pleased to call for respect, at the hands of his People, toward
those who carry no respect to him, that thereby he may either gain such to his
obedience, or heap coals of fire upon their heads: for, unto Heathen
Magistrates he is here calling for submission and obedience at the hands of his
People, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man. 2. Although Civil
Magistracy be a Divine Ordinance, in regard it is of Gods appointment, Prove.
8.15. Yet it is here called a humane Ordinance, in regard it is mainly
exercised about humane affairs, and for the good of humane societies as such,
in regard the particular forms thereof are left to be determined by men, as was
touched in the Exposition; and in some cases, may be altered by them. In all
which respects, it differs from that spiritual Government, which Christ has
established in his House; this being wholly about spiritual affairs, 2 Cor.
10.8. the particular form thereof determined by Jesus Christ in his Word, and
never to be altered in any place of the world, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. for, Civil
Government, for the forementioned respects, as also to difference it from the
Ecclesiastic, is here called an Ordinance of man. 3. Not only private
Christians, but also the public Ministers of Christ, and all ranks of
professors of his Name, are bound to give submission and obedience in things
lawful, unto lawful Magistrates, though they prove enemies unto Religion,
under whose Dominion Gods Providence has cast their lot: which submission,
does consist in a reverend esteem of the persons of Magistrates, because of
their Office, Eccles. 10.2. in the maintaining of their Authority and respect
before others, especially their Subjects, Exodus 22.27. in giving of our worldly
substance for that end, Romans 13.7. in our earnestness with God in prayer for
his blessing upon their Government, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and in suffering patiently,
and with due respect to their Persons and Office what they do unjustly inflict
for disobedience to their unlawful commands, Act. 23.5. for, this exhortation
is given both to the Officers and Members of the Church, scattered through
those Nations who had only Heathen Kings and Governors, Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man. 4. This dutiful and submissive carriage of Christians,
toward wicked Magistrates, is a special mean of commending Religion to the
profane, and gaining of them to glorify God, who use most unjustly to
represent Christ's Subjects as enemies to Civil Magistrates, Act. 24.5. for,
this exhortation may be conceived to be pressed as a special mean of attaining
to that honest conversation among the Gentiles, who spoke against Christians as
evil doers, especially in the matter of their loyalty, whereunto the Apostle
did exhort in the former Verse; Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man.
5. It is agreeable to the mind of God that there be plurality of Magistrates
set over every Country or Incorporation of people, it being impossible for any
one, or a few, by reason of the imperfection of their wit and strength, to
administer Justice aright to many, Exodus 18.18, 21. which ought to be brought
near to poor people, to prevent their toil and expenses so far as may be, 1 Samuel 7.16. And likewise that there be some order among these Magistrates; some
of them in greater eminency and power than others: for, so the Apostle
supponeth here, while he mentions many Magistrate^, and some of them more
eminent than others; whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors.
6. Although the supreme Magistrate, may be a prime instrument in appointing and
protecting inferior Magistrates in the exercise of their Office, 2 Chronicles.
19.5. in which respect the inferior may be said to be sent by him, to wit, the
Supreme; Yet are the Lord's People no less straightly bound to obey and submit
to the inferior, acting in his station, than to the Supreme acting in his, the
one being essentially Judges, and in God's place, to the people, as well as the
other, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Prove. 8.15, for, the Apostle does press equally, and
upon the same grounds, submission to both, whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. 7. This
submission and obedience, which Christians owe to lawful Magistrates, ought to
slow from their respect to God's Command enjoining the same; and from love to
Him, who has established that order among men, and would have his People
commending Religion to heathen or profane Magistrates by their respect to his
Ordinance in the persons of such; so that whosoever have not a hearty respect
to God and his Commands, and love to Him and his Honor, they want the
principle of true loyalty to Magistrates, whose great care therefore should be,
to advance true piety and respect to God, and his Commands in the hearts of
their Subjects, as they love to find true loyalty in them to themselves: for,
this is here made the principle or motive of Christians subjection to
Magistracy, Submit, etc. for the Lords sake. 8. Magistrates should be so far
from giving toleration, let be encouragement, to any wicked doers under their
power, whether godless and profane live^, Psalm. 101.4, 5, 7, 8. or Heretics
and false Teachers, though never so seemingly pious, who are no less evil
doers than the other, Philip. 3.2. That they should esteem it the great end of
their advancement to their Office and a principal part of their Duty, to
restrain and punish all such: for, this is here made one end of Magistracy,
comprehending one chief part of the Duty of Magistrates; for the punishment of
evil doers. 9. It is the Duty of Magistrates, to put most honor upon, and give
most encouragement and respect to, those, that live most subject to the will of
Christ, those being the best friends of Magistrates; and the disgracing or
wronging of them, being, in a special way, resented by Christ, the Supreme
Magistrate: for, this is another end of their Office, and branch of their Duty,
that they are for the praise of them that do well.

Verse. 15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men.
The Apostle repeateth in substance, his first argument, whereby he did press
upon Professors of Christianity, subjection to lawful Magistrates, to wit,
that this was now plainly revealed to be the will of Him, who is above all
Magistrates: and withal, he adds a third, That Christians respective
carriage toward Magistrates should prove an effectual mean of confuting the
calumnies of unreasonable men; who, being enraged against the Lord's People,
did represent them as enemies to Civil Government, that so they might raise
persecution against them. Hence Learn, 1. It is not so much the fear of hazard,
for neglect of duty, or the apprehension of advantage by the performance of it
as the consideration of the will of the Lord, which should be the prime and
m^st prevalent motive of Christians to their duty; co^^^^ring, that his will
(though never so far above our natural reason, and contrary to our natural
inclination (...) is the rule of Righteousness, Romans 12.2. in our obedience
whereof our welfare does consist, Mark 3.35. for, the Apostle having suggested
this before, ver. 13. as a motive to this same duty, holds it forth here
again more expressly; for so is the will of God. 2. Disaffection to Civil
Government and Magistracy, is an old slander which has been ordinarily given
in against the Godly by wicked men, who hate to the death those, who, by their
holy walking do reprove and shame their profanity; and therefore labor to
engage those in power against them, as their enemies, Prove. 29.10. for, as it
was ordinarily charged upon the Servants and People of God of old, Jer. 37.13.
Ezra 4.12, 13. So the Apostle, prescribing a way to these Christian Hebrews how
to silence such slanders, imports, that it was, in his time, the ordinary
trial of the Godly to whom he writes, That with well doing ye may put to
silence, etc. 3. Although it be fitting sometimes for the Lord's People, to use
verbal apologies for their own clearing, and other lawful means of defense
against false aspersions, Act. 24.10, etc. and 25.8. Yet a holy and christian
carriage, is the most powerful mean (though it be more seldom made use of than
any) to confute the calumnies of wicked men; and to bind up their mouths (were
they never so enraged) from speaking against the Godly? for, the Apostle,
having recommended this mean for this end before, ver. 12. prescribes it here
again, importing the fitness of it for the end for which he presses it, and
likewise some unwillingness in people to make use of it; That with well doing
ye may put to silence (in which word, there is a metaphor taken from the
putting of a musle upon the mouth of some wild beast, or mad-dog, such as the
malicious slanderers of God's People are) the ignorance of foolish men. 4. The
ground of wicked men's malice, which vents it self against the Godly in
slanders, and in mis-representations of them, especially to men in power, is,
that they are grossly ignorant, to wit, of the terror of that God who resents
the least wrong done to his Servants, as done to himself, Zech. 2.8. and of the
due subordination of men in Authority to Him, by reason whereof, His People may
disobey their sinful commands, without any wrong to their Office, or disrespect
to their Persons, Act. 4.19. for, here the Apostle leads the Lord's People, to
take the malicious calumnies of wicked men, for the language of their
ignorance, that so they might rather pity and pray for them, than study to
requite them, as their Lord did upon the same consideration, Luke 23.34. while
he thus directs, with well doing put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.
5. They who employ their wit to make the Lord's People odious, and bring them
under hazard from those that are in power over them, although they may have as
much use of it as may get them the car and favor of them that are in power,
and may prevail by their calumnies to bring trouble upon the Godly; Yet, are
they really and in Gods esteem, mad and demented, as the word here signifies,
seeing by their so doing they run the hazard of the wrath of Him, who is a
jealous and a terrible God against his Peoples enemies, Isa. 49.14, 17. for,
the Apostle's scope and strain here, does import, that malicious slanders of
the Godly, given-in to those in Authority, had such acceptance and weight with
them, as to occasion the rise of persecution from them against the Godly: and
yet those who gave in these slanders, are here represented by the Spirit of God
as ignorant and foolish men.

Verse. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the Servants of God.
The Apostle, in answer to an objection, which has been in the hearts of some
professors, against that subjection, which he had pressed upon them, to Civil
Magistrates, to wit, that their christian liberty did exempt them from it;
especially, those Magistrates being wicked, and pagans, brings in a fourth
argument to press the same: The sum whereof is, That however Believers be
brought by Jesus Christ to a state of true and spiritual freedom; Yet the Lord
does not allow them to make their christian liberty a pretense or vail to cover
any wickedness; and consequently, not that wickedesse of despising and
rejecting his Ordinance of Magistracy; but on the contrary, does enjoin them
all to use their liberty, purchased by Christ, wholly, as an engagement and
motive to his service. Hence Learn, 1. Believers in Jesus Christ, are by him
advanced to a state of true liberty and freedom, which does not consist in a
liberty to sin against God, which is Satan's slavery, 2 Timothy 2.26. nor in
freedom from the sweet yoke of his service, whether it be in attending his
Ordinances, to which he has tied us till his second coming, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1
Cor. 11.26. or the duties we owe to others of his People, Gal. 5.13. But it
does consist in our freedom from the Law as a Covenant of works, by which we
are not to seek Justification or Salvation, Gal. 3.18. Romans 3.21, 22. we are
free from the guilt of sin, Tit. 2.14 from the dominion thereof, Romans 6.22. and
the curse due thereunto, Romans 8.1, 2. and from the yoke of Mosaical Ceremonies,
Gal. 5.1. and, especially, in this we are free, that we are honored and
enabled to do God acceptable service, Psa. 119.45. In all which respects,
Believers are presupposed truly, free according to the Apostle's concession
here, As free. 2. Even the Redeemed Ones by Christ have as much corruption
remaining unmortified in their hearts after Regeneration as makes them in
hazard, not only to commit wickedness, and excuse the same; but to make the
privileges they have through Christ, and particularly their christian liberty,
a cloak to hide it, as if sin were no sin in them, or as if Christ had
purchased to them liberty to sin: for, so much is imported in the Apostle's
dissuading Christians here not only from refusing subjection to Magistrates,
but from defending the same, and using their liberty as a cloak of that
wickedness; As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.
3. When Christians shake off any duty pressed in the Moral Law, under a pretense
that their christian liberty gives them warrant so to do, they are then come to
such a height of wickedness, as has much of malice in it; especially, against
any that would oppose them in that course, and such as will spread to more and
more wickedness: for, the Apostle sets forth here, Christians, defending their
exemption from obedience to Magistrates, with the pretext of their christian
liberty, by such a word as does comprehend in the signification of it, all
wickedness; and points especially, at that particular sin of malice, or envy;
Not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. 4. These iniquities which
are unjustly charged upon all the Godly by wicked men, may be justly charged by
the Godly themselves upon their own hearts, as inclinable to those iniquities,
which do break forth in some: for, the Apostle, having in the former Verse,
called them ignorant and foolish men, who did slander all Professors of
Christianity, as enemies to Magistracy, does here warn all to beware to make
their christian liberty a cloak of it, while he says, Not using your liberty
as a cloak of maliciousness. 5. The right use which Believers ought to make of
that liberty, which Christ has purchased for them, is to be thereby the more
strictly engaged to his service; our serving of Him being a great part of true
christian liberty, Psalm. 119.45. and one great end of God's giving a Redeemer
for us, Luke 1.74. for, here the Apostle discovers wherein the right use of
christian liberty did consist, to wit, that Christians who are truly free,
should carry themselves as the servants of God.

Verse. 17. Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God Honor the King.
The fifth argument, whereby the Apostle presses upon all Christians due
subjection to Civil Magistrates, is taken from the necessary connection that is
betwixt this and other unquestionable duties: of which, the Apostle gives
three instances; every one whereof, does in some sort infer the equity of this
duty, which was questioned by some of them: The first, is, That some respect is
due to all men, and therefore much more to Magistrates. The second is, That
christian society should be very dear to all the Lord's People; and
consequently they ought to respect Magistrates under whose power and protection
they do enjoy the same. The third is, That they should stand in aw to offend
God, and therefore should give that honor to Magistrates, which he had so
straightly enjoined by the Apostle before, and here presses again in the close
of this Verse. Hence Learn, 1. While the Ministers of Christ are earnestly
pressing some one special duty upon the Lord's People, they ought also jointly
to press such other duties as are to be joined therewith in their practice, and
may be helpful toward the performance of that, lest by insisting much in the
pressing of one duty, without mentioning of others, which ought to be carried
along therewith, the Lord's People may receive such impression of the necessity
of that one, as may make them forgetful of others, not only equally necessary
with that one, but also subservient toward the performance of it: for, while
the Apostle is earnestly pressing subjection to Magistrates by many reasons, he
intermixeth a bundle of other duties, which are necessary to be joined in
practice with that; and being made conscience of, will fit them for the
performance of it, Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. And so,
Honor the King. 2. It is a prevailing way of dealing with the Lord's People
(which Christ's Ministers should study) to bear in upon them duties more
questionable, against which they may have some prejudice, as necessary
concommitants or effects of other duties, which they do less question, and
will more easily subject themselves unto, that from the acknowledged equity of
the one, they may be brought to yield to the other, which has necessary
connection therewith: even as it is a most convincing way of reasoning upon any
subject, to make use of premises easily assented to, for gaining assent to some
questionable conclusion, which is the Apostle's way here; for while he presses
the duty of subjection to Civil Magistrates, from which some Professors of
Christianity did apprehend themselves exempted by their christian liberty, he
presses upon them such other unquestionable duties as did infer that
subjection by the force of good consequence; if they found themselves bound to
honor all men, to love the Brotherhood, to fear God, then they could not but
find themselves bound also to honor the King. 3. Although there be some so
grossly and avowedly wicked, that they ought to be contemned and esteemed vile
by the Lord's People in comparison of others, Psalm. 15.4. Yet, there is no man,
to whom the Children of the Lord do not owe some respect; considering that all
men do partake of some excellency from God, Act. 17.25, etc. and carry some
resemblance of his Image, Jam. 3 9. and that the best may know more to be
loathed in themselves, than they can do in the worst, Philip. 2.3. and that the
worst, for ought we know, may be within the compass of God's election, 1 Cor.
7.16. for which causes, we ought to give them some signs of our respect, that
so we may keep our selves in the better capacity of doing good to their souls;
Honor all men. 4. It is not only the duty of every Christian to give a special
measure of love and respect to the persons of other Christians, beyond what
they give to any other men, Psalm. 16.3. and to evidence the same by their
sympathy with, and supply of, one another under their necessities, Gal. 6.10.
But also to love the society one of another, both in the exercise of public
Ordinances* to which Christ has promised his special presence, Mat. 18.20. and
in the more private duties of mutual edification, which are very pleasant to
the Lord, Mal. 3.16. and profitable to themselves, Heb. 3.12, 13. for, the
Apostle having exhorted to honor all men, subjoyneth this, as a further degree
of respect* not only to the Saints themselves, But as the word signifies, to
their society, Love the Brotherhood. 5. It should be the great care of the
Children of God, to carry along in the discharge of every duty, the fear of God
in their hearts: which is a frame of spirit that he works in all that are in
Covenant with him, Jer. 32.40. whereby they hate every known sin, Prove. 8.13.
and, in obedience to him, aim at every commanded duty, especially, those of
their particular relations, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. and is entertained by the believing
consideration of the terror of the Lord, Psa. 119.119, 120. his excellency, Job
13.11. his goodness, Hos. 3.5. and his pronenesse to pardon sin, Psalm. 130.4.
All which is comprehended under this duty, which seasoneth all the rest, here
pressed; Fear God. 6. There is a special measure of honor and respect due by
the Lords People unto those whom God has set in Lawful Authority over them,
beyond what is due to any others on earth, by reason of their place, wherein
they resemble the Majesty of God to his People, Psalm. 82.6. for, the Apostle,
having exhorted in the beginning of this Verse, to honor all men, as if that
honor which is due to all, were not sufficient for Magistrates, he closes the
Verse with this, Honor the King. 7. The Lord's People, are so to honor
Magistrates, as that they forget not the fear of the Lord, and the duties
comprehended under it, in the first place: without which no duty can be
faithfully discharged to any man, Luke 18.2. for, this is not only the order of
the words here, but of the purpose it self; Fear God. Honor the King. 8. These
duties, against which the hearts of the Godly have some prejudice, and the
neglect whereof, proves most offensive to the profane, had need to be
frequently and earnestly pressed upon the Lord's People: for this duty was
unpleasant to many Professors, and the profane apprehending it to be so to all,
were incensed against Christians: Therefore, the Apostle, having pressed it
before, ver. 14. renews his exhortation to it here again, Honor the King.

Verse. 18. Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward.
The second exhortation to the study of holiness, for showing forth the
praises of God, is directed to Christian Servants, in which rank the greatest
number of Believers then were, who seem to have been in hazard, under pretense
of their christian liberty, not only to shake off subjection to Magistrates,
(as was shown before) but to their particular Masters (the most part whereof
were also at that time Heathens) unto whom, the Apostle presses Christian
Servants to give subjection and obedience, with all fear, to wit, of offending
God, or their Masters; and that not only to the better and more equitable sort
of them, but even to the more austere and inhumane. Hence Learn, 1. As the
Children of the Lord in the meanest and hardest condition wherein his
providence does cast them, may be isntrumental in bringing some glory to Him;
So, He is especially glorified by them in their conscionable discharge of the
particular duties of that relation wherein they are fixed: for, the Apostle
(having shown the end of all Believers privileges, to be, that they might
show forth the praises of God, ver. 9.) holds forth this to persecuted
Christian Servants, as one principal way of showing forth His praises; Servants
be subject to your Masters. 2. One wrong principle, being admitted in the minds
of Christians, concerning the matters of God, may be the occasion and rise of
manifold disorders in their practice: for, it is clear from the former purpose,
that the mistake of Christians, concerning the nature of their christian
liberty, did make them apprehend themselves exempted from subjection to
Magistracy; and by this exhortation immediately subjoyned, compared with 1 Cor.
7.20, 21, 22. it does appear that the same mistake has prevailed, to make
Servants apprehend exemption from subjection to their Heathen Masters, which
makes the Apostle find it necessary to press them to this duty, Servants be
subject to your Masters. 3. Although there be some of the great ones of the
earth, given by the Father to Christ the Mediator, who will therefore receive
Him, and subject themselves to Him, Psalm. 72.10. Yet the most part of. His
Subjects and Servants are of the poorest and meanest in the world, whom He
chooses, to commend the freedom of His grace, and the condescendency of His
love, which often lights upon the Servant, and passes by the Master: for, it
would seem, there has not been many Magistrates or Masters in those Nations
where these believing Hebrews, to whom the Apostle writes, were scattered, who
have been fit to be spoken to, which makes the Apostle omit them, and speak to
their Subjects in the former words, and to their Servants here, Servants be
subject to your Masters. 4. Christian liberty, does not exempt Christian
Servants from subjection to their Masters, though they were Heathens, but does
consist with obeying all their lawful commands heartily, and as service to God,
Col. 3.22, 23. in giving due respect to their persons, as being placed above
them, as the word here signifies: for, this is here pressed upon the chosen
Generation, and such as were truly free by Jesus Christ; Servants be subject to
your Masters, 5. Not only the immediate acts of God's Worship and Service,
should be gone about with much fear and reverence to Him in the heart, Psalm.
2.11. but even these outward duties, which we owe to men, should be seasoned
therewith, that so Christians, even while they are employed in most common
duties, may be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Prove. 23.17. for, this
is the qualification of that subjection, which Christian Servants owe to their
Masters, Be subject with all fear. 6. It may be the lot of the Lords dearest
People, not only to be in the rank of Servants, which is a part of their
likeness to their Lord for His outward state in the flesh, Philip. 2.7. but
likewise to be, by divine providence, put to serve Heathens, and the worst of
Heathens, that so the Lord may make them instrumental to do good to some of
these, 2 King. 5.2, 3. or convince them that God is with their Servants, Genesis
31.44. for, here the Apostle suppones some of the chosen Generation, and the
peculiar People, to be Servants to Heathens, and to froward and perverse
Heathens. 7. Although all that are without the saving knowledge of God in
Christ, be in a like damnable and cursed estate, Ephesians. 2.3. Yet there may be
amongst them much difference of disposition, some of them being of a more
bountiful and liberal temper, as the word, here rendered good, may signify,
Mat. 20.15. and less rigid in exacting all that in strict justice they might,
as the word, translated gentle, does import; others of them more perverse and
harder to have dealing with, according to the signification of this word
froward: which difference, does mainly flow from the Lord's various
dispensation of the gifts of nature, and his common influences for improving
the same, according to His Sovereign pleasure: for, here among wicked and
heathen Masters, there are some good and equitable, or moderate, to wit, in
comparison of some others of them, and there are others who are more perverse
or froward. 8. The wickedness of those, to whom in God's providence Christians
are tied by any relation, does not exempt them from making conscience of the
duties of that relation toward those to whom they are tied; the ground of our
duty, not being the qualification of the person to whom we owe it, but the
Command of God obliging us to it: Servants be subject to your Masters with all
fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.

Verse. 19. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully.

20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall
take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently; this is acceptable with God.


From this, to the end of the Chapter, the Apostle brings many arguments, to
press upon Christian Servants, dutifulness to their Pagan-Masters, and patient
suffering of injuries from them in following their duty to Christ. The first,
is, That if they did out of respect to Christ's command and glory, hold on in
their duty, notwithstanding of hardest sufferings, He should graciously reward
their so doing, as acceptable service to Him, ver. 19. The second is, That it
would be a great disgrace for Christians to deserve by their miscarriage hard
usage from Heathens; but, if they were faithful in their duty, and patient
under sufferings for it, they might be sure of God's approbation, ver. 20.
Hence Learn, 1. Although neither our doing, nor our suffering, can merit any
thing at God's hand, it being wholly His grace (as the first expression, ver.
19. may be rendered from the Original) that enables us for both, Philip. 1.29.
Yet when His grace has in some measure enabled us for both, He is pleased to
esteem thereof as if it were worthy of thanks from Him; and graciously to
reward it with a further increase of grace, and ability to do and suffer, Mat.
25.19. with begun peace and consolation in the heart under sufferings for duty
to Him, 2 Cor. 1.5. as earnest of the full reward which His grace is to bestow
at last, Rev. 3.4, 5. which ought to be a sufficient encouragement to the Godly
in their duty against all their sufferings from men, for which end, it is held
forth here: for, This is thank-worthy, or (as the Original may be rendered)
this is grace. 2. God does not so much respect the sufferings of Professors,
even for Truth and Duty (seeing Hypocrites may attain thereunto, 1 Cor. 13.3.)
as He looks unto the principle and manner of their sufferings, whether they
suffer because of their former engagements by profession, or otherwise; and
because they desire to carry a name and esteem of religious persons to the end
with them: or, whether they suffer out of conscience toward God, that is, in
obedience to Him, who commands them to choose affliction rather than sin, and
from a desire to please and honor Him, by bearing Testimony to His Truth, by
suffering: for, this suffering, and this only, is reckoned thank-worthy, if a
man for conscience toward God* endure grief, suffering wrongfully. 3. Although
the Lord sometimes keeps heaviness and grief off the spirits of his People
under such sufferings, as are very heavy and grievous in themselves, Act.
16.25. Yet, at other times, He sees it sitting, not only to exercise them with
hard and unjust sufferings from men, but likewise with many sad weights upon
their spirits under these sufferings, arising partly from the sight of God's
dishonor by their enemies, Psalm. 42.3. and partly from the fear of their own
miscarriage under their trials, Joh. 14.1. together with their mis-belief of
the Promise of their through-bearing and out-gate, Psalm. 116.11. both which
exercises together, are sometimes necessary for the Godly, that they may be
completely denied to their own strength and courage, and may be taught to
depend on God for their through-bearing, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. and therefore both
exercises ought to be patiently submitted unto by them, in so far as they are
for their trial and advantage, even as they would expect a reward from God:
for, this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. 4. Although it be the mark of Hypocrites to do all duties
of Religion for respect to their own credit and glory before men, Mat. 23.5.
Yet, the Lord allows His own People to have so much respect to their own
credit, especially before the profane, as may provoke them to a tender and holy
walking, and to eschew every thing that may disgrace them, and their holy
Profession: for, this is here made an argument to duty, and patient suffering
of wrongs, that if they neglected duty, and so were put to suffer for their
miscarriage, That would be no glory, but rather a disgrace to them, and their
Profession; for, what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? 5. As it has pleased the Lord for the good of humane
society, to leave in the minds, even of Heathens, some knowledge of what is
contrary to His will, Romans 2.14. 15. and some inclination to punish the same,
Act. 28.4. So it is a very great disgrace to Christian Religion, when Heathens,
or such as are like Heathens, void of the saving knowledge of God in Christ,
may find Christians in those sins, which their light leads them to punish,
especially, when Christians make their liberty by Christ, a pretense and cloak
to cover those sins: for, it is here imported by the Apostle, that Heathen
Masters did not only know some what of their Servants duty, but also would
justly punish them for neglect of it; and that, if Christian Servants did by
their miscarriage deserve sufferings from such Masters, (as they were in hazard
to do by abusing their christian liberty) this would prove a great disgrace to
them, and to the Profession of Christianity: for, what glory is it, if when ye
be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? 6. Although patience,
under deserved strokes from men, be in it self commendable, and will prove
persons to be accepted with God, when they accept the punishment of their
iniquity, and fly to Christ for mercy, Luke 23.41. Yet the patience of a
Professor of Religion, under those strokes, which his own miscarriage has
justly procured from wicked men, will not remove his disgrace, nor the disgrace
of his profession, nor be any glory to him, in comparison of what patience
under sufferings for well-doing would be: for, this question, What glory is it,
if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye take it patiently? imports, that
their sufferings for their faults, though never so patiently, would be no glory
to them, to wit, in comparison of what it would be to suffer patiently for
well-doing. 7. As none may expect that well-doing will exempt them from trouble
and suffering, but rather that it will occasion and increase the same; So, the
Lord's favor toward sufferers, and His acceptance of them, and of their
sufferings as service to Him, should be thought a sufficient encouragement to
patience under that lot; and should be often considered as a recompense of all
the shame and pain of the cross: for, with this encouragement, which the
Apostle held forth, for the substance of it, in the beginning of the former
Verse he closes this Verse: If when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently: this is acceptable with God.

Verse. 21. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.
Here are some further arguments, to press upon Christians patient suffering
for the Truth of Christ, and Duty to Him. The third, in number is, That they
were by the Gospel called to follow Christ with a cross upon their back. The
fourth is, That Christ has in their room born all the wrath that is due to them
for their sins. And the fifth, is, That he has cast a sweet copy and pattern of
a right way of suffering for all His own to imitate: and therefore they should
hold on in their duty, notwithstanding of sufferings. Hence Learn, 1. As
Christ's Followers are called by the Gospel, to enjoy a sweet fellowship with
Him here, 1 Cor. 1.9. and to the obtaining of glory with Him hereafter, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. So, are they also called to endure a suffering lot in the world
for following their duty to Him: for, to those who were suffering wrongfully
for well-doing, the Apostle thus speaks, Even hereunto were ye called. 2.
Christ does not hide this hard lot of suffering from His Followers, till they
meet with it; but when first He invites them to engage with Him, He gives them
fore-warning of the worst that may befall them in His service, that so they may
not be offended at it when it comes, Job. 16.1. that they may give proof of
their esteem of Him, by consenting to take up a cross for Him, Mat. 10.37, 38.
and by their former consent to follow Him upon these terms, may be the more
strongly engaged to adventure upon suffering for Him, Joh. 21.18. 2 Pet. 1.14.
for, the Apostle brings this, as an argument to patient and constant suffering,
that even hereunto were they called. 3. Jesus Christ has suffered in the room
and place of the Elect, so that none who are one with Him have any part of
vindictive wrath to undergo, whatever fatherly displeasure they may be
exercised with to humble them in the sense of sin, and wrath due to them, that
so they may flee to Him, Psalm. 89.30. because Christ also has suffered for us.
4. Christ's suffering thus for Believers, does strongly oblige and encourage
them to suffer for Him, when they must either suffer, or sin against Him, seeing
His sufferings for them, has freed them from wrath, Gal. 3.13. and made
everlasting blessedness sure for them, Romans 8.34, etc. for, this is the
Apostle's fourth argument, to suffer for well-doing, because Christ also has
suffered for us. 5. Although it be high presumption in any* to aim at imitation
of Christ in these acts of His, which He did for satisfying the Father's
justice for sinners, for proving of His Deity, and the like, it being
altogether impossible to imitate Him in these, Joh. 15.24. Yet Christians are
bound to imitate Christ in these actions of His, which being in themselves
moral, are purposely propounded in Scripture for Christians to imitate, such as
meekness, Mat. 11.29. humility, Joh. 13.12, 13. self-denial, Romans 15.2, 3. and
here, patient and constant suffering for well-doing: Christ has suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that we should follow His steps. 6. Although the
best will still be far short of conformity to their pattern Christ Jesus, even
in these things wherein they are to imitate Him, and in which some measure of
conformity may be attained; Yet ought we not to give over, but still aim at the
next time to come nearer our copy, which is perfect in it self, and able to
change those who by Faith look on it, 2 Cor. 3.18. for, there is a metaphor in
the word here, taken from an exact copy which is cast to Children, whereunto
they are still to study more conformity, though after many essays they be very
unlike it; leaving us an example that we should follow. 7. Jesus Christ does
not call His Followers to step any hand step in His service, but such as He
has trod before them himself, whose paths drop fatness to them, Psalm. 65.11.
and who by His Spirit does yet go along with them through the hardest, Cant.
4.8. for his steps, here spoken of, are both the several kinds of His
sufferings from wicked men, which He went through, and the particulars of the
right way of suffering wherein we are to imitate Him, who has left us an
example that we should follow his steps.

Verse. 22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth.

23. Who when He was reviled, reviled not again, when He suffered, He threatened
not, but committed Himself to Him that judges righteously.


The Apostle insists in commending Christ, as the Believers copy, from three
particulars: which may be taken for so many further arguments to patient
suffering for well-doing. The sixth, in order, taken from Christ's innocence,
is, That seeing He who did not in the least offend either God or man, was
handled as a sinner, His sinful Followers should therefore take well with
sufferings. The seventh, taken from His patience, is, That since the Son of
God, when foul crimes were laid to His charge, did not at all requite His
slanderers, nor give the least ill word for the worst usage; therefore patience
under injuries, without studying revenge, becomes His Followers. The eighth,
taken from His Faith and Confidence, is, That seeing Christ did resign Himself
to His righteous Father, to deal with Him, and His persecutors as He saw
fitting, they that desire to be like Him, should take the same course. Hence
Learn, 1. Christ Jesus our Mediator, was altogether free of the least
transgression of, or defect in, conformity to the Law of God, though the
strongest of Satan's fiery darts were shot at Him, Mat. 4.1, etc. and 16.22,
23. Yet, His Bow abode in its strength, Genesis 49.24 there being nothing in Him
to befriend a temptation, Job. 14.30. He being by His miraculous conception,
exempted from the contagion of Original sin, Luke 1.35. whence actual
transgressions flow, Jam. 4.1. and it behoved Him to be so, that He might be
completely lovely to God, as being the truth of all those spotless Lambs that
were offered under the Law, as types of Him, Joh. 1.29. and that He might be a
perfect pattern of holiness to His Followers, who did no sin. 2. There is
nothing but truth and sincerity in all the words of Christ, He never expressed
more willingness to receive and do good unto sinners, than He does mind really
to make out to all that come to Him; nor has He expressed more wrath against
slighters of Him, than they shall find to be true: for, this is another branch
of the commendation of Christ from His innocence, Neither was guile found in
His mouth. 3 How innocent soever the Children of the Lord may be of those
crimes, which are unjustly charged upon them by persecutors, as the cause of
their sufferings; Yet, the sense of their sinfulness in other things, ought to
make them submissive to, and patient under hardest sufferings from men,
considering that they suffer for less than they deserve, Ezra. 9.13. and that
it becomes them to bear indignation because they have sinned, Mica. 7.9. for,
the Apostle proposes the innocence of Christ, who was a patient sufferer, as
an argument from the more to the less, to move sinful things not to take ill
with sufferings, since Christ was a patient sufferer, who did no sin, etc. 4.
As all that would glorify the Lord by their sufferings, and have comfort under
them, must study to imitate Jesus Christ in His innocence and sincerity; So,
they that have attained to the greatest measure of conformity to Him in these,
may not therefore expect exemption from sad sufferings, but rather, the liker
to Him in these they are, to look for the worse usage from wicked men: for, as
Christ's innocence and sincerity are here held forth as steps of His which they
that would honor Him by their sufferings, and have comfort under them, must
follow; So, He is here held forth as exposed to extreme grievous sufferings,
notwithstanding He had these in their perfection, He did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth: yet He was reviled, and put to hardest sufferings. 5.
It was the lot of our Lord Jesus, when He was in our place, in the estate of
His humiliation, not only to suffer hard things in His Person, but likewise in
His Name; to have that rent and torn with reproaches, and to have foul crimes
(as the word here, rendered to revise, signifies) unjustly laid to His charge,
such as compliance with Satan, Joh. 10.20. blasphemy, Joh. 10.33. sedition,
Luke 23.2. and the like: and that because, though He never did any thing worthy
of blame, He stood in the room of many sinners really guilty of all these
crimes, which were only upon Him by imputation, so as He bear the curse of God,
and the shame of the world, that was due to these sins: for, this lot is here
suppo^ed to have been Christ's, that He not only suffered, but was reviled. 6.
While our Lord Jesus was under this lot, He did not give a meeting of any kind
to his enemies, but was so far from charging them with foul crimes unjustly,
which is reviling, that when they had done so to Him, calling Him a Devil, Joh.
8.48. He did not at that time so much as repeat the like challenge, which He
had before justly laid to their charge, Joh. 8.44. and though He did sometimes
threaten fearful judgments upon despisers of reconciliation with God through
Him, Mat. 23.13, etc. Yet, upon his receiving of greatest personal wrongs, He
did not so much as renew any of these threatenings, but on the contrary prayed
for his enemies, Luke 23.34. lest in the misapprehension of any onlookers, His
sufferings might have been stained with imputation of passion or revenge, and
his followers might have abused his practice to vent their carnal passion
against their persecutors; the hazard whereof, is likewise imported in the
Apostle's guarding thus against it, Who when He was reviled, reviled not again;
when He suffered, He threatened not. 7. As all Christ's Followers should resolve
to meet with grievous reproaches and slanders, joined with their other
sufferings, as Christ did, So ought they to follow Christ's steps, in not
requiting their enemies, or giving ill language for the worst usage, but must
learn to die to their reputation as well as to other things, for His sake, who
when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, he threatened not. 8.
While Christ our Lord was suffering in our room. He did with much confidence
and willingness deliver Himself up to the will of his righteous Father, to
endure the utmost that was due to sinners, according to his undertaking in the
Covenant of Redemption, Psa. 40.7, 8. knowing that his Father's righteousness
was engaged in the same Covenant, to sustain his Manhead under all his
sufferings, Isa. 50.7, etc. to reward Him for them, by giving Him all that He
died for, as his seed, to serve him, and praise him for ever, Isa. 53.10, 11.
and to punish all the rest according to their deserving, Psalm. 110.5, 6. for,
this is here expressly asserted as the ground of the patience and submission of
the man Christ to the Fathers will, He committed himself to Him that judges
righteously. 9. Although these acts of Faith which do necessarily presuppose
guiltiness, or have with them any mixture of mis-belief or discouragement,
could not be in Christ, who was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from
sinners, Heb. 7.26. Yet His Soul was eminently endued with the grace of Faith,
as it is taken for resting upon the faithfulness of God, and resignation of
ones person, and cause to Him under unjust sufferings from men: for, thus is
Christ here, as a Believer, described, He committed Himself to Him that judges
righteously* 10. The oppressed and suffering People of God, who are not able to
defend themselves from wrongs at men's hands, nor to redress the same, ought to
commit themselves and their cause to God their Father, as to a righteous Judge,
not out of malice against, or desire of judgment upon, their persecutors, but
as a mean to prevent their own despondency of spirit, and despair under their
hard usage: for, this practice of Christ's is one of his steps, which suffering
Christians ought to follow; He committed himself to Him that judges
righteously. 11. The best way for Christians to attain to true christian
patience under a cross for Christ, to keep down their carnal passions, while
they suffer wrongfully from men, and to guard their hearts against the study of
revenge toward their persecutors, is, to resign themselves, and their cause, in
the hands of God the righteous Judge: for, though there was no hazard of such
sinful motions in Christ, yet He took that course which He knew would be most
effectual to prevent them in his Followers, whom He would have to follow his
steps in this, as a mean to keep them down; When he was reviled, he reviled not
again etc. but committed himself to Him that judges righteously.

Verse. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were
healed.
The Apostle repeateth, and enlarges his fourth argument (it being the
sweetest and strongest of all the rest) to press patient suffering for
well-doing, to wit, That since Christ has born the weight of our sins, by
enduring the wrath due to us for them in his own Person upon the cross, how
patiently should his Redeemed Ones, bear light afflictions for his sake? And
withal, he adds some further arguments to press the same point, taken from the
sweet ends of Christ's death, and the advantages Believers have thereby. The
ninth in number, is, That the very end of Christ's death, being to purchase
virtue for the slaying of sin in his own, and for quickening them to the duties
of holiness, it does become all his Redeemed Ones to follow their duty,
without desire of revenge upon those who put them to suffer wrongfully. The
tenth, is, That seeing the Redeemed by Christ have spiritual and eternal health
and welfare, by virtue of those wounds which he received from God, and men, for
them; therefore they ought not to take in evil part, wounds and stripes from
men, for following their duty to him. Hence Learn, 1. Christ's suffering in the
room of the Redeemed, is a subject that they should not soon weary to think and
speak of, it being to them a ground of much patience and comfort under their
sufferings, to consider, that God cannot now be avenging himself upon them for
their sins, who are fled to Christ, nor taking satisfaction to his justice at
their hands, he having received it already from Christ: Therefore, the Apostle,
having held forth Christ's sufferings, ver. 21. as an argument to constancy in
duty, notwithstanding of persecution from men, he loves to come over the same
argument here again, Who his own self bare our sins, etc. 2. The sufferings of
Christ were not only exemplary, that we might have a copy how to carry our
selves right under our sufferings, but they were expiatory of our sins, and
satisfactory for them to the Fathers justice: for, after the Apostle had set
forth Christ in the former words, as casting us a copy of the right way of
suffering, lest any should think that to be his greatest design in suffering,
he adds this, Who his own self bare our sins in his own body. 3. Jesus Christ
our Mediator, who was altogether free of any guiltiness inherent in himself
(as was cleared from verse. 22.) had all the sins of the Elect upon him by
imputation, and was handled by divine justice, as if he had been guilty of them
all, as is imported in this expression, He bare our sins, which frequently in
Scripture signifies, to bear the punishment of sin; See Lev. 20.17, 20. Ezekiel.
23.49. 4. As sin is to a waking conscience one of the heaviest burdens that
ever was felt, Psalm. 38.4. So Jesus Christ has by his satisfaction upon the
cross, lifted up (as the word here signifies) that weight from off the
conscience of those, who feel as much of it as chases them to him for ease, so
as it shall never press any such down to hell, or to despair: for, the Apostle
speaks of his own sins, and the sins of other penitent and believing sinners,
as a weight that none but Christ was able to lift, and which he has lifted up
and born, Who his own self bare our sins. 5. That the second Person of the
blessed Trinity might be fit to bear our sins, he behoved to be incarnate, and
to take on a true body, not borrowed, or assumed for a time, but a body of his
own, which with his soul being personally united to his Godhead, he will keep
for ever and ever, that his conversing in Heaven with his Creatures that have
bodies may be the more sweet: for, he bare our sins in his own body. 6.
Although the principal part of Christ's sufferings for us, was in his soul,
Isa. 53.10. Mat. 26.38. Yet, he is said to bear our sins in his body, not only
because that is an ordinary designation of the whole Person, consisting of soul
and body, but because it is most wonderful that ever the Son of God should have
assumed so frothy a being, as a body of flesh; because his bodily sufferings
did visibly represent his love to sinners, and the desert of sin; and because
his soul suffered only while it was in his body before his death: therefore the
Apostle says, He bare our sins in his body. 7. Our Mediator behoved to be put
to a painful, lingering, and shameful death, because he was in the room of
many who deserve such kind of deaths, even by humane Laws, that he might the
better illustrate the terror of God against sin, and might take the sting out
of such kind of deaths to any of his own, who should endure the like for his
sake; for these causes he bare our sins in his own body on the tree, to wit, of
the cross. 8. That which does most heighten our esteem of Christ's love, in
giving himself to die for us, and most strongly oblige us not to spare our
persons for him, is the consideration of the excellency of his Person, and of
our unworthiness for whom he suffered; both which the Apostle leads Believers
unto here, while he does so often mention him and us, Who his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree, that we, etc. 9. Till the merit of Christ's
death be applied by Faith to the hearts of sinners, they are alive to sin,
being active, and delighting in the commission thereof; they are dead to
righteousness, being no less impotent for any spiritual act, or holy
performance, than dead men are for the actions of the living; as is supponed in
this, That Christ's death was for these ends, that we being dead to sin, might
live to righteousness. 10. Christ's intention in dying for sinners, which he
does in some measure gain in all his Redeemed Ones in this life, and will fully
attain in the other, was, That the love of sin in their hearts, might by the
virtue purchased with his blood, be so weakened, that they might have no more
pleasure in the commission of it, than dead men have in the delights of the
living, and that their hearts might be quickened with spiritual life, for holy
performances, and they might live eternally praising their Redeemer for that
righteousness of his bestowed upon them, whereby they are justified,
sanctified, and saved: for, these two are here made the great ends of Christ's
death, that we being dead (to wit, being made so in a spiritual sense by the
virtue of Christ's death) to sin, might live unto righteousness. 11. As every
man in his natural state, before the application of the virtue of Christ's
blood to his soul, is in no less dangerous and deadly a condition, than a man
that is wounded and bleeding to death, Luke 10.30. which is not to be
understood, as if such had any spiritual life at all, but that while they live
naturally, they are altogether dead spiritually, and posting toward eternal
death, as a man bleeding in his wounds is to his natural death; So, it is only
the virtue purchased by Christ's sufferings that brings true health to sinners,
which consists in the pardoning of their sins, Isa. 33.24. the curing of
their spiritual distempers, Psalm. 103.3. and enabling them like healthy men to
go about spiritual performances, Isa. 35.6. for, it is here supponed that
sinners are naturally in a deadly condition, and that there is no health for
them, but from Christ's sufferings, by whose stripes ye were healed. 12.
Although we ought to conceive nothing of Christ's body now glorified, that may
any way in our apprehension stain the incomprehensible glory and beauty
thereof, Philip. 3.11. Yet, so deep were the wounds that Christ received from
the Father's justice, that we may safely conceive the impression of them to be
no less biding in his heart, for the entertaining of sympathy with his
Redeemed Ones, (who are wounded in their consciences with the sense of sin, and
fear of wrath, or, in their bodies, by stripes from men for their faithfulness
to Him) than if He had yet in his body the print of those wounds to move his
sympathy toward them: for, the word here, signifies the biding print, or skar
of a wound after it is healed; By whose stripes ye were healed. 13. None can
with patience and cheerfulness suffer wrongs for Christ, but they that do by
faith apply the virtue of his suffering for them to their own souls, for the
pardoning and subduing of sin, quickening of their hearts in holiness, and
healing of their spiritual distempers; which effects of his death, are so sweet
to them that partake of them, that they cannot but cheerfully endure the worst
that men can do against them, rather than do the least thing that may be
offensive to Him, Who his own self bear our sins in his own body on the tree,
that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness; by whose stripes
ye were healed. All which the Apostle sets down as so many motives to constancy
in well-doing, notwithstanding of hardest sufferings.

Verse. 25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.
The last argument to press upon Believers, patient suffering of wrongs for
Christ, and their duty to Him, is taken from that blessed change, which by the
virtue of his death is made upon them: and this the Apostle sets forth in two
branches, The one, containing the woeful case they were in before Conversion, to
wit, That they were then wandering in their ignorance and sinful ways, to
their own destruction, like straying sheep: The other, holds forth the blessed
state they are now brought to, to wit, That by the powerful grace of Christ put
forth in their conversion, they are brought back to Him the good Shepherd and
Overseer of their souls; and therefore they ought to follow Him, and their
duty, notwithstanding of any hardship they can meet with in that way. Hence
Learn, 1. Before conversion, the Elect, as well as others, are wandering toward
their own destruction, unable to bring themselves into the right way, and in
hazard to be preyed upon by the roaring Lion: which condition is fitly set out
by this similitude, which the Apostle here makes use of from Isa. 53.6. Ye were
as sheep going astray. 2. True conversion is that change which Christ works
upon sinners, whereby they are made not only to turn their back upon their
former sinful courses, but also to betake themselves to Jesus Christ, seeking
to enjoy his favor and fellowship, submitting to Him, as their Ruler and
Guide, and resigning themselves to be at his disposal: for, so the Apostle here
describes it, Ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to the
Shepherd. 3. This blessed change which is made upon sinners in conversion, is
that which does evidence to them that they have received the healing virtue
which flows from the wounds of Christ to his Redeemed Ones; None else can
esteem themselves healed by his stripes, but those that find themselves brought
back from their former sinful courses, and made to follow Him as their Leader:
for, after the Apostle had said, by his stripes ye were healed, he adds this,
as the evidence thereof, for ye were as sheep going astray, but are now
returned to the Shepherd. 4. Those whom Christ's powerful grace has thus
turned toward Him, shall find Him prove himself to them a good and faithful
Shepherd, and Ruler, as the word also signifies, reclaiming them from their
wanderings, not only before their conversion, Luke 15.4. but likewise after it,
Psalm. 119.176. providing plenty of wholesome food for them as his flock, Psalm.
23.1, etc. tenderly leading, and bearing them in his bosom, in their sick and
weak conditions, Isa. 40.6. and so protecting and defending them, that none can
pluck them out of his hand, Joh. 10.28. for, He to whom they are returned, is,
the Shepherd of their souls. 5. It is not any one relation among the creatures
that can sufficiently set out what Jesus Christ will prove himself to be unto
true Converts, all the usefulness and sweetness which is but scattered among
all the relations which one creature has to another, being but shadows of what
he is to them that are truly turned to Him: for, the Apostle says, they are
returned to Him, who is not only their Shepherd, but their Bishop, or Overseer,
who foresees and guards them against hazards, so far as is fitting, and
furnishes them with all necessary provision in his service, and so proves
himself the Bishop, or Overseer, of their souls. 6. As the Believers outward
man, and the least thing that does concern the same, is cared for, and
respected by Jesus Christ, Mat. 10.30. So, He loves to commend his respect,
and oversight to them, mainly in reference to their souls, which are their
better part, the welfare whereof necessarily brings along with it the welfare
of the body; and, their souls being beyond peril, That may make them cheerfully
adventure upon bodily hazards in following Him, who is the Shepherd and Bishop
of their souls. 7 That which engages the hearts of sinners to love Jesus
Christ, and out of love to Him, to follow their duty through hardest
sufferings, is, the frequently renewed sense of their woeful condition wherein
sometimes they were, and of the blessedness and privileges of that state
whereunto his grace has brought them: for, after the Apostle had represented
this change to them, ver. 9, 10. as a motive to holiness, he does here hold it
forth again as a motive to constancy in holiness, notwithstanding of
sufferings; For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

CHAP. III.
THis Chapter has three parts: In the first, containing the duties of married
persons, the Apostle presses upon Christian Women, first That they should make
conscience of duty to their Husbands, though they were Pagans, that so they
might be gained to fall in love with Christianity, ver. 1. by the sight of
their chaste and religious carriage, ver. 2. Secondly, That they should not be
much taken up with trimming of their bodies, ver. 3. But, thirdly, That their
prime care should be to have their souls adorned with grace, especially,
meekness: because, 1. that is an ornament durable: and, 2. it is in high esteem
with God, ver. 4. So should they resemble holy Women recorded in Scripture,
ver. 5. and prove themselves heirs of Sarah's blessedness, ver. 6. Next, he
exhorts Husbands to a wise and tender walking toward them, by some arguments,
ver. 7.

In the second part, he exhorts all Christians, whatever their relations be,
to the exercise of such graces and duties of holiness as serve for keeping up
a comfortable communion among themselves, and with the Lord, ver. 8. and
disswadeth them from some evils that might mar the same: Because, first, they
were all called to inherit the same blessedness, ver. 9. And, secondly,
because a holy walking with God, and a peaceable carriage toward others, is the
only way to sweeten the lives of Christians under all their troubles, ver. 10,
11. Thirdly, that, that was the way to have God's favorable providence
watching over them for good. Fourthly, to get acceptance to their prayers. And,
fifthly, to eschew his wrath, ver. 12.

The third part, contains several motives to constancy in holiness, and
encouragements against suffering in that way: As, first, that well-doing was
the way toward off the evil of all their troubles, ver. 13. Secondly, that no
trouble for well-doing should hinder, but rather promove their blessedness: to
which encouragements the Apostle subjoyneth six directions, for attaining a
right carriage under suffering. First, that they should labor to banish the
fear of flesh, ver. 14. Secondly, that they should adore the holiness of God
in carving out a suffering lot for them. Thirdly, that they should timously
enrich themselves with the knowledge of the Truth, so as they might be able to
give a reason of what they suffered for. Fourthly, that they should manifest
meekness toward their persecutors. And, fifthly, entertain fear of their own
miscarriage, ver. 15. Sixthly, that they should labor still to keep a good
conscience under their suffering, so should their carriage convince and make
ashamed their very persecutors, which is their third encouragement, ver. 16.
Fourthly, that their sufferings after this manner, should prove much more
comfortable to them, than if they were procured by their own miscarriage.
Fifthly, that the good will of God had the carving out of these sufferings,
ver. 17. Sixthly, that innocent Jesus Christ had suffered to the death for
reconciling them to God, and for the applying of his purchase, was raised by
the power of his Spirit, or Godhead, ver. 18. Seventhly, that there are many
souls now imprisoned in Hell, for slighting such Truths as Christ's Spirit
speaking through Noah, and others of his Servants, had pressed upon them, ver.
19, 20. Eighthly, that the spiritual safety of Believers from the deluge of
Gods wrath was made no less sure to them by their Baptism, and the work of
Christ's Spirit with it, than the temporal safety of Noah, and those few
persons with him, from the flood, was made sure to them by the Ark, ver. 21.
And, ninthly, that their Surety is now in highest power and glory, that he may
bear them through all their troubles, and possess them in that salvation,
which he has purchased for them, ver. 22. All which prove, that Believers
ought to follow their duty to him, notwithstanding of all sufferings for him.

Verse. 1. Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that if
any obey not the Word, they also may without the Word be won by the
conversation of the wives:

2. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.


THe Apostle, being to point out the duties of married persons, he begins
with, and insisteth most upon the duties of the Women, partly, because they had
maniest discouragements; and partly, because their making conscience of their
duty was the best means to provoke their Husbands to their duty. Upon them he
presses subjection, or dutifulness to their Husbands, by two arguments: The
first is, Because their obligation to their duty was no less strait, than the
obligation of others who stood in any of those relations, mentioned in the
former Chapter. The second is, Because their unbelieving Husbands might,
through Gods blessing, be moved to receive the Gospel, which formerly they had
rejected, ver. 1. providing, they did mark nothing but chastity and holiness,
joined with the fear of God, and reverence toward themselves, shining in the
conversation of their Wives, ver. 2. And therefore Christian Women had reason
to make conscience of duties, even toward their Pagan-Husbands. Hence Learn, 1.
They that would rightly divide the Word of Truth among the Lord's People, must
not content themselves to press the duties of holiness in general, as they
concern all Christians, but must learn in their Doctrine to come down to the
lowest relations that are among the Lord's People, and to point out the
particular duties of these, it being in the discharge of such duties mainly
that Religion is adorned, Tit. 2.10. Therefore, the Apostle, after he has
spoken at large of the duties of holiness, belonging to all in general, he
comes, among other relations, to point out the duties of wives to their
husbands; Likewise, ye wives, be subject, etc. 2. The sum of a Woman's duty to
her Husband, is, subjection, which does consist in a reverend esteem of him, as
of one placed by the Lord in a degree of superiority above her, which will
produce reverent speaking of him, and to him, ver. 5. and in giving obedience
to his commands in things lawful, both which are in the signification of this
word, whereby the Apostle expresses the whole duty of Wives to their Husbands,
Likewise, ye wives, be subject to your own husbands. 3. However there be
difference among those relations that are betwixt the Lord's People, some of
them having more of dominion and subjection in them, as those last mentioned in
the former Chapter, betwixt Magistrates and Subjects, Masters and Servants,
others of them having more of equality and love in them, as this which is here
betwixt Husband and Wife; Yet, the obligation to the duties of the latter sort
is no less strict, than to the duties of the former, both being enjoined by
the same authority, and so to be made conscience of upon the same hazard:
Therefore the Apostle presses the duty of Women to their Husbands by such an
expression, as imports a like strictness of tie upon them to their duty, as
was upon those mentioned in the last part of the former Chapter, Likewise, ye
wives, be subject, etc. 4. The wickedness and disobedience to the Gospel of
any married person, however it may draw themselves under the curse of God, Yet
it does neither loose the relation, nor exempt the other party from their duty
(excepting in the case of Adultery, and lawful divorce thereupon, Mat. 5.32. or
wilful desertion, 1 Cor. 7.15.) but does rather tie the better party the more
strictly to a conscionable discharge of that duty, for the conviction or
gaining of the other party: for, though the Apostle here does suppone Husbands,
some of them at least, to be disobedient to the Word, Yet, he presses upon
their Wives, dutifulness to them, as to their own Hubands; Be in subjection to
your own husbands, that if any obey not the Word, etc. 5. Although the public
Ministry of the Word, be the ordinary and principal mean of sinners conversion
to the Lord, Romans 10.15, 17. Yet the Lord may, and sometimes does make use of
the pains of private Christians for that effect: for, it is supponed that they
who obey not the Word, may be won to obey it by the conversation of their
wives. 6. Although the Children of the Lord be bound to deal with the
unconverted, or profane, among whom they live, by discourse and conference,
commending Christ to them, and pointing out the way of attaining acquaintance
and communion with him, Joh. 4.29, 30. Philip. 2.15, 16. Yet, it is mainly a
conversation suitable to the Word that God uses to bless, for gaining of such
to fall in love with Religion, without which the best discourses will rather
harden folk in sin, than reclaim them from their sinful ways; Therefore the
Apostle here presses practical duties upon Christian Women, as the best way to
gain their unbelieving Husbands, That if any obey not the Word, they may be won
by the conversation of the wives: while they behold your chaste conversation,
etc. 7. The Lord's People ought not to quit their hopes of the conversion of
those, who have not hitherto been persuaded by the Word to follow the
directions thereof, neither yet do believe the Truths revealed in it, But they
ought to continue their pains toward those with whom the public Ministry does
not prevail: for, even to these Husbands whom the Apostle supponeth to be
unbelievers, disobedient to the Word, and such as will not be persuaded
thereby, (as the word here signifies) he pleads for duty from their Wives, in
hopes of gaining them thereby, That if any obey not the Word, they may without
the Word be won by the conversation of the wives. 8. The winning of a sinner to
Jesus Christ, is an employment full of gain and advantage, (as the word here
translated to be won, signifies) both to the sinner it self, who is thereby
made partaker of the true riches, Jam. 2.5. and to those who are instrumental
in that work, in regard of the comfort they may have from them, Philip. 4.1.
and the reward they shall have from God, Dan. 12.3. and therefore it ought to
be managed with a great deal of spiritual policy and skill, as the same word
also signifies; That if any obey not the Word, etc. they may be won. 9. There
is no part of a Christians conversation so prevalent to gain on-lookers to fall
in love with Religion, as that wherein the duties which we owe to others, in
the relation we have to them, does shine: for, these two, chastity (which in
the peculiar signification of it, is one main duty of the Wife in reference to
her Husband) and fear, (signifying reverence to a superior, Romans 13.7.) are
the qualities of a christian conversation, which the Spirit of God here
condescends upon, as most prevalent for gaining unbelievers to fall in love
with Religion; They may be won, while they behold your chaste conversation,
coupled with fear. 10. Carnal men do very accurately pry into all the secrets
of the practice of those that are religious, which though it be done by them,
that they may find occasion against the Godly, Psalm. 56.6. who should therefore
be the more circumspect, Psalm. 39.1. and the more earnest for God's teaching,
Psalm. 27.11. Yet the Lord may make use of it contrary to their intention, to be
a mean of much good to their souls: for, the word which the Apostle uses here,
while they behold, signifies very accurately to pry into, and seriously to
consider a thing: upon which, the Apostle may be safely conceived to lay some
weight for moving Christian Women to the more holy circumspection in their
carriage, which the Lord might bless for gaining of their Husbands, While they
behold your chaste conversation. 11. There is no true purity or holiness of
conversation, which does not flow from fear of offending God in the heart, by
which Christians depart from evil in their practice, Prove. 16.6. Nor is there
any true fear of God in the heart, where, the conversation is not in some
measure holy, Jer. 32.40. for, though this chastity and fear, of Christian
Women here spoken of, may be taken with a special respect to their Husbands,
Yet the words are of a larger signification, and must necessarily include
holiness of life, and fear of offending God in the heart, what ever they might
suffer from their Husbands, the one whereof cannot be separated from the other,
A chaste conversation, coupled with fear.

Verse. 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel:

4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.


The Apostle gives here two further directions to believing Women for
attaining to such a conversation, as, through the Lord's blessing, might prove
a mean of gaining their unbelieving Husbands: The one is negative, that they
should not be too curious, and superfluous, in trimming their outward man. The
other is positive, that their great pains should be to have their inward man
adorned with the grace of God, especially meekness and peaceablenesse of
spirit, in reference to their Husbands, and the Lord's dispensation in tying
them to such men, and to a cross with them: which last, he presses by two
arguments, The first is, that this was an ornament that would not wax old as
others do. The second is, that it is in very high esteem with the Lord, and
therefore as they desired to gain their husbands by their outward carriage,
their great care should be to attain to a right frame of spirit within. Hence
Learn, 1. Even the Children of the Lord are in hazard to offend Him and others,
in the matter of their apparel, while they labor not to have the same
suitable to their several ranks and conditions, which God would have
distinguished in some measure by apparel, Esth. 5.1. Genesis 38.14. while they
affect a newness and strangeness, whether in the kind of their apparel, or in
their way of using of it, Zeph. 1.8. and when much time and expenses are wasted
about apparel, as is imported in the Apostle's words here. In all which, and
the like cases, the Lord's People are ready to offend in the matter of their
apparel; and that because there is in them much unsubdued pride and vanity
ready to manifest it self that way, Isa. 3.16, 18, etc. and because they
forget, that apparel is given to make them ashamed in remembrance of their sin,
1 Timothy 2.9, 14. for, the hazard of offending (by wasting both time and means)
is imported in this disswasive of the Apostle; Whose adorning, let it not be
that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and wearing of gold, or of putting
on of apparel. 2. Although the Lord allow persons who are in eminency above
others, to have ornaments beyond necessity, Isa. 22.^0, 21, 22. and others to
have more than ordinary at some special occasions, Genesis 24.30. and all of his
People to provide for things honest in the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. Yet,
when any Professor of Religion becomes excessive in the use of his liberty in
these things, he will be so far from commending Religion to others thereby,
that his practice will rather be a hinderance unto others to fall in love with
it, who may, or will readily take occasion thence, to think that Christians
have no better things to take them up, than these whereupon they wast their
time, pains and means: for, from this evil the Apostle here disswades Christian
Women, as they would gain their Heathen Husbands; importing, that their vanity
and excess in the matter of their apparel, would rather hinder them, than gain
them to fall in love with Christianity; Whose adorning, let it not be that
outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, etc. 3. They that would by their
outward carriage, commend Religion, and win others to fall in love therewith,
must have their prime care exercised about their heart, which, if it be adorned
with the graces of God's Spirit in life and practice, the conversation cannot
but be lovely to all rightly discerning on-lookers: for, the Apostle, having
told those believing Women before, that it was their conversation mainly which
would gain their Husbands, he now condescendeth upon the way of attaining to
such a conversation, Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, etc.
but let it be the hidden man of the heart, 4. Those that wast much time, pains
and means, in decking and trimming of their bodies, do ordinarily neglect their
souls, leaving these in a disorderly, sordid and filthy condition: for, the
Apostle, dissuading from the one, and (in opposition thereto) persuading to the
other, imports the inconsistency of such an adorning of the outward man, with
the adorning of the inward; Whose adorning, let it not be that outward
adorning, etc. but let it be the hidden man of the heart. 5. The Lord has been
pleased to hide the hearts of every one, from the knowledge of another, who
therefore ought not by their rash judging, and censuring of the inward frame
and state of others, to invade the Lord's prerogative of searching the heart,
Jer. 17.10. but ought to bestow much pains, for keeping in a right frame their
own hearts, which are hid from all eyes but God's, as a prime evidence of their
sincerity, Psalm. 51.6, 7. Therefore the inward frame of the spirit, is here
called, The hidden man of the heart. 6. That which mainly makes the carriage of
a Professor of Religion a mean to gain others to Jesus Christ, is, the exercise
of the graces of God's Spirit within, especially meekness and quietness of
spirit; by the former whereof, (to wit, meekness) they keep down their
passions from rising against others that wrong them, or against the Lord's
dispensation in exercising them more hardly than others, Numb. 12.2, 3. whereby
also they essay all amicable and loving ways of reclaiming such as do wrong
them, before they go to the rigor of justice, 1 Cor. 4.21. and by the latter,
(to wit, quietness of spirit) they do eschew all needless contradiction of
others, Isa. 53.7. all rashness in their actions, Act. 19.36. all meddling with
things not belonging to them, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. and all expressions of miscontent
with that lot which the Lord has carved out to them, Psalm. 131.2. All which
are here required of Christian Women, tied to unbelieving and profane Husbands,
as special means of gaining them to Christ: for, in order to their gaining, the
Apostle thus exhorts the Wives, to put on the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit. 7. Where such a gracious frame of spirit is within, as the Apostle here
exhorts Christian Women to labor for, it will have visible effects that may
be discerned without: for, the Apostle exhorts Christian Wives to the study
of meekness and quietness of spirit, as a mean to gain their unbelieving
Husbands, which it could not prove, except the effects thereof were visible in
their carriage. 8. The grace of Christ is such an ornament, as being once put
upon the soul, does never altogether fade or wax old; The consideration whereof
should make Christians more careful to have it in exercise in their hearts,
than to have on the best of their ornaments which will soon wear and wax old:
for, as an argument to move Christians to put on this adorning of Gods grace,
the Apostle affirms it to be that which is incorruptible. 9. Although every
grace be the Lords own free gift, Jam. 1.17. and the most Gracious cannot
properly be profitable to Him, Job 22.2. Yet, He is pleased to esteem of his
own grace, and graciously to reward the persons to whom He gives it, as if it
were of much worth to Him; The consideration whereof, should heighten the
esteem of grace in our hearts, and quicken us to pains for getting and
increasing of it: for this end is this adorning of a meek and quiet spirit here
commended from this, that it is in the sight of God of great price.

Verse. 5. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who
trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands.

6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him, Lord, whose daughters ye are as
long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.


Here are two further arguments, whereby the Apostle presses upon Christian
Women the study of such a carriage, as might prove a mean of gaining their
wicked Husbands; The one is taken from the example of holy believing Women,
registered in Scripture, who counted it their best ornament to manifest their
holiness and faith, by their dutifulness to their Husbands; and particularly
of Sarah, who testified her obedience to her Husband, by her respective and
reverend language to him: The other argument, is from the advantage of such a
carriage, that if they did imitate these holy Women, especially Sarah, in
dutifulness to their Husbands, notwithstanding of any terror from them, they
should prove themselves heirs of Sarah's blessedness. Hence Learn, 1. The
Children of the Lord have not only need of precepts to press their duty upon
them, but likewise of the examples of others held forth to them, who have gone
before them in the practice of these duties, that so they may apprehend them
feasible, seeing others have attained to them; and sweet, seeing others have
cheerfully practiced them; and the neglect of them hazardous, since these who
have made conscience of them, may be brought as witnesses against the
neglecters of them: Therefore, after the Apostle has pressed, by precepts and
reasons, the duty of believing Women to their Husbands, he here bears in the
same further by the example of the Saints: for, after this manner also the holy
Women in the old time, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in
subjection to their own husbands. 2. The approven examples of the most eminent
of the Saints, making conscience of moral duties, which are registered in the
Old Testament, are obligatory under the New to the meanest of Believers in
Christ, who are not by their Christian Liberty freed from imitating them in
these: for, here the Apostle presses upon Christian Women, dutifulness to
their Husbands, from the example of holy Women under the Old Testament, and
particularly Sarah, who was an eminent, and, in some respects, an extraordinary
person; For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, etc. Even as
Sarah, etc. 3. There is no true holiness, which has not Faith in God for the
fountain and root of it, whereby the heart relieth on God for furniture for the
duties of holiness, and encouragement against difficulties in the way thereof;
Nor, is there any real trusting in God, which has not for the fruit thereof,
holiness, consisting in the study of abstenance from every known sin, and
endeavor after every known duty: for, from these two jointly, are those
ancient Believers described, as examples to be imitated by others; Holy Women*
who trusted in God. 4. True holiness and faith in God are mainly evidenced in
the particular duties of these relations, wherein the Lord's Providence has
plac^d his People; the conscionable discharge whereof, does prove the principal
ornament of Professors: for, here the Apostle sets forth those ancient
believing Women, as in their best ornaments, while they are evidencing their
holiness, and trusting in God, by their dutifulness to their Husbands, to be
imitated by Christian Women under the Gospel, The holy Women who trusted in
God, adorned themselves, being in subjection to their Husbands. 5. The Lord
takes notice of the least act of sincere obedience to his Commands, even when
it is mixed with many sinful failings, which he passes in penitents, and would
not have any of his People cast at any good in others, nor be the less careful
to imitate it, that they do discern much miscarriage joined with it: for, in
that passage of Sarah's, Genesis 18.12. which is here related to, there are many
sinful failings, and little thing commendable, beside that one word, evidencing
her reverence to her Husband, which the Lord here registreth for her
commendation and others imitation, hiding the faults that were therewith; Even
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him, Lord. 6. The want of these qualifications
in parties to whom the Lord's People have relation, which have been eminent in
others, does not exempt them from these duties, which by virtue of that
relation have been performed to others, endued with these qualifications: for,
here the Apostle, from Sarah's reverencing of Abraham* an extraordinary and
eminently gracious man, infers upon Christian Women reverence to their
wicked infidel Husbands; Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him, Lord. 7.
When we obtain grace from the Lord, to follow the footsteps of the Saints,
registered in Scripture, especially in the faithful discharge of the duties of
our particular stations and relations, then do we prove our selves to be
partakers of the same spiritual privileges with them, and heirs of the same
eternal blessedness which they now possess: for, as those who imitate the
faith and obedience of Abraham, are for that called his children, Romans 4.11,
12. Gal. 3.7, 9, 29. So, these Women here, who imitate Sarah in well-doing,
particularly, in obedience to their Husbands, are called her daughters, Whose
daughters ye are as long as ye do well, which is not to be understood, as if
they were cast out of the number of her daughters for every short-coming in
their duty, but that it is in the way of their duty, that they will clear to
themselves their right to her blessedness, and enjoy the sense of their
interest in the spiritual privileges which she had. 8. They that resolve to
hold on in the way of well-doing, may resolve to meet with as much of terror
and afrightment therein, as wicked men can make them; yea, even from those of
their nearest relations, whose enmity against godliness, before the Lord
change them, is greater, than any natural affection they have to those they are
most strictly tied unto: for, it is mainly against the terror and amazement of
wicked Husbands, that the Apostle here guards Christian Women, encouraging them
by this, that they should prove themselves daughters of Sarah, if they held on
in their duty, and were not afraid of any amazement. 9. It is perseverance in
the way of duty, when there is not only small appearance of success, but much
terrible opposition from wicked men in following of it, which mainly clears
to Believers their right to the heavenly inheritance: for, this the Apostle
presses upon Christian Women, as that which would prove them daughters of
Sarah, that is, coheirs with her of the heavenly inheritance, if they did
well, and were not afraid of any amazement.

Verse. 7. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
In the next place, the Apostle presses the duties of Husbands to their Wives*
which he comprehends in two branches: First, That they should manifest a
special measure of prudence and heavenly wisdom in conversing with them; And
secondly, that they should season their authority over them with tenderness and
respect to them: both which he presses by several arguments, 1. From the
strictness of their obligation to these duties, which was the same with that
of the Wives to theirs. 2. From the weakness and infirmity of the Women, which
calls for the more wise and tender dealing. 3. From the equality of both in
partaking of spiritual and eternal privileges. And, 4. from the hazard of the
neglect of those duties, to wit, the interrupting of their service to God,
particularly the marring of their access to him in prayer. Hence Learn, 1.
Husbands are no less strictly tied to duty toward their Wives, than the Wives
are to duty toward them, or any inferior toward their superior; and
therefore, they ought not to make their superiority a pretense to the neglect
of their duty, as if their Wives were tied, and themselves left at liberty:
for, the Apostle uses the same word in pressing the duty of Husbands to their
Wives, which he did before in pressing the duty of Wives to their Husbands, and
of Servants to their Masters; Likewise, ye husbands. 2. It is the duty of
Husbands to cohabit with their Wives, and to labor for much prudence and
wisdom in conversing with them, that they may not only know their own duty
toward them, but may be able to instruct them in theirs, 1 Cor. 14.35. that
they may discern how far to entrust them with their affairs and counsels, Prove.
31.11. and how far they ought to keep up the same from them, Mica. 7.5. and
that they do not rule them according to their passion and will, but according
to that wise rule set down in the Word: for, the Apostle here presses upon
Husbands, both cohabitation, and wise walking with their Wives; Ye husbands,
dwell with them according to knowledge. 3. There is not only love required of
the Husband toward the Wife, but likewise some respect and honor, such as
makes them signify their sympathy with them under their crosses, 1 Samuel 1.8.
their high esteem of the virtues they discern in them, Prove. 31.28. and such as
may conciliate respect to them from the rest of the family, Genesis 16.6. for,
this is the other branch of the duty of Husbands, giving honor unto the Wife.
4. It has pleased the Lord to exercise the Woman with a special measure of
weakness and infirmity, both natural, by imposing upon her much pain and
labor in bringing forth and educating of Children, and moral, by giving her
fewer opportunities than the Man has of means for perfecting of her natural
parts, which likewise are not ordinarily so strong in her as in the Man: in
which respects she is here called the weaker vessel. 5. The consideration of
this weakness of the Woman should be so far from making Husbands to despise
and slight them, that by the contrary it should increase their respect to them,
considering that by reason thereof they are the more easily crushed and broken
in their spirits, especially by the austere and undutiful carriage of their
Husbands, and the more apt to apprehend themselves slighted: for, so it is here
made an argument to procure respect to them from their Husbands, giving honor
unto the Wife, as unto the weaker vessel. 6. Both the work of God's saving
grace in his own, which is here called the grace of life, because it quickens
the soul, where it is, for spiritual performances, and clears its right to
eternal life; and likewise eternal life it self, which may be safely conceived
to be comprehended in the same expression, is the free gift of God's grace,
proceeding merely from his favor and love, bestowing the same upon sinners, as
their inheritance never to be taken from them: for, of both these the Apostle
may be understood, while he calls Christian Women, and their Husbands, to
whom he speaks, as being Believers, Heirs together of the grace of life. 7.
The difference of sex, or outward condition, among the Lord's People, does not
hinder their equality in the participation of spiritual and eternal
privileges, which free grace does bestow without respect to these differences,
Gal. 3.28. for, here Husbands and Wives are called Heirs together of the grace
of life. 8. The consideration of this equality should strongly move superiors
to make conscience of duty toward their inferiors, considering, that because
of this equality, their inferiors are no less dear to God than themselves,
and that they are fellow-heirs with them of that which is much better than any
thing of a temporary concernment, wherein they do excel them: for, this is here
brought as an argument of Husbands dutifulness to their Wives, That they are
heirs together of the grace of life. 9. Although none can be so infallibly
persuaded of another being in the state of grace and salvation, as they may be
of their own, Rev. 1.17. Yet ought every Professor to entertain so much charity
of another, concerning that, as may make them no less conscionable in every
duty toward them, than if they were such, and not upon slender grounds to
question the same, or admit of thoughts to the contrary, lest thereupon Satan
make them apprehend exemption from duty toward them: for, so much is imported
here, while Husbands are exhorted to duty toward their Wives, and that because
they ought to judge them in charity, Heirs with them of the grace of life. 10.
When Christians are not making conscience of the faithful discharge of the
duties of their particular relations, especially of this betwixt Husband and
Wife, then the duties of God's Service, chiefly in their families, and in
secret, will either be broken off, or the success of them marred; for,
how-ever the one party may be more innocent than the other, yet the guilt of
the injuring party, and the grief and passion of the injured, will not only
indispose the hearts of both for duties, and mar their hearty joining in them;
but will also readily cut off (as the word here rendered, to hinder, signifies)
the very external performance of the duty of Prayer (under which all other
religious performances may be comprehended) and mar their access to God, and
the success of their duties: for, so much is imported in this last reason,
That your prayers be not hindered. 11. The more conscionable Christians are by
the grace of God enabled to be, in the discharge of the particular duties of
their several relations, the more access to God, and success of all their
religious performances may they expect: for, this motive, as it imports the
hazard to follow upon the neglect of duties of that sort, so it imports also
the advantage to follow upon the conscionable discharge thereof, to wit, that
their Prayers should not be hindered.

Verse. 8. Finally, be all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love
as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:

9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise
blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
blessing.


Here is the second part of the Chapter, wherein the Apostle exhorts to the
exercise of such graces and duties of holiness, as do concern every Christian;
and do serve in a special way for keeping up a profitable and comfortable
communion with God and with his people: of which sort, the Apostle
condescendeth upon seven, First, That they should labor for unity of judgment
among themselves. Secondly that they should be affected with one another
condition, as if it were their own. Thirdly, that their love one to another
should resemble that which is among Brethren. Fourthly, that they should pity
the infirmities one of another. Fifthly, that they should show themselves
courteous in their carriage, and easy to be conversed with, ver. 8. Sixthly,
that they should not study to requite mutual injuries: But, seventhly, rather
seek the happiness of them that wrong them. All which, especially the last
two, the Apostle presses by this reason, that they were all called to inherit
one common blessedness.

From ver. 8. Learn, 1. Although complete oneness of judgment cannot be
expected among the Lord's People, whilst knowledge is imperfect in all, 1 Cor.
13.9. and dispensed in different measures, Romans 12.6. Yet it ought to be the
sincere endeavor of every one, so to drink-in the knowledge of all saving and
necessary Truths themselves, and to employ their power, according to their
calling, to make all others do the same, that they may be, so far as is
possible, as if one and the same mind were in them all, (as the word here
signifies) which is in some good measure attained, when Christians do agree in
all saving and fundamental Truths, and when their prime projects and designs
(as the word also signifies) do meet in one, to wit, the advancement of the
glory of Jesus Christ; without which unity of judgment, there does ordinarily
follow among the Lord's People alienation of affection, Gal. 4.15, 16. and a
loss of the consolations of Christ's Spirit, which uses to be given through
their communion among themselves, Philip. 2.1, 2. for, this is it which the
Apostle here expressly presses, Finally, be all of one mind. 2. Every one of
the Children of the Lord, ought to be so affected with the condition of
another, as if it were their own, mourning with, and for one another in
affliction, as if they were afflicted with them, Heb. 13.3. rejoicing in, and
praising for, their welfare, as if they were in their case, Romans 12.15.
considering, that they are all members of one body, 1 Cor. 12.26. and, that
this sympathizing frame of spirit is a special part of our conformity to Jesus
Christ, Heb. 4.15. for, this is the second duty here pressed, having compassion
one of another. 3. Whatever differences for worldly respects, or measures of
spiritual gifts, there may be among the Children of the Lord, there should be,
notwithstanding, such affection and love in the most eminent and strongest,
toward the meanest and weakest, as is among Brethren, they being all Children
of one Father, Joh. 1.12. and the weakest owned by Christ as his Brethren, Heb.
2.11. and coheirs, not only with the strongest, but with Jesus Christ himself,
of everlasting blessedness, Romans 8.17. and therefore that measure of affection
which may be found among men without the Church, who have not put off humanity,
is not sufficient for one of the Lord's People toward another: for, this is the
third duty here pressed, Love as Brethren. 4. There can neither be unity,
sympathy, nor brotherly love among the Lord's People, unless they have hearts
to pity the infirmities one of another, and some prouenesse of spirit to do
good to others, even when they deserve the contrary at their hands: for, this
word, whereby the Apostle presses the fourth duty, is often used to signify
Christ's compassion to his own, which is manifested in bestowing favors
notwithstanding of provocations, and signifies such a tender-heartednesse, as
is evidenced by forgiving of wrongs, Ephesians. 4.32. be pitiful. 5. They that would
keep up a sweet and profitable society with others of the Lord's People, must
show themselves affable and pleasant in their carriage toward them, studying
to speak and do, so far as they may with a good conscience, what may be
acceptable, and engaging of their affections to them: for, this duty, which is
the last in the eight Verse, as also all the former, may be taken in reference
to the keeping up of society with others; be courteous.

From ver. 9. Learn, 1. Even those who have attained to such a carriage, as
ought in all reason to be lovely, and honored by all with whom they converse,
may, notwithstanding, resolve to meet with much hard usage, and many slanders:
for, the Apostle presses here, patience, in the sixth place, importing, that
they who had attained to all the former sive, would, notwithstanding, have ado
with their patience, Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing. 2. The
Children of the Lord may resolve, not only to meet with hard usage, and bitter
language, from the profane, or those that are without, but even from their
fellow-Professors, whether Hypocrites, who will still be maligning the sincere,
Gal. 4.29. or even truly gracious, whose corruptions oppose grace in others,
Job 16.20. for, this last grace of patience, pressed in the beginning of the
eight Verse, cannot well be taken in reference to other persons, than these, in
reference to whom the exercise of the former graces or duties were pressed,
which do clearly relate to other Professors; and therefore this imports, that
they might be tried both with evil deeds and words, from such, while the
Apostle thus dehorteth, Not rendering evil for evil or railing for railing. 3.
However the best of the Children of the Lord, are prone to study revenge, and
requital of private injuries, as is supponed in this disswasive; Yet must they
not allow themselves in so doing, as they love their own, and others peace, and
desire to eschew the displeasure of God for usurping his place, Romans 12.19.
Prove. 23.2. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing. 4. So far
should the Lord's People be from the study of private revenge, and retaliation
of wrongs done by one of them against another, that by the contrary the
greatest personal wrong by word or deed, should not hinder one of them, to
procure the bestowing of blessings, if they be able, upon another, to commend
in them what they can discern to be praiseworthy, or to pray for their true
blessedness, which is a special draught of the Image of the Lord, Mat. 5.44,
45. All which, is in the signification of this word, whereby the Apostle
expresses the duty opposite to rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing;
but contrariwise, blessing. 5. The consideration of that everlasting
blessedness, which consists in the clear vision, and full fruition of God in
Christ through the Spirit, and which sinners, who are naturally under the
curse, are called to possess, as their free-gifted inheritance (as the word
here translated, to inherit, signifies) should comfort the hearts of Believers
against the worst usage, and vilest reproaches of men, which will be
sufficiently made up when they come to possess that blessedness: the thoughts
whereof should take them off from all study of revenge, toward those who may be
heirs with them of the same inheritance; and who could never wrong them so far,
as they have wronged the Lord, who has graciously called them to possess that
free-gifted inheritance: for, this is here proposed by the Apostle, as an
argument to patience under wrongs, and a disswasive from revenge among the
Lord's people: for, even hereunto were ye called, that ye should inherit a
blessing.

Verse. 10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

11. Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.


Here is a second motive to the study of the duties formerly pressed, to wit,
That that study was the way to have a sweet life, and many good days in
communion with the Lord, notwithstanding of all their troubles: And this
argument is taken out of Psalm. 34.12, 13. and does contain four several
directions, for clearing the way of attaining to that sweet fellowship with
God, and among themselves. The first, is, that they should watch against the
evils of the tongue. The second is, that they should set against every known
sin. The third is, that they should set about the practice of every known duty.
And fourthly, that they should earnestly pursue peace with others of the Lord's
People, So might they expect sweet communion with himself. Hence Learn, 1.
Although the most part of men esteem their life happy, and their days good
enough, if they enjoy abundance of earthly comforts, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and 49.16,
18. Yet there is no life, that deserves the name of a life, except it be
sweetened sometimes with tastes of the Lord's special love; nor are there any
days, that are worthy to be called good days, which are not spent in
fellowship with God: for, this life, and those good days here spoken of, are
the same with tasting how gracious the Lord is, as appears, by comparing these
words, with the ninth verse of the Psalm whence they are cited. 2. There is no
way to live that sweet life, and to see those good days that sinners may
attain unto, even here away in communion with the Lord, but by the study of
holiness, eschewing every thing that grieves the Spirit of God, and aiming
sincerely at the practice of every thing that is well-pleasing in his sight:
for, both these are here pressed as the way to have that life, and to see those
good days. 3. Although men are prone to count very little of the sins of their
tongue, Psalm. 12.2, 4. Yet much of that guilt, which marreth sweet fellowship
with God, will be found in sins of that kind; partly, in idle and unprofitable
discourses, whereof men must give an account, Mat. 12.36. foolish talking, and
jesting which is not convenient, Ephesians. 5.4. rigid censuring of, and bitter
env^ighing against others, which makes all that Christians do in Religion,
useless, Jam. 1.26. and grieves the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.29, 30, 31. meddling
with those things in discourse wherein folks are not concerned, 1 Timothy 5.13.
and the like, which may be comprehended under that which is here called Evil;
and partly, in equivocation, Genesis 20.2. 12. venting of error under fair
speeches and pretenses, Romans 16.17* and hypocritical or fained discourses,
whereby Christians do give out themselves to be what they are not, which
resembles that, whereunto David relates in that passage of the Psalm which is
here cited, as appears, by comparing the words with the title of that Psalm.
All which, and the like, may be comprehended under guile; and both sorts of
sins of the tongue, are to be abstained from by those, that would enjoy
communion with the Lord: for, in order to that, this is the first direction, He
that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. 4. Were Christians never so innocent in
their discourses, and watchful over their tongue, except also they make it
their serious study to keep a distance in heart and practice from every known
sin; and that as it is evil, and contrary to the holy nature and will of God,
they cannot expect to keep up that sweet communion with God, which he allows
upon his own: for, this is the second direction necessary for attaining to that
end, Let him eschew evil. 5. It is not simple abstinence from sin, (suppose
that could be attained to without further) that fitteth souls for entertaining
fellowship with God, unless there be also joined therewith a sincere and
universal aim at every thing that is well-pleasing in the sight of God, both in
duties relating more immediately to God, and his public matters in the world,
2 Chronicles. 24.16. and in duties toward others of his People, whether those of our
particular relations, 1 Timothy 5.4. or others, Gal. 6.10. to which these
Scriptures give the name of doing good: for, this is the third direction for
attaining and enjoying communion with God, Let him do good. 6. They that desire
to have much peace in fellowship with God, must be very serious in studying
peace with others, both by living peaceably with them themselves, so far as is
possible, Romans 12.18. without prejudice to Truth, Zech. 8.19. or holiness,
Heb. 12.14. and procuring and cherishing peace among others of the Lord's
People, Mat. 5.9. both which are comprehended in this fourth direction for
attaining to, and enjoying of communion with God; Let him seek peace, and ensue
it. 7. As there will be no small difficulty from Satan, our own and others
corruptions, in the way of attaining and entertaining peace among the Lord's
People; So none of them must stand upon their pains in the pursuit thereof, nor
quit the same, though upon many former essays they have not had success, and
though peace seem to be flying from them. All which is imported in the
signification and doubling of the word here, Seek peace, and ensue it.

Verse. 12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.
Here are three further arguments to press the forementioned duties: The first
is, that the watchful providence of God is exercised about them for their good,
who having fled to the righteousness of Christ, do also walk in the way of
righteousness or holiness formerly described. The second is, that he does
favorably accept of their prayers. And the third is, that the terror and wrath
of God is employed against those that walk in the contrary way. Hence Learn, 1.
It is the privilege of justified persons, walking in the way of holiness, to
have the favorable providence of God, watching over them for good; which
comprehends his furnishing of them with every thing necessary for their
welfare, Deuteronomy. 11.12. warding hazards off them, as far as shall be for their
good, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. rendering ineffectual all opposition made to them, while he
has service for them, Ezra. 5.5. supporting them under, and delivering them
from all their troubles in due time, Psalm. 33.18. and making out his Covenant
to them, Jer. 24.6, 7. All which, the Scriptures cited, make clear to be
comprehended in this expression which holds forth their privileges; The eyes
of the Lord are over the righteous. 2. Although, for wise reasons, the prayers
of the Lord's People may have no answer for a time, even after frequency and
importunity in that duty, 2 Cor. 12.8. Yea, and to their sense, may seem to be
mis-regarded by the Lord, Psalm. 22.2. Yet, their requests have always a
favorable acceptance with Him, in so far as He delights to hear them, Prove.
15.8. Cant. 2.14. and during the delay, is preparing them for a good answer,
Psalm. 10.17. Isa. 30.18, 19. Providing, they be praying for things agreeable to
His will, 1 John 5.14. not to gratify their lusts, Jam. 4.3. but for his
glory, and building their confidence of acceptance upon Christ's merits and
intercession, Joh. 14.13. for, this must be some special notice he takes of
their prayers, since he hears also the prayers of the wicked, though with
detestation, Prove. 28.9. His ears are open to their prayers. 3. Only those who
in the sense of their own unrighteousness are fled to the righteousness of
Christ, that so their persons may be accepted with God, and have obtained grace
to be sincere students of true holiness, may lay claim to these privileges,
the Lord's favorable providence exercised about them for good, and his
acceptance of their prayers: for, the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous,
and his ears are open to their prayers, 4. That which makes the life of
Believers a life indeed, and their days good days to them, in the midst of
many troubles, is this favorable providence of God watching over them for
their good, and his gracious acceptance of their prayers through his Son: for,
these privileges are brought in to clear wherein that life, and those good
days, spoken of in the former words, do stand, even in this, that the eyes of
the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers. 5.
However the Lord may long spare wicked men in their sinful courses, from which
indulgency of his, they take occasion to do more and more wickedly, Eccles.
8.11. Yet His constant purpose is to destroy all of them, who make a constant
trade of provoking Him, Psalm. 68.21. and that without any battle or reluctance
in their heart, Ezekiel. 11.21. and at last He will employ his power and terror
for their ruin; as is imported in this, The face of the Lord is against them
that do evil. 6. It is both lawful and necessary for the Lord's People to
encourage their own hearts in the duties of holiness, by the consideration of
that sweetness which the Lord uses to let out to them, while they hold that
way; and to deter their hearts from those sins whereunto they do strongly
incline, by the consideration of the hazard abiding them that continue in sin:
for, both the gain of godliness, and the hazard of sinful courses, is here
proposed to be considered by them for these ends; for, the eyes of the Lord are
over the righteous, etc. But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.

Verse. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which
is good?
Follows the last part of the Chapter, which is full of encouragement against
sufferings, and motives to the duties of holiness notwithstanding thereof,
together with several directions for attaining to a right carriage under the
same. The first encouragement is, That the following of duty, notwithstanding
of suffering, would prove the best way of any to eschew the hurt of all trouble
from wicked men, with whom the Lord would assuredly reckon for molesting of his
People, while they were following their duty to him. Hence Learn, 1. Although
the Godly may expect the hardest usage in following their duty, that wicked men
can devise or inflict upon them, Heb. 11.34. Yet properly, there can be no harm
or evil done unto them, in regard the nature of all afflictions, especially for
well-doing, is charged to them, Romans 8.28. their persecutors cannot at all
reach their better part, Luke 12.4. and all their losses by suffering for
Truth, are more than sufficiently made up to them, Mat. 19.29. for, this
question may be safely conceived to have the force of a denial, None shall be
able to harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good. 2. The best way to
eschew, at least to mitigate trouble, even from wicked men, is close adherance
to that which is right in the sight of God: not because wicked men favor the
way of well-doing; but because the Lord does sometimes allay their fury against
those that follow it, by putting convictions upon their conscience of the
equity of the cause which they persecute, 1 Samuel 24.17, etc. and does sometimes
work in their heart some reverence toward it, and them that follow it. Mark
6.20. for, here the Apostle mentions the following of that which is good, as
the best way of eschewing trouble from wicked men, who would be glad to see the
miscarriage of the Godly, that they might thence have occasion to trouble them:
And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? 3.
Whoever shall enterprise to harm, or evil entreat (as the word here signifies)
the Children of the Lord for their dutifulness to him, the Lord shall enquire
after them, he shall find them out, and reckon with them, be who they will:
for, this question may be taken for the Lord's challenge of them, and his
enquiry for them, to judge them; Who is he that will harm you? 4. The Children
of the Lord are not only to go about their duty in obedience to his Commands,
but likewise in imitation both of Christ himself, as their prime pattern, Ephesians.
5.1. and of the rest of his Saints who have walked in that way before them,
Heb. 6.11. for, this is the description of those to whom this encouragement is
given, that they are followers (or, as the word is, imitators) of that which is
good.

Verse. 14. But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be
not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled.
The second encouragement to constancy in duty, notwithstanding of sufferings,
is, That if Christians be put to suffer for adhering to the way of free
justification by Christ's imputed righteousness, (which legalists did then
persecute) or, for any duty of holiness (which Libertines opposed) those
sufferings should evidence and promote their true blessedness: from which
encouragements, the Apostle does infer, in the following words, several
directions for attaining to a right carriage under suffering: whereof the first
is in this verse, to wit, That they should labor to banish the fear of what
flesh could do unto them, and not suffer their hearts to be terrified or
perturbed, by the terror or hard usage of wicked men, while they suffered for
so honorable a cause. Hence Learn, 1. Were the cause which the Lord's People
maintain, never (...) ^ood, and their carriage in following of it never so
innocent, it is in vain for them to dream of exemption from trouble, at the
hands of wicked men, who are oftentimes the more incensed against them that
their ^ause be good, Joh. 7.7. and their carriage a shame and ^^proof to
others, 1 John 3.12. for, lest from the former ^^couragement any might expect
exemption from trou^^^ by following that which is good, he does in this ^uppone
that they might expect to be put to suffer for righteousness sake. 2. The
sufferings of the Godly for ^ighteousnesse sake, are so far from making them
miserable, as themselves are apt to apprehend, Psalm. 73.13. and the wicked
world do ordinarily judge, 2 Cor. 4.13. that by the contrary, they serve both
to promote their spiritual happiness, the times of suffering being the times
wherein every grace thrives most, Romans 5.3. and divine consolation abounds
most in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1.5. and likewise to evidence and prove to them
their right to everlasting blessedness, Philip. 1.28. a special measure
whereof, is reserved for the greatest sufferers, Rev. 7.13, etc, for, this
second encouragement does contradict the Lord's Peoples ordinary apprehension
of themselves, and the profane worlds opinion of them, under suffering; If ye
suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye. 3. The best of the Children of the
Lord are in hazard to have their spirits troubled and perplexed with the fear
of hazard from flesh, which is then exceeding sinful when it makes them deny
the Truth, Mat. 26.70. or take any sinful course for their temporal safety, 1 Samuel 21.10, 13. or when their spirits are thereby defiled and mudded (as the
word in the Original here signifies) with passion against the instruments of
their trouble, Mat. 26.51. which hazard, is imported in this disswasive, given
to those that suffer for righteousness, Fear not their fear, neither be
troubled. 4. They who are sled to the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and
desire to adhere to that which is right in his sight, notwithstanding of
suffering, have no cause to fear what flesh can do unto them, or to have their
spirits perturbed under the hardest of their su^^^^ings, considering that what
ever they suffer, is according to the Lord's fore-appointment, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.
and carved out by His al-ruling providence, Mat. 10.30. that they have the
promise of his presence with them under the sufferings, Heb. 13.5, 6. and are
sure of a glorious iss^^ out of them, 1 Cor. 4.17. Upon which grounds (...)
ought to banish fleshly fear and perturbation out of (...) hearts, as the
Apostle here exhorts, Fear not their ^ea^ neither be troubled.

Verse. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear.
This Verse contains some further directions to persecuted Christians, for
attaining to a right frame of spirit, and carriage under their sufferings. The
second, in order, is, That they should reverence and adore in their hearts, the
sovereignty and holiness of God, especially in that dispensation of his toward
them, in putting them to suffer, while their wicked persecutors prospered;
which direction, as also the former, is taken out of Isa. 8.12, 13. The third
is, That they should timously furnish themselves with such clear knowledge of
the Truth, that they may be able to hold forth from the Word of God, reasons of
what they believe and suffer for. The fourth is, That their testimony for the
Truth should be seasoned with meekness, even toward their persecutors. And the
fifth is, That they should entertain in their hearts some holy fear of
miscarrying in the way of giving that testimony. Hence Learn, 1. It is a
principal part of a right disposition for sufferers, to entertain in their
hearts the sense and acknowledgment of the holiness of God, who though he be
matchless in holiness, 1 Samuel 2.2. and can have nothing added to that, or any
other of his infinite perfections, by any creature, Romans 11.35, 36. Yet does
esteem himself sanctified in the hearts of his own, while they are by the
consideration of his holiness made submissive to the hardest of his
dispensations toward them, Psalm. 22.3. afraid to offend so holy a Majesty, Isa.
29.23. and thereby also are confirmed in the faith of his performing all his
Promises, Psalm. 111.9. and e^ecuting of his threatenings, upon his enemies and
theirs, ^^b. 1.12. for, this is the Apostle's second direction, for attaining
to a right frame of spirit under sufferings, sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts 2. The Children of the Lord, while they are under hard usage from wicked
men, are in great hazard not only to forget the soveraignity of God over them,
to use them as he pleases for his own glory, which occasioneth much
perturbation of spirit in them, Isa. 51.12, 13. but likewise to entertain in
their hearts, thoughts unsuitable to the holiness and purity of his Nature, as
if their sufferings, and the wickeds prosperity, were not consistent therewith;
both which, are imported in this exhortation to acknowledge the holiness of
God, whom the Apostle represents under such names as hold forth also his
soveraignity, Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. 3. Although the Godly
ought not to be anxious concerning their furniture in a time of trial, Mat.
10.19. Yet ought they not to neglect ordinary means of preparation for trials,
such as the drinking-in of the solid and clear knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy
6.19. entertaining the presence of that Spirit who reveals Truths not yet
known, and brings known Truths to remembrance when it is necessary, Joh. 19.26.
that so they may be able to defend the Truth by holy reason drawn from the
Scripture, or make apology for it, as the word here signifies, and answer
objections that may be made against the same, Prove. 15.28. as is imported in
this third direction, Be ready always to answer every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you. 4. Although in some cases the Children of
the Lord may safely answer their adversaries with silence, to wit, when they
have sufficiently and frequently born testimony to such Truths before, Mat.
27.12, 14. or when questions are propounded to them by wicked men out of scorn,
Prove. 26.5. or curiosity, Luke 23.8, 9, 11. or to be a snare to the Godly, Isa.
36.21. Yet ought they still to keep themselves in a readiness of mind and
fitness of disposition for defending the Truth, and giving a reason of what
they hold, when the glo y of God, and edification of others, call for it, the
season and manner whereof, every humble waiter on God shall know from Him, Luke
12.11, 12. and 21.14, 15. Hab. 2.1. for, the Apostle does not direct them here
to answer always every man that asks them, but to be ready always to answer
every one that asks a reason. 5. The Children of the Lord ought not to
satisfy themselves with any confidence or persuasion concerning the truths of
the Gospel, whereof they have not such clear and rational grounds from the
Word, as may not only convince themselves, but such, as they are able to hold
forth to others, when they are called; be ready to give a reason to every man
that asks you. 6. Every testimony that God's People give to his Truth before
the enemies of it, ought to be seasoned with meekness of spirit, evidenced in
their carriage toward their persecutors by their eschewing all signs of carnal
passion and revenge against them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. by their respective and sober
language to them, Act. 26.25. which may be blessed of God to procure a
mitigation of their trouble, Prove. 15.1. at least to put convictions upon the
wicked of the equity of the cause which they persecute, as the following Verse
clears: for, this is the fourth direction for a right carriage under
sufferings, that they be ready to give a testimony to the Truth with meekness.
7. Although the fear of flesh, which ma^reth confidence and peace in the heart,
be most unsuitable for sufferers, as was cleared from the Apostle's first
direction; Yet, a holy fear of miscarriage under trials, by denying, or
concealing any necessary Truth, by bringing forth the same untimously, or
mixing our own passions with our testimony to the Truth, is a prime
qualification of a right sufferer for Christ and his Truth; for (...) is the
Apostle's fifth direction, That they should (...) to bear testimony to the
Truth with fear.

Verse. 16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak (...) evil of you,
as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely (...) accuse your good
conversation in Christ.
Here is a sixth direction for attaining to a right carriage under suffering,
That they should labor to have their conscience purged from guiltiness, and
so made good in God's sight; the study whereof, as also of all the former, the
Apostle presses by a third motive, which is also an encouragement against
suffering, That if they made conscience of following those directions, their
slandering persecutors should be convinced and ashamed by their christian
carriage. Hence Learn, 1. None can rightly undergo a suffering lot for Christ
and his Truth, who do not labor to get, and keep a good conscience within, by
the application of Christ's blood for purging of it from guilt, and of the
virtue of his Spirit, for subduing the power of corruption, Heb. 10.22. which
proves a continual feast to them that have it, Prove. 15.15. and so makes them
cheerful under their hardest sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.12. for, this is the
Apostle's sixth direction, for attaining to a right frame of spirit and
carriage under suffering, having a good conscience. 2. Even those who have
attained to a good conscience within, and an honest conversation without, may
resolve not only to meet with hard sufferings, but as a principal ingredient
embittering the same, to have many false and grievous crimes laid to their
charge, and those not only forged, and spread in a private way for their
disgrace, but (as the word here translated, to speak evil, signifies) given-in
judicially against them, that so they may be the liker to their Lord, Mark
15.3. and may learn to die to their credit before men, while they are honored
to suffer for Him, 1 Cor. 15.31. for, this the Apostle suppones to be the lot
of those, who have both a good conscience, and a good conversation, that they
shall be evil spoken of, as evil doers, and have their good conversation falsely
accused. 3. It is the Lo^ (...) way, to bring the shame and confusion of wicke^
(...) out of the integrity and uprightness of his suffering people, and the
endeavors of their enemies to disgrace then (...) by drawing a testimony of
his Peoples innocence, from some of their adversaries to the shame of the rest,
Act. 2^*29. and 26.31. by enabling his suffering Servants to maintain his
Truth, and their own innocence, with such clearness and power as sometimes
confounds their opposers* Tit. 2.8. by making use of enemies fury, and his
Peoples constancy, to disappoint wicked designs, and directly to promove the
cause which enemies intend to crush, Philip. 1.12. that so they may either be
reclaimed from their opposition to his Truth and People, or have everlasting
shame poured upon them, Psalm. 83.16, 17. for, this is the result which God
brings out of all the wickeds slander, and persecution of the Godly, that
they may be ashamed who falsely accuse their good conversation in Christ. 4. The
consideration of the disappointment and shame, which the Lord does sometimes
make wicked men to meet with here, for their persecuting and slandering of his
People, should be a strong motive to the Godly, to constancy in following their
duty, whatever they may suffer: for, this is given to them here for their
encouragement, that whereas they speak evil of the Godly, as evil doers, they
may be ashamed who falsely accuse their good conversation in Christ. 5. To the
end that the conversation of a Christian may be good in God's sight, and so may
serve to make their slanderers and persecutors ashamed, it must flow from a
good conscience within, and must be a conversation in Christ, the person being
by Faith united to Him, and enabled to draw virtue from Him for walking unto
wel-pleasing, Joh. 15.5. and to aim at conformity in the conversation to His
carriage, 1 John 2.6. for, both these are necessary for that conversation of a
Christian, which may make persecutors ashamed, and which deserves to be called
a good conversation; Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil,
etc. they may be ashamed who falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

Verse. 17. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing.
The fourth motive to press the former directions, and to encourage against
suffering, is, That in their suffering for Christ, and their duty to Him, they
should find much more comfort and spiritual advantage, than if they did
procure, sufferings to themselves by their miscarriage; And this fourth motive,
or encouragement, has a fifth in the bosom of it, That they should not be put
to a necessity of suffering, except it were the good will of the Lord so to
dispose. Hence Learn, 1. Christians have a great deal of more spiritual
advantage, honor and sweetness in suffering for Christ, and duty to Him, than
they could have in suffering for their faults, though they had obtained mercy
for them from the Lord, and had peace in their spirits while they did stoop to
the stroke of humane justice inflicted for these faults; the former sort of
sufferings being more conform to Christ's, and having ordinarily a larger
allowance of peace and cheerfulness, than uses to be letten forth to them who
suffer for their faults, though they were never so sure of God's mercy: for, in
this sense must the Apostle be understood here to compare suffering for well
doing, and for evil doing, and to prefer the one to the other; because
suffering from men for evil doing, without obtaining mercy from God, has no
goodness in it at all, and so cannot be compared in that with suffering for
well-doing, as here it is by the Apostle; For, it is better to suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing. 2. The consideration of this difference, in regard
of comfort and spiritual advantage, which is betwixt suffering for well-doing
and for evil doing, should move the Lord's People to watchfulness and tender
walking, lest by their miscarriage, they deserve suffering at men's hands; and
to constancy in suffering for well doing, considering that they have within
them strong inclinations to such evils, as being acted, might justly put them
to suffer before men; and that if they shift duty to Him, for fear of suffering
from men, He may justly leave them to fall in those sins, which may procure
harder sufferings, with less comfort, than what they should have met with in
suffering for well doing: for, this is here brought in as a motive to constancy
in duty, and suffering in the way of duty, that it is better to suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing. 3. Suffering for well doing, is a duty that does
not bind, as negative precepts do, at all times, and in all cases; nor are the
Children of the Lord tied to it, as they are to some other positive duties, for
the opportunity whereof they are to watch, 1 Pet. 4 7. but is only binding when
the Lord by his providence, has brought his People under the power of
persecutors, and they do put them to a necessity either of suffering, or
sinning: in which case only, the Lord manifests his will to his People that
they should suffer: for, the Apostle here commends suffering, not absolutely as
other duties, but only upon this supposition, that it be manifested to be the
will of God; For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well doing, than for evil doing. 4. When God's will that his People should
suffer is manifested to them, by leaving them no midst between sin and
suffering, then they ought with courage and cheerfulness to choose suffering
as the only best course for them, considering that his will is a good will to
them, and so would have prevented their suffering, if it had been good for
them; that without His will, no creature could bring them to that necessity;
and that as it is His will, they should suffer for Him, so it is His will they
should reign with Him: for, this is here cast in as a special encouragement to
constancy in suffering for well doing, that they should not be put to undergo
that lot, except the will of God be so.

Verse. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust: (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit.
The sixth motive or encouragement to constancy in duty, notwithstanding of
hardest sufferings, is taken from Christ's sufferings for us, whence many
encouraging arguments to suffer for Him may be drawn. The sum of all which is,
That since the innocent Son of God has completely satisfied God's justice for
unworthy sinners, that He might reconcile them to God, having for that end
suffered to the very death in his humanity; and that He might apply his
purchase, is raised up again by the power of his Spirit or Godhead; it does
therefore well become his sinful Followers for whom He died and rose again, to
undergo cheerfully a suffering lot in following their duty to Him. Hence Learn.
1. Of all motives that may prevail with Christians to suffer for Christ, when
they are called, His suffering in their room is one of the strongest, and
should be most frequently made use of by them for that end, considering that He
by His sufferings has taken the sting out of all theirs, Isa. 53.4. has
defeated all their enemies, Joh. 16.33. Col. 2.15. has cast them a sweet copy
to follow concerning the right way of suffering, Heb. 12.2. has engaged them
not to desire a better lot than He had, Joh. 15.20. and has made sure their
perseverance and eternal happiness, which none of their troubles can mar, Romans
8.38. for, the Apostle, having made use of this same argument, to this same
purpose, in the close of the former Chapter, does here again insist upon it, as
the strongest and that which should have most weight with all His Redeemed
Ones, to move them to suffer for Him; For Christ also has suffered for sins.
2. As the whole time of Christ's humiliation was one uninterrupted course of
suffering; So, by that whole course, and especially by His offering Himself a
sacrifice for us upon the Cross, He has so completed the work of
satisfaction to God's justice, for the sins of the Elect, and of purchasing
grace and glory to them, that nothing thereof remains to be done, nor needs
that sacrifice be again repeated: for, though His sufferings were finite in
regard of duration; Yet in regard of the worth, which the excellency of His
Person who was God, did add to them, they were infinite: for, both in respect
of the continuation of His sufferings all along His state of humiliation, and
in regard of the compleatnesse of them for satisfaction to God's justice, as
also in opposition to all the legal sacrifices, which for their imperfection
behoved to be often repeated, Heb. 7.27. the Apostle says here, He has once
suffered for sins. 3. Although our blessed Mediator had all the sins of all the
Elect upon Him by imputation, 2 Cor. 5.21. and the punishment laid upon Him of
all the heinous crimes that ever were, or shall be committed by the Elect, Isa.
53.6. Yet, was He in Himself completely just and righteous, not only as He is
God, Isa. 45.21. but even as Man, He being wholly freed of that original
contagion, Luke 1.35. wherewith all others that are come of Adam are defiled*
Job 14.4. and completely conform to the Law of God in heart and practice, Mat.
3.15. that so as our Mediator He might be lovely to God, Psalm. 45.7. and to all
the Saints, Cant. 5.16. for, so the Apostle sets Him forth, who suffered for
sins, the Just for the unjust. 4. There was nothing in those, for whom Christ
suffered, to have moved Him to lay down his life for them, many of them who
were then living, being his actual persecutors and murderers, and all of them
being still at enmity with Him, till He by the virtue of His death changed
them, and yet His free love made Him suffer for their sins; The Just for the
unjust. 5. As all are naturally far from God, Ephesians. 2.13. and the Godly, at
their best, at a distance, and ^nable to come nearer, Cant. 1.4. So, this is
the comfortable end of Christ's death, and His intention in dying, that sinners
might be brought to a state of nearness, to wit, of favor and reconciliation
with* God, Col. 1.21. and that being done, to a growing nearness, to wit, of
communion and fellowship, till they be completely one with Him, Job. 17.11, 20,
21, etc. for, thus does the Apostle express the end of Christ's death, and His
intention in dying, that He might lead us by the hand (as the word here
signifies) and give us ready access to a reconciled God, He has suffered for
sins, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us unto God. 6. No lesser
degree of suffering could be accepted from our Cautioner, than the suffering of
death, there being no other way, except all had eternally died, to illustrate
the exact justice and righteousness of God in punishing sin, Romans 3.24, 25.
and his faithfulness in executing that just threatening, Genesis 2.17. to take
away the sting out of the first death to His own, 1 Cor. 15.55. and keep them
from tasting of the second, Joh. 8.51. for which cause the Apostle here affirms
of our Mediator, That He suffered, being put to death. 7* Although Christ did
truly humble Himself even in respect of His Deity, by assuming frail flesh, in
a personal union therewith, Joh. 1.14. and obscuring the glory thereof for a
time with the vail of flesh, Philip. 2.6, 7. Yet (the Godhead being altogether
impassible) His sufferings were properly in His humanity, to wit, both in His
soul, which suffered the unspeakable wrath of God, Joh. 12.17. Mat. 26.38. and
in His body, which suffered all sorts of torments whereof it was capable, Luke
22.44. both which parts of humane nature are here comprehended in one, because
His soul suffered only while it was dwelling in flesh, before His death; being
put to death in the flesh. 8. Our Cautioner having paid our debt, could not be
holden in the prison of death, but by the power of His own Spirit, or Godhead,
which are essentially one, was quickened in His humanity, by the union of His
soul to His body, and raised up, as an evidence that He was discharged of our
debt, and we in Him, Romans 4.25. as a pledge that we shall be quickened by the
virtue of His Resurrection to newness of life, Romans 6.4. etc. and after death
raised to possess glory with Him, 1 Cor. 15.20. for, He was put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. 9. All the considerations of our suffering
Mediator, whereof the Apostle does here mention several, are strong
inducements to His Redeemed People to suffer for Him, when He calls them to
that honor: for, so may every particular here mentioned be applied; that since
the Son of God being so innocent and just, did suffer, and by suffering did so
completely satisfy Justice, for so mis-deserving wretches, and did suffer to
the very death, for so sweet an end to bring sinners to God, and had so
glorious in outgate, It becomes all His Redeemed Ones to adventure cheerfully
upon suffering for Him: to which every expression h^^e may be applied as a
motive; For, even Christ has suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that
he might bring us to God: being put to death in the flesh, but quickened
through the Spirit.

Verse. 19. By which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison.

20. Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that
is eight souls, were saved by water.


Here is the seventh argument, pressing upon Christians constant obedience to
the Gospel, notwithstanding of hardest sufferings; The sum whereof is, That
since there are many souls of men and women, to whom Christ did once by his
Spirit in the Ministry of Noah, and others of his Servants, make plain the way
to life and salvation, who are now imprisoned in Hell for evermore, because of
their slighting so much patience and pains, as the Lord did exercise toward
them, especially, during the time of Noah's preparing the Ark, wherein a few
only escaped destruction by the flood: Therefore it does concern those who have
the Gospel more clearly preached to them, to give obedience thereunto, whatever
they may suffer for it within time. Hence Learn, 1. The second Person of the
blessed Trinity has been exercising his Mediatory Office, long before his
incarnation; and by his Spirit, the third Person, speaking through his
Servants, has been publicly inviting sinners to repentance, and faith in
himself: for, this preaching to the old world here spoken of, must be the same
in substance with that which is more clearly held forth now under the Gospel,
it being Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.
who did then preach by his Spirit, who speaks his mind only, Job. 10.13, 14. By
which he went and preached. 2. When the mind of Christ is plainly held forth by
the Ministry of his Servants, then Christ himself comes to them to bestow
himself, and fellowship with him, by his Spirit, upon them that receive his
Word; and to deal with others in wrath, as if they had rejected him,
immediately, and in his own Person dealing with them: for, though Christ did not
preach in Person to the old world, but only in the Ministry of Noah, and
others of his Servants, Yet, of Him it is here said, that by his Spirit He went
and preached. 3. It pleases the Lord to invite to repentance, and make offers
of his grace unto many who will never obey his counsel, nor embrace his offers,
that he may make his grace more manifest, while he does more effectually
prevail with his own that are among them, Act. 18.10. and may take away all
excuse from them that wilfully disobey his counsels, and reject his offers.
Joh. 15.22, for, there are spirits, or souls, who once had Christ preached to
them, that are now in prison. 4. The souls of men and women do not (...) to
nothing, nor die as their bodies; but so soon as they are separated from the
body, must either go immediately to the place of blessedness, Luke 23.43. or
else to this place of their everlasting imprisonment: for, though it could not
be told where their bodies were that drowned in the ^^ood. Yet their souls are
to the fore, and (...) spirits in prison. 5. Hell is a place of safe custody,
(...) ^^ame of it here imports, where there is no (...) Devils and damned souls
to torment one another, out of which there is no possibility of escaping: for,
by this prison can be meant nothing else but Hell, (which elsewhere in Scripture
has this same name, Rev. 20.7.) it being the place where only the spirits of
them who were disobedient to the Lord are now in prison. 6. Of all the sins
that men and women commit, who have the way of salvation truly preached to
them, this is of the highest nature, and the chief cause of their damnation,
that they will not be persuaded to accept the offers of God's grace and mercy
in Christ, will not obey the sweet directions of his Word, will not follow the
motions and strivings of his Spirit with them thereby; in which course
whosoever do continue, they look like those that are appointed for the prison
of Hell: for it is clear by comparing this Text with Genesis 6.3. that these, here
spoken of, had offers of forgiveness of sin, and eternal life through the
Messiah, invitations to repentance and holy walking, and some motions of his
Spirit working with his Words and yet, though they were guilty of many gross
and filthy sins, as appears by the sixth and seventh Chapters of Genesis,
their disobedience to the Gospel, or unwillingnesse to be persuaded thereby (as
the word signifies) is here set down as the chief cause of their perpetual
imprisonment in Hell; those spirits are in prison, who sometimes were
disobedient. 7. The Lord does not at the first give over dealing with despisers
of his saving counsels, and rejecters of his blessed offers, but does defer
their deserved punishment, and draw out his patience in length toward them, as
the word here signifies, that they may be the more inexcusable, and he may
have the glory of long-suffering and patience after it is expired: for, upon
those who are now in prison, the long-suffering of God once waited in the days
of Noah. 8. (...) length of time can make the Lord forget his (...) which in
penitent sinners have abused, even when (...) are in Hell he will remember
them, and make (...) remember their, for the increase of their (...) torment
and vexation, Luke 16.25. for, here the Spirit of the Lord, speaking by this
Apostle, declares to the world, that he is mindful of the despising of his
patience and pains, manifested many thousand years ago, toward them that are
now in Hell; Once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, etc.
9. Even those who may have good hope through grace, that they are delivered
from the pit of destruction, ought to consider the woeful case of them that are
there, as a mean to keep them from provoking the Lord by those sins, which
bring souls to that prison; and as a motive unto thankfulness to Jesus Christ,
and constancy in duty to him, notwithstanding of temporary sufferings, who has
delivered them from the same: for, here the case of the damned for disobedience
to the Gospel, is presented by the Apostle to the consideration of those, who,
(as he supposes in the former words) might comfort themselves in their
exemption from wrath by Christ's sufferings, as an argument to constancy in
holiness, notwithstanding of hardest usage from men; which is the Apostle's
scope to press. 10. When the Lord vouchsafes to send his Word unto a People,
he uses also with it to frame his workings and dispensations, so as may be
most fitting for bearing-in his Word upon them, that if they reject and slight
both, their stripes may be double: for, beside that Christ went and preached to
the old world, he made a work to be wrought before their eyes, which was a
visible preaching of wrath to come upon them, except they did repent, and a
real invitation of them to repentance, that they seeing such a small vessel, in
comparison of the great multitude that were upon the face of the earth, every
one might have studied to be one of those who might have had entry into it; He
went and preached, and his long-suffering waited while the Ark was a preparing.
11. Whenever the Lord has judgments to bring upon the generality of a
People, it is his way to provide sufficient means of safety for his own that
are among them; sometimes, from the outward judgment, as here, and always from
the evil of it, Psalm. 91.10. for, while judgment was approaching upon the old
world, the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls, were saved.
12. Though there never were, nor will be at any time wanting, some true
Believers in Jesus Christ, in regard of his standing relation of a Husband and
Head to the Church; Yet, so far may profanity, or error, overspread the face of
the Church, that the number of visible Professors may be very few; and
therefore the multitude of such can be no real mark of the true Church: for,
here in all the world there are but a few (and of those, a great part wicked,
for what may be gathered from the Scripture history) that is eight souls, saved
by water. 13. It may fare the better with the wicked in this life (though
nothing in that which is to come) that they have been in society with the
Godly, and have outward relations to them partly, for the more satisfaction and
encouragement of the Godly, who are tied to them by natural bonds, or
affection; and partly, that they may be some way serviceable to the Godly in
the Work of the Lord; for which causes, among others, there are here eight
souls (whereof some were of a wicked disposition, and cursed, Genesis 9.22, 25.)
saved by water. 14. The Lord can make that which is the mean of destruction to
the wicked, a mean of safety to his own: for, the water which drowned the rest
of the world, bears up the Ark; and so proves a mean of the safety of there
eight, who were saved by water.

Verse. 21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us, (not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
The eight encouragement to constancy in suffering for Christ, and his Truth,
is, That since Believers have a spiritual privilege answerable to the Ark,
sealing their safety from the ^^ludge of God's wrath, to wit, their Baptism;
not the external part of it alone, which can only remove the filth of the body,
But the internal, to wit, the application of Christ's blood to the conscience of
Believers, which the Apostle expresses here by the effect thereof, that
thereby Believers may challenge all Christ's purchase as theirs, and answer all
challenges to the contrary; and that upon this ground, that their Cautioner is
absolved from their Debt, whereof his Resurrection is the evidence: Therefore
they have no reason to faint in following their duty, or fear to be lost in the
midst of their sufferings. Hence Learn, 1. Whatever outward privilege any of
the Lord's People had of old, when he was working in a more extraordinary way
than now, every ordinary Believer may find in Jesus Christ a spiritual
privileage answerable to it: Faith can seed upon Christ the bread from Heaven,
Joh. 6.32, 35. as the Israelites did upon the Manna; it can draw spiritual life
and health from him, as the stung Israelites had health to their bodies by
looking to the brazen Serpent, Joh. 3.15, 16. and can find spiritual and
eternal safety in Him through his own means, as in an Ark, when others are
perishing in the deludge of his wrath: for, though Believers in the Apostle's
time, had not such an extraordinary way of preservation from persecution, as
Noah and the few with him had from the flood, Yet, they have a spiritual
privilege answerable to it, and of a far better nature; The like figure
whereunto Baptism does also now save us. 2. Baptism does in a spiritual sense
resemble the Ark, in so far as few in comparison of the rest of the world, do
partake even of that outward Ordinance, as few were in the Ark, In that it is
equally dispensed to good and bad, who are within the visible Church; as but
such were admitted into the Ark, In that it does exempt all that partake of it
according to Christ's appointment, from the common case of the rest of the
world, and does seal to the Elect, safety from that wrath which does destroy
the greatest part of the world: in which, and the like respects, it is here
compared with the Ark; The like figure whereunto Baptism does also now save us.
3. Although the spiritual and eternal salvation of Believers, be only the
effect of the merit of Christ's blood applied to the conscience; Yet, does the
Spirit of Christ in Scripture oftentimes ascribe the same to the instrument or
mean by which He does convey that salvation to them, (compare with this place,
Luke 7.50. 1 Timothy 4.16.) that so he may keep up due respect to his own means,
which, if they be neglected or despised by them that have the opportunity of
them, salvation cannot be expected: Therefore says the Apostle, Baptism does
now save us. 4. There is no small hazard of peoples placing too much in the
external and outward part of the Ordinances, as if that of it self were of some
efficacy for salvation; against which the Ministers of Christ have no less
need to guard in their Doctrine, than against peoples under valuing of the
Ordinance: for, after that the Apostle has asserted Baptism, to be the mean of
our salvation, answerable to the Ark, lest any might persuade themselves of
salvation, because they had received the external Baptism, he adds, as a
guard, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh. 5. The internal Baptism,
to wit, the application of Christ's merits, is known to be bestowed upon
sinners, by the effects thereof upon their conscience: which do appear, first,
When they do answer to the Lord's offers and commands in the Gospel, by their
hearty acceptance of the one, and engagement in his strength to obey the
other. Secondly, When they become humbly familiar with God, in laying claim to
the purchase of Christ's death, as theirs. And, thirdly, When they are taught
of Him, to answer the accusations and challenges that may be brought against
them in doing of the former two: for, all there three which make a good
conscience, to wit, stipulation or engagement, claim or challenge, and apology
or answer, are in the signification of this word, which the Apostle makes use
of here to express the internal part of Baptism, to wit, the application of
Christ's merits by the effect thereof, which effect manifests the cause, even
the answer of a good conscience. 6. Christ's Resurrection, is to the Believer
one chief ground of this answer of a good conscience formerly described, from
whence he may justly claim to absolution from guiltiness, since his
Cautioner's discharge is evidenced by his Resurrection, Romans 4.25. and to
virtue for subduing of his corruptions, since he who purchased it, is risen to
apply it, Romans 6.9, 11, 12. and to throughbearing strength under all trials,
since the Head being risen, the Members must needs be where it is, Joh. 14.3.
and from thence also may answer all objections drawn from his guiltiness, and
from the strength of his corruptions, and from his weakness to go through
trials, which might discourage his heart, or brangle his faith, Romans 8.33. for,
here the Apostle shows how the Believer has this answer of a good
conscience, to wit, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto Him.
The last encouragement to Christians under all their sufferings, has three
branches. First, That since their Head and Mediator is gone in their nature and
name to possess Heaven. Secondly, Since He is in highest dignity and power
with God. And, thirdly, Since He has all the heavenly hosts of Angels at his
command, Therefore none of his Followers need to fear suffering in following
their duty to Him. Hence Learn, 1. Christ's withdrawing of his bodily presence
from his People at his Ascension, is so far from being matter of discouragement
to them, as the Disciples did mistake it, Joh. 16.5, 6. that by the contrary it
is to them a wellspring of much consolation, whence they may with joy draw
answers to every discouragement, He being gone to Heaven, that He may pour out
of his Spirit more plentifully than He did before His Ascension, Joh. 7.39.
Ephesians. 4.10. and having in that very act of His Ascension triumphed over all our
spiritual enemies, Psalm. 68.18. and made (...) patent access to us to enter
Heaven by our faith and prayers, since He is gone there in our nature and name,
Heb. 6.19, 20. and 10.19. etc. for, as a consolation against sufferings, and
ground of the answer of a good conscience, is this brought in, that Christ is
gone into Heaven. 2. The high esteem and power which Christ, as our Mediator,
has with the Father, signified by his sitting at his right hand, Ephesians. 1.20,
etc. having the fullness of grace and glory given Him to dispense to his
Redeemed Ones, Act. 5.31. is another strong ground of Believers consolation,
whence also they have the answer of a good conscience to all challenges
given-in against them; His sitting there, being a clear evidence to them, that
the work of their Redemption is completely done, Heb. 10. 11, 12. that the
Father is abundantly satisfied therewith, Psalm. 110.1. Romans 8.33, 34. for, this
is another branch of their encouragement, That Christ is on the right hand of
God. 3. Whatever be the order, or several degrees that are among the Angels in
Heaven, in which we are not curiously to enquire, seeing it is not made known in
Scripture; Yet this is sure, That Jesus Christ, not only as He is God; but as
He is our Mediator, has all of them subject to Him, as His Messengers and
mighty Hosts, having authority from Him, for the defense and comfort of the
Godly, Psalm. 34.7. Heb. 1.14. and for the terror and punishment of His and
their enemies, Psalm. 68.16, 17. for, of Him, as our Mediator, is this spoken,
that He has Angels, and Authorities, and Powers subject unto Him. 4. The
consideration of this subjection of all the Angels and heavenly Hosts to Jesus
Christ the Mediator, may be very comfortable to the few oppressed Godly,
Especially when the Powers and Authorities on Eearth, and their Messengers and
Hosts are employed against them, as in this Apostle's time they were: for, this
is here given to Believers, as the last branch of their encouragement in this
Chapter, That they serve, and suffer for such a Master, as has Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers subject unto Him.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter, (which contains an enlargement of the former purpose) the
Apostle does, by several arguments, press upon the Redeemed, the study of
holiness; and gives them many encouragements against suffering in that way,
which are the two principal parts of the Chapter. The sum of the first is, That
Believers should renounce the slavery of their sins, first, Because they were
esteemed judicially to have suffered for sin in their Cautioner, Christ, ver.
1, 2. Secondly, Because they had already followed too long the filthy fashions
of the profane, ver. 3. Thirdly, Because those who did wonder at, and slander
them for changing their course and company, behoved to give a sad account
thereof to their Judge, ver. 4, 5. Fourthly, Because censure, and opposition
from the profane had been the lot of the Saints departed, ver. 6. And, fifthly,
Because time was now near an end, Therefore they should keep themselves in a
praying disposition, ver. 7. make conscience of love, ver. 8. and of
hospitality toward the Saints, ver. 9. and employ their talents and gifts in
their several places, for the glory of Christ, ver. 10, 11.

The sum of the second part, is, That hardest sufferings should not seem
strange to Believers: considering, first, that they were sent to try their
graces, ver. 12. Secondly, that by them they were made conform to their Master.
And, thirdly, should share of his glory, ver. 13. Fourthly, that even reproach
for faithfulness to Christ, should prove them happy. Fifthly, that they should
be sure of the presence of His Spirit with them. Sixthly, that He did resent
their wrongs as done against Himself. Seventhly, that He did esteem Himself
glorified by their sufferings, ver. 14. providing they did not procure these
sufferings by their miscarriage, ver. 15. but endured them with courage and
cheerfulness for the Truth of Christ, ver. 16. Eighthly, that God's appointed
time was now come for purging of his Church by such hot persecution, that even
the Godly could not come to Heaven but with great difficulty. And lastly, that
the end of their ungodly persecutors behoved to be unspeakably terrible, ver.
17, 18. It was therefore their best, to commit themselves to Him, whose power
and faithfulness is engaged to bear them through all their trials, ver. 19.

Verse. 1. Forasmuch them as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind: for, he that has suffered in the flesh,
has ceased from sin.
THe Apostle's scope, in the first part of this Chapter, being to stir up the
Redeemed of the Lord, to fight against sin, and to give themselves wholly away
to the obedience of their Redeemer, as appears from ver. 2. and 7, etc. he
brings his first and principal argument for that purpose, from Christ's
sufferings for them, and their interest in these sufferings; The sum whereof
is, That seeing Jesus Christ had in their name and nature suffered the wrath due
to them for their sins, they ought to put on this very same consideration, as a
complete armor against all temptations, and that because Believers being
esteemed judicially to have suffered in their Cautioner, they are thereby
strongly obliged to desist from those sins for which Christ has suffered, and
for which they are reckoned to have suffered in Him: So that the last clause of
this verse, cannot be understood of Christ, who never sinned; but of the
Believer, who is reckoned a sufferer in Christ, and to have ceased from sin, in
regard of Christ's undertaking to make him cease from it, and of the obligation
that Christ's suffering in his room puts upon him to mortify it, which
makes the matter as certain as if it were done: and therefore the Apostle
speaks of it in the bypast time, as if it were already done. Doct. 1. They
that would make use of Christ's sufferings for them, as a motive to suffer for
him, must learn to make use of them for mortifying of their lusts, by faith
drawing virtue out of his death, for weakening the love of sin in their hearts:
the strength and vigor whereof is the main thing that makes Christians shift a
cross for Christ, and indisposes them for carrying it aright, Mat. 16.24. for,
the Apostle, having taught Believers, in the last part of the former Chapter,
to make use of Christ's sufferings for them, as a motive and encouragement to
suffer for Him, he does here teach them to make a further use of His
sufferings, as necessary to be joined with the former, if so be they would
attain unto it, to wit, that by faith they should draw virtue from his
sufferings for mortification of their corruptions; Forasmuch then as Christ
has suffered, arm your selves, etc. 2. Christ our Mediator has taken true
flesh upon Him, and in it has suffered all that wrath which was due to the
Elect for their sins; So that His sufferings were not to be a pattern only to
Christians, of a right way of suffering, but they were in the room and place of
the Elect, as is clearly imported in this ground which the Apostle lays down
in the beginning of this Chapter, from whence he is to infer and press upon
Believers the study of mortification; Christ has suffered for us in the flesh.
3. As those for whom Christ has suffered in the flesh, and who cannot
therefore be overcome by their spiritual enemies, Col. 2.15. must,
notwithstanding, make them for a battle and a fighting-life with those enemies;
So, they are of themselves naked, and without armor for this spiritual warfare,
till they receive the same from Jesus Christ; and not only so, but they are
often found secure, and forgetful of their warfare, and therefore have need to
be roused up to lay hold upon their spiritual armor, and to accept of the same
from Jesus Christ, as is imported in this military exhortation, Arm your
selves. 4. The Believer's best armor against his spiritual enemies, especially
temptations to sin, is the believing consideration of Christ's suffering, in
his name and nature, which cannot but give him courage and strength in the
battle, seeing by these sufferings of Christ for him, his spiritual enemies are
spoiled of all power of overcoming, though not of molesting; and so he may be
sure of victory, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. for, with this same very consideration,
or notion (as the word signifies) that Christ has suffered in our room and
nature, the Apostle exhorts Believers to arm themselves against all
temptations; Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your selves also with the same mind. 5. Whatever sufferings were inflicted
upon Christ, the same are judicially reckoned to be inflicted upon Believers in
Him, He being their Surety, Heb. 7.22. and a common person representing them
all, Romans 5.18, 19. for, the Apostle, having in the first part of the verse,
asserted Christ's sufferings for Believers, in the close of it, he designs the
Believer as if he had suffered in his own person; He that has suffered in the
flesh. 6. None that do truly believe their union with, and interest in
suffering, Christ Jesus, can continue in the slavery and servitude of sin, they
being, by their believing of their union with Him who suffered for them,
certified of the mortification of sin, Romans 6.6. and so encouraged in the
battle against it; and by His love, manifested in his suffering, powerfully
constrained never to take pleasure in that which put Him to so much pain, and
does so much grieve his holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Therefore the Apostle
speaks of their c^asing from sin, as a thing already done in regard of the
certainty of it, and their obligation to it, it being ordinary in Scripture to
affirm the duty of Believers, as already done by them, thereby to assure them
that it shall be done, and to oblige them the more strongly to the study of it,
Col, 3.9, 10. He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin.

Verse. 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God.
In this Verse, the Apostle expresses the end of Christ's sufferings, and of
Believers interest therein: the attaining whereof, should be their constant
aim, to wit, that no more of their time in this mortal state should be spent in
the service of those lusts, whereunto corrupt nature leads unregenerate men;
but that their life and time should be wholly spent in conforming themselves to
the will of God, who gave Christ to suffer for them: whereby it appears that
the ceasing from sin, spoken of in the former Verse, must be understood of the
Believers obligation to the study of mortification of it, and of Christ's
undertaking to make him cease from it, as the original word there used,
signifies. Hence Learn, 1. Whoever believes that Christ has suffered for
them, should think themselves thereby obliged, not to give the least part of
their life or time in the flesh to the service of their lusts, or to take the
least part thereof from obedience to the will of God, but to employ the same
entirely and wholly in the mortifying of sin, wherein they should have no more
pleasure than if they were dead men; and in conforming themselves to the will
of God in doing and suffering, which should be the great business of their
life, considering that their time is short, and their strength, while they are
in frail flesh, but small, which is here insinuated as a reason of this truth:
for, this the Apostle makes the end of the Believers union with
suffering-Christ, and the use that he should make of this privilege, that
Christ has suffered for him, and that he is esteemed to have suffered in
Christ, to wit, that be no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. 2. Christians cannot but be
slaves to their own unmortified corruptions, and servants to the lusts one of
another, making it their very trade of life so to do, until they do by faith
arm themselves with the consideration of Christ's undertaking to deliver them
from that servitude, and of his purchasing virtue by his death for that effect:
for, while the Apostle exhorts them thus to arm themselves, that they might
no longer live to the lusts of men, he does clearly import, that before their
so doing, they had been slaves; and until they did so, they could not but live
the rest of their time in the flesh, to the lusts of men. 3. Then it is made
clear to the Believer that Christ has suffered for him, and that he is
reckoned to have satisfied God's justice, in Christ his Cautioner* when by
faith he draws virtue from Christ, to make him aim at the mortifying of his
corruptions, and at conformity to the revealed will of God in heart and
practice: for, this may be looked upon as the clear mark of those, who may
conclude that Christ has suffered for them in the flesh, and who are esteemed
to have suffered in him, that they have now ceased from sin, and do live no
longer to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

Verse. 3. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will
of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, and excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries.
The second argument, whereby the Apostle presses upon Believers the study of
holiness, especially that part of it which consists in the mortifying of sin,
is, That they had given too much of their time already to the service of their
lusts, wallowing themselves in all sorts of vileness, against both Tables of
the Law, after the manner of the Heathens, among whom they were scattered:
whereof the Apostle gives here some instances. The first is, Lasciviousness,
whereby is meaned such open vileness and wantonness in sin, as is contrary to
common honesty. The second he calls Lusts, which signifies those strong and
burning desires which are in unrenewed hearts after more and more wickedness,
especially their sinful pleasures. The third, fourth, and fifth, point out
their excess in drinking and belly cheer, with their shameless and unseemly
carriage, while they kept up a sinful society together. And the last is,
their idolatry or false-worship, in a special way detestable to God. In all
which steps, and others of that kind, they having too long walked already, they
ought therefore now to think it more than time to break off that course, and to
consecrate the remnant of their time to the study of holiness, for His honor,
whom they had formerly so much dishonored. Hence Learn, 1. Whenever the Lord
makes a gracious change upon the hearts of sinners, they will be so far from
putting off and delaying the forsaking of their sins till afterward, that they
will with grief look back upon the time they have already given way to them, as
very long, and too long to have been employed that way: so, that they who mind
to live any longer in the course of their sins, have no ground to think that
they have yet met with the power of converting grace, seeing they say in
substance that they have not yet taken time enough to dishonor God, and
destroy their own soul: for, this is the sad language of every real Convert;
The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles. 2. The longer that sinners have continued in the course of their
sins, and the greater height of wickedness they have been at before their
conversion, the more eagerly should they set about the mortifying of sin, and
the more assiduous and serious should they be in the study of holiness after
their conversion, that so they may so far as they can, restore the Lord to his
honor, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. reclaim, if it be possible, some of those whom
formerly they have hardened in their sin, Gal. 1.11. and get their own hearts
loosed from the love of those sins, which long continuance and custom have
deeply rooted in them, Jer. 13.23. for, the Apostle makes this a reason why
Believers should give no part of their life, or time, to the service of their
lusts, but employ the same wholly in obedience to the Lord, that they had spent
so much thereof in the slavery of sin already, and had been at so great a
height in wickedness; For the time past of our life may suffice us to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, etc.
3. Jesus Christ has suffered for, and conferred his saving grace upon some of
the vilest of the children of men, that He may proclaim his grace and love to
be most free, by bestowing it upon them, who have nothing in them but what is
loathsome in his sight, and most powerful in coming over, and doing away so much
vileness, and adorning the soul where it was with his beautiful grace: for,
the Apostle clearly supposes here himself and other Converts, for whom Christ
had suffered in the flesh, to have been really such as are here described,
working the will of the Gentiles, walking in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, etc. 4. It does much concern all true Converts, to entertain in their
hearts the lively apprehension of the several steps of their former vileness,
wherein they have wallowed themselves before their conversion, that they may be
still vile in their own eyes, considering how dishonorable to God they have
sometimes been, and may have their hearts frequently raised in the praises of
Him who has graciously pardoned, and powerfully changed them, 1 Timothy 1.13,
etc. and may manifest much compassion and meekness in their carriage toward
those who yet remain in that condition wherein themselves once were, Tit. 2.2,
3. for, here the Apostle represents to his own heart, and the hearts of other
Converts, the several branches of that profane disposition and course wherein
they had lived before their conversion, to wit, that they had wrought the will
of the Gentiles, walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, etc. 5. True
penitents will not stand to proclaim and aggreage their own vileness, when it
may serve for the glory of Christ's free grace, in pardoning and changing of
them, and may provoke others to mortification and holiness: for, here the
Apostle puts himself in the catalogue of these, who had walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, etc. 6. They who would reflect aright
upon their disposition and carriage before their conversion, should not only
make their more gross practices, but the very inward motions and lusts of
their hearts toward those sins which possibly they have never committed, and
consider with what strong bensell of spirit they have been inclined to, or did
commit, those iniquities, and call to mind the several sorts of their sins
against both Tables of the Law, such as, their abusing of God's good creatures
to be fuel to their lusts, their following the example of others, their
serving of others, or hardening of them in their sins by evil example, their
forsaking, or corrupting of the right Worship of God, and the like: that by the
distinct and clear up-taking of all, they may be the more humble, and the more
provoked to praise God, and to be diligent in their duty: for, such a
representation is here given to Converts, of their former disposition and
carriage, that they had in time past wrought (with great intention and bensel
of spirit, as the word signifies) the will of the Gentiles (by following their
examples, serving and encouraging them in their sins) walking in outward
vileness, and inward lusts, in excess of wine, and such other gross sins
against the second Table; and in abominable idolatries, against the first
Table. 7. Where the love of sin is entertained in the heart, and profanity
given way to, in the practice, contrary to the second Table, there is
ordinarily joined therewith, a forsaking or corrupting of the right Worship of
God, contrary to the first; A spirit of strong delusion in the matters of
Religion and God's Worship, being the ordinary and just plague of God, upon
those who frame not their heart and manners according to the Rule of the Word,
2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. for, this is the last instance of their profane course,
and may be taken for the consequent of the rest, that having walked in lusts,
excess of wine, etc. they did also walk in abominable idolatries. 8. As every
sin is hateful to the Lord, Psalm. 45.7. and should for that cause be so to all
his People, Zech. 8.17. So, he has a special detestation of the sin of
idolatry, whether that more gross kind of it, whereby that external Worship
which is due to God, is any way given to a creature, Exodus 32.5. Psalm. 106.19,
20. or that which is more spiritual, whereby the affections of the heart are
powered out excessively upon any thing beside God, were it never so lawful in it
self, Col. 3.5. Therefore is this Epithet expressly added to the last step of
their wicked course here mentioned, abominable idolatries.

Verse. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you:

5. Who shall give account to Him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.


Follows a third argument, whereby the Apostle presses the study of
holiness upon Believers, and removes a great discouragement out of their way.
The sum whereof is, That however they who had now changed their course and
company might expect to be made a wonder to the profane, and disgraced by them
so far as they could, for not joining with them in their profane courses
formerly described; Yet this ought to be no discouragement to the Godly in the
way of holiness, in regard that these their mockers and persecutors behoved
shortly to give a strict and sad account of their way to the Judge of all.
Hence Learn, 1. Men that are left of God to live in any sinful course, are very
unwilling that any should part company with them in their way, and are strongly
desirous to have others infected with their sins, that so there might be none
to make them ashamed, and many to encourage them in their evil way, Psalm. 64.5.
for, so much is imported in this, that they think strange that others run not
with them to the same excess of riot. 2. Were the course of profane men never
so vile, and even such as Nature's light cannot but condemn; yet it is to them
matter of great admiration that any should abandon the course which they
follow, because they apprehend a paradise in the satisfaction of their lusts, 2
Pet. 2.13. and the true sweetness which is in Christ's service is wholly hid
from them, Prove. 14.10. Therefore they think it strange that others run not
with them to the same excess of riot. 3. It does not satisfy graceless
persons to go at leisure in the way to their own destruction, but being acted
by that violent spirit of Satan, they make all the have they can toward their
own ruin, as men in a race do for a great prize, as the word here signifies;
and will not spare to spend their bodies and spirits, and wast their means in
the service of their lusts, and cannot be satisfied with any that will not do
the like, as is imported in the signification of these words, They think i^
strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot. 4. Profane men
cannot abide that the Godly should be in credit and reputation beside them,
partly, because of their natural enmity against them, Gal. 4.29. and partly,
because their way is a shame and reproof to theirs, as Christ's was to his
enemies, Joh. 7.7. therefore they devise and spread false calumnies, to hurt the
credit (as the word here signifies) of the Godly; speaking evil of you. 5. Even
the Godly are so little mortified to their credit before the world, and do so
little prize esteem with God, and his People, that the mockery and slanders
even of profane men, are ready to prove great discouragement to them in the
ways of the Lord: for, the Spirit of God finds it necessary here, to guard
against this discouragement, by discovering of it, and threatening the
slanderers; They think strange that ye run not with them, etc. speaking evil of
you: who shall give account, etc. 6. Although the saving grace of Christ does
not loose those, upon whom it is vouchsafed, from the relations they may have
to graceless persons, nor from the duties of those relations, neither yet from
fellowship with them in necessary commanded duties, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. and 7.12,
13. 1 Samuel 11.6, 7. 2 Cor. 11.20, etc. Yet it will make them separate from
their sinful fashions, and loath their company in their sinful courses, even
though they should be wondered at and evil spoken of for so doing: for, the
Apostle imports clearly, that those Converts, to whom he speaks, would not
now keep fellowship with their former companions in their sinful courses,
whatever they might suffer at their hands, while he says, They think it
strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot. 7. Although a
long-suffering God may let wicked men have a long time of prospering in their
sinful ways, and persecuting of his beloved People; yea, and may defer his
reckoning with them the whole length of their time, Yet, of necessity, they
must all of them at last appear before Him as their Judge, at the great day,
when both those of them that have died before that time, and such as shall then
be found living, must be present, to give account to Him, that judges quick
and dead. 8. The delay of the last reckoning with wicked men, is not, because
the Lord is not ready for that work, but, because there is yet a number of the
Elect to be gathered, Rev. 6.11. their faith and patience is to be tried, Rev.
14.12. and the wicked to be more ripened for judgment, Rev. 14 15. So that
there is nothing upon the Lord's part that hinders the day of account; for,
He is ready to judge the quick and the dead. 9. So dear are the Lord's People
to Him, and so exact is He in his justice, that there is not a thought in
wicked men's hearts, nor a word in their mouths contrary to Him, or his People,
but He takes notice of it, and will exact a strict account thereof from them:
for, here the Spirit of God, signifies His notice-taking of their admiring
thoughts of the Godly, and their ill speeches of them, and assures His own,
that for these they shall give account to Him, who is ready to judge the quick
and the dead. 10. Although the Children of the Lord should not desire a woeful
day upon the most wicked for any personal injury, they have received from them,
Jer. 17.16. nor rejoice when it comes upon them, because they are their
enemies, Prove. 24.17. but rather should pray for their conversion and
salvation, Mat. 5.44. Yet, it is both lawful and necessary for the Lord's
suffering People to consider how glorious the Lord will be in his justice upon
so many of them as are irrecoverable, and without the compass of his electing
love; and thereby ought to comfort their hearts against their bitter flanders,
and other injuries of that kind: for, this is here given as an encouraging
motive to the study of holiness, notwithstanding of any discouragement from
such, that they shall give account to Him, that is ready to judge the quick and
the dead.

Verse. 6. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the spirit.
The fourth argument to constancy in holiness, notwithstanding of any
discouragement from the profane world, is, That seeing the Gospel had been
preached to the Saints who are now at their rest, for this very end, that they
being exercised in their external condition with the hard censures and
persecution of the profane, might have the life of grace promoted in their
hearts, and so be fitted for life eternal; there was therefore no reason why
the Lord's People should be discouraged in that way, because of such a lot as
all the Saints departed had met with. Doct. 1. All that believe the Gospel, and
give up themselves to the obedience of it, may resolve to have many hard
censures past upon them by those that do not profit by it, to be judged by
them, a deceived and accursed people, Joh. 7.47, 49. a proud and precise
company who will not do as neighbor and others do, Mark 7.2, 5. to have many
false calumnies raised and spread of them, Romans 3.8. and to be condemned to the
worst usage that wicked men can bring upon them, Jam. 5.6. for, this is here
set down as the lot of the Saints departed, and the consequent of their
embracing the Gospel, For, for this cause the Gospel was preached to them that
are dead, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh. 2. Although
the Gospel of it self tend to the making of peace both with God, and amongst
those that hear it, Romans 10.14. Luke 19.42. and the Lord does no ways approve
profane men's censuring, or condemning them that embrace it, Luke 10.6. Yet does
the Lord send the Gospel among men for this very end, that upon occasion of his
Peoples embracing of it, wicked men may vent their natural enmity against Him,
by their persecuting of His People, that so they may be justly punished for
that and other of their sins, and His own People may be exercised by their
opposition, for their good; which are just and holy ends upon God's part; For,
for this cause was the Gospel preached to them that are dead, that they might
be judged according to men, etc. 3. It gives much encouragement to the Lords
People in the way of their duty against all discouragements from the profane,
to consider, first, That they are not singular in a suffering lot, seeing the
same has fallen to the Saints before, in whose person God has given a proof
of His power and good will to bear His own through all their trials. Secondly,
That their troubles from wicked men, can reach no further than their flesh, or
outward man, and the concernments thereof. Thirdly, That those troubles can
continue no longer than their dwelling in the flesh. And, fourthly, That all
their hard exercises are carved out not by the lusts of men, but by the holy
and wise providence of God: for, these considerations are here presented to the
Godly for their encouragement against the mockery and persecution of the
profane, that the same had been the lot of the Saints now departed, that it was
measured out by the Lord, that it could only reach their flesh, and them only
while they were in frail flesh, as is imported in these words; For, for this
cause was the Gospel preached to them that are dead, that they might be judged
according to men in the flesh. 4. Gods great end in sending and keeping up the
Gospel among His own, is, That they being quickened by His Spirit, which He
communicates to them through the preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 3.2. may be
enabled to live the life of faith, Joh. 20.31. and holiness, 2 Cor. 3.18. and
may have also a life of consolation here, 1 John 1.4. and a life of glory
hereafter, 1 John 5.13. All which is imported in this great end of preaching of
the Gospel to the Lords People, That they might live according to God in the
spirit. 5. The life of grace and of consolation, could not thrive so well in
the hearts of the Godly, not could they be fitted for the life of glory, except
they met with trials, and opposition from the wicked of the world, to stir them
up to the exercise of their grace, Romans 5.3. and to cry for a further measure
of it, Psalm. 119.25. to loose their hearts from this life, and make them long
for a better, 2 Cor. 5.2. For, for this cause the Gospel was preached to the
Saints departed, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
(by the blessing of God upon the Gospel, and upon their hard exercise from the
wicked) might live according to God in the spirit.

Verse. 7. But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober and watch
unto prayer.
The fifth argument to the study of holiness, notwithstanding of
discouragements in the way thereof, is, That wicked men's opposition, and the
Godlies sufferings, and all things of that nature would shortly be at an end:
from which, together with the former arguments, the Apostle infers seven
directions for attaining to a right carriage in duty, under so much opposition
from wicked men, whereof three are comprehended in this Verse; The first is,
That they should manifest moderation and prudence in their disposition and
carriage. The second is, That they should be much with God in prayer. The third
is, That they should carefully watch against every thing that might mar their
intercourse with God in that duty, Hence Learn, 1. It cannot now be long to the
end of time, and all things in it whether we compare the remainder of time,
with that which is already past, or the whole of it, with eternity; or whether
we consider how near the end of time, and all things in it, is to every
particular person: in all which respects, the Apostle expressly asserts here,
that the end of all things is at hand. 2. The Lord's People could not faint in
their duty, nor be discouraged because of opposition in the way of it, if they
did entertain the believing consideration of the nearness of the end of wicked
men's persecution, and of their pains in duty and sufferings for it: for, this
is here given as an encouraging argument to constancy in duty, notwithstanding
of opposition in the way thereof; That the end of all things is at hand. 3.
They that would carry themselves aright under much discouraging opposition in
the ways of the Lord, and would keep themselves in a fit disposition for
meeting with Him at the end of all things, must study sobriety, which consists
in a mean esteem of our selves for our gifts or graces, Romans 1^.3. in the
exercise of right reason, and Christian prudence, in compassing our affairs,
Mark 5.15. and in a spare-modling with such earthly delights, as may indispose
us for our christian warfare, 1 These. 5.8. for, this is the first particular
direction, which the Apostle gives for a right carriage in duty under
opposition, and which he infers upon the nearness of the end of all things,
as the way to be prepared for the same, Be ye therefore sober. 4. None can hold
out in their duty, when they meet with discouragement in the way of it, nor can
keep themselves in a right disposition for the end of all things, but those
only who keep much correspondency with God by prayer; in which exercise His
People receive from Him light and strength to carry themselves aright, and
encouragment against all that might discourage them in His way: for, this is
the second thing recommended to them that would persevere in their duty, even
under opposition, and be sit for the end of all things, that they should watch
unto prayer. 5. None can expect acceptance, or success of their prayers,
except they join therewith watchfulness, that so they may furnish themselves
beforehand with matter for prayer, Psalm. 5.1. that they may discern, and make
use of the fittest opportunities for the discharge of that duty, Psalm. 55.17.
that they may eschew in their ordinary carriage what may mar their access to
God in prayer, and the return of the same, 1 Pet. 3.7. and may carefully
observe what answers of their former prayers they have from God, Hab. 2.1. for,
in order to this duty, and as a necessary pre-requisite of it, watchfulness is
here pressed, Watch unto prayer.

Verse. 8. And above all things have fervent charity among your selves: for,
charity shall cover the multitude of sins.
The fourth direction to the Lord's People for attaining to a right carriage
under so much opposition from the profane, which the Apostle infers from the
former arguments to the study of holiness, especially that, taken from
Christ's love to His own, manifested in his sufferings, is, That they would
labor for fervency of affection one toward another; and this the Apostle
presses with great earnestness, as the sum and chief of all the duties we owe
to our neighbor; and bears it in by this argument, That love will prevent and
pass many mutual wrongs, which cannot but mar comfortable society among the
Lord's People. Hence Learn, 1. Next unto our love to the Lord Jesus, which is
the first and great Command in the Law, Mat. 22.38. Love to His People ought to
be studied above all other things, it being the main evidence of our love to
Him, 1 John 5.1. and of His love to us, 1 John 3.14. and that which makes way
for every other duty to our neighbor, 1 Cor. 13.4. for, the Apostle supposing
love to Christ, to be in the hearts of those to whom he writes, Chap. 1.8. does
press this love to others of His People in the next room, as that which should
have the precedence of any other duty; Above all things have fervent charity
among your selves. 2. They that love Christ, should not only entertain love in
their own hearts to others of His People, whatever their estate or condition
be, but should likewise labor to procure and cherish hearty love in and among
all the rest of God's People: for, this direction, as it presses upon every
one of the Lord's People, love toward one another, so it presses upon every
one of them the entertaining and promoting of mutual love among others; Have
fervent charity among your selves. 3. The more hatred and opposition the
Children of the Lord meet with from the profane world, the more warmness of
affection should they entertain and express toward one another, that so the
comfort they have in one another affection, may make up to them the
discouragement they have from their wicked enemies: for, while this People were
exposed to many discouragements from the profane, as is clear from the former
words, the Apostle with great earnestness, presses them to this, as that
which would sweeten their sad lot; Above all things have fervent charity among
your selves. 4. It is not enough that the Lord's People keep themselves free of
malice and hatred one of another; neither yet, that they have such a measure of
affection toward one another, as they ought to have toward all men, Tit. 3.2.
Yea, even their very enemies, Mat. 5.44. but they must beware of all
cold-rifenesse of affection one toward another, and labor for such a hight of
love as may keep them always in a bensel to do one another good, and such as
may not be interrupted by the failings one of another: for, such a measure of
affection is here pressed by the Apostle in these words, wherein there is a
metaphor from a Bow that is bended; Have fervent charity among your selves. 5.
None of the Children of the Lord have ground to expect such a society of His
People to converse with in this life, in whom they may not discern many
failings and wrongs, and those often reiterated both against God, and against
one another, which cannot but mar the benefit and comfort of their society,
unless one of them can pardon and passe-by a multitude of such in others: for,
this argument does import, that there will be among the Saints, a multitude of
sins to be covered. 6. Although the Lord's People ought not to justify or
connive at the faults one of another, Lev. 19.17. but with zeal and meekness
to point them out to them, and reprove them, Gal. 2.11. which should be much
desired, and well taken by one of them from another, Psalm. 141.5. Yet, where
true love is, it will not be interrupted by the discerning of these, but will
cover them, by pardoning the wrong done to the person that has love, Ephesians.
4.32. interceding with God for pardon of the wrong done against Him, Jam. 5.16.
hiding from the party injuring, our knowledge of such wrongs, as we may in
charity think they will challenge themselves for, Prove. 12.23. and all of them,
so far as may be, from the profane, Prove. 11.13. who can make no better use of
their knowledge of them, than to take occasion from them to loath and disgrace
Religion, 2 Samuel 12.14. Romans 2.24. and especially by furthering the repentance
of the guilty person, and their use-making of the blood of Christ, Jam. 5.20.
whereby alone sin is covered from God's justice, Psalm. 32.1, 2. for, the
covering of sin, here spoken of, is not attributed to love, as if it could
either justify our selves, or others, But because it is a grace that pardons
and hides wrongs done against them that have it, and furthereth others what it
can to seek the Lord's forgiving of these wrongs also; Love covers a
multitude of sins. 7. The consideration of the many wrongs and sinful
infirmities that one of the Lord's People may discern in another, should be so
far from weakening the affections of one of them toward another, and so marring
their comfortable society, that by the contrary it should move them to study
the greater fervency of affection, that thereby they may cover these
infirmities, and by their so doing be the liker to their Lord, whose love
kythes in covering a multitude of sins, in every one of His own, Ephesians. 4.32.
for, it is here brought in as a reason encouraging to the study of fervent
charity, that thereby they should cover a multitude of sins.

Verse. 9. Use hospitality one to another without grudging.
The fifth direction, is, That they should prove the fervency of their love one
to another, by their kindly entertainment of such Christians as wanted those
outward accommodations, which others had; and this duty the Apostle qualifieth,
that it ought to be made conscience of, without any fretting or
male-contentment. Hence Learn, 1. It may be the lot of the Lord's dear People,
to be without house or harbor, or any such worldly accommodations of their
own, and to be put to live upon the charity of others: for, in such a case are
several of the Lord's People here supposed to be, while the Apostle commands
them to use hospitality one toward another. 2. The Lord does not ordinarily
bring all of His People in a like hard condition at once, but in hardest times
uses to keep some of them in a capacity to be helpful, and comfortable to
others: for, while there are some that want lodging and accommodation of their
own, there are others of His People that have these things to give to such as
want them, as is supposed in this exhortation, Use hospitality one to another.
3. Although humane Laws do not bind Christians to the duties of charity, nor
punish them for the neglect thereof; yet the supreme Lawgiver has enjoined
these duties as strictly as any other, and therefore, no question, will be as
terrible to the neglecters of these duties, as of any other duties, Mat. 25.44.
for, this Text is the poors right to a share of the accommodations and society
of the rich, and the Lords order to the rich, for giving the same to the poor;
Use hospitality one to another. 4. Duties of charity to the Lord's People in
necessity, ought to be done without fretting or male-contentment, either at the
poor as being burthensom, or at God's providence for casting so many objects of
charity in our way; and consequently they ought to be gone about willingly and
pleasantly, considering, that the Lord esteems of them as done to Himself,
Prove. 19.17. and that He delights exceedingly in our cheerful performance of
such duties as are expensive to us, 2 Cor. 9.7. for, thus does the Apostle
qualify the right manner of performing this duty of hospitality, that it be
used without grudging.

Verse. 10. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
The sixth direction which the Apostle infers upon the former arguments, is,
That they would mutually communicate all their receipts for the glory of
Christ, and the good of others: and this he presses by two arguments: The one
is, That whatever they had, was a free-gift, flowing from the grace of God.
The other is, That they were not absolute owners, but dispensers, or stewards
of those various gifts and graces of God. Hence Learn, 1. There are none of the
Lord's People but they have received some gifts from Him, which being rightly
employed, may be made forthcoming for His glory, and the good of others of His
People: this is supposed while the Apostle thus exhorts, As every man has
received the gift, so let him minister the same, etc. that God in all things
may be glorified. 2. It has pleased the Lord to dispense His gifts variously
among His People, giving to some more talents, and to some fewer, Mat. 25.15.
and different measures of the same gifts to several persons, Romans 12.3. that
all may know, all fullness is only in Himself, Col. 1.19. and that every one
may make use of that gift, or degree of gift in another which themselves want,
1 Cor. 12.21. for, this variety of the Lord's dispensing of His gifts, is
imported in this direction of the Apostle's, while he thus exhorts in the
beginning of the Verse, As every man has received the gift, etc. and while he
calls those gifts, in the latter part of the Verse, the manifold grace of
God. 3. Whatever gift or talent any of the Lord's People have, that may be any
way useful for His glory, and the good of others, that is a free-gift to them,
flowing from the undeserved grace of God, there being nothing foreseen or found
in any that can merit the least good at Gods hand, Romans 11.35. as is clearly
held forth in the signification of this word, As every man has received the
Gift. 4. None of the Lord's People have received any gift from Him, for
themselves alone, but that they may lay forth the same for His glory, and the
good of others, as is imported in this direction, As every man has received
the gift, so let him minister the same. 5. The Children of the Lord have much
need of His Spirit, that they may discern the gifts they have received, and so
may know what is freely bestowed upon them, 1 Cor. 2.12, that they may neither
undervalue their receipts as useless, and so hide their talents in a napkin,
nor yet take upon them what they are not able for, but may put forth their
gifts in their stations, for the glory of God, and others good, suitably to the
measure they have received, As every man has received the gift, so let him
minister the same. 6. All our receipts ought to be communicated with much
diligence and activity, as also with humble condescendency to profit those that
are inferior to us, as being in that, servants to others: for, both diligence,
and condescendency, are imported in the signification of this word, Let him
minister the same. 7. The consideration of the freedom of God's grace in
bestowing any of His gifts, should strongly move all His People heartily to lay
out the same for His glory, and the good of others: for, that we may never
think upon any of our receipts but as free-gifts, and thereby may be moved to
communicate the same, the Spirit of the Lord has put such a name upon them
here, as in the Original signifies a gift of grace, and a gift whereby others
may be gratified; As every man has received the gift. 8. The Lord's People are
not to look upon themselves as owners of any gifts they have, so as they may
use the same at their pleasure, but as dispensators and stewards, as the word
here signifies, who ought to dispose of their receipts according to the mind
and direction of the giver of them, communicating the same seasonably and with
discretion, considering the several tempers of the rest of the family, to whom
they are to give out these gifts, and faithfully, as those that must give
account, how they have employed all that they have received, as good stewards
use to do: All which is imported in the manner of Christians dispensing of
their gifts, here held forth in a metaphor, As good stewards of the manifold
grace of God.

Verse. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God: If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and dominion
for ever and ever. Amen.
The last direction, is concerning the right manner of communicating their
receipts: for which the Apostle gives two instances, The first is, anent the
communication of things spiritual, which are to be communicated by word: and
for that, he exhorts that it be done (whether by public Ministers, or
private Christians in their stations (with that reverence and confidence which
is suitable to the majesty and certainty of divine Truths. The second is,
concerning the right way of communicating things temporal; and for this he
exhorts, that those be given forth (whether by all Christians, whom charity
obliges to supply one another necessities, or by those who have an Office in
the House of God, to gather and distribute the charity of the rest) in a way
suitable to every ones ability, and with such a willing and cheerful frame of
spirit as the Lord vouchsafes upon them; and withal he proposes the right end
that Christians should have before them, in all their duties, and especially in
this, the communication of their receipts, to wit, the glorifying of God
through Jesus Christ: upon the mentioning whereof, the Apostles heart rises, to
ascribe eternal praise to him, wherewith the first part of the Chapter is
closed. Hence Learn, 1. All that speak any thing to others of the matters of
God (as private Christians in a private way may do, for their mutual
edification, Judge. 5.10, 11. Mal. 3.16. especially to these under their charge,
1 Timothy 5.4.) more especially, those who have an Office in the House of God for
that end, ought to study the right manner of delivering the mind of God, that
they speak nothing but what they understand, and are clearly persuaded to be
His Truth, as the word here signifies; that they speak the same with plainness,
that there may be no ground for people to doubt of the meaning, as ordinarily
there is of Satan's oracles, which use to be doubtsom and ambiguous; that they
speak seasonably, with reverence and humility as becomes the mind of God: All
which is imported in this direction, prescribing the right manner of
communicating spiritual receipts, which is to be done by speech, If any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. 2. As every Christian ought
willingly to give out of his worldly substance for the supply of the
necessities of others of the Lord's People, and that with due consideration how
far his ability may reach, so, as his charity may neither be unsuitable to the
Lord's liberality toward him, 2 Cor. 16.2. nor prejudicial to duties of
equity, Romans 13.8. especially to those of his near relations, 1 Timothy 5.8. So,
those who have an Office in the House of God, for gathering and distributing
the charity of others, ought to discharge the same with faithfulness and
diligence, cheerfully going about the meanest ^uty of their office: for, this
last part of the Apostle's direction may be understood both of the Deacons, and
of every private Christian, and likewise of the proportion which should be
betwixt their charity, and their ability; as also, of their stretching
themselves to the utmost of the grace given unto them, to do those duties of
charity in a right manner; If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
which God gives. 3. As there is a great pronenesse in all men naturally,
whereof the Regenerate are not free, to seek their own glory, especially in the
giving out of their receipts, as is imported in the Apostle's proposing this
end to Believers in the communication of their gifts, that God may be
glorified: So, none can acceptably employ their best gifts, unless their main
end be, that God he giver may be praised, both by the dispenser of these gifts,
and by those that are profited by them, for giving such gifts to men, and the
heart to let them forth for so holy an end as this, that God in all things may
be glorified. 4. As every gift we have, comes to us through Jesus Christ, Job.
1.16. So, all the glory that redounds to God by the right use of these gifts,
must be given to Him, (whether by the dispenser of them, or those who are
profited by them) through Jesus Christ, in whose strength they are rightly
employed, Job. 15.5. who makes His People intend the glory of God in all
things, Isa. 61.3. Job. 17.10. and makes their intention to glorify Him,
accepted by His merits, Heb. 13.15. for, this glorifying of God, which is here
proposed, as the end to be intended both by them that let out their gifts to
others, and by those to whom they are dispensed, must be through Jesus Christ,
That God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. 5. Although the
essential glory of God be so infinitely great, that it can receive no addition,
Neh. 9.5. and His dominion in it self so absolute and large, that it cannot be
more, Psalm. 115.3. Yet, it is the duty of all His People, especially His
Ministers, to declare that glory of His, to wish that it may be ascribed to Him
by all, and that His dominion may be voluntarily acknowledged and submitted to
by all: for, so does the Apostle here, To Him be glory and dominion for ever.
6. So full of desires, to have Christ glorified and submitted unto by others,
should the hearts of all that love Him, especially His Ministers, be, that they
should be ready to intermit other purposes, and burst forth in His praise,
thereby to provoke others to that duty: for, so does the Apostle here, To Him
be glory and dominion for ever. 7. Our desires to have the glory of the Lord
manifested, and His dominion over all acknowledged, and willingly submitted
unto, should reach the length of eternity, in regard we are obliged to Him by
favors of infinite worth, for which we will never be able to give Him the glory
due to Him, To whom be glory and dominion for ever. 8. We ought to raise our
hearts in praise, by the consideration of the Lord's faithfulness in
performing of His Promises, and to close that exercise for the time with the
hearty acknowledgment thereof, and with our faithful engaging of our selves to
glorify Him, by believing of His faithfulness: for, this Hebrew word, Amen,
signifying faithfulness, is used in all languages, importing that all tongues
should, and must at last give to God the glory of faithfulness; and is made
the ordinary close of our prayers and praises, to signify our acknowledgment
of His faithfulness, and engaging of our selves faithfully to every duty that
may honor Him. Amen.

Verse. 12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is
to try you, as though some strange thing ^^^pened (...).
The second part of the Chapter, contains several directions for a^^ining to
a right disposition and carriage under a cros^ for Christ, and several
encouragements against the ^^t ^e. The first direction propounded negatively,
(...). Tha^ they should not be amazed nor perplexed at the ^rest sufferings, as
men use to be when they meet with ^^e new and strange thing. The first reason,
pressing this direction, is, That their hardest sufferings were but to (...)
graces, and purge away their corruptions, and (...) ^ore ought to be well
taken. Doct. 1. Christians under a cross, especially for Christ, and Truth,
stand in need of frequent directions and encouragements, and those born-in with
much affection, they being then in hazard to take some sinful course for their
ease, or else to suffer heartlesly, and in a way unbeseeming their Master; and
ready also to think themselves forgotten, or slighted by others: for which, and
the like causes, it is, that the Apostle, having been upon this subject of
directing and encouraging sufferers frequently before in this Epistle, does
here return to it again, and make way for it by this loving compellation,
Beloved, think it not strange, etc. 2. The Children of the Lord have not only
trials, but fiery trials to prepare for, which are such as do deprive them of
the sweetest of earthly comforts, and reaches to that which is dearest to them,
as men, their credit, liberty and life, Mat. 16.24. and such as few Professors
will abide, Zech. 13.9. for, such trials are the Godly here forewarned of, and
supposed to be in, while the Apostle thus directs, Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial. 3. So unwilling are the Children of the Lord to
forecast sore trials, and so make them familiar to themselves before they come,
Heb. 12.5. so subject to security, even when trials are nearest, Mat. 26.40. so
ready to dream of much worldly ease, Act. 1.6. and when they get but a little
breathing-time from trouble, to promise themselves perpetual exemption
therfrom, Psalm. 30.6. that they are in great hazard to be surprised and
perplexed at the sight of approaching trials, as men use to be at the sight of
any thing strange and terrible, which they did not forecast and prepare for; as
is imported in this direction. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial,
etc. as though some strange thing had happened unto you. 4. How fiery soever
the trials of the Lord's People be, there is no reason why they should seem
strange to them, seeing they are so frequently forewarned of them in Scripture,
considering that the best of the Saints, and the Captain of our salvation, have
gone through as hot, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. and especially that they are assured of
one with them in the hottest furnace of affliction they can be put in, who will
quench the violence of the fire, that it shall not consume them, Isa. 43.2, 5.
Therefore they should not think it strange concerning the fiery trial, as
though some strange thing had happened unto them. 5. One main end for which the
Lord exercises His People with fiery trials, is. That they may have proof of
the strength of His grace in them for their comfort, Romans 5.3. and a discovery
of the weakness thereof also, and of the much dross of corruption which is
with it, for their humiliation and purging, Isa. 27.9. for, this the Apostle
affirms of the hottest sufferings of the Godly, That they are only to try
them. 6. The consideration of those excellent advantages which the Lord's
People have by trials, should guard their hearts against offense thereat: for
this, that afflictions are but to try them, is here held forth as a special
reason why they should not take uncouth with them; Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as though some strange thing
happened unto you.

Verse. 13. But rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings;
that when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.
The second direction for a right disposition and carriage under the cross for
Christ; which the Apostle propounds positively, is, That they should count it
great matter of joy to be honored to suffer for Christ: And this, together
with the former direction, the Apostle bears in by two further arguments. The
one i^, That by their sufferings for Christ, they were made conform to Him in
His suffering, and did partake of the fruits of His sufferings for them. The
other is, That their sufferings for Christ were to them sure pledges, and
forerunners of their sharing with Him of His glory, at His second appearance.
Hence Learn, 1. It is not enough for the Lord's People to have their hearts
kept free of discouragement under the cross, or amazement at it* as a strange
lot; but they ought also to rejoice in their sufferings for Christ, as the
matter of their great honor and happiness: which frame of spirit may be
attained unto, under the hottest trials wherewith the Lord's People can be
exercised: for, after the Apostle has exhorted them not to think it strange
concerning the fiery trial, he adds this second direction, But rejoice, etc.
2. Those who are honored to suffer for Christ, do in a special manner partake
of His sufferings, in regard they have a special measure of that wisdom and
strength which he purchased by his death, communicated to them under their
trials, Rev. 12.11. are then brought to a nearer conformity with Him in his
estate of humiliation, Romans 8.29. do undergo what He esteems done to Himself,
Act. 9.4. and do fill up their share of these sufferings which divine
providence has carved out for Christ mystical, Col. 1.24. In all which
respects, sufferers may be said to partake of the sufferings of Christ; every
one whereof ought to be a strong motive to cheerfulness and constancy under
sufferings for Him: for, to this end does the Apostle give this reason,
comprehending all these privileges, In as much as ye are partakers of the
sufferings of Christ. 3. Although Christ's essential glory be always one and
the same, Heb. 13.8. Yet His declarative or manifested glory is sometimes much
hid and veiled, as it was in a special way during the time of His personal
humiliation, Joh. 17.5. and will be so, in a great measure, till all His
suffering-Members share of His glory at the last day, at which time He shall be
clearly manifested to be fully glorious; as is imported in this other reason of
joy in suffering for Christ, That when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be
glad also, etc. 4. The Lord has reserved the fullness of the joy of His
People, till the time of the full manifestation of His own glory at His last
appearing, that His own may long much for that day, and may not take it ill to
suspend their joy, while His glory is under a vail; for, when His glory shall
be revealed, they shall be glad with exceeding joy. 5. As Christ's second
coming will be a glad day to all that believe in Him, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. So, there
is a special measure of joy and gladness reserved for them, who get grace to
go cheerfully through a sad suffering-lot in the world for His sake; in the
consideration whereof He does allow them to comfort themselves against their
sufferings, and does not esteem it a mercenary disposition in them so to do:
for, to sufferers is this consolation given, as especially verified in them,
That when His glory shall be revealed, they shall be glad with exceeding joy.

Verse. 14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part He is evil spoken
of, but on your part He is glorified.
The Apostle adds to the former three arguments, several others, to encourage
them against their sufferings. The fourth is, That even their enduring
disgraceful speeches for Christ, should prove a mean and evidence of their
happiness; and therefore much more their greater sufferings. The fifth, which
explains their happiness, is, That the glorious Spirit of the Lord delights
to reside in the hearts of sufferers; which must be understood of some special
operations of His, seeing He dwells, or rests, in the hearts of all His own,
whether they be put to suffering, or not. The sixth is, That the reproaching of
the Godly, is taken as done against that glorious Spirit of God residing in
them. And, the seventh is, That their constant enduring of that, and other
degrees of their sufferings, is esteemed much glory to that glorious Spirit.
Hence Learn, 1. Although even those of the Lord's People who do not decline
suffering for Him, are very strongly desirous to suffer with credit before men,
Psalm. 119.22. Yet they ought to expect reproach as a main ingredient in their
trials, whereby their reputation will be st^^ned in the minds of many, and foul
crimes, to make them detestable, laid to their charge, as the word here
signifies: for, this is supposed to be a part of their trial, against which the
Apostle here guardeth, and comfort the^; If ye be reproached, etc. happy are
ye. 2. As there are several kinds of trials where with the Lord's People are
exercised, and every one are not tried with the same kind; So the Lord takes
notice of all the degrees and kinds of their trials, were it but an envious
look, 1 Samuel 18.9. or the least disdainful gesture, Psalm. 22.7. Isa. 58.9. and
will not suffer the lesser sort of their sufferings to (...) their own
consolation and reward; and particularly He takes notice of all disgraceful
expressions against His People, which is the particular trial here spoken of:
for, having comforted them against fiery trials, in the former Verse, he here
comfort them against reproach, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ,
happy are ye. 3. Even those who are not put to the hottest kind of sufferings,
are ready to miscarry, and be discouraged under the lesser, because the best
are not easily brought to deny their own strength, till they be under some
extremity, 2 Cor. 1.9. for, this is imported in the Apostle's guarding and
comforting against reproach, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy
are ye. 4. The consideration of the greatness of the reward, which the Lord
graciously bestows upon the least degree of suffering for Him, should make
His People joyfully undergo the greatest and most fiery of their trials; If it
be a happiness to be reproached for His sake, it must be a great happiness to
be killed for his sake: for, the Apostle makes this a reason why they should
rejoice under fiery trials, that to be reproached for Him, was a happy thing;
If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye. 5. It is not the
sufferings of Christians, but the cause for which they do suffer, which makes
them happy, to wit, their suffering for the profession of the Name of Christ,
for adhering to His Truth, and their duty to Him, and out of respect to His
glory: for, this is the qualification of a right sufferer, who may count
himself happy in his sufferings* If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ,
happy are ye. 9. The third Person of the blessed Trinity is glorious in Himself
being God equal with the Father and the Son, 1 John 5 7. and works glorious
effects in the hearts where He dwells, such as the bestowing and increasing
of grace, which is begun glory, 1 Cor. 3.18. giving clear fore-sights of glory,
Ephesians. 1.17. and sometimes sweet fore-tasts thereof, Romans 8.23. In which respects
He is here called, The Spirit of glory, and of God. 7. As the Spirit of the
Lord does constantly abide in the hearts of all Believers, in regard of some of
His operations. Joh. 14.^6. especially in regard of His preserving the seeds
and habits of grace, and keeping the Saints from final apostasy, 1 John 3.9.
So, He has ordinarily a more glorious, and more constant residence, in regard
of His comfortable and supporting operations, in the hearts of sufferers, than
of others; and though he have not tied Himself to fill the hearts of his
suffering-people always with sense and comfort, but may withhold the same from
the dearest of them under their sharpest sufferings, and put them to live by
Faith, as it was with David, and Christ himself, Psalm. 22.1, 2, etc. Yet
oftentimes their allowance of comfort is larger, and their enjoyment of
sensible presence longer than what others have, who are not put to suffer, and
sweeter than what themselves have had before suffering: for, this is here held
forth as an encouragement made out in a special way to sufferers, The Spirit of
glory and of God, rests upon you. 8. The true happiness of Believers
stands in their enjoyment of the presence of Christ's Spirit, residing in
their hearts, and proving Himself to be there by His gracious operations, which
may be had in the midst of sharpest sufferings: the consideration whereof ought
to make great joy in the hearts of sufferers: for, the Apostle having
pronounced such happy, he does explain their happinisse, which is the reason of
their joy under their sufferings, That the Spirit of glory, and of God rests
upon them. 9. The more glorious and constant the residence of Christ's Spirit
in the hearts of His suffering-people appears to be, the more enraged will
their profane persecutors be to speak evil of that Spirit that dwells in
them, which they will be esteemed to do (though they do not expressly blaspheme
the Spirit) when they father the operations of the Spirit upon Satan, Mat.
12.24.28. or, when they wilfully resist and oppose His known mind delivered to
them, by His suffering-people, Act. 7.51. for, though the Spirit of glory, and
of God rest upon these persecuted Saints, Yet, upon the part of their
persecutors He is evil spoken of. 10. It may allay to the Godly, the
bitterness of reproaches, and disgraceful expressions against them, to
consider that by those the Spirit of the Lord counts Himself evil spoken of,
and takes, as done directly against Himself, those wrongs which are done to
His People, who are His Temple, and His workmanship, and will punish wicked men
accordingly: for, this may be taken as a particular encouragement against
reproach, that even the Spirit of God was, upon the part of them that did
reproach His Followers, evil spoken of. 11. The Lord does esteem Himself much
glorified by His Peoples constancy in suffering for Him, while His terror,
sweetness, power, and other properties are proclaimed and commended, by that
practice of His People, in choosing of affliction rather than sin against Him;
and His esteeming so of it, should be a strong motive to cheerfulness and
constancy in suffering for Him: for, this the Apostle expressly asserteth, as an
argument to constancy and cheerfulness under suffering, On your part He is
glorified.

Verse. 15. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters.
Here is a third direction for attaining to a right carriage in a time of
persecution; the sum whereof is, That as they desire to find the sweetness of
the former consolations which the Apostle had held forth to sufferers, they
would keep themselves free of those evils, which even Heathen Magistrates,
under whose power they lived, would readily punish; such as, wronging the
persons, or estates of their neighbors, meddling with things without the bounds
of their calling, and other wickednesses of that sort, So should they be the
less moved with their sufferings. Hence Learn, 1. It is the duty of those who
have power and authority over others, to prove themselves keepers of both the
Tables of the Law of God, by punishing without respect of persons, not only the
grosser sorts of transgressions, such as murder, and theft, whereby men injure
the persons or estates of their neighbors: but also those more subtle and
specious sins, such as invading the rights of others, going beyond the bounds
of folks calling, which often are veiled with the pretenses of zeal for God,
and the public good, Numb. 16.3. which kind of sins the Apostle understands
here, by being busy in other men's matters; Yea, all other known iniquities,
whether against the first Table, such as idolatry, Job 31.26, 27, 28.
blasphemy, Lev. 24.11. Sabbath-breaking, Numb. 15.32. Or against the second,
such as disobedience to parents, Deuteronomy. 21.18, etc. adultery, Job 31.11. All
which, and the like, are iniquities to be punished by the Judge, and are
comprehended here under this general clause, evil doers: for, the Apostle
supposes here, that even Christians, being found guilty of any of those
iniquities, ought to be put to suffer for them, while he gives them this
caution, But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil
doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters. 2. Even natures light will
speak against the toleration of several sorts of evils, and will not suffer men
that have power, and have not put out that light, by frequent sinning against
it, to pass them without punishment; What a shame then is it for these within
the Church to commit such things, or tolerate them in others? For, the Apostle
supposes here, that Christians who lived under Heathen Magistrates, would
certainly be put to suffer by them, if they were found murderers, thieves,
evildoers, or busybodies in other men's matters. 3. As it is the duty of
every one who by their miscarriage have deserved the stroke of humane justice,
willingly to submit to the same, Luke 23.41. So it should be the great care of
the Lord's people to eschew those sins which may draw them under that stroke,
it being a great reproach to Christianity, when the professors of it, are found
guilty of those things, which even Heathens, or such as are no better, cannot
but punish, and a great hardening of wicked men in their evil ways: for which,
and the like causes, the Apostle gives this third direction, But let none of
you suffer as a murderer, etc. 4. Except Christians employ Christ's Spirit to
apply that virtue which He has purchased by His death, for the changing of
their nature, and mortifying of the love of sin in their hearts, and study
watchfulness in their carriage, they will readily break out in those
abominations, for which even Heathens would justly put them to suffer: for,
this direction of the Apostle's, does import, that except Christians did watch
and pray, and make use of Christ's death for mortification of sin within, to
which duties he had stirred them up before they were in hazard to break out in
the sins here mentioned, and so be put to suffer as murderers, thieves,
evildoers, and busybodies in other men's matters.

Verse. 16. Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
let him glorify God on this behalf.
The Apostle gives some further directions for attaining the forementioned
end. The fourth in number, is implied in the beginning of this Verse, That they
should cleave to the profession of the Name and Truth of Christ, carrying
themselves under their sufferings, as His anointed ones; upon which he
infers the fifth, That if they did so suffer, they ought not to be ashamed
of their sufferings; But on the contrary, (which is a sixth direction) they
should take occasion from such sufferings, of giving much glory to God, for
honoring and enabling them so to suffer. Hence Learn, 1. They that would have
true comfort under their sufferings for Christ, must first study to be real
Christians, taught of Christ to know Him, and His will, Act. 11.26. to have
from Him the anointing of His Spirit, 1 John 2.20. whereby they are made in
some measure to resemble Him in His nature and disposition, 1 Cor. 3.18. 2 Pet.
1.4. and in His Offices, to which He is anointed, by having power over their
lusts; and in His strength, overcoming all opposition in the way of their duty,
1 John 5.4. as anointed Kings to God, by offering up themselves in a sacrifice
to God. Romans 12.1. and their service through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. as a
spiritual Priesthood; by communicating the knowledge of Christ to others,
especially those under their charge, Genesis 18.19. whereby they do resemble Him
in the exercise of his Prophetical Office; and especially to be conform to Him,
in suffering for Him, and showing forth that meekness and constancy, and other
of His communicable perfections, which shined in Him under his sufferings,
avowing his Name, and Offices, to which He is anointed, upon all hazards: for,
this is to suffer as a Christian (whose name is an anointed one) which the
Apostle here implies as necessary for all that would taste the sweetness of the
former consolations; But if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed. 2. Profane Christians who may be justly put to suffer for their
faults, are very ready to entitle themselves to the honor of suffering for
Christ; and therefore, it concerns Christ's Ministers to clear the cause of
suffering, in which Christians may comfort themselves, and the right manner of
suffering for a right cause: for, the Apostle in this, and the preceding Verse,
sets a guard about the former consolations given to sufferers for Christ,
lest they might be usurped by profane professors, justly put to suffer for
their miscarriage; Let none of you suffer as a murderer, etc. but if any man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. 3. There is no shame or contempt
that the world can pour upon sufferers for Christ, whereof they ought to be
ashamed, but rather to despise shame for Him, as He did for us, Heb. 12.2. as
they would not have Him dealing with them as if He were ashamed of them another
day, Mark 8.38. for, this is the fifth direction; If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed. 4. When the Lord by His providence brings a
necessity upon Christians of suffering for Him, and his Truth, and by his grace
enableth them to carry themselves christianly under the same, they owe much
praise and glory to Him for putting that honor upon them: especially
considering, that His grace alone has prevented their falling in those sins,
which might justly have brought them to no less suffering, and with far less
credit and comfort, than now, while they are put to suffer for Christ, and
their duty to Him: for, this is the sixth direction, Let him glorify God on
this behalf, to wit, that he is put to suffer not as a thief, or a murderer,
but as a Christian.

Verse. 17. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the House of God:
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God?
Here are two further arguments to move the Godly to courage and constancy
under their sufferings; the one is, That now God's appointed and fit
opportunity was come, wherein he would have his just displeasure against the
sins of men, beginning first to kyth in his own family the Church, under the
New Testament, by trouble and persecution, for the correction and trial of his
own; and therefore they had no reason to faint under these trials, seeing the
time of them was of God's appointment, and that the Godly were only to endure
the beginning of that which would make an end of their persecutors. The other
argument is, That seeing God's just displeasure against sin, was first
manifested toward his own People, the end of their wicked enemies behoved to be
unspeakably terrible, and therefore they had no reason to fear sufferings from
them, nor to join with them in their evil ways to eschew the same. Hence
Learn, 1. Trouble and persecution cannot arise in the Church when wicked men
please to plot it, or set a time to the beginning of it, were their power,
policy and malice never so great, but only when that fit and prefixed
opportunity (as the word here signifies) is come, which has been condescended
upon in the eternal council of God, who has also determined how long the
troubles of the Church shall continue, Hab. 2.3. and at what period of time
they shall end, Psalm. 10^.13. The consideration whereof should quiet and
comfort the hearts of the Godly under their sufferings: for, it is here held
forth, as a ground of cheerful submission to a suffering lot, that the time
prefixed and fittest for that business (as the word signifies) ^s come. 2.
The Church is the House of God, whereof himself is both the Builder, Psalm.
147.2. and the Foundation and chief cornerstone, Isa. 28.16. wherein he
delights to dwell, Psalm. 132.14. and which he will therefore protect and
defend, Zech. 2.5. wherein there should be every thing belonging to a
well-ordered family, 1 Timothy 3.15. especially holiness in the members thereof,
Psalm. 93.5. for, so the Church is here called. The House of God. 3. As the Lord
is pleased sometimes to begin his judgments at the sins of men without the
Church, that thereby his own may take warning, Zeph. 3.6, 7. So he sees it
fitting at some other times to take another method, and to begin at his own
Church with sore corrections, while his enemies (who must drink the dregs of
that cup, whereof his own taste but a little, Psalm. 75.8. Jer. 25.29. and
17.18.) are spared, that he may make use of them as a rod wherewith to scourge
his Children, Isa. 10.5.12. that he may prove himself impartially just in
correcting the sins of his own, which are oftentimes more dishonorable to him
than the sins of others, Amos 3.2. for which, and the like causes, it is, that
judgment must begin at the House of God. 4. Although there be no vindictive
wrath in any of the troubles and sufferings of the Godly, since Christ has
born that to the full, Romans 5.9. and so all his paths toward his own, and
consequently even persecution it self, must be mercy and truth, Psalm. 25.10.
Yet those calamities wherewith the Lord exercises his visible Church, may be
called judgments, not only because they are properly such, to many wicked and
profane, with whom God deals by these calamities, as a just Judge punishing
unpardoned i^^^ities, and because that same calamity, which ^s a merciful trial
to the Godly, will be turned in a judgment to their persecutors; as the Apostle
imports in the latter part of this Verse, but also because even persecution
it self, and suffering for Christ and his Truth, in reference to the Godly, as
they are always acts of the Lord's love to them Heb. 12.6. So they may be also
acts of his holy justice, correcting and humbling them for those iniquities
which he has pardoned, Psalm. 99.8. so that those same sufferings which the
Godly endure for Christ and his Truth, may be to them also fatherly
chastisements for their faults, which in Scripture are called judgments, even
upon the Godly, Psalm. 119.75. for, here the Apostle, speaking of the trials and
sufferings of the Godly says, Judgment must begin at the House of God. 5. The
trials and hard exercises of the Church are certain forerunners of a woeful
end, abiding the instruments thereof, when the Lord has done his work by them;
the consideration whereof should keep the Lord's People from fainting under
their sufferings from wicked men, and from inclining to join with them in their
evil ways for present case; for, if judgment first begin at us, what shall the
end be of them that obey not the Gospel? 6. As the end of all wicked men, even
of these who have not heard the Gospel, shall be everlasting destruction
because they have not made use of those natural impressions of God, and his
Will, that are left in them, Psalm. 9.17. So the judgment abiding those who have
heard the Gospel, and would not suffer themselves to be persuaded to embrace
the blessed offers made therein, nor give up themselves to Christ's obedience,
(which is the description the Apostle gives of those whom he here threatens*
supposing them to have been hearers of the Gospel) shall be so terrible, as no
words can express; Therefore the Apostle uses this question, which none can
answer What shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel?

Verse. 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear?
Here the Apostle clears his former argument, to this purpose, That if even
justified persons, and holy walkers, had such a hard lot in the world, that
they could not but with great difficulty, and through many fiery trials win to
the Kingdom of Heaven. Those who did cast off all Religion, and gave themselves
up to all wickedness, might expect in the day of God's reckoning with them, to
find no place to shelter themselves from his everlasting wrath; and therefore
there was no reason why the Godly should fear them, or join with them in their
evil ways, to shun sufferings from them, seeing their end should be so
terrible. Hence Learn, 1. Although the salvation of all that fly to Christ,
and take themselves to the study of holiness, be most sure, in regard of
Christ's undertaking to cause them persevere till they come to it, Joh. 10.28.
and the way to that salvation be in it self sweet, Prove. 3.17. and in regard of
Christ's large allowance of strength and comfort, easy to the renewed man,
Mat. 11.30. Yet, considering the many fiery trials that are in the way, and the
Believers own weakness, it is no easy matter for them to win through to the
possession thereof; The consideration of which difficulty should be so far from
discouraging them in the way, that it should provoke them to put on much
resolution to hold on that way in Christ's strength, notwithstanding all
difficulties: for, not the possibility of the Elects losing salvation, but the
difficulty of attaining it, by reason of many trials, and their own weakness,
is imported in this expression, as a motive to constancy, If the righteous
scarcely be saved, etc. 2. While the Lord's People are suffering, and wicked
persons prospering, they should put their hearts frequently to consider how
woeful, and unspeakably terrible the end of these wicked enemies must be, when
they shall be forced to appear before their Judge, and shall find no place to
shelter them from his fierce wrath, which shall pursue them to Hell, and
torment them there for ever; that by such thoughts the suffering-Children of
God, may be moved neither to envy them for their present prosperity, nor
incline to join with them in their sinful courses, for eschewing trouble from
them, Psalm. 37.1, 2, etc. and 73.2, 17. but rather to endure sufferings from
them, that they may not share with them in their woeful end: for, that the
Godly might not run with their prospering persecutors to the same excess of
riot, nor faint under sufferings from them, The Apostle does again represent to
their hearts the consideration of their unspeakably terrible end, by this other
question, Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 3. The consideration
of this difficulty in the way of the Godlie's salvation, is sufficient to
convince us, that their end must be unspeakably terrible, who are so far from
taking paint to be saved, that they shake off all duties of Religion, as the
word, ungodly, signifies; and give themselves up to all wickedness, as the
word, sinners, does import, and so have their own destruction: for, so much is
imported in the connection of the first part of this Verse, with the latter; If
the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

Verse. 19. Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their souls to Him in well doing as unto a faithful Creator.
Lest the sharpness of the trials, whereof the Apostle gave fore-warning in
the former words, and the difficulty of attaining salvation by reason thereof,
might discourage the hearts of the Godly; The Apostle gives here the seventh
and last direction, which is, That they should give up their souls to the
keeping of their Lord, f^r whom they suffered, and so hold on in their duty,
notwithstanding of sufferings: and this direction the Apostle bears in by two
arguments; the one is, That whatever they did suffer, was carved out to them,
not by the lust of men, but by the good will of their God. The other is, That
under their sufferings for well-doing, they might be at quietness concerning
the eternal salvation of their souls, and their through-bearing till they come
to the possession thereof, having put them in his hand, who is both able to
save them, having made them, and all things, of nothing; and in testimony of
his good will to save them, has engaged his faithfulness in his Promises for
that end: and therefore Believers had no reason but to go on cheerfully and
constantly in their duty, notwithstanding of all their sufferings. Hence Learn,
1. The consideration of the difficulty that is in the way of the salvation of
the Lord's People, by reason of the many fiery trials they have to go through,
should stir them up to make sure work about their souls, by putting them in
Christ's hand, so shall they have courage and strength under their sufferings:
for, this last direction is inferred upon the former purpose, as the first word
makes clear, Wherefore, let them that suffer, etc. commit the keeping of their
souls to Him. 2. The Lord's People should more highly esteem of, and be more
solicitous about, the preservation of their souls, especially in a troublesome
time, than of all things else in the world; it being a special part of heavenly
wisdom and prudence, to ensure that by faith, putting it in Christ's hand, So
will they be sure of quietness of spirit under all their sufferings, Psalm.
31.5. and will value the less, other losses, their best Jewel being in safety,
2 Timothy 1.12. for, the Spirit of God does not mind them of taking course to
preserve other things, knowing they were ready to spend too much of their care
that way in an evil time, but gives them this direction for quieting their
hearts, however other things went: Commit the keeping of your souls to Him. 3.
They that have committed the keeping of their souls to Jesus Christ, as they
would have comfort under their sufferings, must hold on in the way of
well-doing; considering, that however their souls that are committed to him,
cannot be lost, yet their assurance and comfort cannot be kept but in that way:
therefore the Apostle qualifieth this direction, Commit the keeping of your
souls to Him in well doing. 4. They who from the sense of their souls hazard to
perish, for any ability themselves have to preserve them, and from their desire
to have their soul (...) ^^fety above all other things, do by faith, put them
in the hand of a Savior for mercy and salvation; and having so done, do betake
themselves, in his strength, to the way of their duty, whatever they may suffer
in it, they need not doubt of Christ's taking the charge and custody of the
soul thus committed to him: for, that they may be confident he will take the
charge of them, and safely keep what is committed to him, he thus by his
Spirit, speaking through the Apostle, commands, Commit the keeping of your
souls to Him. 5. The sufferings of the Lord's People come not according to the
lust and will of their adversaries, but are measured out, and ordered by the
will of the Lord, which is always a good will toward his own, making all
things work for their good, Romans 8.28. The consideration whereof should hearten
them under all their sufferings: for, this is here asserted as an argument to
constancy and cheerfulness under their sufferings, that they did suffer
according to the will of God. 6. They that would have courage under their
sufferings from powerful adversaries, must by faith lay hold upon God's
Omnipotency, manifested in the works of Creation; The consideration whereof
cannot but give strength and courage to Believers under their sufferings, they
having the Lord, and all his Properties engaged to be forthcoming for them in
the Covenant of Grace; and especially, considering that their through-bearing
and deliverance cannot but be easy to Him, who made all of nothing: for, that
the Apostle may encourage sufferers, he represents the Lord to their faith,
under the consideration of a Creator. 7. The consideration of the Lord's
faithfulness in keeping of his Promises, is a strong pillar of the Saints
confidence, that they shall be well born through all their trials, seeing his
good will has moved him expressly to pawn his faithfulness for every thing
they need; particularly, for pardoning their sin, upon their confession, 1 John
1.9. for enabling them to the duties of holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. and for
bearing them through all their sufferings, 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2, 3. for,
this consideration of the Lord, joined with that of his Omnipotency, is here
held forth to the faith of sufferers, as a strong ground of their confidence,
anent the safety of their souls, and their being well born through all their
trials; He is a faithful Creator.

CHAP. V.
THis Chapter has three parts. In the first, the Apostle (having insinuate
himself upon the Officers of the Church, ver. 1.) persuades them to the prime
duties of their Calling, and disswadeth them from the main evils incident to
them, ver. 2, 3. by the consideration of the glorious reward abiding Christ's
faithful Servants, ver. 4.

In the second part, he presses the duties of the slock, that they should be
subject to their Officers, and one of them to another; that they should study
humility, which he urges by several arguments, ver. 5, 6. that they should
trust God with their thorow-bearing in these duties, ver. 7. and prepare
themselves for the battle against Satan, their cruel and restless adversary,
ver. 8. by faith opposing all his temptations, notwithstanding of afflictions
in that way, considering that all the rest of the Saints were their
fellow soldiers in this warfare, ver. 9.

The third part, contains the close of the whole Epistle, wherein the Apostle
prays for their perseverance and perfection, ver. 10. praises in confidence
of hearing, ver. 11. commends the bearer of the Epistle, and the Epistle it
self, ver. 12. delivers commendation to them from other Saints, ver. 13.
exhorts them to mutual expressions of love, and wishes unto them all true
happiness, ver. 14.

Verse. 1. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed.
THe Apostle, being to pr^sse the duty of the Church Officers, he does in the
first place insinuate himself upon them, by drawing several reasons from his
own person, to make his following exhortations have the more weight with them;
The first is, That he who was so earnest with them, had the same Office with
them, to the duties whereof he did excite them The second is, That he had been
an eyewitness of Christ's suff rings for the Church; which did oblige him,
and all Christ's Servants, to faithfulness. The third is, That he did by faith
share with them, and other Believers, of the right unto, and first fruits of,
that blessedness which Christ had purchased, and will in due time manifest to
his Redeemed Ones: All which considerations might move them to take an
up-stirring message well off his hand. Hence Learn, 1. Even in the midst of
persecution, and while the Lord's People are in exile, and under the power of
enemies to the Truth, the Lord can keep up a standing Ministry, and his
Ordinances among them, in despite of Satan and all his instruments: for, the
Apostle; writing to the dispersed, and persecuted Christian Jews supposes them
to have Officers, and those Officers to have opportunity of going about their
duty, while he thus exhorts them to it, The Elders which are among you I
exhort, etc. 2. Even those whose calling it is, to stir up others to their
duty, and in whom there is no such remarkable defect in the discharge of their
duty, as deserves any public notice to be taken of it, have notwithstanding,
great need to be very earnestly stirred up to greater diligence and progress
in their duty, than what they have already attained, there being in the best,
even of Christ's Ministers, a strong party drawing them back from their duty,
Mat. 26.41. and at their best much short-coming in what they might attain unto,
Philip. 3.12, 13. for, here the Spirit of the Lord, whose love makes him
publish the faults of his dearest Servants, when it is necessary, Rev. 2.4.
Although he see it not meet before the Church in this Epistle, to reprove the
Officers for any failing, Yet does he by his Apostle very earnestly stir them
up to their duty: The Elders which are among you I exhort, etc. 3. The duties
of Ministers, and other Office-bearers of the Church, ought to be pressed upon
them in the hearing of the People, that so those Officers may be the more
engaged to their duty, and the People the more able to discern betwixt those of
them that are conscionable in the discharge of their duty, and others that are
not; Therefore the Apostle does not satisfy himself to write to the
Church Officers concerning their duty in any private Letter, directed to
themselves alone, but does insist upon their duty in this public Letter,
directed to the whole Church; and while he begins to deal with the Officers,
he directs his speech to the People, The Elders which are among you I exhort,
etc. 4. Those that bear Office in the House of God, ought to be such as are
come to some maturity of age, and such as are of some considerable standing in
the profession of Christianity, See 1 Timothy 3.6. and especially such, as for
their wisdom, experience, and gravity may deserve that reverence and respect
which is suitable for the aged: for, this style of Presbyters or Elders, here
given to the Officers of the Church, may be safely conceived both to point at
their age, and their qualifications suitable to the aged, The Elders that are
among you. 5. Christ's Ministers have not only the charge of his Flock, but
also of their Fellow Laborers with whom they have society or correspondence in
the Work of the Lord, and so are bound to stir up and encourage one another in
their duty: for, th^^ Apostle does not only press the duty of the People, b^
also of their Church Officers; and while he does it, represents himself as a
Fellow-presbyter, or Colleague with other ordinary Ministers; The Elders which
are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder. 6. No Minister of Jesus Christ
ought to affect or usurp any superiority over other Ministers, considering how
much Christ was displeased with it in his own Disciples, Mat. 20.25, 26. And
that this great Apostle, from whom the Antichristian Church pretends her
warrant for Prelacy among Ministers, while he speaks to other
Church Officers, holds forth himself only as their equal, Who am also an
Elder. 7. As the Ministers of Christ ought to take well with exhortation to
their duty, even from the people under their charge, who, though they have no
jurisdiction over their Officers, to call them to a judicial account, or
inflict censures upon them for their faults, which does belong to their
Fellow-presbyters, 1 Cor. 14.32. Yet they have good warrant to warn them of
their duty, and incite them to it, with due reverence and modesty suitable to
their station, Col. 4.17. So should they receive counsel and warning,
especially from their Fellow Laborers, who ought to have more courage and
skill than ordinarily the people have, to point out the duty of
Church Officers, and ought to be looked upon by other Officers who hear them
point out their duty, as having a calling from God through virtue of their
Office so to do: for, the Apostle speaking to the Officers of the Church, makes
this an argument to prevail with them, that he who brought this message, was
also an Elder. 8. It is no easy thing for one of Christ's Ministers to prevail
with others of that same sacred Calling, by counsel and exhortation, every one
of them being apt to lift up themselves above another, Luke 22.24. and at the
apprehension of that frame of spirit in their Fellow Laborers, to have their
passions stirred against them, Mat. 20.24. The consideration whereof should
move every Minister to much humility and loving-earnestnesse in dealing with
their Fellow Laborers: for, the Apostle does here use many insinuations upon
the Church-guides, as arguments to bear-in his following exhortations upon
them, thereby importing some difficulty of prevailing with them, and is very
humbly earnest with them, thereby casting a copy to one Minister how to deal
with another, as is imported in the signification of these words, The Elders
which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder. 9. It pleased our Redeemer
to suffer before witnesses, both in his agony in the Garden, Mat. 26.37. and
upon the Cross, Mat. 27.39. and likewise to employ some of these Witnesses to
preach Him crucified to the Church, thereby condescending to beget the greater
certainty in the hearts of Believers, that God's justice is satisfied for them,
Act. 5.30, 31. to give us the more lively description of his sufferings, Act.
3.15. and to let us know that he has born shame for us, as a part of the
punishment due to our sins, Heb. 12.2. for which, and the like causes, the
Apostle calls himself here, A Witness of the sufferings of Christ. 10.
However these whom the Lord makes most instrumental to gain others to himself,
may expect a special reward from him, Dan. 12.3. Yet everlasting blessedness,
or glory, is not a thing proper to them alone, but is the common portion of all
faithful Ministers, and Believers in Jesus Christ: for, the Apostle only
calls himself a partaker, (or, as the word signifies, a sharer together with
others, to wit, the flock of Christ, to whom his speech is directed, and their
Officers, whose duty he presses) of the glory that shall be revealed. 11.
Although the Saints, in this mortal state, could not well endure the least
glimpse of glory, much less partake of it, as they shall do afterward, Mark
9.6. Yet even while they are in the midst of much outward misery, and in the
expectation of more, they have a right, and may attain unto some real
participation of glory, while they are by faith united with Christ the Lord of
glory, Col. 1.27. and do sometimes taste of the first fruits of that whereupon
glorified spirits do live, Rev. 2.17. for, the Apostle, a persecuted man, and
looking for martyrdom 2 Pet. 1.14. calls himself a partaker (or sharer with
other Believers) of the glory that shall be revealed. 12. Although Christ's
Ministers should detest the seeking of their own glory before the world, as
they desire to resemble their Master, Joh. 8.50. and the best of his Servants,
1 Thessalonians. 2.6. Yet may they humbly assert any special honor that Christ has
put upon them, when it is manifest that their so doing may tend to his glory,
and the advantage of the message they carry: for, that the Apostle may make way
for the receiving of the message which he has to the Church-guides, he does
commend himself from the honor Christ had put upon him, to be a personal
witness of his sufferings, and a partaker of the glory to be revealed. 13. The
greater certainty of the Truth, and comfort by it, appear to be in them that
deliver it, and the more charity they may express concerning the good estate
of those to whom they do deliver it, the better acceptance, and success of
their message, may they expect: for, the Apostle, that his message might be the
better taken, represents himself as one to whom the truth of the Gospel was
most certain, he being a witness of the sufferings of Christ, as one that had
much courage and comfort in adhering to it, and much charity toward those with
whom he deals as being a co-partner with them of the glory to be revealed.

Verse. 2. Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind.

3. Neither as being lords over Gods heritage: but being ensamples to the flock.


The Apostle, having insinuated himself in the former Verse, upon the Officers
of the Church, that so his counsel here might have the better acceptance with
them, he does in the next place branch out particularly their duty, exhorting
them to feed the Lord's People with his Truth, and rule them by his Discipline;
both which, are in the signification of the first word: and that these might be
the better done, he presses them to take diligent inspection of the manners
and several conditions of the people: which duties he beareth-in by an argument
taken from the relation that the People of their charge had to the Lord, as
being his Flock; and withal, points out the right manner of going about
these duties, in six several directions; one whereof is still negative,
dissuading from some evil, incident to men of that calling; and another
positive, persuading to the study of some necessary qualification requisite in
such, to wit, first, That they should not go about their duty, as if they were
forced unto it; But secondly, from an inward inclination to serve their Master,
and profit his People. Thirdly, not from so base an end as their outward gain;
But, fourthly, from a heart fitted by Jesu-Christ for their duty. Fifthly, that
they should not affect any dominion over the Lord's People; But sixthly, in
their whole carriage cast them a copy of holy and humble walking. Hence Learn,
1. Every Minister of Christ ought both to be able to feed his People with his
saving Truth, Jer. 3.15. rightly divided, and applied 2 Timothy 2.15. to every one
of them, according to their several conditions, Mat. 24.45. which is no less
necessary for cherishing and increasing their spiritual life, than their
ordinary food in season is for their bodi s, Job 23.12. And likewise they ought
to have wisdom authority and equity, for ruling of the Lord's People by the
right exercise of discipline, and application of censures: for, both feeding
and ruling is expressed by one word in both the original languages, to signify
that they are jointly requisite in every Minister, whose duty here is mainly
held forth, Feed the Flock, etc. 2. It is not enough for the Ministers of
Christ to hold forth sound and saving Truths to his People, in their doctrine,
and to rule them by the application of censures and discipline, unless they
also take diligent inspection of their manners, and of their several conditions
and necessities, by frequent conversing with, and visiting of them, as this
other word, holding forth their duty, signifies, without which they can
neither apply the Truth, nor censures to the People as they ought: for, this is
the second principal part of Church Officers duty, especially Ministers, toward
the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof. 3. It should provoke Ministers
to fidelity and diligence in their Calling, to consider that the People of
their Charge, are the Flock of God, who therefore will provide for them, Isa.
40.11. and will be very terrible to them that have the charge of them, in case
they slight or wrong them, Ezekiel. 34.2, 10. etc. for, to move the
Church Officers to faithfulness and painfulnesse in their duty, the Apostle
thus designeth the People of their charge, The Flock of God. 4. Although none
that are sensible of their own weakness, and the weight of the charge of
souls, will be very forward to thrust themselves into that employment, Exodus
3.11. Jer. 1.6. Yet, being once called to it, and engaged therein, they should
not go about the duties thereof, as being constrained thereunto by their fears,
lest they discover their own weakness, or lest they fall under the censure of
others, or lest their own conscience may vex them for neglect of their duty:
for, this is the first evil from which the Apostle disswadeth Christ's
Ministers, as that which would mar the right manner of going about their duty,
Not by constraint. 5. There should be in the heart of every faithful-Minister,
so much love to Jesus Christ, arising from the sense of his personal obligation
to him, 2 Cor. 5.14. and so great a desire of the salvation of souls, 1 Cor.
10.33. as may beget in him such a strong inclination, and inward bensel of
spirit to his duty, that though there were no external consideration of gain,
glory, or the like, to hold him on, Yet may he not be suffered to neglect it:
for, this is the first positive qualification of a, Minister going rightly
about his duty, But willingly. 6. Although Christ's Ministers may with his
allowance challenge from the People under their charge, a competent means of
outward subsistence, according to their ability, 1 Cor. 9.14. Yet for any of
the Ministers of Christ to make their worldly gain their great inducement to
undertake that Calling, or their prime encouragement in going about the Duties
of it, is a filthy frame of spirit, which appears to be in them when they
streatch themselves to the utmost to please them most, from whom they expect
most gain, Numb. 23.1. and to oppose and discourage others, from whom they
expect least, Mic. 3.5. for, from this evil, as abominable to God, detestable
to faithful Ministers, and a thing that indisposeth them for the right
discharge of their duty, the Apostle here does dissuade in the third direction,
Not for filthy lucre. 7. A Minister of Christ that would go rightly about his
duty, must ly in wait for every opportunity thereof, keeping himself in some
fitness of disposition, for every part of his Calling, whether the opportunity
of discharging the particular duties thereof do presently offer or not, as is
imported in the fourth direction, which is positive; But of a ready mind. 8. It
is an evil to be abhorred by all that would expect the reward of faithful
Ministers, to affect or usurp any lordship or dominion, whether over their
Fellow Laborers, which appears in their seeking preference over them, 3 John
9. or over the People of their charge; which appears, by their taking a way
with people rather to compel them to subjection to the Gospel, than to persuade
them to it, contrary to the Apostles practice, 1 Cor. 4.21. 2 Cor. 12.20. by
their making use of the Word, or Discipline, to vent their own private revenge,
or to carry their point by mere violence, and outwearying of those that oppose
them, Ezekiel. 34.4. contrary to the Apostle's precept, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. for, this
is the third evil the Apostle disswadeth from, in his fifth direction, Neither
as being lords over God's heritage. 9. The Church and People of God are his
inheritance, which he has purchased to himself with his blood, Act. 20.28. in
which, he is the only Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. and therefore will never cast off
or alienate the same, Psalm. 94.14. The consideration whereof should make all
afraid to lord it over his People, or to appropriate this style to themselves,
which is here given to all the Lord's People, as a motive to their Overseers to
diligence, and a disswasive from usurping dominion over them; Neither as being
lords over God's heritage. 10. That which does much complete the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, is, when with their abilities to teach, and rule, and other
inward qualifications, they have also such an external conversation, as may be
alluring to the Flock to follow, and worthy of their imitation, while they
express in their practice, the graces of God to be in their heart, such as
faith and love, 1 Timothy 4.12. patience under personal injuries, 1 Cor. 4.16.
humility, and self-denial for the good of others, 1 Cor. 10.33. and 11.1. for,
this is the Apostle's last direction, without which all the rest (suppose they
could be where this is wanting) would do little good, But being ensamples to
the Flock.

Verse. 4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away.
The Apostle, having cleared the duty of the Officers of the Church, he gives
them here in the close of the first part of the Chapter, some strong motives to
fidelity and diligence therein; As first, That there was a higher Shepherd than
they, to wit, Jesus Christ the Prince of Pastors, to take an account of them.
Secondly That if they were found faithful and diligent in their duty, they
might be sure of an eminent degree of glory from Christ at his second coming.
Thirdly, That that glorious reward should remain always the same in it self,
and be eternally possessed by them. Hence Learn, 1. The most eminent of Christ's
Servants have no less need of encouragement in their duty, than the meanest
under their charge; their trials and temptations being often greater than
others, Luke 22.31. and they no less subject to discouragement, by reason of
these than others, Cor. 7. -- 5, 6. Therefore the Spirit of the Lord finds it
necessary here to give them encouragement, as he did to the Flock before, Chap.
4.13, 14. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown.
2. Jesus Christ is the chief Shepherd, the Prince of Pastors, the prime Feeder
and Ruler (as the word signifies) of his own Flock, from whom all the
Under-shepherds, the Officers of his House, have their Commission, Mat. 28.18,
19. their furniture or gifts, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. and to whom they must all give an
account, Heb. 13.17. who takes the prime charge of his own Flock, Isa. 40.11.
and will supply to them the defects of the Shepherds under Him, Ezekiel. 34.11. In
all which respects he is here called the chief Shepherd. 3. Albeit the Lord
uses to give in hand unto his faithful Servants worth all their pains in his
service, either by letting them see some success of their labors, 2 Cor.
2.14. or by giving them inward peace from the faith of his approbation, when
desired success is wanting, Isa. 49. -- 4. Yet he would have them taking their
prime encouragement, from what they shall get when he and they meet: for, to
the consideration of this the Apostle here leads all the Servants of Christ;
When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory. 4. The
reward abiding Christ's faithful Ministers, wherein all the lovers of Christ
shall share in their own measure, 2 Timothy 4. -- 8. shall be exceeding complete
and glorious, as the metaphor of a Crown of glory signifies, and such as shall
never fade or wax old, but unto all eternity shall remain still in its
primitive vigor, as if a flower should still keep its fairest luster, and
sweetest smell; which metaphor, is also in the words: and this may comfort them
against the fading of their reputation among men, which is incident to the
best, Joh. 5. -- 35. Gal. 4.16. for, this is here given to the Church-guides,
as their great encouragement, that they are to receive a crown of glory, which
fades not away.

Verse. 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder: yea, all of
you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for, God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
The Apostle, having in the former part of the Chapter, exhorted the Officers
of the Church to their duty; In the second part, he points out the duties of
the flock, whom he designeth by the name of younger, not only because the most
part of them are ordinarily younger in years, than their Officers; but, mainly,
because in their disposition and carriage toward their Overseers, they should
show some resemblance of that reverence and obedience, which is suitable in
young ones, toward the aged; And their duty he holds forth in six directions.
The first which belongs to them, considered only as they are under the charge
of their Officers, is, subjection to them in the Lord, which imports
obedience to their message, and respect to their persons. The second, which
concerns them mainly as fellow members of the Church, is, mutual subjection of
one to another in all the duties of love. The third, which holds forth the
special mean of attaining to the former two, is, that they should adorn
themselves with a mean esteem of themselves: and this the Apostle presses by
two arguments; The one is, that the Lord opposes himself to them that lift up
themselves. And the other is, that he gives his favor and grace to them that
abase themselves. Hence Learn, 1. It is the duty of the Lord's People, to be
subject to their Rulers whom he has set over them in his Church, by submitting
to the duties which they press upon them from the Word, Heb. 13.22. and to the
censures they inflict according to the Word, 2 Cor. 2.9. by affording them some
means of outward subsistence, Gal. 6.6. and by giving some respect to their
persons, because of their Office, 1 Cor. 4.1. in respect whereof, they are
lifted up by the Lord above his People, as the word here signifies: for, the
substance of the duty of the flock to their Church Officers, is here by the
Apostle comprehended in this one word, Be subject. 2. Whether the Members of
the Church be younger or elder in years, they should, in reference to their
Overseers, resemble that disposition and carriage, which beseems young ones
toward the elder, in their earnest desire of the Word, and means of salvation
administered by them, chap. 2.3. by depending upon them, as instruments, for
counsel in their difficult cases, Mal. 2.7. calling for their help and
assistance under their crosses, Jam. 5.14. and by their meek submission to
censures from them, Heb. 13.17. for, it is mainly in respect of the resemblance
that should be betwixt the disposition of the Flock in reference to their
Pastors and Overseers, and that of Children toward their Parents, or such as
have the charge of them, that the Apostle thus designeth them; Ye younger be
subject to the elder. 3. The obligation of the Lord's People to their duty
toward their Overseers, is no less strait, than that of their Overseers to
their duty toward them, and therefore their hazard in neglecting their duty can
be no less than theirs: for, the Apostle bears in their duty upon them
toward their Overseers, by such a word as imports an equality in the
strictness of the tie, Likewise ye younger be subject to the elder. 4. There
is a mutual subjection due by every one of the Lord's People toward another,
which consists in their condescendency to reprove one another in love, for
their faults, Lev. 19.17. their instructing and admonishing one another
concerning their duty, Col. 3.16. in their taking well with reproofs and
admonitions one from another, Psalm. 141.5. and in their stooping to all the
duties of charity one toward another, Gal. 5. -- 13. and the like. All which is
comprehended in this second direction given to the Members of the Church, in
reference to their fellow members; Yea, all of you be subject one to another.
5. However men appointed for destruction, do glory in their pride and violence,
wherewith they think themselves adorned, Psalm. 73.6. 18, 19. Yet the grace of
humility, whereby a Christian has a mean esteem of himself, flowing from the
sense of his own sinfulness, 1 Cor. 15.9. and of the undeserved goodness of
God, 2 Samuel 7.18, 20 whereby he is inclined to prefer others to himself, Romans
12.10. not desiring more esteem from others than God allows him to have, 1
Cor. 3.5. and 4.6. and takes well with all chastisements from God as less
than his deserving, Ezr. 9.13. is the prime ornament of Christians, which they
should tie about them, and delight to wear, as the word here signifies, and be
no less ashamed to appear without, than without their clothing; Be clothed
with humility. 6. There can be no right discharge of any duty that the Lord's
People owe to Superiors, inferiors, or equals, until they get from God that
humble frame of spirit, formerly described: for, this exhortation may be taken
for a mean of attaining to the former duties; And be clothed with humility. 7.
Although the Lord may suffer proud sinners to prosper in their sins for a time,
Psalm. 73.4, 5. Yet he does still stand in battle array (as the word here
translated, to resist, signifies) against them, and will take his fittest
opportunity to bear down all that live in that sin of pride, which does
manifest it self in the slighting of the study of reconciliation with God
through Christ, Psalm. 10.4. the neglect of clear duties pressed by the Word, Neh.
9.16, 17, 29. and in unthankfulness to God for his mercies, 2 Chronicles. 32.25,
26. The consideration of which opposition from God, should make the study of
humility, lovely; and pride, hateful to the Lord's People, as they would not
have God for their party: for, this is a reason to press humility, God
resists the proud. 8. The sweet proofs of God's favor, and the increase of
the graces of his Spirit, is that which every humble sinner may expect, which
should commend the grace of humility to them, and make them study the exercise
of it: for, both these are comprehended in this second argument, pressing them
to put on this ornament, God gives grace to the humble.

Verse. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time.
The Apostle does here again urge his former exhortation to the study of
humility, especially under the cross, by two further arguments, The one taken
from the omnipotency of God, which is able to crush the proud, and carry the
humble through all their straits. The other from the certain^y of the humble
person's deliverance, which is promised in the season fittest for it. Hence
Learn, 1. Humility is a lesson so hard to be learned, that Christ's Ministers
had need to press the same frequently upon his People, and study many
arguments to bear it in upon them: for, the Apostle, having in the former
verse, by very strong reasons, persuaded them to clothe themselves with that
ornament, he does here again by other arguments, press the same in substance;
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, etc. 2. The consideration of
the mighty power of God, which is sufficiently able to protect and bear through
all his Followers, Joh. 10.28. and to find out, and punish all that oppose him,
or them, Psalm. 21.8, 9. should move the Lord's people humbly to submit to their
duty, and to the hardest dispensation in following thereof: for, his Almighty
Power, here signified by his Hand, is mentioned as a further reason of his
Peoples humbling of themselves; Humble your selves therefore under the mighty
hand of God. 3. Although the Lord's People who have attained to some approven
measure of the exercise of this grace of humility, under their straits, may not
expect a present deliverance out of them, Hab. 2.1, 3. Yet their delivery is
made sure for them, and they are certified by his faithful Word, that they
shall be carried through till they meet with it: for, though he do not promise
here to the humble, that they shall be presently exalted, Yet he makes them
sure of this, that if they humble themselves under his mighty hand, they shall
be exalted. 4. The deliverance of the Lord's humble People comes always to
them in the fittest time, which is, when the Lord has perfected his work
intended by their affliction, Isa. 10.12. particularly when they are brought to
that measure of humiliation, to which by their straits the Lord intends to
bring them, Lev. 26.41. when they are prepared by their straits to put a due
price upon a delivery, Psalm. 102.13, 14. and when the cup of their enemies
iniquity is full, Genesis 15.16, for, this word signifies both the opportunity
fixed, and fittest for the exaltation of the humble, He shall exalt you in due
time.

Verse. 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.
The fourth direction, which is brought in as a special mean of attaining to
the former, is, that Believers should by faith commit unto the Lord their
thorow-bearing in their duty, the event thereof, and all their anxiety about
these; and that because the Lord's loving providence does not suffer him to
neglect them, or any of their concernments. Hence Learn, 1. The Children of the
Lord are subject to much sinful anxiety in following of their duty; which
appears when they are hindered from their duty, by looking more to their own
weakness, and the difficulties in the way of duty, than to the sufficiency
promised by him that calls them to it, Exodus 3.11. or when they are
discouraged in their duty by the apprehension of probable hazards in the way of
it, Isa. 51.12, 13. of which evil the Spirit of the Lord would have them
sensible, while he finds it necessary thus to exhort them; Casting all your
care on him. 2. Although it be most commendable in Christians, to entertain
such a care of discharging their duty aright, and of eschewing what may provoke
the Lord in their way of going about it, as stirs them up to much diligence,
and employing of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 7.11. Yet such a care, whether anent the
manner of their going about their duty, or the success and event thereof, as
does distract their heart in duty, and indispose them for it, is sinful, and to
be shaken off by all that would discharge their duty acceptably: for, so does
the Apostle here direct, Casting all your care upon him. 3. The way to be
liberated of anxiety and heart-dividing cares, which indispose for duty, is, by
prayer to commend the success and event of our duty, and our thorow-bearing
therein to the Lord, Philip. 4.6. and by faith to commit both to him, Prove.
16.3. for, this is here the direction of the Spirit of the Lord for attaining
to freedom from sinful anxiety, Casting all your care upon him. 4. The Lord
allows his Children to cast upon him all their anxieties, both such as they
have about their souls and matters of highest concernment, and those about
their bodies, and lesser matters; how small soever the thing be where-about
their heart becomes anxious, he allows them to commit the same to him; for,
he knows that a very small matter is ready to occasion much vexation of
spirit to his own, Jona. 4.8. Therefore does he thus direct them, to cast all
their care upon him. 5. It is not only the privilege of Believers that they
may disburden themselves of their distrustful heart-dividing cares, by casting
them over upon the Lord; but it is also the very great desire of our God, that
we should not sink under the insupportable burden of our own needless cares
and fears; Yea, it is his peremptory command, to put these off our selves upon
him, which his People may not disobey, except they would incur his displeasure,
and destroy themselves: for, this has the force of a command, Casting all your
care upon him. 6. As no duty can be rightly discharged by us while the Lord is
not trusted with our thorow-bearing in it, and with the event and success
thereof, or, while the heart is distracted with misbelieving anxiety about
these; So the trusting of God with these, is the best way to come speed in
every duty: for, the Apostle, having exhorted before to duties toward their
Overseers, to one another, and to God, he brings in this as a mean of attaining
to all these, without which none of them could be attained unto, Casting all
your care upon him. 7. Misbelieving anxiety, whereby Christians break
themselves with the burden of these cares, which God requires to be cast upon
him, is one of the greatest signs of pride in the world; and to trust God with
the weight of these in following our duty, is a prime evidence of true
humility: for, this is brought in as a special way how they should prove
themselves to be humbled under God's mighty hand, and as that without which
they could not but declare their pride; as both the construction of the words,
and their connection with the former, do import; Humble your selves, etc.
casting all your care upon him. 8. Although the Lord be altogether free of such
passions, as care, sorrow, and the like, which are in men, Numb. 23.19. Yet
those of his People that cast their care upon him, shall find no less proofs
of his love, both in warding off hazards, so far as is necessary, and providing
every thing needful for them, than if he were as solicitous for their wel-being
as they can be for themselves; the consideration whereof, should liberate their
hearts of their distrustful cares: for, this is here asserted, as a reason
enforcing the fourth direction, He cares for you. 9. While the Lord's People
take upon themselves the weight of their matters, and have their hearts
distracted with cares about their thorow-bearing in, and the event of, their
duties, they do not then believe the fatherly providence of God watching over
them for their good, the faith whereof could not but banish their anxieties: as
is imported in the connection of this reason with the direction, Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you.

Verse. 8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour.
The fifth direction is, That Christians should prepare themselves for the
spiritual warfare against their great enemy, Satan. And for this end he shows
what frame of spirit and carriage, becomes a Soldier of Christ, in two
directions, preparatory to this warfare. The one is, That they should meddle
sparingly with the delights of this present life. The other is, That they
should still be upon their watch, lest they be surprised by their spiritual
enemies, and to move them hereunto, he describes their prime enemy, Satan,
from his great enimity, unwearied activity, and insatiable cruelty, as so many
arguments to sobriety and vigilance. Hence Learn, 1. They that are most
conscionable in their duty, and have come nearest to the right manner of going
about it, have reason to make them for the hottest battle, and forest assaults
from Satan, to hinder or discourage them therein: for, the Apostle (having
directed the Flock of Christ in the former words, to their several duties, and
to the right manner of going about them, with humility and confidence,) does
here exhort them to prepare for a battle in that way, and for this end thus
instructs them for it, Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary etc. 2.
Every one that would be a good Soldier in this holy War against Satan, must
labor for a sober frame of spirit, whereby Christians esteem meanly of their
own abilities, Romans 12.3. they keep down the kything of their passions against
those that injure them, Act. 26.25. and meddle sparingly, even with lawful
delights, the excess whereof becomes fuel to Satan's temptations, and
overchargeth the heart, so as it cannot foresee, and guard against hazard from
him, Luke 21.34. for, this is the first preparatory direction given to
Soldiers in this spiritual warfare, Be sober. 3. Holy watchfulness, whereby a
Christian forecasteth hazards, and guardeth against them, is also required in a
Christian Warrior, without which he cannot but be surprised, and made a slave
to his adversary the Devil: for, to prepare Believers for this battle, the
Apostle gives this second direction, Be vigilant. 4. Satan is such an enemy as
in opposing the Lord's People, pleads Law and Equity upon his side, and by
Law would carry his point against all that are come of Adam, were it not Christ
has freed Law-breakers, who believe in him, from the curse of the Law, Gal.
3.13. for, this style of Satan's, Your adversary, imports, an adversary in some
suit of Law. 5. Of all the enemies of the People of God, whereof they have many
both within, 1 Pet. 2.11. and without, Psalm. 3.1. Satan is the chief, acting
in, and by all the rest, and far exceeding them all in power and policy, and
therefore to be especially watched against and opposed: for, he is here called,
That adversary the Devil. 6. Satan watches all possible advantages of
prevailing against the Children of the Lord by his temptations, compassing them
round about, that he may espy where they are weakest, or least afraid of
hazard, that there he may assault them: for, he is an adversary that goes
about. 7. There is no outwearying of Satan in this warfare, by never so much
opposition or frequent disappointments, he is still in action against the
Lord's People, which should provoke them to constant watchfulness and
employment of Jesus Christ for strength against him: for, his constant activity
is here set forth by a word in the present time, as a motive to sobriety and
vigilance, Your adversary goes about. 8. Satan is a very powerful enemy and a
terrible, and so cruel, that no less than the utter destruction of souls can
satisfy him: for, he is here described by the similitude of one of the most
powerful, terrible, and cruelest of beasts, A roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour. 9. All the activity, power, terror, and cruelty of the Devil, should be
so far from discouraging the Lord's People in the battle against him, that the
consideration thereof should animate and hearten them to the same, considering
that he is an enemy spoiled by Jesus Christ, Col. 2.15. that there is more
power to be employed for Believers than is against them, 2 King. 6.16. and that
victory over Satan is sure, and near to all Beleivers, Romans 16.20. for, as an
argument to sobriety, vigilance, and the exercise of other graces and duties,
formerly pressed upon Believers their adversary is thus described, he goes
about like a roaring Lion seeking whom be may devour.

Verse. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions
are accomplished in your Brethren that are in the world.
Here is the sixth and last direction, wherein the Apostle presses the great
duty of spiritual Warriors, to wit, resistance of their great enemy, Satan;
and withal, holds forth the right way of maintaining that holy warfare against
him, which is, by constant adhering to the truths of the Gospel, and resting by
faith upon the promises thereof, notwithstanding of all afflictions in that
way; to which the Apostle gives this encouragement, That they had all the rest
of the Lord's People in the world for their fellow soldiers, each of them
filling up their own measure of hardship in this battle. Hence Learn, 1.
Although the power and policy of our spiritual adversary be exceeding great, as
was shown from the former verse; yet none of Christ's Soldiers must think of
flying from him, or yielding to him in the least, But must make them for a
stout and peremptory resistance of him in all his temptations; considering,
that the more place be yielded unto him, he tyrannizeth the more, Mat. 12.49,
etc. and the more stoutly he be opposed, the more ground he loses, Jam. 4.7.
for, this is the order which Christ's Soldiers have received from their
General Jesus Christ, concerning Satan and his temptations, Whom resist, etc.
2. The principal mean whereby Believers beat back Satan and his temptations, is
their constant adhering to the truth of the Gospel, whatever they may suffer
for their so doing, and their maintaining of their interest in Christ and the
promises; both which are comprehended in this direction, holding forth the
right manner of opposing Satan, Whom resist steadfast in the faith. 3. The
strongest of Satan's temptations, are conveyed to the Godly through
afflictions, under which his temptations are ordinarily most prevalent with
them, to make them quit the Truth, or their duty, or else to ding them from
their confidence in adhering to these: Therefore the Apostle, giving an
encouragement to oppose Satan's temptations, he suiteth the same for an
afflicted condition, importing, that through affliction the greatest
temptations are ordinarily conveyed to the Godly, Whom resist, etc. knowing
that the same afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren. 4. It is an
ordinary and strong temptation which Satan suggests to the hearts of the Godly,
That they are singular, and matchless in their sufferings; that so he may make
them question their Fathers affection, and put themselves out of the number of
his Children, because of their afflictions: for, this is the temptation which
the Apostle mainly guards the hearts of sufferers against, while he says,
Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren that are in
the world. 5. It ought to be a great encouragement to sufferers, in that battle
against their temptations which accompany their afflictions, to consider, that
their lot is no harder than the rest of the Saints of God through the world,
from whom they may expect sympathy, and the help of their prayers: for, this is
here given as an encouragement to the battle against Satan's temptations,
notwithstanding of afflictions in the way of their duty, That the same
afflictions were accomplished in their Brethren that are in the world.

Verse. 10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.
Follows the last part of the Chapter, which is the Conclusion of the whole
Epistle, containing several articles. In the first, the Apostle betakes himself
to God by prayer for these suffering Christians, that the begun work of grace
in them might be carried on to perfection; and for that end, that they might be
established in what they had already attained, that their spiritual strength
for all their duties and difficulties, might be renewed and increased, and
their union with Christ the foundation made more and more firm (which is the
signification of these several expressions in the Apostle's petition) and for
the strengthening of his faith, and theirs: concerning the hearing of this
prayer he takes hold of the alsufficiency of grace which is in God, and makes
use of the sweet proof thereof, which they had already received in the Lord's
calling of them by the Gospel to the possession of his everlasting blessedness
through the Mediator, after they had wrestled a little while through a few
difficulties in the way to it. Hence Learn, 1. The Ministers of Christ ought
not to satisfy themselves with the pressing of pertinent duties upon the
Lord's People, and holding forth fitting encouragements to be made use of by
them, that thereby people may come to the knowledge and approbation of their
doctrine; but they must also by prayer and faith put over upon the Lord to work
in the people what they have pressed, and must go before them to the Fountain
of furniture, that so the people may apprehend a necessity of divine influence
to concur with men's best gifts in order to their profiting, without which
neither Ministers pains, nor peoples resolutions or endeavors, can have
success, Romans 9.^6. for, so does the Apostle here put over upon the Lord by
prayer to work in the people that which was his main scope in preaching and
writing to them, But the God of all grace, etc. make you perfect, etc. 2. It
may be a great comfort to the Lord's People, and encouragement in their duty,
when the Lord sends them such Messengers, as have not only ability to clear
their duty, and hold forth their encouragements to them, but such as have also
skill of wrestling in prayer with God for them, to draw down the blessing upon
their doctrine, and by their practice of that duty of prayer before the Lord's
People, to direct them in the right manner of going about it: for, this may be
taken for a sweeet encouragement to them to study the duties he had pressed upon
them, that they had the Apostle, so earnest and skilful a wrestler with God for
them, putting up, as it were, in their hearing such pertinent petitions on
their behalf, and making use of such strong grounds of confidence, as was
fitting for the strengthening of their faith and his, that he should be heard,
The God of all grace, who has called us to his eternal glory by Jesus Christ,
after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, etc. 3. Even those of the
Lord's People, who are furthest advanced in grace, are far short of that
measure of perfection which is attainable; they are oftentimes like a member
out of joint, (as the first expression here in the Apostle's prayer signifies)
both in regard of their own inward distempers, Psalm. 22.14. and of their
divisions among themselves; for healing whereof, Paul uses the same word in
his exhortation to the Corinthians, 2 Ep. 13.11. they are not so hardened
against, nor resolute as they ought to be to meet with further difficulties, as
the next expression in his prayer imports; They are far from that vigor, and
ability for their duties and crosses, and from that close adherence to Christ
the Foundation-stone, (as the two last expressions import) that they might be
at: Of all which defects, every one that desires to thrive in grace, would
labor to be sensible, that so they may be humble, and stirred up to greater
progress: for which cause, the Apostle makes use of such expressions in his
petitions, as might represent to the minds of the people (of whose progress he
had spoken much before) their several defects, The God of all grace make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. 4. It ought to be the great aim and
design of Ministers, in all their labors with God, and with the people, That
those who have attained to some good measure of grace, may not rest satisfied
with the same, But may be stirred up to aim at progress and perfection
therein: and for that end may have their inward distempers and mutual divisions
healed, as a broken member is set in joint again, that they may be made able
for their duties, and hardened against their trials; and that they may be
better built upon the Foundation Christ, by a more hearty embracing of his
offered Grace, and firm adherance to his Truth: for, these are the things which
the Apostle has aimed at in his writing this Epistle to these persecuted
Hebrews, and in his prayer to God for them, as is clear by the signification of
the words in the Original, The God of all grace make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. 5. There is in God an Alsufficiency of every grace, and
withal, a strong propension to communicate the same freely to unworthy
sinners, the consideration whereof should hearten both Ministers and People to
pray for, and expect a more plentiful measure thereof, than what they have
already received: for, this first ground of confidence, which the Apostle makes
use of, to strengthen his own and the peoples faith for obtaining of what he
seeks here, includes both the abundance of grace that is in God, and his
gracious inclination to communicate the same freely; in both which respects he
is here called, The God of all grace. 6. Whether the Lord's People consider
that woeful case out of which they are called by the Gospel, Col. 1.13. or that
blessed state to which they are called, 1 Cor. 1.9. they may take his calling
of them for a sure ground to their faith (if so be they have consented to his
call) concerning his willingness to give them every thing necessary for their
perseverance, till they come to the possession of what he has called them to:
for, this is a second ground of confidence which the Apostle makes use of to
obtain what he seeks, hereby teaching the people to make use of the same, That
God had called them unto his eternal glory. 7. The blessedness which the
Gospel calls sinners to possess, is such, as they that obey the Call, can
never be put from the possession of it; Yea, it is of the same kind with that
which the Lord himself lives in, glorious for ever, So that they share with
Him of his own blessedness, so far as they are capable, Joh. 17.22. for, that
blessedness whereunto sinners are called by the Gospel, is here called, His
eternal glory. 8. It is by Jesus Christ the Mediator, that sinners are called
to the possession of this eternal glory; He by his blood has purchased it for
them, Ephesians. 1.14. by His Word and Spirit does clear to them the way to it, 2 Timothy 1.10. Yea, He himself is the way, and quickens His Redeemed Ones to walk
in it, Job. 14.6. for, we are called to his eternal glory by Jesus Christ. 9.
The way to eternal glory lies through sufferings, so that none have ground to
expect it any other way: for, this clause, after ye have suffered, may be knit
to the words going before, who has called us into his eternal glory by Jesus
Christ, after ye have suffered. 10. Those who get grace to adventure upon
sufferings for Christ and His Truth, with the small measure of ^^rength and
grace which they have already attained, may expect a further degree of
perfection, and a greater measure of strength, and stability, after they have
suffered a while: the Lord makes trials discover to his People the weakness of
his grace in them, and that discovery, to chase them to himself, who loves to
let out liberally upon sufferers, chap. 4.14. for, this clause may be also knit
with the following petitions, After ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
etc. 11. Even the hardest of the Lord's Peoples sufferings are of small weight,
being compared with the reward, 2 Cor. 4.17. and of short continuance, being
compared with eternity, 2 Pet. 3.8. the consideration whereof may hearten the
Lord's People under them all: for, in both these respects may this
encouragement be understood, that they are but for a while, or, a very little.

Verse. 11. To Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
The next article of the Conclusion of the Epistle, coutaineth a song of praise
to God; wherein the Apostle acknowledges Him worthy to be glorified and obeyed
by all, as their Sovereign Lord unto all eternity; and by his so doing,
expresses his faith of being heard in his former petitions, that so the people
for whom he prayed might with the like confidence join with him in the song.
Hence Learn, 1. Christ's Ministers should carry a praising disposition in their
hearts all-along their work, and be ready frequently to break forth in some
expressions thereof before the Lord's People, especially in a suffering time:
for, the Apostle raised one long of praise at the beginning of this Epistle,
chap. 1. ver. 3. another, chap. 4.11. and here in the Conclusion takes it up
again, To Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. 2. While the Lords
People are praying for a further measure of his grace, they should join praise
therewith, acknowledging Him to be glorious in Himself, and worthy of all glory
from others, to have dominion over all, and wishing that His glory may be seen
and acknowledged, and His dominion submitted unto, in testimony of their
thankfulness for that measure of His grace which they have already received,
and of their confidence grounded upon their knowledge of His gracious Nature,
and their former experience of His Grace already bestowed upon them: for, upon
these grounds, the Apostle, having prayed for the Peoples perseverance,
stability and perfection, does here praise, and lead them so to do: To Him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. 3. When ever the Lords People see aright
how gracious the Lord is, and has manifested Himself to be, in the offers of
his Grace to them in the Gospel, they cannot but have their hearts raised to
glorify Him, and to wish that many might be subject to Him: for, the Apostle,
having set forth the Lord, as the God of all Grace, who had graciously called
sinners to partake of his own eternal glory, does now break forth in praise, as
that wherein all, that were sensible of what he had said, could not but join
with him; To Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. 4. Where there is a
real and kindly desire of ascribing glory and dominion to the Lord, it will
extend it self beyond all time and ages, even toward the length of eternity;
considering, that His love, and the proofs thereof, will follow His own that
length; and that His excellency, and the worth of His favors bestowed upon His
People are such, as unto all eternity they will not be able sufficiently to
acknowledge; and therefore will desire that Glory and Dominion may be given to
Him for ever and ever. 5. While we ascribe glory and dominion to the Lord,
there should be in our hearts strong desires, that His glory may be known and
acknowledged, His dominion enlarged and submitted unto, and much confidence
that it shall be so, He having engaged his faithfulness for that effect, Isa.
45.23. for, this word wherewith both prayer and praise uses to be closed,
signifies both desire and confidence, Amen.

Verse. 12. By Silvanus a faithful Brother unto you (as I suppose) I have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifying, that this is the true Grace of God
wherein ye stand.
The third article of the Conclusion of this Epistle, contains two branches.
In the first, the Apostle commends the Bearer of the Epistle (who was to
explain and apply the purpose of it to them, he being a public Minister, 2
Cor. 1.19.) from his fidelity and near relation to himself and them, as he had
good ground in charity to judge of him. In the next, he commends the Epistle
it self, 1. from the shortness of it: and 2. from the sweet scope thereof,
which was to stir them up to their duty, and to bear witness to the Doctrine
of God's Free Grace, whereunto they did adhere. Hence Learn, 1. Though saving
Truth should be heartily embraced, who ever they be that carry it, Philip.
1.15, 18. Yet it contributes for the better acceptance thereof, that those who
deliver it, deserve and have a good esteem amongst those to whom it is
delivered, and be looked upon by them as having a special respect to their
good: for, to make thi^ Epistle the more acceptable to those to whom it was
first directed, the Apostle commends him that carried it, and was to open it
up unto them, as one faithful in his Office, and loving toward them, By
Silvanus a faithf^ll Brother unto you. 2. It becomes those who are of longer
standing and more eminent gifts in the Ministry, to be so far from
undervaluing or slighting those who are of shorter standing and meaner gifts,
that they ought to gain to them all the respect and esteem they can, among the
Lord's people, for the Message-sake which they carry: for, this Apostle, being
among the first of those that Christ called immediately to the service of the
Gospel, and eminently honored by him, to be a Penman of Scripture, does here
commend Silvanus (of whom there was no mention in Christ's days, and who was
only an ordinary Minister, called to expound the written Word) as if he had
been in all respects his equal, By Silvanus a faithful Brother. 3. It is the
great commendation of a Minister of Christ, that he be faithful in his Master's
service, by improving his talents, whether more or fewer, for His glory, Mat.
25.21, 23. and that he have a brotherly affection toward his fellow laborers,
expressing the same by working to their hands in the work of the Gospel, Col.
4.11. and to the people, by a humble and affectionate care of their good, as if
they were his brethren, Philip. 4.1. for, this is the commendation of Silvanus,
A faithful Brother to you. 4. It is neither safe to withhold our testimony
concerning the fidelity of others, when we have grounds for charity, that they
do deserve it, nor to be positive and superlative in commending of any, as if
we were infallibly persuaded of their faithfulness: for, the Apostle gives
this commendation to Silvanus of his faithfulness, with such an adjection as
signifies a judgment of charity concerning him, which the Apostle had gathered
by several probable grounds and reasons; and yet the expression does import an
inferior degree of certainty, to that which he had concerning his own estate
and fidelity in his Calling, Romans 8.38. 1 Timothy 1.12. By Silvanus a faithful
Brother, as I suppose. 5. It is a necessary favor to the Church and People of
God, to have the mind of God given unto them in writing, to be a standing Rule
for trial of every thing that is pretended to be His mind, Isa. 8.20. to help
their frail memories the better to remember His Truth, Isa. 30.8. to prevent
mistakes among His People concerning His mind, which would far more readily
arise, if it had been only delivered in so transient a way as Satan's oracles
are; and that His People, when they have not occasion to hear His Mind preached
or spoken by others, may have it with them to read and meditate upon, Act.
8.28. for, though this Apostle, and others, had preached the substance of (...)
Doctrine, contained in this Epistle, to these same persons to whom it is
directed, Act. 2. 1 Pet. 1. -- 25. and though they had Silvanus, a man able to
preach the Gospel, coming to them, Yet the Spirit of the Lord finds it
necessary to write his mind to them, By Silvanus, etc. I have written unto you.
6. It is a commendable thing in Christ's Servants, and a special gift of God's
to them, to be able to deliver much of the Lords Mind to His People in a few
words, providing it be with plainness of speech, So will people be the more
able to comprehend in their judgment, and retain in their memory, what is
delivered to them: for, the Apostle commends this Epistle, which has in it the
heads of all saving Truths, delivered in much plainness of speech, from the
shortness of it; I have written unto you briefly. 7. It is necessary for
Christ's Ministers to make use of several strains of Doctrine, in dealing with
people, sometimes to exhort them, and that with much earnestness and vehemence
to their duty, sometimes to comfort them against discouragements in the way of
their duty; both which are in the signification of the first word Exhorting: at
other times again, to bear witness to the Truths they deliver, as a thing
themselves know experimentally, and believe to be the Truth of God, Joh. 3.11.
confirming the same from other places of Scripture, Act. 26.22. and 28.23. and
testifying against them that reject or disobey the same, Deuteronomy. 8. 19. according
to the signification of the next word, testifying: by both which the Apostle
holds forth his several strains of dealing with the people, especially in
this Epistle, and these as a pattern to Ministers, Exhorting and testifying. 8.
The sum of the Gospel, and of all right preaching thereof, is, To make offer
unto sinners of the rich and free grace of God, for pardoning, sanctifying, and
saving of them, to stir them up to embrace that offer, and having embraced it,
to study the exercise of grace, and walking like gracious persons, in the
obedience of that Doctrine* for here, the Apostle gives the sum and scope of
this Epistle, which is the same with that of the whole Word, To exhort and
testify that this is the true grace of God. 9. The Doctrine of the Gospel wi^^
deceive none that receive it, they will find the Lord as gracious, and his
ways as sweet as the Gospel affirms: for, it is the true grace of God. 10.
Even those who have made good progress in grace, and are for the present fixed
in their adherance to the Truth, are in hazard to be shaken by temptations, and
made to question the truth of the Gospel, and the reality of the gracious
offers made therein; as is imported in this, that the Spirit of the Lord
finds it necessary to put the Apostle upon writing an Epistle to such, for
exhorting and testifying, that is was the true grace of God wherein they did
stand.

Verse. 13. The Church that is at Babylon elected together with you, saluteth
you, and so does Marcus my son.
Here is the fourth article of the Conclusion of this Epistle, wherein the
Apostle delivers salutations to the scattered Jews; 1. From those Christians at
Babylon, whom the Lord had chosen out of the world, to be a Church to himself,
and to share with others of His People in spiritual and eternal mercies. This
Church at Babylon seems to have been made up of the posterity of those Jews,
who stayed there after the expiring of the seventy years captivity, whom this
Apostle, being a Minister of the Circumcision, Gal. 2.7. has gone to visit,
and planted in a visible Church. And next he delivers commendations from Mark,
who was a public Minister of the Gospel, Col. 4.10, 11. and being one of this
Apostle's old acquaintance, Act. 12.12. has been instructed by him in the
Gospel, for which he is here called his son, as Timothy is called Paul's for
the same reason, 1 Timothy 1.2. Hence Learn, 1. It is the duty of the Lord's
People (especially in a suffering time) though never so far distant in place,
to love and remember one another as if they were present, and embracing one
another, as the word of saluting in the Original imports, to signify their
desires to know one another condition, their sympathy with one another
suffering, and joy for one another welfare: all which is imported in the
salutation common among the Hebrews, 1 Samuel 25.25. 1 Chronicles. 18.10. And it is
likewise the duty of those who are entrusted with the carrying of such
salutations, to make conscience of the delivery of them: for, the Church at
Babylon remembereth their dispersed Countrymen, and desires the Apostle to
signify the same to them, who does it here accordingly: The Church which is at
Babylon saluteth you. 2. The Lord who reigns in the midst of His enemies,
Psalm. 110.2. can erect and keep up a Church to himself, even in those places of
the world where His enemies are permitted to have all the external power in
their hand: for, He has here a Church at Babylon, where we never read that the
civil-power was employed for Him. 3. The Lord has many designs of providence,
which will not appear for a long time after He has begun to work in order to
the execution of them: for, now it appears that when the Jews were carried
captive to Babylon, the Lord has had a design to have a Gospel Church erected
there before they should all come back again, as is clear by comparing Acts
15.18. with this, that there is a Church at Babylon. 4. The Lord can make the
sinful failings of His People, subservient to His gracious purposes, and yet be
holy in all His ways: for, the sinful stay of some of the Jews in Babylon
when they had a call and opportunity to return in Cyrus's time, is made to
serve the accomplishment of this holy purpose of God, ^anent the having of a
visible Gospel Church at Babylon. 5. The constancy of some of the Lords People,
who are under the power of wicked men, and the appearance of the grace of
Christ in them, especially their love, and sympathy with the rest of His
People, ought to move others to constancy under their sufferings, and make them
confident of the same thorow-bearing strength: for, that the Apostle may
encourage these suffering-Believers, to whom he writes, he sends them here
commendations from their Bretheen in Babylon, in testimony of their love to,
and sympathy with them; The Church which is at Babylon saluteth you. 6. No
journey never so long or hazardous ought to be shunned by any Servant of
Christ, to do service to Him, who has engaged Himself to be with them go
whither they will, Mat. 28.20. In the faith whereof, Peter has undertaken this
long and hazardous journey from Judea to Babylon, from whence he sends this
Epistle to the rest of the Christian Jews. 7. Because all the Members of the
visible Church are chosen out of the world, to profess Christ, and to have the
offers of His grace made to them; and so many of them as do really embrace
these offers, have doubtless been from eternity chosen to be equal sharers of
spiritual and eternal mercies, Therefore they may be all spoken of, and dealt
with by Christ's Ministers, as the Elect of God: for, so does the Apostle here
speak of the whole visible Churches, at Babylon, and other places, Elected
together. 8. It is a special comfort to suffering-Christians, to know
themselves remembered and respected by more eminent Christians than themselves,
by whom they are apt to apprehend themselves forgotten and slighted: for which
cause we may safely conceive the Apostle here to mention commendations
particularly from Marcus his son. 9. Those who have been instrumental in the
conversion or spiritual edification of others, ought to entertain a special
measure of tender affection toward them, and should have from them a special
measure of reverence and love, such as children owe to their parents: for,
because Mark was instructed by this Apostle, in the knowledge of Christ and the
Gospel, and did resemble him in faith and conversation, he is here called his
son. 10. A penitent's former failings ought not to hinder his esteem with any
of the Lords People: for, Mark, who by his separating from the Apostles while
they were about the Work of the Lord, did occasion a sinful separation of one
of them from another, Act. 15.37, 38, 39. is here particularly mentioned, as
one dear to this Apostle, and whose love and remembrance should be a comfort to
sufferers; And Marcus my son. 11. So careful should the Ministers of Christ be
to entertain love among the Lords People, and particularly to beget and cherish
in their hearts, a good esteem of other Ministers, though inferior to
themselves, that they should willingly condescend to be servants in the meanest
offices of love, that may conduce for that end; Therefore does this great
Apostle registrate in his Epistle the commendations of the Church at Babylon,
and Marcus his son.

Verse. 14. Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity: Peace be with you all
that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
In this last article of the Conclusion, the Apostle exhorts these to whom he
writes, to express mutually their hearty affection one to another, by such
signs as were ordinary in those times, and confidently wishes unto them all
sort of happiness. Hence Learn, 1. It does much contribute for the success of
the Gospel among a people, that there be mutual love amongst them, and
expressions thereof: Therefore the Apostles do ordinarily close their Epistles
with exhortations to mutual love and unity, as that without which, the fruit of
their pains in these Writings would be much hindered; and so does the Apostle
here, Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. 2. Whatever decent
expressions of mutual respect and love be the ordinary custom of the times and
places where the Lord's People live, they ought not to be scrupled at, but
rather made conscience of by them, in obedience to Him, who commands love and
respect, and consequently the expressions thereof, to be among His People;
Greet one another with a kiss of charity. 3. All the mutual expressions of
love and respect among the Lord's People, ought to flow from an inward
affection of christian love in the heart of one of them toward another, and
ought not to be performed as fashional and flattering compliments, which are
hateful to God, Psalm. 12.2, 3. for, so the Apostle exhorts, Greet ye one
another with a kiss of charity. 4. The occasion of frequent converse and
correspondence among the Lords People ought not to diminish their love or
hinder the expressions thereof, but rather to increase the same; they who live
together being more ready to offend, or mistake one another, and so to be
mutually jealous of the alienation of one another affection, than those who
are at a greater distance, whose love should provoke those that are nearer:
for, the Apostle, having signified the love of those that were at Babylon to
their dispersed Brethren, does here exhort them that had more frequent occasion
of meeting and correspondence, to greet one another with a kiss of charity. 5.
As it is the duty of Christ's Ministers heartily to wish all sort of true peace
upon all the Members of the visible Church, who, in regard of their external
profession, and participation of common gifts and benefits from Christ, may be
said to be in Him, Joh. 15.2. So true spiritual peace, which is the calmnesse
and contentment of the soul, arising from the faith of acceptance with God
through Christ, when fears of His wrath, and jealousies of His love, are in
some measure banished, Romans 5.1. together with as much outward peace and
prosperity, as shall be for their true good, is the Lords allowance only to
real Believers, and to all of them whether weaker or stronger, and may be in a
good measure attained unto, in the midst of many troubles, by those who are
chased out of themselves, and by faith planted in the living Vine, Christ
Jesus: for, as this Apostolick-benediction may be understood of the Apostle's
wish to all the Members of the visible Church, So it does especially respect
true Believers therein; Peace be to all them that are in Christ Jesus. 6. As it
is the duty of Christ's Ministers, to press duties upon all Professors; So it
is their part to guard promises and privileges, by qualifying the persons to
whom they do belong: for, the Apostle, having pressed the duties of love, and
expressions thereof, upon all indefinitly, to whom he writes, in the first
part of this Verse, he does in the latter part restrict his wish of Peace,
qualifying the persons to whom it does especially belong, Peace be to all them
that are in Christ Jesus. 7. As the Ministers of Jesus Christ ought to enter
upon every part of their Employment, with the faith of their Calling and
Commission from Him, as was observed upon the first words of this Epistle; So
they ought to close the same with some confidence in their hearts, of the
blessing of God upon their labors, and of His granting their desires for that
end: for, here the Apostle closes his exhortations and prayers in this
Epistle, with this word of confidence, Amen.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the second Epistle General of PETER.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Epistle may be called the latter Will of a dying Apostle and Martyr of
Jesus Christ: for when Peter wrote it, he knew that he was shortly to seal the
Truth in it with his blood; as will be clear, by comparing the 14. Verse of
this Chap. with Christ's prediction, concerning his death, Joh. 21.18. It is
not directed to any particular Church, but to all Believers, especially
believing Jews, scattered at that time through many Nations; as appears, by
comparing 1 Pet. 1.1. with the first Verse of this, and of the third Chapter.

The principal heads of Doctrine contained in it, make clear the scope and
parts of it; And they are three. The first is, concerning a Christians growth
in grace, and diligence in holy duties, which is cleared and pressed, chap. 1.
The second is, concerning error; the way of working, and hazard whereof, is
handled, chap. 2. The third is, concerning the last coming of Christ, some
errors about it being confuted, and the right preparation for it, held forth,
chap. 3.

What can be more necessary than to study growth and diligence in so declining
and secure a time as this is? to guard against error when it so prevails? and
to prepare for the last coming of our Lord, when now it is so near, and so much
forgotten?

CHAP. 1.
THe parts of this Chapter are three. In the first, which is the preface to the
whole Epistle, is contained a description of the Apostle, and those to whom he
writes, in the Inscription, ver. 1. An Apostolic wish for the best blessings
of God to them, to wit, the growing sense of His love, and the fruits thereof,
in the Salutation, ver. 2. Grounds of encouragement that it should be according
to his wish, to wit, that there was a saving work of grace already begun in
them, which he describes, from the cause, nature, parts, and way of working of
it, ver. 3, 4.

In the second, which is the first principal part of the Epistle, he exhorts
to diligence, and the study of growth in grace, reckoning out several steps of
their progress, ver. 5, 6, 7. with many moving arguments thereto, ver. 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And because there is no growth but by the knowledge and
use-making of Christ, and Christ is only revealed in the Word preached and
written. Therefore,

In the third part of the Chapter, there is a commendation of the preaching of
the Gospel, ver. 16. of Christ himself the chief subject thereof, ver. 17, 18.
and of the whole written Word from the certainty and usefulness thereof, ver.
19. and from the divine authority thereof, ver. 20, 21.

Verse. 1. Simon Peter, a Servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that
have obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ.
THe Apostle describes himself, 1. from two names, which design his person.
Simon, his old name, when he was a fisher; Peter, his new surname, given him
when Christ called him, Mark 1.16. and 3.16. The one minding him of his former
ignorant and mean condition; the other, of the honor Christ put upon him, when
He made him a lively stone in the Church, and a Believer, and Preacher of that
Truth, upon which, as a Rock, He builds His Church; which is Christ's own
exposition of the name Peter, Mat. 16.18. Hence Learn, It is very necessary to
carry to the end of our time with us, the sensible remembrance of what we were
before Christ did manifest himself to us, and of what His grace has made us,
that we may go to Heaven both humble, and thankful: Therefore the Apostle
sets down these two names here in the beginning of his Testament, Simon
Peter. Next, he describes himself from two styles, which design his office;
the one common to all the Officers of the Church, the other proper to those who
had immediate Commission, and extraordinary Assistance from Christ, to publish
the Gospel, and work Miracles. Hence Learn, 1. It is honor enough for the
highest Office-bearer in the Church, to be a Servant of Christ; so does this
Apostle esteem it, who never called himself, Lord, or Head of the Church; but
discharged it in all Ministers, 1 Pet. 5.3. and here takes a lower title to
himself, A Servant. 2. It is necessary for Christ's Ambassadors to know and
assert their Calling from Him, that Truth may have weight with People, and they
may have courage, whatever their faithfulness may cost them: for, while the
Apostle knows himself to be a Servant of Jesus Christ, he dare avow himself
by name and surname, even when he (...) publishing Truths, that cost him his
life; Simon Peter a Servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ. 2. He describes
these, to whom the Epistle is mainly directed, from the worth of their faith,
equal to the faith of the Apostles, for all saving effects; and clears the
way how they came by it, to wit, by the virtue of the faithfulness of God, and
the merits of Christ. Hence Learn, 1. The Scriptures are not only given for
converting sinners, and working grace where it is not, Psalm. 19.7. But also for
their sake who are already converted and gracious; fine places being mainly
intended for them, to further their growth, guard them against temptations, and
to fit them for their last meeting with Christ; which are the ends of this
Epistle, directed mainly to them that have obtained precious faith. 2. Although
some Believers are more strong in believing, and so have more joy and peace
than others, 1 John 2.13, 14. Yet is the faith of them all of alike worth, in
so far as it uniteth them all to the same Savior, from whom the weakest faith
shall never shed; interesteth them all in the same spiritual promises,
privileges, and glorious reward, and is bought for them all with the same
price: in all which respects, the true faith of the meanest Believer is alike
precious with the faith of the Apostles. 3. The way how saving faith comes to
the Elect, and is wrought in their hearts, is, by virtue of the faithfulness
of God, who promised to Christ, in the Covenant of Redemption, the bestowing of
it upon the Elect, Psalm. 110.3. and to the Elect in the Covenant of Grace, Isa.
54.13. Joh. 6.45. It being God's righteousness to prove himself faithful in
making all these promises; and it comes also through Christ's righteousness,
which is his doing and suffering to purchase it, and other saving graces for
us; and so, although we have it freely, Yet Christ bought it dear, and God is
righteous in giving what Himself promised, and Christ paid for, 1 John 1.9. So
the Apostle makes this precious faith to come to all that have it, through the
righteousness of God, and our Savior, Jesus Christ.

Verse. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus our Lord.
In this Salutation he wishes to them a daily growth in their hearts, 1. Of
the sweet sense of God's free favor, making the graces of His Spirit to
thrive. 2. Of true spiritual peace, flowing from the former, and carrying with
it every necessary blessing, as the signification of these words, grace and
peace, and their order does import; and all this, through their growing in that
knowledge of God, and his Son Christ, which has faith, affection, and practice
with it. Hence Learn, 1. No less than what is here wished for, is the Lords
allowance to every Believer; if they get it not, they have themselves to blame:
for, His Majesty does nothing to mar the multiplying of grace and peace upon
all that have precious faith. 2. They that would have this rich allowance, must
not only expect in this order; Grace, or, God's free favor, first, and then
Peace, with every necessary blessing; But, they must study to grow daily in the
knowledge of the nature and will of God, the purchase, fullness, and offices of
Christ; so as by the use-making of all, heart and life may be changed: for,
such a knowledge is this, through which grace and peace is multiplied. 3. It is
not formality or vain repetition, to use frequently the same expressions to
God, or to others, when they flow from new sense of the worth and need of the
things: for, this Apostle, and others, do ordinarily use these same expressions
in the beginnings of their Epistles, Grace and peace, etc.

Verse. 3. According as His divine power has given unto us all things, that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him that has called
us to glory and virtue.
Follows the ground of his confidence, which might also hearten them, that it
should be acording to his wish, to wit, That Gods powerful gr^^^ ^ad already
begun a saving work in them, by bestowing freely upon them, all that is
essential to a gracious frame of spirit within, and a holy life without; and
this he had done by making them so to know Christ, as to consent to Him,
calling them by the Gospel, to glory, or eternal life, as the end, by virtue,
which is grace and holiness, as the way or means. Hence Learn, 1. The seen
beginnings of a saving work of grace, are comfortable pledges and confirmations
to faith, that that work shall thrive, it being suitable to the Lords wisdom,
power and constancy, to carry on and perfect what He has begun: for, the
Apostle wishes grace and peace to be multiplied, According as His divine power
had begun the work. 2. To give grace to a graceless soul, is a work of Gods
infinite power, there being so much unworthiness, guiltiness, and opposition
to hinder that work in all the Elect: Therefore the cause of this work is here
made divine power. 3. The Lord in the bestowing of saving grace, works both
irresistably and freely; neither can any for whom it is appointed and
purchased, so oppose, as to hinder the bestowing of it; for, it is divine power
that works it: Nor can any in nature so use their naturals, as to prepare
themselves for, or merit the bestowing of it: for, divine power works, by
giving freely all things that pertain to life, and so the very preparations for
the new life. 4. The substance of every saving grace, though not the full
measure, and a right to what may enable for honoring God in practice, is given
at once in conversion; As a Child, when it first lives, or is new born, has
all the essential parts of a man: Therefore to these, to whom the Apostle
wishes increase of grace, and upon whom he is to press growth, he affirms
to be already given all things that pertain to life and godliness. 5. The very
first beginnings of grace is wrought in the heart, by making a sinner drink-in
the knowledge of Christ: the Law indeed prepares for this work, by discovering
sin and deserved wrath, and terrifying the conscience; But the Gospel, which
holde^^ out Christ the Savior from sin and wrath, having in Him the fullness
of grace, and a heart to let it out freely upon graceless sinners, is the
Spirit's instrument of working grace: for, as the Apostle wished grace to
thrive, in the former Verse, through the knowledge of Christ; So here he says,
it is given at first through the knowledge of Him. 6. Then Christ is savingly
known, and so saving grace wrought, when the heart consents to Him, calling
in His Word to eternal life, by grace and holiness the way to it; They may
quit their part of glory who come not to Christ to be made virtuous, or
gracious and holy; for, He has called us to glory and virtue.

Verse. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that
by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
Both the means of working, and the nature of this saving work, i^ here further
cleared. The means are the promises of the new Covenant, containing such worthy
and dear-bought blessings, as the pardon of sin, taking away the stony-heart,
etc. the fulfilling of which Promises to sinners, by the divine power of God,
does make them partakers, not of the infinite Essence of God, which can neither
be divided, nor communicated to any creature, but of such heavenly qualities as
make them in some weak measure like their heavenly Father, and so does free
them from the disposition, fashions, and estate, wherein unregenerate men live
and perish. Hence Learn, 1. As the Promises of the new Covenant are beyond all
expression great and precious, because of the spiritual and eternal riches
which they do contain, and will be therefore highly esteemed and commended by
all that have faith to embrace the gift of them; So the way how the Lord
works saving grace at first, is by making out these Promises, enabling the
guilty, graceless and cursed sinner, to believe and apply, the pardon, grace
and blessedness freely offered in them: for, so the Apostle expressly
affirms, that by the divine power of God these Promises are given to us, that
by them we may be changed. 2. The receiving of these Promises by faith, makes
a wonderful change upon sinners: for, so soon as a sinner gets grace to
believe and apply the free promises of the Covenant, as soon does the Lord
begin to make out upon his heart the things promised, so stamping it with His
own Image, that the sinner receiving these Promises, begins presently to
look like God his Father, and in some weak measure, to resemble Him, in
heavenly wisdom, holiness, uprightness, and other of His communicable
properties, especially in humility, self-denial, love and pity toward other
miserable sinners, zeal for the Lords honor, and such other perfections as
were eminent in the Man Christ; and this is to partake of the divine nature.
This change kythes also, in abhorring and flying from the filthy fashions
which flow from the unmortified corruption of these that are yet living in
nature, and so eschewing the wrath and ruin which such are liable to; both
which may be understood by escaping the corruption which is in the world
through lust; and is here made the effect of receiving the Promises: and where
this work is, it proves a right to the Covenant, and gives ground of
confidence, that that work shall grow. The study of the growth whereof, the
Apostle presses in the next place.

Verse. 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue;
and to virtue, knowledge;

6. And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness;

7. And to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity.


To the end that this saving work of grace, described in the preface, may
thrive, The Apostle does here seriously exhort gracious (...), not to satisfy
themselves with the sight of one, or some few graces in themselves; but to give
more than ordinary diligence, that they may see every grace drawn forth to
exercise, and kything in fruits: for which cause he reckons forth a number of
these graces, in the exercise whereof a Christians growth does consist. Hence
Learn, 1. Even they who discern in themselves a saving work of grace, and know
the privileges spoken of before, to be theirs, are not now to sit down idle,
and satisfied, but to be the more active and diligent in the exercise of grace
and holy duties: for, so says the Apostle, Besides this (that ye have precious
faith and promises, and do partake of the divine nature) give all diligence. 2.
As it is not that ordinary diligence, wherewith most Professors satisfy
themselves, that will be blessed to make a thriving Christian; but, such as goes
through all means, and waits upon all opportunities of profiting, that their
ability and calling will permit them to follow; and gets the flower of a
Christians wit, affections, and time, which is here called, all diligence; So,
a Christian's end in being thus diligent, must not be his own credit before
others, or the satisfaction of his conscience only, But that the exercise and
fruits of one grace may be still added to another, and so Christ may be
honored in him, and by him; Giving all diligence, add to your faith, etc. 3.
Saving faith which gripeth Christ for pardon and strength, and daily flies to
Him for both, must be holden fast and renewed in the exercise of it, by all
that would thrive in any other grace, or be fit for any duty; if either we
loose the grips of faith, or do not frequently renew them, we can thrive in
nothing: therefore is faith here made the first stone in this spiritual
building, to which all the rest are to be added; Add to your faith, etc. 4.
With the maintaining and renewing the acts of saving faith, a Christian that
would grow, must so mind his duty, as that he keep himself in the nearest
disposition for it: for, no less is signified by virtue, than the working
habit of every grace, which keeps a Christian in such a fitness for doing or
suffering, that when he is called to them, either of them are lovely to him,
and he is in some measure ready for them; which the Scripture calls
elsewhere, the having of the heart at the right hand, Eccl. 10.2. and standing
with the loins girt, Ephesians. 6.14. and here is called Adding to faith, virtue. 5.
There is more than this readiness of disposition for duty, requisite to make a
growing Christian, even the use of holy reason to time and manage duties
wisely, that as the heart lies to duty, there may be skill to go about it with
prudence and circumspection, as the word, knowledge, here signifies, which is
to be added to virtue. 6. Because there remains in the best many immoderate
and unruly affections and passions, which, as they are ready to exceed bounds,
even about lawful objects, so the excess of them does darken reason,
indispose the heart for duty, mar the exercise of faith, and so hinder all the
former three; Therefore, a Christian that would grow, must labor to have, by
the power of God's grace in him, such a command over his passions of anger
fear, grief, etc. and over his affections of love, joy, and the like,
especially in the use of sensual delights, that he may be able to keep them
within the bounds, which right reason, according to the Rules of God's Word,
does prescribe to them. Therefore, the Apostle exhorts to add to knowledge,
temperance; which is a grace whereby a Christian's passions and affections are
held under the dominion of sanctified reason. 7. Because all that walk in this
way may expect trials and crosses in it, Therefore must a Christian that would
grow, labor for a rational and willing submission to these, knowing, that he
deserves worse, that they may come from love, and work together for his
spiritual and eternal good, upon which Scripture-grounds Believers Christian-
patience is built, which is here to be added to the former. 8. The Christian
that would grow, must never conceit himself to be above the necessity of
attending the external Worship and Ordinances of Christ, but must conscionably
wait upon these; not resting upon the outside of them, but looking especially
to the right manner of going about them: for, so much does this wo^d,
godliness, signify, being distinguished from inward graces, and duties to our
neighbor, as here it is. 9. A thriving Christian must with his godliness make
conscience of duties to his neighbor, especially, of entertaining a kindly and
tender affection toward all, whom he is bound in charity to esteem Children of
the same Father with himself, and kyth this affection to weak and strong, by
sympathizing with them in trouble, supplying their necessities, edifying their
souls, and every way studying to promote their spiritual and temporal welfare,
according to his place and ability, which is to add to godliness, brotherly
kindness. 10. The duties of love are not to be all confined to the Saints only,
But if we would prove our selves growing Christians, we must thirst after, and
endeavor the true good of the souls and bodies of all to whom our prayers or
pains may be profitable, within the compass of our calling, which is to add
to brotherly kindness, charity, a grace, the exercise whereof, the Scripture
presses upon Christians in reference to all men, Gal. 6.10. 1 Thessalonians. 3.12.

Verse. 8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye
shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
Because even those who are endued with these graces, are ready to become lazy
and too contented with their measure; Therefore the Apostle, to the 16. verse.
does by many moving arguments, labor to rouse them up to diligence, and the
study of growth. The first motive is from the advantage thereof, That the
Christian in whom these graces are, and are in lively exercise and growth,
shall never be without work, as the word here translated, barren, does properly
signify; nor shall his work be without such fruits as shall manifest, for his
own comfort and God's honor and the good of others, that he does savingly
know, and has an interest in, Jesus Christ, as his own Lord; Therefore the
growth, and exercise of grace, is much to be studied. Hence Learn, 1. The most
unquestionable duties had need to be pressed upon Christians by many arguments:
for, what we do most easily assent to in judgment, we are oftentimes most
careless of in practice: Therefore does the Apostle in this following part of
the Chapter, multiply motives, to press this one clear duty, That gracious
persons ought to study growth in grace. 2. Even these of whom the best in the
world, may be charitable that they are gracious, ought, notwithstanding, to put
themselves to the trial, both concerning the truth, and growth of their graces;
Therefore, even these, who are before spoken to, as having precious faith and
other graces, are here put to try, if these things be in them, and abound. 3.
Though the grace of sanctification be in, and from Christ, as the treasure and
fountain thereof, yet it is really inherent in the Regenerate, as the subject.
It is not sufficient to believe, that there is abundance of grace in Christ;
but we must try, and labor to see, if these things be in us from Christ. 4. It
is a safe and approven way, to try the reality and growth of grace by the
effects thereof, to wit, a Christian's activity in commanded duties, and his
fruitfulness in his conversation, for the honor of Christ, and the good of
others: for, here the Apostle puts them to try, if these things be in them,
and abounding, which he says they will know by the effects of them, They make
you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ.
5. As grace may be in the habits and seeds of it, where it is not lively and
growing; So it is not the being of it in us, but the liveliness and growth of
it that makes a Christian busy, and bear the fruits of cheerful obedience to
Christ's Commands, edifying and supplying others, and the like; which fruits
will kyth in some measure, where grace is, and is in vigor, and will evidence
a saving knowledge of Christ, and interest in Him: for, says the Apostle, If
these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be
barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 9. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far off,
and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
The second motive to diligence and growth in grace, is taken from the hazard
of the want, or decay of these graces. Those that are altogether void of saving
knowledge, faith, and the rest of the graces mentioned, are utterly blind in
all things spiritual, and cannot be taken up with any thing beyond this present
world, and so does declare that they undervalue that great privilege, the
forgiveness of sins, which by their Baptism and Profession they did seem, and
were esteemed to have; Yea, and even those, in whom these graces really are,
but are under a decay and without exercise, they are so far blind in things
spiritual, and intent upon things worldly, that they do, for the time, walk as
if they had forgotten their pardon: Concerning both which, the Apostle's
argument may be understood, and has force to move all to diligence, and the
study of growth in grace. Hence Learn, 1. How sharp-sighted soever graceless
souls may be in things that concern their back and belly, and this present
world; Yet, till Christ make a gracious change upon them, they can see nothing
of the hazard of their perishing, the worth of salvation, or their need of
Christ, that they might fly to Him, and give up themselves to His service, and
so make preparation for death and eternity; For he that lacks these things is
blind, and cannot see afa^ off. 2. While folks are of this temper and way,
however they may be esteemed pardoned souls by themselves, and others, and
dealt with by the Church as if they were such, Yet by their being wholly taken
up with this present life, and making no provision for a better, they do
declare that they undervalue the forgiveness of sins (...) for, when the
esteem of forgiveness does not stir up to thankfulness and holiness, God
esteems it forgotten; And he that walks, as if he forgot himself to be
pardoned, cannot comfortably conclude himself to be such a one, however he may
be esteemed and spoken of by the best, as one that has been purged from his
old sins. 3. As sins once committed, ought still to be esteemed old, as rags
that are cast off, or vomits never to be licked up again; So all that either
are, or do profess, or esteem themselves to be pardoned, ought to keep the
sensible remembrance of the Lord's pardoning mercy so fresh in their hearts, as
they may be daily renewing their repentance for their old sins, their
thankfulness for the forgiveness of them, and watchfulness against the like;
the lack of which lively exercises, even in real Believers, proves them to be
much forgetful that they have been purged from their old sins.

Verse. 10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling
and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.
Follows the third and fourth motives to diligence and growth in grace. The
one is, The more of these a Christian attain* unto, the more shall be his
clearness and certainty that he was from eternity chosen to life, and is in
time effectually called. The other is, That by this means he shall be kept from
Apostasy and yielding to temptations by the way. From the third motive, Learn,
1. Although the election and effectual calling of every soul fled to Christ,
can be no surer than they are in themselves, Romans 11.29. 2 Timothy 2.19. Yet may
those privileges be very unsure, and unclear to the apprehension of these that
are both chosen and called; Therefore they are here exhorted to make them sure.
2. As some comfortable measure of the certainty of both may be attained to,
even by ordinary Believers; So this jewel of Assurance does not fall in the lap
of any lazy soul, nor can any expect to attain to it, or yet to entertain it,
in whose hearts grace is without exercise, and whose conversation is without
fruitfulness: for, so the Apostle exhorts, to give all diligence to make
them sure; importing, that without that diligence they cannot be made sure to
our hearts. From the fourth motive, Learn, 1. Although none that are chosen and
called, can finally or totally fall away from grace, Yet are they of themselves
subject so to do, and may actually fall in foul and scandalous sins for a time;
so much is supposed in this argument to diligence, If you do these things, ye
shall never fall. 2. The Lord's way of preserving His own from falling, is, by
helping them to exercise their faith, and other graces before named, and to
entertain so much of the fear of falling finally, or scandalously, as stirs
them up to give all diligence, that their falling either ways may be
prevented: for, the hazard of falling is here made a motive to stir up
Believers to diligence and exercise of grace.

Verse. 11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Here is the fifth motive. The life of a Christian growing in grace, and
diligent in duties, shall be to him a begun Heaven upon Earth, his clearness
concerning his right to it, and his feeling of the first fruits of it, being a
begun entry into Heaven, and the blessing of God upon his pains. Hence Learn,
1. There is a beginning of Heaven to be had in this life, even such a clear
sight by faith in the Word, of God reconciled with us in Christ, and such
fore-tasts of that sweet life we shall have with Him for ever, as fills the
heart sometimes with comfort, makes duties and difficulties easy, as if a
Christian were walking in the entry or p^rch of Heaven, and stepping-in at the
open gate thereof, Psalm. 63.5, 6. Philip. 3.20. which is to have an entrance
abundantly ministered unto us in that everlasting Kingdom. 2. As the reward of
well-doing here, and hereafter, may be proposed to Believers, and looked upon by
them as a motive to diligence, and growth in grace; So the only way to win to
the beginning of that sweet life here, and the full possession of it hereafter,
is, activity in duties, and keeping grace in lively exercise: for, the Apostle
does propose sweet first fruits to be had here, and an eternal reign in
Christ's company for ever hereafter, as a motive to diligence, and the study of
growth, without which neither can be expected; for, So (says he) an entrance
shall be ministered, etc.

Verse. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance
of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present Truth.
As a sixth motive, the Apostle applies his own Doctrine, pressing growth and
diligence to himself in his Calling as a Minister, That since the hazard of
negligence, and the vantage of diligence was so great, as he had cleared,
therefore he himself would not be negligent in his duty of stirring them up to
diligence, although he supposed many of them to be both discerning and solid
Christians, by reason whereof they might conceive so much pressing needless.
Hence Learn, 1. While a Minister presses duties upon People by arguments, or
motives, he ought to apply these motives to himself, for his own up-stirring in
the duties of his Calling; So does the Apostle here, while he says, Wherefore
(to wit, because of the motives, whereby I pressed diligence upon you) I will
not be negligent. 2. One kindly motive of a Minister's diligence and
earnestness with People, is, the sense he has of the hazard or benefit may
come to souls, by slighting, or obeying the Truths and Duties pressed; So is it
with the Apostle here, as his own hazard, and vantage stirs him up; So his
consideration of their hazard and advantage, makes him stir them up. 3. As it
is the duty and commendation of Christians, not to be still fluctuating and
unfixed in matters of opinion, or practice in Religion; So neither the promise
of the Spirit, to bring all things to their remembrance, nor Peoples great
knowledge and setlednesse in the Truth, does put them beyond the need of the
daily pains of Ministers, whose work is, not only to point out Believers
Privileges, and to inform them of what they know not, But to inculcate, clear,
and press known Truths and Duties, even upon discerning and stablished
Christians, whose imperfection in knowledge, forgetfulness, laziness,
formality, and oftentimes conceit, that much pressing of known Truths and
Duties is needless, does require that they should be put in mind, though they
know and be established in these things.

Verse. 13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance.
The seventh motive serves both to stir him up to diligence in his place, and
these to whom he writes, in theirs; and it is taken from the necessity of his
so doing, and that both upon his part, who was bound to it by virtue of his
Calling, as long as he had life with ability; and upon their part, who stood in
need, not only to be minded of their duty, but to be powerfully roused (as the
word signifies) to the practice of it. Hence Learn, 1. It is neither the
credit nor profit of a Ministers Calling that should move him to painfulnesse,
but rather the consideration of the equity of the work, how just a thing it is,
as the Apostle's word here signifies, that one so unworthy of so honorable an
Employment, and many times justly deserving to have been thrust out of it,
should yet be employed, furnished, and rewarded by Jesus Christ: This made the
Apostle, and ought to make every other Minister, to stir up himself and others,
because he thinks it meet, or, just and equitable so to do. 2. As death is
the term-day of a Minister's service in his Calling, till which time he ought
neither to desire to change his Calling, nor do it by Deputies under him,
though he meet with small success and great hardship; So the consideration of
his frail, flitting and fighting condition, imported by being in a tabernacle,
should make him stir himself busily while time and strength lasts; Therefore
the Apostle counted it just so to do as long as he was in the tabernacle of his
body; and was moved to diligence, by taking up his present condition, under the
similitude of being in a tabernacle. 3. A Minister should not content himself
barely to propound Truths, and mind people of their duty, but by all means
should labor with God, and his own heart, to have such power accompanying his
pains, that dead, sleeping and lazy souls, may be quickened, wakened, and
roused up: for, no less does this word signify, which the Apostle adds to
the word he used in the former Verse, to stir you up, by putting you in
remembrance.

Verse. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our
Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.
The eighth motive, is taken from the nearness of the Apostle's death, Christ
having told him, Joh. 21.18. that in his old days he should be martyred; and
now knowing the time to be near, he makes use of the warning, both for his
own, and their up-stirring. Hence Learn, 1. The nearer our journeys end be, the
faster should we run, according to our strength, in serving Christ, and doing
good to souls: for, when death is near, the best will think the great part of
their business undone: Thus the Apostle is earnest with them, because he knew
he was shortly to put off his tabernacle. 2. Learn from this, how hard usage,
and unpleasant to flesh and blood, those who are most beloved and honored of
Christ, may meet with in the world, even such as this Apostle met with, who
after much persecution, frequent scourging and imprisonment in his younger
days, must notwithstanding in old age, when natural vigor is abated, and men
use to look for rest, fall in the hands of cruel persecutors; for, he must put
off his tabernacle, as Christ showed him. The reward makes up all, and the
faith thereof can encourage against all; And, no doubt, this man, who had
denied his Master, did account it his greatest honor to get leave to suffer
for Him. 3. Though every one be not so particularly warned of their personal
trials, as Peter was, Yet all, being commanded to make them for sufferings, 2 Timothy 3.12. should live mindful thereof, though they be long delayed; and
prepare for them, though they be kept off till gray hairs: So the Apostle here
minds, and prepares for that trial, now in his old age, whereof Christ
foretold him in his youth. 4. Though it be dangerous to slight a Message from
the youngest Minister, fitted for, and lawfully called to, that Work, 2 Timothy
4.12. So a Message from an aged and persecuted Servant of Christ, who is
shortly like to be plucked away from people, should have a special weight with
them: for, the Apostle makes this an argument to stir them up, That he was
shortly to put off his tabernacle, as Christ showed him.

Verse. 15. Moreover, I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to
have these things always in remembrance.
The last motive, is taken from the Apostle's zeal for Christ's glory, in
studying to propagate His Truth for the good of souls; And for that end,
resolves to take course before he died, how the Church might reap profit when
he was gone; which he did, by writing Scripture, putting forth and instructing
faithful Laborers, who did good after him. Hence Learn, 1. The sense of
Obligation to Jesus Christ, will make His Servants and People, sincerely
studious to do that while they live, that may be some way useful for His
honor and the good of others, when they are gone. And though every one cannot
leave such profitable monuments as some others have done; Yet ought every
Christian endeavor to leave behind them the seeds of saving knowledge, sown
in the hearts of those with whom they converse, at least, the savory
remembrance of their humble and holy walking, the fruits of their charity and
other good works, which may do as much good after their decease, as some
Volumns do: Therefore did the Apostle, not only stir them up, while he was in
his tabernacle, but endeavored to propagate the Truth among them and others,
after his decease. 2. As the best way of serving the generation after us, is
the study of transmitting pure Truth to them; which the Apostle here resolves
upon: So, the foresight of approaching trials, does not abate, but increase the
zeal of the Lord's faithful Servants after His honor, and the good of souls;
(the death of the Godly, of what ever kind it be, being a perfect outgate (as
the word, decease, signifies) from all sin, sorrow and fears) Therefore does
the Apostle, knowing he was shortly to be martyred, stir up himself the more to
diligence.

Verse. 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of His Majesty.
Follows the third part of the Chapter, containing a commendation of the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ the chief subject thereof, and of the whole
written Word. All which may also be taken for so many further motives, to
press what the Apostle has been upon in the former part. 1. He commends his
own, and the other Apostles preaching, from the excellency, and certainty of
the Gospel which they preached, to wit, That their Doctrine, which held forth
Christ's coming in our flesh to redeem, and His furniture for that work, was
not to be looked upon, as some witty fiction, or pleasant fable, but the most
certain and serious purpose under heaven, delivered by those who were
eyewitnesses of the Son of God's personal presence in our flesh, and of much
glory breaking through it, in His Miracles and Transfiguration. Hence Learn, 1.
There is as much atheism and unbelief natural to all, as to look upon the
mystery of Salvation through Christ incarnate, as upon a fable, invented to
kyth the quickness of men's wit, and please the ears of people; so much is
imported in this negative part of the commendation of the Apostles preaching,
We have not followed cunningly devised fables. 2. The main subject of the
preaching of the Gospel, is to point out Christ's coming in our flesh, such an
errand as to Redeem, and Save, and his furniture for that work, which is
encouragement enough for every lost sinner that hears it, to fly to Him for
salvation, since He is come to seek, and save such, and has power to save to
the utmost all that come to God through Him: for, this is here made the
substance of the Apostle's preaching, To make known the power and coming of
Christ. 3. As Jesus Christ does not use all His Servants alike familiarly in
everything, but oftentimes those most, whom He minds to try most: So, any
special honor any of them gets, should never be forgotten, but minded,
especially when trials are near, and brought forth, only to commend Christ and
His Truth, and encourage against suffering. So does the Apostle here, near
death, mention that special honor put upon him and other two, upon the Mount,
and makes it an argument to commend the Doctrine, and prove the certainty of
it; We were eyewitnesses of His Majesty. 4. The Lord has used all means that
can be expected, to make us look upon the business of our Redemption and
Salvation, through His Son incarnate, as the most certain and real business of
any other: therefore, though He might have only employed men to write the
Gospel, who had never seen Christ in the flesh, and commanded us to believe,
Yet has He condescended, for our further satisfaction, to make use of such men
to write the most part of the New Testament, as saw with their bodily eyes
Christ glorious in flesh, and so were eyewitnesses of His Majesty.

Verse. 17.For He received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came such a voice to Him from the Excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased.

18. And this voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with Him in
the holy Mount.


In the next place, the Apostle commends Christ, as our Cautioner and
Mediator, from the high esteem He has with the Father; and from the full
satisfaction the Father has with the price of Redemption, paid by Him: of both
which the Father gave a public Declaration, from His glorious residence in
Heaven, before three witnesses, who were with Christ upon a Hill where He did
manifest Himself to be God, glorious in holiness. Hence Learn, 1. The Glory of
the Son of God incarnate, was so obscured for our sake, that He needed a
Declaration from Heaven, to show the Father's esteem of Him, and to beget a
high esteem of Him in the hearts of His own: This is imported in Christ's
receiving from the Father, honor and glory, which was not an addition of any
glory to Christ, which as God He had not; but a manifestation of the glory
which He had, but obscured under the vail of our infirm flesh. 2. As Glory is
so excellent a thing, that they that get but a little glimpse of it, cannot but
remember it, and commend it, as worthy to be contended and suffered for, as
here the Apostle does: So Christ, as our Mediator, has not only much Glory
given Him, as the fruit of His obedience to the death for sinners, and a pledge
to His Members, that they shall share of the Glory of their Head, whereof this
upon the Mount, was a little foresight and taste, given Him for His and His
Followers encouragement under suffering: But also, He is in such power and
credit with God the Father, that He can do in Heaven and Earth, what He
pleases, for the good of His Redeemed Ones; and nothing can be done without
Him. All which is imported in Christ, receiving from the Father honor and
glory, by a voice from that Excellent Glory. 3. God the Father is so fully
satisfied, and completely paid, by the Mediator Christ, for all that fly to
Him for refuge, that He seeks no further mends for all their wrongs, nor
further price for what they need, only that they do receive Him freely, as He
is freely offered; and that as the Father speaks down this of Christ, to
sinners, He is my beloved Son, in Him I am well pleased; Hear Him, So sinners
should answer back again with their hearts, Christ is our beloved Redeemer, in
whom we are well pleased, Let the Father hear Him for us. 4. It is not easy
for wakened sinners, who are oftentimes much unsatisfied with themselves, to
believe, and take comfort from this, That God is well satisfied with Christ for
them: Therefore, though Isaiah preached, and wrote this Truth, the Father spoke
it down from Heaven twice before witnesses; three Evangelists have recorded it,
and some of them have set it down thrice, Isa. 42.1. Mat. 3.17. and 12.18. and
17.5. Mar. 1.11. Luke 3.22. and 9.35. Yet the Apostle sets it down here, and
to make it take impression, says again, This voice we heard, when we were with
Him. 5. It is no sin, nor superstition, to esteem, and speak of things, that
can have no inherent holiness, and may have no religious worship, so, as may
most testify our respect to His Holiness, who does manifest Himself in, or by
these things; for which cause, the very Ground and House where He manifests
Himself, is called Holy, Exodus 3.5. Isu. 64.11. though they can have no more
than a relative holiness: And several other things, such as the Day for His
Service, the written Word, etc. and here the Hill, where the Lord, who is
glorious in Holiness, did show much of His Glory, is called The Holy Mount.

Verse. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.
In the third place, the Apostle commends the whole written Word, 1. from the
certainty of it. He calls it A Word of Prophecy, giving to the whole the
name of one principal part, most of the Old Testament being a foretelling of
these things concerning the Messiah and His Kingdom, which the New clears to
have their accomplishment in Him that was born of the Virgin Mary; and calls
it A more sure Word, comparing it with the Voice from Heaven, whereof he spoke
immediately before; not as if there could be any uncertainty in the Lord's Voice
speaking from Heaven, but because it is a greater matter, to have foreseen and
foretold things to come, than to have seen and related the greatest things
present: And because a transient Voice is more easily mistaken or forgotten,
than a standing authentic Record; therefore, the written Word is a more sure
ground for sinners faith to rest upon, than a Voice from Heaven could be. Next,
he commends the written Word from the usefulness thereof, that it should
prove to sinners, who make it the rule of their faith and manners, a
comfortable Directory, through this dark state of ignorance and misery, until
they get such a measure of the promised Spirit, and nearness to the Son of
righteousness, that they shall not need a prospect of Glass, of the Word and
Ordinances, which will not be till death and the dawning of the day of
eternity. Hence Learn, 1. The written Word, believed to be the Lord's mind, is
the surest ground, for faith to rest upon, of any that ever has been, or can
be, given to sinners, subject to forgetfulness, jealousies and mistakes; the
general offers of Christ, and free promises of His grace, excluding none who
will not exclude themselves, give more solid encouragement to self-judging
sinners, than they could have by a Voice from Heaven, calling them by their
names; for, that would readily be suspected to be another than the Lord's, or
spoken to another of that name: Therefore, the Apostle comparing the written
Word, with the Voice from Heaven, calls it to sinners, A more sure Word. 2.
As this world is so dark a place, that our own reason, the counsel or example
of others, will often leave us comfortless, to wander and fall in snares,
except we look to the light of the Word, which shines in this dark place: So
they have the Lord's approbation and commendation, who do apply their hearts
to, and satisfy themselves with, this Word, as the only and sufficient ground
of their faith, and rule of their manners, to keep them from erring in judgment
or practice; for, so says the Apostle, Whereunto ye do well to take heed, as
to a light that shines in a dark place. 3. Although the light be now clear, in
comparison of what was before Christ came; Yet, being compared with that light
we shall have in Heaven, it is but dark; Like the light that shines out of a
room where a candle is, in a room where the candle is not seen: So much does
this similitude of a light shining in a dark place, import. 4. Though it be so,
Yet shall the Word give comfortable direction to all that follow the light of
it, under all their crosses, confusions, and difficulties, and these who make
it a lamp to their feet, and a light to their path, may be sure to get at last
such a clear and satisfactory sight of Christ, as shall banish all darkness
and doubts; and such a near union and fellowship with Him, the bright
Morning Star, gloriously present by His Spirit in their hearts, and personally
also in humane nature, conversing with them for ever, that they shall have no
more need of Word or Ordinances; which is the condition here described by the
Apostle, only to be expected in Heaven, till which time we will never be above
the direction of the Word and use of the Ordinances, Ephesians. 4.13. Cant. 4.12.

Verse. 20. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation.

21. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.


Last of all, the Apostle commends the written Word, from the Divine
Authority of it; the interpretation or true meaning whereof, cannot be found
out by the wit, or proper invention of any; whereof the Apostle gives a
reason, Because these truly gracious men, who were consecrated, and set a part
by the Lord, for receiving and registring His mind in Scriptures, could neither
speak nor write, when, nor what things they pleased, but as they were
immediately moved, and infallibly furnished by the Lord's Spirit, whose mind it
is; Therefore the Scriptures are of Divine Authority; and this the Apostle
says, must be known first, to wit, as a principle of saving knowledge, without
which, Christians cannot profit by the Scriptures. Hence Learn, 1. As the
Scriptures do not hold forth to us the device of their heads who wrote it, but
the public mind of God: So none can attain to the right meaning, nor be able
to hold forth the true interpretation thereof, by their own proper skill, or
invention, there being in it such knots (as the word interpretation imports)
as cannot be loosed, but by humble imploring the help of the Spirit, whose mind
it is, as the Penmen of it themselves did, that they might know what was
revealed to themselves, Psa. 119.18. Dan. 2.22. Zech. 4.4, 5. and by comparing
one place with another, Act. 17.11. and making use of other helps that God has
given, Dan. 9.2. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15. by which means, through the Lords
blessing, we may come to some saving measure of the knowledge of God's mind in
His Word; and may have the common or public consent of both Prophets and
Apostles, to every saving Truth made known (...) us therein: for, no Prophecy,
or, part, of Scripture is of any private interpretation. 2. As it is the duty
of all the Lord's People, to fix in their minds, as an unquestionable Truth,
this principle, That the Scriptures being the Lord's mind, none can of
themselves attain to the true meaning of them: So, till this principle be
known, at least so far as that it be not questioned, there can be no light or
comfort expected from the Word: for, the Apostle, having exhorted in the former
Verse, to look to the Word for direction and comfort, does add here, that as
they would find these, they must know this first, that it is not of any private
interpretation. And though only the Spirit of the Lord, the Author of the
Scriptures, can fully persuade hearts, that they are His mind; Yet, if men
would consider, that a great many of these truths that are revealed in
Scripture, are not only agreeable to Natures-light, but may be in some measure
known by it; The one (to wit, the light of Nature) teaching, That there is one
God, the first cause of all, omnipotent, wise, righteous and good; that it is
reasonable He should be served, and that according to His own will, which
therefore He, being both wise and good, must have some way revealed, that
reasonable creatures have immortal souls, and so die not as the beasts; that
there is no true happiness in these things, wherein men do ordinarily seek it;
that since vice and virtue, receive not suitable rewards here, there must be
punishment and reward after this life: all which, and many other things of this
sort, Natures-light teaches, though darkly, as the Scriptures themselves, Romans
1.19, 20. and the Writings of those that never knew the Scriptures, do
witness. The other again, (to wit, the Scriptures) clearly revealing these
same things, pointing out the nature, will and way of worshipping of the true
God; what that reward and punishment after this life, is; and the right way of
attaining the one, and eschewing the other. And though some things revealed in
Scripture, such as the incar^^tion of Christ, the way of salvation by faith in
his death, the resurrection of the dead, and other things (...) these, have not
been known by natural reason; Yet none of all these are contrary to such
conclusions as may be drawn from principles that are naturally known,
concerning the power, wisdom and goodness of God: And withal, if men would
consider the wonderful harmony of the purpose contained in the Scripture; the
likeness of the style thereof, though written by so many several men, living
in so far distant ages, and places of the world; the exact answerablenesse of
so many future events to their predictions in this Word; the experience of all
the lovers of it, who (having no less use of their reason than any Atheist
ever had) have found so singular a power in it, to terrify and humble the mind
of man, and then to give it true peace and comfort, and so fresh a sweetness,
that the more it be studied, it delights the more, which no Writing in the
world besides can do: The wonderful preservation of it against the malice of
Satan and wicked men, who would have so hated and persecuted it, and the lovers
of it, if it had been a man's device: If (I say) men, that have the use of
reason, would ponder these things, they could hardly (except they were plagued
with Atheism) force their hearts to contradict this Truth, which the Apostle
here delivers, That the Scriptures are not the mind of man, but the mind of
God. And the arguments that move to the receiving of this Truth, are so much
the more to be weighed, that the Apostle makes this a Truth to be known first,
before Christians can get saving light, or true comfort, from the Scripture.
Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private
interpretation. 3. Although the Lord have employed men, void of true
sanctification, to prophecy some things now set down by others, in Scripture
as His mind, Numb. 23, and 24. chapters, and to preach the Gospel, Mat. 10.4.
and so may yet employ such men, in whose hands the Word and Ordinances may be
made ^^^ectual for the salvation of others, as the Laws of a Na^^^^ orderly
published by an authorized Messenger, are (...), whatever his personal
qualifications be; Yet, those men, whom the Lord employed to put His mind in
the public Register of the Scripture, though compassed with many sinful
infirmities registered by themselves, were endued with true holiness, and in
that to be imitated by all, especially those that handle the Scripture, and
were infallible in that work, being consecrated and set a part by the Lord for
it: Therefore does the Apostle here call them, Holy men of God. 4. Although
these extraordinary men did find themselves bound to wait upon the ordinary
duties of God's Service, the means of their salvation, such as Reading, Prayer,
Hearing, use of Sacraments, etc. even when they wanted these motions, and that
assistance of the Lords Spirit which they desired and sometimes found; as
appears, by their fixing set times to themselves for those exercises, and at
them, crying for the motions and influences of the Lord's Spirit, Dan. 6.10.
Ps. 119.164. compared with ver. 148, 149. and Psa. 63.1, 2. and 101.2. Yet was
it otherwise with them, while they were employed in that extraordinary work of
receiving and publishing the Lord's Mind, which now is the Scripture: for, they
were not bound to see Visions, or to prophecy, except when they were forcibly
moved, and had an extraordinary impulse and furniture so to do; in which
employment they were so infallibly born through, as that they could not err,
or miscarry: All which is signified by this word of the Apostle's, They spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Hence it follows also, That although
the Lord's Spirit be promised in the Covenant of Grace to every Believer, Ezekiel.
36.27. and His light and assistance (which He does not vouchsafe when we will,
but as He pleases, Joh. 3.8.) is to be sought, and is necessary, in some
measure, for the right performance of every duty, Joh. 15.5. Yet is not any
ordinary Minister, or Christian, to stay from their duty till they find that
measure of the Spirit which they desire, and ought to seek after, But they are
to make use of the power which they have, as reasonable creature^, Eccles.
9.10. and to stir up the gifts and graces they have as Christians and
Believers, Isa. 64.7. 2 Timothy 4.6. and in the way of their duty, to wait, and
cry for the necessary influences of the Lord's Spirit, Cant. 4.16. for, the
Apostle speaks of this way of the Prophets being immediately acted by the
Spirit, and their not acting as Prophets till then, as singular, and proper to
them, and such as they; and therefore, not to be pretended to, or imitated by
any other, except they would presume to seek out more Scripture from God, after
He has closed His Book with a curse on them that add to it, Rev. 22.18. They
were no ordinary men, nor acted in an ordinary way, who, according to the sense
of this place, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. II.
BEcause the prevailing of Error does ordinarily bring with it, a great decay
of Grace and Holiness; Therefore the Apostle, (having in the first part of
this Epistle, Chap. 1. pressed the study of growth in grace and diligence in holy
duties) does in this Chapter, which is the second part, guard against the
infection of error. And for this end, he does, 1. give fore-warning of the rise
and prevalency of false Teachers in the Church of the New Testament, especially
such as under a pretense of liberty through Jesus Christ, would loose the
reigns to all licentiousness, as appears by comparing the 1. and 19. verses.
2. He does at large describe them by such clear characters, taken from their
abominable doctrine and vile practices, as might make them known and hateful to
all the Lord's People. 3. He does threaten them with no less terrible
judgments than ever had come upon the vilest sinners that ever lived, that so
all might be afraid to drink-in their errors. And, 4. he does hold out to the
Godly some grounds of confidence, to be made use of by them, for their
preservation both from their errors and plagues. These four are the principal
parts of the Chapter; which are not handled apart, but often intermixed
throughout the whole, as will appear by a particular view of the Sum thereof.
The Apostle forwarneth of the rise of these soul-seducers, describing them from
the strain and tendency of their doctrine, together with the hazard of it to
themselves and their followers, ver. 1. from the success they should have,
ver. 2. from their way of prevailing, and certainty of their judgment, ver. 3.
Which last, he confirms by a threefold instance of God's judgment upon the
Angels, the Old World, and Sodom; intermixing therewith a twofold example of
the Lord's preserving of Noah and Lot, as pledges of His respect to His own in
all times of the prevailing of sin and judgment, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. both which
he does apply for the comfort of the Godly, and terror of the wicked, ver. 9.
especially of such soul-deceivers, and their followers, as had given themselves
to the service of their lusts, wherein they were so bold and self-pleasing,
that they labored to disgrace all lawful Authority that might oppose them,
ver. 10. which sin, he aggravates from the carriage of the good Angels who
honor Magistracy, ver. 11. And from their likeness to the beasts, by reason
of it, in undervaluing that whereof they knew not the worth, and violent
prosecuting of their lusts of pleasure, gain and glory; for which he threatens
that their end shall be worse than the beasts, ver. 12, 13, 14. And for their
Apostasy from the Truth, for gain, and other idols, which they no less
violently pursue than Balaam, ver. 15. when no opposition, even extraordinary,
could restrain, ver. 16. and for their many fair pretenses, whereby they did
ensnare poor souls, once brought from Paganism to Christianity, ver. 17, 18,
19. For all which, especially their Apostasy after so great a change
externally, he threatens them and their followers, with more wrath, than if
they had never known and professed as they did, ver. 20, 21. Which Apostasy,
he shows, is not to be stumbled at in regard they still retaining their
unrenewed nature, are only gone back (like dogs and swine) to their seemingly
renounced errors and sins, ver. 22.

Verse. 1. But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.
THe Apostle brings in the forewarning of the rise of Heretics, both with
guarding against offense thereat, upon this ground, that it had been the lot of
the Church before; and withal, describing them from this, that they should
cunningly convey into the Church, and minds of people, such errors, as would
bring damnation upon themselves, and all that should receive and continue in
them; of which errors he gives an instance, That they should deny the Lord
that bought them; which is not to be understood, as if either Christ had died
for such men; for then could they not have perished, Joh. 10.11, 28. Nor, as if
they had expressly denied Christ to be the Redeemer; for then could they not
have prevailed as they did with Professors of Christ, ver. 2. nor had their
words been fained, as they are said to be, ver. 3. but open blasphemy. The
meaning therefore is, That they being by profession, and in their own and
others esteem, Redeemed Ones, should vent such errors, as would in substance
tend to the denial of the Soveraignity and Lordship of Christ over His People,
by laboring under a pretense of christian liberty, as it is, ver. 19. to loose
Believers from their subjection to Christ's Royal Law; for which he threatens
speedy judgments to come upon them, as if they had expressly denied Him, after
they had been redeemed by Him. Hence Learn, 1. It has ordinarily been, and so
will continue the lot of the Church, to be troubled with false teachers, The
wise Lord so disposing, (...) He may have a proof of His Peoples love to Him,
by their constant adherance to His opposed Truth, Deuteronomy. 13.3. 2 Cor. 11.16.
That He may make His Truth the more clear and lovely to His own, Tit. 1.9. That
He may justly punish with strong delusion, them that receive not the Truth in
love, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. and that His own in no time may stumble at what has been
the lot of the Church in all times: for, to guard against offense at such a
lot, and to stir up all to the study and esteem of the written Word, which the
Apostle had commended in the close of the former Chapter, he thus forewarneth,
But (or, for) there were false prophets among the people, even as there shall
be false teachers among you. 2. The way how seducers bring-in error into the
Church and minds of people, is not easily discerned, it being often mixed with
many precious Truths, ver. 19. veiled with odd and heavenly-like expressions,
Romans 16.18. with the pretense of singular piety in the venters of it, 2 Cor.
11.13. and of much love to the welfare of the souls they seduce, Gal. 4.17. and
born-in mainly upon the simplest sort of Professors, 2 Timothy 3.6. By these and
the like artifices, do men privily bring in damnable heresies. 3. Error, no
less than the vilest practice in the world, may bring damnation upon the souls
of people, especially if it be freely and voluntarily chosen, (not for terror
or compulsion) as the word heresy signifies, if it do either expressly, or in
substance, destroy any of Christ's Offices, or the way of salvation through
Him, and if it be vented by some Professor, for the seducing of others, and
renting of the Church: All which are here made ingredients of heresy, which
the Apostle calls damnable, and such as will bring upon them that receive,
vent, and continue therein, swift destruction. 4. Albeit only the Elect are
redeemed unto life; and none of them who are given unto Christ of the Father
can perish, or finally deny Christ unto destruction, because Christ is engaged
to keep them from perdition, Joh. 6.39. Yet Reprobates, who do profess
themselves to be redeemed by Christ, and are esteemed for such by the Church,
may be said ^o deny the Lord that bought them, in the terms of judi^^^
process, (when they say He has redeemed them, and in the mean time in
doctrine and deeds do deny and betray Him) howsoever in the terms of historical
narration, they were never redeemed nor written in the Book of life. Even as
Apostates, in the terms of judicial process, are said to trample Christ under
their feet, Heb. 10.29. which in the terms of historical narration is
impossible: because our Lord, was long before that time that the Apostle did
write this, bodily ascended into Heaven, and was without the reach of any such
bodily injury. And as the Amalekite (2 Samuel 1.16.) is charged for killing the
Lord's Anointed, albeit the history tells us he was slain before he came to
him, because his own mouth testified so much against him; So may reprobate
hypocrites, crept-in into the Church visible (calling Christ their Redeemer,
and yet proving in effect bodily enemies to Him) be charged for denying the
Lord that bought them, because their own mouths and deeds do testify so much
against them.

Verse. 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the
way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.
Follows the success of these Sectaries, held forth in two branches. 1. That
they should have a numerous party to back them in their soul-destroying
courses. 2. That they, and their followers, should prevail to bring saving
Truth in disgrace among many. Doct. 1. It is not strange to see the most
dangerous Heretics have many followers; every error being a friend to some
lust, 2 Timothy 4.3. and having often more of prosperity and applause attending it
than Truth, 1 Cor. 4.8, 10. and because of the activity and fair pretenses of
them that vent it, Mat. 23.15. Romans 16.18. for these, and the like causes, many
shall follow their pernicious ways. 2. They that are loft of God to the
leading of the spirit of error, do not only enslave their judgments to their
seducers, But do also give up themselves to back them in all the courses they
take to propagate their errors, and increase their faction, even, although
these courses, no less than their errors, be destructive to the honor of
Christ and welfare of souls: for, the Apostle says, Many shall follow, not
only their errors, which he called damnable before, but their ways, which are
called pernicious. 3. As error is received, Truth goes out of request, the
lovers thereof bending all their wit to disgrace those Truths that discover the
vileness of their errors, Romans 3.8. and to raise and keep up hot contests
among the Professors of the Gospel, Gal. 1.7. thereby giving occasion to a
third party, who resolve to side with none, but to slander, or (as the word is)
blaspheme the whole profession of Christianity, Romans 2.24 for, the Apostle here
makes the slander of Truth, the consequence of embracing error, and does point
at a third party, who would take occasion from Heretics prevailing, to slander
the Truth, By reason of whom, the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

Verse. 3. And through covetousness shall they with fained words make
merchandise of you; whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their
damnation slumbreth not.
Follows the way how these false teachers came to have so great success;
held forth in two branches. 1. Their immoderate desire of gain and glory made
them very industrious. And 2. their figurative, or, plaistered language, as the
word signifies, made them easily gain a number of poor souls to be completely
at their disposal, as wares are under the power of the Merchant that has
bought them; for which dealing, he does forewarn, that God's watchful
providence was framing His decreed judgments for them. Hence Learn, 1. However
they that seduce fouls by error, may seem to be the most mortified men in the
world, Col. 2.23. and most desirous of the good of souls, Gal. 4.17. Yet is the
rise of all their pains with people, from some unmortified lust, such as the
immoderate desire of gain or applause: for, the Spirit of the Lord is in this
to be believed, what ever they pretend, that through covetousness make
merchandise of His People. 2. False teachers are in their way of dealing with
souls very like unto cheating Merchants, 1. in their using of much fair and
plaistred language to commend their errors; 2. In their activity and stirring
from place to place (as the word in the Original, of making merchandise, does
signify) to vent them; And, 3. in their unsatisfiableness till their followers
become their complete slaves, both in judgment and practice All which is held
forth as clear resemblances betwixt them and cheating Merchants, in these
words, With fained words shall they make merchandise of you. 3. However the
judgment of such men be hardly believed because of their success and fair
pretenses, and may be long suspended for the exercise of the Godly and
punishment of those who receive not the love of the Truth, with strong
delusion; Yet it is most certain, according to the foreknowledge and decree of
God, it is swiftly approaching, and shall light upon them by way of surprizal;
for, their judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not.

Verse. 4. For, if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment.
The Apostle proves the certainty of the judgment threatened against these
false teachers, by a threefold instance, in this and the following Verses. The
substance of the first, which is in this Verse, is, That if the holy Lord did
not spare the Angels, His most glorious Creatures, when they sinned against
Him, but did presently imprison them in the pit of Hell, reserving them for
further judgment, These false teachers, and their followers, have no reason to
dream of exemption. Which conclusion flowing from this and the following
instances, the Apostle finds not necessary to express, but leaves to their
own conscience to infer. Doct. 1. Although it be ordinary for sinners to harden
themselves against threatenings, because of their excellencies and privileges
conferred upon them by the Lord, Rev. 18.7. Yet nothing of that kind can
shelter them from the wrath of a provoked God; but the more of these gifts
there be, and be abused, the greater measure of wrath may be expected:
Therefore is the judgment of God upon these excellent and privileged
Creatures, the Angels, brought to prove the certainty of the like wrath to come
upon false teachers, who by reason of their excellent enducments, and esteem in
the Church, were ready to make light of the Apostle's threatenings; If God
spared not the Angels, etc. 2. It ought to be esteemed marvelous mercy in God
that He does not presently thrust sinners down to Hell when they provoke Him,
and much more that He has provided a remedy, and offers pardon to them. Every
moments sparing after the commission of sin should be thought wonderful
indulgence in God, who spared not the Angels, but (as the words in the Original
will bear) imprisoned them while they were sinning, secluding them from all
possibility or hopes of recovery for ever; He spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains, etc. 3. The
fallen Angels, who are the Devils, are under such a powerful restraint of
Divine Providence, that they cannot move, or act any thing, but in so far as
the Lord's holy Justice and Wisdom permits and orders them, for the
punishment of the wicked, or exercise of the Godly; for, they are reserved in
chains of darkness, which are nothing else but God's irresistible Power, and
terrible Justice, overruling, tormenting and restraining them. 4. Although the
Devils, when they are permitted, can appear visibly, as if they were at their
own liberty; and can seem jovial, as if they were free of torment, 1 Samuel
28.13. that so they may the more effectually prevail with such poorslaves as
have provoked God to give them up to their delusion: Yet, go where they will,
their Hell is always with them, they live in the constant feeling of the wrath
of the Almighty, as their being delivered in chains of darkness does import,
and in the dreadful expectation of a more high measure of wrath, which they
shall get at the day of judgment, when they, together with all that serve them,
and follow their counsel, shall have nothing else to do but endure torment, and
shall torment one another for ever: for, they are delivered in chains of
darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.

Verse. 5. and spared not the old World, but saved Noah the eighth person, a
Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the
ungodly.
Follows the second instance, to prove the certainty of God's judgment to
come upon these soul-deceivers, whereof the sum is, That if the old World,
notwithstanding of their multitude, and their long and great prosperity, were
all, excepting a few, swept away with the sloud, because of their wickedness;
those false teachers, notwithstanding their multitude of followers, and long
success in propagating their errors, have no reason to imagine to themselves
an escape from the wrath of God: with which instance, the Apostle does intermix
the example of Noah's preservation, as a pledge of the Lord's respect to all
who keep the way of Truth and Holiness in an evil time, as is clear by
comparing this and the 9. Verse. Although there were seven preserved from the
sloud beside Noah, who is therefore called the eight, Yet he only is named,
because he was mainly respected in that deliverance, and the rest for his
cause. He is called a Preacher of Righteousness, because even in that time he
did hold forth to the people the way of free justification by the
Righteousness of Christ, and the duties of holiness, wherein justified
persons ought to walk; with both which, Noah has been well acquainted, as is
clear by comparing Heb. 11.7. with Genesis 6.9. Hence Learn, (...) The^e are not a
few shifts in the hearts of wicked men, prospering in their sinful courses,
whereby (...) harden themselves against the threatenings of the Word of the
Lord, and put the thoughts of His wrath far away from them: for, after the
Apostle has by the former instance of God's judgment upon the fallen Angels
cutted off the hopes of false teachers evading the wrath of God, because of any
pretended or real excellency they had, he does by this instance prove, that
neither their multitude of followers, not former success, could avail them,
since God spared not the old World. 2. As the Lord uses in times of greatest
defection to profanity or error, to preserve a few who will bear testimony for
His Truth, and against the dishonor done to Him by others: So He is never so
terrible to the wicked, but that He will remember to manifest His respect to
His own few amongst them, who labor to keep themselves free of, and mourn for,
these abominations which provoke Him to let forth His terror: For, Noah in this
instance, and Lot in the following, are brought in as pledges of a few whom the
Lord minded to preserve from that universal infection of error and vileness
which was to prevail in the Church of the New Testament, and whom He minded
also to deliver from the plagues to follow thereupon, as appears from ver. 9.
But saved Noah the eighth, etc. 3. Even in the very infancy of the Church under
the Old Testament, the way of justification by Christ's Righteousness has
been publicly preached, and the duties of holiness pressed upon justified
persons; the study of both which ought always to be much pressed upon people by
the Ministers of Christ especially in a time of abounding of iniquity, and
approaching of judgment, as the only way to be hid from wrath, and enjoy
communion with God: for, Noah in such a time was a Preacher of Righteousness,
both imputed and inherent, as was cleared in the Exposition of this Verse. 4.
The Lord in the dispensation of His Justice, is not bound to keep the ordinary
course of nature, but for the illustration thereof (...) may, and sometimes
does, make the creatures mo^e (...) (...) to their nature, there being in them
all a stronger ^^^pension so to do for their Maker's service, than to move
according to their ordinary course in serving their fellow creatures to His
dishonor: for, here in this instance, the Sea comes out of its channel at His
Command to drown a profane World; and in the following instance, the Fire
comes down out of its region to burn up filthy Cities; Bringing in the flood
upon the world of the ungodly.

Verse. 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra into ashes, condemned
them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should
live ungodly.
Here is the third instance, confirming the certainty of God's dreadful
reckoning with false teachers, and their followers: The sum whereof, is, That
if Sodom and Gomorra, with other flourishing Cities beside them, were for their
vileness totally and terribly destroyed, and so made lasting Copies of Divine
wrath to come upon all ungodly persons: these soul-deceivers who were guilty of
as high provocations, and had drawn in their guilt a great number of the Lord's
People, could not think in reason to escape. Hence Learn, 1. The judgments of
God upon sinful Cities and Incorporations, use to be most terrible and
exemplary, there being in them a confluence of many mercies, and so of many
provocations, powerful examples to sin, and bold despising of warnings, which
provokes God to make them ensamples of much wrath, Turning the Cities of Sodom
and Gomorra into ashes, condemned with a total and singular overthrow, as the
word signifies, making them ensamples, etc. 2. The sins of reasonable
creatures provoke the Lord to write His displeasure, not only upon the persons
of the sinners, but also upon the sinlesse and unreasonable creatures, which
they abuse to His dishonor: for, here the Cities, comprehending both the
persons of the sinners, and all the plantation, store, and pleasant things of
Sodom, are burnt to ashes, and condemned with an overth^^^ 3. However error or
heresy be often looked upon with more charity, and less abhorrency, than
profane practices; Yet shall not the judgment of Heretics and their followers,
be inferior to the judgment of the vilest of men that ever lived: for, God's
judgment upon Sodom, is here brought in as an ensample and pledge of His wrath
to come upon all the ungodly, amongst whom false teachers and their followers
are mainly eyed, as is clear by considering the connection betwixt the third
Verse and this. 4. However sins and judgments, in respect of their special
nature and circumstance, may vary in several times; Yet the desert of every
sin, and the exactness of Divine Justice remaining still the same, former
judgments, of what sort soever, executed upon any kind of sinners, are certain
pledges of the same wrath, or the like for substance, to come upon all that
walk contrary to the Truth and Will of God, though they were never so free of
these special sins, that formerly did procure that wrath: Therefore is this
instance of Gods judgment upon the Sodomites (as also the two former) brought
in here, as certain pledges of God's wrath to come upon false teachers, and
their followers; yea, upon all ungodly persons, making them ensamples (not only
to those who should be found guilty of such unnatural uncleanness as the
Sodomites were, but also) to all that after should live ungodly, whatever their
particular sins should be. 5. However they that live in sin under the light of
the Word, be neither willing to hear threatenings, nor to apply them to
themselves, Isa. 13.10. Yet is the Lord's Justice against impenitent sinners so
clear, in the examples thereof recorded in Scripture, and the witness and
deputy conscience, which God has in every man's bosom, so impartial, that if,
upon serious consideration of what God's holy Justice has done to sinners
before, it were put to speak what men, continuing in their sinful courses, have
to expect now, they could not but be made to apply wrath to themselves, and
certainly to expect it, while they compare their own sins with those for which
others have been punished; and do consider how impartially and immutably just
He is with whom they, as well as others, have to do: Therefore the Apostle does
not express the inference, which he clearly intends should be drawn from the
three forenamed instances, But leaves it to the consciences of these whom he
has been threatening, as that which they might easily conclude from thence.

Verse. 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked:

8. (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and bearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.)


For the comfort of all that mourn for the prevailing of iniquity in those
among whom they live, the Apostle subjoyneth to the former instance, the
example of Lot's preservation, whom the Spirit of the Lord, that indicted this
Scripture, does commend by several expressions of great respect, for His deep
resentment of, and sympathy with, the Lord's suffering honor, and for these
vile Sodomites amongst whom Providence had cast his lot for a time. Hence
Learn, 1. The dearest of the Children of the Lord may be put by His providence
to have their residence among the worst of men, the Lord thereby correcting and
humbling them for their too low esteem and little use-making of better society
while they had it; of which fault it seems Lot was not altogether free, Genesis
13. and thereby also giving them occasion to do good to the souls of their
godless neighbors, and bear witness against their wickedness: both which,
Lot endeavored, Genesis 19.7. who for these, and other reasons, had his lot among
the Sodomites for a time. 2. It is not impossible for the Children of the Lord,
living among the most profane, to retain their integrity, and have the Lord's
approbation for their disposition and carriage, there being much more power in
the grace of Christ, and his indwelling Spirit in them, than there is in the
temptations of Satan, or the example of the wicked, notwithstanding all their
terrors and allurements: for, Lot among the Sodomites is approven, and
commended as a just and righteous man. 3. It is the kindly disposition of a
true penitent, to be so far from taking pleasure in the sins of others, as the
wicked do, Romans 1.32. that he will be vexed in soul, and will account it his
duty to put himself to much grief, as the words here signify, while he does
ponder, and is a witness of His dishonor that has forgiven him: for, so was
it with penitent and pardoned Lot, he was vexed, (which is a passive word) and
did vex, (which is an active) his righteous soul with the filthy conversation,
and unjust deeds of the Sodomites. 4. This sympathizing frame of spirit with
the Lords suffering honor, is much taken notice of by Him, both to reward it
graciously, and to punish them that occasion that grief to His People;
Therefore both the expressions of Lot's vexation, and of the Lord's respect to
him, are frequently repeated here, Just Lot was vexed, and did vex his
righteous soul. 5. It is the privilege of a true penitent, to be in no less
esteem with a merciful God, and to find no less expressions of respect from
Him, than if he had never sinned against Him: for, though Lot (not without
guiltiness) did separate from Abraham, choosing Sodom to live in, for better
worldly accommodation, for which he met with much oppression and soul-vexation,
(both which, the word in the Original does signify) Yet the Lord did not only
preserve him from Sodom's judgment, but He does yet preserve his memory in
esteem by these manifold expressions of His respect to him, He delivered just
Lot, that righteous man, who vexed his righteous soul. 6. When men are left of
God, to follow the inclination of their corrupt nature, they will go to such a
height of wickedness as ought not to be mentioned without abhorrency; they
will not be restrained by any Law, they will cast aside all modesty, and avow
their vileness in their outward conversation; unnatural sins will become the
very element, wherein they will not weary to wast themselves daily: all which
is signified by these words here in the Original, whereby the carriage of the
Sodomites is set forth, and by the Apostle's speaking of it with so great
detestation, while he says, Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked, and did vex his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful
deeds.

Verse. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.
This Verse contains the application of all the former instances, in a
conclusion drawn from them, especially for the comfort of the Godly, as also
for the terror of the wicked, who ought both to draw the inference which is
here from the former examples. Hence Learn, 1. Although there be now no
ordinary warrant to expect such an extraordinary way of preservation from
common calamities as some of the Saints have found before; Yet, that same
wisdom, power and love in God, which wrought deliverance for them, being
engaged in the Covenant of Grace, to be forthcoming for all His own, in the
way that may be most for His honor, and their good, All who imitate these
Saints, in fearing threatened judgments, in mourning for, and keeping themselves
free of, the causes procuring them, and in the use of commanded means for their
preservation, may take their extraordinary deliverances, recorded in Scripture,
for pledges to them, either of exemption from the outward calamity, if that be
for their good, or of the equivalent thereof; or, rather that which will be
better for them, to wit, such a measure of the Lord's presence under it as
changes the nature of it to them; or, their full deliverance both from sin and
trouble by it: for, Noah and Lot's preservation, which were extraordinary, are
here held forth as useful for ordinary Believers, whence they might draw this
comfortable conclusion, The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
temptation. 2. It is the lot of the truly godly, to be brought into many and
great straits, not only by outward troubles, but by inward temptations; both
which come ordinarily together upon the Children of the Lord, that so their
manifold corruptions may be born down, the several graces of God's Spirit in
them may be tried, and increased by exercise, and the power, faithfulness, and
love of Christ manifested and commended in their thorow-bearing and
deliverance: for, they from whose case this inference is drawn, were in both
these exercises at once; and the word, temptation, here, does ordinarily in
Scripture signify both afflictions and temptations to sin. 3. While the
Children of the Lord are exercised with outward afflictions and inward
temptations, they are also oftentimes both ignorant of a way of delivery, and
anxious concerning it, as if their straits, and the way of their out-gate, were
hid from the Lord, as it is, Isa. 40.27. for, this consolation, The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly, is fitted for such a case, and so does
suppose it to be ordinary. 4. The Lord's taking notice of the straits of the
Godly, and His knowledge of the way of their deliverance, should be to them a
sufficient ground of comfort, both against their straits and their ignorance of
a way of out-gate, His love having engaged His power and faithfulness to make
forthcoming for them every thing His infinite Wisdom sees to be most for their
good: for, for this very end, is this consolation given to the Godly, The Lord
knows how to deliver them out of temptation, that they may be comforted both
against their straits, and their ignorance of a way of delivery. 5. Whether the
Lord spare wicked men, or let, out the earnest of His wrath upon them in this
life; yet is the fu l measure thereof, keeping to the fore for them, against
the day of judgment, when they shall be made able to endure that wrath; a
sparkle whereof, would now undo them: Therefore for their terror is this
conclusion also drawn from the former examples, The Lord knows how to reserve
the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished.

Verse. 10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the last of
uncleanness, and despise government, presumptuous are they, self-willed, they
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.
The former threatenings and examples of God's judgments, which do concern all
ungodly men, are here particularly applied to some, who did in a special manner
incense the wrath of God against themselves, amongst whom false teachers and
their followers are mainly eyed; and who are described from this, that they
follow their unmortified corruption as their ordinary leader, making a trade of
sins, against the second Table, particularly the seventh and fifth Commandments
thereof, wherein they were so bold and self-pleasing, that they did not fear
openly to disgrace any lawful Authority that might oppose them in their
wickedness. Hence Learn, 1. Whatever be the fair pretenses of singular
holiness that false teachers use to have, 2 Cor. 11.13. Yet really and in
effect they are nothing else but profane slaves to their lusts: in so far as
Truth is forsaken, and error received, profanity must needs have place, and
holiness be forsaken; the same Spirit of Christ, being the Spirit of truth,
and the Spirit of Holiness: for, these Seducers who drew so many after them by
their fair pretenses, are mainly intended here, while the Apostle says, They
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness. 2. Although any one act of
sin; yea, the least sinful motion of the heart, does deserve God's everlasting
wrath, Romans 6.33. Yet there is a singular measure of wrath abiding some sinners
beyond others; particularly those, who are not only through infirmity overtaken
in sin, as the best of the Saints have been, but do also make their corrupt
inclination their ordinary guide and rule, and their following and satisfying
thereof their common trade: for, the threatening formerly given out against all
the ungodly, is here particularly applied to some, chiefly those that walk
after the flesh. 3. The wrath of a holy God is in a special way incensed
against the sin of uncleanness, and that not only against the outward acts of
that sin, such as fornication, adultery, etc. but against the very inward
motions of the heart toward it: for, there is a special measure of wrath here
denounced against them who walk in the lust, or, (as the word signifies) the
desire of uncleanness. 4. Lawful Magistracy is a Divine Ordinance, so precious
in God's account, that He will let out a special measure of His wrath upon men,
for want of inward respect to it in their hearts; yea, for any expressions that
may weaken the due esteem thereof in the hearts of others, even though they
were Heathens that were invested with that Office: for, though Magistrates were
generally such at this time, Yet there is a special degree of wrath threatened
against them, who either undervalue in their hearts, or disgrace by their
expressions, that Ordinance, Especially those who despise Government, and are
not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. 5. Men that are slaves to their own
lusts, are ordinarily un-friends to lawful Magistrates; pretend what they will,
they who live in rebellion against God, can never be truly loyal to any
Vicegerent of His, and therefore ought not to be preferred or countenanced by
such, or any that give our themselves to be such: for, they that walk after the
flesh, do also despise Government. 6. The more stout-hearted men are in their
sinful courses, out-facing all challenges, and the more wedded to their own
inclination, not fearing to disgrace any that have a calling to oppose them in
their wickedness, the more wrath have they to expect from God: for, thus is
the sin of these men aggreged, who are here threatened with a special measure of
wrath, Presumptuous are they, self-willed. 7. Although sedition and disloyalty
to lawful Magistracy be the ordinary charge which false teachers give in
against he faithful Servants of Christ, Act. 24.1, 5. and 17.6, 7. as they did
also against the Lord himself, Luke 23.1, 2. Yet these false teachers
themselves will be found to be the greatest unfriends of lawful Magistrates,
either denying or weakening their Authority, if so be they employ their power
any way for opposing their errors, or wicked practices: for, false teachers are
mainly intended here, and charged by the Spirit of the Lord with this guilt,
They despise Government, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

Verse. 11. Whereas Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the Lord.
The Apostle does aggrege their sin of despising and disgracing lawful
Authority, from the carriage of the good Angels, who, though they be far above
the greatest on Earth in power and other perfections, Yet do they esteem so
highly of Magistracy, that they are loath to do any thing that may disgrace, or
bring in contempt, that Ordinance, in the person of any, as these base men do,
whose guiltiness and wrath must therefore be exceeding great. Doct. 1. The
good Angels are some way present at, and employed about, the affairs of the
children of men, not only within the Church, as guardians and servants to the
Saints, Psalm. 34.7. as witnesses of their Worship, 1 Cor. 11.10. and
condisciples with them in the study of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.13. But also
without the Church, in reference to her good, executing judgment, at the
Lord's command, upon her enemies, Isa. 37.36. marring their counsels against
her, Dan. 10.20. Although they use not now visibly to appear, since the
worshipping of them has so prevailed in the Antichristian Church; Yet if they
were not some way present, and employed as is said, the carriage of these
Heretics could not be aggreged from the dissimilitude thereof, to the present
carriage of the good Angels toward Magistrates, as here it is, They despise
Government, and speak evil of Dignities, Whereas Angels which are greater (...)
power and might, bring no railing accusation against them. 2. Although the
power of Angels be smit, as themselves are, it being the Lord's incommunicable
property to be Almighty, Genesis 17.1. Yet, that power which the Lord has given
them for the safeguard of the Saints, whom they attend, Heb. 1.14. and for the
terror of the wicked, whom they oppose, Psalm. 68.17. does far exceed the power
of the greatest on Earth: for, whether they be compared with false teachers,
who, by reason of the multitude of their followers, are very powerful; or with
Magistrates, who are the mightiest on Earth, they are, according to this
Scripture, greater in power and might. 3. The more nearness any creature have
to God, and the more eminent for gracious qualifications they be, the more
tenderness and compassion will they bear toward creatures that are void of
those perfections wherewith they are endued, and compassed with infirmities
whereof they are free; and the less delight will they have in their disgrace,
or destruction: Therefore the Angels, who do with much alacrity, and height of
divine zeal, execute the judgments of the Lord when they are commanded, Psalm.
103.20. who are witnesses of more of the wickedness and sinful infirmities of
Magistrates than false teachers can be, and who do far excel both in
perfection, do not (as false teachers use to do) bring any railing accusation
against them before the Lord. 4. As the eminency of sinners does in some
respects aggrege their sins, because of the power of their example, and their
great engagements to God, 2 Samuel 12.7. So also does the meannesse of their
condition in other respects, Prove. 30.21. they being thereby called to the more
humble dependence and duty toward God: for, thus is the sin of these false
teachers aggreged, that they, being such base and mean creatures, should
despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, Whereas Angels that are greater
in power and might, bring no railing accusation against them before the Lord.

Verse. 12. But these, as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their
own corruption.
The Apostle, having shown how unlike these false teachers who despise
Magistracy and Government among Christians, are to the most glorious creatures
of God, the good Angels, He shows here how like they are in this, and the
rest of their carriage, to the basest of the creatures, the bruit beasts: and
the resemblances betwixt them, which, the Apostle's words may lead us unto, are
especially three, 1. As the beasts are void of humane reason; so are they of
heavenly wisdom. 2. As the beasts do readily trample under foot the most
precious things; so do they speak evil of the things they understand not:
whereby is especially meant their opposing of Magistracy and Government among
Christians, and their slandering of the doctrine of holiness, so much pressed by
the Apostles, as if it had been contrary to the liberty of Christians. 3. As
the beasts are framed for destruction; so are they for utter perdition: which
is not to be understood as if they that have immortal souls could come to
nothing as the beasts, but that they are appointed for eternal torment, which
they do procure to themselves, as the beast is appointed for the slaughter.
Hence Learn, 1. However men of erroneous opinions, and vile affections, may be
in so high esteem in the Church, by reason of their fair pretenses and specious
titles they assume to themselves, as to draw a very considerable faction
therein after them; yet does the Lord esteem such (and will in his own time
discover them to be, what they are in effect) base and beastly in their
disposition and carriage: for, here these false teachers, who pretended to be
the only fountains of consolation to the Church, ver. 17. and patrons of
christian liberty, ver. 19. by such fair pretenses, gaining to themselves a
numerous party, ver. 2. are declared by the Spirit of the Lord, to be as
natural bruit beasts. 2. When men are led by their sensual appetite, not by
holy reason, and do become very adventrous in passing most hard sentences
against things they understand least, they have then the characters of a
beastly disposition and carriage: for, both these are here made resemblances
betwixt the beasts and false teachers, who as natural bruit beasts speak evil
of the things they understand no^. 3. When men do thus resemble the beasts in
their disposition and carriage, it is the clearest evidence that can be, that
they are appointed for destruction, as the beast is for the slaughter; and that
however they may, as fed beasts, prosper for a time; yet their end shall be
much worse than theirs: for, the Apostle makes the resemblance also in this,
that as the beast is to be taken and destroyed, so shall they utterly perish.
4. The punishment that abides the wicked, does consist in a through and
continual torment of soul and body, in the privation of all comfort, and that
to all eternity, without any hope of recovery: which is imported in this, they
shall utterly perish. 5. Whatever destruction comes upon wicked men, it is of
their own procuring, they do in time by their sins treasure-up the wrath, and
gather the fuel which shall seize upon them, and burn them up to all eternity:
for, they shall utterly perish in their own destruction.

Verse. 13. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, at they that count
it pleasure to riot in the day time: spots they are and blemishes, sporting
themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you;

14. Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, begutling
unstable souls, an heart they have exercised with covetous practices: cursed
children.


Here is a further amplification of the sin and judgment of these false
teachers, whom the Apostle has formerly described and threatened. The substance
whereof, is, That they shall want nothing of the wrath due to those who count
it their heaven to exceed in all carnal delights, notwithstanding of the light
of the Gospel, thereby disgracing their holy profession, and making but a sport
of deceiving their own souls, since they can in the mean time deceive others,
insinuating themselves in the esteem and society of the Godly, whether in their
religious or ordinary feasts, ver. 13. who are so under the power of their
unclean lusts, that they cannot but manifest their filthy disposition, being
altogether impotent to resist temptations themselves, and ensnaring with their
errors and vile practices such others as are not well settled in knowledge and
grace; And who are so sold to the love of their gain, that they make it their
heart-exercise to attain thereto: for all which, he pronounces them heirs of
God's fearful curse. Doct. 1. The wrath of God against sin had need to be often
inculcated to the guilty, and knit unto the several branches of their sin, that
so they may have the more lively apprehensions of that wrath, and may have
their hearts accustomed to think upon it, whenever they think upon their
sins, that so they may be either stopped in the course of their sin, and
hastened to repentance, or left the more inexcusable: Therefore the Apostle, in
branching out the sin of false teachers and their followers, does so frequently
intermix threatenings, or some new representation of that wrath they have to
expect, They shall utterly perish, in the former Verse, and here, they shall
receive the reward of unrighteousness: and they are cursed children. 2. When
God reckons with the wicked, they shall not want a grain weight of the wrath
due to them; for, since they have slighted the use-making of Christ's
righteousness, which makes sinners righteous; and the study of holiness,
which proves them righteous, they shall receive the reward of unrighteousness,
which, in the Original, does signify a due proportion of wrath to their sin.
3. That which does ripen wicked men for wrath, is not their sins only, simply
considered, but mainly the several aggravations ordinarily attending their
sins, whereof there may be seen here nine in number, As, 1. This does
exceedingly aggrege men's sin, when they count it their very paradise to
satisfy their lusts; for, so the word in the Original, They count it their
Eden to riot. The more Heaven men apprehend in their sins, the more Hell they
will find. 2. When men become so impudently bent upon their lusts, that neither
the light of the worlds knowledge of their sin, nor the light of the Word
discovering the evil and hazard thereof does restrain them; both which may be
comprehended in this other aggravation of their sin, They count it pleasure to
riot in the day time. 3. When men by their sins, do stain a holy profession
that they have made before the world: for, if these men had not had a fair
profession and high esteem in the Church, they could not have been spots and
blemishes while they feasted with the Lords people; which is here made another
aggravation of their guilt. 4. When men do not only live in sin, but do make a
sport of it, beguiling their own hearts with groundless apprehensions that
there is neither such evil nor hazard therein, as the Word holds forth, and
their own conscience sometimes suggesteth: for, this is another aggravation,
They sport themselves in their own deceivings. 5. When in the mean time of
their living in the slavery of their lusts, they are careful to keep up their
esteem with the Godly, and attend all occasions of converse with them, that so
they may cloak their sins: for, it is here made another aggravation of their
guilt, that all this wickedness is committed while they feast with the Lord's
People. 6. When men's lusts are so vigorous within, that they manifest their
predominancy in their very outward carriage: for, this is a further aggravation
of their sin, They have eyes full of adultery, 7. When men become so impotent
to resist their lusts, that the satisfying thereof becomes their very element,
out of which they cannot rest, as the word here signifies, They cannot cease
from sin: which is also another aggravation of their guilt. 8. When sinners
become infectious, and insnaring, with the bait (as the word, beguiling, in the
Original signifies) of fair pretenses, many others, to swallow down their foul
errors and profane practices: this also is a high aggravation of their guilt.
9. When men make it their heart-exercise, whereabout they spend their wit and
affections to fulfill their fleshly desires: for, this is here the last
aggravation of their sin. An heart they have exercised with covetous practices.
Doct. 4. Although it be possible that the Lord's People may without guiltiness
admit into their ordinary and intimate society, the worst of men, while they do
not discover themselves, as is clear concerning Ahithophel and Judas; Yet does
the admission of such into their society oftentimes prove a great snare,
especially to those that are admitted, while they take occasion therefrom to
harden themselves in those sins, and to count the less of that vileness, the
commission whereof does not mar their esteem and society with the Godly: for,
this is one thing that helped these soul-deceivers to deceive themselves and
willingly to overlook the evil of their own condition, that notwithstanding of
all their wickedness, they were admitted to the society of the Godly, and did
pass among them for such; While they feast with you. 5. When men labor not to
mortify their inward lusts, the Lord oftentimes does justly suffer them to
manifest the predominancy of these lusts over them in their outward carriage;
As grace which is lively within, will put some beauty upon the outward man,
Eccl. 8.1. So corruptions vigorous within will readily bewray the person to be
its slave, Isa. 3.9. Having eyes full of adultery, or (as it is in the
Original) of the adultress. 6. So bewitching is the spirit of error where it
enters, and so devoted are deluded souls unto their seducing teachers, That
though these teachers be judicially plagued of God (as ordinarily such are)
with profanity of life; Yet this does not make their followers loath at them,
or abhor their errors: for, though they did riot in the day time, and had eyes
full of adultery, Yet were they still beguiling unstable souls. 7. Those who
are not rooted in knowledge by clear information and frequent meditation of the
Truth, and have not their hearts established with Grace by the frequent
exercise thereof, will readily be a prey to soul-deceivers: for, these whom
they beguile are here called Unstable souls. 8. No man does serve one idol
alone, but many at once: he that is wedded to worldly pleasures, will be also
to his credit^ the want whereof, does mar his pleasure; and if pleasure and
credit be two of a man's idols, readily gain will be the third, that so he may
the more easily attain to the other two. Therefore does the Apostle describe
these men here as slaves to all these three idols at once, to their pleasures,
which were their Eden; to their credit, which made them hold forth baits to
take many followers; and to their gain, wherewith their heart was exercised,
that so their pleasures and credit might be attained and upheld. Lastly, They
who, professing themselves to be the Children of the Lord, do spend their
immortal spirits upon the unworthy things of this present life, not trusting to
his care and providence in the moderate use of lawful means whereunto their
profession does oblige them, They do forfeit their right they pretend to have
to the Privileges of His Children, and serve themselves heirs to His curse:
for, because their heart is exercised with covetous practices, they are cursed
children.

Verse. 15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following
the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness:

16. But was rebuked for his iniquity; the dumb ass speaking with man's voice,
forbad the madness of the prophet.


The Apostle, having shown what idols these false teachers did set up, he
shows here two woeful effects that their love to them, especially to their
gain had upon them. The first, is, their apostasy from the Truth and way of
Christ. The second, is, extreme violence in the prosecution of these idols;
Which last he sets forth by comparing them with B^laam, who was so mad in
the prosecution of these same idols, that even extraordinary opposition could
not restrain him. Hence Learn, 1. However men that really enter the way of
Christ can never totally or finally fall from it, by reason of the Lord's
undertaking, Joh. 10.28. and unchangeablenesse, Romans 11.29. Yet they who have
been once in opinion sound, and in external practice blameless, remaining in
the mean time without any inward saving change, may make apostasy from both:
for, such had these men been, of whom the Apostle says, They have forsaken the
right way. 2. Love to some unmortified lust, especially covetousness, is the
prime cause both of much apostasy, and of extreme violence in sinful courses:
for, so was it with these false teachers and their followers, their heart was
exercised with covetous practices in the former Verse, and therefore they
forsook the right way, imitating Balaam in the violent prosecution of that
idol. 3. When the right way, which is the way of truth and holiness, is
forsaken, men can keep no certain course, but must needs be like wandering stars
or planets (as the word here signifies) ever seeking, and never finding, that
true satisfaction they might have had, and have forsaken, by forsaking the
right way; And are gone astray. 4. When the Lord's ordinary means, to reclaim
sinners from their lusts, does not prevail with them, the Lord is justly
provoked to give them up to go on in their own way, over the belly of more than
ordinary opposition, if they have it, till they perish: for, Balaam was not
restrained by means more ordinary in his time, and therefore he is not
reclaimed by means more extraordinary; He loved the wages of unrighteousness,
though he was rebuked for his iniquity by the dumb ass. 5. Covetousness being
once rooted in the heart, and proposed as a man's main end, it is so powerful
and imperious an idol, that it will make the covetous man adventure upon any
course, though never so unrighteous, and go over never so much opposition in
the way of his gain: for, though the wages that Balaam desired, were wages of
unrighteousness, because they could not be had but by cursing the People, whom
God had blessed; Yet he loved them, and pursued them, though the dumb ass forbad
his madness in so doing. 6. The more opposition from the word, or
dispensations of God, men do go over in the prosecution of their lusts, the
greater is their guilt, and the more wrath have they to expect from God,
especially when they trace the steps of sinners, whom God has by His Word and
Providence opposed before them: for, it is here made an aggravation of sin, and
cause of a special measure of wrath, that these men followed the way of Balaam,
who would go on after his lusts, though the dumb ass, speaking with man's
voice, forbad his madness. 7. It is in some respect more easy to work the
greatest miracle in nature, than to stop the course of a sinner, violently
pursuing his lusts; the reasonlesse creatures, who have no active opposition in
them to their Maker's will, being more prone to obey Him, contrary to their
ordinary course, than reasonable creatures, without special grace and
assistance, can be, either to follow the direction of His Word, or their own
reason contrary to their corrupt and vile affections: for, while Balaam goes
on in his sinful course, The dumb ass, speaking as if it had a man's voice,
forbad his madness. 8. A cross providence meeting sinners in a course
contrary to the revealed Will of the Lord, has a language to them, proclaiming
their madness, and prohibiting them to go on in their sins, which they ought
to hear and obey, although it be not so express, as when one man reproves
another; See Mica. 6.9. for, though we read not, ( Numb. 22.) that Balaam's
ass did either expressly call him mad, or prohibit his course; Yet here the
Spirit of God puts that commentary upon what it spoke, which also Balaam
should have done, That the dumb ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the
madness of the prophet. 9. It is the height of madness to walk contrary to
the revealed Will of God, how much use of reason soever men may have to cover
their wickedness, and attain to their idols: for, though much carnal reason
and policy did appear in Balaam's way, Yet the dumb ass forbad the madness of
the prophet. 10. A man who is mad in the pursuit of his lusts, and so
incorrigible, that even extraordinary means do not reclaim him, may,
notwithstanding, be employed by the Lord for revealing of His Will to His
People, and for the edifying of His Church; and in the discharge of that
employment may be furnished with much heavenly matter, and suitable
expressions, and ought to be heard and obeyed by the Church in the discharge of
his employment, while he is not discovered to be what he is, and is not
according to the order established in the House of God put from that
employment: for, such a man was Balaam, whom the Lord did employ, and by whom
He did deliver most comfortable and edifying Truths to His Church: all which is
clear by comparing this place of Scripture, with Numb. 21,22. chapters.

Verse. 17. These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.
In this, and the two following Verses, the Apostle holds forth several of
those means, which false teachers make use of for attaining their forenamed
idols, especially their gain and applause. The first, which is in this verse. is
their fair promises of doing much good to the Church: They give out themselves
to be wel-springs of comfort to the Lords People, and clouds to drop down their
doctrine as rain, to make the Church fruitful, whileas in effect they did but
disappoint poor souls, and darken the Truth; for which, the Apostle threatens
them with everlasting darkness, as their portion. Hence Learn, 1. They that do
most hurt to the souls of the Lord's People, by venting most dangerous errors
among them, make oftentimes the fairest promises of doing most good to them,
that so they may feed People with vain expectations of more than ever they can
find from them; faithful Ministers, being sensible of their own insufficiency,
2 Cor. 3.5. and of the necessity of a divine concurrence with their pains, 1
Cor. 3.7. are more ready to express their fears of Peoples disappointment, 2
Cor. 11.2, 3. than to make such large promises of much comfort and profit to
People by their means, as false teachers use to do: for here, these seducers
give out themselves to be what faithful Ministers ought to be, Wells of
consolation, receiving from Christ the Fountain, and giving out to His People
what may comfort them; and Clouds, to drop down their doctrine as rain in
season, to make them fruitful. 2. Whatever be the fair pretenses and promises
of false teachers, the Lord's People can meet with nothing but disappointment
from them; and whatever esteem they may have among the best for a time, God
will take His own time to manifest what they are in effect, and to undeceive
His own People: for here, they that gave out themselves, and were esteemed to
be the chief instruments of the comfort and fruitfulness of the Church, as the
similitudes of Wells and Clouds, whereby they set out themselves, do import,
are here discovered to be such as did disappoint, and in disappointing,
increase the anxiety of these that expected comfort from them, as Wells without
water do the weary travellor; and to be such as are acted by the restless
spirit of Satan into every airth where their forenamed idols of gain and
applause can be had, as clouds that are carried with a tempest. 3. The judgment
of false teachers, whereof their followers shall get a share, shall be very
proportionable to their sin; for, they promise to be Wells of consolation to
the Lord's People, and do disappoint them; they themselves delight to walk, and
to lead others in the works of darkness: they darken the Truth of God; and in
this course they are restless, as clouds carried with a tempest: and therefore
the threatening is exactly suited to these sins; For them the mist of darkness
is reserved for ever.

Verse. 18. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean
escaped from them who live in error.
Here is the next course which soul-deceivers take to ensnare poor souls by
their errors, to wit, a high and lofty style of language, which their love to
their lusts made them to affect, and whereby they were very taking with
unmortified wanton professors, especially such as have been turned from
Paganism, to the profession of Christianity. Hence Learn, 1. They that vent
error do ordinarily hold it forth under some lofty strain of language, and
high-bended expressions, beyond what is ordinary, such as may be most taking
with, and admired by the hearers; whileas faithful Ministers can trust Christ,
to make plain Truth, spoken in the simplicity of words, effectual for the
salvation, comfort and edification of His own, which is their main scope, 1
Cor. 2.4. for, it is here a character of false teachers, They speak great
swelling words. 2. When the vail of odd and soaring expressions, wherein false
teachers delight, is laid aside, and the naked purpose, held forth under them,
is considered, it will be found of no worth, but either some untruth, or that
which makes nothing to the true advantage of souls; both which are vanity: for
here their great swelling words, are words of vanity. 3. An affected lofty
style of language in uttering things divine, does ordinarily flow from some
unmortified lust in the speaker, especially the love of applause; and is also
mainly taking with wanton unhumbled souls, when it does provoke to more vanity
and lightness, by diverting them from the study of their natural vileness,
their need of Jesus, and the necessity of the mortification of their
heart-evils: for, they who speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness: both which last
clauses may be understood, as well of the principle which does bend the
preacher to that strain, as of the qualification of these hearers with whom it
is most taking. 4. There may be a very remarkable external change from vile and
blasphemous opinions, idolatrous and profane practices, to a profession of
Truth and suitableness of the outward conversation to it, where there is no
saving or inward change made of the heart, from the love of secret lusts to the
love of Christ and His grace; the one without the other may be occasioned by
the power of example, the majesty and clearness of Truth, which is in nothing
contrary to natures light, the beauty of holiness shining in the conversation
of Professors, and outward advantages which sometimes may attend the profession
of Truth and Holiness: for, these here who were yet given to the lusts of
their flesh, and much wantonness had once clean escaped from the blasphemous
opinions, profane and idolatrous practices of those without the Church, who are
here called them that live in error. 5. Whatever change of this sort be wrought
upon men, unless they labor to find the power of Christ's Spirit changing,
their nature, and mortifying their inward lusts, they will easily be a prey to
seducing spirits, and carried to those sins which are no less dishonorable to
God, and destructive to their own souls, than those wherein they lived before:
for here, those who had once clean escaped from the vile opinions, and wicked
practices wherein Pagans live, are now by the seduction of false teachers,
turned profane and licentious Christians.

Verse. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption: for, of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage.
The last of those means whereby false teachers do ensnare so many of their
hearers, is, their pretending to make clear to them, and possess them in, that
Christian liberty, whereof the Gospel speaks, which they could not at all
perform, in regard themselves were complete slaves to their lusts, as captives
in war are servants to their conqueror. Hence Learn, 1. The Doctrine of
Christian liberty, which is in it self most sweet and saving, holding forth our
freedom from the Law as a Covenant of work, Romans 7.4. and from the curse
thereof, Gal. 3.13. from the dominion of Satan, Heb. 2.14, 15. the terror and
allurements of the world, Gal. 1.4. and the dominion of our own lusts, Romans
6.14. has been, and yet is, much abused, while it is stretched to give liberty
to sin, and to loose Christians from the holy Commandments of the moral Law, as
they are now pressed in the Gospel: for, so does the Apostle forewarn it should
be abused along the time of the Gospel, as is clear by comparing this with the
1. and 21. Verses. 2. They that are much in crying up Christian liberty, and
little or nothing in pressing the holy Commandments of Christ upon His Redeemed
Ones, the obedience whereof is a great part of our Christian liberty, and one
main end of our liberation from our spiritual enemies, Luke 1.74, 75. they
cannot but be slaves to their lusts; and so must those be that embrace that
doctrine: for, while they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption. 3. Although every man be bound in Law to be the servant
of Christ, who can make the worst thing that men can do subservient to His
ends, Psalm. 119.91. Yet he who does voluntarily, and ordinarily, give-up
himself to serve the Devil, and his own corruption, without resistance or
crying to Christ for help, is then in a manner, a lawful captive to Satan, to
be detained by him till the Supreme Judge execute deserved wrath upon him, as
one that rendereth himself to a conqueror, is his bondslave, according to the
Law of Nations, to which the Apostle alludeth while he says, Of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

Verse. 20. For, if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

21. For, it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them.


The Apostle proves the condition of these Apostates, whom he supposes to
have attained so much of the knowledge of Christ, as had power upon them to
cleanse their outside, to be much worse than it was before that change, because
their sin and judgment had been less if they had never known any thing of the
way of justification revealed in the Gospel, than it will be now, after that
has been cleared to their understanding; and yet in doctrine and practice they
do cast off another part of the Gospel, to wit, that which presses the duties
of holiness upon justified persons. Hence Learn, 1. Even those who are
destitute of the saving knowledge of Christ, and strangers to the mortification
of heart-pollutions, may find so much power of the knowledge of Him, as to make
them cleanse their external conversation; the knowledge of Christ is so
ravishing a subject, able to divert even an unrenewed mind from many sinful
speculations, that even a hypocrite, living in love with his secret lusts, may
escape the pollutions that are breaking forth in the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2. They who have not attained
to a heart-outcast with sin, and some inward mortification thereof, will, upon
fit occasions and temptations, be readily ensnared again, and made slaves to
these same sins which were externally reformed, and from the outward acts
whereof only, they had made an escape: for, these here spoken of, having only
escaped the pollutions that are in the world through the knowledge of Christ,
they are again entangled and overcome. 3. Before men be overcome by temptation,
they are first entised with the apprehension of some pleasure, profit, or the
like, to be had by their sins; with which apprehension the hazard and danger of
committing the sin is covered and hid, as the fisher's hook is by the bait,
which is the metaphor in the Apostle's expression, They are again entangled and
overcome. 4. The guilt and deserved wrath against those who after illumination
by the truth, and external renunciation of their sins, do return back again to
them, is much greater, than if they had never been so far enlightened and
reformed, their sins being now against light, and some tastes of sweetness,
which is sometimes letten out even to those who do but externally renounce
their sins, and betake themselves to the way of Christ, Heb. 6.4, etc. for, of
such the Spirit of God says here, The latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. 5. Those to whom the Lord does make known the way of free
justification by the righteousness of Christ, to them also He does deliver His
holy Commandments, the obedience whereof they ought to set about in His
strength: for, so much is imported in the Apostle's words, that having known
the way of righteousness, there was a holy Commandment delivered to them. 6.
It is less difficult, and more ordinary for men, to adhere in their opinion
and profession, to the way of free justification by Christ's imputed
righteousness, when that way is once cleared to their minds, than it is for
them to insist in the constant practice of holy duties, which Christ presses
upon them, and offers them strength for, there being even in corrupt nature,
which is most averse from holy duties, some inclination to be made blessed, and
that freely; which is imported in the Apostle's changing of the expression:
for, he does not say, that after they had known the way of righteousness,
they, had turned from it; importing, that these false teachers did still
profess and preach justification by His righteousness; but, after they had
known that way, they turned from the holy Commandment delivered to them; their
adhering to the one without the other, made their guilt greater than if they
had never known that one, and no less than if they had turned from both.

Verse. 22. But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire.
In the last place, the Apostle guardeth against any offense which might be
occasioned by the apostasy of these false teachers and their followers, in
regard they had now proven themselves never to have been inwardly renewed, as
the true sheep of Christ are; but only by their Baptism and profession to have
externally renunced that vileness, whereunto they are now returned again,
after the custom of dogs and swine, according to that common proverb, which is
made use-of in Scripture, Prove. 26.11. Doct. 1. Sin ought to be represented by
the Lord's Ministers in its abominable vileness, especially when men labor to
palliate their filthy practices with fair pretenses. Therefore these vile
practices, which these false teachers called their christian liberty, the
Apostle here calls a licking up of their vomit, and a wallowing in the mire.
2. They who after external reformation and great profession of holiness, do
return unto, and continue in, their renounced sins, do thereby give evidence
that they were never inwardly or really changed in their nature: for these, of
whom the Apostle speaks here, being still dogs and swine, were only washen
externally, and did vomit up by confession and seeming renunciation, their
filthy practices, to which they did return again, as the dog returns to his
vomit, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire; and so this
place can make nothing for the apostasy of the Saints. Lastly, It is lawful
for the Ministers of Christ to make use of common similitudes, or proverbs, to
clear the Truth, and fix it in the minds of those that are led by sense,
(providing they do make use, especially of such as are scriptural) propose all
their similitudes in a decent and cleanly way, suitable to the majesty and
purity of Truth, and apposit to their present purpose, and bring them forth
only for illustration of Truths, otherwise proven: for, so does the Apostle
here make use of such a similitude as he found in Scripture, which, though it
be taken from things in themselves vile, is expressed in the most honest terms,
that can fitly set out the vileness of apostasy, the evil whereof he had
clearly proven before; It is happened unto them according to the true proverb,
etc.

CHAP. III.
BEcause the believing consideration of Christ's second coming, is a special
mean to make Christians thrive in grace and holiness, and to guard their
hearts against temptations; Therefore the Apostle, having pressed growth in
grace and holiness, in the first part of this Epistle, Chap. 1. and guarded
against the infection of error, in the second part, Chap. 2. He does in this
last Chapter, wherein is the third part of the Epistle, 1. defend and clear the
doctrine of the last judgment; and 2. does show what use Believers should make
thereof.

In the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle, having put them in mind of his
main scope in both the Epistles, which was to keep the substance of the Gospel
fresh in their minds, ver. 1, 2. gives forewarning of the rise of profane
mockers of Christ's second coming, who, that they might serve their lusts with
the more quietness, would plead for an eternity of this present world, because
they had never observed any appearance of such a change as was foretold to be
at that day, ver. 3, 4. Which blasphemous opinion, together with their seeming
reason for it, the Apostle confuteth by several reasons drawn from the works of
Creation and Providence, which prove there will be such a day, as will be very
terrible to profane mockers of it, ver. 5, 6, 7. and holds forth to the
Godly, satisfying reasons of the delay of that day, to wit, that it is very
small, being compared with eternity, ver. 8. that the delay is mainly for the
gathering of the Elect, ver. 9. which being done, that day will come suddenly
and with much terror, ver. 10.

In the second part of the Chapter, the Apostle makes use of his former
Doctrine concerning Christ's second coming, for the up-stirring of the Lord's
People to the study of holiness, ver. 11. to wait and pray for that day, ver.
12. when they had ground to look for so excellent an estate, ver. 13. as might
provoke them to much diligence in making ready for it, ver. 14. to esteem the
delay thereof to be granted for the furtherance of their salvation, in which
strain Paul had insisted much in his Epistles, ver. 15, 16. And upon the
consideration of all, to labor for steadfastness and progress in grace, and
in the knowledge of Christ, who is worthy of eternal praise, ver. 17, 18.

Verse. 1. This second Epistle (Beloved) I now write unto you, in both which I
stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

2. That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy
Prophets, and of the Commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior.


THe Apostle does here present to them his chief scope intended by him in both
the Epistles, which was the wakening and rousing of these sincere-hearted
Christians, to whom he writes, to an actual consideration, and constant
practice of known Truths, that had been delivered to them by the Prophets,
himself, and other Apostles of Jesus Christ. Hence Learn, 1. The Ministers of
Christ ought not only to intend, as their scope, some particular advantage to
the souls of the Lord's People by all the Messages they carry to them; But also
in their delivery of them, frequently to make clear to the People what their
main intent is, that so themselves may be engaged to direct all they deliver
toward that scope, the People may have it the better fixed in their minds, and
all that they hear, relating to that scope, may be the better understood, and
have the greater weight; otherwise, the greatest variety of Truth, and most
taking expressions, can have but a slender and soon evanishing impression upon
that hearer, who cannot be able to condescend upon the principal scope of the
speaker: for, here the Apostle has proposed their up-stirring as his scope,
and by his frequent mentioning of it in the first Chapter, and this also, did
ty himself to speak to it, and made his hearers able to judge how all he
delivered did make for it; This second Epistle (Beloved) I now write unto you,
in both which I stir up your pure minds. 2. A Minister's main scope, ought not
to be the acquiting of himself before men in his duty, so as he may be free of
censure, neither only the clear information of the minds of the Lord's People
in the Truth, neither yet the bringing forth of some new things which they that
live under the Gospel have not formerly heard, But more principally he must
study the quickening and wakening of the affections of the Lord's People to a
delight in, and resolution to walk in the practice of Truths they have formerly
known and remembered: for, it is here the Apostle's scope, to stir them up, a
word frequently used in the New Testament of raising the dead, and wakening
those that are asleep, by putting them in remembrance, which signifies to
represent of new to the mind and memory truths formerly known and remembered. 3.
A Minister that would prevail with the Lord's People, ought both to keep love
to them, that his pains may flow therefrom, and in his dealing with them to
express his love and high esteem of any measure of sincerity he has discerned
in them: Therefore does the Apostle style these whom he intends to stir up,
Beloved, and does acknowledge that they had sincere and pure minds. 4. Even
those who for sincerity of heart, and honesty of their aims and intentions, may
a bide the trial of Gospel Light, have great need of many messages to the same
purpose, and of much up-stirring to the right use-making of them, there being
in them that have the clearest understanding, much darkness, and many mistakes
concerning the Truths of God; and in the sincerest Believer, whose heart is
most lively and forward in duties, a great remnant of hypocrisy, deadness and
unwillingnesse to the practice of many known duties: for, the Apostle finds
it necessary to write two Epistles for the up-stirring of pure minds, or, as
the word in the Original signifies, minds so sincere that they may be judged
by the Sun. 5. The Word of the Lord has most weight with People, when not only
they that carry it to them, are holy, and so esteemed by the People, but the
minds of the hearers are carried above the Messengers to Jesus Christ, and
their hearts in hearing or reading, are filled with some sense of His
Soveraignity who does employ those Messengers, and of His usefulness for them
in all His Offices: Therefore, that the Word which the Apostle here exhorts
them to study, may have the more weight, he leads them not only to look upon
the Messengers that carried it, as holy men; but to consider the soveraignity,
excellency, and usefulness of Christ in His Offices to which He is anointed;
Be mindful of the Words which were spoken by the holy Prophets, and of the
Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 6. The
way to keep life in the affections of the Lord's People, is to have their wit
and memory actually exercised about the Truths of God, both the Prophesies and
Promises of good to the Church and People of God, and to press the Precepts
enjoining their duty: for, that the Apostle may gain his principal scope, to
wit, the rousing up of their affections, he makes this his speech subordinate
thereto, That they might be mindful of the Words that were spoken before by the
holy Prophets, and of the Commandments of the Apostles of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. 7. Although the Lord has letten forth His mind to His Church by
little and little, in several Ages of the World, and by several Messengers,
Heb. 1.1. Yet is there such a complete harmony among all the parts of His Mind,
that all serve for one and the same principal scope, the up-stirring of the
Lord's People to a hearty receiving and use-making of Christ and His Truth;
for, unto this scope the Apostle here affirms, that the whole Doctrine both
of the Prophets and Apostles did harmoniously tend.

Verse. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts,

4. And saying, Where is the promise of His coming? For, since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation.


That the Apostle may attain his forementioned scope, he does forewarn of the
rise of profane mockers, toward the end of time, who, that they might sin the
more securely, should question the second coming of Christ, and plead for an
eternity of this present World, pretending this reason for it, That since the
whole frame of Nature had kept one constant tenor and course since the death
of Adam, Seth, Enos, and the rest of the first fathers, it was not to them
credible that ever there should be such a change as was foretold to be at the
day of judgment. Doct. 1. Variety of very fierce and discouraging opposition in
the way of Christ, and that from several sorts of enemies, is the lot wherewith
the Church and People of Christ may resolve to be exercised: for, the Apostle,
having forewarned of, and guarded against, open persecutors in the former
Epistle, subtle and fair pretending. Heretics in the former Chapter, he does
here forewarn of^, and guard against, a third sort, to wit, profane scoffers of
Christ's second coming. 2. The consideration of the hazard that the best are in
of being drawn aside, some one way or other, from the Truth and Way of Christ,
by such variety of opposition as they ordinarily meet with, ought both to stir
up Ministers carefully to warn and guard People against the same; and People to
the use-making of their pains: for, after the Apostle had guarded against open
persecutors and cunning deceivers, he does here bring in the forewarning of the
third sort of enemies, scoffers: which may be taken both for a reason of his
pains in writing two Epistles, as also for a reason why they should be stirred
up by what he had written, Knowing this, that besides furious persecutors, and
subtle deceivers, they should also be exercised with profane scoffers. They who
have not been terrified by the first sort, nor deceived by the second, are in
hazard to be discouraged by the third. 3. The certainty and necessity of being
exercised with variety of opposition in the Way of Christ, is one of the
principles of Christianity which ought to be held in the first place by all
that resolve to adhere to any other saving Truth; they who do not first know
this, and, notwithstanding thereof, resolve upon adherance to the Truth in
Christ's strength, will readily, when they meet with such a lot, be surprised
therewith, and either forsake the Truth, or faint in their adherance to it:
Therefore the Apostle would have them knowing this first, that after several
other sorts of enemies, there were also to come in the last days, scoffers. 4.
There are no such pure or peaceable times to be expected by the Church and
People of God within time, wherein the forementioned lot is not to be
expected; they who dream of the best times to the Church on Earth, look for
them toward the end of time: and yet the Spirit of God here forwarneth, that
beside the rage of persecutors, and prevailing of heretics, there shall come
in the last days scoffers. 5. It is a clear evidence that men are slaves to
their lusts, when they do strongly desire an eternal enjoyment, of this
present world, and labor to banish out of their own hearts the thoughts of a
day of judgment; Yea, their so doing is also the cause why they give up
themselves to the service of their lusts, the believing consideration of the
terror of that day to the wicked, being a special help to mortification and of
the sweetness thereof to the Godly, a special encouragement in the battle
against corruption: for, their scoffing at the promise of Christ's second
coming, may be looked upon here both as the evidence and cause of their walking
after their ungodly lusts. 6. When men are left of God to vile opinions for not
receiving the Truth in love, they are then oftentimes plagued further, not only
with devilish wit, to find out seeming reasons for the defense of them, very
plausible to themselves, and others like themselves; but also to take manifest
falsehoods for undeniable grounds of their errors: for, these mockers here lay
all the weight of their blasphemous opinion upon this seeming reason, That
since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were, etc. which
appears from the Apostle's contrary instance, ver. 6. to be a manifest
falsehood. 7. Although it be a sweet mercy, much to be acknowledged by the
Lord's People, that things in nature do ordinarily keep one constant course,
and that they are not terrified with the frequent change thereof, but may be
thereby confirmed in the faith of the Lords constancy and faithfulness, as
David was, Psalm. 119.90, 91. Yet men that are in love with their lusts, do make
a woeful use of the consideration thereof, hardening themselves in their
conceit that there shall never be a change, that so they may sin the more
securely: for, thus did these scoffers abuse this mercy, taking occasion
therefrom to question the promise of Christ's second coming, and to walk the
more boldly after their ungodly lusts; since all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the Creation.

Verse. 5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the Word of God the
Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, and in the Water.

6. Whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with Water, perished.

7. But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same Word are kept in
store, reserved unto Fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
men.


Because these mockers did pretend reason for their blasphemous opinion, the
Apostle takes pains to confute it by several reasons, such as they did not
love to understand. The first, taken from the work of Creation, is, That the
whole fabric of the Heavens was set up by a Word of God's. The second, taken
from an ordinary and daily work of Providence, is, That the Earth, being the
lowest and heaviest of the Elements, is by His Word kept from being overflowed
by the Waters that go about it, and cover it in many places, ver. 5. The third,
taken from an extraordinary work of Providence, is, That by a Word of His,
letting out the Waters to their natural course, the whole Earth was once
overflowed in the time of the flood, ver. 6. The conclusion drawn from these
three, is, That His Word is a sufficient ground for us to believe that He shall
come again to judgment, and that this whole frame of Nature is keeping to the
fore, as fuel to burn up all the ungodly, especially profane mockers of that
day, ver. 7. Hence Learn, 1. When vile blasphemies are not only boldly vented
but maintained with some show of reason, to make them taking with people, they
ought then to be solidly confuted, and born down with strength of reason,
grounded upon the Scripture. Though otherwise, when they are only simply or
rashly asserted, and are not taking with hearers, it is sufficient to reject
them with detestation, and expressions of our abhorrency of them: for, because
this blasphemy had a seeming reason to back it with, the Apostle takes pains
to confute it by many solid reasons, drawn from the Scriptures. 2. They that
are in love with their lusts and errors, they love also to be ignorant of these
Truths, the knowledge whereof might disquiet them in following their lusts, and
maintaining their errors; Yea, they would willingly be ignorant of what they do
know, that so they might sin the more securely: for, these men here, whom the
faith of a day of judgment could not but terrify, are discovered to be
willingly ignorant of these things that might have helped them to believe it.
3. As the whole frame of Nature had its being, and has its subsistence by the
Word of God; So the believing consideration of this, is sufficient to make the
most unlikely thing that God has promised, to be credible to us. They who look
right upon what God has already done by a Word, will never think any thing He
has promised or foretold, impossible: for, the Apostle gives this as a
sufficient confutation of their blasphemous mockery at the promised appearance
of Christ; That since by the Word of the Lord the Heavens were of old, and the
Earth standing out of the Water, and in the Water, it is not incredible that
all shall be taken down with as little difficulty as it was at first set up,
and has hitherto been upheld: which is the force of the Apostle's reasoning
here. 4. It is a standing miracle of Nature that the Earth is not overflowed by
the Water, while one part of it is covered therewith, and another not, whereof,
though some probable natural reasons may be given, Yet all will not satisfy,
till we look to God's Decree of Providence, and His executing thereof by His
Word, by which the Earth is standing out of the Water, and in the Water. 5.
However error, when it is looked upon alone, as the cunning craftiness of men
usually represents it, may seem to have a kind of likelihood and probability,
Yet when it is compared with the clear light of the Truth shining upon it, it
does manifestly appear to be a lying deceit: for, that plausible assertion, All
things continue as they were from the beginning, ver. 4. wherewith these
scoffers labored to weaken the faith of a day of judgment, is clearly
discovered to be a manifest lie, by this contrary instance, ver. 6. The World
that then (to wit, before the flood) was, being overflowed with Water,
perished. 6. Particular judgments upon some wicked men, while others are
spared, do prove that there shall be a general judgment: for, seeing some are
justly punished here, and others, deserving, no less, are spared, He who is
immutably and impartially just, must have a day for judging these afterward,
who are spared in time: Therefore does the Apostle bring in the instance of the
flood upon the ungodly World, not only as a contradiction to their assertion,
ver. 4. but as a proof against them of a day of judgment; The World being
overflowed with Water, perished. 7. The day of Christ's second coming will be a
most dreadful and terrible day to all ungodly men, who banish the thoughts of
it, and desire eternally to possess this present World, and the pleasures
thereof; when they shall see all those creatures, which they have abused to
serve them in their serving of their lusts, burning fuel, to kindle (as it
were) that flame, which shall burn them up for ever and ever, and shall not be
so happy as to be destroyed with the rest of the creatures, but shall then
enter into their never-ending torment: for, the Heavens and the Earth which are
now, are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the day of judgment and
perdition of ungodly men.

Verse. 8. But (Beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Apostle having, by strength of reason drawn from Scripture, overthrown the
opinion of these mockers of Christ's second coming, He does in this and the two
following Verses, hold forth three reasons which may satisfy the Godly,
concerning the delay thereof: The first, which is in this Verse, is, That the
delay ought not to be judged of according to our sense or apprehension, but
according to the duration of God, with whom that space of time which seems
very long to us, is but as one day, and to whom all those differences of
duration, which to the creatures are longer or shorter, are all alike, and
always constantly present. Doct. 1. There is so great affinity betwixt the
hearts of the Godly, who are but in part renewed, and the vilest temptations to
the greatest blasphemies or errors, especially such as patronize the lusts of
corrupt Nature; that when they are boldly vented with pretense of reason, there
is great hazard that there be some impression left upon their hearts, inclining
them to the same: Therefore, for the preventing or removing of this, the
Apostle takes pains to satisfy the Godly, concerning the causes of the delay
of Christ's coming, which had not been needful except they had either
received, or had been in hazard to receive some bad impression from the bold
assertion and seeming reason of these mockers. 2. Although it has pleased the
Lord to condescend so far to our shallow capacity, as to set forth to us in
Scripture, and to give us leave to take up, His duration in our own terms,
while He calls Himself, Yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. Which
was, and is, and is to come, Rev. 1.4. The Ancient of days, Dan. 7.9. Whose
years have no end, Psalm. 102.27. Yet all these differences of time, which to us
are longer or shorter, are all alike to Him, whose duration admits of no
beginning, succession or ending, but consists in a constant presentness of
all that which seems to us past, or to come: for, one day is with the Lord as
a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. 3. The Servants of Christ
ought to have a far different esteem of those who mock at the Truth of God, and
scoffingly vent their errors contrary to it; and of those who through infirmity
may have some inclination toward error, and therefore stand in need to be
guarded against it; and accordingly their carriage ought to be different toward
the one and the other: for, of the one the Apostle spoke in the former words,
with indignation and contempt, as they deserved, calling them scoffers, walking
after their ungodly lusts; but to the other he speaks here with love and
tenderness, But, Beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing. 4. There are some
things revealed in Scripture concerning the Lord, which must be understood by
faith, as the Apostle's expression is, Heb. 11.2. although they cannot be
comprehended by us to the satisfaction of our shallow reason: for here, the
Apostle would not have them ignorant of this one thing, That one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; which is a Truth
that none with ^ time can well comprehend, only faith can assent to, and make
use of it, in judging as he judges, that many years delay to us of the
performance of a promise, is but a very little time, being compared with
eternity, only it may foster a holy longing to be with Him, when we shall
partake of His duration as well as of His glory, when there shall not be such a
thing as any sad reflections upon bypast sweetness, or any painful langour
for sweetness to come, but a constant present possession thereof; our duration
resembling His, with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day.

Verse. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning His promise, (as some men count
slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.
The second ground, for satisfaction of the Godly concerning the delay of
Christ's second coming, is, That that delay does not proceed from any such
thing in God, (whatever men may judge) as usually makes men slow in performing
their promises, but only from His patience toward His Elect, whose temper
requires time and pains for working grace in them, that they may be fitted for
glory. Hence Learn, 1. We ought not to frame our thoughts of God as one man
uses to do of another, especially when we think of the delay of performance of
promises, as if that delay did slow from want of foresight of possible
difficulties, weakness, forgetfulness, or fickleness, whence delay among men
does ordinarily flow^ all such thoughts of Him, as our hearts are very apt to
entertain, Psalm. 50.21. we ought to remove far from us, and to persuade our
selves of the contrary, that He is most mindful of His Promises, Psalm. 111.5.
and so swift in performing of them, that He will not stay a moment after He
has wrought what is necessary before the performance, Mal. 4.2. for, such
negatives as this here concerning God, do in Scripture both import an aptness
in us to imagine the contrary affirmative of Him, and likewise that the
contrary of what is denied, is, in a superlative degree, His property; The Lord
is not slack concerning His Promise, as some men count slackness. 2. The true
and satisfying reason of the delay of the second coming of Christ, is the
Lord's long-suffering toward His own Elect, who must be dealt with in order to
their conversion, in a way suitable to their temper, which requires time and
pains to work upon each elect soul come into the world, and to the years of
discretion, by commands, threatenings, promises and alluring motives, every one
of these being multiplied after another, and by these same means every elect
brought to that measure of grace, which God has determined to work in the
converted, that they may be fitted for glory: for, this is here given as the
satisfying reason of the delay of Christ's second coming, that the Lord is
long-suffering to usward. 3. The Lord does not soon nor easily gain His point
even with His own Elect, but after many refusals of His renewed offers, and
slighting of His pains, His patient and powerful love does at last overcome
all opposition in them, and so brings them to repentance: for, before they
are brought to it, He is long-suffering to usward. 4. The Lord cannot fall
short of His intention toward any upon whom He does take pains, nor does His
good will to save, reach to any sinners, but those whom He does really make
partakers of Salvation: for, the Apostle says here, He is long-suffering to
usward, that is, to us Believers, and others, elected as we are, not as yet
born, or not as yet converted, not willing that any such should perish, but
that all of that kind should come to repentance; So that the Scripture All, is
not always to be understood of all and every individual person in the world,
but oftentimes it is put (here comprehended in Us) for all the Elect only, as
is clear by comparing, Jer. 31.34. with Joh. 6.45. and this present Scripture.
5. Although the Lord do only intend the salvation of His Elect by His
long-suffering and pains, Yet He is pleased to express His desire of their
salvation, in the largest terms that can be, that so He may the more
effectually prevail with His own, and render the rest the more inexcusable,
who, except they will exclude themselves, are not excluded by such large
expressions of the grace of God as are here, He is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. 6. All those whom the Lord
minds to save in an ordinary way, are first brought by Him to a sensible
sight of sin and deserved wrath, and to such apprehensions of mercy in God for
them through Jesus Christ, as makes them turn in to Him, grieving for, and
forsaking their sins, and giving up themselves to His service: for, those whom
He wills not to perish, He wills and makes to come to repentance.

Verse. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the Earth also and the works that are therein shall
he burnt up.
The third thing whereby the Apostle labors to satisfy the Godly anent the
delay of the day of judgment, is, That that day will be very unexpected and
terrible to secure sinners, as the coming of a thief in the night uses to be
to a sleeping family; and that there will be then a great change and
dissolution of the whole frame of Nature, and of all things wherein most men
place their happiness; the inference from which, not being expressed, but to be
collected from the Apostle's scope, is, That it is the wisdom of the Lord's
People rather to prepare for that day, than to complain of the delay, or to be
anxious concerning it. Doct. 1. Similitudes made use of in Scripture, do not
justify the actions of men whence these similitudes are taken, only they do
much commend to us the Lord's condescendency, and desire, to have us taking up
His mind, while He dimitteth Himself for our capacity to compare His most just
and holy actions, to these actions among men which are most abominable and
hateful to Him; Therefore is the suddenty and terror of Christ's second
coming, set forth here by the coming of a thief in the night; which practice,
though it be in it self sinful and condemned by the Lord, Yet it is made use
of by Him, because the terror and suddenness of it is so well known to men,
that they may by it the better conceive the manner of Christ's second coming;
But the day of the Lord will come as a chief in the night. 2. Christ's coming
at the last day will be a great surprisal to the most part of the children of
men, who will not be wakened out of their security by the Word, to make
preparation for it. As for these foregoing signs of that day, which the
Scripture speaks of, such as the destruction of Antichrist, the conversion of
the Jews, and that great alteration of the whole course of Nature; some of them
may be done in so little time, and so immediately before that day, and others of
them so little taken notice of, or believed, as signs of that day, that,
notwithstanding of them all, the most part shall be surprised with it, as with
the coming of a thief in the night. 3. That day of judgment will be a most
terrible day to all who do not expect and prepare for it: There will be a
strange sight, and a dreadful noise, when this great Workmanship, being on
fire, shall all rush down, and all the delights of wicked men shall be burnt up
before their eyes, The Lord thereby testifying His displeasure against men's
placing their happiness in these things, and their defiling of them, by making
them subservient to their lusts, mean time signifying His purpose to give a
more cleanly and glorious Mansion to His own to dwell in; In that day the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
As for questions which may be stated here, it is much more safe for us to give
time and pains, that we may be found of Him in peace at that day, than to be
taken up in enquiring and determining whether the visible Heavens, and the
Earth, and the rest of the creatures of that kind, shall then be totally and
for ever annihilated; or, whether there shall be a new edition of them all, or
of some of them only, to be lasting monuments of the power and glory of the
Maker, and so ravishing objects of the Saints delight, who may through that new
world follow the Lamb wherever He goes.

Verse. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness?
In this second part of the Chapter, are contained the several uses, which the
Apostle draws from his former Doctrine concerning the last judgment, and they
are especially six: The first, which is in this Verse, is, That the
consideration of that day should make all the Lord's People very inquisitive
how they may be more and more forthcoming for His honor, in the discharge of
all the duties of holiness, especially those whereby He may be glorified in
their conversation. Hence Learn, 1. The Ministers of Christ ought not to
satisfy themselves to draw the Lord's People to a naked contemplation of the
Truth, which Hypocrites, yea Devils, may attain unto, Jam. 2.19. But they ought
to draw every Truth they propound to them, to some practical use for the
promoting of holiness in the hearts and lives of their hearers, without which,
peoples condemnation will be greater, than if they had not heard or known these
Truths, 2 Pet. 2.21. Therefore the Apostle does not think it enough to have
defended by reason the second coming of Christ, and to tell them of strange
events to fall forth at that day, But does here, and to the end of the Chapter,
apply all to them for their use; Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, etc? 2. The whole creation is
now in a manner imprisoned, and in bondage, while they are abused contrary to
their inclination, to the service of men's lusts, and dishonor of their Maker;
from which slavery they shall be loosed at Christ's coming, Romans 8.21. for, the
word in the original here is used to signify the loosing of a captive, or
prisoner, out of his bonds, Act. 22.30. These things shall be dissolved. 3. The
consideration of this dissolution of the creatures, should make these of the
Lord's People that are furthest promoted in holiness, very inquisitive after,
and still aspiring toward a further degree of holiness, than what they have
formerly attained; knowing that the greater degree of holiness they attain
unto, the more comfort shall they have now, and the more glory when Christ
comes: for, the Apostle puts this question to his own heart, and the hearts
of all the Lord's People, What manner of persons ought ye to be, etc? 4. That
holiness which should be aimed at by the Lord's People, and which will be
comfortable to them, and approven of God, now and hereafter, must be manifested
in all the parts of their conversation, both in their outward carriage, and
secret practice, in their common affairs and religious performances, in duties
of Gods immediate Worship, and in duties relating to their neighbor, as is
imported in this, What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? 5. In the discharge of all the duties of
holiness, Christians ought to look much to the qualification of their persons,
that they be reconciled with God through Christ, and daily renewing the
friendship, by the exercise of godly sorrow for sin, and a living faith in the
Mediator, and by keeping their hearts in frame for the particular duties of
holiness they are called to: for, the Apostle does not put the question, how
holy ought our conversation to be? but, what manner of persons ought ye to be
in all holy conversation and godliness? 6. If the holiest on earth would put
their conscience to speak to them, after serious consideration of the terror
and glory of the second coming of Christ, they would be much unsatisfied with
their present measure of holiness, and would have their desires quickened, and
their endeavors strengthened after a further measure thereof, as is imported
in this question of the Apostles, put to his own, and others conscience, What
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness?
including himself, ver. 13.

Verse. 12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat.
The second use of the former doctrine, is, That the consideration of so
dreadful and glorious a day, should make all the Lord's People live in the
constant expectation thereof, by their prayers and pains furthering these works
which must be done before it come: which use, together with the former, the
Apostle beareth-in by a new representation of the glory and terror of that day.
Hence Learn, 1. To live in the constant expectation of Christ's glorious
appearance, is both the duty of all the lovers of Him, and a special mean to
make them grow in holiness: Therefore is this expectation pressed here by a word
of the present time, importing that it is both a perpetual duty in it self, and
a special mean of attaining to what is pressed before; What manner of persons
ought ye to be, etc. looking for the coming of the day of God. 2. Although the
time of Christ's second coming be so fixed in the decree of God, as that it
cannot be altered, Act. 17.31. Yet ought the Lords People to be no less
earnest in ^astning their own preparation for it, and by their prayers, and
other means competent to them in their stations, furthering these great works
to be done before, than if that day could be hastened by them: for, the word in
the Original signifies, not only our hastening toward that day, but also our
hastening of it; See Isa. 16.5. Looking for and hasting the coming of the day of
God. 3. It is safe for the Lord's Ministers frequently to represent to His
People those Truths, that are much contradicted by enemies of Truth, that are
but little considered by His People, and which have greatest influence upon
their practice, to restrain them from sin, and provoke them to duty: for, such
is this Truth concerning the terror and majesty of the last day, which the
Apostle, having spoken of before, repeareth here again; Wherein the Heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

Verse. 13. Nevertheless we, according to His promise, look for new Heavens and
a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
Here is the third use of the former doctrine, and it is for the consolation of
Believers, against all their pains and sufferings in Christ's service, and
especially against the loss that they may apprehend to be in the
forementioned dissolution of all things; They have a more excellent state to
look for, a new World, when the old is destroyed, where only righteousness
shall have its constant abode. This promise of the new Heavens and the new
Earth, was first given out to the Church by Isa. 65.17. and 66.22. and had some
accomplishment, as these places make clear, at the return from Babylon, which
was a new World to the ruined and exiled State and Church of the Jews. It is
also made use-of by the Apostle Paul, as having spiritual mercies in it, such
as conversion, regeneration, and the like, which is as a new World to sinners:
for, he marketh it to have accomplishment this way, 2 Cor. 5.17. And yet this
Apostle here leads Believers to expect more out of that same promise, not any
worldly or temporal felicity, as Millenaries dream, because it is a state
promised after the day of judgment, as fully satisfactory to Believers, where
no sin, but only righteousness, shall have its constant mansion; which cannot
agree to any earthly happiness, but must be understood of everlasting
blessedness, set forth under these borrowed expressions. Doct. 1. One and the
same promise may contain several sorts of mercies, both temporal and spiritual,
to be le^^en-out at several times to the Lords People, and yet may have its
full accomplishment only in Heaven: for, such is this promise of new Heavens
and a new Earth, out of which Isaiah has drawn temporal deliverance, Paul
spiritual mercies, and Peter here everlasting blessedness. Many promises in
Scripture are of the same nature, e. g. That promise, Isa. 25.8. The Lord God
will wipe away tears from off all faces, was in part accomplished when the
mourning Church came rejoicing home from their exile in Babylon, as is clear,
Psalm. 126. That same promise has also been often made good, in the Lord's
comforting of particular persons, humbly mourning for their sins as appears
by Psalm. 116.8. And yet that promise is to have its full accomplishment in
Heaven, as is clear by Rev. 21.4. The consideration whereof may serve to direct
us to a right usemaking of many promises. 2. The state of Believers in the
other life, will be wholly new, their bodies will be new like Christ's glorious
Body, Philip. 3.21 their spirits also new, 1 John 3.2. their duration new, a
constant presentnesse of enjoying the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Their exercises
shall be new, to sing new songs to the Lamb, Rev. 5.9. and to follow Him
wherever He goes, Rev. 14.4^ Their clothing shall be new, glory and
immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. New food and refreshment, to eat of the Tree of
life, and drink of the Water of life, Rev. 22.1, 2. and a new light and sun to
shine upon them, the glory of God and of the Lamb being the light of that new
World, Rev. 21.23. All which are but borrowed expressions to set forth the
glory of that Estate, which cannot be fully set forth: for, even the Apostle,
not having time nor ability to reckon out all the particulars of that new and
blessed Estate, sets it out by a new World, which comprehends many new
things in it; We look for new Heavens and a new Earth. 3. In that new World,
there shall neither be sin, nor temptation to sin; there shall be no wrong, nor
oppression, nor affliction, which are the consequences of sin; there shall
neither be any change, nor any possibility or fear of change: for,
righteousness, which often falls in the straits now, and cannot get
entrance, but is banished out of the most parts of this World, Isa. 59.14.
shall have a constant mansion there, as the word here signifies, Where
righteousness dwells. 4. They that would have a wellgrounded confidence of
attaining to this better World, must take hold of it in the promises thereof in
Scripture, which ordinarily contain both the qualification and duty of the
person that may expect it, as is clear by comparing 2 Cor. 5.17. Joh. 3.16. 1 John 3.3. with this present Text, We, according to His promise, look for new
Heavens and a new Earth. 5. They who have laid sure hold upon eternal life by
faith in the promises thereof, will not be shaken out of their confident
expectation of it, either by profane men's scoffing at the ground of their
confidence, or by the sight of never so strange events falling forth before
they possess what they believe: for, the Apostle, having foretold Believers
that they should hear much bold mockery of the last judgment, and a better life
than this, and that they should see all this World on fire before they did
possess that better, expresses here what should be their hope and language
notwithstanding of both; Nevertheless we, according to His promise, look for
new Heavens and a new Earth.

Verse. 14. Wherefore (Beloved) seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent
that ye may be found of Him in peace, without spot, and blameless.
From the consideration of that comfortable state that Believers have to look
for beyond time, the Apostle exhorts them to serious and constant diligence
in making use of the Blood and Spirit of Christ for the doing away of their
sinful spots, as the only way wherein they may expect true peace when Christ
comes, which is in substance the same with the first use of his former
doctrine, ver. 11. Hence Learn, 1. The lively hope and expectation of
everlasting blessedness, should be so far from making them that have it
negligent and remiss in holy duties that it should be a special motive and
engagement to the same, that so they may honor Him who has made sure for them
that heavenly inheritance after time, and allows them the comfortable
expectation of it in time: for, this exhortation to Believers, is inferred upon
their confidence, Wherefore (Beloved) seeing ye look for such things, be
diligent, etc. 2. They who have an approven and well-grounded confidence of
Heaven, are so subject to laziness in their duty, and thereby in hazard to
lose or weaken their assurance, which is only maintained in the way of
diligence, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. that they have much need to be frequently roused up
by the word of exhortation, to diligence in their duty: for, it is those whose
confidence of Heaven the Apostle questioneth not, but supposes to be
well-grounded, whom he does here (as often before) exhort to give diligence. 3.
It is not unlawful for the Lord's People to look upon the excellency of the
reward which free grace has prepared for them, and thereby to provoke their
own hearts to diligence in their duty: Though the reward be neither the main,
nor the only motive of a Christian to his duty, Yet it is one that may
warrantably be made use of, as here the Apostle does, Wherefore (Beloved)
seeing ye look for such things, (to wit, the new Heavens and the new Earth,
spoken of in the former verse) be diligent. 4. The main thing whereabout
Christians diligence ought to be exercised, is, The washing away of the spots
of their by past guiltiness, by the frequent application of the Blood of
Christ, and the changing of their polluted natures, whereby they are inclined
to defile themselves further, by the virtue of the Spirit of Christ; both which
may be comprehended in this, without spot, and blameless, which is here holden
forth as the object of Christians constant and serious diligence. 5. Although
there be now many spots, and much to blame in the best, who may, so long as
they are in time, cry, Uunclean, unclean; Yet these who get grace to be
seriously diligent (as the word here signifies) in employing of Christ for
pardon of bypast guiltiness, and for strength in the battle against sin for
time to come, shall be found by Him when He comes without spot, and blameless.
6. Much sweet peace and quietness when Christ comes, whether at death or
judgment. will be found in the spirits of those who make it their serious work
in time, to have their daily guiltiness washen away by the application of the
Blood of Jesus, and their filthy natures changed by the power of His Spirit;
and, on the contrary, much fearful unquietness, and bitter anxiety will be at
that time in their hearts who carry their unpardoned guilt, and unrenewed
nature, to their end with them, without any serious diligence for removal of
either: for, the words in the Original are, That ye being without spot, and
blameless, may be found by Him in peace; importing that these, and none but
these, will have peace when He comes. 7. The thoughts of that peace which
diligent Believers will have at Christ's coming, and of that unquietness which
will be then in the hearts of others, ought to provoke all that love their own
peace, to much diligence, in making use of Christ for pardon of sin, and
victory over it: for, the Apostle makes this an alluring motive to diligence,
that such, and none else, shall be found in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Verse. 15. And account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, even
as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you.
The fourth use of the former doctrine, both anent the delay of Christ's second
coming, and the manner thereof, is, For upstirring of the Lord's People
seriously to ponder, what work the Lord is about while His second coming
seems to be delayed, to wit, the working and promoting of saving grace in His
own, and fitting of them for that eternal salvation which He is to bring with
Him, for which work, time and pains are necessary; and this use the Apostle
beareth-in upon them, as a thing that had been much pressed, from the same
ground, upon these same Hebrews, by the Apostle Paul, of whom he speaks with
much love and respect, as a man dear to him, and faithful according to his
talent. Hence Learn, 1. The way to quiet our hearts under the delay of the
performance of promises, is, to have them much exercised with the consideration
of that work which the Lord is about during the delay, how much it serves for
the advancement of our spiritual and eternal welfare: for, this way would the
Apostle have the Lord's People to lay their reckoning, that every days sparing
of the world is given to them for making fast-work of their peace with God, and
fitting of them for glory, that so their hearts might be quieted under the
delay, And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation. 2. These
Truths which have been often, and by several of the Lords Ministers,
harmoniously pressed upon the Lords people, ought to have a special weight with
them, as being attested by many witnesses, to be the mind of God, more fully
cleared, and offered with a new relish, from several hands: for, by this the
Apostle bears-in the study of holiness and preparation for the day of judgment,
that both he and the Apostle Paul had agreed in substance upon the use that was
to be made of the doctrine of Christ's second coming; Even as our beloved
brother Paul also has written. 3. All the faithful Ministers of Christ ought
to be so far from lifting up themselves above their fellow laborers, or
lessening the reputation of their persons and labors among the Lords People,
even although their fellow laborers be in some things inferior to them or
differing from them; yea, and have sharply rebuked them for their failings,
That by the contrary, they ought to entertain, and to express love and esteem
of them, and to conciliate respect to them, and to their gifts and labors
among the Lord's People ^ for, this Apostle, who had the advantage of Paul in
the priority of his calling to the Ministry, and acquaintance with Christ in
the flesh, whom Paul had withstood to the face, and whose failings he had
registered in one of his Epistles, Gal. 2.11, 14. does not lift up himself above
Paul, nor labor to weaken his esteem, but does write of him as his equal,
beloved by him, and faithful according to his gifts, and does commend his
Writings as useful for this people, Even as our beloved brother Paul also,
according to the wisdom given unto him, has written. 4. The Lord has not
given a like measure of gifts and qualifications for His Service to all his
faithful Servants, but to some more, to some, fewer talents, that every one may
make use of another, and none may expect fullness but in Christ Himself: for,
that there were diverse measures, even among the Apostles, is imported in this,
that Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him, has written. 5. Whatever
measure of gifts or graces any have more than another, it is a free gift of
God's, and therefore ought to be humbly and thankfully possessed, and carefully
employed for His honor, who ought to be acknowledged as author of these gifts,
not only by those that have them, but by every one who does discern them in
others: for, while this Apostle speaks of Paul's wisdom, He calls it the
wisdom given him. 6. It is the prime commendation of a faithful Minister, that
he has faithfully employed his measure, whether it be less or more, in
serving Christ, and doing good to the souls of His People: for, here it is
Paul's commendation, that according to the wisdom given him, he has written.
7. Although it be the duty of one faithful Minister to keep up the credit of
another among the People, Yet ought their commendations one of another to be in
sobriety, such as may not detract from the due esteem of those whom they do not
commend, and such as may lead peoples thoughts above them that are commended,
to God as the author and free-giver of any thing commendable in them: for, this
Apostle does sufficiently commend Paul and his Writings, while he says of him,
According to the measure given him, he has written. 8. Although it be both the
sin, and the character of false teachers, to steal the words, and lessen the
estimation of other ministers that are more in esteem than themselves, that
thereby they may cloak their own laziness, and want of God's calling, Jer.
23.30. Yet it is very lawful, and the duty of the most eminent Ministers of
Christ, to make use of the Gifts and Writings of their Fellow Laborers, for
clearing of the Truth to themselves and others, and sometimes to cite their
testimony for gaining the greater credit to Truth with people: for, so does
this Apostle here, who not only presses the same Truth that Paul had pressed,
but is not ashamed to a vow that he had perused Paul's Writings to those
Hebrews, as also all the rest of his Epistles, wherein he had found that which
did agree with his doctrine, Even as our beloved brother Paul has also
written. 9. Although the Apostle Paul has not put his name to that Epistle to
the Hebrews, which is extant in the New Testament, either because he was
hateful to the unconverted Jews, or suspected by weak Converts, who were too
much addicted to the Levitical Law; or, because he was sufficiently known and
of unquestioned authority with the stronger sort; Yet this place of Scripture
puts it out of doubt, that he is the Author thereof: for, it is clear that
this Apostle writes both his Epistles to the Twelve Tribes, by comparing 1
Epist. 1.1. and 2 Epist. 1.1. with 1 Epist. 2.12. and here he asserteth that
Paul also had written to them; which writing of Paul's can be no other than
that Epistle to the Hebrews which is extant, 1. Because the purpose in Paul's
writing, to which this Apostle here relates, is clearly held forth there in
Heb. 10 35, 36. 2. Because that which this Apostle speaks in the following
Verse, concerning the difficulty of understanding some passages in Paul's
writing, does especially agree to that Epistle; And 3. because that writing of
Paul's to the Hebrews, whereof this Apostle here speaks, cannot be supposed
to be lost, except we would reflect both upon the providence of God, and upon
the fidelity of those to whom the Oracles of God were committed, Romans 3.2.
whose faithfulness in that matter, the Lord has never challenged; Even as our
beloved brother Paul has written unto you.

Verse. 16. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these things, in
which are somethings hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction.
The Apostle, having confirmed his doctrine from Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews,
takes occasion to commend all the rest of his Epistles, as confirming the same
Truth; and withal removes a prejudice, which has been at that time rife,
against Paul's Writings, as dark and obscure, showing that there were only some
few things in his Writings hard to be understood, which none but unhumbled and
wanton spirits would pervert and mistake, as they would do much more of the
Scripture, to their own damnation. Hence Learn, 1. Although the frequent
pressing of necessary Truths upon People, be oftentimes a burden to their
corrupt nature, Jer. 23.33. Yet must not the Lord's Ministers weary to repeat
and inculcate one and the same Truth to them, not knowing when life and power
from God may accompany that Truth to their heart, which has been often told
them before, and as often slighted by them, See Philip. 3.1. for, this Apostle
presses the same Truth upon the Hebrews, which he knew Paul had pressed before
upon them, and upon all others in all his Epistles, which were all intended for
the common good of the whole Church in all ages; As also in all his Epistles
speaking in them of these things. 2. It has pleased the Lord so to express
some parts of His Mind in His Word, that the sharpest-sighted will not at the
first, nor easily take up the meaning thereof, that all that study the
Scriptures, may be made humble in the sense of their own blindness, earnest in
employing Christ for His Spirit, and may be quickened to pains in meditation,
comparing one Scripture with another, and the use of other commanded means,
that after the use of all, any insight they get in places formerly dark to
them, may be the more esteemed of: for, there is in Paul's Epistles some things
hard to be understood. 3. Although no man without special illumination from
God, can savingly take up any Truth revealed in Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.14. Yet i^
there much of the Lord's mind revealed therein, in it self plain and easy to
be understood, by them who humbly depend upon Christ's teaching in the use of
His own means: So that the simplest, who desire to know as much as may save and
comfort their souls ought not to be hindered or discouraged in the study of the
Scriptures, In which (the Apostle says only) there are some things hard to be
understood, importing that there are therein many things plain, and such as may
be easily understood. 4. Those Truths which are most darkly propounded in
Scripture, are not impossible to be understood, if men would seriously exercise
their wit about them, and humbly employ Christ for understanding, as the Saints
have done, Psalm. 119.33, 34, 97. for, the Apostle says only, there are some
things hard (importing, not only that there are many things plain, but also
that there is nothing impossible) to be understood. 5 Although humane learning,
being sanctified in the use thereof, may prove a blessed mean of fitting men
for the service of God, Dan. 1.17. Act. 7.22. and 22.3. Yet it is not so much
the want thereof, nor yet any obscurity that is in the Scriptures, which
causes men dangerously to mistake and wrest the Word of God, as that men will
not become humble Disciples of Christ, renouncing their own wit, and giving
themselves up to Christ's teaching: for, the word here in the Original,
Unlearned, is not that which is made use of in Scripture, Act. 4.13. to
signify the want of humane litterature, but it is a word that signifies to be
undiscipled, or not taught by Jesus Christ; in which sense, they that are
unlearned do wrest the Scriptures. 6. Another special cause of wresting and
mistaking these things in Scripture which are hard to be understood, is, That
men labor not to fix themselves in the knowledge, love and practice of Truths
that are plain, but have their hearts distracted with the cares and pleasures
of this present world: for, it is they that are unstable in this sense, that
wrest the Scriptures. 7. To wrest the Scriptures, is, to endeavor to force
them to speak contrary to the intent of the Spirit that endited them, in
defense of vile errors or profane practices: for, there is a metaphor in the
word, which is translated wrest, taken from those who by tortures labor to
compel the innocent to speak against their mind. 8. They that wrest one plate
of Scripture, will readily wrest many more, there being a connection between one
error and another, as there is between one Truth and another: for, they that
wrest Paul's Epistles, they wrest also other Scriptures. 9. The hazard of men's
forcing a sense of their own upon the Scriptures, contrary to the mind of the
Spirit that endited them, is no less than the everlasting destruction of them
that do it: for, they that wrest the Scriptures, do it to their own destruction.

Verse. 17. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness.
The fifth use of the Apostle's former doctrine, is an exhortation to
constancy. The sum whereof is, That since they had been clearly forewarned of
their spiritual dangers, and informed concerning the remedies thereof, they
should be the more wary, lest they be drawn away from that way of Truth and
Holiness wherein they had been, through the Lord's grace, in some good measure
established. Hence Learn, 1. Clear forewarnings of spiritual dangers, and
informations concerning the remedies thereof, do lay upon the Lord's People
strong obligations to watchfulness; it being a great aggravation of their
guiltiness, if after these, they be ensnared: for, the Apostle makes the
foreknowledge they had of these things by his former doctrine, a special
motive to watchfulness, Wherefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware. 2. There is no error nor temptation so gross that has overtaken
others, whereof those that are dearly beloved of God and His Saints, ought not
to entertain so much fear, as to make them very strict in watching, lest they
be ensnared with the same, considering that there is a friend to these in their
unmortified part; Beloved, beware lest ye also be led away with the error of
the wicked. 3. Although the Lord's People can neither totally, nor finally fall
away from Truth or Holiness, Joh. 17.11, 12. Yet those who have been in some
good measure established in the knowledge of the Truth, and practice of holy
duties, may for a time, and in a great measure, fall from both; as is imported
in this warning, Beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall. 4. The possibility of Believers falling for a time, should
provoke them to much circumspection, and, as the word here signifies, to keep
very strict watch over themselves, which exercise the Lord has appointed to be
a special mean of His Peoples preservation, Beware lest ye also being let away
with the error of the wicked, fall. 5. The Lord's People have a steadfastness
proper to themselves, which no hypocrite can attain unto, whereby they do
adhere to the Truth and Way of Christ, not for the applause or example of
others, or any worldly advantage whatsoever, but because their minds are
enlightened to know, and their hearts renewed to believe and love the Truth for
its own worth, and for his authority that reveals it: for, the words in the
Original are, Beware lest ye fall from your own proper steadfastness.

Verse. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: to Him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.
The sixth and last use of the former doctrine, is an exhortation to the study
of a continual growth and progress in grace and knowledge: and this the Apostle
presses, as a special mean to attain to that which he pressed in the former use,
to wit, steadfastness; and closes with a song of praise to Jesus Christ. Hence
Learn, 1. It is not enough for the Lord's People to maintain that measure of
grace which they have already attained; but they must labor to find the lively
exercise and daily growth of every grace: for, the Apostle, having exhorted to
steadfastness in what they had already attained, does add this, But grow in
grace. 2. Growth in grace is a special preservative from apostasy, there being
no possibility to keep what we have attained, except it be improven, and be
upon the growing hand, Mat. 25.29. for, this exhortation is added to the
former, as a special mean of attaining to stedfastness, Grow in grace, etc. 3.
They that would have grace to thrive in their hearts, must labor for a daily
increase of knowledge in their minds concerning Christ's soveraignity, His
offices, and the benefits we have by Him: for, as growth in grace is here pressed
as a special mean to stedfastness, so growth in knowledge is pressed as a special
mean of attaining to growth in grace; But grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 4. It is the duty of all who have any
right thoughts of Christ, to break forth some way in His praise, and to ascribe
glory to Him, who, being the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, is become the
Savior of sinners, and has clothed Himself with Offices answerable to all
their necessities, as is imported in the names of Christ that are here: for,
the Apostle, that knew Him well to be such a one, takes up the song, which all
that know Him should follow and keep up in their hearts, To Him be glory. 5.
Praise is a duty, wherewith all our other duties should be closed, both for the
help we find in them, and for the pardon we believe to obtain for our failings;
upon both which grounds the Apostle closes his Epistle with praise, To Him be
glory. 6. Praise is an exercise, for the discharge whereof, not only all our
time, but the long age or day of eternity, as the word here signifies, is
little enough; To Him be glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

