A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL of LINCOLN, July XVIII. 1681. Being the
ASSIZE-MONDAY.

By DANIEL NICOLS, A. M. Rector of Scotton in Lincolnshire: and sometimes
Fellow of St. John's in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Joseph Lawson, Bookseller at the Bail
of Lincoln; and Sold by Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and Thomas Sawbridge, at the Three Flower-deluces in
Little-Britain, 1681.

To the Right Worshipful Sir CHRISTOPHER NEVILE, Knight. High Sheriff of the County
of Lincoln.
SIR,
IT is very great pity, that those who pretend to Religion, should be given to
Faction, as if Religion (I mean true) which is but one) could Patronize
Division; as gross a mistake as Pope Adrian's Interpretation was of St.
Gregory's Liturgy, which was preferred to that of St. Ambrose, because it was
torn into a thousand bits and scraps; whereas the other remained whole, and
therefore by him judged unfit to be used. Who could believe that a Pope should
be guilty of such a construction! Sure I am, he has given the same measures to
many of his Sons and Daughters, who (though they pretend Liberty of Conscience)
yet are very angry that their own small conceits about Religion (which are
diverse, and contrary each to other) cannot be countenanced by Law; and will
rather choose to have a thousand Religious lies imposed, (since they cannot have
their wills) than that Religion to flourish, which is at present Established.
But as God is one, and his Name one; so is it requisite, that the solemn
Worship, which all pay to him, in their public addresses, should be but one,
that with one heart and lip his praise may be exalted by all: This was the
ancient and primitive Sacrifice which the Church did acceptably offer up, Acts
2.46, 47. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising God, etc. And you will easily perceive, Sir, that Religion in
the Fountain (where the water is living and pure) differs far from what she is
called at the foot of the hill, after her streams have passed through the
corrupt brains of a confused multitude. It Is a melancholy, doleful sight, to
observe a vast number of phrantick persons, pretending to the height of skill
in Religious Chemistry, as if their inspired noddles were the only limbecks to
extract the spirit and quintessence of Religion; as if they only knew the
secrets of the Kingdom, and have been taken up into the third Heaven, ravished
with joys unspeakable, fed with hidden Manna. Some of these are to be pitied;
such (I mean) as are humble, willing to be informed, who have been cheated out
of their good designs, by the subtilty of wicked men: the rest deserve the
lash, and ought to be scourged into better manners. The great design of these
Religious Quacks, is to set men at an infinite distance from the solemn service
of Almighty God: and the first lesson they teach their Children and Proselytes,
is, that our Liturgy is Popery, that our Ministers are Antichristian, that we
have all received the mark of the Beast. Some of their Novices I have met with,
who instead of discoursing, have turned over their Bibles, always turned down
at certain places; amongst the rest, to be sure the 13 Revelat. 16, 17. must be
one: Would to God they were cut off, that hunt after souls to destroy them;
that creep into houses, to lead captive silly women. No severity can be too
great for those who exercise cruelty and tyranny over them, for whom Christ has
shed his most precious blood. I confess, Sir, that an Address of this nature
can no way be suitable to a Dedication; nor had either it, or the ensuing
discourse ever seen the light, if the desire of the Right Honorable the
Judges, with the select and choice company of Knights and Gentlemen of the
Grand Jury, had not been as forcible as a Command, which I cannot but mention
as an excuse to my appearance in Print; For how could I deny so general an
expectation, without Imputations of disrespect?

To your self, Sir, give me leave to plead the design of this Preface, to be a
Chaos to that which follows, hoping that some of those persons, who have
taken up their Religion upon trust, will be persuaded to reflect upon
themselves, and judge how inconsistent it is with true Piety, to absent
themselves from the public Worship of God, and be reckoned amongst those who
break the peace, spoil the beauty, discourage the friends, encourage the
enemies of our Church. That the God of Heaven would succeed the good design of
this Paper to his own glory, the comfort and advantage of our much-despised and
neglected Mother; That he would pour out of his blessings, both Temporal and
Spiritual, upon you, and your truly religious and devout Lady, shall be the
daily prayer of him, who is glad of an opportunity to declare to the World,
that he is

Your very much obliged, most thankful, and most humble Servant, DANIEL NICOLS.

1 SAMUEL 12.14, 15. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his voice,
and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye, and the
King, that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God. But if ye
will not obey the Voice of the Lord, but rebel against the Commandment of the
Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your
Fathers.


SATAN was always an Enemy to Religion, not only true, but false, and would (if
it were possible) force all pretenses to it out of the World; for wheresoever
that is professed, a Deity must be acknowledged; and how is it credible, that
he who affects Supremacy himself, should endure a Superior Power, if he could
help it? But because the Character of a God is engraven upon the tables of our
hearts, therefore does he improve his utmost Policy and Power, to spoil the
beauty, and exact proportion of true Religion, representing it to some as harsh
and severe, that none may dare to take up the profession of it, but the Sons of
Issachar, men composed of slavish, dreggy, and melancholy humors: To others he
renders it so facile and easy, that it is impossible for them to keep their
Religion and Sacrifice to their lusts. Many he benighteth with thick
Egyptian-darkness, persuading, either that there are more Gods than one, or no
God at all, or (that which is as bad as the worst) that he himself must have
divine Worship and Honor. But he that loves the Souls of his creatures, has
always declared to the world, by the most curious and exact Government of the
same, that he is a holy, just, and righteous God, and expects of them that
Worship him, that they be holy and virtuous in all manner of Conversation, and
especially to his peculiar people he has given severe and strict Commands, to
observe the pattern given them from the Mount, and not to swerve a hairs
breadth from the same, appearing more jealous in the instance of divine Worship
and Honor, than in any other concern. This is one great reason (if not the
only) of the charge given in the Text; If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him,
and obey his voice, etc. For the Children of Israel were now innovating in
State Affairs, chopping and changing of Governments, Kings are desired in the
place of Judges; and that which gave the greatest occasion of displeasure to
the great King of Heaven, was not (as I humbly conceive) either the change of
Government considered in it self, or the desire of that change, but rather the
copy and example, which they choose to follow in this alteration, viz. the
Canaanites, and the Nations round about them, which were all of them
Idolatrous, and cursed of God; those must persuade them that it is better to
have a King, than a Judge (although of God's immediate choice) to rule over
them. Now as all changes and innovations are dangerous, so here in Special, for
this reason, lest Conformity to them in Civils, might by degrees incline them
to a Conformity in Spirituals also; for it is commonly seen, that the
Discipline and Government of the Church, does follow that of the State; and it
is apparent, that if there be not some harmony and consent between the one and
the other, there must necessarily ensue Convulsions both of Church and State.
And it is no ways improbable, that Heathens (though fond and foolish enough in
their conceits about Religion) did, to avoid these ruptures and storms, advise
their Disciples, not rigorously, in strange Countries, to adhere to the Rites
and Ceremonies of their own Gods, but rather to condescend, for the sake of
Peace, to Worship the Gods of the place, according to their own customs. This
compliance (though it might pass well enough, in point of Policy, in those
places, where no true God was worshipped) yet cannot here be endured; to
prevent which, the holy One of Israel had frequently inculcated this Command,
Not to follow strange Gods, nor to walk in their ways; which were called Via
Amorrheorum, to keep themselves close to the pattern of the Mount; and as some
conceive those Prohibitions mentioned Levit. 19.19. Thou shall not let thy
cattle gender with diverse kinds: thou shall not sow thy fields with diverse
kinds, and a garment of diverse kinds of Linsey-woolsey shall not come upon
thee, are purposely designed by Almighty God to keep the children of Israel at
the vastest distance from some Superstitious, and Idolatrous customs, then in
force with the Heathens near them.

This must however be the cause of those multiplied phrases, and flood of words
poured out in the text, and other places of the same nature, so much signifying
one and the same thing; that if we had not a reverence for Divine Writ, and a
through belief, that it proceeds from the God of Truth, the imputation of
Battology, so common amongst Heathens, or Tautology, so common amongst our
selves, would not seem injurious.

The words then under a double Hypothesis, contain a strict and severe charge
to the Children of Israel, to keep close to that form of Religious Worship,
which the King of kings had Established amongst them: For though he had now,
upon their importunity, indulged them in Politics, giving them leave to be
like other Nations in Kingly Government; yet he expected that he himself, as
God, should be worshipped according to his own Prescriptions.

To the first Hypothesis, for their encouragement, is annexed a Promise, If ye
will fear, etc. then both ye, and the King which reigns over you, shall
continue following the Lord. To the latter Hypothesis, is added a Threatening,
to check Disobedience; If ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, then shall
the hand of the Lord, etc.

These two Hypothetical Propositions may be reduced Categorically, after this
manner: That a zealous Observation of true Religion, is the most infallible way
of securing Peace between the Trinity of Persons, mentioned in the Text, God,
the King, and the People.

Secondly, The neglect, or contempt of Religion, does most effectually break
Peace between God and a Nation, and consequently bring ruin and destruction
upon the same.

The first of these (if duly handled) will involve the latter, where three
things must be inquired after.

1. What that Religion is of the Text. Then how it comes by its cementing and
uniting Nature. Lastly, What the Privilege or Promise signifies, which is
annexed, Then shall both ye and the King, etc.

First then, what is Religion? If there were but one or two in the world, it
might be no hard matter to define them: but when every Town and Village almost
is full of Faction, and every Faction has a different persuasion; and this
opinion, or persuasion, must be cried up for Religion, Who is able to coin
Diffinitions fast enough? And methinks it should not a little conduce to
confirm those in their present Faith, who yet retain soundness in their
Judgments, to take a short view of the fantastical dreams of men about
Religion. One tells you, that the very Genius of it is Separation, and pleads
Scripture for it: Come out from amongst them, lest ye partake of her plagues;
and dare, with the proud Donastist, exclude Heaven, and confine to Hell, all
such as jump not with them in all their blasphemies. A second defines his per
Illuminationem, and Revelationem, and, with the stately Greek, supposes none
to see but himself; all the world, at most, have but one eye, whilst he sees
perfectly with both.

If you will compare Old and New Rome together, you will find them to accord
very well in the account of Religion: Cicero thus describes it, Religio est
quae curam affert caeremoniis divini cultas: And who knows not, that the
Religion of Rome at present, consists rather in washing the outsides of dishes
and platters, in crossing, and cringing, and creeping, than in the Devotion and
Worship of the Soul; which cannot be very intent, whilst busied in an exact
observance of so many External Rites. The truth is, the multitude of Ceremonies
imposed by that Church, has devoured the greatest part of her substantial,
Religious Worship; but because, without Religion, she cannot pretend to be the
Church of God, therefore must her Ceremonies stand for her Religion. The
Atheist defines Religion by fear, and tells you, That Primus in Orb Deos fecit
Timor. And will force himself, like Lucian, to laugh and scoff at Religion, as
if it were nothing but the pretty device of Politicians, to keep fools in awe:
Those are some of the dreams, and mad conceits of men, about Religion, which I
produce merely as a taste of those infinite conceptions, whereby Satan works
cunningly upon the minds of men, persuading them, either that Religion is not
yet defined, and so leaves them in the Labyrinths of Sceptism; or else that
there is no God, nor Religion at all, and so drowns them in Irreligion and
Atheism. Thus this beautiful Virgin is every minute in danger to be destroyed
by the beasts of Ephesus, the latter sort; and defloured by the former, tho
pretended Lovers; who, by their abominable Separations, have torn into pieces
the seamless garment which Christ had beautified her with; and have put upon
her a Coat of diverse colors and patches, representing rather the spots and
changes of the Moon, than the luster and beauty of the Sun; she is become a
stone of stumbling, a rock of offense, scarcely known; so miserably disfigured,
that she is like that Stone which Pliny calls Achates, tot variis inumbratus
coloribus, ut unum lapidem esse, minime credamus. But thanks be to God, that in
this night of confusion, some of us know what we Worship, and what our Worship
is; and to satisfy men of unbiassed principles, I need go no farther than the
Text to fetch a true Description of both; for it must necessarily follow, from
the nature of the promise and threatening, that the Worship we offer is to the
living God, who made Heaven and Earth, according to the Precepts of his
revealed Will. This is our solemn and public Sacrifice, so defined by St.
Austin, in his Civitas Dei: and thus it is distinguished from the private
Devotions of a Religious Soul; which tho it be very acceptable to the great
God, yet falls far short of that acceptance, which the union of hearts and
voices in public Assemblies finds with him: He has always loved the gates
of Zion, better than the dwelling-places of Jerusalem: the reason of which, the
holy Prophet gives, Psalm. 122.4. Because thither went up the Tribes, the
Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name
of the Lord. When a multitude speak the same thing, and conspire together to
offer up their Sacrifices to the Lord, then does the Glory of the Lord appear;
then does he manifest his gracious Presence, as he did his Glory in the days of
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14. It came to pass when the Trumpets and Singers were
as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord: and
when they lift up their voice with the Cymbals, and Trumpets, and Instruments
of Music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the
Lord; so that the Priests could not stand to minister, by reason of the Cloud:
for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God. The want of this sweet
harmony, and consent of Souls in the Worship of God, is the reason why our
Church mourns at this day; her visible Members speak not the same things, but
diverse, and contrary one to another. Babel is found in Bethel; confusion in the
house of God, as if we would force that to be the true and genuine meaning of
our Savior, when he brought the Everlasting Gospel into the World; I come not
to send Peace, but a Sword. How unlike are we to those (...), who came up
thither to Worship; and tho of diverse Nations and Languages, yet w^^e they of
the same Religion, from whence undoubtedly they were called Jews? We, tho we
use no other but our Mother Tongue in the Service of God, yet have we more
Religions, than they were Nations. Can any good come out of this Galilee? Is it
likely that a fire should be quenched with Oil, or a healing plaster be made
of Corrosives? Let us fear, rather lest a Church divided against it self should
not stand: Rome rides faster, and gets more ground upon the speckled horse of
our own divisions, than upon the prancing Genet of her own worship; she
cunningly does her work, and sits still, whilst we, by our Separations, are
perfecting her designs in our own ruins; and lest any should wonder why so
magisterially I seem to obtrude my own Sentiments upon the World, let him but
impartially consider how the old Axiom is again revived in Rome [divide and
impera]; and then let him tell me whether the reason of our present impotency
and weakness, and of their hopes and expectations, does not proceed principally
from those cursed and sinful Divisions amongst Protestants?

My humble Address therefore to this Right Honorable and Noble Assembly, is,
That in your respective places, as Judges, as Magistrates, as Nobles, as
Gentlemen, you would glorify your God, save (if possible) your Country from
that destruction, which as a dark Cloud hangs over her head, that you would
imbellish and perfume your names to all generations, by honoring Religion, by
vindicating her innocent beauty from the vile assaults, and brutish rapes of
profane and dissolute men. Assert the solemnity of our Worship, by your
public, constant, and reverential attendance, against all Detractors, who set
up Altar against Altar, Church against Church, and make it the greatest part of
their Religion, to defame ours. Defend the purity and simplicity of it, from
the superstitious and corrupt mixtures of the Church of Rome, by a generous and
rational observance of decency and order in the Worship of God. Religion takes
no pleasure, either in a nasty, slovenly behavior, or delight in a Pharisaical
gaudery. Our Ceremonies are few in number, easily told, as easily understood,
not like those of the other Church, a load insupportable, scarcely inferior to
the Bondage of the Jewish State. Again, Let me beseech you to show your Zeal
for it in the Presence of Atheists; Let not Hell (tho it be broken loose in our
days) make you ashamed of your Crucified Savior, and his Royal Laws. It
argues a poor, sneaking, ingentile spirit, when men shall be hectored out of
their Religion, by a company of Sots, that have no God but their Belly, and
understand no other pleasure, but what Bruits do find. Hand ulla Numina
expavescunt Coelitum, Ventri offerent Deos ignorant caeteros, as Euripides
expresses them. These are the Antichrists which endeavor publicly and
privately the ruin of our Religion, a Jewel too precious to be lost, if you
please to consider the second particular, the healing and cementing nature of
it: It Is the Balsome of the Creation, the Pandora of all excellent Virtues,
which undoubtedly will heal all wounds in Church and State, may they be
applied. But that which does not a little advance the Excellency of it is, that
the perfection which she challenges as her own, does not proceed merely from
the abstracted blessing of the great God, but in part from the curious
composure of that Spirit which God has endued her with, which her very Name, as
(St. Austin and Propertius testify) does sufficiently demonstrate, this being
that which fasteneth the Soul and Conscience to God and Goodness. The Greeks
translate it by (...), and those that joined themselves as Proselytes to the
Jewish Church, were called (...), and sometimes waiters for the Kingdom of God,
longing for the Revelation of the Messiah. We may judge of the force that
Religion has, by the combining nature of Superstition and Will Worship, which
(as Lactantius observes) is but verae Religionis unitatrix, it makes men all of
one mind and judgment; Pignoratos reddit animos, it causes them to pawn their
Souls, and Affections, and Estates also, one to another. Herod and Pilate,
though desperate enemies before, were then made friends, when Christ was to be
crucified. Old Rome will dye to the last man pro aris, and focis; new Rome is,
at this day, as zealous for her new-coined Devotions, and will unite all the
World over against those, whom they are pleased to Damn for Heretics: The Jews
stand as stiffly to the Traditions of their Forefathers, the Rabbis and Doctors
of their Church, as the Turks to the Precepts of their Alcoran, or we to the
Old and New Testaments. Now, if the name of Religion, though it be false,
carries with it such Magical force and power, to how much more may true
Religion pretend? He that reads the History of the Ten Persecutions, when the
native and simple beauty of Religion ravished the Souls of those blessed
Martyrs, will easily believe that she is strong and mighty, as well as amiable
and lovely. The pacifick argument which Abraham urges to Lot, when there was
discord between their herds-men, was this, That they were of the same Religion,
Genesis 13.8. Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, between my
herds men and thy herds-men, for we be brethren: Hoc est, Fide, and Religione;
and the more cogent was his request, because the Canaanite and the Perizite,
men that were strangers to God and Religion, dwelt then in the Land. No sooner
had the influence of it touched the Souls of the Three thousand, Acts 2.44, but
they were together, and had all things common. I confess, when Religion began
to grow into Faction, then sprang up Divisions; a parting of Minds and Souls,
as well as of Purses and Estates; then was the Common of Christianity turned
into enclosures, when one cries out, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollos; a
third, I am for Caephas; and a fourth, I am for Christ; that is neither for
Ministers, nor Ordinances, but only for Jesus and his Spirit: But who dare
impute this to Religion, when St. Paul tells you it proceeds from the flesh, 1
Cor. 3.4. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are
ye not carnal?

But the glory of true Religion will be more apparent; If you observe, (1.)
That she is a most perfect piece of Beauty, and therefore of her own nature
attractive; for love to its proper object, is strong, and never at rest, till
it does transire in amatum; the drawing out of those lines of Perfection upon
her, was not trusted to the pencil of Apelles, or the curious finger of any
Mortal, but the unerring hand of God himself; nor was there any Copy or
Exemplar to draw by, but himself, he was (...), the Original of her Perfection;
in her shines forth his Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, Justice, Purity,
and all other communicable Virtues to the Sons of Adam: All other Beauties, in
respect of this, are but tenebrae. What you see in the vaulted Heavens (which
made the holy Prophet admire), the beauty of Sun, Moon, and Stars; what you see
upon Earth in the Spring, when nature has put on her rich embroidery; whatever
can be said of, or for Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Preferments in the World,
are nothing in comparison of her loveliness. If that (...), which St. Paul
speaks of 1 Cor. 14. the exact and comely disposition of the Worship of God
could be found in our Assemblies, where all persons with one consent should
offer up their Spiritual Sacrifices to Almighty God, Angels would rejoice, and
delight to join with us, and make up the Chorus of sweet-fingers in Israel:
Papists would no longer have occasion to say, that we are Fracti cord, and
ore. The sober part of Dissenters, that have truly tender Consciences, would
no longer keep at a distance; you would then see the Antepast of Eternity, when
Religion shall ascend the Meridian of her Glory, where there shall be (...),
the same sound, and therefore (...), all sweetly together singing Hallelujahs
to their King. That which spoileth the beauty of our Service now, is want of
Order, as the most exact piece of Beauty may be ill drawn, or the best Dish of
meat spoiled with ill cooking. Those Factions and Divisions which are amongst
us, the slovenly, and nasty carriage of many, that come to our Assemblies; and
of them also, which wait upon the Altar, represent Religion deformed, made up
of disproportion; so that St. Paul's Infidel (if he should come amongst us)
cannot say the Lord is with us of a truth.

Secondly, True Religion is most rational, answering the Philosophy of Man's
Nature, and the Ends of Discourse. I know some Mysteries of our Religion are
supra rationem, [that a Virgin should bring forth a Son, that the same should
be (...), that the dead should rise again, etc.] but none of these are contra
rationem. If you take Religion in a large sense, as she comprehends all
Virtues, nothing can be more reasonable than her demands, To fear God, to love
our neighbor, to be humble and meek, to honor our parents, to pray for our
enemies; What can be more reasonable? God has now taken away the rigor and
severity of the Law, and given us a yoke to bear, which is more easy, and the
burden more light. And if I come nearer the Text, you will find it to be the
purest reason, that God should have the fattest of the flock for his portion;
the most ingenuous and holy observance in his Worship; the most exact order and
decency in our approaches to him, which St. Paul calls (...), Romans 12.1. Now if
Religion be thus rational in all her demands, it must also be of a knitting and
cementing quality, Reason being the substratum of all Societies, of all
Converse between man and man. And if we add to this the sweetness of her
Nature, exactly answering the Conversation of our Blessed Savior, when upon
Earth, his Love, Affability, Candor, Humility; nothing certainly can better
attract, and draw the Souls of reasonable men, than Religion. The Professors of
it, I confess, are sometimes morose and cynical, not at all inviting in their
behavior; but the fault of them cannot be imputed to our Religion, which
(though it does correct,) yet does it not utterly remove the frowardness of our
Nature.

Thirdly, It is delicate and spiritual; so attenuate, that it can penetrate the
Soul, ravish the Thoughts, and command the Conscience with a holy and sweet
Violence. Good and bad Angels, as they are Spirits, have a power to suggest
good, or bad thoughts: Of this refined substance is true Religion, and the
Character given of the Word of God, by the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 4.12.
That it is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, joints and marrow, may very
properly represent the power which she has upon the souls of men; all which are
(...), laid open and naked before her. When St. Paul had established Order in
the Church of Corinth, he prophesies of the converting and convincing power
that it would have upon the Conscience, 1 Cor. 14.24. He is convinced of all;
he is judged of all: and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, etc.
At least it has a convincing power; and he that is the most debauched upon the
face of the earth, is forced to shut his eyes, as not able to behold the luster
and beauty of true Religion.

Thus have we taken a short view of the Nature of Religion; it will now be time
to review it in the special influence it has upon the persons mentioned in the
Text, God, the King, and the People.

First then, Kings are God's Representatives upon Earth, they bear his Image in
a peculiar manner. The worst and most wicked of them declare his severity, in
the punishments, which they inflict upon offenders with a liberal hand; their
Crowns and Scepters show the absolute Dominion and Rule which he exercises
over all; the Thrones which they sit upon; his Glory and Majesty; their vast
attendance, Officers and Servitors signify an innumerable company of Angels,
which as winged Messingers, attend the first notice of his Will: But, alas!
this representation of God is but imperfect; we see indeed part of his Glory,
but no part of his Beauty; rather his back parts, than his face: Men care not
much to see Jehovah clothed in the Robes of his strength and power, in the
Altitudes of his Majesty and Greatness; the sight of him, in this manner seems
terrible, like his appearance upon Mount Sinai, when he gave forth his Law in
lightning and thunder: But the beauties of God's face, which render him most
acceptable to the sons and daughters of Adam, are conveyed to us only by a
Religious Prince, where Justice and Mercy, Greatness and Goodness, Glory and
Grace, are so sweetly commixed and attempered, that both Original and Copy,
Substance and Shadow, God and the King are honored and adored by all. Such a
Prince as this, St. Cyprian calls Animatam Dei imaginem, the Picture of God
drawn out to the life; and though there were no other reason, yet upon this
account he must be conjunctissimus Deo: For as it is but just and equal that
God should love himself first and best, because there can be no object so
perfect as himself; so is it but rational to believe, that next to himself, he
will love those best who come nearest his Image, and represent him most amiable
to the World: Nor is it improbable, that this is one choice reason why David is
called a Man after God's own heart, viz. because he did not only as a Prophet,
declare the Glory and Excellency of the divine Majesty, but as a King in his
Religious and Holy Conversation publish the same.

Secondly, Princes are Sacred Persons, uncti Domini, the Lord's anointed; the
worst, as well as the best; as well Nero, as David; as well Jeroboam, the son
of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, as Solomon; for there is no power, says the
Apostle, but of God; he is the Fountain and Original of all: But Religious
Kings are Sacro-sancti, as they have devoted themselves to the Honor of their
great Lord and Master. This makes the Almighty so careful and tender of their
welfare, that not the weight of a finger must lie upon them without a curse,
saying, Touch not mine anointed. And it seems, by the custom of Heathens, to be
a principle in Nature; for it was usual with them to make Virtuous and Renowned
Princes, the companions of the Gods, Refer eos in numerum Deorum, to reckon
them amongst the Gods.

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. The Greeks, and especially their Poets
had as Fantastical opinions of their Hero's and Demons, they phancied their
departure out of this world to be a Translation only, for presently you find
them amongst the Gods of near relation to Jupiter, Jove Satus, and Jove Ortus;
Homer abounds in such instances. The Church of Rome, though she has no great
respect for Emperors and Kings; yet the homage which old Rome paid to their
Princes, she offers to her Saints; whom though she denies to Deifie, yet at
least she Divifies, and too liberally gives them Divine Worship. By all these
instances you may see, as in a glass, how wonderfully Religion does exalt a
person, especially a Prince, in the love of the Almighty, placing him under the
direct beams of his Power and Goodness.

Thirdly, Religious Princes are ex natura Dei, partakers of the divine Nature,
I said ye are Gods. I confess all Princes are so virtute officii; but Religious
Princes ex natura rei, as they are in an extraordinary manner spirited and
furnished by God for Government; their Souls usually are larger by far, than
other men's; their hearts are deeper. Saul, the first King of Israel, is sent to
the School of the Prophets, and there taught to prophecy, before he wears the
Crown, or sways the Scepter: His Successor David was also a Prophet, endued
with a noble and divine Spirit. The Wise man tells us, Prove. 25.3. That the
hearts of Kings are unsearchable, not to be fathomed. Moses was possessed of
this glorious Spirit, it had been otherwise impossible to have governed that
stubborn and unruly people, which at last tired our his patience; and it is
worthy observation, when God was pleased to ease him of some part of the
burden, Numb. 11.17. he spoke thus to him: I will come down, and talk with
thee, and will take off the Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon
them, and they shall be as the burden of the people with thee. In all these
respects, Religious and Holy Princes, as Menander observes, are (...), the very
Images of God; and therefore they must be nigh unto him, and he unto them.

Secondly, As true Religion does unite God and the King, so also the King and
the People.

First, As it makes the heart of a Prince truly noble and generous; for there
is no School that can so excellently improve a Prince, as true Religion; no
Precepts so refined, to furnish him with Wisdom for all parts of Government; no
policy so true and successful; no learning does so exactly and precisely
declare the duties of the one to the other as the Word of God; so that what
Prince soever he be, that takes pleasure to govern according to those Rules,
must needs be magnified in the eyes of his Subjects: These are the men that
best deserve the names of Patres Patriae, to be reverenced, honored, and
esteemed of all. What a tender regard had the children of Israel for David; by
no means must he endanger his Person in the battle, for in their eye he was
more worth than ten thousand of them. Good Josiah did better deserve the name
of Delicium humani generis, than Caesar: observe how the people lament him, by
the lips and eyes of the weeping Prophet, Lament. 4.20. The breath of our
nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was token in their nets: of whom we said,
Under his shadow we shall be preserved alive among the heathen.

Secondly, There is imprinted upon the Nature of man, a special reverence for
Holiness and Religion, which you may easily perceive in the common people, who
(tho they seldom understand what true Religion is) yet how do they hug and
embrace the very rumor and report of it? Let Religion beat up a drum, and you
cannot allay the heat of their spirits; they must follow the noise of it. This
makes Satan, in our days, put on the appearance of an Angel of light; and every
juggling Enthusiast will pretend Sanctity and Religion, when he designeth to
obtrude his own blasphemies upon the World. How many miserable Souls are
trepan'd into the thraldom of the Romish Church by a Religious blush, which
sits upon the face of her Worship? It was no hard matter for the Scribes and
Pharisees to swallow down whole houses under the pretense of Devotion. Plutarch
in his Politics, gives this advice to Traj^^^^ the Emperor, Venerare Deos, and
per pietatem in co^^m honorem opibus tuis utare, magnopere enim multitudo
affici sol^t, dum pietatem coram conspiciunt; quos maximi ducunt. This got Numa
Pompilius such an. excellent name, Quod plurima fana, lucosque Deorum dedicavit.

Thirdly, The great design of: Christian Religion, especially the public and
solemn Worship of God, is to render men alike one to another, of one heart,
mind, way, and life: Our prayers are the same, that all of us, as one man, may
consent to say Amen. Our Discourses either are, or should be the same,
differing in phrase and manner of utterance; yet bearing proportion (...), to
the wholesome form of sound words. We are initiated after the same manner by
Baptism into one and the same Church, at the Eucharist fed at the same table
with the same bread, refreshed with the same wine, by all incorporated, that
being one body, all the members may have a mutual respect, and care one of
another. St. Paul upon this consideration magnifieth the Christian Religion,
Ephesians. 4.3. as keeping the unity of the spirit: and commends it in the next
words, for the power that it carries to secure the common interest of love,
which he calls the bond of peace; the reasonableness of which he evinceth, v.
4. There is one body, as there is one spirit; as likewise ye are called into
one hope of your calling: One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God, and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all things. The whole
body of Religion is comprised in this word Love; and we may judge of the
sincere professors of it, by their conformity to it. Thus have I done with the
second particular, the cementing nature of true Religion.

The third and last Enquiry is, What privilege the Text allows to a Nation,
or People, whilst they are zealous and devout in Religious Worship, thus
expressed: Then shall ye, and the King which reigns over you, continue to
follow the Lord. In the Original there is nothing at all found for following;
all that is there expressed, is (...), which Translators have rendered as you
read; the Septuagint does not much differ, (...), walking behind, or after the
Lord; the meaning of which must be, that as God, when they had no King, was
their Captain, leading forth their Armies, and giving them success and victory,
(for this was the great reason they urged for alteration of Government, that
they might have a King to go out before them, and so fight their battles); so
also upon due observation of Religious Worship, by him appointed, he would
still be their General, and under his Banner they should sight victoriously
over their Adversaries. Now that this blessing is not merely temporary,
belonging only to that people, but entailed upon Piety and Religion to all
generations, is evident from the constant care, and tender respect he has
continued to his Church, to this day; for according to his promise, that the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against it: so it is, and so it shall be, so
long as the world endures.

And lest it should be objected, that Promises of this nature are peculiar to
the Church Universal, and have no reference to particular Churches, or Nations,
(although true Religion be therein professed and encouraged); let it be
remembered, that what belongs to the whole, belongs also to the part; and
though many particular Churches formerly renowned, are now utterly extinct, as
the seven Churches of Asia, and many more; yet before their ruin, they had a
charge of notorious crimes drawn up against them, and notice of those
exterminating Judgments, which (without repentance) would follow. God does very
rarely, if ever, deal with Churches, or Societies of men, as with Individuals:
these he oftentimes leaves under dismal and sore afflictions; not so much for
the demerit of their Sins, as the probation of their Graces. This was the case
of Abraham, of Lot in Sodom, of holy Job, who had this excellent character from
God, at the very instant, when he sealed a Commission to Satan to afflict him,
that he was an upright and perfect man. But who can tell of a Righteous Nation,
which has kept inviolate the Judgments and Statutes of Heaven, that was ever
forsaken by God? If you please to look home, you will find the never failing
Providence of the Almighty to watch over this Kingdom for good; so long as we
kept our Garments clean; so long as Religion flourished, and the Corruptions
thereof were discountenanced. Prosperity attended the long Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, although the Enemies of our Church were more numerous then, and as
busy and active as they are now. The peaceable bringing in of King James,
almost to a Miracle, was a demonstration of the kindness which God had for a
people unanimous, (for then neither Popery nor Phanaticism were tolerated.) All
the time he reigned both Church and State, were in a prosperous condition; but
as soon as ever extravagant spirits began to break the unity of the spirit by
Faction, then did God righteously begin to break the bond of peace. And it is
farther observable, that when the Inhabitants of England waxed wanton in their
Religion, then also did they become immoral, loose, and debauched in their
lives; for Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Factions in the Church, and
Adulteries, Fornication, Drunkenness, Profaneness in the State, are but gemini
fratres, which come into the world at one and the same time. If we look for a
reason why men of all sorts, rich and poor, the Lord and the Beggar are so
daring and confident in all kind of licentiousness, as if there were neither
Heaven nor Hell, God, or Devil, you need not go far, Religion has not been
encouraged, which was always, and ever will be (may she be protected) a curb to
all Impiety.

If any man therefore shall ask why the promise of the Text is not made good to
England, why we are in a trembling, dangerous condition? The Answer is near;
Protestants have declined in their Zeal; abated in their love to Religion:
these burned gloriously a considerable time after the Reformation, but now
their heat and light are both impaired. Some are turned Atheists, and so hate
Religion; others are turned Heretics, and so corrupt it; a multitude are
become froward Schismatics, and at this day are tearing and renting it into
pieces.

The proud Atheist scorns to be controlled; his tongue is his own, and he will
be Lord of it. Tush, does the Lord see? and is there any knowledge in the most
high? He has said in his heart, There is no God: And this abominable Principle
opens a sluice for a whole flood and deluge of all Impieties, Psalm. 14.

Esse aliquos manes, and subterranea regna,
Et Contum, and Stigio ranas in gurgite nigras
Nec pueri credunt.
They will not believe any thing of this nature, unless sometimes God does
extort it. St. Paul met with this herd of men, rather beasts, that were
laughing at the resurrection of the dead, as a mere cheat imposed upon the
world to keep it quiet, 1 Cor. 15. And the abominable conclusion which they
draw from these horrid Premises, you may there read, Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall dye; i. e. after death we shall neither taste nor smell, but
be annihilated; and therefore let us have as great a share of pleasure, as we
can, before it comes. Can it be well with the Nation, whilst this Viperous
brood are suffered to rant and hector in the World, venture into Gentlemen's
company, diffuse their poison, take liberty to baffle young and old, to make as
many Proselytes to Hell as they can? These men that deserve the worst of Deaths
for their blasphemy, at least to have their tongues cut out, are the Gallants
of the time, and no man must be so saucy as to control them. Can there be
peace, whilst these go unpunished?

Secondly, Heretics corrupt our Religion: for this is the next piece of
Satan's damnable policy; if he cannot club down true Religion, and force it out
of the world, he will make it as useless, as may be, in the world, by spoiling
the simplicity, and adulterating the purity of it: His instruments are always
prepared to serve this cursed turn, men that are reserved, close, carrying the
fairest show of Religion, that with more facility they may confound it.
Nestorius will by no means deny the Blessed Virgin to be the Mother of Christ,
but she must not be the Mother of God, subtly designing thereby to spoil the
glorious office of a Mediator. We have too many amongst us at this day, who
have swallowed down the poison of this cursed Doctrine, granting that Christ
dyed at Jerusalem, without the gate; but they will not own him to be a Savior
of the World: He was indeed a good man, but not ab aterno; there was a time
when he was neither God, nor Man. I should be too tedious in enumerating many
instances of this nature, there being (I believe) no Article of our Creed,
which at this day is not depraved: We are not without Arians, Socinians,
Munsterians, etc. who tho they lie snug and close, not appearing like the broad
faced Atheist, yet are they as dangerous to Church and State, and as great
disturbers of the peace of our Israel, as the former.

Lastly, The angry Schismatic, who tho he professes the same Faith and
Doctrine with our Church, yet does he scorn that any should conduct his Zeal in
the Worship of God: Whereas a truly pious, and humble Soul, whether he be of
the Clergy, or Laity, entertaineth low thoughts of himself, and is willing to
be guided in those things that concern Discipline; the other is proud,
self-conceited, and thinks that he is more fit to govern, than to be governed.
I confess Charity commands me to believe, that some Dissenters have better
hearts, but these may easily be differenced from the rest, by their meekness,
patience, readiness to be informed: But when men have brazen brows, Iron necks,
I cannot conceive how they should have tender consciences; and let them pretend
to what they please, yet till I see them fashioned to the sweetness of the
Gospel of Christ, I cannot persuade my self, that they aim at the Glory of God,
or the Exaltation of true Religion.

But are there none else, none amongst our selves, who deprive us of the
blessed influence of the promise? I fear we cannot excuse our selves. Our want
of devotion, our irreverence and hypocrisy in the presence of Almighty God
will bear witness against us. We rather bring our pomp and gallantry with us
into the public Assemblies, than our consciences; our eyes, than our ears; our
faces, than our faith; our lusts than our graces; we look not upon Religion as
our business, but rather our diversion; not the (...) of our souls, but the
(...) of our fancies. When I consider how devout Heathens have been at the
Worship of their Idols; with what fear and reverence they approach their
Deities; what study to make them propitious; how superstitious, not daring to
strike the first blow, nor begin a battle, till they have killed their
sacrifice, and found out the faustum omen. When I read how cogent Pliny is in
his Panegyric to his Mecaenas, nihil been, riteque auspicandum, sine Deorum
immortalium natu, and consilio; how penitent and sorrowful they have been, when
sensible of any neglect in Religion.

It may cause Christians to blush at the indifferency and looseness of their
behavior before the All-seeing God. When I see our Congregations full of those
men and women, which St. Chrysostom complains of in his days, (...), dull,
sottish, sleepy souls, snoring, yawning, I may add whispering, laughing, intent
upon, nothing less than Religion. Lastly, When I consider the immoralities of
all, from the highest to the lowest, of Priest and People, rich and poor, the
common and bloody Oaths, the National drunkenness, adulteries, fornication,
murders, too common and rife amongst us; there cannot, methinks, be any room
left for this Question, Why is it thus with England, since we profess true
Religion? but rather why are we not as Sodom and Gomorrah, as Adm^h and
Zeboiim, since our abominations are as weighty and numerous as theirs were? I
have no more to add to this first Proposition, but to leave these few words to
your consideration; That as it was neglect of Religion, which did first open a
wide and effectual door, through which crowded in upon us all Impieties, and
both together have caused the Heavens to look sable and black over us; so must
Religion be exalted to her former simplicity and observance, before we can
expect the face of our God to shine upon us; which will lead me to this short
word of Application.

You see, Right Honorable, both our wounds, and the cure of them, the only
restorative of our consumptive, both Church and State; use, I beseech you, with
all diligence and speed this healing plaster; pour of this blessed Oil into
our wounds; let us not bleed to death in the lap of our abominations, although
it be an easy death; Oh! let not an Icy slumber seal up our eyes to
everlasting darkness. We are brought low, very low, if the floods of Irreligion
and Impiety be not stopped, our destruction cannot be far. Stir up your selves
therefore to a due consideration of our danger; be strong and courageous, you
that have power to suppress all Profaneness; let not the wild beasts of the
Forest, wicked and debauched persons, trample under their profane feet, the
Royal and Holy Law; it is below a Christian to be a mere man, when the interests
of God and Religion lie at the stake. Endeavor, I beseech you, to establish
Unity, as well as Purity in Religion. Why should men, without control, take
liberty against Law, not only to separate from our public Assemblies, but set
up Altar against Altar? Reasonable men would soon be persuaded to frequent our
Congregations, were it not for them who are heady, high-minded, and
unreasonable, men that love to Proselyte silly souls, that they may serve to
maintain their own Factions, whilst they exercise a sordid Jurisdiction over
their Consciences. I confess it is a vanity to go about to knock down men's
reason, or to captivate their minds by force; let them abound in their own
sense, please their own fancies in their retirements; but in public worship,
where we are all alike interessed, there, I beseech you, contend earnestly for
a blessed agreement. Every river and rivulet will have its private murmurs,
according to those Eddies and turns which oppose their waters; but the Ocean,
into which they all empty themselves, has but one sound; it were desirable
that every Christian were a good Economy, able to govern himself and family
according to the Laws of God and his Church; but who looks into corners, or
digs a hole through his neighbors Wall, to pry into his Family-devotions? But
no less can be expected, then that upon solemn days of Worship they should be
ready to join with us, in setting forth the praises of our gracious God, and
presenting our Petitions at the Throne of his Mercy. This is the counsel of the
Text; which if we will entertain, we may still continue to follow the Lord; if
not, I must leave to your consideration the last Verse of the Text, The hand of
the Lord shall be against you, as it was against your Fathers. Which God of his
infinite Mercy divert, for the sake of our dearest Lord: To whom with thee, O
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Glory and Praise for evermore.

FINIS.

