A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF CARLISLE, On Sunday Feb. 15.
1684/5.

Being the next day after our Sovereign Lord JAMES the Second, was Proclaimed
KING in that City.

By Will. Nicolson, M. A. Archdeacon and Prebendary of CARLISLE.

LONDON, Printed for John Gellibrand at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

TO PHILIP MVSGRAVE, Esquire; One of the CLERKS of His Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council.
SIR,
I Know not what to think of the Present I here offer you. If it be worth your
Acceptance, it cannot meet with a more deserving and worthy Patron: and, if
not, you have so much kindness for the Author, that the Censure will be easy.
All I can say in behalf of it is only this: That its appearance in public is
encouraged by a City, whose Loyalty has been sufficiently signalized in her
being owned by the MUSGRAVES; and I cannot doubt but that, in this general
Patronage, some small share may be allowed to

Your most affectionately faithful Servant Will. Nicolson.

Prove. XXIV. xxi. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not with
those that are given to change.
THat Solomon was as great a Master of Politics as any other part of
Knowledge, and that He was as expert at rearing of Kingdoms as building of
Temples, we have little reason to doubt; if we consider how unreasonable it is
to imagine that God, who had promised to make him wiser than all the Children
of the East, and to furnish Him with Understandiing exceeding much, should yet
withold from Him that part of Wisdom which was most necessary for so great a
Prince. The young King was conscious of his own Weakness and Unfitness to go in
and out before so great a People: And therefore He readily concludes that the
most proper Boon that He could possibly beg at the Almighty's Hand was an
understanding Heart, able to direct him in the Execution of Justice and to
discern betwixt Good and Evil. Accordingly, his Petition is heard; and God
assures him that his request shall be granted him in so ample a manner, that
(for Wisdom) none of all the Kings that had gone before him could be compared
to him, neither after him should there ever arise any like unto him. Kings. 3.
12. So that a Monarch, thus wise and knowing, could not be mistaken in his
directions: But his Advice must needs be looked upon as most weighty and solid;
as well in his prescribing the Measures of our Duty to God, and Allegiance to
our Prince, as in his Cautions against the impolitick Vanity of Treason and
Rebellion.

In these particulars, his own experience had been sufficient to instruct him;
without any extraordinary Assistances of a Divine Spirit. He could not but have
observed how the Mercy and Meekness of his Father David had encouraged some
Sons of Belial in Factions and Conspiracies: and withal, how unsuccesful such
Attempts had always proved, and how the Designs of restless Men (to subvert the
Government, and to establish Anarchy and Confusion) had been continually
blasted and overthrown. Three notorious Plots especially had miscarried within
his remembrance; and these were enough to convince him of the madness and folly
of such hairbrain'd and unsettled Hotspurs as are ever uneasy under the
lightest Yoke, and always given to change.

The first instance in this kind that King Solomon had met with was in his
Brother Absalom: A Prince whose sweet Countenance, and sweeter Carriage, had
(as himself fancied) procured him Interest enough to gratify his Ambitions;
and sufficiently strengthened his Aim to wield his Father's Scepter: Flushed
with the prospect of so good success, he resolves to give the King Battle; and
either to carry the Crown, or perish in the Adventure. For the better
furtherance of his Design, he begs leave of his Father to retire to Hebron;
under pretense (forsooth) of paying a Vow and offering Sacrifice: As Rebellion
never appears barefaced at first, but steals into the World under the Veil and
Mask of Religion. This plausible Petition the good King has no sooner granted
then he is alarmed with Trumpets and the noise of War; forced to quit Jerusalem
and his Palace; and leave his Throne to the Usurper. But Traitors are seldom
long lived, having always Vengeance at their Heels: and accordingly, if we
follow but Absalom a Chapter or two further, we find him hanged and stabbed.

The second Plot, in the latter end of King David's Reign, we find to spring
out of the Ruins and Rubbish of the former. The Rebellious Tribes, having lost
their General, begin immediately to tack about; and to sneak and fawn on their
lawful* Sovereign, with as great a show and appearance of Zeal as that
wherewith they had lately opposed him. They have ten parts, they say, in the
King: and therefore they conceive it is a saucy encroachment upon their Right
for Judah to monopolize their Prince. But the King, it seems was too well
acquainted with the rebellious Tempers of these Hypocrites to repose any great
share of confidence in them: And therefore he believes it to be the safest
course to re-establish himself among his old trusty tried Friends at Jerusalem.
Upon this Sheba, a hotheaded Benjamite, takes upon him to rally the
Rebel-Forces; and proclaims a second Revolt, with this popular Remonstrance, we
have no part in David, neither have we Inheritance in the Son of Jesse: Every
Man to his Tents, O Israel. 2 Samuel 20. 1. But, before we come to the end of
that Chapter, we have the Head of this Foolhardy blade thrown over the Walls
of Abel; and thereby another stop put to the progress of Rebellion*

The third and last Conspiracy, within the Memory of Solomon, was that of
Adonijah. 1* Kings 1. A design as unfortunate as either of the former; and
every whit as fatal in the end. This brief survey of these three Plots is
sufficient to illustrate the Text without any other Comment; and we may hence
easily learn upon what grounds the Wise Man was induced to give this advice to
his Son, To fear the Lord and the King; and not to meddle with those that are
given to change*

The Words do evidently contain in them

1. An absolute command, pressing the observance of a positive Duty; fear thou
the Lord and the King.

^^d. A negative Precept, or Caution against a dangerous failure; meddle not
with, etc. Of both which in their order.

And first I take it for granted that 'twill be needless at present to enforce
the Duty of fearing God. I presome there can be none here, who are not already
sufficiently convinced that it is this which is the beginning of Wisdom; and
that therefore to be ignorant of, or not to regard, our Obligations in this
particular must doubtless be the errantest folly and madness imagnable. So that
our main business in this place will be to show you the necessary connection
there is betwixt the true Fear of God and the Fear of the King; and the reasons
why King Solomon has here linked them together.

And indeed we shall not need many Instructions to find out the reasonablness
of the Wise Mains Injunction; if we consider that the Power of Princes owes its
Original to that of an Omnipotent God: and therefore if we quake and tremble at
the remembrance of the one, we cannot but shiver at the thoughts of the other.
For all supreme Governors and Lawgivers (such only excepted as have advanced
themselves to that Station by their own I reasons and Ambition) have a fairer
Character than ordinary of the Divine Essence stamped upon them: They are Gods
Vicegerents on Earth, and act wholly by his Authority and Commission. Now,
whether their Titles and Government have descended upon: them by hereditary
Right or the free Voice and the Election of their Subjects, their power is
still the same* They are ever the Ministers of God, and not of the People; and
therefore are to be obeyed not solely in regard or bearing the Sword, and
executing Justice on Offenders; but because they are the Ordinance of God, and
Deputies to the King of Heaven. To say that an Elective Prince has his Power
from those that have voted him into the Throne, is indeliberate and
unreasonable Nonsense. For, since no private Man has a Legal Power over his own
Life, to dispatch and execute himself upon the Sense of some gross and enormous
Crimes, it follows that he cannot transfer any such Power to another; and
therefore* that those that have any just power of Life and Death must
necessarily borrow it of him by whom Kings Reign, and Sendtours decree Justice,
who only has the Supreme disposal of our Souls and Bodies; and who can, at
Pleasure, throw both into Hell Fires*

The old Testament is every where very plain in asserting this Divine Original
and right of Government: Always stiling Princes the Anointed of the Lord, or
bestowing on them such other Titles as do necessarily imply, that their
Deputation comes from above. The Almighty himself has there declared of them
that they are Gods, and that they are all the Children of the most High* Having
nothing common with other Mortals but that they dye like Men. And if so, the
Fear of God and the Fear of the King are not only mutually depended the one on
the other; but are one and the same* It can be no less than Sacrilege to rob
our Princes of that Tribute of Fear and Honor* which is due to them and it
must be direct Blasphemy to despise their Dominions and to speak evil of their
Dignities.

Nay; and to take of all occasion of Cavil upon a Princes Mal-Administration of
Affairs, and falling into Irreligious practices (as if these failures were
enough to forfeit his Commission and supersede his Authority( we find in the
Language of the Holy Scriptures the very Heathen Emperors styled God's
Anointed, as well as the Kings of Israel and Judah; as deriving their Authority
from the same Fountain of Government, the great and Almighty Lawgiver of the
Universe. Thus Nebuchadnezzar, the Pagan King of Babylon, is called Gods
Servant. Jer. 27. 5, 6. I have (says God there by the mouth of his Prophet)
made the Earth, and given it to whom it seemed meet unto me: And now I have
given all these Lands into the Hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my
Servant, and all Nations shall serve him and his Son and his Sons Son. And
therefore the Prophet Daniel applies himself to this Tyrant, in the same awful
strain as he would in any other Prince appointed by him who stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, and delights to be entitled a Judge among Gods.
Thou O King, says he, art a King of Kings: for the God of Heaven has given
thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength and Glory. Dan. 2. 37.

And the Doctrine of the Gospel* in this particular, runs exactly parallel with
that of the Law: Our Savior having there in the same Sentence and breath,
commanded us to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things which are Gods. Which is only another Phrase for Fear the Lord and the
King: And does in as express Terms command us to remember that Religion and
Loyalty go hand in hand; and that a firm perseverance in Religious Practices is
the surest Prop that can be thought of to support the Credit and Repute, the
Power and Authority of a Lawful Prince. It Is true, our Savior's Enemies
accused him of this, amongst many other Capital Enormities, That he was a
Fellow that perverted the Nation, and forbad* to give Tribute to Caesar, saying
that he himself is a King* Luke 23. 2. But had he bin, as his Accusers there
represent him, a man of a Factious Spirit, and one that loved to raise
fedition, he would certainly have resisted the Authority that led him to the
Cross; especially, since (upon one Prayer to his Father) he could have bin
furnished with more than twelve Legions of Angels to assist him.

Nor were his Apostles any greater Encouragers of Tumults and Rebellion than
their Master. St. Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, tells his Flock that
they must needs be subject to their Magistrates, and pay them Tribute; because
they are Gods Ministers. And therefore he advises them to render to all of them
their dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Elsewhere ( Romans 13. 1, 2.) he requires
passionately, that every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; because there is
no Power but of God; the Powers that are, are ordained of God. And he there
adds, Whosoever resists the Power resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. St. Peter's Epistles teach
the same Doctrine; that we ought to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as
unto those that are sent by him: for so is the will of God. And again: This is
thank-worth if a Man for Conscience sake toward God endure Grief, suffering
wrongfully. For what Glory is it, if when ye are buffeted for your Faults, you
take it Patiently? But if when you do well, you shall take it patiently and
suffer for it, this is acceptable to God. 1 Pet. 2.

Upon the whole Matter, our Duty to God and the King seem to be as inseperably
linked and twisted together, as the Love of God and of our Neighbors. And how
firmly that is done, St. John will teach us. 1 John 20, 21. If a Man say, says
he, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: for he that loves not
his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And
this Commandment have we from him that he that loves God loves his Brother
also. Which two Verses, by a very small variation of the Words, may be very
well applied to our present Purpose. For if a Man say he fears God and yet
fears not his King, he is a Liar: For he that fears not the King whom he has
seen, will never fear God whom he has not seen. And the latter Verse is yet
more apposite than the former. And this Commandment have we from him, that he
that fears God should fear his King also.

I have now done with the Former Part of the Text having shown you the
reasonableness of joining the fear of the Lord with the fear of the King: But
to reduce this Doctrine the better into Practice, 'twill be extremely
convenient to take along with us.

In the Second place, King Solomon's negative precept, or Caution against a
dangerous failure; mentioned in the Words following: Meddle not thou with
those, etc.

By Men given to change some Interpreters would have us to understand iterantes
peccata; suck lukewarm Converts as for a while (to secure their Interest and
the main Stake) put on an outside Color of Loyalty; but, upon the least
Prospect of Advantage reassume their beloved Principles of Faction and
Sedition. It Is underlyably true that there have always bin, and to the end of
the World always will be, a numberless Company of such Pharisaical Loyalists as
these; who fear the King, as the Indians worship the Devil, to prevent his
hurting of them, and not out of any Right and Sincerity of their Duty. And it is
as certain that these fellows are a most pernicious Race of People, and utter
strangers to God and Religion: So that, if we are wise, we should no more
meddle with them than we would bear company with a man infected with the
Plague, or sojourn in a Pest-Pouse. But these men are not properly geven to
change, because of their returning thus with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the
Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. No. They are rather to be
ranked among such as the Scripture tells us are settled on their Lees; and can
no more alter their Rebellious Opinions than the Ethiop can change his Skin, or
the Leopard his Spots.

Others again will have the wise Man's Inhibition levelled at such sickle and
unconstant Souls as have ever their thoughts gadding after this and the other
new Toy; and are ever satisfied with the present juncture of Affairs, how happy
and prosperous soever. We are all of us (God knows) to be liable to
transgressions of this Nature; and are seldom, if ever, pleased with our own
Lot and Station in the World. Ambition, Envy, Pride (or some such unlucky
passion or other) is always a hurrying us on to some new project either out of
a design of gratifying a revengful humor, or out of a fail Prospect of
advancing our Fortunes. This Weathercock Temper may indeed be most justly and
modestly reckoned a being given to change: and 'twill become a man of Prudence
first to endeavor to cure himself of this Natural and Epedimic Distemper, and
then to have a care not to meddle with such as are overgrown in it.

However; since King Solomon's Caution in the Text against meddling with such as
are given to change, is annexed to his command of fearing the King, it seems
most agreeable to Reason that we should here think our selves forbidden to
associate with those that have a Pique at Monarchy, and are always pressing for
a Change of that into some other new Model of Government. We may every where
meet with too many sad instances of this kind: Men that have accustomed
themselves to confound Liberty with Licentiousness, and Freedom with Power; and
therefore they are very apt, or very desirous at least, to think their
Propreties invaded if they may not be permitted to share the Scepter with their
Sovereign. By these Blessed Informers we are taught to look upon our selves
Freeborn Subjects; Men fairly entitled to Liberty and Property, and a People
that (by the fundamental Laws of our Land; have a right to prescribe Rules to
our Prince and to sit as Fellow-Companions with him on his Throne. Any other
kind of subjection then this is to be interpreted Slavery; and we may not, for
shame, tender any other Obedience than what will just serve to create a
distinction betwixt Prince and People.

Now wherever we meet with any of these preposterous Politicians (that are for
fixing the Head of Justice in the Heels and fag-end of the Nation) we are to
betake our selves to the Advice the Text gives us; and to be industriously
careful not to meddle with them. We are not, by any means, to suffer our selves
to be wheadled into their Councels and Cabals; or ever to indulge our selves
the Curiosity of prying into their Secrets. And we ought the rather to be on
our Guard, the more prone we are to be tempted into this sort of miscarriage*
It Is a mighty tickling piece of Honor to be reputed a Man of Intrigue, and a
Person well versed in the Mysteries of State; to be admired and cried up for
one of a politic Pate and a shrewd Commonwealth-Man. These are the Glittering
Temptations which usually betray Men into an acquaintance and intimacy with
such as are given to change* Till experience, in the end, convinces them of
their Folly, and shows that those edge-tools are not to be meddled with by every
forward Child and Stripling Statesman. And therefore any man of common
dirscretion, that observes a Bait of this Nature laid for him, ought to arm
himself with Old Isreal's Ejaculation O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret
unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be thou not united.

But, yet farther; we are not only to avoid the being drawn into the secret
Leagues and Associations of these Men: But we are withal to shun and fly their
Company, as much as we would a common Infection Evil Communication, the
Apostle* has forewarned us, will corrupt good Manners: and the best of us will
be sure to bring away some tincture of the ill Habits of those with whom we
converse. Besides, Rebellion (we are told) is as the sin of Witchcraft it is a
virulent and incurable Distemper, not to be wrought on, nor removed by any
Application whatever. Nay, and it is such awkard and unaccountable sort of
Witchcraft, as (by a strange and unusual kind of philtre) makes us in Love with
Ugliness and Deformity: A Passion every way as unnatural as for a Man to dote
upon a Spirit or Hobgoblin.

Some of us here present may have cause to remember the time when the Fear of
the Lord and the Fear of the King were banished the Land together and when the
vanity of being given to change was an Humor that generally prevailed. And we
cannot surely have forgotten the ghastly Face of Affairs in those days, when
every man was permitted to do what was right in his own Eyes, or (to speak in
the Language of the Times) as the Spirit moved him. A Spirit of that infernal
Hue, that Hell it self is hardly able to give us a prospect of more Horror and
Amazement than Liberty of Conscience (which is only another Name for License to
Sin) had then brought upon us. Into how many hideous shapes, within the space
of twelve years, was our Government changed? First, we had a Parliament to lead
and guide us then a crazy Remnant of the House of Cmmons afterward a Committee
of safety; then an Army; and last of all a Protector. And under all these
various forms of Treason and Rebellion and Usurpation, our Land lay a bleeding
and wallowing in her Gore; nothing out an universal Destruction and Desolation
appeared in our Streets. Our Young Men were slain with the Sword, and there was
hardly any left to make Lamentation, but those Traiterous Crocodiles that had
done the Murder.

This is the Countenance of Affairs so much admired by Rebels; and the Diana
that is adored by men given to change: But certainly the Features are not so
lovely as to ensnare men of Thought and Consideration. On the Contrary, if we
desire to have a view of the Blessings and Beauty of Monarchy; we cannot
furnish our selves with a fairer Draught than we meet with in the Reign* of our
late Sovereign: A Prince so peculiarly the care of Heaven, that his very
Enemies would confess that God was with him of a Truth. The whole Tenor of his
life was a continued Series of Miracles; and he was every where most visibly
protected by the Arm of the Omnipotent. Who less than a God of Infinite Power
could have brought back that exiled Prince to his Fathers House in Triumph: And
that too without the expense of a drop of Blood; with the General Shout and
Acclamation of his People? Nor has the Glory of our Peace bin since eclypsed.
We have sat happyly under our own Vine, and eaten of our Fig Tree without
Disturbances whilst our Neighbors round about, the Generality of Europe, has
bin floating in a Sea of Blood. Nay, and he had reduced the Unity of our Church
to as great a measure of perfection as that of the State. Instead of our late
infinity of separated Assemblies and Congregations, steered and pilotted by
puny Zealots of different Notions and Interests; he lived to settle among us an
Uniform Profession of one God, one Faith, one Baptism* And in this complete
State of Happiness (when it could neither be said of us that without were
quarrels, nor that within were Fears) it pleased the Lord to take away our Head
from us; to crown him with an eternal weight of Glory in the highest, for the
Faithful discharge of his Commission on Earth.

And after all these Demonstrations that the Lord cares for us, shall we be
afraid to make him our Confidence and our Portion for ever? Doubtless the
Almighty's Arm is ^ot shortened: But he is still as mighty to save as ever. Our
Religion cannot want a Protector; as long as the Crown is worn by a Son of that
Royal martyr that sealed it with his Blood. The blackest of our present
Sovereign's Enemies will acknowledge him to be Prince highly Generous and
brave; and therefore we may be well assured he will keep his Would in following
the Example of his Gracious and Merciful Brother, as well in the Preservation
of our Religion as in the Maintenance of our Laws. The Representative of a God
of Infinite Truth cannot but be Faithful when he his promised. In this
Assurance let us rest quiet and peaceable; always remembering that we are not to
say any Evil of the King so much as in our Hearts. Besides; if we desire that
our Sovereign should make the Laws of the Land his Rule as we have no manner of
Reason to doubt but he will* It is very fitting that we should first make them
ours. And if so, we shall there find that it has bin deemed Treason to think
the King was of any other Communion then the Church of England; and (...) th^^
Loyalty and Obedience to (...) Sovereign is still consistent with the
established Principles of that Religion, which his Majesty has already engaged
to defend and protect.

Lastly; supposing that any of our Princes (which in our present Circumstances
cannot be imagined) should so far forget his Duty to God, as to transgress the
Commission wherewith the Almighty had entrusted him for our good; yet this
cannot possibly give us any warrant to go and do likewise. No. We must, with
all Christian Humility, submit to the severest Penalties in the Ordinances of
our Lawful Sovereign; wh^^ the Precepts of the Gospel will not allow us to pay
an Active Obedience. These are the true Measures of Allegiance, chalked out to
us in the examples of our blessed Savior and his Apostles: And if any Man
teach any other Doctrine than this, we have no such Custom neither the Churches
of Christ.

Now to God the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost; three Persons and one God, the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords* be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Praise* Might,
Majesty and Dominion now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Plain and Profitable Exposition of, and Enlargemeut upon, the
Church-Catechism: By way of Questions and Answers. For the more ample
instruction of the more adult Children, and other elderly Persons that need it.
And divided into so many Parts as there are Lords Days in each Year; that it
may be gone through Yearly, either publicky in the Church, or privately in
Families. Together with the Scheme of a short Catechism annexed for the benefit
of the Younger sort of Catechumens. By SIMON FORD D. D. and Rector of
Old-Swinford in Worcestershire. And are to be sold by John Gellibrand at the
Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard.


