THE INEXPEDIENCY OF THE EXPEDIENT. Or an ANSWER to a Printed Paper, Entitled
AN EXPEDIENT For Preventing any Difference between His HIGHNESS and the
PARLIAMENT, About The Recognition. The Negative Voice. The Militia.


Wherein is discovered the pernicious ASP that is hid under some pretended
Flowers, which may offend and sting some weak Judgments, and may cause a
swelling, and a rankling tumor in the Commonwealth.

Set out to undeceive the good People of these Nations, who by an overhasty
credulity may be misled thereby, and brought into strange musings, and perhaps
murmurings (if no worse) concerning the present, most perfect, and most firmly
established Government.

By Charles Noble, a faithful Subject, and a great honorer of his present
Highness, and a true Lover of his Country.

London, Printed for Tho. Pierrepont at the sign of the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

The Inexpediency of the Expedient.
When I first beheld the foresaid Paper with its Painted Face, and Tired Head
like another Jezabel looking out of the Window, I had thought that long ere
this, it would have been thrown down, and tore in pieces by some able and
powerful hand in an Answer; but finding as yet of no essay that way, and
knowing withal, that silence does nourish and feed an Error; that it does feast
and banquet it so, that it is strengthened and confirmed, and shoots up and
sprouts and grows by it: And least it might acquire the title of an undoubted
truth, and sit, and rule, and prescribe in the hearts of some with a nemine
contradicente; therefore I thought it my duty (weak as I am) to encounter this
great Champion, who so boldly stalks and vaunts himself, and throws down his
Gantlet, and bids defiance, and that in the sight of the Sun, to all that will
abet our present Government, and so by a covert Consequence, and by a tacit
Inference, to all that will abet our present most Illustrious Governor.

And though I am in the way of writing, but as a dry Tree, and as a withered
Leaf; and though I am for the present made an Eunuch, and do lie under a
Castration by being deprived of the Armor of Books, which might assist me in
this combat, and so a good Cause may receive some hurts and wounds, through the
unskilfulness, or weakness, or nakedness of the Defendant; yet though I have
neither Sword, nor Spear, nor Helmet of Brass, nor Coat of Male upon me: Yet
naked as I am, with a sling and a stone, I shall encounter this Goliath. And
least I should seem to build the Gates of Mindus, which were bigger then the
City, I shall directly come to an Answer to all that is in that Paper, and to
all the Six Stanza's (if they may be so called) or Sections, or Pausings, or
Chasmas, or Distinguishments that are there set down.

I shall begin with the Frontispeice, which like an intoxicating Philter fairly
made up and gilded, has yet within it poisonous and destructive hintings, such,
as should they be swallowed, would send up into unsteady Brains, vain and
phanatick vapors, and fill them with a dismal and a vertiginous giddiness. It
is called (An Expedient for the preventing any difference between his Highness
and the Parliament,) when the Remedy that is prescribed, is the very Seed and
Sperm, the very Nursery, and Fomenter, and Vivary of that difference: For the
Recognition, the Negative Voice, and the Militia, what is said unto them, shall
receive their censure and solution, according as they shall fall in those
places that the Printed Paper has allotted them. Only concerning the Author, I
shall say but this little, which is in effect his own words, That he is A
nameless Lover of his Country. And however the great Bias of some special
interest or self-end may lean so hard upon his judgment, that it may make it
stand bent, yet surely his parts are great, and so no doubt is his policy,
which he possibly may make use of to his designed advantage: For since it is a
Maxim, That it is better to buy of Enemies, then to reward Friends; He may
happily put himself into that posture, still looking and with a purpose to be
bought off. But I may not pretend to the knowledge of any man's thought, I shall
leave that to the great Cordignostick that is above, and shall fall to the
words that follow.

THe Preface, is like a strong and subtle poison that boils in the veins, and
works so powerfully upon the spirits, that moderation and reason is utterly
laid by, and a mad Conclusion made from a suggested, a forged, and a false
Principle. Though (says he) I look not upon the present Dispute about the
Negative Voice and the Command of the Militia, as like to give us much trouble;
(For, Usurpations and Tyrannies once judged by God, never recover to rise again
in the same form:) Yet to satisfy those doubts and fears of those honest Souls
who see not what strength they have on their side, etc.

Mark in what sly, in what amphibious, in what Epecine insinuations he
endeavors to wimble himself into the belief of those honest souls whom he
terms so, whom he hoodwinks and muffles, and even reeses and smoaks with
doubts and fears, that he may amuse them and blind their eyes, which could not
else but see the Imposture and the Hocus-Pocus which he uses. He looks not
upon the present Dispute about the Negative Voice and the Militia, as like to
give much trouble; when there is no Dispute about it, (unless the clandestine
and sly Redarguings that are occultly laid down in this printed paper be that
Dispute, or be a rise and fomentation to such a Dispute) nor indeed can there
be, in any right reason, unless there be a dividing the bark from the tree, or
the marrow from the bone, which is the perishing and destroying of both: I hope
that is not the intention, though the words Usurpations and Tyrannies bear but
an ilfavored, and an incongruous, and a splenatick interpretation, and have the
smatch and relish, and rank taste of the spirit of envy, if not of rebellion.
Besides when it is added, There is reason and equity sufficient to stop the
mouth of such a claim by any single person in this Nation; Is not this speaking
out as the Jews of old, We will not have this man reign over us? We will not
have this man our Supreme Magistrate: Or if our Supreme, his Supremacy shall
be so manacled, and so fettered, and so restrained, as the Heathens Idols were
of old, who were chained up with golden chains, lest at any time they should
depart from them, or do hurt to them: Or we'll make him so impotent, and bring
him to such a pass, that we'll do with him as the Persians did with their god
Fire, whom upon the least disgust they would take and carry to the Water, and
threaten his extinguishment, if he denied them any thing.

But I shall hasten from these ill-boding foggs, as from the opening of a
noisome Vault, which sends forth such a pestilential Vapor that oftentimes does
strike the head with a stupifying diziness, and oftentimes with Lethargies
which lead to death: And I shall come to the rise and occasion of this
Government, whereby the nature and power of it will best appear; which is set
down in the first Section.

Sect. I.
And here little more needs to be added for the clearing and asserting the
indubitable Rights of this present Government, then what may be gathered from
the words and concessions that are laid down in the Section it self. The
present form of Government (faith he) as it varies from a Republique, was
begotten by Necessity. See, the very life and ground of any Action, that may
render it authentic and passable, is the Necessity of it; and this Necessity
by his own concession was the parent and sire of this Government. And if, as
the proverb is, Necessity has no law, or be above law, or be at least a law to
it self; what childish and untoward waywardness is it, to dispute or contest,
or any ways to limit or recall a voluntary act of this great Master?

It was found that the Parliament, by long standing, like water, grew corrupt
and putrid, and was as gall and wormwood, or the potion of Jealousy to all
palats; it was not only bitter, but it caused swellings, even swellings and
risings of heart: So that (as it is confessed) the people threw themselves into
the arms and protection of his present Highness late Father (of blessed memory)
whom they found so stout and so faithful, (and withal successful) that they
looked for all peace and happiness (in which they were not at all deceived)
under his most wise and prudent government. Well, this being freely done, and
by the honest people (as he says) who were accessory to the devolving the Power
here; wherefore is the voice of murmuring and dissatisfaction heard? why is
there a supposition now only of his truth and righteousness? why does he come
with a Non putavi, 'twas never dreamed nor thought of A Monarchal or
Family-interest? As if they had acted hand over head and knew not what they
did, (which would be loath to be owned) and yet it must be so, or the Author
must be said not to know what he writes.

There were other wiser heads (as he calls them) that by their high Places had
approached nearer this temptation in their own hearts, which did foresee and
were aware what might be the consequence and product of this overhasty
credulity and trust, as afterward indeed it came to pass. And here lies the
rancor and spightfulness that makes him even foam at the mouth, that there were
thoughts of heart by some in high places, that their turn might be next: And to
see themselves Tantalized and played at Chop-cherry with, by the glisterings
only and shows of a Crown, which they have missed of, this is a goad in the
side, a thorn in the eye, and as the thrusting through with a sword.

Sect. II.
The second Section begins something smoothly, but yet is but as the playing of
the Porpus before a storm. The Protector (says he) did clearly run Bias to the
honest Intentions of those that wished him the administration of the Power, when
he made himself a Civil Ruler. See here a contradiction: They wished him the
administration of the Power; and the next words, He made himself. a Civil
Ruler. What was then upon the hearts and wishes of those that were instrumental
to his late Highnesses most deserved advancement to the Supreme authority, lies
not in my discernment, no otherwise then by a demonstrative conjecture, which
leads me to a belief that they really wished what they so willingly acted, and
that they would not have been so ready and so sollicitous to make him a
Protector, that they would ever afterward wish him to be otherwise; especially
it being (as he says) that changes in States and Governments being brought
forth with such pangs and throws as are very uneasy and dangerous, and so
they may not be imagined to be every days work: Therefore it was indeed in vain
to retract or withdraw the trust committed, or to divorce the Militia from the
Scepter, either in his Person, or in the Person of his Successor; for be it
what it will, That was fought against in the person of the late King. This I am
certain of, That take away the Power of the Power, take away the Militia from
the Protectorship, take away the Sword from the Magistrate, and then the Power,
and the Protectorship, and the Magistracy will be but like great Gilt Letters,
and all Consonants without Vowels, which at best will make but a harsh and
insignificant noise: Where the power of Compelling is taken away, the desire of
Serving grows quickly cold, abates and dies.

Sect. III.
In this third Section, the bone that so sticks in the throat shows it self.
It Is put upon the Disgust of the Patriots in the late Parliament: When I am
confident the knowing good People of this Nation, whose Representative they
only were, would not at all difrelish the word, nor be disquieted at it. It Is
called Hereditary succession, and (by his own words) there was then in
Parliament powerful strivings for Hereditary succession. Now should that have
taken place, the buds of all others hopes had been nipt, their branches that
ways had been lopt off, and their very roots had been laid bare and dug up:
Therefore to keep up their spirits from a despondencie, and an utter dying in
them, The Nomination of the Immediate Succession was indulged (as it is phrased)
to his late Highness; and that but upon a very high confidence of the spirit,
and principles of his late Highness, to carry him above all private respects,
in the execution of the trust of Nomination. By this it is plain and evident
what is drove at; Hereditary succession is twice named, and once hinted in the
words, Above all private respects, in the trust of Nomination. So that had his
late Highness waved all his own Relations and concernments, had he shut up his
Princely bowels of nature and humanity, and passing by his own Illustrious
Sons, had pitched upon the Nomination of one of those that looked, and longed,
and hoped, and lingered after it; then question not but Hereditary succession
had gone down easily, then the Match betwixt the Militia and the Scepter had
admitted of no scruples, and it should have been too late for any to forbid the
banes. But in regard he did nominate for his Successor his Royal Son (whom God
long preserve) from hence these fretful, peevish scruples do arise.

Sect. IV.
In this Section, and in the other that follows, there is, as I may so say, a
Scale of Votes. It Is put to the Question, Whether or no his present Highness
being in possession of the Government, may not therewith take the power of the
Militia which was invested in his Father? And whether the Negative Voice also
descends not unto him with the Civil Government? It Is resolved by the Author
negatively: The ground he lays must be viewed. For the Militia (he says) it is
true, the supreme Command of all the Armies in the Three Nations was in his
late Highness, but not as he was Protector, but as he was General, which he was
before he was Protector; so that the Protector or Civil Government was annexed
to the Militia, not the Militia to the Civil Government, etc. To the solution
of this, I must have recourse to the Humble Petition and Advice, where the
confusion being foreseen that might commence for want of a Nomination of a
Successor, It was petitioned to his late Highness in these words; That your
Highness would be pleased during your lifetime to appoint and declare the
Person who shall immediately after your death succeed you in the Government of
these Nations. Which his late Highness accordingly did; he nominated and
appointed the most Illustrious RICHARD to succeed him in the Government in the
three Nations. Now could it be supposed that he would have him succeed in part
of his Government, and not in the whole? Or can it be imagined that he would
appoint him to the Scepter, and leave the Militia in the power and at the
dispose of any other person? especially since it is alleged by the Author, that
the Military power and capacity must serve as a strength and security to the
person of the Protector, in the due exercise of the power of Civil
administration (be it) only entrusted with him. So that if the now present
Protector be to administer Justice, as undoubtedly he is, and ever will do, it
would be but an idle dream to think he either should or could do it, should the
sword of Justice be ever wrested from his hand: Or if he be looked upon as a
Protection and a Defense unto his people under his dominions, how can that
great benefit be reasonably expected, when he shall be divested of all power
and means to do it? So that whatever power was thought fit to be entrusted in
the person of his late Highness, (which was indeed, and also thought fit for
all the power the three Nations could cast upon him) whatever trust was reposed
in him under what capacity soever, whether as General or Protector, or
Protector or General, or both, or more, the same power, the same trust
indubitably is devolved upon the person of his now present Highness. First by
the Humble Petition and Advice it was thrown upon his late Highness; and
according to that Petition and Advice, it is now thrown upon the present
Protector. And I question not but that we shall have all great cause to bless
God, that has set over us so good and so pious a Ruler, one who is of such a
spirit, of such Integrity and Faithfulness, that it may be as justly said of
his Highness, as it was of his late renowned Father, The like qualified Person
is not to be found in the Three Nations.

Sect. V.
In the next place comes the other Vote, which is passed to the condemning the
Negative Voice. The Negative Voice (says he) was never disputed with his late
Highness (where it was suffered to sleep as in a safe hand) for his Personal
Virtues. If it was never disputed with his late Highness, why is it disputed
now? And if it was suffered to sleep in his days, as in a safe hand, why is it
not suffered to sleep in those hands now, which assuredly are as safe? And were
not his present Highness endued with Personal Virtues more then ordinary, he
would not certainly suffer such harsh and unpleasant Speeches to pass by
without some eminent resentment: For whereas it is urged, That his late
Highness for his Personal Virtues had the Negative Voice sleeping by him, as in
a safe hand, without the least question, may it not be reasonably, if not
necessarily inferred, That since the business is in dispute with his present
Highness, that the eclipsing or abating of such Personal Virtues in him (which
I renounce the thought of) is laid as the ground and rise of this dispute? And
if the Negative Voice may not be concredited nor trusted with any Power, or
Person, since the taking away the King or Kingly Government, why was it trusted
so before in the hands of his Highness Father? And if with him, is it
imaginable that it should be given up, or abate, or go less now?

And whereas it is alleged to be a thing superfluous as well as dangerous, to
grant the Supreme Power a Negative Voice; for that its deemed the Parliament to
be quick sighted enough, and to be so wise in their generation as to be able to
judge, what is good and behoveful for the Nation, wherein their stakes and
interests lie. It is easily granted, That they can spy enough as to their own
concerns and interests, but whether or no, if they be left at large, and to do
what ever they please, they may not possibly at sometime or other be tampering
with that, that may not at all suit with the convenience and concernment of
another. The words following have an odd tang with them, In a Commonwealth
(says he) as we are (or should be) no distinct Person or Family-Interest, ought
to be owned. And this is not the first time he has been up with this Family
Interest in this Paper, by which it appears, that the word is hard of
digestion, and lies very heavy upon his stomach, as you will further see in the
next Section.

Sect. VI.
Here is the Negative Voice quite out of doors, and put to Kennel (as it were)
with Kingship; and having by this the World in a string, as may be imagined,
they here proceed to run riot, and with full cry they pursue and hunt, both the
Supreme Power, and the Other House.

First, (he says) We have no Civil Head now that is Master of the Commonwealth,
but a Servant to it, (though an honorable Servant, and it is fit he should be
so maintained.) It is true, though the greatest Prince be but a Servant to his
Country, out of mere Natural Love and Affection, yet it was never disputed,
but that the Supreme Ruler, was styled and owned to be a Civil Head.

And yet one thing more may be hinted as to the Servant (whom they term so) how
honorable and glorious soever they may nominate him, and how liberal and large
soever his Exhibition and Maintenance may be, yet it is not always safe to give
too overhasty a credulity and reliance upon some Masters. But the resolution
he says is easy, and it may be so; for it is like Penelopes Web, that one hand
unravels what the other makes up.

First, he says, Let his present Highness be acknowledged and confirmed as
Supreme Magistrate in these Three Nations; and next he says, Let the Officers
of the Army choose their General, and let him have his Commission from the
Protector and Parliament. If this last be granted, and that the Officers choose
their General, it is in another Breast whether the first shall stand good or
no; or whether his present Highness shall indeed be acknowledged or confirmed
as the Supreme Magistrate in the Three Nations, which is evident by the next
Proposition, which is accented thus.

Let his Highness, now being with the Parliament, have the power of disposing
and commanding these Forces, and of making War and Peace. So that the sense is
obvious, That whilst his Highness is with the Parliament, he shall command the
Forces (if his Commands will be hearkened too, when there is another General)
but when the Parliament breaks up, then he shall have no such power; which is
further intimated in the following words.

A single person (says he) cannot hurt us, if an unfit power be not concredited
and entrusted with him; and what that unfit power is, it cannot be surmised,
unless it be the power of the whole Army; and if that may not be trusted with
his Highness, with what safety may he trust it in another hands, and put it
out of his own.

But it is frankly granted, That the single Person may stand; for (says he)
when we engaged against a King, it was not against a single Person simply but
so circumstanced as Arbitrary, Tyrannical, with a luxurious Court, etc. We
engaged not against what might be useful (no Rational man would do) but what we
found hurtful: Therefore the single Person may stand. It is possibly he may do
so, but how, or how long, or with what safety, there is the Quere; for the next
words are ominous and direfully portentous. We gave not up the substance of our
Cause, be not baffled in that, says he; and with an ingemination, give not up
the very heart and substance of our Cause, part not with that. And what that
Cause may produce, and what sad effects that may beget; the great God above
only knows, who only knows what might be meant by that Cause: For whilst the
Officers in the Army are covertly invited to keep their integrity (as
questionless they will, according as they have vouched it, and protested it to
their lives and fortunes) I hope it is no other integrity, nor to no other
Person then to his present Highness, who ought of special right to be invested
Generalissimo, and to have the primary and sole Command of the Army, and to
have not merely an Honorable, but the only Interest in the commanding the
Militia.

Now for the Other House (as he calls them) he gives them a short pass and
sends them away, some to go whither they will, and others (whom the Parliament
shall think fit) to pass into the Council of State: Never heeding, nor so much
as casting an eye upon the Humble Petition and Advice, which plainly says, That
the persons so Summoned and Assembled together (it is laid down before, how,
and by whom, and after what manner, and how many shall be called) shall be, and
are hereby declared to be the Other House of Parliament, and shall and may
without further Approbation of this House (meaning the House of Commons) from
such time of their meeting, proceed to do, and perform all such matters and
things, as the Other House of Parliament. So that if they are constituted a
House of Lords, merely with the single Impress of the Supreme Signature, and
Summoning, without any further Approbation of the House of Commons, whom he
calls the Parliament, then hands off for any Person or Persons else to
intermeddle with them, or to dispute their existency, or to limit and bind up
their power.

The Humble Petition and Advice has butted and bounded our Interests, that
there might not be any straying in our thoughts of new Models or Platforms of
Government; there were presumptuous thoughts of old in some Astrologers, that
made them give out (how vainly it is easily imagined) That if they had been at
the making of the Heavens, they would have contrived them better, and put a
goodlier shape upon them, then now they have. Such a spirit of giddiness has
possessed some brains now, that they could form a better Commonwealth, beyond
that of the fancied Utopia, that they could make better Laws, a better
Government, a better Governor; and that makes their fingers so busy, and to
nib so about the Knot that ties up, and is the very Bond of our Peace.

To conclude, (I may say it with sorrow) See if the grudging spirit of the
revolting Israelites be not strayed and got into some bosoms here amongst us.
The Scripture at large records it, and it cannot be unknown to any man of any
reading, what Gideon did for the deliverance of Israel: The Midianites
oppressed them sore, so that they were forced to make themselves dens in the
mountains and caves in the rocks to hide themselves; there was left no
sustenance for Israel, neither Sheep, nor Ox, nor Ass; they had Enemies like
Grasshoppers for multitude, and they and their camels were without number; they
could make no resistance: And yet in these straits the Lord raised up Gideon,
and by a handful of men with a few pitchers and lamps he delivered them from
all their Enemies: Upon this the men of Israel cry up a Gideon! Rule thou over
us, both thou, and thy son, and thy sons son! And they had rest forty years.
But Gideon dies, and mark their ingratitude, They showed no kindness to the
house of Gideon.

Are not there some such spirits in this Nation! Was not his late Highness, of
precious memory, as another Gideon to this Nation? Might it not be said of him,
as the Angel said to Gideon, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man? Were not
our fears horrible fears, and our Enemies many Enemies? and not only so, but
were they not potent Enemies? were not they politic Enemies? were they not
abetted by most of the Christian Nations, besides their own Party, and that no
small one, in our very bowels, and in the heart of our Nation among us? And yet
this our Gideon, though with many and sore Battles, gave us at length our.
Liberties which we now enjoy. Did not this our Gideon highly merit at our
hands, to lift him up, and to cry, Do thou and thy son, and thy sons son rule
over us! But this our Gideon now rests from his labors: And what kindness is
showed to the House of this Jerubbaal, this our Gideon, the Printed Paper to
which this is intended as an Answer, will plainly show.

The End.

