OF ADORATION IN SPIRIT AND TRVTH.

Written in IV. Books by JOHN EVSEBIVS NIEREMBERG Native of Madrid. S. I.

And Translated into English. by R. S. S. ^*

Christogram I H S



In which is disclosed the pith and marrow of a spiritual life, of Christ's
imitation and mystical Theology; extracted out of the HH. FF. and greatest
masters of spirit Diadochus, Dorotheus, Clymachus, Rusbrochius Suso, Thaulerus,
a Kempis, Gerson: and not a little both pious and effectual is superadded.

Printed Anno M.DC.LXXIII.

The Translatour to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Present thee here with a stranger whom I have put in an English vest; and if
thou deem him not worthy to be naturalizd, at least, I pray entertain him
civilly. When thou art thoroughly acquainted with him, and have dived into a
discovery of his perfections, thou will find rich pearls shrouded under a
course shel; and I am confident it will never repent thee, no more then me, of
his acquaintance. One that knows how to distinguish fruit from leaves, and
pith from bark, a solid substance from a superficial show, one that delights in
truths, and seeks rather his own spiritual advance, then a frothy feeding of
his fancy, will here find entertainment right for his purpose, that is, both
substantial and delightful. He will teach thee how to serve God in spirit and
truth, not by an empty sound or canting use of these two words, as do our
sectaries, who when they have named them think all done, but by a real practice
of Christian virtues in the discharge of our incumbent duty to God, our selves,
and our neighbor.

To speak without metaphor, I offer thee a plain Translation of a Latin
treatise, a piece in high esteem with me and many; and I require only thy
perusal thereof to make thee esteem it so too. That which moved the Author to
compile it, moved me also to translate it, yet with this difference, that he
sought only his own behoof, I my own, and chiefly others. He a Parent of many
such issues, having labourd long with his pen for the advance of his neighbor
in the way of virtue, judgd it but meet to a make some provision for himself as
a store house of spiritual truths and maxims, which he might have ready at
every turn both for his meditation and practice. And I think he was much in the
right, since charity begins at home, and it availes very little to perfect
others if we be still truants our selves: self-interest ought to be the first
concern; nor are we to let our family starve at home while our endeavors are
laboring to feed others abroad. This prudent ceconomy and sage care of his own
good is the common case of us all who have a soul to save; it being also our
task to provide in the first place for its indemnity, that being the grand
affair of our whole life, which if not done all is utterly undone. And how can
we provide better then by making use of his provisions where the common
exigence is the same? For by the dictamen of charity it seldom happens, that
one is so treacherous to himself as not to provide himself of the best: and if
what was best for him cannot be but good for us, what he communicates without
envy let us make use off with much freedom, little cost, and a hearty welcome.
There is not so much applause in translating as writing, but the common benefit
no whit the less, yea more; because no man of judgment will translate what he
deems not more then ordinarily good and taking; but who can promise so much of
his own conceptions amidst so many miscarriages and abortions as daily happen?

This our age and kingdom is a little unfortunate in this respect, that our
best wits are forcd so to employ their pens for the defense of Catholic
religion against the common adversaries and their assaults, as that they cannot
fully attend to what is as necessary in its kind, the writing of spiritual
treatises for the preservation and increase of piety in the hearts of the
faithful. The former indeed is necessary, but is a misfortune it is so, upon
such a score, or that among the children of the same Mother some should be
found so rebelliously bent; especially with such prejudice to the latter; this
being the nursery of devotion and consequently promoter of virtue and piety.
Spiritual books are the ordinary tongue by which God speaks to our souls,
and the conveyancers of his holy inspirations when he is pleased to knock at
the door of our heart for entrance, yea the key which unlocks it. How many by
reading them receive both light in their understanding and love in their will,
not only to acknowledge but perform what conduces to a virtuous life? How many
have quit the filth of sin in which they wallowed by wonderful conversions; and
how many more of better principles found thereby effectual incentives to
Christian perfection. Certainly the benefits redounding thence are unspeakable,
and great pity it is that we are not better stored with such books: for as our
appetite cannot feed long upon the same meat without being cloyed, though
otherwise both wholesome and savory; no more can our understanding without a
nauseousnes employ it self in matter of reading, unles there be variety to
season it: I have heard even spiritual persons bemoan their own and the common
scarcity in this kind. Besides the excellency of the treatise it self, this was
a motive to me to contribute my mite toward some small redress of the
aggrievance.

This premisd, I must speak a word or two of the Title it carries, which is, Of
Adoration in Spirit and Truth: the which he borrowes from the words of our B.
Savior to the Samaritan, and is the subject of the whole work. In that
conference, Io. 4. the great master Of Spirit and Truth told her, the time
would come when true adorers should not be confined to Jerusalem or the
mountain in Samaria, but were to adore God in spirit and Truth: for God being a
spirit covets to be adord in spirit. Now what it is to adore him in Spirit and
Truth he explaines through the whole treatise, and chiefly in the 4. first
Chapters of the first Book, where he explicates what he understands both by the
one and other, and so clearly, that nothing needs to be superadded. Only it will
not perchance be amiss to forewarn some les skilful Reader, that he be not
frighted into a prejudice of the Book by the title, it seeming to sound somewhat
of the Sectarist, who has nothing so frequent in is mouth, as I said above, as
Spirit and Truth, and nothing les in substance. The words indeed are easily
named, and may serve for canting, among the ignorant; but if one go to the pith
and substance of spirit and truth, as the Author uses them, to a true denial
of our selves and more then a lipp-love of God, here the sectary will be found
as void of spirit as truth, and in both a nut without a kernel. When the reader
sees the Author to aim at nothing more then mortification, penance, fasting,
prayer, carrying our cross, and this through the course of our whole life, he
will soon discover him no sectarist, who dares scarce so much as talk of these
things, much les teach or practice them, but a Roman Catholic, who alone owns
them both in doctrine and practice, as the chief means to Christian perfection.
Nor will any body, think I, be so inconsiderately over-byassd, as to take any
prejudice by these expressions, o infirm spirit, pusillanimous spirit, which
here and there he will meet with. It Is true, by the abuse of this our age; they
sound not so well with us; through the default of those who have renderd both
them and themselves ridiculous; yet the words, like wine, are good enough, nor
any more then that, for the sophistication or abuse of some, to be mislikd:
consider also that the Author is a forraigner, with whom they carry no such
note; nor did I deem it necessary to change them.

His industry in the compilement of this work seems by his own confession to
have been very extraordinary; he not sticking to aver that it was the fruit of
all his labors and the honeycomb of al his studious endeavors while bee-like
he suckd from each H. Father and Master of Spirit; as from so many delicious
flowers, what he found in them rare and exquisite? with these truths and
maxims as with so many precious stones he has paved the way to perfection,
digesting them into that triple path, which according to its great masters
leads thereto, to wit purgative, illuminative, unitive, in the first, after he
has told us what it is to adore God in spirit and truth without either
fanaticisme or duplicity, he gives us the lively resentments of a penitent
heart, while it rock-like, struck with the rod of the cross, dissolves into the
waters of a profound compunction. Amidst its sighs and tears he conducts us on
toward the second by true fruits of penance, love of God, contempt of the
world, through all the oppositions of self love worldly concerns and contrary
temptations. By degrees he leads us out of the desert of sin into the land of
promise and the darkness of Egypt into the fair sun shine of divine grace, and
here that light offers himself for guide which illuminates every man coming into
this world, and we know that who ever follows him walks not in darkness. For
what does this path aim at but a perfect imitation of his life by a constant
treading of those sacred footsteps of virtue which he left deeply imprinted by
self-abnegation, humility, patience, meeknes, poverty, persecution and all
those which complete a total fulfilling of Christian justice and perfection.

That this may be the better accomplishd, he spends no les then a whole book
(to wit the 3.) in teaching us how to discharg our duty in order to the
aforesaid imitation by a most perfect practical performance of our daily
actions. And not without good reason since the whole is but the result of all
particulars, which if perfect, the other can scarce suffer any allay: he that
performs his daily actions perfectly, treads a sure path to perfection; and
whosoever aims at it without this medium shoots at random like a blind archer.
All these are works of light, and this according to the Philosopher, being
productive of heat, they dispose wonderfully to the 3. path which leads a soul
thus affected to a strait union, the true lovers knot, with almighty God. And
whether should such a bird of Paradise, so disdaigning earth, so enamoured on
heaven, so wingd with charity and fitted for the flight soar, but up to the
bosom of God himself where nestling as in its center, it may say with H. Job,
in nidulo meo moriar. This is the last complement of a virtuous soul in this
life, the purchase of its labors and fruition of desires; where its activity
becomes passive, and its task with little Samuel is only to say Loquere Domine
quia audit servus tuus; nor yet can it be said to be idle. For he teaches not a
lazy love but operative and masculin, a love that loves to be in the sun and
dust, bearing the heat and weight of the day in carrying its cross, and yet well
knowing even in these how still to enjoy its beloved.

And in this spiritual journey which certainly tends to a Vade in pace and
arrives to that peace of God which passes all understanding, directs the
traveller not through any extraordinary paths, or by new and uncouth lights,
but teaches him to take the roadway of the cross in the broad daylight thereof,
following him who said, I am the way; and this by a profound contempt of
himself as well as all the things of this world, by an entyre mortification of
his passions, subduement of his will to the will of God, by a curbing of his
appetites, mastry over self love, command over sense and much more over
sensuality; and by such steps (the truest steps of love, and to it,) assisted
by a daily recognition of the divine benefits toward man, so unparallelld and
inestimable, he leads him up the mount of perfection. Which journey though it
be not performd without great extente of time, labor, and contradiction, yet
having once surmounted the difficulty and its top, raysd now above all wind and
weather, in what a peaceful calm does he find himself! few believe this
besides those that experience it, and therefore it is but lost labor to insist
upon it; yet I dare say its joyful contentivenes exceeds the gust of the most
affecting pleasures the world affords. But these are only the entertainments
of choice souls, the perfect; I can say to the comfort of all, that the work
it self affords both effectual helps to perfection, and a certain redress for
spiritual maladies in what kind soever they be. For the peruser will discover
in it a rich mine of heavenly treasures, a new dispensatory of celestial
recepts, antidotes against all the poisons of sin, and an Armory of defense to
shield him from the assaulting enemy. Which though it was writ for himself, a
Religious man, and by its sublimity may seem proper for that state; yet it is
of that latitude and capacity, that even seculars, if they be but virtuously
disposd to the service of God, may plentifully reap benefit by it, nor would I
wish any body upon this score to harbor a prejudice against it.

Thus much being said of the matter and weightynes of his discourse, I must now
in a word touch also the manner. His way of arguing is solid and witty but he
has no regard at all to evennes of style or quaintnes of expression, speaking
as we say a la negligence as to both like one that study's more what to say
then how: and this it seems he does on set purpose. For in his Epistle
Dedicatory (which I omit as needles) he gives account of it: I write this
memorial says he, in a plain style and without any ornament of speech, since
the word of God (not unlike a sword) the more naked it is the more deeply it
pierces, much deeper then if it were sheathd in the richest phrases of humane
eloquence: and it is the sincerity of the speaker, not the gorgeous attire of
Rhetorique which makes it majestical. I aymd, says he, at the self same in
this Treatise which the zealous Bishop Salvianus mentions in his Epistle to
Salonius: We who love deeds better then words, says this holy Prelate seek
rather after profit then applause; neither do we labor so much that the vayn
pomp of the world be praised in us, as wholesome and substantial matter; in our
writings we covet not to set forth a fine dress but to give redress. This was
the reason, (says my Author) why I was not curious at all about the style,
which I thought was not to be uniforme, but attemperd to the nature of the
subject it treated of, for a pious and sincere matter is to be handled without
all pompousnes and Oratorical figures; and I preparing it for my self, slender
ornament would serve the turn. Thus much he: and all this I have inserted, as
pertinent to teach my Reader how little regardable these things are, where
spirit and truth sway the balance, the heart being not touched but the fancy
only tickled with such vanities. What no judicious reader will condemn in
him, will not I hope be mislikd in the Translatour, so far, as wauing all
matter of style, he attends to the englishing of the Authors sense, yea words,
in as proper phrase and expression as he can, he being a Translatour not a
Paraphrast. Which how far he has attaind, must be left to the readers
verdict; and that, be what it will, he stands not much upon, if the fruit he
aims at be produced in his soul, following, in such a fair view of truth as
it expresses, her footsteps to a sincere Adoration in Spirit and Truth,
misled, no more by the world and its impostures.

The Division of this Work.
In the I. Book are containd those things which concern the Purging of our
souls.

In the II. what appertains to its illumination, and the Imitation of Christ
our Lord.

In the III. what belongs to a most perfect practical performance, of our
actions.

In the IV. what helps to inflame us with a most ardent love of God, and elevat
our souls to the divin Union.

OF ADORATION IN SPIRIT AND TRVTH
THE I. BOOK.
THE FIRST CHAPTER
The Deceitfulnes of a secular life.

THe proceedings of men in this life^ intercours are a continual piece of
forgery, as void of credit as full of imposture. Be not too zealous of death in
a mistake of life; for the H. Ghost hates dissimulation in matter of
discipline. An imposture is so much more pernicious, by how much the affair in
which it is used, is of greater concern and consequence. Men deem nothing
dearer then life; how then can they endure to be deluded in it: how can they
brook forgery in matters of Spirit and worship of God, which are infinitely to
be prizd above life it self. An imposture concerning life is the worst of
evils. It is too dangerous and formidable to be seduced in a thing of all
others the most important and precious. Men suffer not willingly their eyes to
be cheated; and how ill do they manage their business, if they suffer their
minds? They fret and chafe if they be cozend in precious stones, and how much
more ought they concerning themselves? How careful and vigilant are those that
traffic in gems least a counterfeyt be put into their hands instead of a true
one: no man will buy a jewel, unles the seller give both oath and suerty, that
it is not adulterous. This is the madness of men; they are content to set a
false rate upon their life though not upon a stone; they love not to be
deceived in their eyesight, but can digest a greater fallacy in their mind,
in their life, yea and in their heaven.

We take it very ill to be cheated by another though but in small trifles, and
we willingly cheat our selves even in the price of our selves. We love neither
to hear nor tell a lie; and yet we make both our selves and our life a continual
lie. O miserable! who are both the deceived and deceivers of our selves; and we
bear this two fold misery, which men so much abhor, with patience, and we
tolerate this double infamy in a business of such consequence, whereas we should
brook neither in a trivial one. If thou judge it a heinous crime to deceive thy
friend, and holds it the greatest of wrongs to be deceived by thy friend; what
ground or pretense in the world can thou have to cozen thy self or be cozend
by thy self who should be dearer and faithfuller to thy self then any friend
whatsoever. But we willingly entitle our losses through our own default (which
nevertheles are the heavyest and in a double kind) with the fair name of
patience: and animate our selves to our own destruction, by not only holding
our selves unworthy of blame, but worthy of Congratulation. The covetous man
would take it ill if one should cozen him in the fading goods of fortune: he
would deem it an intolerable injury if one should stuf his Coffers and bags
with dirt or rubbage in lieu of gold or silver; and why do we not only endure
but even affect to be cozend by our selves in the goods of virtue and grace;
nor grieve that our life is soyld with the stains of vices and defects; or
that our virtue is hypocritical, our charity but forged, our mortification
superficial, our humility counterfeyt.

A main reason of this endammagement is, because we do not pursue or rather
thoroughly persecute self love lurking in us, and put not this domestique enemy
to the sword. It Is no charity to save the life of an enemy to the prejudice or
endangering of our own by giving ear to his pernicious counsels. We harken to
our appetits as to so many Oracles, although they utter nothing but lies. He
that lends his ear to soothing flatterers must needs give credit to many things
that are false, and he that attends to the fawning charms of self love shall
ever and anon be deceived.

Tell me, o my soul, if a court or Senate of wise and co^scientious men should
all with joint consent determine a cause, and the malefactor alone, pleading
nevertheles guilty and convinced by witnesses, one as foolishly fond as
desperately wicked, should stand out against the verdict of the whole Court as
unjust and partial; would thou believe this one wretch rather then so many
wise and upright Senators? Why then do thou follow the toys and fancies of
self love and its brutish appetites? how dare thou oppose its verdict alone
to that of God, of his Angels, of the Doctors of the Church, of ancient
Philosophers, of reason it self, nay even of thy own conscience all these
condemning for naughty what it approves for good, yea condemning its very
dictamens and defires. Persuade thy self that that is false which God holds not
for true, which the Angels disapprove, which the Doctors impugn, Philosophers
refute, reason disallows, nor squares with Conscience. All these find this self
love, this crafty fox full of wiles, guilty of forgery. We are full of deceyt
because full of self love; and so much the more perniciously full by how much it
is not only a domestique cheat but so linkd to us, yea so engrafted in us that
it never leaves us, nor gives us the least respit from error. Hence not only
custom but even prescription in cozenage has so hardend us, that what is done
viciously, we maintain many times as done very prudently, yea and according to
gospel, and seek to sanctify by the doctrine of Christ, what is clearly
repugnant to reason. The mist of ignorance which man walks in renders him
sufficiently miserable, he needs not be missed with forgery: yet ignorance is
but a petty and inconsiderable misery, its darkness being easily dispeld as soon
as the light of instruction shines; but the night of error is so wilfully and
pertinaciously blind that it is incapable of being illuminated with any
precepts. O, it were heartily to be wishd we were only ignorant and not seduced
also!

This folly and imposture of worldlings reigns in a manner among all sorts and
conditions of them. Let them account themselves never so wise, let them be the
prime Doctors and professors of Universities, they are idiots and ill-maximd,
and unworthy of such titles, unles they be good and virtuous. Pick out any one
of these, such as all the world holds for an Oracle of knowledge; if thou
should but once see this man void his curious cupbords and cabinets of
jewels and vessels of gold, and throw away pearls and precious stones to fill
them up with dirt and dung, could thou persuade thy self, that this were a
wise man who so prizeth the latter and misprizeth the former? And how then
shall he be accounted wise, who not once but always is stuffing his heart with
aspirements to honors with desires of riches and pleasures, and contemns the
love of God, the treasures of divine grace, the merits of Christ, yea God
himself? All which incomparably more surpass worldly honors, treasures,
pleasures, then gold does dirt, as much to wit, as God the Creator surmounts
his creature. What imports it if thou say, that this proceeds not from his
ignorance in undervaluing things, but that this man knew well enough the
difference betwixt spiritual things and temporal, a thing which no body can
doubt of though his proceedings be contrary? what, I say will this avail; for
nether will he be excused from madness, who should say that he knows well enough
the value of gold above other things and how base dirt is in comparison of it;
yet nevertheles keeps dirt, courts it, embraces it, kisses it, yea and refuses
no danger nor labor in search of it; but if gold be tenderd him he throws it
away and daigns it not so much as a look. Certainly this hidden madness and
visible darkness is far more to be admired; and thou dare not call such a one a
wise man, or well in his wits least thou should be houted at by all having lost
thine own. How much more will he expose himself to the censure both of
laughter and madness, who professing that the spiritual treasures of grace are
much to be preferred before all the goods of this world, covets nevertheles the
latter and rejects the former. Could he be accounted a learned man or sound in
judgment or a good Christian, who should cast the B. Sacrament of Christ's holy
Body out of a golden Ciborium consecrated to its conservation, and place there
instead of it a piece of clay? And how deserves he the name of a wise man who
expels the Divinity it self out of his soul, where it took complacence to
reside as in its tabernacle, and sets up in its place not dung but more filthy
vices and sordid desires, as the idols of his licentious devotions? Therefore we
must conclude that there is no wisdom no truth to be found in a worldly life.
The dread fullest instruments of revenge which Christ shall make use of to
punish the sensles in the day of judgment, shall not be the conflict of
confounded elements, nor the fall of the stars, nor the eclipse of the sun, nor
the conflagration of the world, nor the frightful voice of the Archangel, nor
that shrilsounding trumpet of God, nor the countenance of the angry judge, but
truth alone: Truth, I say, which shall then be rendered illustrious to all,
though now as it is veyld with our naughty desires we contemn it.

But although truth be certainly found in a spiritual life, yet not altogether
refined from the dregs of forgery; both by reason of the subtilty and soothings
of self love, (for soothing and flattery every where corrupts and sophisticates
truth.) as also the wiles and malice of the devil, who labors by all means to
destroy created truth since he cannot the increated. Therefore Christ our
Savior recommends to us as the glory of Euangelical perfection, that we adore
God in spirit and truth. The true God ought not to be worshipped with a false
life. The only begotten Son of God is truth, and he that will be the Son of
God must love truth and possess himself of it. Wherefore whosoever evading the
precipices of the flesh, treads now the plain paths of spirit, let him not
hold himself altogether out of dangerunles he walk the roadway of truth. And to
the end thou may follow this more securely, take these admonitions which will
teach thee to adore God, and serve him unfaignedly in uprightnes of heart; and
make thee understand what truth speaks, least some deceit mislead thy spirit:
but rather doing truth in charity we may increase in Christ by all our
proceedings.

The II. Chapter. Of the Truth of the Spirit.
DO not think that thy life will be rendered any whit more unpleasant and
tetrical by the fellowship of truth: it is a mere aspersion to say that truth
is bitter and unsavory. A false imputed nick name must not make us out of
conceit with a thing in it self most delicious. Do not frame this discourse: If
the very outward name of truth be so bitter, what may we judge of its interior
relish: if another discourse concerning it be noisome, what will our own
study and practice of it be: if it sound so harshly to our heart, to our
conscience, to our whole life? Make not, I say, such illations; for it is not
the fault of honey if it taste bitter to a tainted palate. One that is giddy
thinks the earth runs round when it stands stock-still. We judge of every one
by our own misdemeanors, and seek to patronise our humane frailties by
ascribing the same to the Divinity. Truth is innocent sweet and displeasing to
none but the c^^nal and such as are displeasing to God. The same royal color
of purple recreates men and exasperates bulls: this purple truth of God, this
luster of sanctity, delights those that understand it, what makes matter, if it
offend those that have neithet wit nor brains to conceave it, yea this makes
more for its commendation.

Nothing shows the inestimable worth and comelines of truth more then that it
seems worthles and deformed to the wicked. Consider but the causes of this
their aversion, and thou shall see that they render it much more amiable. Of
all crosses and afflictions truth seems the most harsh and burdensome: because
particular afflictions impugn either one only pleasure or at least but some
few, but truth fights them all together, and proclames war at once against all
other kind of vices. Therefore they hold it the saddest adversary they have; and
for the same reason think they can revenge themselves no ways more upon their
enemies nor sting them more picquantly then by speaking truth to their
disadvantage: the reason is, because what harm soever one most dreads to
himself, his passion makes him wish the same to his enemy; and because he
dreads no kind of evil more then truth, therefore he tells all he knows to his
adversarys prejudice, and seeks thus to wound him as with so many poisonous
darts. But these causes of offense are arguments which ought to heighten our
love and esteem of truth: is not that worthy of all love which has all vice in
such hatred and detestation? If thou had one potion which would cure thee of
all diseases, thou would not contemn it for being bitter and distasteful,
nay thou would prize nothing more highly: so truth upon that same score is to
be loved and adored, although it be even nayld to a cross, though void of
beauty and unhandsome. But it is comely of sight and pleasant of taste, not
deformed but de^forme, not unwise but the wisdom of God: the voice of truth is
sweet, and its countenance amiable. It has God for its seasoning it cannot be
unsavory, or disgustfull, or tainting. That which makes God happy must not be
noisome, neither can it make thee miserable. What shall I say? God is truth,
and can he be either more distasteful to thee then gal, or not more lovely then
light? Go to then take the courage to look it in the face, to affect it, to put
thy self under its tuition and patronage. This is the main maxim of a
spiritual life, that as carnal people hate nothing more then truth, so those
that walk the paths of spirit have nothing in higher esteem or desire. What is
more dear or useful to an archer then his eyes; and what ought to be more
desirable to a reasonable man then truth which is the eye of his soul. Archers
and other creatures also made for the behoof of man, if they want their eyes
become altogether unserviceable; so our whole life without truth proves but a
fruitles business. No one of the senses is more delectable then the sight; and
truth surpasses all the other facultys of the mind; neither is it more
pleasing a midst the smiles of prosperity then the frowns of adversity.

Let us therefore beg^n with an upright conceit of truth to exclude falsehood;
deeming nothing more delightful nothing more excellent then sincere truth of
spirit. Most men because they believe not this are apt to grant themselves now
and then a little indulgence to nature, and self love, and the propensions of
the flesh, though but in petty matters, mixing with a most subtle dissimulation
and self cozenage foreign comforts, that so they may mittigate the austerity
which they conceive or fear accompagnies the spirit; and not trusting
sufficiently to it and God, they reserve as yet some relics of their flesh
and will, of which they are loath to dispoyle themselves, that they may make
their retreat thither in time of need; not daring by a total self denial to
give themselves entirely to God and the spirit, as if some corrosives did
attend his intimate familiarity. These people deceive themselves; for this is
not the spirit of truth. This spirit is a most simple and transparent thing;
and therefore that will not be true and genuine which is so confounded and
intoxicated. The flesh and the spirit are two things so different, that they
cannot be combind into one simple. The spirit of truth ought to be so refind
and sincere, that it is not enough to dread and abhor all the feigned soothings
of the flesh, all the pernicious dictamens of worldlings, and the forciblest
insinuations of self love, but one must moreover dispoil ones self of himself
and his own soul, and renounce totally his own will and all created
contentments, yea even intellectual and otherwise lawful, to seek God alone and
in him possess all things.

The spirit is somewhat more sublime and refind then is the soul, the
understanding, or nature. Hear thy Jesus saying, God is a spirit and those that
adore him must do it in spirit and truth. Wherefore that thou may adore God as
thou ought, and serve him perfectly in truth of spirit, thou must rear thy
self, above all creatures and created affections; and breath after and be
enamourd upon the divine truth alone; and as one ready to depart out of this
world, bid adieu to thy self and all creatures, adhering by pure charity to our
Lord, becoming one spirit, as S. Paul speaks, with God who is truth it self.
Force thy self from thy self, that is, from thy vicious stock, that thou may
be engrafted in him: sever thy self from thy self that thou may be united to
thy Creator: loosen thy self from thy self that thou may be fastened to the
cross of Jesus; root thy self out of thy wicked self, that thou may be
implanted in all goodness: fly from thy own nature, and thou shall find a
sanctuary in God: loose thy self unfaignedly and thou shall find thy self
really.

The III. Chapter. Of Purity of Spirit.
DO not in any thing, o coheyre of Christ, become like unto the beasts thou who
may be one spirit with God; thou must resemble them in nothing at all. Thou
ought to tread underfoot all the delights of flesh and nature not reserving
any one from a total renunciation. One alone is able to mar the relish of
truth; one alone will tarnish the luster of the spirit. Great things are
oftentimes over powrd by little ones, a small quantity of vinegar spoils a
whole vessel of the strongest wine* a little drop of ink infects and discolours
a violl of the fairest water. Why will thou blemish the candor of truth and
noblenes of the spirit with a petty delight so trivial and momentary? Why do
thou debase thy self so much below thy sublime condition? why will thou leave
the bosom of God and his sweet embracements to solace thy self with the silly
dregs of creatures, since thou ought not to descend from the cross of Christ
for all the kingdoms of the world. O miserly and base-minded man since thou
have already employed so many talents toward the purchase of an invaluable
margarite, will thou at last break of the bargain for one single half penny?
Nay thou art more foolish then this: for such a merchant would loose nothing,
he only would not gain the jewel, all his money would be restord him again: but
restitution will not be made to thee of those incomparable delights thou did
forfeyt; and because thou will not relinquish a frivolous toy thou loosest a
genuine spirit. Why, having consummated so happily a long race, do thou fall
short of the prize at the very goal for want of running a little further? Do
not think it burdensome and noy some to abstain from all; as thou could
weane thy self from greater so may thou from lesser, as from many so from
more, as from most so from all.

What is the reason that having embraced so many mortifications, corporal
austerities, humiliations, disgraces, fastings, lying on the bare ground, thou
art vanquishd and made prisoner to thy own appetite, by some bit of meat, or
other sensual delight? Will thou be undone, thinks thou, if thou wholly mortify
thy pallat? The Angels fast continually, and yet live most happily; yea the
devils are not tormented by their long abstinence, no nor creatures; for there
are some of them which without this grosser food enjoy nature pleasantly, and
live only as it were upon the spirit. Hold always thy self to be rankd in a
higher class then apes and wolves, and by that means thou shall never be
tempted with their pleasures. Art thou sorry that thou sings not like a grass
hopper? I believe not; or that thou feeds not with the vultur upon carrion?
much less: and the reason is, because these contentments are of another kind
and order; so if thou hold thy self a man thou will contemneal these pleasures
which are proper to beasts, as being impertinent. What if thou consider thy
self an associate of the Angels? What if thou ad here to God, becoming one
spirit with him? Thou may want now and not be miserable, what thou art to
want for all eternity, and yet be happy. As thou were not sorry being come to
man's estate to want the toys and bables of children, so being made an Angel or
demy-God, thou shall not grieve for the pleasures of men. If thou mighst at a
wish be changed from being a man into an Angel, would thou not be content,
upon supposition perpetually to abstain from eating? Behold, now for a time
thou may enjoy thy w^sh. When thou have glutted thy self with good cheer,
thou can with out any difficulty despise all daintyes; and why can not thou
do the same out of a strong appetite to virtue? Sickness of body m^kes thee
abhor and loath them and why cannot health of mind? Why deemst thou that
impossible to virtue which is so easy and necessary to infirmity? If feeblene^
of nature can make all sensual delights irksome why cannot the strength of
grace do the same? If thou find sometimes a loathsome tediousnes of heavenly
and spiritual things, persuade thy self the same of carnal. Thou can live in
this exile even with danger of incurring hellfire though thou be not inebriated
with the joys of heaven; so may thou also upon the future hopes of paradise
though thou bid a long fast to these muddy and dreggy pleasures. How many
millions of men eat their daily bread in toil and sorrow and nevertheless still
maintain life; and shall thou alone dye because void of such contentments? Thou
have lived sometimes in anguish, live now without pleasure: thou have been
often oppressed with grief be now only not jocund. If thou art ashamed to
think with the commonalty of men, be ashamed also to seek thy content with the
commonalty of beasts. Nay beasts are more abstemious, as who are satisfyd with
fewer and more obvious pleasures then the most part of men. And thou must frame
the same dictamens concerning other solaces both of sense and soul or
whatsoever enjoyment of our own will.

Thou must be eternally divorced from all things, and thou may be so, and
that without any danger to thy self, yea without trouble. But if thou desire to
renounce all pleasure renounce thy own will, even in the smallest things, even
in things just and lawful. Beware least if thou be found with the cloak of
self will, the domineering flesh which makes use of all advantages, catch hold
of its skirts as the Egyptian lady did of Joseph's, that is to say, of thy
appetites so linkt with thy will, and solicit thee to play the naught. The
very skirts are hold enough whereby to draw thee to such a fact: great over
throws are occasiond by petty neglects: unles thou wholly disrobe thy self and
walk naked, thou will not be altogether void of danger. Dispoyle thy self I say
entirely of thy own will, do not wear thy own undoing, do not cloth thy self
with danger of thy self. When Elias was carried up to heaven, he left his cloak
behind him; and each one that betakes himself to a heavenly life if he will do
it securely must relinquish his own will. Quit all self-interest and self
delight, quit thy self of thy self in all things: having broken the greater
cords which manicled thee, why will thou endure the lesser with such an
abridgment to the liberty of thy spirit. A mastif that's tyd up is not at
freedom because his chain is so long that he can frisk and play a little to
and fro. It fares with the most part not much otherwise then with a sparrow
which a child holds by a thread at its foot; which being let of his hand, thinks
it self free and flies cheerfully the length of the thread but then being
checked it falls to the ground and finds it self still captive: so a soul
remains as it were with a thread at its foot if it do not totally quit all,
and thinking it self at liberty after some time it will disgracefully fall into
the filth or pudle of some gross imperfections. Yea although it escape the
ensnarements of the flesh and demean it self uprightly, nay even soar by
contemplation up to heaven, if it be clogd with its own will, it will be
detaynd and entangled even in those sublime regions. Although a sparrow make an
escape out of the prison of the child's hand, if it carry the thread along with
it, it will find its destruction nigh to heaven, being encumbered and entangled
by it on the tops of trees.

But perchance thou will yet hold it very insupportable to be wholly deprived of
thy own will and pleasure. What if I should tell thee that it is not
insupportable even to wish for sorrow and suffering? for it will not seem
burdensome to be deprived of all pleasure, if the privation it self be pleasant
and delectable: The vigor of the spirit reaches to this, the inuentivenes of
grace can bring it to pass, rendering all gustfull rellishes so distasteful that
all sweet things become unsauory and fastidious; and bitter on the contrary,
delicious and toothsome. Nature many times effects, that what is harsh to one
is gustfull to another, and will grace be less operative? The longings of women
make them covet ridiculous extravagancies, coals, clay, mortar, and to loath
meats exquisitely seasond: and that which happens so obviously to a womanish
indisposition, shall it be thought impossible to divine healthfulnes? A corrupt
and queasy stomach rules the appetite, and shall a sound and masculine mind have
less or no sway over the will? Be not then frighted, o dejected creature, with
what thou hear of a spiritual life, for it is not at all troublesome or
noisome, although it necessarily embrace al troublesome and noisome things. Let
not an empty name or conceyt terrify thee; be but confident and accoast them,
and thou shall frighten the very difficulties themselves. Some relate of
certain enchanted treasures which are in the custody of terrifying ghosts and
sprits; but if any one be so resolutely hardy as contemning those phantasmes*
to assail them, they are presently put to flight and vanish to nothing, in
such sort that they appear no more, but permit the accoaster to enjoy those
riches in all peace and security. Nothing more is requisite to effect this but
courage and resolution. Be but valiant in purchasing these spiritual treasures
and all those bugbeares of pretended difficulties will suddenly disapear. Set
upon them undauntedly and thou shall enjoy without any great plains-taking the
hidden manna of a spiritual life. Bees work honey shelterd under the homely roof
of a rough-cast hive.

The IV Chapter. How Truth is made manifest by faith: and of the fruit and
practice of this virtue.
HE walks in falsehood and forgery not in truth nor spirit who takes not faith
for his path and guide. Truth dwells very remote from sense, This heavenly
flower grows not in our gardens; it is not nourished with flesh and blood; it
is not to be found amidst the dung of our muddy and material substances. We are
at al turns cheated in corporal goods even those which we behold with our eyes
and fingar with our hands. A whole oar in the water seems broken; a square
tower to one that stands at a great distance seems round: the very light of the
sun, which is all the faith our eyes are endowd with, cozens them oftentimes by
representing colors that are not existent: and how then shall we avoid being
misled in the affairs of our soul which we see not, and in spiritual and
divine things which are so much above our reach and capacity. All the race of
mankind was grown quite blind through the night of error; like one shut up in
a dark dungeon without either window or chink to let in the least glimmering of
light. The learneder sort of Philosophers were of opinion we knew no more, then
what we knew was false: or rather that we knew only this one truth, that we
knew nothing at all; and they were so swollen and puffd up with vanity that none
but heaven could give an allaying remedy. One among them did think that the
master of truth was to be some Son of a God: Behold now, o thou Son of the
highest, o thou eternal Truth, behold o thou wisdom of thy father, thou did
descend from heaven, o light of the world, to illuminate it, to teach us truth;
and why do not men make more account of so great a benefit, why do they
contemn this blessing of faith? What imports it to believe truth if we our
selves practice falsehood? saving truth is good works, and the true word the
deed of the word. The word of God became flesh that the work of man might
become truth, because the Truth of God is become operative.

All is mere falsehood and vanity which is not according to the doctrine of
JESUS: why do we neglect the practice of this great blessing, contenting our
selves with a dead kind of faith? We should reap great advantage from our faith
if we knew how to use it, and work as we ought according to its prescript,
greater then if we beheld those things it affirms with our eyes. All by faith
believe true things, but they ought also to believe truly which all seem not to
do. If thou believe, o malepert soul, what Christ taught, work accordingly. If
it be true that it behooud JESUS to suffer, and so to enter into his glory; if
it be true that God ordaines all for the good of the just, why art thou
afflicted at some trivial crosses and calamities? Why do thou account them
losses, which when they are patiently taken, faith teaches us to be the souls
greatest enrichment? If thou believe this to be true as in very truth it is,
thou ought rather to rejoice and comfort thy self. If thou should behold
some one of the H. Prophets with thy corporal eyes as David or S. John Baptist,
if thou should see one raised from death, or an Angel from heaven, who were
to tell thee from Almighty God, that his will is, that thou bear this cross
patiently because it will be for thy greater good and no little gain: would it
not suffice to make thee refrain from all impatience? nay would it not
replenish thee with such joy as siezd the Apostles, when they went away
rejoicing because they were made worthy to suffer reproaches for the name of
JESUS? And why do thou not now do the same? Thou ought not to esteem that
miraculous message as infallible as a matter of faith: for in that case one
might lawfully sometimes entertain a doubt, since the evil spirit might delude
him or he himself be deluded in his senses. Therefore if this truth as matter of
faith be more certain, then if an Angel had teveald it from heaven, why ought
it to be less persuasive? Our manner of working follows the certitude of our
knowledge and the judgment we frame of a thing; and proportionable to this
knowledge must needs be the excellency of our operation. Wherefore whosoever
desires to walk in truth let him square the actions, and paths of his life
according to the model of his faith, believing not only true things but after
a true manner: least he become ridiculous to the Angels and joynt-sectary with
the Devils who are all solifidians, their belief being barren of works.

What availes it to know the way to heaven, if we do not walk it. The wicked
spirits know it better then we, and nevertheles because they stand still and
advance not, they are devils. Tell me, who is in a better condition, thou that
wilt not do good or the devils that cannot. It is all one in most things not
to have a will and to be impotent; yea it is more damnable and reproachful to
thee who wilt not when thou may. The devils believe and tremble; I wish thou
when thou believe, were possessd with a just fear. Why do thou not tremble
at the judgments of God considering their certainty and the uncertainty of thy
own condition either to eternal punishment or joy? what is the reason if we
believe the greatness of the divine goodness in it self, and his immense charity
and inestimable benefits toward us, what is the reason, I say, that we do not
correspond in love, fidelity, and observance? but rather dare offend him though
but venialy, and do not worship and love him indefatigably with all the extent
of our strength, who employed all the force of his omnipotency in creating and
conserving us, and loves us both perfectly and eternally, and loves us even to
the end, yea even unto death? what is the reason that we are always senseles
to our own good, and shameless toward his majesty whether we believe or believe
not truly, while we remain so senslesly benumd? If we have not a firm belief,
what greater folly, since men give credit in all things to flatterers, because
they speak according to their pallat and profit, then to disbelieve matters of
faith so much importing us to be so, and redounding so much to our credit and
profit, that they be true and undoubted? What greater irreverence then to
believe a man, all men being obnoxious to lying and deceit, and not believe God
speaking things profitable to us, and attesting them by so many miracles? But
if we believe these things and belie them with our actions; what greater
absurdity and derision of God then to reject his most amiable goodness, contemn
his love, his blood, his benefits, and either not dread the pains of Purgatory
and hell, or not hope for and most ardently desire the glory of heaven, which
God esteems matters of high concernment, and as such eggs us on both by threats
and promises to good works. What greater madness then to expose our selves by
our own negligence to the hazard of forfeiting eternal glory, or at leastwise
enduring a long Purgatory.

We must be sure to make our works square in all exactly with our belief and
adhere more tenaciously, then if those objects were patent to the eye or any
other sense or experiment. Thou have received the sacred body of Christ, or art
present at the dreadful Sacrifice of the Mass, if thou believe that Christ is
really there present with thee, thou oughst to behave thy self with greater
submission and veneration, then if thou did clearly behold him with thy eyes,
and to pray to him with a livelier confidence, then if the heavens were opend
to thee as they were to S. Stephen, and thou beheldst the Hierachies of Angels
accompanying Christ coming to thee to receive thy petitions: for thou may be
more infallibly ascertaind by faith that he is upon the Altar, then if thou
did see him with thy corporal eyes. Let every one procure after this manner
to penetrate the truths of divine faith, and strengthen himself in their
certainty, making his works consonant to his belief. But how do thou proceed
consequently and not rather cozen thy self when thou say thou esteemst the
least degree of glory more then the empire of the whole world; and nevertheles
to gain heaven thou will not deny thy self the least pleasure; and art so be
sotted upon temporal things, that thou toylest and moylest without respit for
their purchase. This certainly cannot stand good unles thou esteem earthly and
perishable goods more then heavenly and eternal.

The V. Chapter. Of the hope of pardon, and zeal of penance.
THe more virtuous one is the more he hates sin; the more he hates it, the more
he desires its destruction: and therefore God desires more to pardon sin then
the Penitent himself who begs pardon. God is most accomplished in all goodness,
and therefore he of all others most hates sin. If the sinner who is evil hates
his own sin and desires its destruction, how much more God who is supremely
good? Every one seeks his own ends and commodity; God alone seeks thine, and
covets thy salvation; doubt not then of pardon and the divine assistance. We
have a most sufficient suerty, the Son of God, if we would but resolve upon our
conversion. There is neither good nature wanting to the creditour nor ability
in the bonds man: do not then despair, o sinner, by reason of the vastnes of
thy debt; it is but a trifle in regard of the infinite mercy of God and endless
merits of Christ. JESUS crucified is our inexhaustible treasure. It were a
simple thing to think that the exchequer of a vast Empire, if it were granted
to thy use, were not sufficient to defray thy petty debt of a few pounds: and
it is more simple to make delays in discharging thy debt to Almighty God,
hoping he will be content to accept the merits of JESUS for thy payment.

It will be ridiculous, if thou be unjust to thy self, who seeks to be
profitable and beneficial to others. How much content would it cause thee, if
thou had occasiond the conversion of S. Austin, or S. Mary Magdalen, or S.
Paul the Apostle or some other great sinner, and drawn him to God: and without
all doubt thou would endeavor that now, if thou thought it lay in thy power
to make any one become truly penitent and as holy as Magdalen. Remember that it
is in thy power mediating the grace of God to operate this in thy self, that
is, to become truly penitent and heartily compunct for thy offenses even small
ones, and very fervorous and devout. Convert thy self, and glory far more in
thy own conversion then another. What man that is well in his wits: if he
himself were at the point of starving would give a loaf of bread to another
who were scarce pincht with hungar, and stood but in small need of that
merciless courtesy, suffering himself in that utmost extremity to perish with
famine? Admonish thy self, exhort thy self, preach to thy self; nothing is
wanting to a remission of thy sins but thy desire, thy sorrow, thy disposal,
and this also by a special favor. Behold God stands expecting thee, ready to
give greater supplies if necessary. Thou have already a pledge of his good
will, thy own will and desire of good, which is from God.

I know not how it comes to pass, that thou being compounded of a body like to
brute beasts and a soul allied to God, thou seeks all ways and means to
preserve thy body, and sleights and neglects what may make for the health and
integrity of thy soul. Thy chief solicitude ought to be placed upon the
chiefest thing. Let thy first care be concerning thy soul for which thy body
was framd and molded: and if the first, then for these reasons it must be the
sole and only. The diseases of the soul are greater and more in number, and
more pernicious; its cure is certain and with out all peradventure, since they
are cured who only have a real desire to be cured: but the cure of the body is
deceitful; for those that are cured recover not presently but by degrees;
besides corporal medecines are harder, bitterer, and more costly, not always
at hand, but must be fetched from beyond the seas and almost the worlds end: but
the remedies of the soul are more easy and obvious, and may not only be had at
home but even with in thy self, nor needst thou go further then thy own will.
Why do thou not then give redress to so many maladies of thy soul, since thou
art so sollicitous for any the least indisposition of thy body.

O supreme truth of God illuminate me, for this proceeds out of ignorance: for
the soul resents and feels the alterations of the body but the body feels not
the diseases of the soul; they can only be felt and known by the mind: but
seeing that very thing, to wit the soul, which ought to judge of them is in
such a languishing condition, therefore it resents them not, as being past all
sense, nor seeks for redress; and by how much the worse it is so much the les
sensible it is of the evil; how much more sick it is, so much the less does it
apprehend its sickness. Even as the members of our body are never worse then
when they are past all sense of being ill. O Lord, in what a languishing state
are our souls which ressent not ^o many defects, distractions, negligences,
and irreverences toward thee, who dwelst in them grant me grace that I may
wash away with a torrent of tears even the least fault, and that I may sorrow
with my whole heart forit; nor ever endure in my self the least offense against
thee.

What pretense can man allege why he delays his conversion and adheres not to
God with all his forces? Is it because he is insensible of the evil it being
not patent to the eye? but now we are taught it by faith which is more certain
then our eyesight. Or because our nature is infirm and prone to vice? but for
this very reason it ought to seek the support, and supplies and favor of God:
least being destitute of all help and redress, it lie still in its infirmity
exposd to its enemies. Is it because there are more incentives to sin. It is
much mistaken, there are both far more and more forcible ones to justice, and
to make head against sin. If the world exhort us, God disswades us: if nature
incline us, grace refraines us; if the diveltempt us, the Angels inspire us. Or
is it because the wicked flourish in a prosperous condition? O pure madness! to
love a momentary prosperity, and not fear an eternal calamity! Or because thou
hopest to have time in thy old age to reform thy self; for God has patiently
expected many. O senseles! life is not promisd thee, but pardon is proferd
thee: o ungrateful thou abusest the grace and patience of God: look what thou
do; God will not be taxd of injustice, if he grant thee not pardon when and
how thou will, since thou will not accept it when he makes a profer. Or is it
lastly because the way of virtue and a spiritual life is thorny and
troublesome? but will that of hell or the flames of Purgatory, trowest thou, be
any whit more ease full and pleasant?

The VI. Chapter. The model of a sinner is set before our eyes.
O You Cherubins and Seraphins who veyle your face and feet, because you are
ashamd that ye love not my good God sufficiently; lend me your tongues, lend me
the voice of an Archangel and the trumpet of God, that I may alarm the whole
world, and sound a summons to all mortals: arise ye dead even while ye live and
come to judgment: come that ye may give your verdict upon a strange and
stupendous fact which happend but very lately. Come that ye may be moved to
indignation, come that ye may be moved to laughter; or rather come that ye may
be moved to tears. I Will tell you a lamentable story which I know to be
certainly true, and you shall judge whether it be not such. Certain robbers
dragd a woman tied neck and heels through foul and stenchy places and would
needs cast her into a glowing furnace too too dreadful for its raging flames-
As they were going they met a king, one that for power and other princely
qualities was matchles; nay he was in all points so accomplishd, that nature
seemd to have bestowd all her perfections upon him. He was more valiant then
Samson, more wise and wealthy then Solomon, more fortunate and bountiful then
David. He taking compassion upon this poor woman, to rescue her out of their
bands (for he was all alone) exposed himself to death; and having received many
wounds, and lost much blood; he put the robbers to flight: and to cleanse her
who was all covered over with filth, there being no fair water at hand, he made
her a bath of his own blood: he took her for his spouse though she were a Black
a more and very deformed, he crowned her queen, he built her a magnificent
palace, he adornd it most artificially, engraving every where his own images,
which were to be so many memorials of him and incentives of love to her: he
allotted her a family, and gave her a fair retinue of servants: and which is
more he doated so upon her, that he himself would become her servant even in
mean offices: his sole joy was to be always in her company or thinking upon
her; desiring no other recompense of so much kindness but a reciprocal
affection: lastly he made her heir of his kingdom, promising that this should
be the least expression of his bounty, if she would only prove kind and loyal.
Nevertheles as if so many benefits had tended only to procure treachery and
hatred contemning her spouse and king, she solicited his very slaves and
grooms of his stable to acts of adultery: yet they more loyal to their king did
partly fly, and partly were murderd out of mere passion; for they chose rather
to perish then be eye witnesses of such disloyalty to their king and his
spouse. In a word every one resented with detestation the queens unworthines;
nor did ^he for all that desist to compel them, prostituting her self to all.
Neither did she here put a period to her wickedness: but seeing him still kind
toward her, she hatchd a piece of unparalleld treachery; she betrayed him into
the hands of his enemies whom he hated even to death; this wicked woman made
him their slave and compelled him to serve his deadlyest foes; who blind-folded
him, and made him their laughing stock: and which was the strangest of all
being altogether insensible of so many gifts and courtesies, she raignd most
impudently in all security and jollity, as if she had done a piece of
remarkable service. Now judge, o ye men, now give your verdict; tell me if there
be any one among you who will not be replenishd with indignation against this
woman, and will not say; the Lord lives because the woman that did this is a
child of death. But the story is not yet at an end: hitherto I have showed her
wickedness, now I must show her folly. For while she thus hated and scornd her
fair spouse and king she nevertheless kissd the pictures of him which stood
engraven here and there in his palace, and reverened them exceedingly for
their beauty, which not withstanding in comparison of the king himself were
ugly: nor did they entirely resemble all his features, but one his eyes only,
another his hands, a third his countenance: and they being both together, if he
desird to embrace her she turned her back disdaignfully, and loathing his person
sought after his image. Judge now o mortals: The Lord lives, because the woman
that does this is a child of laughter.

O I wish I could entrap thee in the snare of Nathan and make thee relent with
the penance of David! Thou o my soul art this woman. This says the Lord God of
Israel. I have anointed thee, o man, king over all the creatures of the world:
I have created all things for thy use; I have deliverd thee out of the hands of
Saul and robbers, to wit, Lucifer and the devils; out of the filth in which
thou did wallow, out of the flames of hell to which thou were sentencd; I
cleansed thee with my own blood, I gave thee the heavenly mansion house of thy
Lord and God and all the delights of heaven together with it; I appointed thee
the house of this world as a kingly palace and all creatures to be thy
attendants: and if these benefits of thy creation, redemption, and
glorification be but slender ones. I will heap far greater upon thee: for which
of all these do thou persecute and contemn me? do my kindnesses seem crimes
to thee? thou art angry at me and punishes me as men do malefactors who are
chastizd with the instruments by which they offended: thou abusest my very
gifts, condemning me in them, as if I became criminal by my well doing. Which
of my favors deserves these thy injuries? tell me and I will amend it; i will be
thy revenger upon my self, because I desird nothing more then thy good will, nor
do I desire, nor shall I. To make thee love me Iam ready to destroy the world,
if it were injurious to thee that I made it. If I were faulty in dying for
thee, I Will dye again to make satisfaction and come to an atonement. If it were
a crime that I prepared my glory and heaven for thee; upon condition thou
would pardon me, I would relinquish it once again and evacuate my self,
depriving my self of my Majesty and glory. Why do thou think those things,
which if they were done betwixt man and man would be accounted virtues worthy
of praise, being now done to thee by God, to be crimes deserving nothing
lesthen disgrace and death? But if thou esteem those things as benefits, which
I have heapd upon thee with all the extent of my omnipotency and purchase of my
sufferings, why do thou seek to affront me still more and more. Perchance my
offense was in this that my benefits were so many and great, (for in each
particular I can acknowledge no fault) and therefore thou will punish me with the
greatness and multitude of contempts and strive to out number my kindnesses by
thy affronts: Behold, thou alone have picked up the most notorious debaucheryes
of the lewdest women against me thy lover to cast them into my dish. Thou
did take complacence in the impudency of Putiphars wife, and thou itching to
practice the same against me, covetest to play the harlot with the servants
which I assigned thee, to wit, creatures: and thou compelst them to this; nor
will thou learn by their loyalty who run from thee like Joseph, and either pass
away presently or perish: they all are full of a deep resentment and replenishd
with sorrow for the throws and pangs of those that being violated by thee, are
ready to be delivered, it being much against their will that thou sinnest with
them, or art enamoured upon them to the prejudice of thy spouse and their Lord
and Sovereign. But thou heaping iniquity upon iniquity slanderst them for
giving thee the slip, and complainst of them for running away. This is the
common complaint of mortals, that their Gods are mortal, that creatures are
fading and perishable. Thou criminatest them for being the occasion of thy
adultery; when they as innocent, faithful to their God and thy well wishers,
fly from thee that thou may not commit it by loving them with an inordinate
affection. But thou reply, saying if I were wealthy, if I had riches, if I
enjoyd this or that commodity, I would serve God peaceably nor desire more: but
because I have lost all, and the goods of this would fly me, I can not but do
thus: want compels me to sin, poverty puts me upon unlawful desires to the
great prejudice of my own spirit. Leave of complaining, cease to blame them,
and rather give ear to creatures, who teach thee thy duty better then Joseph.
Behold say they, our Lord forgetful of himself gives thee all; neither is there
any thing which he has not subjected to thy power, to do with it what thou will, this only excepted, not to love us; how can thou be so il-naturd, as
to offend thy God? how can we admit of this thy love which thy Creator has
reservd to himself? He has given us to thee that thou might give thy self to
him: we serve thee that thou may serve him: learn of us to serve him to
death, and play not the adulterer. We are destroyed that thou may subsist; for
we have neither scandalizd thee, nor given thee il example: we covet not to be
loved by thee, but rather wish thee to give him the best thing thou have, to
wit, thy love. Love him and praise him as we do. Learn zeal of us, for to the
end thou may do so we willingly suffer our selves to be destroyed: Learn to
dye that the glory of God may live, for to the end thou may live we dye.
Learn humility of us* for being thy sisters equal in noblenes of parentage, yea
elder by birth, we disdain not to serve thee even in abject things that thou
may reign with thy spouse and love him. That thou may live eternally with
him we are turned into filth and corruption nor do we detrect any the meanest
offices for thy sake with manifest hazard of our destruction: only we cannot
brook that on the altar of God, that is thy heart, idols of us should be placed
through a disorderly affection toward us, thou thinking oftener upon us then
him, and sacrificing to us not beasts but thy own soul. Fie fie, be ashamd to
make a celestial soul the victime of a piece of earthly metal, or vain honor,
or momentary pleasure, and in it divine grace, and by that eternal glory.

Thou tookst content moreover, o soul, in the treachery of Dalila, and
forthwith attemptedst to practice the like upon me thy God and thy lover. Thou
betraydst me into captivity like Samson to my greatest enemies, and made me a
slave to the Philistians of thy sins: for thou made me serve thee in them,
thou made me toil in thy iniquities, neither have I any other foe so hateful
to me as sin: thou nevertheles art the occasion, that I who make the sun to
rise, and send showers at due seasons, watering the fruits of the earth,
ripening the apples on the trees, furnishing the pastures with grass for the
cattles sustenance, thou I say art the occasion that I serve thy gluttonous
appetite, and in the mines which I engenderd in the bowels of the earth become
a drudge to thy avarice. O villainy! to make God the servant of villainies, the
captive of iniquity, the caterer of wickedness, the steward of malignity! Thy
vices also made a scorn of me as one that were blinded: no man would dare play
the thief in presence of a severe judge, nor do boys any unseemly act before
their master; but put out his eyes and they will dare any thing, they will use
ridiculous gestures and flout him without control or danger: so thou also
though thou knewst me to be present did commit all kind of wickedness, because
thou would make me blind. Thy sins, my foes, did that, which blinding thee,
made thee judge the same of me; and in such a condition thou deliveredst me into
my enemies hands, that I could not kill them but I must dye my self; nor could
I indeed justly, Samson like, better kill sin then by my own death.

The VII. Chapter. The second part of the Parable: and how we must use
creatures.
YEa and that thy ridiculous proceeding, o my soul is to be deplored with
inconsolable tears, when contemning the true beauty of thy spouse, thou
adorest its imperfect shadows in the mean images of creatures. If a great
Emperor should appoint a day and place for his inauguration, by the due homage
of his Pears; and the people being assembled for that end, he should come forth
in robes of state carrying his crown, scepter, chain of gold, and other
venerable ensigns of majesty, and seating himself in a conspicuous throne in
the midst of the market place, expected each moment the rites and ceremonies of
Consecration: if in this expectancy they should all forsake him and turn
themselves to his statue ill-polishd, half defacd, and carrying scarce so much
as a resemblance of his features; and should all adore and do homage to it,
leaving the good Emperor all alone, no body regarding him nor showing him any
respect at all; what a cold entertainment would this be? how would he blush and
remain confounded? But what if they should not only desert him but his statue
also, and do their obeisance to the print of his foot, and that in no better
element then clay, frustrating all his expectation, and sleighting his majesty.
Thou do this, o my soul, while thou love and adorest the mangled and
mishapd goodness of creatures which is but a trace or imperfect print of the
divine, contemning that original goodness so majestique so complete so
beautiful. O men, why leave we God alone in his majesty, and turn our backs
unseemingly to him whom we were created to adore, preferring a piece of clay
before him! what an indignity was it that Barrabas should be preferrd before
Christ, and Christ sentencd to the cross; and how great a one will it be, for
dirt to be preferrd before the Divinity and be adord as God.

Why art thou thus cheated, o my soul? know that all created goodness what
soever is only a rude and duskish image of God. Why does a blurrd and slubberd
draught please thee when thou may delight thy eyes with the polishd and
lively original? Place before a weary traveller a living and a carvd horse,
will he choose the carvd one, since he must be forcd to carry it and not it him,
to come more commodiously to his journeys end? why do thou burden thy self
with created goods to walk more easefully the journey of this life? they are
only resemblances of the living good: he only shall walk without wearines who
has God for companion of his journey. Set a real and painted dish of meat
before one that is hungry, will he covet to feed on the painted? and why then
desire thou shadows and images and seeks not after a real good? Man is more
absurd then a dog who if he light on a piece of bread he takes it, and leaves
it not to bite at a shadow: but thou leaving God; embracest his shadow. Why
desire thou a part rather then the whole? if one that is thirsty see two
pitchers, the one whole, the other broken, will he leave the whole one and
content himself with the ear of the broken, or some other fragment to take up
water to quench his thirst? creatures are only partial images of the divine
goodness, whose perfections are divided among created natures; why will thou
choose a part rather then the whole, and a part of that whole, which availes not
but in the whole, neither do creatures conduce singly a part nor all together
but only in God: broken pitchers nor any fragment of them in particular, nor
all together are useful to take up water; and the thirst of our appetite can
only be satiated with the integrity of the divine goodness.

Learn the true use of creatures they are not to work upon the will, but to
help the memory. Thou, forgetting God, amuzes and busies thy will, but does not
satiate it; and because it is not satiated, thou may easily know thou art
deluded. Albeit thou love all the goods of this world, yea and enjoy them all,
yet still thy desire will be as empty and hungry as ever. Painted bread does not
fill one, but is only a figure of that which fills; so created goods do not
satiate the appetite but are resemblances of that which satiates, to wit God.
All the goods of this world stand proportiond to our will as a painted fire to
a cold hand; one may take it and apply it, but shall find neither warmth nor
refreshment. A picture of burning coals pleases the eye but contents not the
touch of him that is cold, and created things affect the m^nd, but do not
satisfy the affection. God gave his people monitory memorials of his law, which
they were to sow in the skirts of their garments, to hangat their wrests, write
in the posts and gates of their houses, least forgetting the true God of Israel
they might fall to adore false ones. No less provident was he in the great house
of this world which he built for man; he engrav^ every where in it monitories
of himself in the posts, in the gates, in the pavements of the earth by such
variety of natures, in the rooff and arches of the heavens by so many refulgent
lights. All the good that is among creatures are so many commandatories to make
thee love God, and adore no other: why then Pharisy like contemning this
admonition, do thou dilate them and magnify these borders, possessing more,
or covetting more, or deeming any thing great besides him.

Thou crosses and thwarts the designs of God, adoring that very thing for him,
by which he forewarnd thee, that thou should adore nothing but him. Go too,
cross thy own desire, curbing whatsoever it covets by interposal of the divine
goodness, that in the desire of things thy appetite may aim at nothing but God.
Is any thing presented as pleasant and delightful? oppose God forthwith as a
strong shield, and say, how will this be in my spouse. I will not busy my self
about this crum of handsomnes, about this mote of sweetness, but will drink
larged raughts of pleasure in God, and glut my self with his delicious
relishes: I will no longer feed with Lazarus upon crumbs. If a slubberd business
can delight thee, will not much more a fair copy? Bulls are diverted and amuzd
by casting a cloak or some other thing before them on which without hurt to the
man they spend their fury: and do thou object God to thy roaming desires, that
spending themselves fruitfully on him they may be diverted from created things.
By this means, o effeminate spirit, thou shall both wholsomely and in its own
kind defeat the poison of thy own appetite effecting that the very affection to
things which induces an oblivion of God, become to thee a memorial of divine
love and incentive of charity. The desire wherewith the covetous man thirsts
after a piece of money will be more hightend, if an offer be made of a piece of
gold; because the value of silver is not only equalizd but outstript in gold:
so must thou object God to thy itching desire of riches and pleasures, the
value of them all being containd in him with a vast excess. Hence thou shall
experience incredible fruit. God shall incessantly be proposd to thee as
present, and thy love toward him shall be so improved, that thou may
traffic among the necessary affairs of wordly employments without any great
prejudice; til thy-spirit being more refind and robustious, thou be admitted
to the strayter embracements of thy spouse, creatures now not disquieting thee
but becoming so noisome, that this very visible heaven, will be loathsome to thy
eyes in comparison of my God and my JESUS. He that sees the sun is blind to the
stars, and creatures compard with their Creator are unsightly and unsavory.
Stars because they borrow their light from the sun are as it were nothing in
his presence, they being invisible: so all things that are, because they take
from thee, o God the lover of men their essence and being, as it were nothing
before thee, before thy superessential essence and goodness.

But there is yet another important commodity redounding to him that loathes
creatures. Do thou hear of any one that loves or desires them? blush and
lament that one so leagved with thee in nature should be so forgetful of God:
and stir, up thy self, and labor to repair this common disgrace by loving thy
Creator for both. Deem thy self guilty of all the affection which the world
bestows upon perishable things, and make satisfaction by loving eternal.
Account thy self a debtor for all the inclinations by which things are carried
to their center, nor prolong the payment, rearing thy mind and love more
impetuously toward heaven then a stone is carried downwards from heaven. All
created things seeking by an in bred propension to partake of happiness, show
that they love a trace of the divine goodness: be thou confounded and lament
that thou love not more eagarly true goodness and happiness it self, since
grace is prevalent above nature. O what a thing must that needs be, whose
shadow creatures love with so much vehemence, to which the total love of all
things lives and breaths! do thou endeavor to collect in thy self all the
dispersd inclinations, all the errors of desires, that thou may hasten
toward God and make amends for the forgetfulness of man.

The VIII. Chapter. The affections of a true Penitent.
TRansfer transfer my sins from me, o most loving father, who art in heaven;
for so I am confident to call thee* animated thereto by the consent and doctrine
of thy best beloved Son JESUS, so to distinguish thee from that father in hell
to which I adopted my self by my sins, choosing by them to become a child of the
devil and such I was for a long time. I lay open my horrid and numberles crimes
before thee, which if it were in my power, I would conceal from thee, and wash
them away with my hearts blood, that thy sacred countenance might not be defild
with such a spectacle. But because the blood neither of al men nor beasts can
cancel so much as one of them, therefore I show them to thee that with one drop
of the blood of thy beloved Son JESUS thou may quite obliterate and deface
them. I show to thee what I have committed against thee; for my malice does not
lessen thy goodness. After all my malignity and innumerable misdemeanors, thou,
o father, remains still good. If then I, who am evil, nay stark naught, am
replenishd with horror at the sight of my offenses, how much more will thou
who art good, yea goodness it self, how will thou be able to endure such
monsters and not forthwith abolish and destroy them. Thou being so good do
more detest sin then I that am so bad either now hate it, or ever heretofore
loved it. I tried to wash them away with a flood of tears, but no soap will
take out these stains besides the blood of thy beloved JESUS. I am in the hell
of my own wickedness, and demand not a drop of water as that rich glutton did of
Father Abraham, but I that am rich and most wealthy in all iniquity beg a drop
of Christ's blood of the father of mercies. My intent is not to defraud thy
justice by this my petition, but only not to offend thy goodness; I do more
earnestly beg that thou will wash of the stain then remit the pain.

O heavenly father I do equally and with the same arms embrace and welcome thy
justice upon me as I do thy mercy toward me: I do not so much beg a forgoeing
of the penalty, as pardon of my faultines. I wish most earnestly and from the
bottom of my heart, that I could collect the desires of all creatures into one,
and could make them all beg with joint consent that thy justice would take
revenge upon my delinquency. I would willingly undergo all the paints of hell
inflicted both on men and devils, neither should they appale me, upon condition
that thy countenance might not terrify me. Sin is a more hideous evil then
they; yea beyond all comparison; because my sin alone is evil, they are good,
because thou inflicts them. Yea and if they were all heapt upon me, they would
not render me more evil, my malice being mixed and attemperd with their good;
neither should I be compounded merely and purely of malice but should have some
ingredient of good from thee, derived to me from thy justice.

But, o father of mercy, I am afraid least while I seek to detest sin humbly, I
sin a new arrogantly. I could wish I went to hell if it were possible, by doing
so, to obtain thy grace. But how dare I, that am nothing but an extract of sin,
wish that, which thy greatest Saints and choicest favorits have made their suit
and humble petition. How dare I wish only a hell, who alone am the sinner of
sinners. What place shall I pretend to there? Shall it be in the very center of
it at the feet of Lucifer? If some one of thy friends had an ambition to be
there how dare I pretend it? that place was desird by some of thy Saints and
proved to them a ladder to heaven. Thy servant B. Vrigman of the Order of S.
Dominick, when he could find no fit place for himself but in the bottom of hell
under Lucifer, was invited by a voice from heaven to mount up thither to a most
sublime throne, the heart of God the father: and how then dare I covet that
place? what then? will there remain some other place for me below all who am a
sinner above all? Shall it be at the feet of ludas? but this is already taken up
by thy servant, Saint Francis Borgia, who not withstanding quitted it, when he
reflected that sometime it had bin the seat of my Lord and master the humble
JESUS. What place then remains for me? Shall it be at the feet of him who gave
JESUS the buffet on the face I having given him many more such injurious
blows? or at the feet of Caiphas, being I daily condemn Christ and his
doctrine: or at the gate of hell that all who enter there may tread upon me? or
shall I expect the precipice of Antichrist into that infernal pit, that I may
suffer under his feet? o most bountiful sovereign, worse then the worst of all
sinners am I, there is no place for me in hell who am unworthy of al place. I
hold my self not worthy even of the fellowship of devils; in so much that
according to my desert a viler and more penal hell ought to be prepared for me: I
am the disgrace of nature the scum and refuse of mankind! If thou, o father,
were capable of shame, thou would be ashamd of nothing save only preserving
me in the world, such a horrid and abominable mo^ster as my sins have made me.

Nay I am a discredit even to the devils themselves, and they might deservedly
discard me from their infernal community. Am I not worse then the devils? It is
clear I am in my nature, and I do not deny it in my behavior and carriage; yea
I see many things in my self which force me to grant it. For they were damned
for one sin and that of thought only, whereas mine are infinite and most
enormious, and of fact also. What difference then or excess is there betwixt my
malice and theirs? as much as there is betwixt a single unity, and a number
that is numberles: But though we alter these conditions, yet still I must
acknowledge my malice greater then theirs, although they had bin damnd for
innumerable offenses and I but for one. For they did not sin against a God, who
for their sakes became an Angel, neither had they such a full proof of his
goodness: they did not sin against a God, who for them vouchsafd to be crucifyd:
they did not sin against a God, who made himself the food of their souls: they
did not sin against a God, who left them such a sublime Priesthood: they did
not sin against a God, who by his example gave them the documents of a good
life, and did undergo the incessant labors of 33. years in inculcating them.
But I have sinned (and why do thou not, o my soul, dissolve into tears at
the very thought of it) against a God, who so often has bin so immensely good
on my behalf, who died for me, who wept for me upon the cross with loud
outcries, and not a joint of his body but bewaild each of my offenses, in the
garden with tears of blood. I am more unworthy then Lucifer, more unworthy
then the devils, more unworthy then Judas, who had not as yet seen Christ dying
for him, more unworthy then Antichrist, who will not so often as I, experience
the great mercy of God: deservedly therefore may they disdain my company;
neither is hell worthy of me, nor would it willingly receive my sinfulnes.

It Is more then this hell that I deserve; I have merited to be cast out of all
nature, least I dishonor it, who have disgraced its graceful glory. I have
murderd as much as lay in me, its parent; I have taken the crown of creatures
from of his head: I have dishonourd each creature by contemning their Creator:
therefore I ought to be the but and object of all their hatred, and they all
rejoice at my destruction. Perchance I should beg this, if it were possible
that I who am the reproach of nature, the dispite of grace, the moth of the
divine will, could not have had a being; Notwithstanding because I deserve to be
tormented, what place shall I find fit for it?

Thou o infinite power, o incomprehensible wisdom, o immense justice, thou
can tell what to do with me. In the mean time till a place be found and
prepared, I Will expect not beneath Satan, nor at the feet of Judas, nor will I
before hand take Antichrists place, of all which as yet I acknowledge my self
unworthy; but I will place my self at the feet of the Son of God, and his B.
Mother, standing and weeping at the foot of the cross of my JESUS; for they are
better stored with patience, and will tolerate me, whom neither the devil, nor
Judas, nor the rout of the damned, would be able to endure. Pardon me I beseech
thee, if I entrench upon the patience of thy Son and his Virgin Mother. Let me
lie at the feet of JESUS and Mary; they know long ago how to tread underfoot
venomous creatures. I am that poisonous and savage Chimera, that four-formd
deformity, that manifold monster having the eyes of a basilisk, the head of an
asp the claws of a lion, and the fiercenes of a dragon. But, o father of
mercy, because my JESUS cannot as now walk upon me a basilisk and aspe, nor
trample down this lion and dragon (for my sins keep his feet fast bound to the
cross) therefore let the heel, of the most B. Virgin Mary my Mother, in the
interim bruize this malice of mine, let her crush the head of this serpent, by
her merciful intercession. I am cause of her sorrow, and guilty of her tears;
she may justly complain of me and take revenge upon me. The feet of the purest
JESUS are welinurd both to tolerate and take away the monsters of our sins. I
seek not them amidst banquets and delights as did the Magdalen, but among
nails and sorrows; and because I cannot water them with my tears, I covet to
be washd with their blood. I will not entangle those feet which I behold, with
my locks, least my Lord be forced to fly from the horror and nastines of my
sins: I behold them fetterd with sharp irons, and that was my doing. But if it
were a grateful piece of service, which Magdalen did to these feet, the torment
also which was occasiond by my sins could not be ungrateful. I, o Lord, fastened
them, my malice was more prevalent toward this, then the goodness of all other
creatures. The Angels grieve and stand amazed; creatures tremble and complain;
all law disavowes it, all right cries against it; my sins alone exacted the
death of thy only begotten Son and compasd it. I m^ke public profession of
this, to the end ^ may have some share in the prayer of JESUS. He, he it was
that prayed for those who crucifyd him. Behold me here present, I was the chief
Crucifyer, the prime executioner. I furnishd his hands putting a hammer in his
right and a nail in his left: I first of all others gave that hand the dint
which transpiered those tender feet. O how much more heinous was my offense
then theirs, who executed only Pilates sentence and the will of the Jews! They
being commanded crucified, him whom they held no more then a man and a
malefactor, and one so disfigurd in his whole countenance, by that hideous
nights work. I have again, as much as in me lay, crucified him being now
glorious, who for me was heretofore crucified. Which of the Jews beholding
Christ as Saint Stephen beheld him, at the right hand of God, durst cry out
aloud crucify him? but I have bin so impudently bold as not only to say it, but
even more then do it. I clear and quit the executioners of Christ: they will be
confounded in the latter day beholding him glorious whom they treated so
ignomiously: I seeing him that was crucified for my sake glorious, am not
confounded but have again crucified him. What excuse then shall I be able to
pretend?

O Father as often as I call this to mind, considering thy infinite mercy, by
which thou did patiently sustain my so great in gratitude, I cannot but wish
thy exemplary justice upon me; I cannot detrect the pains of hell as due to my
iniquity, supposing the pain were void of guilt. Shall divine love be les
forcible then humane, or charity more feeble then concupiscence, the love of
thee, then the love of me? If my self love could make me contemn God, why
cannot the love of God make me thoroughly despise my self, and debase my self
even to hell? Again, again I imbracingly kiss thy justice: punish and revenge
upon me thy affronts and just indignation; for I who profaned and violated all
thy attributes, seeking to destroy them by sin as much as I could, do now wish
such a penance and remission, as would make a full restitution of all, and leave
them in their integrity. They will remain so, o Lord, if out of thy mercy thou
give me thy grace, and out of thy justice my due punishment. Thy servants
Moses and Paul desird to be anathem^tizd for their brethren, and I will become
accursed and Anathema for my God, and the justice of my God, as Christ JESUS
was for me. That skinner of Alexandria wishd others the joys of paradise, but
allotted for himself the pains of helfire and surmounted in perfection the
great S. Anthony. S. Christina chose rather to undergo here unspeakable
torments for the relief of the souls in Purgatory, then to go immediately to
heaven: and I to render the justice of God, which I have violated, undamnifyd,
ought not to refuse the punishments of hell. O if I could imitate my JESUS, who
when he was unseparable from his heavenly Father, stoopt to our misery, that he
might be acure for us: and I unseparable from thy charity, would become also
accursed and anathematizd to the very pit of hell; and even there would ^
embrace my JESUS. I have two arms, the one is humility, which I would put
under him, and unite my self to his Humanity: the other and that the right is
love, and by it I would embrace his Divinity. O Father, prostrate at the feet
of JESUS, I beg and beseech of thee for his sake that thou will cleanse me from
the ordure of my sins: I hope for his sake to obtain pardon, for whose sake
thou could not obtain of me to forbear sinning. Thy goodness is greater then
my malice; and thy crucifyd Christ is prevalently powerful to bend and incline
thy goodness, though he prevail not with me to avert and decline my malice:

The IX. Chapter. Of the ardent desire of those that desire God.
IT is not meet that thou, o faintharted spirit, have but a faint desire of
that which is the chiefest good. Grace and nature are sisters, and they have
the same Autour and parent God. If thou learnst not of thy JESUS how to frame
thy desires, who desird so earnestly to suffer for thee* that thou may be
ashamd not to desire most ardently to rejoice with him: learn at least of
natural things how thou art to covet heavenly. Nature affords no good to any
creature, unles a strong appetite thereof did go before and if there be not such
a precedent appetency arising from grace, thou shall never be guifted with any
signal virtue. Natural things aim at more then they can attain to: fire when
it mounts upward covets nothing more then to reach its element, and yet it
never can reach its home: but yet that excess of desire was requisite, to carry
it to a higher region. A stone when it falls, covets to descend even to the heart
or center of the earth, and yet it remains on the surface or superficies. What
a vehement affection is inbred to beasts toward their of spring? A cow in the
absence of her calf bellows without end, and hastens thither as fast as she
can where she thinks to find it. The same innate love, arms other creatures
which are of a more fearful and soft disposition, and exasperates and renders
them fierce and hardy: and this strong desire, was necessary to make them break
through all difficulties in rearing their young ones. Perfect virtue and union
with God is a business full of opposition; and how can thou overcome this unles
thou eagarly and earnestly intend it. A natural appetite is a disposition to
natural perfection; and a great and supernatural appetite disposes a soul to
supernatural perfection, and to receive the graces and gifts of God in greater
plenty, Christ compard those that traffic for the kingdom of heaven to
merchants and bankers; and styled them happy that hunger and thirst after
justice; combining in the selfsame thing two most vehement appetites. There is
no stint in desiring to please God: there is no other mean nor stint, but that
one always without all mean and interruption, wish and embrace indefatigably
the cross, and never be satiated with suffering. So ought thou to serve God
with the whole extent and intensenes of thy mind; and all this is very
requisite, that thou faint not under the burden of difficulties; neither is any
strength imaginable equivalent to the least particle of the divine infinitude.

God is infinite; and how then dare thou, o strait-harted creature, limit and
bound thy desires? The fading goods of this world are desird a hundred, yea a
thousand times more then they covet or deserve to be, and are not for all that
obtained. God is immense and infinite, and ought to be desird more then
infinitely; and why breathst thou after him so faintly and rem^sly, and
labourst to possess thy self of him being void of this flagrancy of affection?
zowze up thy self and be confounded that thou do not covet him more then an
ordinary man covets created goods; yea more then ever any other creature
coveted him. A most intense desire is a golden key that unlocks the gates of
heaven, and opens the passage to all our spiritual progress: for as no mean
thing is compassd without some precedent desire of it, so the most difficult
and precious of all others cannot be attained but with a most ardent one. To
obtain terrene joys, it is requisite that our desire far exceed their worth
and value, that so it may make us master all rubs that occur in their purchase;
and is it not an arrand shame, that our affection to the eternal joys of Gods
infinity, should be so pity fully remiss, and rate them so much below their
worth, below what they exact and we may afford?

Grant me grace, o Lord, thou who out of thy excessive desire of suffering for
me, were straightened so far, as to be baptizd in thy own blood, that I may be
carried with a most intense desire toward thee. What ought to be dear to me
either in heaven or earth besides thee, my God and the lover of me; and next to
thee, what but to suffer for and with thee? It is a profound act of contrition,
and a love due to the divine goodness, to be willing to suffer for the least
vemal sin, yea to impede the least in any body else, as much as in me lies, the
pains of hell through all eternity: and how much, o Lord, should I covet to
suffer for my spiritual advancement and rather then I my self commit that? And
notwithstanding how little am I sollicitous for thy glory? my whole employment
ought to tend to the compassing of this by desire, prayer, sighs, and tears;
and since all I can do, is little or nothing in comparison of thy greatness, my
good will must make amends for my inability and supply for my defectuousnes.

The X. Chapter. Of contemning and relinquishing the world.
VVOrldly joys as well as discontents conclude always with sorrow and
bitterness: but a virtuous course is so priviledgd, that not only its consentive
part, but also the harsh and burdensome, both contains and attaines true
delight. Why walkst thou the way of spirit with such heavines and tepidity?
Thou can not set thy affection upon any thing of this world without thy great
peril and hazard; yea thou seekst thy own danger, where those things which it
prizeth for good are bad, and ^ul of corruption, and will corrupt thee also. If
a little leven mar the whole batch, how can he be untainted and unlevened, who
is so incorporated with the world, whose whole lump is stark naught, where the
bad a lone are accounted good, and they so numerous. He that is once dead to
the world, let him beware he revive not to it again by dying to God, or
coveting worldly things, although he neither possess nor enjoy them. The love
of temporalities is wont to harm us more then the use and possession of them:
its not the thing but the affection to the thing which hurts us, which
affection is more restlesly pressing in its absence. Be not according to Saint
Jude a tree twice dead and unfruitful. He dies to the world who relinquisheth
the world; he is defunct to God who returns to it again. Such a one having
lost the fruit and commodities of a worldly life, loses also the benefits of
a spiritual, and consequently is altogether unprofitable and barren to himself.
The world cannot endure the sight of one that is dead; a worldly life is a sea,
and it harbors not dead bodies, but within three days space casts them up.

Beware thou be not deceived, if now thou deemst it good when thou have no
commerce with it, remember that it was evil when thou traffickst with it, and
knewst it not superficially and at a distance; and therefore did relinquish
it. Believe rather thy own certain experience then a deceitful opinion; believe
rather thy self an eye witness, then one that is absent. Know that it is not
changed since thou left it, nor grown better by length of time, nor that it
affords any more security then it did, but is rather worse every day then
other. It decays daily; it doats more and more by age: an error gains
authority by being old; its wine, drinks with a stronger relish of malice, for
being long kept: vices the more inveterate they are get a more undeniable
prescription, and new ones arise daily. Because the world was evil thou could
not brook it, now when it is grown worse, why will thou embrace it? It is
intolerable and perfidious even to those who, did stick constantly and without
breach of trust to it, what will it then be to thee, who have revolted both
from it and God, loyal to neither? wherefore the world will chastize thee as a
fugitive, and God will not defend thee, by reason of thy treachery. There are
more urgent reasons now of not returning to the world, then there were at first
of leaving it, or at least the same are now in force which forcd thee then to
quit it. It is blind and a cheat, both to it self and thee, of a base nature,
and to be despisd even although otherwise not despicable; because it hinders
great good and torments its lovers, be set on all sides with the dangers, not
only of temporal things, but which is more of eternal also: it is nothing else
but falsehood and forgery; for besides that it is malicious and habituated in
cozening others, it is also cozend it self, in so much that worldly men will
deceive thee, even when they intend nothing less then deceits The very wisdom
of the world is pure folly: how then shall truth appear in it? and when all the
light it has is darkness, how great darkness must that needs be? its whole train
of attendance and foundations, are instruments of blindness and dim the eyes of
our judgment, to wit pride gluttony, lust, envy, ambition, anger, to which we
may add treachery, in so much that Judas* like even when it fawnes most upon
them it betraies its darlings by that kiss to perdition and the power of
darkness.

The world is a cheat: it sels its glory, which is nothing, at a high rate. And
it were a small matter if it were only nothing, and not ignominious also. Men
glory in those things of which they ought to be ashamd: it lies against all
experience in telling them that their riches will be permanent, since they pass
through so many hands to come to them who now possess them. It holds those
things forth for good, each one whereof is no less then a triple torment: the
number of evils and vexations are in such an excess, that it affords more then
two real afflictions for one seeming happiness. There Is no one thing of all we
possess, but rackd us with toil and solicitude how we might compass it; and
having compasd it, we are no les tormented with fear and iealousy of it; and
when it is lost, with grief for its absence and privation. O heavenly truth,
what great God a mercy, if I do not covet this mere chaos of deceitfulnes and
vexation? if I contemn for thy sake a thing so contemptible, which were to be
contemnd if not for it self at least for my self? many heathen Philosophers
quitted the world for their own quiet, and why shall not a Christian do it for
his and thy glory? They left it because despicable in it self; and why shall not
we do it because thou art inestimable, and the glory which we hope for
invaluable. Although the world were good, yet it were folly to prefer it before
that, which contains all good.

The XI. Chapter. How Peace is to be obtained.
THou can not live well unles thou dye forthwith and overcome thy nature. Thou
can not enjoy peace unles thou make war upon thy self; this is the way to
purchase true liberty. Be readier always to comply with another will then thy
own and thou shall not know what it is to be at jars: love rather to have
little then much, and thou shall have no occasion of complaint: choose always
the meanest place, and to be every ones underling, and thou shall scarce ever
be sad: have a desire to suffer and undergo something for thy JESUS sake, and
thou shall think no body burdensome: seek God in all things that his will may
be fulfilld in thee, and thou shall never be disquieted. If thou ought to
accommodate thy self rather to another will then thy own, why not to the divine
will, and rejoice that it is fulfilld by thee? keep these things in thy heart
that thou may enjoy an uninterrupted peace. True tranquillity of mind cannot
be obtaind but by a contempt of the world and conquest over our selves. This
may be done two manner of ways; either by forcing thy self, contrary to what
seems good and delectable in the world and nature; or by knowing them to be
naught, and weighing all things in the balance of truth: this latter way is
the sweeter and more permanent, although it must always be accompanyd with a
fervorous contradiction of our appetite. He nevertheles who in faith and spirit
is convined of the verity and vanity that is in things, shall with much facility
overcome himself and despise the world.

Nothing conduces more to a happy progress, then to frame an unbyazd judgment
of things, and to relish them according to the doctrine of JESUS. What hearst
thou pronouncd by that most holy mouth of truth it self? blessed are the poor
of spirit; blessed are they that mourn; blessed are they that suffer
persecution. Why will thou esteem those things harsh and burdensome which the
truth of God held and deliverd for beatitudes? how can thou avoid being
deceivd, if thou account those things evil, which faith teaches us to be good,
and to render us happy? we believe the mystery of the most B. Trinity because
Christ reveald it to us: the same JESUS also reveald, that those things which
the world so much abhors, poverty, sorrow, injuries, are not bad but good;
neither is he to be ratherd is believd in this point, by him that knows he
taught so, then when be teaches the unity and Trinity of almighty God. Let us
then make a true estimate of truth, and frame our dictamens point blank
opposite to worldly maxims. O eternal truth, grant me grace that according to
thy doctrine I may judge all temporal things mere lies, and those far from
containing great good, which bring so much hurt. Grant me that I may not live
in an error by prizing those things highly which I ought to have in hatred. If
it be a matter of faith that poverty, humiliation, affliction, are not only
good but beatifying; why do not I rather choose to have little then much, to be
dispisd then praysd, to be afflicted then swim in delights?

He that walks in faith and truth, accounting those things truly good which
CHRIST judges such, ought to be so far from being contristated for any want or
vexation, that he should covet them with his utmost desires, and rejoice in
them, and abhor wholly and not in part only, all things which the world loves
and embraces, and admit and desire with his whole heart, with his whole soul,
with all his strength, with all his mind, what soever JESUS loved and embracd.
Like as worldlings who follow love and seek with great earnestnes those things
which belong to the world, to wit honors, fame, and the opinion of a great
name upon earth, as the world teaches and deceives them: so those that make a
progress in spirit and truth, do seriously follow, love, and ardently desire
whatsoever is altogether opposite to these, that is, to be clad with the same
livery and ensigns of contempt which the Lord of glory wore. Insomuch that if
it could be done without any offense of the divine Majesty and sin of their
neighbor, they would suffer contumelies, false witness, affronts* and be
thought and accounted fools (they giving nevertheles no occasion of it)
because they desire to resemble and imitate in some manner the Son of God. For
this purpose let thy chief aim and study be, to seek thy own greater abnegation
and continual mortification as much as thou can in all things. Why will thou
live in guile and deceit, making no reckning of those things which God prizd
and honored so highly, that he thought them worthy of his best beloved and only
begotten Son.

Verily although they were not ra^kd among good things, yet for this sole
reason that JESUS chose them for himself, they are honored sufficiently, and
worthy to be sought by us, with the whole extent of our heart: and for this sole
cause that he dispisd all worldly goods, though men have them in so great
esteem, they are to be held base and infamous, and deservedly to be abhord more
then death it self. JESUS overcome with love of us, made choice of these things
the world hates, and why shall not we for his sake at least accept them. What
do I say for love of JESUS? we ought to do it for love of our selves. He that
loves his soul and his life, let him love to dye even while he yet lives. If
thou love life, why will thou not rather love an eternal and happy one then
this wretched and momentary? whosoever loves any thing as good to himself,
aims always at that which is more perfect: and by good consequence, he that
loves life, must not love a temporal but eternal life; who loves good things,
must not love earthly but heavenly goods: wherefore our very affection to things
compels us to disaffect all worldly things. There Is no body that loves any good
thing but he wishes it perpetual: though the contrary be absurd, yet we
always do it; for through our love to life and goods, we suffer great
detriment both of life and goods. Tell me, o thou wretched of the world, who art
so forgetful of eternal life, whether do thou despise these transitory things
or love them? If thou dispisest them, it must be for this reason because thou
seekst after better; if thou love them, how much are greater things more
worthy of love. How ever the case stands, it is convinced that we ought to love
eternal things, which will accrue to us so much more copiously, by how much the
more we are impoverishd disesteemd, and afflicted for God. Notwithstanding all
this, the sufferings of this life are in no degree proportionable to the future
glory; for what is here but light and momentary, works in us an eternal poize
of the same. Our provision for eternity may be prepared with much facility, and
ought to be kept with all carefulnes. Each one furnishes most plentifully the
place he intends for his longest abode: and where his residence is to be but
for a short time, that he regards but slightly and provides it but
superficially. An eternity expects us in the other life, we must lay up store
of merits for it, least we make our provisions preposterously, bestowing great
care on a short abode, and little on a long.

But we ought to have transitory things in hatred not only in regard of the
eternal life, but even in respect of this temporal, they disquiet and vex us
with a thousand cares while we are procuring them, and with a thousand fears
and frights least we fall short of them: we brook any loss but impatiently which
happening so frequently as they do, we are tossd in a continual sea of grief,
anger, and endless vexations. He alone who goes contrary to the world lives
without contrariety and in a holy repose. How then do these things deserve the
name of goods which are so noisome and tormenting to us? rather the quite
opposite ate to be styled such, which far sooner render us such, by putting us
in mind of our present condition, by making us think upon God and have recourse
to him, by occasioning our greater merit, and assimilating us to the only
begotten Son of God. The lover of men JESUS did most truly term those not only
good but also beatifying Yea the choysest of the heathen Philosophers, held not
those things, which the world so much adores, good, but their contrary. Some of
them hated and rejected temporal riches, that at least in this life, void of
care and fear and perplexity of mind, they might enjoy a temporal felicity. It
redounds to our great shame that heathens should do so, who wanted the example
of the Son of God, who were out of hopes of other goods, and this when the
world was in its youth and verdure, and abounded more with such allurements
though false and counterfeyt. But we have the glory of imitating JESUS, and the
incentive of a heavenly reward: the world moreover is now grown worse and more
deformed, and wants not only solid goods but also fading. Now it scarce has
where with all to bait a deceitful book; its false varnish is washd of, in so
much that it cannot deceive us, unles we deceive our selves.

The XII. Chapter. Of the excellency of one that is in the state of grace.
Why seekst thou any thing of the world, if thou be above the world? why
love thou any earthly thing since thou art beloved of God? How can he stick
in the mud of nature who is elevated to the state of grace? O good as little
understood as much neglected! God has bestowd large and precious promises upon
us to make us sharers of his divine nature. Why seeks he any thing besides God
who has found the grace of God, which raises him above all nature, yea even
that of the highest Thrones, Cherubins, and Seraphins, if therrs be considerd
in it self, though so far surpassing all other created substance; by which we
have God for our Father, for our friend, and unseparable Achates. It Is
accounted a matter of high concernment among men to have precedence of place or
dignity before others; and what will it then be to have a preeminence above all
the degrees of nature? Although the world were never so estimable, and the
things in it beyond our valuation, yet they ought to be contemnd by one in the
state of grace. The devil is intolerably proud; yet he regards not the opinions
of men concerning him, nor deems himself one jot the worse for being revild by
them he seeks not popular applause, he sleights material things, he loathes what
we relish so savourly, he scofs at our affairs, and all this for no other
reason but because he is of a more sublime nature; why then is man who is raisd
to a participation of Gods nature, who is rankd in the highest class of
creatures, so sollicitous about these base trifles? certainly if he understood
thoroughly the dignity that is conferd upon him by being rightly confessd and
put in the state of grace nothing else would be requisite to make him contemn
and deride these fopperies of creatures; nor were any great store of virtue
needful to move him to this, but he would do it even by his vicious nature,
unles we should hold it impossible that grace could be the author of a
misdeed. The wicked spirits without any virtue at all have a most mean conceit
of these sublunary things, and why, but because they are of a Superior nature
and rank above them? What then ought man to do with virtue, who is elevated
above all nature? If a great king in his robes of state, should find a spade or
sickle lying in the way, he would scorn to stoop to take it up, as being of a
more eminent condition then a peasant; and why does man, when he has once
possessd his soul of Gods grace, stoop and debase himself to earthly things,
since his dignity overtops the heavens?

O how great is the excellency of grace! It lies conceald many times under a
course and contemptible garment in a weak body, feeble, and sometimes loathsome
to the eye. Consider how much the noblest nature of a Seraphin surpasses the
basest of a silly worm; yet there is not the meanest slave and ugliest Lepar if
he be in the state of grace, but does much more exceed the nature of a higher
Angel. If God should create a select nature in which all under-natures,
vegetative, sensitive, rational and Angelical were comprehended, in so much
that these sublime intelligences of the world Principalities, Dominations,
Seraphins, were to acknowledge it of a Superior Order as creatures did Adam;
what height of dignity would such a one carry? But would it be decent think
you, that such a refind creature should sort himself with brute beasts, and in
his carriage strive to become like them? o man thou art exalted to a higher
rank; while thou art in grace thou excelst not only all created natures but
also creable. How would thou wonder, if thou should see a despicable worm
in a dead dog, become not only a glorious spirit, but equal even to the
Seraphins: and why do thou not admire as much thy own elevation from sin to a
divine state, which is far greater? Would a worm become a spirit covet to
lodge in a rotten carcass? and why do thou love perishable things, since thou
art become after a wonderful manner and privilege a kind of God, and a child
of the increated God, who made thee by creation a man, and by redemption,
divine? Although thou see not this dignity, thou must believe it, and frame a
great conceit of thy self more groundedly, then if thou beheldst it with thy
eyes. If all the perfection, excellency and beauty of all natures both existent
and possible were all collected into one, it were all nothing in comparison of
the least particle of grace, which gives a soul preeminence above all
preeminences, and a beauty above all the beauties of nature. There Is no
resemblance betwixt God and all natural perfection; so he that is endowd with
grace exceeds all the good that's found in creatures; for he is in a divine
degree.

Suppose when thou were yet in the abiss of nothing and God was about to give
thee a being that he demanded of thee in what class thou would be created,
whether a mere element, or a rock, or some piece of metal, or a brute beast,
or a man, or an Angel or one of the Seraphins? would thou not account this a
great benefit? would thou choose to be an insensible creature, or rather to be
classd among the intelligible? or peradventure durst thou hope and presume to
aspire to the same divine degree with God, surmounting all the before mentiond
natures? Behold how God has of his own accord granted thee what thou durst not
so much as co^ceive in thought. He did not place thee among the forms of
animated creatures, nor among the inanimate, nor among the unreasonable, but
raised thee not only to the degree of reason and immateriality, but even to a
certain divine one. One man alone is more endebted to God for the least degree
of grace, then all creatures besides from the Seraphins to the sands of the
sea, for the creation of all other natures. Thou art more endebted to God for
making thee partake of his nature by grace, then if he had made all created
natures subordinate to thee, even from the Angels to the beasts of the field.

All creatures are distributed into their proper files: the lower mix not with
the higher; in animate things cannot attain to the perfection of the animate,
living creatures fall short of the sensitive, the sensitive of the intellectual,
and corporeal things of spiritual. The eye cannot know an Angel, they are of a
different order; so nature cannot reach God in himself, he exceeding all
created substances in a higher degree of disproportio^ then spiritual things do
sensitive. No body can operate after a divine manner unles he be in a divine
state: wherefore to know God in himself, and treat with him, it was requisite we
should be elevated to a higher order above nature, and placed in a
supernatural: and grace effects this, carrying man beyond the bounds of nature,
and setting him in a deifical state and order, making him partaker of the
divine nature, and by a wonderful manner and prerogative a kind of God. For man
by grace partakes of God according to the highest degree of the divine nature,
for as much as it exceeds all nature; not only as it is existent, living,
knowing but as it is God and above all being, life, sense, and understanding.
He partakes of the divine Essence in as much as it is above all essence, he
partakes of the divine substance in as much as it is supersubstantial and
superessential: therefore a man in the state of grace is above nature; above
essence, and all substances. If this prerogative were granted to one Angel or
soul alone to be in the world and adornd with grace, though less then that
wherewith an infant dying immediately after baptism is endowed, it would be
looked upon as a stupendous miracle, and no creature but would adore it. O my
soul, how can thou but deem thy self worthy of veneration, if thou humbly
suspect thy self to be in grace? do not trouble thy self for things that are
below thee; and indeed all things are below thee.

Notwithstanding it is not the sole prerogative of grace to excel all nature,
if we consider that it makes man a child dear to God. O father, what a charity
did thou bestow upon us, that we both are, and are stild the Sons of God? we
receive the Spirit which adopts children, that justifid by the grace of Christ
we may be coheyres of JESUS, and thy inheritours. O that we could understand
how great a dignity it is to become the Sons of God! men account it a great
matter to be the allies or retayners of an earthly king; why make they not
greater account of being the Sons and heirs of God? we are wont to glory in
the pedigree of men defunct, of the descent of flesh and blood that ends in
dust, in our earthly parentage; but why do we not glory, in being in grace, in
sharing the nature of God, and such a divine filiation? One that is of the
blood-royall even afters diverse generations, is had in great esteem by the
world; how much more ought he that is a kin to God and allyd to him in the same
nature.

A parent loves his child more affectionately then he does another who is of
the same complexion, of the same speech and features, because he partakes of
his nature; so God loves him who is in grace more te^derly then he does the
Angelical order, because he shares with him in nature, though he be otherwise
the most contemptible creature in the world. There is a larger difference
betwixt the substance of a Cherubin considerd in it self, and one that is in
grace, then there is betwixt a painted man and the living original: although
each creature partake of God in some sort, yet there is a vast disparity. They
partake of his nature much after the manner of a picture; When a limmer draws
himself to life, the picture partakes of him by way of representation in
resemblance, in color, in his lineaments, and all his exterior; but not in
the degree of life and a rational soul. All natures are so many rude draughts
and expressions of some divine perfection, but without any part of the divine
spirit: he alone that is in grace, is a living image of God quickened with his
spirit, and as it were the child and image of his parent by participation and
communication of nature. What a deal of difference is there and how far falls a
material picture or statue of some king short of the kings own beloved Son? the
noblest essence and natural perfection of the highest Archangel falls much
shorter of a soul that is in grace: for there is no substance or nature but it
represents God only after a dead manner, no otherwise then an Emperor is
represented by a piece of wood or marble or a painted tablet. Among those that
partake of the same nature there is not so much a similitude as an identity or
selfsamenes: and therefore the H. Fathers style one that is in grace, the same
with God, like as the father and the Son in humane generations are accounted
the same person. The natural Son of God himself said; let all be one, as thou o
father in me and I in thee, that they may also be one in us. For although each
just man, besides the just of justs JESUS, becomes only such by adoption, there
is a greater tie and unity betwixt him and God, then is found betwixt natural
parents and their children. The children of men have only a small parcel of base
matter and their parents flesh, but he that is in the degree of grace receives
the whole divine spirit within him. Therefore the adoptive filiation of God is a
more sublime manner of filiation, then that which is naturally found among men.

O man rejoice in this thy dignity, and do not degenerate from the divine
condition thou art raysd to: have a care of Gods honor, be zealous in his
quarrel, if not because he is thy God, at least because he is thy father and
all that he has shall be thine. Children because they hope to inherit their
fathers patrimony; follow their fathers business; thou being heir to God, must
not carry thy self like a stranger or alien. Although God had not given us our
creation, yet for this only that he adopted us his children, we owe him a
cordial love, and must discharge our duty in things appertaining to his service
with a great deal of zeal. O most loving father, why am not I touched with a
deep resentment for being enrolld into thy family, and tasting so singularly of
thy providence. Wild beasts out of love to their young ones expose themselves to
a hazard of death; and what will thou do, who have given such a remonstrance of
love even for us who condemnd thy natural Son, as to take us for thy children.
O what confidence ought a soul to have in this filiation! although God were not
a God of providence, yet he would be watch fully careful and sweetly
sollicitous over him that is in grace: no les then a mother in widowhood over
her only and beloved child; yea far greater then this is Gods affection and
vigilance in regard of the just.

To this we may add that by grace we become the friends of God. JESUS himself
utterd these words sweeter then honey drops; ye are my friends. For by grace
there accrues a certain dignity betwixt God and man, not of a disproportionable
degree but so dignifying that it elevates him to the order of things divine;
and of a mortal man makes him a friend and favorite of the immortal king.
Although we did not become the children of God, yet for this sole respect, that
grace entitles us his beloved, its worth exceeds all valuation. A friend is
preferrd before a kins man, and is held more trusty then nature it self: allies
are often neglected or become the objects of hatred, friends are always
beloved: men do more for their friend then for their brother: what then shall we
conceive of friendship with God? There are two things which endear much,
alliance and love, and both of them are found in grace. To be loved by God is a
rich mine of heavenly gold, and a magazine of all divine blessings. The love of
God is not ^oytering and sluggish but most effectual and operative. To love one
is to wish him well: in God it is the self same to will and to do, and
consequently whomsoever he loves he enricheth him with the treasures of
heaven. The love of God is an ever flowing conduit or rather a river of
celestial blessings. If he exposd his life for his enemies what will he do for
his friends? There is no incongruity or inconsequence to be found in God;
wherefore if he did so much for those that hated him, he will do incredible
things for those that love him, carrying a special providence over them. If he
have so much care of our enemies as to command us to love them, what will he
have of his own friends? He loved us so affectionately when we were yet his
foes that he seemd to love us more then himself; and if he did this when we
were his enemies, will he do les when he both styles and accounts us his friends?

Thou would be glad to have a friend as faithful to thee as Ionathas was to
David; but all humane fidelity is a mere toy, yea to be accounted but
treachery, in regard of that which God shows on thy behalf. Men hold it no
small favor to be taken notice of by a terrene king, what will it be to be
loved, and so affectionately loved by God? will thou know, o my soul, how
signally remarkable Gods friendship and fidelity is? He is so enamourd upon his
friends that he cannot endure to be separated from them. If his immensity were
confind only to heaven, he would relinquish it to come to one that is in grace,
nor would he ever be from him, but would make himself his constant sejourner,
that our society may be with the father and his Son Jesus Christ by the
mediation of the H. Ghost who is diffusd in our hearts. Deer and lambs and
pigeons, are sociable creatures they willingly sort with one another, and love
those whom they know to be of the same kind. God is sociable, the Son of God is
a lamb, the divine spirit is tame and affable, it loves those that become
divine, affecting the fellowship of his nature, and as it were of the same
feather with him. If the most sacred Humanity of Christ took such complacence
in any one as to be always present with him, what should we think of such a
singular privilege? and why do we not admire that the Dinity never departs from
the just man, but becomes his unseparable companion? and not only dwells with
him as his fellow sejourner, but even in him, in whom he places his tabernacle
much more willingly then in the sun.

What parent so loves his child, as with his good will never to be from him, but
always in his company? yea such a one assigns him a tutour and commits him to
his custody. But God our parent and friend entrusts us to no body else, he will
always be with us himself. What mother loves her child so te^derly as that she
will continually have him in her arms? Yet God does this. Grace is a knot which
ties God and man together; it is the sweet and mutual embracement of the spirit
divine and humane. Among men the father may not be where the Son is, but God
cannot but be with him that is in grace. Although God be existent in creatures
both by his essence, presence, and power, this is so because he is God, and it
cannot be otherwise, not for any dignity or desert in them, but by reason of
his immensity and infinitude. But grace not nature has this attractivenes,
that although God could be absent, and were limitable to locality, yet it would
make him present and existent with one in grace, residing with him, and
becoming one spirit: yea albeit he could forget his creatures, he would be
always sweetly present to his memory, and share of his providence; although he
could relinquish them, and not operate in them nor conserve and maintain them,
yet he would still be working some good in the just: for as love is effectual,
so it never intends any good but it compleats it.

What a benefit and dignity is it to have God always for our companion?
certainly we should be struck with amazement to see any creature so beloved by
God, and so noble, that he commanded his celestial spirits those thousands of
thousands that attend him, to accompany it whether soever it went, and be
followd by all that train so stately and majestical: yet this would be but
solitude in comparison of the fellowship and attendance of God. What are all
things before thee, o lord, but as it were a mere nothing and vacuity? If we
should admire such a creature, why do we not also admire a sold in grace,
since it has God for its attendance, not waiting at its elbow, but as it were
in its essence enlivening it: O most fortunate dignity of man and dignation of
God, to have that highest Majesty always accompanying the Sons of men! for God
will not be a lazy and unprofitable companion to a soul, not providing what is
beho offul to it. Will he be like one that is sluggish or blind, who neither
sees nor resents the necessities and miseries which press it? certainly God
does not associate himself to the just for nothing. They may well neglect both
themselves and their temporal, if only they be careful of what concerns him: he
will have a care of them. O my Father, o friend, o companion! I beg of thy
Majesty, that I may always carry a due reverence, fidelity, and affability
toward thee: I will demean my self to thee as a child does to his parent,
taking all thy affairs to heart, reputing them my own: not otherwise then
towardly children are industriously careful of their parents business, because
they look upon it as their own. I beseech thee that I may be a faithful friend
to thee, seeking at all turns thy greater honor and glory, advancing what
concerns thee and loving thee more then my self. Grant that I may keep with
thee all the rules of good fellowship, least by my continual defects I may
contristate thy holy spirit.

But if all grace be of such virtue and efficacy in it self, that it makes us
kinsmen and allies of God, most dear to him, yea in a manner Gods, and this
because it is given by Christ; hence it follows, that that portion of it which
befalls man, is more happy, more venerable and highlyer priviledgd then that
which was bestowd upon the Angels, or our first parents in the state of
innocence. Those children are ordinarily first in their parents affection, who
were deliverd into the world with the strongest throws of a hard labor: and
what wonder then, if our grace be dearer to Christ since it cost him so many
sorrows, and he for it bestow on us greater privileges, affording us more
helps, tolerating us more patiently and longanimously, raising us to great
spiritual advancement; in so much that the very Angels themselves do honor men
for this respect that they have grace by Christ, and are struck with a
reverential fear to see our nature now prostrate before them, which they
slighted so much before God became Incarnate by assuming it; and this, because
a special dignity accrues to the grace we partake of, we being made thereby
living members of Christ and computed the same with him. There redounds a
certain veneration from the head to the members: how can the Angels despise our
nature, which they admiringly behold exalted above theirs, even to the throne
of the Divinity and fellowship of God? what wonder if they treat us not as
their inferiors whom the Son of God the first begotten among many brethren,
under the title of equals, exalted above the celestial spirits themselves,
calling men his brethren and esteeming them more then Angels. He never honored
any of the Seraphins so much as to call him brother. This is the highest
prerogative of grace which renders it so honorable, and elevates it above all
nature. Moreover our nature it self, by grace through Christ is dignified and
exalted above all other natures, for as much as the Lord of glory communicates
the same his glory with his jointly united members and living allies. Our grace
also is founded upon the merits of JESUS and his union, as if thereby it gave us
a juster title to merit from God, and makes us do it after a perfecter manner.
For we are all children of sorrow, we are Gods Benjamins the Sons of his right
hand, and dear above all, others. O most loving father, who sacrificd they only
begotten Son to death, that I becoming thy Son might live, grant that I may
always have a true esteem and knowledge of this inestimable benefit. One Angel
is more endebted to thee for the least degree of grace which he received then
all creatures together for all the goods of nature and creation of the
universe. But I a silly wretched man, owe thee more for the least particle of
grace bestowd upon me, then all the Hierachies of Angels for all the
supernatural gifts conferrd upon them all together. For to the end that I
through grace might live a divine life, thou would have thy son in humane
nature to suffer an unhamane death. Thou have done more for me then for all the
Angels; thou have heapd more obligations upon me then upon the Cherubins and
Seraphins.

There are two reasons for which men are obligd to preserve and highly magnify
divine grace. The one is its inestimable worth and unspeakable dignity; the
other is thy most precious blood, o JESUS, which thou did shed to merit
grace. If we be not satisfyd of its value in its self, this may thoroughly
convince us, that thou would purchase it for us at so dear a rate. It must
needs be a rare and stupendous thing, which God who cannot err in his choice
chose rather to give us then save the life of his own Son so precious to him.

The XIII. Chapter. How Penances and Corporal afflictions help us.
THorns conserve plants in a garden, and austerities grace in a just man. A
fresh vigor of mind flourishes many times in a tottering and witherd body.
That Physicians may cure the body, they more and more afflict it by bitter
potions, by abstinence, by breathing a vein, by searing it, and other ways
yet more penal: if it be exacted of thee to afflict it in some sort for the
good of thy soul, no great matter is demanded. He that is ill at ease amidst
his gripes and pains casts up what annoyd him: so the peccant humors of our
soul, are not purgd by living pleasantly, since the maladies of our bodies are
not curd without annoiance. A flint being beaten yealds flashes of light, and
the flesh by chastisements illuminates the mind. That soul shows it self a
very beast, which treats not its body like a beast. Even as afflictions and
crosses sent by God, make men relent, think upon him, indoctrinate them
enkindle fervor, increase familiarity with God, and raise their hearts; so
voluntary austerities have like effect; they make man have a more frequent
recourse to God, and being void of sensible gust they dispose him better for
divine illustrations.

The curbing of nature is a fit disposition for increase of grace: this is the
aim and endeavor of grace to divorce us from temporal, corporeal, and visible
things; and a penitential life finds this half done to its hand, supposing it
be accompanyd with divine grace, without which nothing is beneficial to us,
nothing profitable. The depth of our humiliation together with bodily austerity
is the throne and kingdom of grace, and a step to glory; and the crucifying of
our flesh, the exalting of the spirit. Thou armest thy self with voluntary
afflictions against necessary ones, learning thus in the school of patience how
thou art to embrace those which are sent thee from God. By these skirmishes
thou art taught to overcome thy self, and consequently disable thy greatest
antagonist by whom the rest assail thee; thou also find a more speedy
redress at the hands of God in thy addresses to him. Although Christ crucifyd
be a sufficient warrant for our penitential austerities, yet we might specify
many more and principally our innumerable defaults and penalties due for them,
that we may make amends for what is past, and lessen future misdemeanors. Thy
soul must be the executioner of thy flesh; for this end through the great mercy
of God, it is reprieved and rescued from the pains of hell fire. Sometimes it
happens that of two criminals sentencd to death the one partner is quitted upon
this condition that he execute the sentence of death upon his companion,
becoming his hangman for want of another. Our soul and body are joint sharers
in sin, let the soul be the executioner of divine justice over the body, and
punish it in a due manner, she when she first sinned being reprieved from
eternal damnation.

Suffer nothing to pass unpunished: make thy self formidable to thy self, as
one that can be cruel against thy self, a most impartial and severe chastizer
of all the delinquencies and soothings of the flesh: all must undergo their
due penalty. There Is no city well governd, unles its penal laws be in force
and vigor; nor can that conscience be well orderd, where so many depraved
affections are on foot without its courts and sword of justice. The punishment
thou inflictest upon thy self must be corresponding to thy fault: beware God
call thee not to an account for contemning and corrupting justice. Take
pennyworths of thy self, both because thou pleadest guilty, and have played the
naughty judge in acquitting thy self so often by being indulgent to thy self.
Justice is exercisd in cities rather to terrify others by such an example from
offending, then to lessen the guilt and punishment of him that is nocent: but
thou reapest more ample fruit by chastizing thy self; thou shall not only
henceforth deter others from offending but thy self, that thou may not commit
new ones, and diminish the punishment due for the committed. Thy severity is
not a piece of justice but indulgence; for man's revenge works Gods pardon. Yet
in all thy proceedings be mindful how praise worthy is obedience, and how
profitable discretion, least thou practice austerity unadvisedly, with decrease
of thy own profit, and les increase of Gods honor and service; for the devil
is ready to catch at all turns. Nevertheles be careful above all and at all
times, rather to chastize thy will then thy body: but as far as a prudent
circumspection divested of self love, and the advice of thy superior with
regard to each ones age, condition, strength, inclination, employment, and
necessity shall permit such austerities, thou must without mercy and
self-flattery not be sparing in inflicting them.

O mercyful truth, how can I flatter and pamper my self, if I call to mind the
hardship and torments which my most innocent JESUS sufferd for my sins, and the
pains that are endured by the souls in Purgatory. It would be accounted a
huge privilege, if God should permit a soul in those scorching flames to
redeem its sufferings, as we now may, by undergoing voluntary afflictions. Let
us now make use of this his indulgence. If a creditour should remit to one a
debt of a hundred talents upon this condition, if within a prefixed time he paid
him only one, would he, think you, refuse so gainful a bargain. What a madness
is it in us to choose rather to pay a hundred in the other life then one in
this? But what need of remission of these terrifical pains? the gracefulnes
and beauty which accrues to our flesh in the life to come is a sufficient
incentive.

Remember how glorious and seemly our bodies will be in the future
resurrection: which shall share of comelines and splendor according to the rate
and proportion of their now-present sufferances. The robes which are to vest
them in eternity are woven by the home spun and temporal afflictions of this
life. Some not to appear deformed to the eyes of men have sufferd their limbs
and bones to be cut and rackd half the term of their short life: eternal
beauty is purchasd at a far easier rate; it is not requird that we cut them,
but only that we do not pamper them, and a little vex and annoy them. Our H.
Patriarch S. Ignatius understood this excellently well; who being not as yet
converted to almighty God, to avoid deformity commanded a bone to be cut out,
enduring the pain without a tear, without a sigh, without the least sign of
grief or torture; but after his conversion, he judgd it an act far more
heroical, upon consideration of a future comelines, that is to invest us in the
resurrection, to undergo austerities, to fast for whole weeks together, to
discipline himself thrice a day, to make prolix genuflexions, lying on the bare
ground, wearing a rough hair-shirt, clad in sackcloth, going barefoot, treating
his body in the harshest manner he could both for apparel and rigor of fare.
The austerities also of barbarous hethens destitute of our hopes may make us
blush at our own tepidity: they wore shirts of iron, which goard their bodies
on all sides with sharp pricks; they shretchd themselves upon tenter hooks
singing the whilst hymns in praise of their God; they cast themselves under
the wheels of the chariots which carried their Idols and sufferd themselves to
be bruizd to pieces; they abstaind from meat for many days together. Let it
confound us, that superstition is more powerful then religion, and the
phantasticalnes of men then the love of God.

The XIV. Chapter. That too much love of our flesh hinders the spirit.
IF our flesh although it be born with us, and the blood which enlivens us, be
such domestique enemies as to hinder the life of our spirit, can flesh that is
only allied and consanguinity much avail? The spirit ought to blush at the name
of alliance; how much more at the allies of a fond and disordinate love? If the
flesh be ashamd of its kindred of the same flesh, if it disclaim from obscure
kinsfolks and progenitors, how much more ought the spirit to be ashamd of all
flesh and blood, and such like affinity? The soul ought to renounce her own
flesh which she animates, and why does she disordinately love another, and
that void of life, which servd others, and perchance serves now only for food
and lodging for worms. The noblenes of grace and our alliance with Christ
should in all reason be forcible enough to make us forget and blush at our
nature, without needing the incentives of its baseness, corruption, and loss of
allies.

O divine truth, thou command me to hate my kindred that I may become thy
disciple; If I love them more then thee, how shall I become thy spirit, adhering
to thee, one spirit with thee? Grant me by thy blood that I may not love my
blood but in thine: let the blood of Christ obtain so much at our hands, that
we love not too much the blood of sinful men. Christ by his sacred blood would
redeem us, and become our allie by blood; for he was not ignorant of the
taintures and defects of our blood and our allies by blood, and therefore
vouchsafed a reparation.

The spirit is not bound to follow the laws and dictamens of the flesh: see
then o my soul, that neernes of blood do not taint thy love. God commands thee
to hate thy self and thy own flesh and blood, how can thou then love thy
friends and kinsfolks otherwise then for God, and according to the prescript of
virtue? Thou might with as much reason love gnats or flies as thy allies,
which nevertheles thou seek'st to destroy. Worms are engenderd by the same
carnal parents with thy brethren; why adhor'st thou them with such a loathing
of stomach more then all, and love thy kindred with such affection of heart
more then God? If the ground of this extraordinary love beyond the dictamens of
virtue, be, for that they are engendered of the same Parents: worms have more
from them then thy brethren, for they gave not these their soul, nor are they
totally producd by them; as the others are. Hence kinsfolks and parents love
and regard only the bodies of their kindred, being little sollicitous for what
concerns the good of their soul; it being Gods handywork not theirs. Yea
neither did thou receive thy body from thy parents, but by them from God.
What? love thou thy allies because they are parts of thy common progenitors?
by the same reason thou ought to love any of their disseverd members yea
though infected with a loathsome canker. If thou love them for resemblance
sake, by the same consequence thou might love their statua or any other
ordinary man.

What is it to descend from the same family, but only to have drawn a little
stenchy matter and corruption out of the same stinking fountain, and what is
worse, sin also? Can two with any reason boast because they fell together into
the same puddle, and were bemird with the same dirt? Thy parent begot nasty
worms of a purer nature then thee, they being void of sin, and thou staind
with the filth of original; neither were thou sooner partaker of life then
guilty of death. He that vainly glories in the nobility of his carnal pedigree,
seeks to entitle to honor the disgrace of common nature. What else is
disordinate affection to kindred, but a vaunting of that common baseness, which
we should be ashamd of, and a complacence in the ignominy of sin. The
viciousnes of our nature takes growth and increase by flesh and blood, and our
misery prospers and gains ground; thence the flesh is maximd in principles
wholly repugnant to the spirit. Our soul no sooner begins to be, but by means
of the flesh it is infected with sin, and the contagiousnes spreading still
more and more, it is the prime cause of all our sinful mortalities. We must
renounce both blood and kindred, that we may be freed from this death of sin,
by the eross of Christ which we must carry. We shall not meet with such harsh
encounters as many children and youths have done, who by virtue of his cross
trampled under foot all flesh and blood. S. John Goto a Iaponian of our
Society, at the place of his martyrdom, beholding at an equal distance on the
one hand the tears and sighs and sweet embracements of his weeping parents,
and on the other crosses and gibbets and bloody executioners; nothing dismayed
with such ensigns of cruelty, chose rather to cast himself into the arms of
the cross then those of his kindred; and sleighting courageously all their
enticing allurements, ^ann to that which stood prepared for him; where dying he
purchasd the kingdom of God, which is not bought by flesh and blood.

The XV. Chapter. Of the loss of temporal things.
THe spirit is not much troubled at the loss of temporalities, for which it
has more reason to rejoice. One that lies groaning under a heavy weight, would
he lament if a friend should remove it? That which is to be taken away, its
much better that God take it then death. If divested of all thou be pleasing to
God and he pleased with thee, to what purpose seek thou by the access of
creatures and cares to become grateful to him. Let himself alone content thee
without his gifts and the assurances of temporal commodities. God loves not
what is thine but thee; do not thou love so much what is Gods, as God himself.
Christ dispoild of all mounted the cross, dispoild of all he came out of his
sepulcher; there he left his shroud behind him; naked also he took the city of
heaven and enterd it triumphant. For love of thee who art naked he d^^d naked,
not for love of thy goods and fortu^es; therefore he seeks thee, not them; and
because he seeks thee, he takes these things from thee expecting thee naked in
heaven. He prepares thee for his espousals, while he disposes of what is
thine, and dispoiles thee of all. Why art thou afraid to become poor, if thou
can carry a kingdom in thy heart? The kingdom of God is within you.

O ridiculous cause of tears which takes away the causes of sin! it is a high
piece of impudence against God, to grieve and lament at the loss of temporal
things, which we ought to have in hatred. A woman though never so much a harlot
hides the grief and tears which she sheds for the losses and injuries of the
adulterer, she conceales also the joy she takes in his presence: thou even to
Gods face rejoycest in the prosperity of those things with which thou playest
the naught; thou art sorry for their loss, and dare ask of him either that he
take them not away, or else restore them. What woman surprizd in adultery durst
beg of her husband, that he would not interrupt that unlawful pleasure, when
she should rather beg pardon for the offense? Her husband would deal
mercifully with her, if he only took away the adulterer; and how shameless art
thou who deemst it an injury? what wife could be so impudent as to say to her
husband, bring me that Blackamore that I may enjoy his embracements, for I like
him better then thee: and thou dare be so frontless as to make God the pandar
of thy disorderly concupiscence by begging temporal things of him. When thou
ask any thing of God besides God, thy very prayer betrays thy adulterous
spirit: for it is the selfsame as if thou should say give me, o Lord,
something wherewith to offend thee. It is bad enough to play the fornicatour to
his dishonor, without begging of him the increase of that store, by whose
fruition thou undoes thy self; and such is the preservation of riches, honors,
gusts, colors, and corporeal beauties.

He that were pesterd with a loath some canker would not be offended with the
Chirurgian for lancing the infected part, but of his own accord would profer it
to be cut of, though with grief and horror: but if perchance waking out of his
sleep, he should find it done to his hand imperceptibly, and without any
concurrence of his own, he would esteem it a miraculous cure, and render thanks
to God for it as such. Thou art not depriud of thy joints and limbs but hurtful
darts which poison thy heart; give God thanks that this privation is made
unsensibly and without detriment to thy patience. Thou who should relinquish
all, do not grieve at the loss of some. To make them a matter of merit, thou
should give them to the poor; if God take them why takest't thou it not
patiently? Gerson spoke piously when he said: If thou o father redemand what is
lent,
Take, I restore most freely what is unspent
VVilt thou by thieves, by sword, by fire it take,
All Is one to me; I quit it for thy sake,
Perchance even so more grateful it will be,
Then if in alms the poor had it from me.
If having nothing thou have all, why art thou troubled and vexed? o amiable
truth, invert my perverse heart, and work so in it, that hence forth it may be
noisome to me to have any thing besides thee: disburden me of all earthly
things and first of all of my self, who am the heavyest burden to my self. I
will not, o Lord, have my self, that I may have thee. If many Philosophers
deprived themselves of all these goods for love of themselves, because they
held them base and great hindrances to their course of life, what do I, who for
love of thee repine to be depriud but of some?

O feeble spirit, why grievest thou to be circumcisd in a few superfluous
things, since indeed a few only are necessary. What do I say a few? Nothing but
God is necessary to me. I congratulate with my self; God is my sufficiency who
knows no deficiency. I knew not, o sweet truth, what a comfortable thing it
was to have nothing; yea to know more clearly then the sunshine, that it is
altogether impossible, although I endeavored it never so much, to have any
thing besides God, which can be mine and not Gods alone. But because all things
are his, and he mine, all things are mine, and then most mine, when I have them
least, because they have me least, and I have them better in God, then if I had
them in themselves. If I were truly humble, I should not grieve at the loss of
temporal things: He that is to esteem himself nothing, how can he esteem other
things some thing, which are baser then himself. When one dies all things die
to him; so he that deems himself nothing, deems the whole world nothing All
things are dead to one that is dead, and all contemptible to one truly humble.

The XVI. Chapter. How profitable temptations are.
HOw can thou expect to be crowned if thou do not combat? and how will thou
combat, if thou be not assaulted and tempted? Without an enemy there is no
combat; and without a combat there is no victory. Nay it were disgraceful and
little to our credit, to be crowned without fighting, to triumph without a
victory, and challenge or usurp an honor not due to us; therefore do not take
it ill, that thou art vexed with temptations, for there is the store house of
merit, and occasion of humbling thy self. God has permitted many to fall into
grievous sins, that they might become humble: he dealt more mercifully with
thee, permitting thee only to be tempted. Resist valiantly in Gods quarrel:
although it be troublesome enough, in the very conflict and assault of
temptations, to fight and make resistance, yet the victory over it, is more
delectable then the pleasure of the sin to which it draws thee. Thou must not
compare the sweetness of the sin, with the noysomenes of the temptation, but
with the joy that arises from the victory; nor the combat with the pleasure,
but the fruit of the victory with the practice of the vice. Try a little what it
is to overcome temptations, who have tried so often what it is to be overcome by
them.

When thou prevailest, think that eer long thou art to fight again: when thou
fightest, think that in that victory the enemy is to be totally routed, and
thou to enjoy an eternal peace. Perchance in part it will so fall out: for the
devil put to confusion and flight will not dare to assail thee again, and God
will give thee some truce, as he knows it expedient for thy good. He who
permitted it for thy advantage, knows at what time it is best to free thee. An
artificer takes not gold out of the furnace til it be purgd sufficiently: and
if thou be not purifyd enough and improved, he will not free thee from that
molestation. In time of victory be mindful of the combat, in time of the combat
of victory. Thou shall be in perpetual joy if thou overcome, in perpetual shame
if overcome: why do thou misprize the secure joy and integrity of a good
conscience, for a vain and momentary delight? All the time of this life is
lost, which is not spent in suffering. Do not refuse the trouble of resisting,
since thou must not expect, so long as thou live here, to be without some
trouble. What manner of life soever thou embracest still must thou undergo
some affliction; choose then to be afflicted for virtue. No place is exempted
from all annoiance and contrariety; but it is a happy one and easy to be born,
which is undergone for the purchase of eternal happiness. Even for humane ends,
we sustain a longer conflict, with greater expense of labor, and less fruit.
The term of our temporal labors concludes in a new lab our, and that many
times an eternal one; but this other, as light and short as it is, works in
thee an everlasting poize of glory, to which all the sufferings of this time
bear no proportion at all. At least wise take this tribulation not repiningly,
which thou oughtst to wish for, out of a thirst of greater glory, which will
increase, when it is waterd with that fire. Yea although noe reward were
allotted for it, it is enough that thereby thou art more conformable to the
example of Christ. Great necessity forces thee to fight valiantly and make
resistance: thou art under the eyes of thy judge, and maintainest a quarrel, in
which his honor lies at stake, the Saints and Angels being spectatours. Thou
must resolve rather to dye a thousand deaths then once be vanquishd, and put to
the shame of suffering a foil. How dare thou commit adultery in the presence
of thy spouse, the Hierachies of Angels looking on, and quires of Saints being
eye witnesses of such disloyalty.

It cannot be, but that thou must often be annoid and tempted in this life;
wherefore look well to thy self and stand upon thy guard: although thou have
built in thy self a castle never so strong, and fencd it with the ramparts of
all virtues, expect temptations, because it is founded upon thy own nature,
together with the weak and frail infirmity of thy flesh. What availes it to the
security of a house that its walls are very strong and made of stone, if it have
a ruinous foundation? what imports it that thou art armd from head to foot, if
thou stand upon slippery ground, or ride upon a boggling, unruly, and head
strong horse? well may thou furnish thy self with virtues; but still thou art
environd with flesh, which is more dangerous then a resty and untractable jade,
and more unstable then sand, unles it be solidated in the grace of God.
Wherefore the most universal remedy, and effectuallest antidote against
temptations, is to dispoyl thy self of thy nature, as much as thou can, with
its appetites, to extirpate al self-seeking interests, and become sincere and
untainted with the least blemish of thy own will: for every one is tempted by
his own concupiscence. When we seek temptation we shall find it. He that seeks
himself will find himself: and what will thou find in thy self, who art so
wretched, but wretchedness, trouble, and affliction.

The XVII. Chapter. That we must fear God and hope in him.
Our enemy lays his snares on all sides; there is no part of our life free from
danger, but the greatest of all is our own security, for that comprizeth all
dangers. Who can be secure in the midst of his enemies, or when they border
upon him, and chiefly a domestique enemy? How can thou besecure, since thou
art thy own foe, and have all the world opposite to thee, and all the devils at
a deadly feud with thee? If ten men should come against one, if twice as great
an army aslail a General, he would fear, were he never so valiant; and why art
not thou a fraid since no les then the whole world is an enemy to thee, and
fights against thee?

Thou must also fear God, both because thou have offended him, and may offend
him hereafter. What woman taken in adultery, if her husband let no word of
pardon fall, could choose but be in fear and suspense? thou also must be so, for
thou know evidently that thou have sinnd, but thou have no evidence nor
revelation that it is pardond; neither should thou covet to have, because an
humble fear and solicitude will benefit thee more then such a favor from
heaven. For as those that fear, are wont to be thirsty, so a holy fear of God
will procure a thirst and more earnest desire of pleasing and serving him in all
things. But if thou have not sinnd, or were by some revelation from God
ascertaind of pardon, yet for all that cease not to fear: some after they have
wrought many miracles, and lead a most holy and austere life for diverse years
in the wilderness, have miscarried miserably. The Angels in heaven, Adam in
paradise, Saul and Judas who were chosen by God before so many others, sufferd
at length a lamentable shipwreck. Heron after he was arrived to a high pitch of
perfection and eminent virtue; after labors, sweats, abstinences, and many
other prodigious things (for he eat but once in 3. months space, and then only
a wood sallad, refraining in the interim from all food, besides the most sacred
Body of Christ our Lord) falling at length most lamentably, he haunted taverns,
becoming first a drunkard, and afterward luxurious. Thou art in the vale of
sinners, nor will thou pretend that thou art elected by God, nor art thou
conscious to thy self of so rare sanctity, but on the contrary that thou art a
sinner: how then art thou not afraid of thy self, why do thou not stand in
dread of God? The Angels and Seraphins do tremble, though they know themselves
secure both from sin and damnation, because they see a possibility only of some
creatures being damned; why do not thou tremble since thy damnation is also
possible?

God permits many great Saints to fall, to teach thee that all proceeds from
him, and that we must not presume and confide in our own merits and diligence,
but in him alone. Thou have no reason to rely upon thy self, although thy
merits be not inferior to those of Saint John Baptist, but on God thou may,
though as desperately wicked as Antichrist; and how frequent and enormous
soever thy misdemeanors are, thou have no reason at all to despair or be
dejected, but must trust so much the more in God, by how much thou have les
reason to trust in thy self. This is true divine hope when a man confides not
at all in himself; the more he fears God, the more will he trust in him. S.
Prosper said very well: He that from fears himself will free
God must his Sanctuary be.
How much more just any one is, and how much more enamoured upon God, so much
more anxious is he with fear: for he knows how much he deserves to be loved
and reverened; insomuch that a man ought to wish and beg to be in torments
through all eternity, that so he might in some sort be thankful to him for so
great goodness; but because the multiplicity of his defects makes him fall far
short of such desires, he is siezd with no small fear, he not doing what he
ought and might do; and for that reason he is afraid least he loose God, which
renders him so much more anxious, by how much he knows him more worthy of love.

Nevertheles the anchour of his hope, must be cast in him that created him, as
well in great as little fluctuations of the mind. Our confidence for the most
part fails in this, that in great affairs it flies to God, as if in small ones
we were able to do some what of our selves. As we lin petty as weighty matters,
we must place our sole hope in him, because we are wholly impotent of our
selves to do any good. Some faulter because they can hope for mean things, but
dare not extend it to greater, either because they hold themselves unworthy, or
else for that they frame two mean a conceit of Gods excellency, and the merits
of JESUS. What makes thee doubt or be dismayed in the pursuit of virtue and
eminent sanctity, as if grace were to be obtaind by thy own strength and
deserts, or God were of an envious, or covetous, or needy disposition? The arm
of God and not thy forces enable thee to follow virtue. God is benevolent, he
envies not thy good. His divine riches are so priviledgd, that to be liberal,
it is not requird he should be good and a lover of us, he loses nothing when
he gives, he improverisheth not his exchequer and revenue, he does not lessen
his stock but augments it. If any man had a treasure of that nature, were he
never so miserly and hide bound, he would not deny what were askd; but the more
covetous he were, the more bountiful would he be, and would take it for an
affront, if a trifle were demanded. Who is so ill naturd as to deny light,
although he had never seen one ask it before; and why? because by giving it he
loses nothing, his light remaining as entirely to himself as formerly. Why
shall not we without presumption expect such a liberality from the father of
lights, from whom each best gift discends? We injure the Divinity by not
hoping from so good a God and our father, what one might hope from the worst of
men though a barbarian unknown to us. Do not doubt of obtaining thy request, he
has promisd far more then thou requirest. Do not mistrust his promise, he has
done stranger things then he promised. He promised thee his kingdom; but he
became a servant for thee; he promisd that thou should live with him, but he
sufferd death for thy sake: it is more wonderful that God died and became a
servant, then that man should live and reign in glory: now then we have a
pledge, which is an assurd one. Wherefore sometimes thou do not so much purely
trust in God as tacitly presume of thy self, when thy hope pitcheth but upon
some things, and those not great, nor all. Of thy self thou art as impotent in
order to small things as great, but in God equally powerful to both.

O Lord, how fondly proceeds he who hopes not great matters from thee? for what
in respect of man is but hope, in respect of thee, is wish and desire. If one,
o my soul, should desire thee to do a thing, and again and again entreat thee,
and offer his assistance, and for that end out of the ardour of his desire
should expose his life to manifest danger: if thou at length had a mind to do
it, and now nothing were wanting but his concurrence, who had so long and
earnestly sought and labourd it; would thou not go to him with an assurd
confidence of having redress, and beg his assistance, especially if he had
before promisd it. This is our case with God, whom thou must importune with
winning entreaties, and a full confidence of relief. On his side there is no
cause of fearing a repulse: how can it be that he will deny, what he so
earnestly desires should be asked. Do thou expect to be heard, God expects
that thou cry to him. Fear him alone, because of thy self thou never art secure
in this life so beset with dangers. Although one lead never so holy and
virtuous a life, he shall not want entrapments: for the devil impugnes such
with greater spleen and malice, because their manner of life is so very
conspicuous: A thief will rather steal pearls and precious stones then peebles
or flints. God permits these dangers for our exercise of humility: for this
life being most precious, he will have it most humble. He permits us to be so
many ways assaulted, that we may still have dependence on him, and so be most
safe when we think ourselves least safe, and remain so still by trusting in him,
if we never venture to presume of our selves. In this manner, dangers render
our life secure; thus by fearing only God, thou quitst thy self of all fear;
and if thou fearst him only, thou shall more confidently hope all things from
him: Hope and fear of God are two admirable companions: they extremely help one
another, and thou must never forsake them; they will help thee not a little, if
in thee they help themselves: for one without the other will little avail either
thee or it self, yea of times proves very prejudicial.

The XVIII. Chapter. That we cannot but suffer something and of the good of
patience.
HE that cannot avoid suffering must seek to furnish himself with patience. Why
do we not fortify, our selves with this most powerful virtue, since it is
impossible not to suffer something in this world, God wonderfully disposing it
so. He that hopes to avoid the troubles of this life, presumes to countermine
the divine providence: it is so orderd, so decreed, and all for our good. God
cannot be deceivd in his appointments, nor frustrated in his disposals. The
occasion of our suffering is born with us, because we are born with sin; nor
will it be removd, till we be taken out of this place of sinning. God could
have placed us in heaven without any more ado to himself or us, at the first
cast, as they say, without the long circumference of this miserable life; he
could with the same facility produce bread, that he does the ear and wheat:
but that man might take pains and suffer some what, he so orderd, that bread
must necessarily be made of corn: He would have labors be precedent to glory,
that he might honor us the more, and heap upon us the boons of his
liberality, by making them as it were a due debt. O the gracious proceeding of
God, that he would become our debtor! He that covets to be rankd among the
predestinate, let him not refuse to suffer, it being the mark and cognizance of
the elect, if imbracd with patience. It was truly said by one, that it was a
wonder all the stones under the feet of those who are to be damnd are not turned
into roses, so to mitigate the miseries they are to suffer. But on the
contrary, it is more to be wonderd that under the feet of those who are to be
saved, they are not changd into thorns, and leaping from thence upon their
heads, do not punish them for their offenses; such unspeakable fruit shall they
reap of their so short labor.

What is the reason, since Christ's redemption is most copious, that it took
away sin, and would not also take away those annoinances which in this life
arise from sin, but because afflictions are beneficially sal^tiferous. How
should we ever aspire to eternal life, if this momentary were pleasant and
caseful, since we now love it, though full of miseries, and conceive but remiss
desires of the others beatitude. That blessed and elevated man F. Baltazar
Alvarez said very well, that tribulations are so many wingd horses to carry us
a main pace toward heaven. How much the more we debar our senses of their
delights by suffering, sorrowing, or sickness, so much the more are we forced to
fly to God, and seek true goods in heaven. The tops of trees if the under
branches be cut away rear themselves much higher; and our mind by depressing
and keeping sense under, flourishes and takes better growth. After the lapse
of Adam God found out the rare invention of suffering, a heavenly devise
against sin. An invention worthy of God was labor and affliction, that we
might be in our body as if we were bodiles, and by that means our relish
might be the purer, our mind being disaffected to sense, and the pleasures of
the flesh, that by suffering it might be preservd from all contagion by its
passions and desires. It is a heavenly devise to supply the commodity and
prerogative of death, that we may not be taken with these fading and sensible
things. Patience was extolld by the Philosophers, because they esteemd
suffering, which it mitigates, an evil: but because suffering is extreme good,
therefore I say that patience is good, it making us not shun, but persist in
what is good.

God is neither ignorant nor unwise (far be such a blasphemy from us) but the
refinedst wisdom; nevertheles he chose afflictions for his best-beloved Son,
he chose them for his Mother; for the Apostles companions of his Son, and
others his friends. That zealous and devout Father Christopher Rodriguez was
wont to say; that he would have no body to compassionate him in his sorrows
and sufferings, but rather congratulate and jointly with him give thanks to
God: for as one friend shakes hands with another and pressingly wrings them in
token of friendship, til they ache again; so God with his hand presses his
friends and wrings them, which is an argument of signal love. Punishments many
times are greater tokens of benevolence then gifts and benefits, because in
that case the punishments themselves are the greatest favors and most
beneficial. Reprehension and chastizement is a more pregnant sign of charity
then indulgence and cockering. One benevolous to foraigners and aliens will be
found more easily then a reprover and rebuker; but chastizement is only usd
toward friends and domestiques. Indulgence and liberality extend themselves
even to enemies; correction only to children and familiars: wherefore the
punishments of this life are surer pledges of love then the favors of fortune.

Tribulations are not always the penalty of delinquency: although no fault
precede they are good; and do thou bear them patiently, whether they be
inflicted immediately by God or by men, and take them so much more joyfully, by
how much less thou seemst to have deservd them. Even as we ought to rejoice
much more if God afflict us, and not for our sins; so ought we also to be more
patient and joyful, when we are persecuted, slanderd, and revild by men, if we
be conscious of our own innocence, and that we suffer without desert. What
cross would thou rather choose, and with whom to dye? with the theives on
theirs, or with Christ on his, The thieves crosses had their merits, they were
punnishd for their sins: but the cross of Christ was a cross of innocence, it
was not erected for delinquency, that were horrid blasphemy; therefore thou must
glory in no cross but that of our Lord Jesus Christ. Our nature fell and in its
fall it lost its rectitude and uprightnes; it must be repaird, renewd, and
rectifyd, by hard and heavy duties. The hammer is hard and heavy, but it moulds
and fashions pieces of plate, which it makes beautiful to the eye, and
rectifies what was crooked and amiss.

Tribulation carries a kind of divine authority a long with it, in so much that
the H. Ghost breaths more effectually many-times by it then by the Prophets and
H. Scriptures. We are sometimes refractory to the word of God, and the good
admonitions of H. Fathers and Doctors; but tribulations, I know not how, make
God when he speaks, be so applauded, that without any more ado we yeald and
obey. He that desires to be heard speaking, by knocking, with his fist, or
making a noise with his hand* ^bids silence and gains his auditory; so God
striking with his, makes us attentive to what he says. Pharao resisted him
speaking by his servant Moses; he became pliable and obedient, when he
afflicted him by any contemptible creature. The people would not hearken to
Jeremy, til captivity at length made them relent. No body is deaf nor obstinate
to tribulation: it is Gods eloquence and the chair of the H. Ghost. it is a
sacred thing, and as it were the Altar and throne of God, although harsh and
repugnant to flesh and blood. O how awful and terrible is that place! but in
very deed, it is no other then the house of God and gate of heaven, the
sanctuary of virtues, whether we fly from vice, as into a sacred place of
refuge.

Go to then, o soul dear to Christ, fly not affliction as if it were venomous:
it cannot hurt thee; thy JESUS has already tasted it; it is neither evil nor
untoothsome, when God is there to season it: how can the bitterness of a drop of
gal be perceivd in an Ocean of honey? whatsoever God sends, or howsoever he
dispose of me, I shall never want this comfort, that it is pleasing to him. Let
this be a solid comfort to thee; and yet if thou suffer without comfort do not
shun it. Let it confound us that we love God les then dogs do their masters.
Although a dog be chid away, although beaten, although stoned, yet he cannot be
kept of, but comes more and more, he follows him, he fawnes upon him: so must
we serve and approach to God, by how much the more we are beaten and afflicted:
for if these should cease, our chief occasion of meriting would cease, nor
could we give a sufficient proof, that we truly love him, and not serve him as
mere hirelings.

OF ADORATION IN SPIRIT AND TRVTH. THE II. BOOK.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of diligence in Prayer.
I Am not worthy, o most sweetnaturd God, who being ineffable art more affable
then any, I am not worthy to be the object of thy eyes. How would thou have
me appear in thy presence and speak to thee, o humble majesty, who disdainest
not the speeches and prayers of men, yea desire and exhortest us to pray
without intermission! and such is man's clownishnes that he loathes thee and thy
conversation, and makes no other esteem of thee, the lover of souls, then one
would do of a deadly enemy. What is the first affront one puts upon his enemy,
but to deny him speech? and we, o sweetest truth, will not converse with thee,
because we love not truth: for what else would men do, if thou hated them, but
what they now do when thou most tenderly love them? as one enemy asks not
advice of another, concerning his affairs and dangers, though he be held never
so wise; so men in the midst of perils and nonplus of redress, will not seek
to be advisd by thee, giving no ear to thy oracles and instructions, with
which thou do furnish us in time of prayer. Passionate men choose rather to
perish, then beg relief for their want of their mortal enemy, that they may
not be forcd to speak to him: and such an obstinate malepertnes do they use
toward thee, o affable ineffability; they are often pressd with want, they are
afflicted, they perish, because they demand not redress of thee, nor will speak
to thee: what greater sign of enmity, then that two living in the same house
will not speak to one another? man lies if he say he loves God and does not
speak to him, residing in him. Dumb freindship is not distinguishd from hatred.

God from all eternity, o ungrateful spirit, cast his thoughts upon thee and
thine: it is but good reason, that we in this short term of life, consider his
divine beauty, and approach him, who would be so near to us, that he united
himself to our nature, and lodges so often in our breast: and that he might
not depart from us, when he ascended to his father, he invented that artificial
master piece of his divine Sacrament, that he might still remain with us. But
our impudence and rechlesnes, found also out a way, that when we come to God by
prayer, even then we leave him, and become absent, by letting our thoughts
wander abroad, and busy themselves with distractions: we procure to be estrangd
from him, that when he comes to us in his most amiable Sacrament, we fly to the
vain thoughts of other affairs, and having entertaind such a guest, we quit
the room and appear no more.

But if, o man, thou carry not this reverential respect to God, have at least
commiseration upon thy self; let thy own necessity persuade thee to a love of
prayer, if love of God force it not. Thou art nothing but ignorance, nothing
but indigency; in prayer alone will thou both grow rich and wise: in prayer God
will open thy eyes, to the discovery of wisdom, and thy hands to receive
relief for thy needines. Our prayers are as pleasing to God, as it is
acceptable to him to give, that which is most pleasing of all the fruits of a
beneficial nature. God did not create the world out of avarice, that he might
have more then he had: but out of munificence, that he might have to whom to
give: for this reason he created all things, that he might have both to whom
and what to give. But because we have made our selves unworthy of his
liberality, the end for which the universe was created failing, our prayers are
grateful to God, because they make satisfaction for our unworthines by sin, by
giving occasion to him of doing for their sakes, that for which he made all
things, which is to be beneficent; in so much that it seems in a manner to be
the same, to pray God and restore the universe. God cannot hold nor contain
himself from being liberal, he is perpetually coveting to be beneficial; and
therefore he exhorts us to pray without intermission, because he desires to be
giving without intermission. Why do we frustrate his desire and our own good?
beg importunely; for this importune impudency in begging is grateful to him.

God many times differs to grant our demands, although he be desirous to give,
either because we ask after an unworthy manner, or not sorrowful for our sins
or too confident of our own merits, or not with due reverence, or begging
temporal things too earnestly, and spiritual too remisly: and for the most part
we demand such things, and after such a fashion, that the very granting our
request is sometimes deservedly its punishment. Were it a decent manner of
asking any thing of a parent, if the murderer of his only Son, carrying in his
hands, as yet imbrued with blood, the sword wherewith he murderd him, should
beg of the father the Sons inheritance? what an unparalleld impudence were
this? he deservd to have taken from him, what wa^ granted before, not to
receive new courtesies. Men frequently proceed thus; either not detesting their
faults, or remaining impenitent: they were our sins that murderd Christ. We
must go to pray pure and undefiled, and not presuming upon our own merits, but
acknowledging our unworthines, dress our selves in the garments of our brother
JESUS, according to the craft of Jacob, that so we may receive a blessing from
God. Let us cloth our selves with the merits of JESUS which are ours; for he
lent us them: not that they make us formally just and grateful to God, but
because they are the cause of our sanctification. Being so apparreld, let us
appear in prayer, using the mediation of his only-begotten, begging of God what
he cannot deny us: then thou begst not for thy self, but for Christ and the
favor is done to him. If thou make account thou give to Christ what a beggar
asks in the name of Christ; the same is done by the heavenly father. If thou
be moved when it is demanded for Christ's sake; how much more readily will God
be moved to give an alms? is he less merciful then thou art miserable?

Nevertheles many times thou art not effectual with the father, although thou
allege the merits of his Son; because the merits themselves and sufferings of
Christ are not effectual with thee. They say, if an Orator would persuade his
auditory he must first of all persuade himself? Thou can not complain of God,
if he grant thee not those graces which thou demandest by the Passion of his
Son; since thou will not quit thy faults and daily defects for the same; how
can thou expect to incline the will of the father to thee for the blood of
his Son, if for the same thou will not yet quit thy own will. If thou ask after
a les decent manner, how can thou hope to gain thy suit by a petition that is
worthy of punishment? men expect to be petitiond, not only civilly but
submissively; and thou presumest to be essicacious with God being proud-harted,
immodest, distracted? Learn of Christ in the garden how to pray; lying
prostrate on the ground, each joint as is were shivering and quaking, and all
bathd in a bloody sweat. If he had taken thee a part with him, to pray together
to his heavenly father, the quires of Angels standing amazd, and accompanying
that Angel who comforted JESUS himself; would thou also sleep then as the
three Apostles did, or employ thy thoughts about the toys and trifles of
worldly commodities, beholding Christ in the interim in such a plight for thy
sins, and the Angels so absorpt in a reverential amazement. Thou that art about
to entreat for thy own offenses with tears, why will thou busy thy mind with
sportive entertainments? how earnestly does a lawyer plead before a man, in a
cause which concerns another life and death? be not thou wrechlesly slothful
before God, while thou pleadest for thy own crimes.

Consider also what thou ask: what parent if his child ask a stone or
Scorpion, will not be readier to give him an egg or a loaf of bread! why
complainest thou of God, if demanding temporal things, which are a poison,
wherewith thou will intoxicate thy self, and play the mad man against him, he
grant thee spiritual? one must not give a sword to a frantic person to hurt
another, although he demand his own; how much les, if it be to hurt him that
gives it? why do thou judge God so wicked or foolish, that asking what is not
thy own, thou would have him give thee weapons, to hurt both thy self and
him? learn yet further of Christ how to pray: o most amiable and loving truth,
let it not be as I will, but as thou: thy will be done in all; thou knows best
what is expedient. Even spiritual gifts also are sometimes differd, because we
ask them not with a due esteem, neither are they sought with like ardour and
desire that temporal things are. He asks a little unworthily, who asks
great things but coldly and remissly. God will have us ask seemly what beseems
him to give; and by differring the gift, he enkindles our desire and disposes
us more worthily. Men think to draw God to their frivolous ends, with any kind
of worship, and sooth him up with any piece of service, and still him as we do
a child with a rattle. Therefore it behooves God, not to be always too facil,
but give worthily gifts worthy of his han^^, either preventing all our
prayers, or if he e^^^ct them, expecting worthy ones. For when of his own
accord he will not impart his gifts unles entreated, he does it not for want
of liberality, but out of a desire of our profit, and a trial and exercise of
our affection. Therefore it is but good reason, that he expect complete prayers,
and seeming desires, and not render his grace contemptible by giving it to him,
who shows he contemnes it while he begs it so tepidly; for we value not
slightly what we compass with difficulty, and procrastinated hopes have a more
welcome issue. God for the most part changes our petitions into other favors
more hidden from us, paying us, but in another coin, or else he expects a
fitter opportunity: for if he should impart them now, perchance we should swell
a little with pride, and sooner be obnoxious to ingratitude.

Thou must also pray for others: he that petitions for another, has the first
share and fore taste of the favor obtained. He that will anneale another, dips
first of all his own fingar in the oil pot. But be sure thou be always
mindful of thy own needines: thou must like Lazarus, beg an alms of God and
his Saints and Angels, covetting to fill thy self with the crumbs of celestial
blessings. Travail about, walk from door to door, among the ranks of Angels
and quires of Saints, begging every where an alms of grace, and chiefly of the
most B. Virgin Mary, who has ample power given her to divide it forth; who
being as it were the mistress of the family in the house of God, she carries at
her girdle the keys of mercy. Cry aloud, show thy soars, thy nakedness, and
mendicity. Be confounded that any beggar, should demand more earnestly relief
of his temporal necessities, then thou redress of thy spiritual; and procure to
comprize in thy self the importunity of all beggars together, in order to
obtain the least degree of grace. One must with more eagarnes, seek relief of
the least spiritual necessity, then of all temporal ones together, were they
all pressing upon him. Blush to see so many needy souls, that groan with thee
under the same calamities, with how great humility and plenty of tears they
beg redress, while thou sits with dry eyes, rejoicing amidst such want of
spirit, insensible of thy pressing necessities. Humble thy self as beggars do,
win affection, expect patiently, urge importunely, be only not impudent in
wearying God with prayers, that at least thy importunity may force an alms.

The II. Chapter. That we must not intermit our practice of prayer.
AS much as the soul surpasses the body so much must we prefer prayer before
all other corporal conveniences. What a deal of care in our lodging, bedding
apparel and daily sustenance is requird to preserve life and our bodily
health; much more will be requisite for the life and safety of our soul, which
has more numerous and heavier enemies then the body. The body is annoid with
the injuries of the weather, and the pinching gripes of hungar: but the soul
has even these very enemies of the body for its enemies, yea and also its
commodities, and the body it self, the whole world moreover and hell with all
its host, and sometimes the very favors from heaven, and its own virtues, if
it know not how to use and conserve them in humility. Against all these, it
has but one only help and refuge, and that is prayer. How then can it be
neglected or intermitted at any time, since the body, being better fencd
against fewer enemies will have almost the whole day spent upon it, and that
custom never omitted. Many because they find themselves firm and constant in
their good purposes, think they can suffer no prejudice by intermitting the
exercise of prayer for some laudable employment* let them beware, let them
beware they be not deceived: perchance they will faulter although they find
themselves strong and able. He that is lusty of body, if he should forbear
eating to gain more time for labor, would without all doubt at length decay,
and find his body in a weak condition: so he that experienceth himself constant
in the service of God, if he detract time from prayer, to spend it in other
exterior employments though pious; will at length grow faintish, and easily
discover his own imbecility. We must never omit prayer, because we never omit
our corporal refection: and if at any time it be omitted, we are careful
afterward to make amends. If one for three or four days together, should
refrain from sleep, out of a mere covetousnes of laboring, in a short time he
would go mad: five hours or more are necessary each day for our corporal
rest: the repose of our soul is prayer: very many, because quitting their good
purposes, they betake themselves so late to it, become giddy-braind, and
besides themselves.

Our prayer which is the food and repose of our soul, must be quiet and free
from disturbance: for we take our bodily sustenance, though corruptible, and
shortly to be together with our selves the food of worms, sitting and with
quietness. The benefit of prayer is not stinted to that hour or time we are at
it, but has influence upon the whole day. A little leaven seasons the whole
batch, and a little prayer will season the whole day. Prayer is not only
beneficial, for that respit of time wherein we pray, because we spend it well
and to our own advantage; but much more in regard of the whole day, that we
loose it not wholly. A long times profit depends upon a short moment: if thou will make purchase of the ensuing day, let thy rising in the morning be
seconded at least with one hours prayers After a due and fervent prayer, one
is replenishd with holy illustrations, which interlace themselves ever and anon
amidst our succeeding employments. After a great noise is past, there remains
a ringing and buzzing in our ears, and the days actions become frequently the
subject of our dreams: so from the repose of prayer, certain images of what
past in it, diffuse themselves through our daily affairs, and holy
inspirations do frequently recur: he that looks steadfastly upon the sun, what
soever he beholds afterward, seems to carry a resemblance thereof. Although
one know completely what appertains to his duty, prayer conduces much to
ground him more solidly in it. Truths themselves gotten by prudence,
experience, learning and reading do penetrate more profoundly when in prayer
they come from above: corn fields prosper better when they are waterd from
heaven, then by the inlet of a brook or fountain: the higher a stone falls the
more impetuous is its motion, and makes a deeper dint in the ground. The same
truth coming from heaven, strikes the heart with a deeper impression and excites
more vigorously to fervor and devotion. They are our wicked propensions, that
mislead us from the paths of virtue, and this obstacle is removed by the
benefit of prayer, which by devotion begets inclinations to good, and is a kind
of fuel which feeds the ardour of doing well, preventing the fuel of sin. But
why do I insist so much upon the advantages of prayer? its enough for me, o
divine truth, that thou show thy self most affable in it, and most bountiful
toward me: there thou discoverst thy self, there I embrace thee; and repose as
in thy arms in this tumult of affairs. Thou show thy self in it o
clear-shining truth, to my endarkned spirit as in thy throne, that it may
harbor no guile nor deceit.

Our prayer must also be prolix, while health and age permits, that so we may
supply for the time of sickness when we cannot, and must always think we have
prayed but little. That most elevated man and great zealot of God F. Didacus
Martinius, made every day with great diligence and strict account 4. thousand
acts of love to God; and added a part another sum, purposely to make recompense
for the time of his last sickness, if perchance then he should not be able, as
he desird, to attend to God: he moreover spent every day ten hours with great
recollection in conversing with him by fervent prayer. That devout Father
Michael Sosa when old age and intensenes of pain in his long and last sickness
interrupted his exercise of prayer, exhorted his Brethren and complaind of
himself saying: make, make amends, o Brethren, for all remissnes in the
exercise of prayer, while age and strength enables you, providing thus against
the future injuries of nature, when ye would pray, and neither age nor sickness
will permit it: I am sorry now that I cannot pray when I would; I am sorry I
did not when I could. So did he accuse himself, whose mind was so absorpt in
God, that he would walk up and down like one in an ecstasy: when he was about to
wash his hands, forgetting to turn the cock of the lavatory, he often rubd
them, as if the water had fallen upon them, and afterward wipt them with the
towel as if they had bin washd. Sometimes being transported in spirit, he
sufferd a rapture for 8. hours together, and being come to himself he thought
it no more then a little quarter. O confusion, and our benumdnes! we that stand
in far greater need of praying, are quickly weary, and think that short respit
of time, which we bestow upon God, or rather purchase to our selves, very long;
but when it is lost discoursing with men, it seems but short: and if we
persist as long in prayer as worldlings sit at a banquet, we think we have done
more then enough.

The III. Chapter. How efficacious the grace and favors of Christ are.
I Wish any one knew and could utter, what my mind aims to conceive and as yet
cannot! O how much I labor to comprize in my heart and cannot sufficiently
comprehend it! Grant, o eternal truth, that I may clearly discover something
that I have in Christ and the immense riches that are reservd for me in my
JESUS. We know not, we know not, o mortals, what treasures we possess in
Christ! The brethren of Joseph were afflicted with famine, because they were
ignorant that he raignd in Egypt: why are we afflicted? our brother reigns in
heaven. Rejoice all ye sinners and beggars, ye that are in calamity and
distress, because that brother of yours, that loves you more tenderly then does
all the world besides, who of all others sticks closest to you, is highest in
Gods favor, is most wealthy, is God, and for your sakes has bin afflicted. I
congratulate, I congratulate with sinners, because Christ in himself has most
fully satisfied the divine justice, frustrating all its hope of making a prey
of you, and this without any double dealing, yea in all rigor of equity.
Christ is the comfort of divine mercy, and the treasure of Gods clemency. I
congratulate with the needy, I congratulate with the miserable, I congratulate
with the distressed; because it is your most loving brother, who has the
dividing of the divine treasures as he thinks good, who gives charters of
beatitude, and grants of true joy. God has placd for master of his family not
a forraigner, not an Angel, but your very own brother.

Christ is our most faithful friend: for when we, as being naked and
miserable, were altogether unworthy to appear before the king; he that we
might come into the presence of God our sovereign, not only not unworthily but
after a most honorable manner, and so obtain mercy at his hands, he I say,
clad us with a most rich purple died in his own precious blood, to wit, divine
grace merited for us by his Passion, and remaining inherent in us. He satiates
our hungar with his own Body, he quenches our thirst with his sacred blood, he
enricheth our penury with the ample treasure of his inexhaustible merits. If
thou will know how much Christ's merits are thine, and how thou may employ
them to gain grace, and offer them to God to obtain mercy, hence gather it;
to wit, because he reput'd thy sins his. It was said in the person of Christ;
the words of my offenses. Yet we must not think his merits so to be ours, as
that it is not needful to have any of our own, but may be saved by sitting still
and doing nothing: for Jesus died not that we might be negligent but fervent
and zealous in the divine service. Even as the soul of Christ could not suffer
damnation for thy sins unles he committed some himself, which was impossible;
so neither shall thou be saved by the merits of Christ, unles thou do good
works and have grace inherent in thee, which nevertheles is also from Christ.
He gave us then his merits, that we might use them as our own, to appease Gods
wrath and indignation, no otherwise then he took upon him our sins as his own
to make satisfaction; he grieved he deplored them, he satisfyd for them as if
they had been his own delinquencies. He gave us not his mere naked works but
cloathd in their robes of dignity, that is, as performd by a divine person:
insomuch that as he took upon him our sins, as committed by most vile and
abject creatures his servants; so we should partake of his merits, as treasurd
up by the Son of God equal to his heavenly father.

Let us imitate Christ in as much as he appropriated to himself our faults,
that we may learn how to use his merits and appropriate them to our selves.
Deem o sinner, Christ's merits thine, and upon that account make thy demands
with great confidence: for this is to ask in the name of Christ. His merits
given to us are far more available to this, then if we had done the same our
selves and had been crucified for the glory of God: for in that case they would
not be the works of God but man a sinner. Lo then how much thou art obligd to
Christ, who took upon him thy sins, and gave thee his merits; who quitted thee
of so great evil, and bestowd upon thee so great good. These two scores upon
which he demands this satisfaction of thee, are infinitely obligatory; to wit,
that as he satisfyd for thy sins as if he had committed them; so thou must not
offer the merits of Christ's otherwise to God and procure grace by them, then as
if they were thy own.

O most sweet IESV, that I could but understand, what benefit and advantages
have and do accrue to us so wretched from thee! we were monsters of horror;
and now by thy means we are become a spectacle grateful to God: we were in the
very mud and bottom of hell; and now we are in the bosom, I will not say of
Abraham the father of nations, but of God thy father: we were in the throat of
the infernal dragon; now we are in the heart of God himself: we were an object
unworthy of the divine eyes; now we are worthy of his embracements: we were
slaves comdemnd to the prison of hell; now by thee we shall be crowned kings of
heaven. Who can conceive whither we had precipitated our selves, and to what
thou have exalted us? our misery ought to have been thoroughly contented, if
thou had only freed us out of hell; but not thy mercy, unles thou had also
elevated us above the heavens and so many Angels: thou had done toomuch, when
we were involud in an irreparable misery, and so desperately, that all redress
seemd wholly impossible, if thou had only obtaynd of thy father a surcease of
his anger; but thou gottest us also our pardon: thou had done too much in
getting our pardon; but thou moreover ga inedst us his good will, his love and
his favor: thou had done toomuch and a thing deserving admiration, if thou
had only won his good will; but thou obtainedst for us also gifts and
graces: thou had done too much, and what might worthily make us amazd if thou
had obtaind for us but the least gift at Gods hand; but thou have gotten us
his kingdom and thy own inheritance. thou had done too much, if thou had
effected this but once; but thou have effected that it should be given us
innumerable times, if we faulterd so often, supposing we had recourse to thee
by true penance: lastly thou obtainedst for us whatsoever God possesses, and
vouchsafedst to admit us, as loathsome and abominable as we were, to share with
thee in thy patrimony. Behold, o man, from whence Christ has deliverd thee,
and where he has installd thee! if thou unwittingly and at haphazard had
freed another not from death, but some casual distress, what thanks and
gratitude would thou expect from him? savage beasts are grateful even for
some benefits: a fierce lion, for one thorn pulld out of his foot, was mindful
of the good turn after a long time and requited it: and why make we the immense
benefits conferrd on us by Christ, of an inferior rank to those of wild
beasts, and rather stand not amazd and at a nonplus through desire of
gratitude? but perchance Christ was obligd to do for us what he did, or did it
with case and with out expense? nay we were his enemies; and the business was
most difficult and desperate; and the atchieving it cost him no less then the
price of his blood and precious life.

O Immense charity of God, what have thou done for hatefulman! when we were in
an impossibility of salvation, and knew not which way to turn our selves, thou
o most merciful God, foundest out a remedy, a devise, a stratagem of
stupendous mercy: and when the compassing of it was out of our reach, thou thy
self would execute the design. But what kind of remedy was it? what captive
durst wish, much less ask of his king, that to gain his freedom he would become
prisoner? Thou, o my JESUS, were content for our sakes to do more, then we
durst either hope or wish. Thou being the king of glory, were bound for us hand
and foot; and treated as one that pleads guilty, yea condemnd and executed for
us thy enemies, that stood impeachd of high treason. It were an act worth
admiration, if an Emperor should daigne to visit a peasant cast into prison
for his misde meanours; and how much more if his own betraier? what if he
should quit his throne for him, and in a disguisd habit remain prisoner, while
the malefactor made an escape? Thou did this, o most loving JESUS. His
praise is never sufficiently renownd, who made himself captive to redeem his
friend; nor that servant, who to rescue his king, exposd himself both to his
enemies and death; nor that parent who lost one of his own eyes, to save one of
his sons, who otherwise had lost both. But what wonder if a friend for a
friend, a servant for a king, a parent for his child did such a feat? how much
more did my JESUS for me not a friend but an enemy, not his king but a base
slave of the devil, not his child, but a child of perdition. If he had pardond
me my trespass, it had been enough; but he relinquishd his throne, he lost his
life, and over and above enthrond me in his kingdom. If he had only canceld the
disgrace and infamy of my sin, he had showed a rare clemency, though the
punishment due for it had stood good; but he has pardond the penalty, and
replenishd me both with joy and glory. Are these things perchance false, or is
faith infallible? if they be truth it self, how chances it, that while we
relate them with our mouth, we are not affected toward the person of Christ
with our heart, who gave us his heart, and inclind and still inclines the heart of
God toward us? O how dear ought JESUS to be to us, by whom we are so dear to
God? how much beloved by us, for whom we are so much beloved by God!

Consider what great good thou enjoyest in Christ: infallibly God would not
endure us and our impudency, if Christ were not our mediator: he beautifies
our deformity and renders us comely in the eyes of God: he cloathd our nakedness
with grace and attired us in his own robes, when we were so miserably tatterd,
that we could not appear in the presence of God; and enricht us with his
merits that we may appear. How gratefuly did he take it at S. Martins hands,
that he gave him but the one half of his cloak. JESUS gloried and made as it
were a flourish before the Angels with that torn rag: and we are ungrateful to
him, who clad us in purple and a divine garment, when we were naked, unworthy,
and infected with leprosy: not that he might only cloak the soar, but
thoroughly cure the loathsome disease; and being washd, like Naaman as it were
in a Jordan, make us truly sound and beautiful: neither do we prize the
garment, and grace, and his merits for whose sake his Father tolerates us,
takes notice of us, and, which is the chief, makes us the object of his love.
O ungrateful mortals! how comes it to pass, that your hearts are not forced
after Christ who is our treasure our riches, and our beauty? without him we are
deformed and unsightly to the eyes of God, by him comely and conspicuous.

God stands proportionably in order to mankind, and Christ its redeemer, as
does our eye to its object, which is color and light. Without light all
colors are invisible, they are void of all beauty; it by only illuminating
them beautifies them: so Christ who was a light to the revelation of nations,
makes God look regardingly upon us men, now visible and sightly to his eyes,
who were buried before in darkness and the shadow of death. Light is the first
and chief in the class of visible things, very agreeable to good eyes; by it all
other things are seen and only seen so far forth as they partake of it: for
only with light, or in light or by light, colors are discernable: light
resides in the color, with our eye, and in the space intermediate betwixt
both. So Christ is that which is the first and most visible in the divine eyes;
most grateful and acceptable to those of his Father; other men only are so, for
as much as they partake of him: by him, and with him, and in him they are
conspicuous; it is he that disposes them and makes them regardable before God.
All the luster and grace of colors consists in light, and by its means has
its being; and all the glory, honor, and grace of men is by Christ, it is all
his blessing and benevolence. Mark how regardles the choicest and lovelyest
rarities are by night, they are as if they were a sleep or rather not at all:
so soaring spirits and subtle wits without Christ lie shrouded in darkness, and
are no more regardable then a nothing. Why then do thou glory in any thing
besides him? without light fair and foul is all one, and both of them in a
sorry condition: without grace by Christ a sharp and piercing wit and a dull and
doltish one is much the same, and all other endowments of nature, art, and
industry are no more then if they were not at all. The heavens also and the sun
are only beneficial by their light, by which they effect all their productions;
so God by Christ alone communicates all the blessings he imparts to man. Of all
our sublunary simple qualities the heavens admit none besides light; so neither
shall any man ascend to heaven, but he whom the light of Christ irradiates;
neither shall any prayer be heard with acceptance which petitions not by his
sacred name.

O JESUS the light of men, the true light which illuminates every man coming
into this world, illuminate me, that thy Father may behold me, who if he see in
me any thing of thine cannot reject me; if he hear thy name in my mouth cannot
but harken to me. O the force of the grace of our only-begotten Christ, which
begets so many children so grateful to God! where Christ is or his name is
heard, thither mercy flies immediately, there mercy is certainly to be found. O
how efficaciously sounds the voice of Christ, by which we assuage his Fathers
anger, and press him to our relief! How can such obsequiousnes of his only Son
most obedient, most holy, most officious, most loving, but move most tenderly
such a parent, especially since he sees himself beloved by him alone according
to the fulness of his desert, amidst so many exulcerating affronts of men? The
name of a child, prescinding from all respects of duty, is grateful even to the
most unnatural and miserly; what then will it be to a most beneficent God,
especially if we add so many services exhibited even to his unthankful enemies.
He that considers Christ's dutifulnes toward his Father, will adjudge all
rewards more then due to him. His father lost the world by the sin of man; but
such was the officiousnes of his Son that he regaind it, and restord it to him;
and was this a small piece of service? All mankind and innumerable Angels became
rebellious and refractory to his Father; the Son took upon him to quel their
stubborness and teach them obedience, and this at the expense even of his own
life. All mortals fell into a high contempt of the Father; the Son by honoring
him would make amends for all: he finally restord him so many servants, he gave
him so many worshippers, so many lovers, so many praysers, he peopled heaven
that was void of inhabitants: and were these but slight services? But with
what affection, what diligence, what love, what seemlines performd he this? it
was altogether infinite, and such, that neither power nor knowledge remains to
the Father, whereby to exceed in rewards the merits of his Son.

If God then be of such a munificent nature, that of his own accord he is
beneficial to sinners: if so just, that he rewards them beyond their merits,
and goes out of himself that he may be bountiful to all, expecting no just
title which exacts his beneficence: will he proceed partially with his Son
alone, and not have regard to the prescript of their agreement, of which as yet
the divine liberality in all its extent falls short? what will he do when he
sees that he cannot outstrip the merits of his Son; but that all the rewards he
gave him and all men for his sake, are infinitely below his services? will he
that was profuse to sinners, be injustly pinching to his own Son? will he
refuse to give what he demands or we ask for his sake, supposing he cannot
reward him too much, nor has hitherto done it sufficiently? if God be
munificent beyond all expectation, to wit, when men judge punishment more due
then favor; will he be niggardly and sparing when they think him bound, not
only to do it by way of friendship, but also in a manner claymd as a due debt?
if God has bin bountiful to some masters for a silly servants sake, because he
did his duty: what will he be to his beloved Son, in whose sole service he took
more complacence then in all the world besides? if he esteem men so highly,
that he usd those expressions, for lacob my servants sake and Israel my chosen;
and elsewhere, for David my servant etc. and this when he was in a vein of
indulgence; will he misprize his beloved Son most dutyful to him, and be harsh
and unmerciful to him, in whom he so gratifid us? o men, let us make our
demands securely, nay most securely by Christ; let us approach with confidence
to the throne of his grace; because how great gifts soever we demand, God will
remain indebted for greater; and because he excuses not himself nor
disclaimes the debt, he will never remain ungrateful or unjust, but will give
what we ask, since he neither has nor can give all that his Son meriteth.
Behold, behold, I now see more clearly then the sun, that it is wholly
impossible for him to deny whatsoever ^e ask for his Sons sake, supposing our
petition be made as it ought: for we seem many times to petition, but perchance
do it so coldly and foolishly, that it is no better then a mock-petition. But
he that makes it truly and really in the name of Christ, not only entreats, but
as it were conjures and exacts.

Christ is the object and delight of all the divine senses: God sees nothing
that is seemly, but by Christ: he hears nothing that is harmonious, but by
Christ: nothing is fragrant and sweet to him, but the good odor of Christ: he
annoints and heales nothing with his mercy but by the oil of the name of
Christ: nothing lastly rellisheth savourly to his pallat, but what is seasond
and sweetened with the passion and gal of Christ. Whatsoever he feels all is
grateful by Christ, so regarding us in him: because we resemble Christ, we are
pleasing to him: as one that looks through a green glass, all that he sees is
green and agreeable to his sight, though before disagreeing; that color which
of all others is most pleasing to the eye, tempering the incongruity of the
object. O how far would God be from tolerating our loath somnes and nastines if
it were not for his sake! o how often would he be out of patience with us, even
after we are once put in the state of grace, which we deservd to forfeit for
our ingratitude and noncompliance, and many other venial sins, if he did not
think upon him who sustaines us and supplies for our defects. He alone is a
lenitive to his Father to make him relish les noy somely, our impudence and
unthankfulnes. The world had perishd a thousand times long ago, unles it had
been detaind and maintaind by him, who by offering a daily sacrifice infinitely
pleasing to his Father, conserves both it and us so shamelesly impudent. Christ
interposeth himself betwixt us and his Father, who beholding us in him, our
deformity does les offend him; as he that beholds a dead dog but in a looking
glass, feels not the stench it sends forth: hurtful objects when they are seen
through a glass are not offensive to the eyes: It fares with God as it did with
that Emperor who having a very fair emerald, which like a mirror reflected
objects, he beheld in it all spectacles of horror as combats of duellists,
slaughters, and whatsoever causd aversion; to the end that the pleasingnes of
the stone might abate and sweeten the distastfulnes of the fact: so our
misdemeanors do les exasperate God, when he beholds them represented in
Christ. Christ is a gem and most precious emerald: nothing is more pleasing to
the eye then that stone, whose only sight is said to exhilarate it; and it
shuts not up this grateful color within its own enclosure, but imparts it to
the neighboring air, void otherwise of all color. So Christ causes joy to
God, and communicates his merits to us, who have none of our own, to the end
that being endowd with his grace and the verdure of hope, we may confide that
by him we shall be acceptable to God. All our good and graces are but only the
exuberancies and as it were the superfluities and offals of the merits of
Christ:

The IV. Chapter. How devoutly we ought to be affected toward the most B.
Virgin Mary.
HOw great is our misery and malice, since though the mercy and goodness of God
be infinite, it nevertheles ^^ands in need of other helps and industries for
our redress! Christ the incarnate truth was a wonderful invention to satisfy
the divine justice; but because this instrument of mercy was to be our Judge,
Gods love toward Christ provided another organ of pure mercy, his most sacred
Mother; for which among other immense benefits of the divine goodness we ought
to be thankful. What had become of us if Mary the mother of mercy had not been?
by whose prayers, though our malignity and shamelesnes, which is always
affronting God, deserve a continual scourge, yet his revenging hand is
suspended, and the scourge changd into a gift. Christ's reverence toward his
Mother is more prevalent then our irreverence toward him: If he offered his
life for his enemies, and those who by crucifying him deprivd him of life; what
will he not do for his dearest Mother, of whom he received life? if God did so
great and remarkable things of his own accord and unrequested for creatures to
whom he gave a being; what will he do for her of whom he took his substance and
Humanity; she especially mediating and urging him by her intercessions and as
it were commanding him by the right and prerogative of a Mother? the entreaties
of a Mother are as good as a command to towardly children: and what child more
towardly then Christ? or what Mother better then Mary? what greater obligation
imaginable, then that of the best of children to the best of mothers? the
obligation of CHRIST is not like that of other children to their parents, but
like that of creatures to their God: It is not only such a one as interceeds
betwixt the begetter and the begotten (although this also is greater in Christ,
since it is not divided betwixt two, like as other children owe their being
both to father and mother: for he took humane nature of his Mother alone, he
having according to it no father, and therefore he owes solely to her his being
a man) but it is also a moral obligation.

Children owe duty and respect to their parents, although they intend not this
child in particular but any other; yea although they beget him against their
will, and would indeed have begotten none, nevertheles this tie of nature is so
sacred, that even Barbarians and hethens were of opinion, that parents were to
be worshipped as second Gods, and that the debt which was owing them could
never be dischargd. O JESUS, whose doctrine transcended the subtilest capacity
of Philosophers; whose example surpassd all humane opinion; if Ethnicks
deliverd such precepts about honoring parents, what will thou, o Son of God,
do in honoring thine? that was the respect which Gentiles afforded; how much
more perfect will thine be, o JESUS? thou who did build upon the virtues of
the ancients, and added to their precepts; thou who to the laws of love
superadded that of loving our enemies, and in the command of charity declard
even concupiscence to be forbidden: so also in the precept of reverencing
parents thou did excel in reverence toward thy mother; wherein besides the
debt due by nature thou owe another of free election. Other parents have
nothing of choice in the child they beget, but with thy most holy Mother it
fared much otherwise: she not only bore thee but would only bear thee alone and
no other but thee. Her good will was expected and desird by God the father and
his Angels: therefore because thou art endebted to her for this elective will,
thou repayst it by denying her nothing which she wills. Thou do acknowledge a
stricter obligation toward her then other children have to theirs; one like to
that which creatures have toward their Creator. This is the great debt of
creation, that God did not only create us, but selected us in particular and
producd us rather then others, whom he left in that heap of things only
possible and their own nothing.

O stupendous excellency of Mary, seeing God is in like manner obligd to her
that creatures are to him which is infinite! and then, as there is an immense
distance betwixt being and not being, so the obligation of him that receives
being and life, infinitely surpasses all other obligations arising from other
common benefits which presuppose being and life. If then, o God worthy of all
love thou art most liberal toward those that are most deeply endebted to thee,
and most indulgent to those that offend thee; how can thou be griping or hard
hearted to thy own Mother, to whom alone thou art endebted, and in such a manner
endebted for the riches of thy mercy and goodness. How can thou deny any
favor where thou acknowledges so great a debt? thou do deservedly impart all
by her who imparted life to thee: for as children can, by no goods whatsoever
make recompense to their parents for the benefit of life; because it is the
foundation of all other benefits; and all the actions and natural endowments of
children are properly belonging to parents, because they gave them their first
being: in like manner thou will deny nothing to her who gave thee humane
nature; insomuch that giving all by thy Mother, thou seemst to give all to thy
Mother; and moreover putst us upon a necessity of honoring her, since thou will have us to obtain what we obtain by her: and because thou had of her thy
natural being, that is, humane nature; so will thou also, that we have from her
a supernatural being, that is grace: that so by making us the children of Mary
supernaturally, thou may satisfy for thy humane filiation by her naturally.

True it is that all things are from God, and this very thing that he is a
debtor to his Mother is one of his benefits: but this imports not much toward
our right understanding how much he is ready to do for the most B. Virgin; for
this is the custom and fashion of God, to regard his own favors no otherwise
then if he had no hand in our merits, though they proceed from his grace; but
is as bountiful in rewarding them, as if they were wholly our own: he will give
as full a recompense for our good works as if these good works were not his
gifts, nor he assisted us with his grace, but we performd our services by our
own strength, and carried of our selves that proportion to glory; after the
same manner will he correspond with the duties of his Mother as if he had
contributed nothing to them; but will proceed as if he had receivd essence,
nature, and life from her independently of any benefit and divine grace, by
which she was prevented and preelected to that stupendous work of the divine
Conception.

If Christ acknowledge and esteem himself thus obligd, will he perchance
infringe the precept of honoring parents, or rather seek to fulfill it with
pressd and heapt measure? if the obligation wherewith other children are tied
to their parents be so great that Philosophers judgd it indissoluble; since
Christ acknowledges a greater then any other, can he possibly fail in
gratitude? if God recompense with glory the minute services of men even beyond
their desert, he will not be wanting in any kind to discharge and satisfy this
debt to his Mother which exceeds all rewards and recompense. Who can doubt but
that Christ's gratitude toward his Mother surpasses the love and gratitude of
all other men? If then ethnicks were of opinion, that children, how obsequious
soever, cannot be grateful enough to their parents; can we imagine that Christ
will let slip any occasion of gratitude to her? in a word he was so grateful
toward his dearest parent, that not content with that reverence which he
exhibited to her the while he lived in the exercise of infinite theandricall
acts with which he honored her, in being subject to her; he would have all us
to honor her also, and help him as it were to do the same. For that end he
would have all us become her children, that for him we might love and honor
her as our Mother. For as there was an obligation due to her as Mother, he
would also have such satisfaction and gratitude as is proper to children. Which
filiation he dedicated on the altar of the Cross, when he bequeathd all his to
her in the person of his beloved Disciple, saying, behold thy Son. He did it,
to wit, when he was at the very point of death, as if he had only desird life
that he might be dutiful to his Mother: but being not expedient that he should
avoid it, he left a deputy of his filial care and obedience in Saint John, and
of observance in the rest of the faithful: that by this means he might both
redeem us by dying, and also be grateful to her, by leaving so many to supply
for him in exhibiting respect, as if he confessd himself not to have fully
accomplishd his desire in that behalf. There at the foot of the cross Mary took
us for her children, there she brought us forth, not of her womb but her heart,
which is a more precious member, and its filiation more efficacious. For each
child of the womb is not always beloved but the child of ones heart cannot but
be so. There did she bear us together with Christ amidst throws and pangs which
she felt, not in her carnal labor or child bed. She took us very opportunely
for her children at such a time when her bowels were wholly replenished with an
affectionate compassion toward her Son, that she might transfer it upon us,
and by it ennoble her mercy: as if JESUS had recommended to his Mother what he
said to the women; Weep not over me but over your children. And therefore
hanging on the cross full of anguish and torment, remitting as it were to others
all compassion due to him, he said to his weeping Mother; Mother behold thy
Son: behold each faithful Christian and my Disciple is thy child: do not so
much compassionate and weep over me as over these thy children, poor wretches
and miserable sinners, whom I recommend to thy motherly tuition. Christ knew
that the misery of sin was a greater object of mercy then any corporal pain
whatsoever: for his soul did more feelingly resent our offenses, then his body
did its own torments. Therefore he would have his Mother transfer her compassion
and mercy to the defects, faultines, and miseries of our soul, that she might
chiefly assist us in them. And because Christ by his sufferings deservd well of
the divine justice for his superabundant satisfaction, therefore was he worthy
of that attribute of being judge of all men, according to the prediction of
David; give, o God, thy judgment to the king and thy justice to the kings Son:
the Mother of Christ by compassionating and commiserating him, deservd well the
attribute conferrd upon her of compassion, and commiseration that we also may
say; thou have given, o God, thy mercy to the queen, and thy pious affection to
the kings Mother: therefore no grace nor mercy is derivd to us but by Mary. From
henceforward, o most pious Mother, I take thee for mine; and will have this to
be the first pledge of thy piety, that thou imitate thy first begotten Son, who
as he not only gave thee to John, but John also to thee; so thou give me to
God, since thou also gave God to us.

Therefore since our misery finds no redress but in Gods mercy, and the disposal
of it is Mary's power to whom her Son denies nothing, and she full of
commiseration; why are we so slow and backward in the discharge of our duty
and devotion toward her? we must for 4. reasons be very officious in the
service of the Virgin Mother. The first is the necessity and advantage of her
intercession; for without her intercourse and solicitation no gifts descend
from heaven: grace depends far more upon Mary then the showers of heaven did on
Elias. The second is the will of Christ; whose desire is that we honor his
Mother; and in honoring her, we do him a piece of grateful service. For he
turns over to her all the debts we owe him, and she is our creditrice, who
must see them cancelld. If what we do to the poor be so acceptable to him, that
he takes it as done to himself, and makes them his substitutes in this behalf;
how much more gratefully will he take what is done to his Mother, whose debtor
he acknowledges himself, to whom all are endebted.

The third cause is the excellency of the most H. Virgin; to whose worship
though neither the tie of necessity, nor the explicit will of her son JESUS
did move us; nevertheles the sole title of her rare prerogatives and
perfections ought to endeare us extremely to her. She is the glory of all pure
creatures, and especially of mankind; the next in dignity to God himself; to
whom he granted this privilege which he alone by reason of the infinitude of
his nature enjoies, to be together a Mother and a Virgin, and Mother of God.
God is both a father and a Virgin; Mary is also a Mother and a Virgin. And like
as Christ according to his divinity was most chastely begotten in the splendours
of Saints by a Virgin father without a Mother, so according to his humanity, he
was most chastely begotten in the splendours of sanctity refulgent above all
Saints, of a Virgin Mother without a father. O double miracle! both that a
Virgin brings forth, and that she brings forth God! and indeed what should a
Virgin bring forth but God? grace and nature are two sisters; the same
artificer gave them both a being: and therefore their proceeding in their
different functions is much a like. Even as God after he had created all things
made an abridgment of them all in Adam and Eve; and all the degrees of life and
nature are more eminently in man then in the natures themselves, heavens,
plants, and living creatures; insomuch that one man is more valuable then the
whole world besides, and is as it were a little world by himself, and all
things do him homage, and were made for his use: so in like manner because Gods
workmanship is no les exactly curious in matters of grace, he also compendiated
in the second Adam and Eve, the whole extent of grace, that ever has or shall
be imparted to men and Angels. And Mary alone contains all kind of blessings,
and supernatural gifts and degrees of grace in a more singular manner then all
the Hierarchies of B. Spirits and quires of Saints: in such sort that she alone
does equalize all their sanctity and perfection. Not piety only but reason also
attesteth this assertion; and now it is manifest enough by the revelation made
to that B. Man and martyr of Christ F. Martin Gutierez whom S. Teresa beheld in
heaven adornd with the ensigns of martyrdom, he dying in prison under the
heretics, wearied out with their fetters and il usage. The Virgin her self
gave many thanks to this her servant for defending her sanctity in these
eminent terms. The very Seraphins themselves, and all the other ranks both of
Angels and Saints do homage to her and reverence her as queen of all: no
otherwise then the brute beasts in paradise to Adam, while he stood as yet in
the integrity of his nature. Man was created in a degree much superior to
other creatures; Mary was exalted above the Cherubins, glorifid more then all
these glorious intelligences, surmounting them as far as Adam did the common
creatures. She alone seems to be twice as great with God, and much deeper in
his favor then the whole world besides; toward which though the Son of God
showed a wonderful dignation in descending from heaven for its redemption; yet
it could not receive the H. Ghost unles heaven first receivd him again: but the
Virgin Mother at the self same time entertaind both him and the H. Ghost in his
superventions.

Therefore the prayers of Mary are effectual with Christ for two respects; both
for observance due to a Mother and for the consummatenes of her merits and
sanctity: for she is heard both for respect and reverence oweing to him, and
worth and dignity due to her self: for the reverence of her maternity, for the
worth of her virtue and sanctity: and we also are heard for her sake: whose
intercession is not only proficuous but also necessary. Therefore let us fly to
Mary in all our distresses, as the child does to his Mother who is beaten by a
stranger: she knows how to support and uphold the tottering world with her
prayers, nor think that thou laiest a heavy burden upon her.

The fourth cause may be an assinity and kind of alliance contracted with the
most B. Virgin, not only spiritualy and after a mystical manner, but even real
and according to the body and nature. For no body is nigher in kindred to
another then the sacred Virgin is to thee. He that receives Christ's body in the
Eucharist, becomes by a real kind of union one flesh with him: insomuch that
there is no other union among men straiter then this, not even betwixt man and
wife: wherefore thou must also esteem thy self akin to the Mother of Christ, and
persuade thy self, that thou sharest in the same flesh with her. There
interceeds also a greater physical and real conjunction betwixt God and thee,
then there is betwixt thee and thy father: how great then will that be which
thou contractest with the Mother of God? what created and real union can be
imagind greater then that which passes betwixt the divine word and his most
sacred Humanity, derived from the very bowels of the most H. Virgin? and what
link of consanguinity can be straiter then that betwixt Christ and his B.
Mother. Therefore the affinity and tie which we have even according to nature
with her exceeds all affinity among men. And if men upon this score of alliance
by blood and kindred do mutually help one another, and have recourse to them
for relief in distress; why shall not we have recourse to her, with whom we
are linkt in the straitest bonds?

What shall I say of the neernes, and as it were spiritual kindred which we
have contracted with her? he by whom thou receivedst the grace of baptism, or
stood for God father to thee in that Sacrament, becomes thy kinsman and thou
art bound to honor him as thy parent; how much stricter a propinquity and
filiation contract we with the Virgin by whose means we have so often receivd
grace, who has so frequently brought us forth to God, and into the light and
truth of a spiritual life?

I acknowledge thee, o Mother of God, Mother of grace and mercy for my Mother,
and beseech thee, that thou will not forget that sweet name in which thou thy
self take so much complacence. Thou art stild Mother of grace and mercy; and
what ennobled thee with this title but our misery, because we stand in such
need of thy grace and commise-ration? wherefore since I am the most miserable of
all, I challenge a greater right over thy maternal bowels then all. Thy dignity
accrues from my indignity, thy sanctity from my sinfulnes: and therefore I
claim the first place in thy mercy, because I am the first and greatest and
unworthiest of sinners. The sins of men made thee the Mother of God: and my
sins alone were sufficient to make thee the Mother of mercy: discard me not
from thy protection, since all the Religious of our Society are shelterd under
thy mantle, as thy most devoted child F. Martin Gutierez beheld once in a
wonderful vision. For who can lay a better claim to mercy then he that is most
miserable? remember that I alone by my innumerable offenses, can only maintain
this title of honor in which next to that of a Virgin Mother thou art wonto
glory above all others. I that am most miserable confide, o Mother, in thy
mercy: for heaven and earth will sooner perish, then thy mercy and grace will
frustrate those that truly and seriously implore ^y assistance, and bestow
themselves in thy service. Admit me among them, that with joyfulnes and tears
I may employ my self in honoring thee: but because my tepidity keeps me cold
and dull, as one that am wholly of an earthly complexion, I envy thy clients a
little of their fervor; and wish, as did that most devout Father John Trexus,
to sweep thy chappells with my mouth and water them with my tears. And to
accomplish this in deed, that good zealous Father and devout child of the
Virgin made on foot a pilgrimage of some miles.

The V. Chapter. That we must imitate Christ, and of the sorrow and suffering
of his most B. Heart.
HOw can that man relish any thing of gust, who thinks upon JESUS afflicted for
the gust of men? One drop o^ his blood was more then sufficient for our
redemption: how happens it then that the effusion of the whole, and such a
world of sorrows, afflictions, and disgraces are not an effectual incentive to
imitation? did the Son of God suffer such, and so much in vain and to no
purpose, since the least prayer he made was a superabundant satisfaction for a
thousand worlds, and able to purchase grace for all mankind. And yet so great
an excess of torments suffices not to stir up me alone to his imitation! for
Christ sufferd for us leaving us an example. The least swarvings of our will
cost God no les then the most exorbitant of our offenses. O if I did but
seriously ponder my works, o Lord how should I be siezd with fear! Thy works
are wonderful, I wish my soul could thoroughly know them; prodigious wonders
which thou have placd upon the earth, wonderful testimonies of thy love and my
ingratitude and hard hartednes. I wish my heart would become like melted wax, I
set thee as a signet upon it, that so I may relish no gustful thing in this
life, but imitate thy griefs and afflictions. I will place that sad heart of my
JESUS, which was in a perpetual crucifixion, as a signet upon mine; so shall I
have it always in my mind and my soul will wast within me. What can be imagind
more effectual to extinguish in us all gust of our own will, then the memory of
JESUS tasting gall, and the whole series of his bitter Passion. Its
consideration is so feelingly efficacious, that it made Christ himself become
irksome and fearful so far as to sweat drops of blood. What more efficacious to
debar us of all gust, then to compassionate with the sorrowful JESUS? It was
not without mystery that those who so perseverantly persisted with Christ, upon
the Mount Calvary and jointly suffered there with him, concluded their life
with no other Martyrdom; whereas the rest of the Apostles and Disciples were
crowned by the hands of persecuting tyrants. For the most B. Virgin Mother, of
JESUS, S. John Evangelist, and the Magdalen dyed not Martyrs: a greater sorrow
then any death or passion, tormented them by mere compassion, and was in lieu
of a cruel martyrdom. Let us then suffer jointly with JESUS and let our
sufferings be joyfully voluntary.

JESUS is the way, the truth; and life: what way will we take to arrive at a
life truly happy but the life of JESUS which was a continual death and
perpetual crucifixion. It might suffice to make us eternally condole and
compassionate with JESUS, and loathingly abhor all self-seeking appetites, if
we considerd what torture he sufferd that last night and day of his life in all
his members, there being no whole bit to be found in him from the sole of the
foot to the crown of his head. His tongue which the torments left untouchd,
that it might not go scotfree seems to have shard as deeply as any of the rest:
for the most patient JESUS complaind of no disjoyntings anguish of his limbs
but only of his thirst: to let us understand, that even those parts which seemd
to be vacant, wanted not also their torment. Neither did the intensenes of the
pain stupify or benum them; but all were preservd strong; lively, and vigorous,
that they might be more able to suffer: and therefore he being ready to give up
the ghost cried out with a loud voice; whereby also he gave a remonstrance of
the never-relenting fervor with which he solicited our cause amidst such
bitter torments; and of the humble acquiescency wherewith he accepted death by
the bowing of his head; and the profound respect and reverence he usd in
fulfilling his Fathers precept so full of difficulty.

Notwithstanding all this we ought to resent most feelingly what he sufferd all
his life long in that one little member of his most holy Heart: whose pain was
unsufferably great even from the first moment of his conception, and continued
so all the time of his life. It was his heart that did first and last partake of
torment. It was so much the more feelingly ressentive, by how much the
unsupportable anguish of all the rest of his members met in it, the most
delicate of all others, as in their center. No les affliction harbourd in the
heart of JESUS from that moment, then he felt in the garden when he swet blood
through his whole body. And even as there he was siezd after an unwonted and
frightful manner with a lively apprehension of all the anguish and pains of
his passion; so also no les intensely did he apprehend the same in the womb of
his most loving mother. For Christ's knowledge was not obnoxious to any
imperfection, at that time especially when he took upon him the grand affair of
our redemption; and all the difficulty he was to undergo and break through, was
without any dissimulation clearly represented to his understanding. He did
there most perfectly apprehend all the series of his sufferings, the
innumerable labors of his whole life, his contempts and revilements; and from
that time this knowledge was as afflictive (and perchance more, if there could
be any inequality) as it was afterward in the garden: for there the sense of
pain broke out and diffusd it self through all his body; in such sort that the
anguish dispersd through the whole did remain les pungent in the heart: but in
the womb of the most glorious Virgin, the whole sea of grief was confined
within the narrow channel of one small member, the little tender heart of the
infant JESUS. When one sheds tears he is les sensible of an affliction, then
when the anguish is shut up and smotherd in the heart, the eyes remaining dry
and tearles: so Christ when he did not sweat, nor the blood trickld out,
sorrowd perchance more because no particle at all of that sorrow did evaporate;
nevertheles it was behoofful for our instruction, to show once exteriourly how
much he continually sufferd interiourly. That grief accompanyd him all along
through the whole course of his life. JESUS enjoyd always a most perfect and
intuitive knowledge of all things as they are in themselves. Unless by divine
privilege and dispensation he had bin particularly assisted, the intensenes of
the pain had causd death in that first instant he began to live: and therefore
his whole life was a signal and continual miracle. Neither did his own Passion
alone afflict him, but much more his compassion over others: he was moved to
it, while he considerd the distress of his most loving and innocent Mother: he
was moved to it in behalf of us: he resented more feelingly the torments of
Martyrs, the austerities of confessors, the discases and maladies of his
Saints, then they themselves who did undergo them. If an affectionate Mother do
more grieve at the sickness of her child then the child himself: who can deny
but Christ loved his more tenderly then any mother does her only child. He did
truly bear our labors, and our griefs did he sustain. How great then must his
pain needs be, if it surpass that of Martyrs, Penitents, and sick folks
comprizd in one? But above the rest he was touchd with a lively compassion over
us, for all and each particular sin of all and each particular man, who has
been or shall be to the worlds end: The immensity of this pain will strike him
that considers it into amazement; it being able, if it had not been
miraculously suspended, to have a thousand times bereaud him of life. If some
men have sorrowd so intensely for their sins that the vehemence of their
contrition causd death; how could it be but that the sorrow of JESUS for one
alone, and that the least venial sin, of any one man, must needs extinguish
life in him; he penetrating so perfectly the deformity of the fault, as also
the majesty of God his Father who is offended, and the baseness of man the
offender, and loving so ardently both the one and the other? as no body can
reach the hight of this his charity, so neither can any sound the depth of his
sorrow. If he conceivd so great grief for one venial sin, how much will he
conceive for all and every venial and mortal so horrid and abominable? he bore
an unsupportable weight of sin who imposd upon us a sweet yoke and a light
burden; and we charge JESUS with the abominable fardel of our iniquities which
forced a bloody sweat from his body, as the press does wine from the bunch of
grapes. If any one should have sufferd all the torments of Martyrs, all the
diseases and anguish of all men, even from the first day of Adams transgression
til such time as Christ comes to judgment; all this would not be equivalent to
his pain; which also upon this score that it was spiritual, was bitterer in
its kind then any corporal affliction whatsoever. The fulness of the Divinity
resided in Christ, and the clear vision of God did illustrate him: which
nevertheles obstructed not some effects; but it was miraculously so orderd,
least by it a tide of joy should over flow his whole body and the inferior
portion of his soul, that place might be left for sorrow as it fell out in his
sacred Passion. But in the heart of JESUS grieving for our offenses, it did not
only give way to extreme sadness, but did extremely augment it, by reason of his
perfect knowledge of God offended: for how much more perfect this knowledge was,
it causd a sorrow so much greater; and CHRIST alone had a more perfect
intuitive knowledge of God, then all the Cherubins and Seraphins, then all the
other Angels and Saints in heaven. Christ's love also toward God offended was
corresponding to the vision of the divine Majesty, wherefore his sorrow exceeds
the comprehension either of word or thought; for he let no opportunity slip of
suffering as much as he could, and was beseeming him to suffer: yea prodigious
miracles were wrought in his most holy soul, that sorrow might have its full
effect. Why then are we so sollicitous to compass joys, and rack ourwits so
much in the search of new pleasures, if JESUS sufferd all this in his heart,
which none ought to think upon without tears, and each good Christian ought to
make it the theme of his thought.

How dare thou, o my heart, slacken the raines to joy? consider the cause why
thy JESUS sufferd? it was for thy offenses that he might work thy salvation.
Because I trespassd, therefore he loves me so tenderly and confers blessings
upon me. Why does not this lover of me and benefactour to his enemies, heap
coals of fire upon my head, and make me blush at my own proceedings? why does
he not heap coals of fire upon my heart, that I may burn with love of him and a
desire of his imitation. I will place the sad heart of JESUS upon my obdurate
heart, that he may find me at length according to his heart, a friend and desirous
of suffering. Compassionate, o my heart, with the suffering JESUS, and comfort
him in his sufferings. How will thou obtain mercy by the sufferings of Christ,
if thou have not compassion over Christ suffering? be not unmindful of such a
courtesy from thy suerty. S. James Guisay not to be unmindful of it, besides
his daily meditation and other devotions to it, carried it always about him
written in a little Book, in token that it was engraven in his heart and faild
no day to read it over. This memory of his Saviors cross was so acceptable to
Almighty God, that he vouchsafed him, after his entrance into the Society, a
true conformity with it, that is, to be crucified for his sake, and by his
sufferings to adumbrate the death of his B. Son: and Christ was not backward in
recompensing the devotion of the Saint: for upon the place where he and many
other Saints were crucified, miraculous lights were seen every friday in the
air, approving and attesting the comformablenes of their suffering with that
of Christ. The memory of his Passion is grateful to him and that we might have
a perpetual memorial of it before our eyes, he instituted the admirable
Sacrament of his most holy Body.

But if thou be midful of Christ suffering, why art thou not unsufferable to
thy self, and heartily angry at thy own proceedings. The king of Moab sorely
straightened by the siege of the Israelites, being quite out of hope of all
relief, took his eldest Son who was to succeed him in his throne and offered him
in holocaust upon the walls: and it causd such a commotion and indignation in
the Israelits camp that forth with they raisd their siege and departed. Behold
the holocaust of the first and only begotten Son of God upon the altar of the
cross! why art thou not replenishd with disdain against thy self, quitting all
self will and pleasure? we use to compassionate even externs yea even brute
beasts; why do we not so to our God, to our Father, to our brother? o our
shameless obstinacy! who, instead of commiserating him, crucify JESUS again by
new offenses! remember that God is thy Father not thy foe; that he suffers for
thee his foe, not for the beasts of the field or their salvation; for thee not
for himself, the bitterst of all punishments, wounded in all his members, not
only afflicted with some small ach of his head or stomach; because he did thee
and the world a good turn, not because he put cities into combustion;
publicly on a day of solemnity and in a mountain betwixt two thieves as their
captain and ringleader, not in a by-corner and secretly, the object of all men's
hatred disgrace and scorn; in so much that the mercy of men was wanting to him
alone who is mercy it self. Nevertheles he suffers willingly and lovingly, not
forcedly not frettingly not complainingly because it was for thee; of his own
people not of barbarians and Scythians; for the space of 33. years, not for an
hour or two. Compassionate then with JESUS, and make not all he has done
fruitles: forbear to offend him, begin to imitate him: and that his Passion may
truly benefit thee, make it the model of thy imitation.

The VI. Chapter. How far we are to follow Christ.
GOD does not tempt us though he has made our salvation full of difficulty.
Nothing is more acceptable to him, he having done and sufferd so much, then
that we imitate him. The words of a man placed in authority are held for laws
and must be fulfild; why are the deeds of God less observable? he that sets the
humble and most sorrowful heart of Christ as a signet upon his own, let him set
it also upon his arm that he may imitate what he commiserates. Love is not
soft and effeminate but strong and masculin, and the cross of Christ will
crucify Gods zealot by compassion and emulation. The imitation of Christ is
harsh and unsavory: some have it in as much hatred as hell it self, but for all
that we cannot emulate better graces. Fear no cosenage when he persuades thee
to take the cross for thy delights, disgrace for thy honor, poverty for
riches; he is the prime and undoubted truth. The eternal wisdom and divine
intellect has so orderd, has judgd it expedient. Be not diffident, he is the
supreme goodness and highest power; by these nevertheles he redeemd thee, and by
the same thou must complete thy salvation: that work is begun and accomplished
by the same instruments: by these Christ ascended into heaven; and the members
must not think of going another way then by which the head leads them. They are
not poison; Christ himself sanctified them and tasted them first of all
himself: yea that a small parcel of them might only pass to us, he drunk up
almost the whole chalice of sorrows and afflictions; and yet for all that, he
lives eternally and sits at the right hand of God. How can thou but be
confounded, whilst seeing Christ accursed by all, thou seek so much to be
honored and praisd? beholding him prostrate at the feet of Judas, thou
preferst thy self before thy betters? seeing him thirsty and in want of a little
water, thou covets plenty and delicate fare?

It is the greatest glory of a servant to follow his masters footsteps. To
imitate Christ is a business not only of necessity but dignity: and for this
respect the main difficulty is removed, and a sufficient reward allotted for
others that occur. If it be a credit to imitate Christ, then it will not be
difficult to suffer contempt and the revilements of men: for that will be a high
point of honor; and there is no contempt, where it is a credit to be
contemned. It will be also no hard matter to debar ones self of pleasures and
superfluous riches to obtain true glory: for worldlings and even heathens did
more then this, when they abstaind even from necessaries for a seeming and only
apparent glory. Let it confound us that some barbarians have bin found so loyal
and loving to their sovereign, that if he wanted eyes, they would put out
theirs; if he wanted hands, they in like manner would cut of theirs; and gave
this as a pledge of their fidelity and imitation in others: why do not we that
are called the faithful, imitate the king of glory, in things of far les
difficulty? If Christ had only told us what we were to do, though he had not
held forth the torch of example, we were to have done it: how much more when he
did it first himself, and did it to the end we might do it after him; and not
only said so in a word, but made large encomiums of the happiness of
afflictions. If a Prophet had but intimated it, we could pretend no excuse; and
how much les can we, when the very wisdom of Prophets, and Gods own mouth has
exaggeratively recommended it, and made himself a model of it? JESUS never let
fall the least idle word, and yet he lest so many praises and magnifying
speeche^ of the happiness of poverty and affliction? if it behooud us not to
suffer, the examplary life of JESUS would be to no purpose and his austerity
wholly unuseful to us, who should be unsensible of his charity who paid such a
vast and superabundant sum for our ransom, neither should we be taught by so
lively an example to love his imitation, and detest all sin and sensual
pleasures. Would God have needlessly thrust his only begotten Son upon such
thorns, if it imported nothing at all to do what he did, that those whom he
preelected and predestined might be made conform to the image of his Son,
that he may be the first begotten among many brethren? God is not a God of
impiety, as who could take complacence in being so cruel toward his only
beloved child. Fierce and savage creatures are most passionately tender over
their young ones: and how could God, who is most meek and full of mercy; be so
tyrannically cruel toward his Son, if it were not needful for us to suffer.
The enormity of our sins exacted not such heavy penalties for their redemption:
one drop I will not say of JESUS blood but of his sweat was superabundant. It
was therefore our behoof of imitating Christ and suffering (it being the road
way to heaven) that requird such outrageous torments and rigor of life. God is
either cruel and impious, or else it is altogether needful for us to be humble,
afflicted, and needy, to have a high esteem of divine charity, and a mean one
of our selves.

No body knows the way to heaven who has not gone it: no body ascends up to
heaven but he who descended from heaven Christ Jesus; and who treads the path
which he chalkd forth. It was a way wholly unknown, nor could any give better
directions then Jesus who knew it and had gone it. Jesus did not as some
peasants do, who with their fingar or speech point out the way to travelers
while they themselves sit quietly at home, no whit sollicitous whether
afterward they hit or miss: for besides that by word he had taught the path
that carries to heaven, he goes himself before and leads the way that we may be
secure from error. Tell me, if we were certainly assurd, as now we are, that
there were such a thing as heavenly joys, and that one were to go thither on
foot, and no more were requird to compass these joys, but only to know the way
which he is wholly ignorant of, and another good body should instruct him in
that; who would not buckle himself to this journey, though crabbed and ruggy,
especially if he that showed us the way would accompany us and go before? why
then do we not believe Christ and follow him? do we fear, the wisdom of God
being our guide, to go astray? do we think we can miscarry our B. Savior going
before? no certainly. Christ showed us a secure path, and traced it out to us,
so secure, that although we die in it, the very danger and death breeds
security: yea if thou did love Christ, thou would not stick to die with
him. He loves not Christ who does not imitate him, for the virtue of love is
assimilation or resemblance. O that one could truly say; I live, now not I, but
Christ lives in me: carrying the mortification of JESUS about in my body and
implanting it in my soul!

If then thou love the Son of Mary and wilt become his tabernacle as she was;
behold with accuratenes and do according to the pattern which is proposd to
thee in the mount Calvary, and take a view of the whole life of JESUS. He chose
to live and die in contempt, he was derided and set with the wicked, accounted
not only an idiot but a fool: he was beaten as one would not beat his slave, he
was punishd as if he had been the worst of criminals: of his own accord he
shund all temporal honor when it was exhibited: there was no miscalling or
slanderous nickname that was not appropriated to him: they called him Samaritan,
idolater, possessd person, false Prophet, seducer, belly. God, devourer,
drinker of wine, blasphemer and transgressour of the law: he was thought to be
a traitor and conspiratour against his country, a friend and abettour of
sinners. What creature can be namd, to which he did not humble himself? He
humbled himself to the Angels: what need was there that an Angel should come to
comfort him who was God, since with one sole word he could have destroid the
whole frame of this universe? what needed he say that legions of Angels would
vindicate his cause and gainstand his apprehenders, as if he himself had been
unable? what need when he was fasting and hungry, to take a little meat and as
it were an alms from the Angels; since the least word of his mouth could turn
stones into loaves of bread. He humbled himself to men, being obedient and
subject to his mother and Joseph. He humbled himself to the wicked Princes
Herod, Caesar, Caiphas, Pilate, by fulfilling their unjust commands and obeing
their decrees and impositions. He humbled himself to the vilest of men and very
servants as Malchus, his executioners, and others. He humbled himself to all
creatures permitting heat, cold, iron, thorns, reeds, spittle and the cross to
exercise their rigor upon him. He lastly subjected himself to the very devils:
in the time of his Passion he was delivered over to the power of darkness, and
he sufferd himself to be carried up by the devil to the pinnacle of the temple.
There Is no creature from the noblest to the meanest, from the best to the worst,
to which my Creator subjected not himself for my sake: and he that made all
things and was Lord of all, would have nothing that he might have me: he
possessd no mannours, he had no yearly revenues; even of alms he took les then
necessity exacted: he went apparelld not like a philosopher or Doctor or
nobleman, but after the manner of a poor beggar: he was also in penury of true
friends; in so much that no entreaty was made to save him from so much as one
box on the ear: he divested himself of his kingdom and principality, he
himself becoming the mask and guize of his own Majesty.

In as much also as he was God he gave us like documents of humility. That
redoubted infinitude and awful omnipotency is most conspicuous for its
humility. For man's sake it made choice of these things which have more of
labor and les of credit: when he created man he would not make him as he had
done the rest of creatures by one commanding word of sovereignty but by serving
and moiling with his hands, as if he had been some potter or labourer. In the
work also of our redemption he would not ransom us, as he might, by assuming
some noble and refind nature, as that of a Seraphin, but he would espouse the
meanest of all rationals, infamous, and in disgrace for the disloialty of our
first parent, and falling of it self into decay and ruin. In his glorification
when he is to satiate us with the glory of his majesty, and as supreme Lord,
give a full and final reward, he tells us he will play the serving-man and wait.
For Christ is truly the Son of God, and both taught and practisd the fashions
of God in his manner of proceeding. The Father acknowledging his spirit of
humility in his Son deservedly said: behold my servant I will receive him, I
have breathd my spirit upon him. We nevertheles who glory in being Christians,
and seek to be entitled the children of God, shun those things, which Christ
the Son of God loved so dearly. How could we hate poverty, humility and the
cross more heartily, if Christ should command it under pain of damnation, then
we now do, when for them he has promisd a reward of glory? our ears are as
open to the lies of the world, and we as pliable to the suggestions of the
devil, as if he had bin crucifid for our sakes: and we so loath Christ's manner
of life, and set as little by his counsels as if some fool or raving buffoon
had blabd them out at random in the market place.

If any earthly king should offer far les pay to his soldiers, they would
without reply follow him through all kind of ways and weather: especially if
he should treat them no otherwise for diet, lodging, and apparel then he does
himself, they would serve him gratis and merely to avoid shame; and we can be
moved neither by love nor shame, nor fear nor gain, to follow the king of kings
and Lord of Lords. O that I were as faithful to Christ as was that young
esquier to Ionathas! do said he, whatsoever seems good to thy mind, go whither
soever thou will and I will wait upon thee through all. He forced his passage
through rocks, through drawn swords, through the enemies camp, and all this
that the kings Son might not go alone. But Ionathas mounted the hill creeping
upon his hands and feet, and his esquier followd close after him. Why do we
leave CHRIST to tread the winepress alone, and no body accompanies him in his
labors and sufferings. What we are ordinarily to undergo for Christ is nothing
so formidable, as what that esquier attempted for Ionathas. What soldier would
desert his king in the midst of an enemy army, and could have the face to
return home well and jocund, and would not rather choose to fall by his side? and
why do we leave Christ all alone? he complains not without reason: I have trod
the winepress alone, and of nations no one man assisted me. Although a soldier
by staying with his king could bring him no rescue nor himself relief, yet he
were not in duty to abandon him: how much less oughtst thou, since so great
advantage accrues to thee, so great comfort to the king of kings Christ Jesus
in his sufferings, and the end intended is accomplishd, which is his imitation.
We must either renounce the name of a Christian, or embrace that which makes a
Christian. If thou refuse to follow Christ, whom will thou follow? it can be no
other then the Prince of this world the devil. He that traceth the foot steps
of JESUS shuns such a leader and guide; in so much that he ought to do so only
to shun him: he follows such a guide that he were to follow him, although
thereby he shund no other evil; and how much more when these two are linkt
together to follow what is best and shun what is worst, to follow God and shun
the devil.

Its only long of our own malice that we do not what Christ did and taught. No
body can excuse himself upon the pretense of impotency: our salvation and
perfection is placed in these things, which every one may have if he list:
every one may be poor, every one may be patient; its in every ones free choice
not to be ambitious of honors. This is the wisdom and love of God to make
choice of those things that are obvious to all, and which all may compass with
small labor. He excludes no man from his kingdom, neither would he have any one
want what is requisite for its purchase. If he had placed our salvation in
honors riches, and pleasures, more would be damnd then now are; for the number
of the poor, ignoble, and oppressd are without number, and in that case would
yet be greater; for the more they were that sought to be rich and happy, the
fewer would attain their desire. What then shall I now say to thee? if thou will
not embrace the poverty, humility, and cross of JESUS, or see not the
incomparable good that is acquird by his imitation, but that this is it which
he himself says; he that follows me walks not in darkness? thou see it not
because thou walkst in darkness whilst thou followest another guide then JESUS.

The VII. Chapter. That necessities and afflictions sent by God are to be born
patiently.
IF thou will not follow Christ, at least do not shun him: if thou dare not
imitate him, how dare thou withstand and slight his similitude? It is an
unsufferable impudence and a miserable blindness since the superabundant charity
of God is so singularly beneficial to some that it makes them, even whether
they will or no, conform to his Son, not expecting that they labor in the
business, ^east perchance they faint in the combat and yeald to the difficulties
of a voluntary assimilation to the life of Christ; but God daines to do all by
himself, putting them in a condition of poverty, of humbling themselves, of
undergoing labors and afflictions; nevertheles they reject this opportunity
and are so far from covetting to resemble the only begotten Son of God, that
they are ashamd of all those things in which the Lord of glory did glory so
much, and seek by all means to shun JESUS, whom they are bound in duty to
follow. They owe many thanks to God for that without any pains or danger to
themselves (for in that case one is secure from presumption or vain glory) they
carry the similitude of his only Son, in which he takes so much complacence,
and out of an affectionate indulgence toward them, when he only calls others to
his imitation, he places them already in it. But they, ungrateful as they are,
thwart his good intentions that they may resemble the proud Lucifer; nay they
become more haughty then he: for Lucifer never thought himself better then God;
but they, as if they were better and greater, when they behold JESUS guiltlesly
punished, with all their guiltines must remain untouchd; and desire that
themselves be better thought of and deemd less worthy of punishment, then the
most innocent JESUS the least worthy of all. Why do we so fret and chafe when
any cross or adversity befalls us? for if it come through our own default, it is
a high insolency for one to except against afflictions who his nocent, he seeing
Christ undergo them who is innocent. If no default occasiond them, let him yet
rejoice more, because he more resembles Christ who was crucifyd faultlesly. Do
not through impatience incur that blame in the sufferance which thou avoidedst
in the cause; being obligd to be thankful to God on a double score; both
because thou art afflicted, and without desert innocently afflicted. When one
is punishd for his default, he must at least have patience; when without
default joy also; then reaps he a richer harvest of grace, there is a stricter
similitude with the innocent JESUS, and hopes of a better advance, since this
cross is not so much for amendment of what is past as for increase of future
merits, and to be an antidote against ensuing infections. He must acknowledge
the great indulgence of God toward him, which he used toward his own B.
Mother, to wit, this preserving preservative. Christ sufferd himself to be
nayld to the cross for thee by the naughtyest of men; and why can not thou
brook with patience to be touchd by God? a better and more benevolent hand
molests thee.

A child when he is corrected by his parent, if he cry too eagerly is wont to
be corrected again; and now he is beaten not so much for the first fault, as
for the second of his impatient crying: so when thou repinest at a cross or
scourge which God is pleased to inflict upon thee, it happens many times that
it is aggravated because thou murmurest, because thou complainest because thou
art quite out of patience. Its ^ fault, great enough to deserve punishment,
that thou contemnest the similitude of his B. Son, that thou will not
acknowledge thy own faults, that thou art so void of patience. O king of glory,
on whom the Angels delight to gaze! thou did not turn thy face from those
that smote thee and spit upon thee, thy cheeks thou permittedst to them that
pinchd them, thou exposedst thy body to those that beat it, thou expectedst
nothing but revilement and misery for my sake, and why am I so wretchedly,
averse and a fugitive from thee, my God and my Father, my chastizer and my
benefactour? Rejoice, o my soul, in conforming thy self to the example of the
Son of God in necessary poverty, tribulation, humility, and disgrace. The
Apostles went rejoicing from the sight of the council, because they were
thought worthy to suffer a contumely for the name of JESUS. S. Paul Michi, a
Iaponian of our Society, went rejoicing in the sight of the people; his ears
being cut of for his greater ignominy and he sent from city to city to be a
subject of derision and infamy to all spectatours: he not withstanding laughd
first at them, and put on such a cheerful countenance, so confident, so
pleasant, so little dismayed, as if he had triumphed, for this sole resemblance
with the Son of God; and he deserved to have that perfected even to the cross,
which he embraced with great alacrity. If thou will not comfort Christ by
taking up his cross, do not contristate the H. Ghost by rejecting it, if thou
can not of thy own accord seek it; at least when it is found and proffered
thee do not in vain refuse it. If JESUS, when in his journey to Mount Calvary he
fell under his burden, had willd thee to bear it for him, would thou have
denied him that courtesy? what if he had laid it on thy shoulders with his own
hands, would thou have withstood him and cast it of? or rather have kissd
that horrid piece of wood, and adord those sacred hands that loaded thee?
certainly thou would not only have been content to bear the cross, but have
earnestly sought and coveted to be crucified in his place. Behold God has
imposed upon thee the cross of this grief, of this humiliation, of this
needines, why do thou reject it? it is lighter then the cross of Christ. If
thou will not comfort JESUS by compassionating him, comfort thy self in the
compassionate JESUS.

O comforter of souls, what can befall me, whereof I shall not abundantly find
redress in thy necessities? If I be ill at ease; in thee there was not a whole
bit to be found from the sole of the foot to the crown of thy head, a man of
sorrows and knowing infirmity; thou did truly bear our languours and carry
our griefs. Am I hungry? thou expended thy fast even to 40. days together, and
felt such pinching gripes of hunger that the devil persuaded himself, that to
assuage it, thou might be induced to sin. Am I thirsty? and so were thou
also, and upon the cross; neither was their any body that offered thee a
refreshment: I am not in such a condition, and easily find those who afford me
that courtesy. Am I cold? thou did quake and shiver when thou lodgedst in the
ma^ger. Am I disturbed in my repose? thy Disciples did also awake thee, when
thou slept in the ship. Am I injured by any one? thou pleading innocent were
sentenced to death. Am I affronted or suffer reproach? thou were publicly
produced by Pilate in the view of all the people, he crying aloud, behold the
man! am I weary? thou did sit at the fountain quite tyrd with traveling
about. Am I falsely accused? and so were thou also in the house of Caiphas. Am
I rebuked for my good deeds? and thou also for curing on the Sabbath. Am I
slanderd? they murmured against thee, that thou cast out devils in the Prince
of devils. Am I mocked and derided? thou were also taunted and flouted at by
those who said, he has saved others himself he cannot save. Do I receive cross
and harsh answers? thou receivedst far harsher, and over and above a villainous
servant gave thee a box on the ear. Am I forsaken by my friends? thou were
abandoned by thy own Disciples. Do I depart from my kindred? thou departedst
from thy Mother to go to thy Passion. Am I slighted in my advice? thy doctrine
also both was and is contemned. Am I annoyd with temptations? thou also were
pesterd with them in the desert. Am I sorry for my brothers miscarriage? and
thou did grieve for the Apostasy of thy Disciple become a runnegate to truth.
Am I sorry for my own defects? thou beheldst them before me and ressentedst
them: Do I feel want of devotion? thou did cry upon the cross, my God why
have thou forsaken me: what distress then is there either corporal or
spiritual, of which we find not relief in Christ first of all distressed for
us? This is it which he says; come to me all ye that labor and are burdend,
and I will refresh you. O most sweet and comfortable promise, the very hearing
whereof is so recreative! If Christ's labor does ease ours, how much more will
his glory do so? if his distresses be so effectual what will his power and
riches be? but I, most meek Lord, covet only thy helping hand that I may suffer
with thee, not that thou may comfort me in this life, in which my soul
desires neither corporal nor spiritual joy, but only to suffer for and with
thee.

The VIII. Chapter. How purity of body helps the spirit.
HE that dwells in a fenny and unwhole some country, what wonder if he be often
ill disposed; as on the contrary, he that breaths in a pure and sweet air,
healthful: so a soul in an undefiled body is lusty and vigorous, in a foggy and
corrupted one drooping and sickly. The mind in unspotted and Virgin flesh is as
it were in a flowery and fragrant mead. Chaste bodies are the delights of God,
what wonder if they be healthful to their souls? They let their mind attend
wholly to God free from the disturbance of temporal things; they exhilarate the
conscience in a loathsomnes of all sensual pleasures, loving God, without let
or obstacle. O my love, o most pure and sincere truth, I am endebted to thee, o
God, not only for the half of my heart but for the whole; I will not only
purify my mind but also sanctify my body. We are members of Christ: let not one
corrupted and unseemly limb defile and mishape a most beautiful body. Who would
prize the beauty of a graceful spouse, if she had a putrid nose or a face and
cheeks which were a receptacle of worms. Christ's glorified body is a thousand
times more pure and refulgent then the Sun. O mortal man, thou art a member of
the immortal CHRIST: consider how much thou ought to regard the sanctity of
thy body, and to thy utmost imitate immortality and incorruption, least thou be
disagreeing from his purity. Thou art made one spirit and one flesh with Christ
by the communion of his most H. Body: do not defile thy own flesh which by a
wonderful kind of real union is become the flesh of Christ. Thou would deem
it no les then a sacrilege, if one should clothe the statua of a Saint in a
spotted and nasty garment: why art not thou at least ashamed to defile that
flesh which is a part of the living Christ, and add an obscene and polluted
member to it? thou thy self would not wear a piece even of royal purple, if
it were steept in dirt and clay: and why will thou wear thy own flesh staind
so pitifully with filthy blemishes, and make it a part of Christ's body?

As both our soul and body shall in the next life glorify God in unspeakable
purity, so must we in this also strive to serve him in cleanenes of both. Thou
must not only seek beatitude by the sanctity of thy soul; but must endeavor
also to merit the felicity and resurrection of thy body by the sanctity of thy
flesh; least siding with thy mortal part, at the instigation of some pleasant
object, thou sentence thy self to a perpetual death. But learn now so to behave
thy self in flesh, as that thou may resemble the Angelical spirits who shall
neither marry nor be married. Learn now the incorruptibility and being of a
single nature and life abstracted from all sense. Thy body must emulate the
purity of the celestial Thrones, in whom God has seated himself; since it is
the temple of the H. Ghost, chosen to be a vessel of honor. We are the good
odor of Christ: Christ breathes purity every where; his attendance is
Virginity, his delight chastity. In almost all the calamities of this world
chastity was, as it were, a lenitive to God and a repayrer of its damages: he
found an excellent way of repayring the ruins of the Angels chiefly and
principally out of Virgins and chaste persons, and by them; choosing a Virgin
Mother and Precursour, having his Disciples and the peers of his Church, and
the more eminent part of his Saints, for the most part Virgins, or living in
continency, or without the use of their wives* or separated from them, and all
of them most chaste: he mitigated the sad disaster of Adams fall, with the hopes
of a Virgin that was to bruize the head of the Serpent: those whom he saved in
the deluged world kept chastity while they were in the Ark: Christ solaced
himself upon the cross with his B. Mother and beloved Disciple both Virgins.
How can he choose but love chastity and Virginity, both his Parents being
Virgins and he having all his being derived from Virginity? Christ had a Virgin
Father according to his divine nature; and a Virgin Mother according to his
humane. He would moreover have the type and substitute of his Father, to wit S.
Joseph, a Virgin, though he were to bear only the name and title of parent.
He made choice of two Virgins Abel and Isaac for figures of his innocence and
obedience: The first fruits that were purchased by the blood of the lamb were
Virgins, and so they follow him whithersoever he goes; whatsoever they do or
say, imitating Christ and his modesty which was so rare, that nothing was ever
objected against him in that behalf. And when the Jews invented many lies
against JESUS, and heaped many aspersions upon him without any show of
probability, yet they never taxed him for impurity, though they knew him to
have held conferences with women, by reason of his rare modesty and the
shamefast composure of his countenance, which alone cleard all suspicion and
calumny of les exact chastity. A mean is chiefly to be observed in the sight
for as S. Orontius admonishes

Love, like those tears which wrongs do from us wrest,
Breeds in the eye but passes to the breast.
From the eyes to the heart is an easy and obvious passage. That venerable
Servant of God B. Alphonsus Rodriguez never be held the face of a woman for the
space of 47. years, nor any thing else that was recreative; to wit, the
modesty of Christ's eyes in a certain apparition to him made such an impression
in his heart all his life long, that their very memory was sufficient to compose
his: and by this means he preserved his heart in great purity, and joyd only
interiourly in God. Do thou also shun exterior effusion if thou desire
internal and external purity.

The IX. Chapter. That our practice of mortification must be continual.
LEt no occasion slip of doing good and shunning evil: he that borrowes an ass
of another is not willing to keep him idle. One might doubt whether it were
more conducible to tolerate evil or do good? but for me I am thoroughly
persuaded that next after God, nothing is more regardable then that by which
one is made acceptable both to God and his Saints. That indeed is the best of
all, when one joining these two together, does good by treating himself ill.
Let not, o afflicted spirit, the difficulties of virtue, and importunity of thy
passions contristate thee, rather rejoice in the occasion of merit. Assail and
overcome: that merit is not so highly prized which is acquird, by living
peaceably as patiently, amidst the assaults of our perverse inclinations, in
the solidity of our service, in the violence and sufferance of our selves and
the cross of Christ. Take it not ill, that thou art enriched by God with more
numerous and fruitful instruments of merit then the Angels: he gave thee a body
that thou might have so many organs of merit, to wit so many crosses as it
has senses and powers of the soul: he priviledgd thee above the Angels with
that charge of thy body, and creditted to thee the carrying of that muddy lump
of earth into heaven. One only care was committed to the Angels, to preserve
their spirit, which was a single one sincere and entire: but a double burden
was imposed upon the soul of man though of a feebler nature, both to raise it
self and its troublesome flesh, to an equality with the Angels and heavenly
glory. It seemd somewhat unjust that the Angels who were in a ready equippage,
expedite, free from all clog or carriage, and man who was retarded and laden
with the luggage of his body, and charged over and above with a thousand
crosses, should be called to the same journey of heaven; the soul especially
being more imperfect and infirm then an Angel: but Gods assisting grace can
easily recompense the grievances which arise from the society of the flesh in
order to merit, that it may equalize or surmount the dignity of Angels. If thou
did but know how to make use of thy massines to thy advantage, it would rear
thee much higher: dancers to make themselves nimbler assume some weight by
holding stones in their hands: thy body will help thee, if thou do but force
it. This is no easy task but a business of great contention: and the gain thou
reapest from thy endeavor must animate thee against all occurrent
difficulties. How many engines and how much force is requird to rear a great
stone into a to^er? and thou can not raise thy massy lump of earth above the
stars without violence and the engine of the Holy Cross.

In this state of mortality, after the accomplishment of our redemption by the
Son of God, Saints are no les eminent then they would have been in the state of
innocence: wherefore they become equally holy in this shortness of life, as they
would have been in the space of many ages, had men still remaind immortal. The
multitude of afflictions together with the grace of JESUS recompenseth the
multitude of years. The redemption of Christ was more copious then the damage
we sustaind by our prevarication; and yet for all that, he would not free us
from the necessities and encumbrances of our flesh, nor wholly extinguish the
rebellion of our appetites, least he might deprive his elect of a very
compendious way of meritting; that by this means he might present them to his
heavenly Father in a shorter time, laden with equal or greater merits, then
could otherwise have been acquired in many ages. He who vanquishd the world by
the cross will have thee to vanquish thy self by the same. The copious grace of
Christ triumphs most in a thwart and reluctant nature: and it helps it self by
that very reluctance to increase its merits. The stronger the enemy is, the
more glorious is the triumph: therefore it must not be burdensome to thee to he
burdensome to thy self: but enjoy this thy violence and patience upon all
occasions of meritting, in overcoming, in sacrificing, in crucifying thy self
in all things. Let not the grace of Christ be idle and ineffectual in thee.
Combat and the cross is necessary to make thee good whether thou will or no.
Some great commanders after they had landed their men, burnt or destroid their
shipping, that all hopes of return being quite cut of, their soldiers might
fight more resolutely: in the same manner God has tied an enemy to us. Why do
we hope to avoid all combat? the necessity of combatting must necessitate us to
victory and merit. Christ redeemd us by his cross, and by it we must be saved,
dying continually that we may live and vanquish by our patience. The way of
salvation is rightly tearmd the way of perdition: destroy and seal up thy
senses with the signet of Christ's cross and they shall be in security, blindfold
thy self or rather put out thy eyes, and thy sight will be much better: become
deaf and thou shall hear with facility: become mute and thou shall speak well;
heep thy self fasting and thou shall relish well; be without hands and
employment, and thou shall labor well; be odious to thy self and thou shall
love well; be dead to the world, and thou shall live well; be fearful and thou
shall be secure; be contemptible to thy self and thou shall be honored; be
laborious and thou shall enjoy repose, sustain all evil, and so thou shall
possess all the good which is containd in the cross.

O truth, o most loving JESUS, if I love thee, how can I hate that cross which
thou lovedst so ardently! how can I shun that cross which none but devils shun
who hate thee? it is the devils task to fly from the cross; it is Christ's to
die upon it: let a Christian consider whether of these two he ought to imitate?
let him be sure to embrace self-victory and self denial, and not divide himself
for a trifling pleasure or the disturbance of a petty incommodity from Christ,
depriving himself of so much merit and satisfaction. Do not go about to excuse
thy self from that which is altogether inexcusable: although thou be one of the
elect, thou must suffer either in this life or in purgatory, where patience is
extremely barren. If one must needs suffer, judge whether it will be more
commodious to do it in this life, where with light afflictions thou redeemest
excessive torments, and sins, and moreover gainest glory by increasing thy
merits: or in purgatory where by vast sufferings thou make but slender
satisfaction, and meritest nothing at all besides? in purgatory there is no
merit, small satisfaction, huge punishment; but in this life the punishment is
extreme easy, the satisfaction great and merit most ample. What merchant would
buy wares at such a time when they are both worst and dearest; and not rather
when he may have them in a manner for nothing?

But above all love to suffer for love of Christ. Is there any one, that having
once embraced him would relinquish him for that cup of water which David powered
upon the ground? tell me, o thou lover and zealer of Jesus; if thou were naild
on the other side of Christ's cross back to back with thy beloved, crucified
together with him for the glory of God on mount Calvary; and if some should
make promise of belief in him and to acknowledge him for the Son of God if he
would descend, and he for all that would not desert thee, nor descend; and
again, some other should offer thee as one would do a child a morsel of meat or
an apple, as Eve did Adam, upon condition thou would desert the company of
thy beloved JESUS; would thou really desert and abandon him? o! our arrand
shame and confusion! how often do we for a toyish pleasure, or the fulfilling
of our perverse will relinquish the cross, and leave Christ to suffer all alone
without the comfort of our company?

Go to, o my soul redeemd by Christ upon the cross, take up thy cross and
follow thy JESUS, and deny thy self: learn self deny al by what it is to deny
another: he that is alienated from another whether he be kinsman or friend, if
he see him beaten, or in want, or imprisond, he comes not at him, he succors
him not, nor condoles with his distressed condition: and so must thou proceed
with thy own body and stand affected toward it, as if an alien or enemy groand
under such a calamity. Its not enough to take up thy cross but t^ou must also
deny thy self by dying upon the cross, on which thou must be crucified by dying
with thy JESUS. In no desire of thy heart nor propension of sense must thou seek
thy own content; even as he that is nayld to a cross has not power to move any
member as he lists, nor do what his list suggesteth. One that were crucified
would have small regard to things present, nor be sollicitous for the future;
he would not labor to hoard up riches nor bespeak pastimes: but would fix his
eye only upon the other life, and though as yet living, reckon himself among
the dead: in such a condition must he be that is crucified with Christ: he must
also number himself among the dead not only defunct to the pleasures and vices
of this life but even to life it self.

The X. Chapter. Of the sufficiency and good of Poverty.
HE that has God what needs he seek any thing else; or how can he but be
ashamd to have or covet any thing be^^des? one that had costly furniture or a
rich cupboard of plate would be far from keeping an earthen dish among it,
choosing rather to break it in a thousand pieces then it should be a blemish to
the rest, and an eye sore to them that behold these rarities, and make them
laugh at the owners rusticity. O infinite majesty and unparalleld beauty; how
dare I be so bold as to hang any terrene thing at thy girdle, and possess it
together with thee? all the hearts of men who ever have been, are, or shall be,
all the wills of the Seraphins or other celestial Spirits suffice not to employ
or exhaust his immensity; and why then do I, a silly imp, employ my heart which
is but one and a narrow one upon other things, and not rather disengage it from
all to give it entirely to him? if I have any thing besides him, I neither
possess it fully nor him; if I have nothing but him, I do not only possess him*
but all things also together with him. Who can be found so little a friend to
his own advantage that if he could gain a thousand crowns for a hundred would
not willingly employ his money? can any one think God les valuable then a
thousand crowns? why then are not men content to exchange for him I will not
say a hundred crowns, but even toys and trifles which cleaving to our heart
extinguish devotion; and sometimes either expel him thence, or like a brazen
wall obstruct his entrance. O the inestimable value of poverty which breaks
down these barriers of our heart, that God may enter into man; and unlocks the
gates of heaven, that man may enter into it and God.

If one should make this profer to a Gentil void of faith who stood ravishd
with the visible beauty of the stars and magnitude of the heavens; what would
thou give to contemplate these fair creatures for a days space nigh at hand,
and even touch with thy fingars the matter they are made of? would he not give
all he were worth, at least out of curiosity, to be among them for a little
time, or at leastwise that a piece of a star might be showed him upon earth? and
how much more ought we to give and do that we may be carried up to heaven, not
to behold them for one day, but possess them for all eternity and reign there
like so many princes. And how much more estimable is it, that thou have God
descending to thee upon the earth and residing in thee, then if one should once
show thee a fragment of the sun? if this be so, what reason can we yeald of so
great madness in contemning spiritual things and doting upon temporal, but
because our faith is so faint and languid? which if it were lively and vigorous
the first time we hear that saying of Christ; Blessed are the poor of spirit
because theirs is the kingdom of heaven; the last syllable should no sooner be
pronunced but we should forth with renounce whatsoever is in our possession.

O; our shame and confusion! there have been some philosophers who have
relinquishd all their goods, gold, silver, and whatsoever else, for this sole
end that with les disturbance they might contemplate this material heaven; and
we refuse to quit mere toys to become Lords of the empireal. Ethnicks, though
they denied the immortality of the soul, did preach up and choose poverty, even
out of a temporal motive, that they might rid themselves of all cares: and we
neither for any commodity of this life, nor hopes of an eternal can be induced
to embrace this virtue. Thou esteemst content of mind and temporal repose more
then all the kingdoms of the world; how much more ought thou to value
eternal content, and above all God himself? one should make a most rich
purchase, if he gave all the treasure of Croesus, the revenues of Solomon, the
Empire of Augustus for one buffet for Gods sake; and why do not thou buy of
God at a far cheaper rate, the kiss of friendship, his sweet imbracements, his
intuitive and beatifical vision? when Adam was cast out of Paradise and a guard
placed at its entrance with a flaming and two-edged sword; if he had been
hopeles of a redeemer, but were to bribe the Cherubin with money for a return
to his ancient and happy state, where he lived in such poverty, that he was not
worth a suit of apparel; would he not willingly have given all he had in the
world, so fertile of briars and waterd with his sweat? how much more industrious
must we now be to come to the glory and fruition of God to gain and possess God
himself? shall we perchance be more excusable for having a redeemer, since for
this respect we are much more obliged, if we be capable of gratitude, to
imitate him and follow his admonitions, and believe his words who said, that it
was harder for a rich man to enter into heaven, then for a camel to pass
through a needles eye.

O most amiable Lord, if thou be the reward of poverty, take what is mine, and
in the first place my self I wish I were so poor that I were not owner of my
self: for he is rich enough who has himself, since he is master of a man. He
that has relinquishd other things and not himself does no great feat in
contemning those things which are of themselves but earth and dust; which for
the most part contain some evil, and by which we become evil; the compassing
whereof is full of vexation the possession of fear, the deprivement of sorrow.
It is no great business to leave those things that otherwise will leave us, and
in the interim are many ways hurtful. Thou o Lord becoming man gave thy self
to man for man, that by such traffic thou might gain man and not the
riches of man: man must render himself into thy hands and not esteem himself
more valuable then God. It is a high piece of injustice for man to deny himself
to God who bought him at so dear a rate. Man must set a true estimate upon God
and retaliate the injury he sufferd by Judas who rated him only at 30. Pence. A
Christian must prize Christ more then the whole world and a creature rate God
higher then it self. He that relinquisheth other things and not himself is so
far from lessening his desire, that oftentimes he more augments it. Privation
causes an appetite and want stirs up desire. All things are only a just price
for him that is all. All things must be abandoned in which man himself is
concerned: for if one retain an appetite though he relinquish the thing it
self, his smootherd desire will soon revive.

We must not only relinquish the things themselves, but the very desire of
them. It is not enough to abandon what thou have, but thou must moreover not
seek any thing else, nor accept of what is offered or given thee, nor, as much
as may be, even borrow things for thy use. It is not the propriety but use of
things that is noxious. Let it be grateful to thee to have less then the rest,
avoiding singularity which is a stumbling block of ill example, laid to the
detriment and overthrow of the rest: It is a singular beast, or beast of
singularity which wastes and depopulates the vinyard of our Lord: many religious
men are less cautious in this behalf: they think their spirit is not disquieted
so long as they feel no anxiety nor desire; but when any thing is proferd and
given without perceivance of these in themselves, they deem themselves free
from all danger, especially when they are not further annoid with solicitude
of other things. But they are not out of danger: for although there be none in
acquiring the thing, yet there is in the use and possession of it. The things
themselves cause an appetite of other things; wherefore although the man himself
have no desire of others yet the things themselves have and they stir up an
appetite in their possessour: for one thing is always craving another. Besides
if thou have relinquishd thy own, why will thou have another man annull thy
fact? that which thou approvedst as conform to the doctrine of Christ, why
make thou another to disapprove? it is because thou intendest to dismiss and
relinquish again what is now given thee? thou may make a shorter cut then
this by not taking it. The chiefest praise of poverty consists not in leaving
much, but in having nothing, and reserving nothing for his own use. Why was the
glory and commendation of the Apostles so eminently great? was it perchance
because they abandond their poor fishing nets, or rather because they retaind
nothing? for that indeed is to relinquish all. If another importune thee to
take any thing, thy poverty must contend with his liberality: thou will prove
thy self a poultron, if thou be overcome. Thy own poverty over came thy
liberality, why cannot it do so to another? thou did rather choose to be poor
and needy then reserve any thing of thy own wherewith to be liberal: why
preferst thou another liberality before thy own poverty? would he be thought
to give good advice who should say, keep this that thou may not abandon all:
no certainly; neither must thou acquiesce to his suggestions which are
repugnant to the counsel of Christ. Suppose him that gives to say in like
manner, beware thou yeald not, but having forsaken thy own do not accept of
what is another; but contemn for the love of God, those things also which thou
have not nor art in possibility of having. Such a love of poverty is wont to be
ingenderd in the servants of Christ, that if even JESUS himself, for whose sake
they quitted all, should restore them something, or command them to possess the
goods of this world, they would reply, and appeal to the throne of his mercy
as deeming that two great a punishment.

O how rich will he be, who is so poor of spirit, that not so much as in
affection he covets any thing of this world! for as soon as he has made this
renouncement of worldly treasures in his heart, he transfers them into heaven;
becoming Lord of them and selling them to Christ, without any prejudice at all
either to him that ownes them or that has them in use. Such a one is strangely
enrichd by those things which neither are his nor ever shall be, having
treasures in heaven and no want upon earth for poverty is not burdensome to him
that loves it, but full of sweetness and content; unsavory only to them that hate
and inveigh against it, and what wonder if it be offensive to its persecutours
and enemies. Nevertheles it is hurtful to none, but good to all: for it is no
hindrance at all to those who contemn all from their heart for God; and very
advantageous to those that gape after terrene commodities; making them even
against their wills forbear a great many sins which in plenty they would have
committed plentifully. Wherefore although it seem to such bitter and distastful,
yet they cannot deny i^ to be extremely beneficial.

The XI. Chapter. That Patience is necessary in all occasions.
PAtience is a thing to be wished above all others: thou must regard it more
then thy life; for there is a greater necessity of suffering then can be of
living. Thou art not born to live easfully for a time but thou live that thou
may suffer for a time, and thou suffer for a time that thou may live
eternally. Thou art born to a life which shall not be interrupted; it is
requisite then that in this its interim thou suffer without interruption. This
life is not for it self: for neither do passengers travel that they may only be
said to be in motion: we live for a more sublime end. What is this life but
toil and labor, to which man is born that by it he may purchase beatitude;
God could have created us in glory: what needed we fetch such a circuit about
and pass through so many windings, unles we were to go by the path of
suffering. Give credit to what I now say, and register it in the book of thy
heart; nothing is more necessary to life then patience because nothing is more
obvious in it then sufferance. In troubles which cannot be avoided it is a
lenitive and asswageth grief, which impatie^ce augmenteth. Thou might have
some pretext for being impatient, if thy impatience would ease the affliction,
but it is a thing beyond all excuse to forfeit the ample fruits of patience,
which thou might reap almost out of every action and adversity, without any
fruit at all. Do not omit nor perform thy virtuous exercises perfunctoriously,
by reason of any encumbrances of this life, or the hard measure thou have from
men; for it would be esteemed injustice to make God pay for an injury done thee
by man. God who is innocent must not satisfy for the default of the nocent.

If thou inure thy self to take these tribulations patiently, thou shall become
after a manner impassible, and a lover of afflictions. Fire does not burn
ashes, nor suffer they any harm from it; they rather love the fire, foment,
and help to its conservation: so the more patient one is, the more joy many
times by a certain divine privilege, does he feel in his greatest pressures.
Patience does not lessen the labor but the pain, and that's enough: it is so
deserving at our hands, that it will not defraud us of any part of our merits,
but only assuage the noy somenes of the affliction: and so it has found a
means to make us enjoy both the fruits of our labors and not be contristated
with the labors themselves. God takes complacence in nothing almost more then
in sending adversities, confusions, humiliations to him that's truly patient;
because he loves most cordially one that is thus thoroughly mortified, and
enricheth his friends with merits, whose harvest is in labors and afflictions.
God shows no greater argument of love, nor imparts any gift with more
tenderness and affection of heart then labors and the bitter cross of his B.
Son: and nothing ought to be higher then this in thy desires. The most loving
heart of Christ expected revilement and misery: and how can thou be his
disciple if thou hate and shun it? seek not to beloved by God upon other
motives then was his only-beloved Son; nor covet to affect any thing besides
what he loved and affected.

Thou will not be patient enought, unles thou desire practice of patience,
which is sufferance: thou will be but half-patient if thou only bear the wrong
done thee, unles thou be also ambitious of them; but this without any others
default. To what end make thou thy complaints? the true patient speaks not of
his wrongs, nor makes rehearsals of his aggrievances to another; because he
places not his comfort in excuses and condolements, but stands indifferent
whether his grief be eased or no. Why resentest thou so heavily to supply what
is wanting to the sufferings of Christ? he for the glory of God would not only
endure scourges and the cross but in desire and preparation of mind he covered
all the afflictions of all men, and this very anguish that now annoyes thee,
which was wanting to his Passion, that is, to a most ardent desire of greater
sufferance, and all torment imaginable. Rejoice that thou endurest this for
Christ, who ought to deem it an inestimable favor to receive one stripe
that it might not be inflicted on him: but if thou brookst this slight
affliction, which was wanting to his desire, with patience, Christ will take
content in it, and thou will afford him no small comfort. O most loving JESUS,
why am I afflicted in my tribulations, if I have this solace, that thou art
solaced by them. Thou did seek, o Lord, some one who would condole with thee,
and could find none: behold me here of my own accord, I will be afflicted and
sorrow with thee, that I may be a companion of thy sufferings and death. Who
wilgrant me that I may die with thee, o Son of God? and if thou be pleased to
send me only this light tribulation, why do I refuse to be lightly afflicted
for thee? others solace themselves if only some men be joint-sufferers with
them; why should not I solace my self, if I be joint-sufferer with my God. This
is enough for me; neither do I covet the compassion of men. I will grieve no
more, o Lord, that I see my self alone injured, my self alone contemned; nay
this shall be a comfort to me, that besides the fellowship of my suffering JESUS
I suffer all alone, and behold none of my brethren involved in the like
distress. O my JESUS I find nothing in this tribulation which gives me just
subject of complaint: why shall I esteem what is done to mea contempt if with
thee it be reputed a dignity? why shall I esteem it an injury, if thou reckon
i^ one of thy favors.

Who would not think himself well sped if being in a continual expectancy of
death for an impeachment of high treason, he be only fined in a pecuniary
mulct, or suffer forfeiture of his estate? would he take it impatiently or
think himself hardly dealt withal, and not rather judge himself worthy of
congratulation? thou, o sinner, art guilty of treason against the divine
majesty; thou deservest to be punished with fire either in hell or at least in
purgatory: why do thou not take it in good part, if in lieu of that, a
pecuniary fine be only set upon thee by loss of thy temporalities or decrease
of thy reputation, or some other commodity or worldly respect. He that were to
suffer death on a public gibbet, if he chanced to be reprieved by reason of
some sickness, he would not a little rejoice although the disease were very
painful; yea he would wish it of a long continuance: in which case nevertheles
the penalty is not pardoned but only procrastinated: and why do thou repine
at this light fit of sickness if by it thou escape eternal death, because it
stirs thee up to compunction, or at least the pains of purgatory.

Be mindful upon all occasions of the patience and fellowship of thy suffering
JESUS, that it may make thee bear injuries, and stand in a true contempt of thy
self. If that suffice not, remember how patient the Divinity is in tolerating
the sins of men. We contemn God even to his face and offend him in his very
presence, yea even while he cherishes us in his bosom and carries us in his
arms; nor for all that does he cast us thence, or annihilate us, but makes his
sun rise equally upon the good and the bad. Who would hold a lighted candle to
an enemy lying in wait to ensnare and undo him, that he might use its light to
his undoing, and would not rather forthwith put it out? O the wonderful
patience and humility of the Divinity! which is both as obsequious to its
contemners as any servant, and while we contemn him, provides us sustenance,
and ripens and seasons the delicious fruits of the earth, that we may fare both
plentifully and deliciously.

The XII. Chapter. What a great good it is to be subject to another.
O Inscrutable Wisdom! what thanks can I render thee for communicating thy
self to me so ignorant by a holy and humble obsequiousnes, which is the highest
providence and knowledge of man. It is proper to the divine wisdom to be
inerrable in all; and the obedient is also such, while he humbly obeyes the
commands of his superior. O how great and discreet a prudence is the obedience
of the simple, regarding all with an indifferent eye! how great a blessing must
it needs be amidst the darkness which our passions induce, and the labyrinths of
error which our concupiscence weaues, and the ignorances into which the
depraved conversation of men and the customs and practices of the world lead
us, to hold the right way, and be guided most securely without fear of error,
no otherwise then if we were steerd by a heavenly conduct and discretion. The
invention of holy obedience effects this, which is the vicegerent of the
divine wisdom, the profitablest compendium of prudence. What greater sign of
wisdom can be imagind, then to be secure from error in all his undertakings?
prudence must lead the way to other virtues, and that is not acquired but with
great difficulty: but sincere obedience is an easy-purchasd prudence. The
subject has this preeminence above his superior, that he cannot err in his
function. A superior in commanding may err and be faulty, but an inferior in
obeying cannot. Well may a superior command imprudently, but a subject in
obeying cannot go against prudence, unles when that which is commanded is a
manifest sin: and in that case it were not so much a precept as a temptation. A
prelate may be defective in commanding but not the obedient; because in obeying
he cannot but do the will of God. The obedient man is always secure and assurd
of the divine will: although what is enjoined be contrary to the will of God
not approving such an injunction, he nevertheles that obeyes works according to
his will and sometimes much more meritoriously. A superior may be naughty and
command naughtily: but because it is always in our power to obey well, so long
as no evil thing is imposed, each superior is to be loved, yea and an evil one
to be tolerated; there accrewing thence a twofold merit both of charity and
patience. A subject may sometimes persuade himself that his own dictamens are
more conducing to the good of his soul then the precepts of his superior; but
for all that he must not omit to comply with his injunctions; for nothing can
be more advantageous, then out of the motive of charity to relinquish and
abandon his own will and judgment.

There can be no safer conduct then that of obedience; and therefore shutting
the eyes of our mind we must without reply do what is injoind, supplying by a
prompt and affectionate will, what our understanding is not bound to discuss.
Obedience is such a welcome and rich commodity that no syllogistical discourses
are required to induce us to it. Obedience is a most evident inspiration from
God, and an unquestionable revelation, wherein one cannot doubt whether it be
from God or no. If thou be heldst an Angel approaching thee, and denuncing Gods
will concerning the performance of any good work, thou would not be slow in
compliance with it though it were accompanied with great difficulties: thou
must be more prompt in accomplishing thy superiors commands, because thou
may be more secure of Gods will in what man commands, then in what an Angel.
And therefore a man's injunction being once made, there needs no great business of
consideration nor tergiversation, but the greatest praise is in a speedy
execution: but after the denouncement of an Angel, one ought to consider who it
is that treats with him, whether a spirit from God or the devil; whether what
he commands be good or the opposite better? one would take it for a great
favor if in all his actions it were suggested to him by some Seraphin sent
from God what he were to do, this or that; and it is no les profitable for us
to obey God in man his substitute and our superior, he being as secure a
domestic oracle, as if one were immediately inspired by the H. Ghost. There
are two primary causes of sin, inconsideratenes of mind and depravednes of will:
obedience annuls both these; for the obedient submits to another judgment, and
by doing so not only supplies but exceeds the advantages of self-consideration
and prudence; and that his will may not be distort he regulates it by the will of
God, endeavoring conformity in all his proceedings.

O what a comfort it is to one that loves thee, o JESUS, to operate not only to
please thee, but because it is pleasing to thee! this is the prerogative of
obedience, that so the obedient may not be frustrated of any part of the
reward, which he expects not only from the work but which he finds in it; he
obtaining his end in the beginning which is to please God: and this depends not
on any future thing, it being anticipated by obeying. O most welcome task of
obedience! why do any complain or seek to be excused from it, for this reason,
that if they obey with humility and promptitude, more is enjoind them: for
superiors are wont to be more forward in commanding them that are most prompt
in complying with their commands. It is a very fond complaint when we complain
of what we ought to wish for. A king is thought to do one a favor if he commit
any businesses to his trust; and the more and weightier they are, the greater
is the favor esteemd: if God proceed after this manner with us, why do we
complain? masters for the most part employ those servants about their commands
who are most dear and intimate with them, and of whose fidelity they have good
proof; and why do we resent that God treats us as such? o God of my heart, if
thou heldst this favorable manner of proceeding with thy own Son in this world
who was obedient even unto the death of the cross, shall I dare presume that any
favor will be showed me of a higher strain? o JESUS, thou who becamest obedient
in all, grant that I may never refuse any compliance with obedience. Thou
atchievedst all by being obedient, from thy nativity to thy very death; thou
were no les subject to Caesar and Pilate then to it. There was also a time when
thou would subject thy self to the powers of darkness, giving way to the
devils, and permitting thy self with great obedience to the fury of hell in the
executioners and malice of the Jews: and because thou could not become
Incarnate by it, thy Humanity being not as yet existent: thy Mother supplied
for this, she conceiving thee by that rare act of obedience and submission of
mind.

O most welcome task of obedience! since it is most certain that nothing is
better or more grateful to God. Adam with drawing himself from it knew good and
evil: obedience is most innocent; it not only knows not good and evil, but is
also ignorant of good and better: for all the works of obedience are in the
superlative degree, that is, best; in comparison of which the acts of other
moral virtues carry no comparison in this, that none of them is to be preferred
before commands: for though one practice all the rest, but yet do against
obedience, they all avail nothing yea he does evil. But if he omit them for it,
he shall have the merit of them all. The obedient man knows no such comparative
discourses, as, it is better to do this then that; but that it is best to do
what is commanded. He that has obedience has all other virtues in a
compendious abridgment; he that is obedient will be both chaste and a lover of
poverty. Adam after he became refractory felt presently the stings of the flesh
and sought a garment to conceal them; while he was obedient he was most chaste
and remained a Virgin; and being content with his own nakedness, he stood in an
exact poverty. O most welcome obedience to him that is emulous of virtue, and
makes God the sole object of his love!

Comfort thy self, o my soul, who covetest and longest so much to see his face
which the Angels love to contemplate, comfort thy self in the interim and
reverence thy superior, whosoever he be, as an apparent Christ and visible
God: God is not worshipped in himself only, but in every superior also.
Persuade thy self that the divine goodness in its eternal love and providence
has ordained and decreed thee this Prelate, that by him and no other he might
communicate his grace, and enrol thee one of the predestinate. Gods authority
resides in him, enquire not why he commands this or that? Gods will stands for a
reason; and so it must be in him who is here his vicegerent. Why demandst thou
a reason for putting thy self into the hands of God? Tell me, what was the
reason he created not another man, who perchance would have been better, when
he created thee, and gave thee to thy self? if thou can not assign any, why
demandest thou one for resigning thy self to God with all the latitude of thy
will? it is an unspeakable glory and content to the heavenly spirits to be
always praising God; but it is far more considerable that it is a property
inherent to him and inbred, then if it proceeded only from their mouth.

The XIII. Chapter. How great harm proceeds from daily and light defects.
Why do thou contemn in thy own soul what men affect so much in their
bodies; they providing not only for life's maintenance, but also for health and
comelines. It would be held an unsufferable misery to be always sick, and a
horrid deformity to have ones body composed of man and beast. Thou must not
only stand in horror of great sins but also dread the very desires and
thoughts that are culpable, yea any imperfection. How unseemly an object would
it be, if a serpents mouth stood upon thy face? and yet every small word whether
but lightly detractive or offensive or idle, is far more deformed. O truth, o
immense goodness! I beg of thee by the merits of Christ, that thou will remove
this veil from before my eyes, that I may thoroughly know how stupendous an
evil is involved in the malice of the least default! o man, how monstrous a
creature would thou seem to the eyes of men, if thou should at any time
appear with the head of an ox: or horse in thy humane body! and yet it is far
worse if before God and his Angels thou conceive in thy soul deified by divine
grace, disproportioned and idle thoughts of terrene things, and a brutish
longing after thy own commodity: nay there is more proportion betwixt a man's
body and that of a beast, which are in the same degree or order of things then
there is betwixt grace and any sin even the smallest. Wherefore the deformity of
the least venial defect exceeds all monstruosity and corporal mishapednes
whatsoever, not only what is now extant but also imaginable or possible. I
beseech thee, o zealot of Christ, by his most sacred blood, pause here a while
and ponder what I say with an unbiazd judgment: and thou who would not have
the least blemish in thy body, permit not to thy utmost these monsters in thy
soul the spouse of JESUS. Employ all the faculties of thy mind, set all the
inventivenes of thy imagination on work, and frame a deformity as ugly as thou
can, and such a mishapdnes as the very thought of it will fill thee with
dread and horror, and this will be small in comparison of the deformity of a
small offense. The more excellent a thing is, the more we ressent its
corruption; and crookednes proves there the greatest eye sore where straightnes
is most requird: what more excellent then our minds and will which is in an
eminent degree above any other creatures? wherefore its least defect is very
ugly, neither can understanding humane or Angelical penetrate to the full the
harm it causes to a soul. What a prodigious thing would it be if thou
carriedst thy heart in thy belly and not in thy breast? it is a greater prodigy
that a soul made to love God should covet pleasures or deforme it self with the
intemperance of gluttony or neglect in any other depraved affection.

Thou must have a horror not only of enormous sins but also of all venial
which are esteemd little, material, and faslely tearmd petty ones. That is not
justly stild light and little, which only has above it another which is great.
A venial defect is not little, which has only above it another greater, that
is a mortal one: yea for this reason it is to be thought great, because it has
above it but one evil which is greater. Men esteem not only death evil and
dread it as such, but also a fever or a deadly wound. That must needs be a
vast evil which is only less then one evil: a vast evil which is greater then
all others, wants, disgraces, sicknesses, torments and hell it self: it is a
vast evil greater then which or equal God neither knows nor can inflict,
although he should heap all the punishments of the damned upon thee.

Thou would think it unsupportable to have a canker which rotted and consumed
thy limbs: what if other diseases much greater were added to this; leprosy,
stoppage of breath, the palsy, dropsey, loathing of the stomach, the gout,
blindness, phrensey, dumbnes, extinction of natural heat? One sole venial sin is
more hurtful then all these. Venial sin is a canker; it spreads insensibly even
to death, inducing many others and at length a mortal, unles the depraved
affection be cut off. It is a leprosy, debarring the scabby and loathsome soul
of the embracements of her spouse: it is a stoppage, causing difficulty of
breathing after heavenly things and admitting divine inspirations, grieving and
contristating the H. Ghost: it is a palsy retarding the nimble motions of our
mind toward God and making us dull and stupidly insensible in the divine
service: it is a dropsy begetting a thirst and high conceit of temporal things
and a neglect of divine and wholesome ones: it is a loathsomnes of stomach
causing aversion from spiritual affairs: it is a gout impeding us in the
advancement of a virtuous progress: it is a blindness making us dim-sighted in
the knowledge of truth, and heavenly goods, veyling our eyes with fond worldly
principles as if a thick mist were cast before them: it is a phrensy, making
the soul go out of her right wits; what greater phrensy imaginable, then that
he, whom the king to honor him, to have him his courtier, yea and adopt him
for his Son had clad in royal purple, should go dip it in a dirty pudle, and
then ridiculously appear in his presence? in like manner one that is vested
with divine grace and the purple of God, defiles himself with venial sin, and
though he be not stripped of that precious robe, yet he pitifully bedaubs and
misuseth it; and dares in this pickle appear before the Angels, and come into
the presence of God. Venial sin is also a deprivement of speech rendering our
prayers so ineffectual that we deserve not to be heard nor obtain redress at
the hands of heaven: it is a wasting consumption disabling the mind to resist
the devil: it is a decay of vital heat much diminishing the fervor of charity.
Can that be little which is the cause and source of so great evils? how can a
soul in this equipage desire to repose in the bosom of her spous? stench of
breath alone is a sufficient cause of divorce in order to marriage bed: how
then dares she that is struck with a leprosy palsy, dropsy, she that is
miserably bleer-eyd presume to aspire to a kiss of her spouses mouth? if we
should spoil our apparel with spittle or dirt, yea though it were only wet
with fair water, we would presently put it of and lay it aside refraining to
appear in it before company: how then can we have patience not with our
apparel but our selves who are nasty, sordid, defild, diseasd, and yet even
thus we covet the embracements of God, never thinking of being first cured or
putting our selves in better array? if thou would be content on condition of
being cured of any of the before said diseases, suppose it were the canker
alone, nay out of hopes of being cured, though with hazard, to have some limb
cut of; how much more to be cured of them all? o the stupidity of man I who is
so insensible of so many maladies that befall his soul, and procures not, what
in him lies, an easy and obvious remedy in order to a certain and invaluable
recovery of its health from so many dangerous diseases; since for the uncertain
recovery of his body he spares neither limbs nor any kind of torment.

Go too, silly fool; be sure in the first place to provide for thy soul; and
use as much caution as thou can by avoiding venial sins not to incur so many
diseases, and for that end be sparing neither of care nor industry. Thou may
conjecture the greatness of the malady by the difficulty of the cure. Behold
what a medecin purgatory, which is the hospital of such diseasd souls,
applies to them: can it be little which must be cured with that fire and such
bitter torments? would one suspect that fault little for which he sees a nice
and tender woman tormented in a flaming furnace for an hours space, and that
by the command of her most indulgent and affectionate spouse? certainly either
her spouse might be thought some furious fellow or the fault was highly
displeasing. Why do we esteem venial defects of small concern, for which God who
is so loving and merciful toward men, will have souls so dear to him to lie
days and years in scorching flames without the least resentment of
compassion? either God is very unjust and cruelly bent, or the least offense is
a fearful irreverence and vast ingratitude. Thou o Lord, art no tirant but an
humble lover of souls, and thy mercy is above all thy works: this is ^y
impudency too too enormous and stupenlious; which thou who art most just, most
meek, and humble of heart, who would be glad to remit much of that pain, art
forced to correct with so much severity, least thou prove defective in point of
justice.

If one should behold a dog struggling in the midst of flames and perishing in
a burning pile, he would be touched with a sense of compassion; and how much
more if he did see his own child in such a calamity? o most mercyful Father,
how can that venial fault be termed little, which it is unseemly for thee to
compassionate, though thou see thy own children by grace, whom thou
affectest so tenderly, so scorched and tortured in that piaculary furnace? and
yet for them it was thou gave thy life and precious blood. Neither paternal
bowels replenished with pity nor infinite wisdom was wanting in thee: thou
art not an ignorant God who can be deceived in the estimate of a fault, nor a
cruel one who takes content in punishing but against thy will: wherefore if thou
tormentest him so rigorously whom thou love so tenderly, it must needs be a
vast evil toward which mercy it self is so unmerciful.

Let us imagine a man void of all knowledge of hell or purgatory, and beholding
only by revelation the state of some one soul pitifully afflicted by those
flames for a venial sin, but wholly ignorant what might occasion such a
punishment: what, I beseech thee, would he guess to cause it? any small or petty
trifle or rather some huge exorbitancy which so benign a God resolved to
chastize with so much rigor?

Again shall that be termed little which he in this life punishes with the
greatest of all punishments, death. If God cannot err in inflicting penalties,
since he inflicts so dreadful ones, how great must that needs be for which he
inflicts them? behold for one venial sin he punished his own servants Moses*
and Aaron with death: for one venial sin also, as is probably thought, Oza and
lots wife were suddenly struck with the like disaster. For one venial sin the
Abbot Moses was deliverd over to the devil and for a space possessed by him:
and in very deed it were a les evil to have a thousand legions of devils in
ones body and be vexed by them, then to have the least venial sin in his soul,
and take complacence in it. The devil labored tooth and nail for 40 years,
together, to make a certain servant of God commit but one venial trespass. Is
the devil such a fool that he would wait and lie in ambush so long to surprise
him for a matter of small moment? why shall not we be watchful at least one day
to avoid so great mischief? o most pure truth purify my impure spirit from such
an evil; and illuminate me, that I may not esteem it light because I regard it
but lightly, since the devils themselves take it so to heart; but let me esteem
that great which is done against a God so great; nor let me repute that
contemptible and slight, which I a contemptible, slight, and inconstant
creature commit by sinning upon all occasions and constantly; but therefore let
me hold it great, because I who am vile and contemptible, dare do it against a
God the best and greatest.

How great must that needs be, which rather then we must but once commit
deliberately, it is better to embrace a thousand deaths, it is better that
heaven and earth returned to their first nothing, and all mankind were sentencd
to damnation. If choice were given to the Virgin Mother while she stands at the
foot of the cross, bewailing the torments and death of her beloved Son, whether
she would have him released from these pains and disgraces, and behold him
presently seated at the right hand of his Father, and the salvation of a
thousand worlds accomplished at that instant, or consent to one sole venial
sin; she would choose not to do this latter, and would also persuade me to do so
too; nay rather then this, she would choose to see her Son and the Son of God
once more naild to the cross, yet without any default at all, and if it were
needful and lawful would strike in the nails with her own pious hand and
sacrifice him with greater charity then Abraham did his. Tell me I pray, would
it be a slender courtesy and comfort to the Virgin and her Jesus if some one
man were found who would put himself upon the mount Calvary in the room of
Christ and be crucified and suffer in his steed? persuade thy self for all this
that they would rather desire a greater comfort at thy hands, which is, to
eschew all venial sin. Consider now whether that would be little which should
preponderate such a piece of service; nor do thou deny this solace to thy
suffering Christ and his compassionate Mother. Let us then cancel and abolish
this opinion, that that evil can be light or little, which the Virgin, Christ,
and God his Father deem so great and punish so exemplarly.

That is not little which hinders things orderd to a great and sublime end;
which lessens the love of God in this life and delays his vision in the other.
It is no small rub which puts as it were a stop and let to the most speedy and
powerful mercy of God and his desires. Would it be accounted a small violence
that should suspend a millstone falling from heaven in the air while it were
poasting to the earth its center? it is therefore no small sin which suspends the
divine munificence, and the ardent desires of an enamoured soul, that they
cannot reach their center God and the promisd holy land of beatitude, but
detaines it in the flames of purgatory. That is not a little displeasing to God
which hinders him from giving out of hand what he has such a mind to give, and
we so willingly would receive. That is, not little which stops the current of
Gods great favors and even in this life obstructs the outlets of his profuse
liberality. Let us tremble at such an evil, and to the very utmost of our power
use all possible diligence to avoid it; not enduring to brook the shame and
disgrace which the name of a fault imports.

How can that soul take complacence in the name of a servant or a child, or a
spouse, which is not careful to please God and comply in all things with his
sacred will? how naughty a servant would he be thought, that would do nothing
as he ought, unles his master threatening death stood over him with a drawn
sword; and can upon no other terms neither by fair means nor foul be brought
to his duty? how untoward a child who is allwaies crossing his parent, and
seeks to please him no further then merely to keep himself from being
disinherited: for the rest is wholly wrechles in accomplishing his will and
desire, and is lead in all with a spirit of contradiction? how disloial a
spouse, who should only so far forth show her self faithful and loving to her
fellow spouse as not to provoke him to take her life; in other things
perpetually crossing and vexing him; and were she never so often corrected,
showed no signs at all of amendment? what argument of love would it be in a
child or spouse to say; I really love my parent or fellow spouse, but little
regard notwithstanding what affront I put upon him besides death or a deadly
wound: I will uncontroulably do what I think good nor ever labor to humor him
further, then may serve to save my life and secure my inheritance. Who could
have patience with one that should speak thus and do accordingly: Just thus
proceeds he who contemnes venial sins and serves God merely to avoid the death
of his soul or forfeiture of heaven by a mortal. Is there, think you, any
master of a family to be found who would give house room to such a servant or
Son or spouse? this is the prodigious patience of God, who tolerates us even
while we abuse his toleration.

Let us then not misprize these faults as little; which although they were so,
yet are they many, and God is great and but one. Grains of sand are small, yet
they may be so multiplied that they will overwhelme one sooner then a great
stone. One locust is an inconsiderable creature, yet what greater destruction
to the fields then their multitude? great cities are delugd by small drops of
rain. If we had so many little wounds or pricks in our body so many pushes or
blisters in our face, so many rends or holes in our garment as we commit venial
sins, we should be half dead, loathsome to the eye, and almost quite naked;
and why do we suffer those miseries in our soul, but because we are less
ressentive of its harms then what concerns our body and apparel. O how dare
we appear before God so replenished with confusion! but why do I insist upon
the number? one sole fault is to be dreaded, because one cannot think any thing
little who thinks God to be infinite; nor will he account it small whose love is
great: what love resides in him who makes no reckning of displeasing God? he
that displeases him in a little, really displeases him; he that displeases
him, transgresses the laws of an ardent love.

The XIV. Chapter. Of exactnes in small things.
GOd is immensly great; in his service thou must esteem nothing little: he were
not great enough unles he exceeded all littlenes. If thou love him, true
friendship is tried in the least duties. Art shows it self in little things:
the perfection of virtue is no les polite, and therefore it stands not
altogether upon ample subjects. Nature is most admirable in the least things;
it is most tender over the minutest creatures. Grace is no whit more dull, nor
ought to be more backward. Those things which seem more minute are to be more
nighly regarded. Since God is so great nothing is little which either pleases
or displeases him. In good and evil there is no minutenes. Whatsoever is good,
for that very respect is great: whatsoever is bad, upon that very score is not
little. An infinite goodness exacts by claim all our forces: he that owes all
does an injury if he deny any thing. Use not these manners of speech; what
makes matter for this; this imports but little, this is of no moment at all.
Yea this which thou deemst nothing is a business of great concern: because what
thou think much or of great moment is nothing in comparison of Gods greatness
and thy obligation. O immense truth, how can any thing be thought little or
great, if the measure of my obligation and diligence be thy immensity, where
there is no little nor great, but an excess of all mean. How can I say this is
little, if whatsoever I do for thee is nothing.

It is not little which is held the least, since perfection consists in the
least. Little things are not to be slighted because greater are contemned. If
thou let a spark of fire fall into a pile of dry sticks which thou keepst under
thy roof, a great flame will be raisd which will consume the whole edifice. Our
corrupt nature is as apt to take the infection of malice as a little dry flax
to take flame. If thou sleightest small things by little and little thou will be
perverted. Regard not the littlenes which appears at first, but by the
beginning measure the end. Seeds are allwaies extreme little, and yet there is
more virtue and efficacy in them then in any part of the whole plant. The
parting of two high ways insensibly protracted into length ends at last in a
great interval of distance and may proceed to an infinitude though at first les
then a step would have concluded the difference. If thou once swarve from thy
good purposes and remit that vigor of mind, thou will by degrees find thy self
very remote from thy former fervor. Great things take their beginning from
little; wherefore a little is not the least if it be but the beginning. The
beginning of every thing is its chief and principal part: yea it is not called a
part but the half of the whole.

Our H. Father S. Ignatius did with reason hold that it was more dangerous to
contemn little things then greater: the damage of these latter is more patent
and may forthwith be remedied: but the prejudice we sustain by the former is
not perceived but by length of time, when being inveterated by custom it is
scarce capable of redress. The very nature and enormity of sin makes us abhor
and detest great ones; but little defects because they seem little for this
very reason are contemned; and this being so, our mind is not bent against
them. Our concupiscence is sharpend and set on edge by little things, as
thinking that it may wander in them without any great danger when it is not so
venturous in great ones, it being curbed and kept in by the apprehension of a
patent ensuing harm: but when our desire is once enkindled and a little traind
up, how will it then lash forth, what will it not encounter? and for this reason
we must sometimes proceed with more warines and solicitude against small
defects then great. Custom which, gains prescription upon vices, breeds from
little things, not from great because they are less frequent: nor shall we find
it an easier task to resist custom then nature. One shall sooner have an action
in law against a public invader and forcible seizure of our goods, then one
that has had them by long prescription. Those things which seem light take
from us all remorse and shame of committing them; and that toward God being
once cast of what good can be expected from us? past shame past grace.

Be ashamd to refrain from great things and yeald to little: for it is
disgraceful and a sign of a coward to be foild by a dwarf or weak enemy. That
little is not to be slighted in which great worth may be comprised. A pearl is
not contemned by reason of its littlenes; nay for this respect it is valued the
more as containing great worth in a little body: why do thou slight that
little, wherein perchance thou may do God a piece of better service then in
greater. Obsequiousnes and diligence in small things gains greater esteem: for
as art commends it self most when it comprehends great skill in a little
compass, and we admire nature for completing in each minute creature all the
requisites of life; so it is loves masterpiece to bestow its whole mind upon
little things and shut up in them an ample and enflamed affection: and such a
diligence is much more praiseworthy, the want of greatness being supplied by our
affection; and that is it which adds worth and only is prizable. No true
estimate of things is made but according to ones affection: the least service
is great when the affection is great; but that many times is greater in little
things; and therefore an exactnes and compliance with our duty in them will not
be les acceptable. Great things of their own nature stir up to attention, and
are les troublesome because les contingent: small things make les impression
upon the mind, nor awake it so thoroughly, and because more frequent therefore
more noisome: wherefore the mind that is exact in them takes them more to heart,
and makes it her task to be more vigilant, more constant, and perseverant in
obeying. Wherefore he will be held no great zealer of Christ who zeales only
great things: he will be esteemd no great lover of God who has relinquished
the world and himself in things of higher concernment, unles he also do it in
minute. The perfection of a statuary consists not in unbarking a piece of wood
or hewing it into great blocks, any rude hand can do this; but he only is a
cunning artist who leaves not a superfluouschip, who carues it to a complete
shape, the least bit not escaping him unaccomplished. Any novice-painter can
lay the first grounds or shadows of a tablet; but to bring it to perfection is
the task of a skillful hand and subtle pencil; and to consummate such a piece
the least limb must be elaborate: in like manner, Gods image in us is
completed by the least duties of a virtuous compliance. That is no absolute
picture which has only a head, belly, and feet; but in which all the parts are
wrought to an exact proportion: why will thou present thy self to God a rude
and deformed image for want only of some petty trifle?

O infinite and most absolute Lord, what can I deem little which causes the
least similitude or dissimilitude with or from thee? why shall I repute little
what thou wishest me to do or avoid? why shall omit the least thing that may
redound to thy majesty or glory, and not accomplish all, since thou were pleased
to embrace all without exception for my vile unworthynes and sin. O remiss
spirit, if an Angel from heaven should come and tell thee that God for his
greater glory, and in thanksgiving for all the benefits conferred by Christ
upon mankind, would have thee suffer the torments of S. Laurence, how
ungrateful would thou show thy self if perchance thou should slight the
favor and make but small reckning of it. Behold what will thou say? God exact
not now of thee the girdiron or racks, or imprisonment, or other torments, but
only that thou apply thy self to the performance of this petty action and do it
not perfunctoriously: esteem this a main business: the will of God is that thou
do this, and it suffices. Martyrs are esteemd Saints for their patient
sufferance of great torments: Confessors acquire sanctity by a patient
shunning of little faults. The former tolerating great pain eschewd the fault,
the latter tolerating no faults eschewd the pains of Purgatory much greater.

The XV. Chapter. That self praise is to be avoided.
HE that loves to be praised loves an impossibility. Praise proclaims one
good; but for this very reason that thou will be praised thou art not only void
of all good but full of great evil, to wit, a diabolical evil, pride and
ambition. Although thou hearst thy self praised, not thou shall be praised but
another. Praise is only for the good; but thou art stark naught who covetest to
be praised. He cannot be good or praise worthy who is so vain as to hunt after
commendation. Wherefore he cease to be praise worthy who seeks to be praised;
and if he be not praise worthy he is wholly incapable of praise; for that will
not be for the future, which could not be for the time precedent. If thou
smilest upon thy prayser, thou do in reality applaud thy disprayser: because
thou art most unjust, whether thou think thy self just or no: for if thou
holdst thy self not such thou rejoycest at a lie: if thou holdst thy self just,
this is unjust enough, that thou be preferred before others who art nothing. When
thou hear men say, thou art extreme just, extreme good; he that really is
such receives praise, not thou who neither art just nor good, and so to thee
it is rather a dispraise. The praise of the just is the dispraise of the
unjust. For this very reason he is unworthy of commendation and worthy of
contempt for grieving at his being contemned and vilified, or vainly puffed up
with self esteem: he that does not hold himself contemptible pleads an excuse
for his contemners.

Self conceit is the daughter of a lie and Mother of ignorance, confusion,
shame and danger: self humility is the daughter of truth, and mother of merit
and instruction: whether will be better to be confounded and deceived, or to
merit and be instructed? love only to be praise worthy not praised, and this
suffices. Thou shall only be praise worthy by seeking solely the praise and
glory of God and thy own vilification. Why had thou rather seem good then be
so; since thou ceasest to be good by laboring to seem such and be vainly
esteemd: Why love thou more to deceive and see others deceived then to frame
a true estimate of thy self. Why do thou vilify thy self below a stone, thou
procuring not only that it be of a sparkling brightness, but that it be not a
counterfeyt; insomuch that each one is ashamed to wear for an ornament a
spurious gem.

O most laudable truth, o glory of creatures, with what face durst I so much as
once seek my own praise and credit, who have so often contemned thee? with what
face do I seek to be esteemd, who although I had been but once negligent in
procuring thy greater glory, deserve eternally to be vilified? how notoriously
impudent or rather frantic would he show himself, who should covet to partake
of the honor and credit he got, who dishonored thee by buffetting thee, or
calling thee, blasphemer, or mocking thee with a reed in the time of thy
Passion. I am worse then all these, and am convinced to be a liar, if I prefer
my self before any of them: how then dare I so much as think of self praise and
esteem? what madness and wickedness is it to seek it; nay what impudence, o faint
hearted spirit, not to judge thy self worthy of all disgrace, nor wish to be
contemned by all?

Thou shall not therefore be really good because others style or think thee
such. A sick man is not cured by being said to be cured. Which would thou
rather choose, to be in very deed able and strong in health although others did
think thee infirm; or rather to be truly sick and esteemd by others sound and
robustious? Why do thou choose, to be held good, since thou are so very bad?
yea it would be highly displeasing to one that is sick or in pain, even more
then the malady it self, if others should say he did but counterfeyt, and loved
to complain without cause? why take thou complacence in being accounted
upright when thou art the quite contrary? sick people are so far from desiring
to be thought sound, if they be not so, that they themselves are wont now and
then to aggravate the disease, and love that others do so too: so one that is
truly humble exaggerates his own unworthines and is glad when others do the
same, augmenting his contumelyes and disgraces: therefore the conclusion is, he
that seeks to be praised, seeks not only an impossible but ridiculous thing.

Thou will commit a piece of injustice if thou be desirous of praise and not of
disgrace, since a plurality of votes conclude thy contempt. If thou balance
thy self, thy misdemeanors and innumerable defects will preponderate thy good
deeds they being very few and depending upon others. Will thou know in plain
terms that it is impossible for thee to deserve praise? it is impossible for
thee to have any thing of thy self for which to be esteemed. And hence thou
may gather man's insufficiency, for laboring to gain credit by what is
another: which if he had them of his own he would never glory in another man's
right: as worldly men are wont to do for having brave horses, faithful
servants, or rich apparel, generosity being only the quality of the horse, and
a generous horse may have a vicious or base minded owner. Fidelity is the glory
of a servant, and a good servant may have a very naughty master. Splendid
apparel is a commendation rather due to the tailor or weaver; and a fine coat
may cover a foul body and ulcerous conscience. By the same vicious manner of
proceeding men appropriate to themselves what is only proper to God, even those
who have abandoned the world, while they do not wholly abandon themselves.

The XVI. Chapter. Of the baseness of man.
IF thou desire peace with God, humble thy self beneath all men and all
things. It is a terrible saying, God resists the proud; neither is that les
terrible, the proud resist God. God resists the proud that they may not commit
wickedness: the proud resist God that he may not do good. God resists the proud
that they become not evil and wholly bad by their pride for which end he seeks
to humble them: the proud resist God, that he be not good and beneficial by
stopping the current of the divine blessings: Make hence an evident conjecture
that thou art extreme base, that is extreme proud, since thou resistest God;
otherwise he would have enriched thee with innumerable benefits, graces, and
virtues. It is palpable that a cloud hangs over thee which keeps off the sun,
if at midday in an open Champian his beams do not forcibly beat upon thee:
thou will as then be all in the shade, although thou see nothing that can
overshadow thee. None is more vile and defectuous then he who acknowledges in
himself no vileness or defect, because his mind raisd above it self stands in
opposition with God and his clarity. There is no more evident sign of our pride
then the surcease of the divine beneficence; because it puts a stop to Gods
ardent desire of communicating himself; it impedes the efficacy of Christ's
Passion, the intercession of the Virgin, and the prayers of Saints. Great is my
malice and bottomless my misery since I being but one can resist so many,
obstructing as much as in me lies the 5. Fountains of Christ's blood, and the
torrent of the divine liberality. Although we were so mad as not to acknowledge
any sin or defect in our selves, we ought to take this for a most pregnant
token of extreme pride and baseness; nor were our sins insufficient, ought any
thing else to keep us more in humility; not the worms in which we are to end,
not the clay of which we are molded; not the ordures with which while we live
we are stuffed, not the miseries of our body which insult so over us, nor the
ignorance of our mind which thwarts and frustrates our counsels. It is more
then enough to humble us beneath all things to see God communicate himself no
more to us, and permit, as he does our defects.

O humble Majesty of God! how dear and desirable is our humility to thee?
Christ dyed for our sins; but he permits them for our humiliation. Did the
humility of man cost dearer then the life of God? Did JESUS prize our humility
more then the benefit of his redemption; since he carries himself permissively
toward our sins, for the cancelling whereof he spent both his blood and his
life, and humbled himself by descending from heaven, that he might give redress
to our pride; and he that redeemd sin by his own humiliation and death, makes
sins themselves as it were the purchase of our humility? what is this which
seems almost incredible, that God should do incredible things to make us
humble? it seeming otherwise inconceptible that ever we can conceive thoughts
of pride: for it is impossible to find what may source them.

We are nothing and we have nothing. Nay though we were some great matter,
considering nevertheles how we have behaved our selves, I see not how we can
with confidence lift our eyes up to heaven. We are in all respects most vile
both for what we are and for what we are not; both for what we have done, and
for what we have omitted; both for what God has done for us and for what he
has not done in us. And because he is so great, and we such a nothing; who is
there that considering the sins which he has committed, will not debase
himself to the center of humility? And yet he must no les do it for the
trespasses he has not committed. For there is no share of this ours, and least
of all is it to be attributed to us that we did not trespass; and for as much
as concerned us we had trespassed. Upon this account thou art as much obliged
to God, with whose grace thou did not cooperate, and have equal cause to
humble thy self as if thou had trespassed. Things are not to be prized
according to their actuality but their intrinsecal virtue. A sword is not sold
dearer for having slain many, but because it could and is fit for such a piece
of service: thy malice was sufficient for so many trespasses; that it did not
actually complete them, is not to be ascribd to thee but God. Others offenses
ought also in good reason to humble thee as much as thy own: for although that
thou did thus offend be not a thing above thy reach; yet that thou did not
share in others transgressions is a peculiar favor from God above nature, and
thou art peculiarly endebted to him upon this account: because it is more
remarkable that he preserved thee from them, then if he had pardoned them being
committed. Wherefore if thou be not guilty of punishment, at least thou art of
greater gratitude and humiliation. What sins soever thou hear committed by
others, deem thy self forthwith guilty of them. The Virgin Mother had greater
motives of humbling her self, for being preserved from sin, then Magdalen who
had so many and such enormous ones forgiven her, yea although she were
dispossessed of 7. devils. Our wretchlosnes also in the omission of many good
deeds must in like manner humble us as well as those which we performed; for the
first are totally ours, the second Gods alone. No man can justly boast of what
belongs wholly to another, but ought to be confounded at his own ingratitude,
and double his diligence for the obligation. We moreover mar many good actions
and do them after a superficial and imperfect manner, besides that they are
both very inconsiderable and few.

But who is there that proposing to himself what thou, o humble JESUS, did
for our sakes dare glory in his own good deeds? compare, o ungrateful Spirit,
thy goodly and ridiculous action for which thou art so vainly puffed up, with
the infinite work of the Incarnation, of the Eucharist, and Passion: Will thou
be able to show thy face and not blush for shame? God who is all fulness
evacuated himself for thee; and thou who art nothing holdst thy self some body
in opposition to him, though all thou do for so loving and zealous a Lord be
far from either fervor or zeal. If any one would bethink himself what God has
forborne to do on his behalf, would he not humble himself for his not
precipitating him into hell after his first sin, as he did the delinquent
Angels?

O man, the bain and infamy of creatures, what have thou of thy self that is
honorable, or why layest thou claim to any thing, and make not forth with an
oblation of all to God, to whom thou art endedted for so many benefits. If we
had store of things which, were really our own, it were our duty to offer and
give them all to him, for what he has been pleased to bestow upon us; how then
are we so senseles, ungrateful, and unjust as to appropriate to our selves
what is absolutely his, which, if we could truly own as ours, it would be an
unsufferable impudence not to make them his. What wonder if thou give some
petty toies to God, since he gave all things and himself to thee. I wish thou
had much to offer him; but since thou have not, rejoice so much the more and
glory in thy poverty beholding all to be his already; which if they were thine,
thou would make his: rejoice that thy desire is his nature.

It is a thing of greater confusion that sometimes we glory in our misdeeds as
if they were good; and present God with our corrupt actions, as if we intended
thereby to oblige him. What greater phrensy imaginable then to think to oblige
him whom thou can not pay, and to do it by those things which render ^hee
more obnoxious to punishment? but if any of thy good works were entire and
perfect, ^^ has not that compleatnes from thee, and ^^erfore thou ought not
so style it thine: and ^ow can thou oblige thy Lord and satisfy ^^y creditour
with what is not thy own but ^others. Nay if the good work were totally ours
and God had no hand nor share in it, why do thou boast of it, and think
therewith to make him full satisfaction, since what measure thou affordest
others the self same shall be afforded thee? if this proceeding be held with
men, why not with Almighty God? thou measurest his gifts with a very short
ell: have thou such a mean conceit of what he has done for thee that thou
think to recompense it with such a slender piece of service? we must measure
God with a larg ell and deem him so great that all we do falls hugely short of
his humility and passion, to say nothing of his majesty and beneficence.

He that is not meanly conceited of his own actions both for number and worth
is injurious to God, esteeming him only worthy of small services. Make God the
pattern of thy humility, who after so many benefits heaped upon thee thinks he
has don nothing; behaving himself so toward thee, and rewarding thy merits
which without him had bin none, as if he had contributed nothing to them: why
then will thou ascribe thy services and good works to thy self, as if they
proceeded wholly from thee and God had no hand in them, when nevertheles all is
chiefly depending on him? why do thou also vaunt thy self better then others,
since thou should rather be contristated that they have less goodness then
they ought, and must reckon their want thy loss? neither is the charity nor
clarity of God conspicuous in thee if thou fixest thy eyes rather upon thy own
perfections then thy nothing. Stars when they are in a remote distance from the
sun, and partake not so fully of his light, one seems to exceed another, and
this is when they shine clearly: but all this proceeds from the darksomenes of
the night; for in the daytime though they more approach the sun as being in
the same hemisphere with him, and one then exceed another and share more
copiously of his light, yet we cannot see which shines brighter, yea none of
them all is exposed to our view; they are then as if there were no star in the
firmament, but all a mere though pretty vacuity. He wanders as yet among his
own imperfections, and cannot be called an illuminated soul, on whom heaven
derives its light but sparingly. He that is in the night of self love and self
seeking dares think himself some body, and much better then his neighbors: but
Saints which adheer to God, though they be laden and chargd with merits,
prefer themselves before none, but esteem themselves a mere nothing, fulfilling
with their JESUS all justice, that is, all humility. The just man is humble,
because he will not admit, nor have any thing that is another fatherd upon
himself. He that esteems himself nothing how can he wrong his conscience, by
being unjust either to his neighbor as thinking himself better then him or
against God as being highly conceited of his own goodness? for no body is good
but God alone; and if none good certainly none better.

Thou have no reason at all to prefer thy self before others whom thou
beholdest poor, humble, ignoble, for any goods of fortune; but should rather
have them in great veneration for the resemblance of CHRIST which shines in
them. JESUS was poor, humble accursed of the Jews, obscure, he subjected
himself to all power and princes though never so wicked; what Christ made
choice of and esteemd, do not thou contemn and vilify.

The XVII. Chapter. What things ought to humble man: and that he can have
nothing besides God alone.
TWo things there are which ought to make thee humble, thy own baseness, and the
baseness of creatures and honors. Although thou thy self were great yet thou
should contemn all wordly dignities as little, vile, and unworthy of thee;
and though they were great thou ought to reject them, because thou art base
and unworthy of them. Thou art nothing but forgery and sin: deceive not thy
self nor seek to excuse thee; thy iniquities will proclaim thee such. Being so
overcharged with sin why do thou extol thy self for some one work but
apparently good? an eagle could not scare on high if she had but one only
feather. The peacock though beautiful in his displayed train is soon quaild for
the sole deformity of his feet; thou being full of defects how dare thou wax
proud for some one feignd virtue? remember that even from thy cradle thou art
infamous for original sin: as one that is branded with ignominy appears in an
assembly of noble men, so must thou stand in the presence of the unspotted
Angels. Thy sins have made thee a parricide of the Son of God and thy own
brother JESUS: the wicked Cain was quite out of countenance, and does thine
become more brazen? account thy self always his equal, and behold not thy
most loving Father but with the eyes of fear and shame.

Thou who have contemned the word of God and his Son, why stand thou so much
upon the words of men? what makes thee so presumptuous, since hitherto thou
have done little or nothing, who when thou have done all, wilt still be but an
unprofitable servant? yea this title is too great and much above thy desert,
since thou have nothing where with to serve God, all being his already, and he
rather serving us. Thou art so wretched and needy, that thou neither have any
thing nor can have: which if thou understandest aright, thou will at first be
much contristated seeing more clearly then the sun thy own poverty, and
despairing to be able to have any thing of thy own; but thou will soon be
replenishd with unspeakable joy, beholding the riches of God and how he
possesses all. I rejoice, o Lord, that it is impossible for me to have any
thing because it is impossible for thee not to have all. Why am I sorry that
nothing is mine, if it be in my power to make God mine? what an ineffable joy
is it, that I can have nothing, no not so much as my self, besides God alone! a
pregnant sign whereof is, for that it is not lawful for me to have any thing in
fruition besides him alone. I must only use the rest of creatures and my self
as another, not enjoy them. He is not master of a thing to whom the use of it
is granted only for a time, that is rather said to be possessed which one may
enjoy for all eternity. He that has only the use of the world shall have the
issues and profits of the Lord of the world.

I congratulate with my self, o Lord, that I have nothing to offer in oblation
to thy sacred majesty: for what worth can accrue to things for being mine, to
make them appear in thy sight? but because I have of thine wherewith to offer,
it will have worth for being thine, and on that account be acceptable. How can I
have any thing of my self who am nothing? yea for this very reason that thou
esteemst thy self something, o proud spirit, thou must repute thy self more
vile and abject. While a sickman keeps his bed he perceives not so well his own
imbecility; but when he is upon recovery and sits up then he feels his own
weakness not being able to stand by himself. The more thou appliest thy self to
the service of God and advancest in the way of virtue, the more humble and
circumspect must thou be, and then thou will discover thy own baseness. While a
sickman keeps his bed he needs not fear falling; but when he rises and begins
to walk about, then conscious of his own infirmity he trusts not to himself but
mistrusting a fall leanes upon another.

Why then do thou so magnify thy self, since for this very respect that thou
do so, thou art more debased. Thou art in a manner more ridiculous then
Lucifer himself, since thou magnifiest thy self upon far les grounds. What is
thy nature compared with that of the Cherubins? what is thy sanctity in
comparison of the sanctity of that grace wherewith the first Angel was enriched
by God? what would thou seem to be and appear to others? thou can have
nothing of thy own; and that which thou can least of all have, is honor. All
glory is only due to God, who though he impart other things to men yet it he
will not. If thou do well it is sufficient that he knows it, that he see and
approve it who is to reward it, and whom thou intendest to please. Certainly
if thou did love God fervently, and were a faithful servant thou would
wish, if it were not altogether impossible, to do something for his sake which
he were not to remunerate nor to come to the knowledge of; making it thy sole
aim to be loyal to him, never regarding the reward at all. Among faithful
friends one is careful of another and does him good offices though he be wholly
ignorant of them, yea many times he conceales them from him: for he aims at no
other salary besides fidelity and obsequiousnes toward his friend: so he that
loves God sincerely, desires no recompense more then to serve him and comply
with his trust. Let me, o Lord, imitate thy fidelity toward me who am so
perfidious, who do me so many good offices, who heapest so many benefits upon
me wholly ignorant of them though thou know that I am always ungrateful.
When men commit acts of wickedness they desire not to have thee an eye witness:
I, o Lord, will recant from this and change my manner of proceeding: wherefore
as often as I trespass which will be very often, I covet thee a spectatour to
the end thou may chastize me, and assist me that I fall not into a relapse:
but when by thy assistance I do good, I had rather thou did not see me at
all, then that men did. If the fervent lover of God do not good for the
testimony of God; how deceitfully will he love, who seeks the approbation of men.

The XVIII. Chapter. How much we owe to the grace of God and Christ.
IT will be an act of pride in thee to esteem thy self dust and ashes since thou
art nothing but imposture and sin. Thou have nothing good, why do thou stand
in opposition with God? thou art replenishd with evils why do thou not blush
even before men? thou art capable of having all evil; why art thou not in
perpetual fear? thou art capable of doing all evil; why do thou not dread thy
own condition? thy own very essence is not thine but Gods: yea what thou had
before thy being was none of thine neither; thou had then a mere nothing
which had a possibility of being; and even that thou had not of thy self but
from God; who if he were not, thou could not be. Why reputest thou thy self
great since the very nothing which thou had before thy creation was not of
thy self? Therefore thou owe more then thy self to God; for this also is a
part of thy debt that when thou wast nothing he gave thee a possibility of
being.

Thou receivedst the benefit of creation: tell me what member was molded by
thy designment or to what joint of any one fingar did apply clay, or afford
materials whereof to frame it? or by what prayer did thou obtain of God to be
created and called out from among infinite natures and better individuals which
sleep still in the dust of their own nothing? what diligence of thine prevented
that thou were not born blind, lame, frantic or some savage barbarian? do
thou glory in thy talents of wit, handsomnes of body, noblenes of birth? yes
thou may lawfully do so, if God at thy suggestion made thee such. But thou will say, I glory not in being created, but in being created such a one, so
industrious, so witty, and so toward of behavior. Tell me, I pray, if thou
did not advise God in the point of thy creation, could thou advise him to
create thee so witty, and after such or such a manner? if thou did not
suggest to him to endow thee with such a mind, why do thou boast of its
piercing subtilty? did thou make choice of that mind, and cunningly sift into
that bottomless abyss of things possible, extracting thence the best qualifyd? I
do not, (will thou reply) brag of my natural endowments; but of the virtuous
practices I embrace while others slight them; I glory that I am better then
they, an upright man, and one that fully complies with my duty. Nay be ashamd
that scarce once thou compliest with it, and have been neglective a thousand
times. O unjust and partial sharer! thou allottest to God the worst share; to
him thou attributest thy being and clay mest to thy self thy being good: it is
more to be good then only to be: Why do thou play the usurper in the better
half, since thou can challenge no interest not even in the worst? there is a
larger distance betwixt being good and being a man then there is betwixt a man
and being nothing. God could make thee a man out of nothing only by commanding,
by acting, by living; but of a man to make thee good he was to serve, to
suffer, to dye. Thou art a most unjust distributer who ascribest nature to God,
and grace to thy self.

I never saw any body proud for his existency, but almost all are for their
being good and better; and yet the former arrogance is more excusable: for thou
had had more (supposing thou had any thing) by having a being when thou
wast not; then after it in being good and just: for we only not contributed to
our creation; but we moreover put a let and obstacle to our justification. O
most patient truth of God! how can thou tolerate our lying arrogance, were it
not for its ridiculousnes; while we make our selves the authors of what we most
oppose and seek by all means to destroy. If we carry our selves so modestly
toward those things which are left in their nothing as not to vaunt over them
for our being: why are we so impudently vainglorious against God for our being
good, and against men for our being better then they? why take thou pride, o
my soul, in that which ought to put thee most to confusion? for thy being
nothing thou have no reason to be confounded, it is enough thou be not proud;
for that has nothing of ignominy in it: but thy being an impediment to God by
thy sins, that affords matter enough to plunge thee in a deep sea of shame and
confusion.

The self-same that gave thee a being will give thee a good being. As thou had
nothing of thy self toward thy existence; so being created, thou had nothing
toward thy being good. If thou have nothing of thy self and in thy self
toward nature, so neither had thou toward grace. Yea although thou did
nothing to deserve a being, thou did no evil to deserve a not being: but to
be good thou did contribute nothing of thy own, and not to be good, thou
did contribute much evil.

Although humane nature had still remaind in that integrity and dignity in
which it was created, it would not preserve it self by it self but by God:
wherefore if it could not of it self preserve the grace which it received, how
can it repair what it lost, and glory in that reparation. Remember the infamy
and corruption of our nature after its fall by sin: if when it stood entire and
in a flourishing condition it could do nothing of it self, being now weakened
and renderd contemptible what will it be able to do? A pot glories not in the
presence of the potter of its form and use fullnes though well it may of its
matter in which he had no hand: thou have nothing at all before God whereof to
glory, thou being moreover made of nothing; why then do thou glory of thy
form and usefulnes, who may well be confounded at thy misusage; and can not
glory in thy matter, because thou proceedest from nothing. Thou have no source
which can derive any goodness into thee, because of nothing nothing is made as
by way of causality. If thou be nothing of thy self, thou can do nothing nor
operate any thing of thy self, for operation follows the being. If thou be
nothing of thy self, if thou can do nothing nor operate of thy self, how much
les any thing that's good? if what is nothing of it self have or can do nothing
of it self, then it is only powerful to sin which is a defect and nothing, yea
les and more contemptible then nothing. The eye of it self has capacity to
darkness and to exclude sight or not to see; but in order to actual vision it
can do nothing without the assistance and concurrence of light.

That which is above nature and above thy self, to wit, an abnegation of nature
and thy self, thou can not have immediately of thy self and nature, but from
God who is above both thee and nature. If thou believe not reason in this
point believe faith: thou art nothing but imposture and sin: of thy self is
only thy perdition: we are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves as
of our selves, but all our sufficiency is from God. If we cannot so much as
have a congruous thought, how shall we be able to perform meritorious actions?
it may be born with that thou would seem foolish; but I cannot be persuaded
that thou would be held an heretic: why, I pray, do thou despise the
world and conceive a love of things eternal? because thou have experienced the
inconstancy of temporal things, and beheld unexpected calamities, as the death
of wealthy and powerful men, and the like. Was it thou, or God, who combined
things into such a series? did thou forecast the death of that king or
Potentat which moved thee so feelingly by beholding the instability of humane
things? besides, these self-same things passed in public and were known to
others; why were not they as well as thou stird up to a contempt of the world?
why when one is reclaimed does another still persist in his wicked courses? thou
must needs acknowledge some supernatural cause of this difference which neither
is in us nor of us alone. Perchance thou gloriest for thy being moved and not
others; as if it proceeded wholly from thy self. Tell me, I beseech thee, how
often have such like casualties, nay more forcible then this, happened, and yet
thou felst no such motion? therefore that now it is effectual to thy conversion,
proceeds not from thy self but from some hidden and provident virtue, from his
love and solicitude over thee, who would not have thee detaind any longer in
an error, but excited thee sweetly to an acknowledgment of the truth, and
orderd things so, as he knew they would move thee efficaciously. Thou will
reply, that therefore now and not before thou art moved, because some hurtful
friend of thine was absent or dead, by whose company thou were drawn to thy
invererate and sinful proceedings or because a fit opportunity of committing
them was not presented. Will thou perchance acquiesce in this? was the death or
absence of thy wicked consort or this opportunity in thy own hand? or was it
not rather God who disposed things so, and moreover furnished thee with
virtuous company, that thou might be incited by its imitation.

In like manner what good soever thou have or do, or what evil soever thou
want and shunnest, it is, because God disposing things for thy good removed
all obstacles, and seasonably gave thee incitements to goodness, and moreover
infused supernatural habits and helps to very many things which exceeded
altogether the reach of nature. What share have thou in these? if thou findst
none, what insolency is it to ascribe all to thy self? either thou must
acknowledge the grace of God and thy own nothing, or together with Epicurus
confine God, and remove him from the government of the world, leaving him no
part of providence. O most wise truth, take compassion upon me most senseles,
who am like to dote much more then that Philosopher who never was so fond as so
say that his own providence mannagd and orderd things; for ^^ he would make
himself better then God: ^ut he that presumes upon his own force in a
^eritorious action, besides that he takes away all providence from God, he
necessarily usurps it to himself: because if there were another concurrence of
things, he would not exercise a good act but a vicious: and although things
were contingent by mere chance or carried with an inevitable destiny, yet he
had no reason in the world to attribute any thing to himself.

He that applauds himself only in the goods of nature denies that he is created
by God; but he that glories in his talents of virtue, denies that the whole
world and all creatures in it are made by him and disposed and ordaind for our
good: in the first he deprives God of the dominion of one only nature, to wit,
his own; in the latter he deprives him of the dominion of the whole universe:
in the first he robs him of his omnipotency, in the latter, of his wisdom also
and goodness, denying that his fatherly providence had with due forecast orderd
things so for our advancement toward salvation. What shall I say of them that
glory in those virtues which are above all nature, and being rankd in the
highest class carry a kind of proportion with God, and either make us as it
were Gods in a divine degree, or at least suppose us such by a sublime
participation of the deity it self; as also in those which have God for their
immediate object, faith, hope, charity? in which whosoever glories, he must
necessarily either deny God to be above nature, or think himself of himself,
equal or better then God.

The XIX. Chapter. That man must not only esteem himself nothing, but also a
great sinner.
THOU art far short of being truly humble if thou think only that of thy
self thou have no good; thou must also hold thy self very bad. Saint Paul stild
himself the first of sinners; and that mouth of the H. Ghost could not tell a
lie: will thou perchance hold thy self better then such an Apostle, or think
thou speak very modestly or with exaggeration, if thou call thy self the
ring leader of the wicked? esteem thy self in good earnest the first among
sinners and the last among creatures, because thou must prefer thy self before
none at all. No body ever had meaner perswasives t^^n thou, to incline Gods
mercy toward thee; do not esteem it an act of modesty to think thus; for
divine faith teaches that no good at all preceded. Thou have no ground nor
reason to think that any other who had experienced the like mercy and favors
from God, that thou have done, would have been les grateful then thou art:
neither is it lawful to judge so rashly of another, who should hold it almost
impossible, that greater ingratitude can be found any where, then thou
evidently acknowledgest in thy self. If thou were truly compunct for thy sins,
thou would be seriously of this opinion. He that is tormented with an intense
and stinging pain thinks no other so great as it, and that no body else suffers
such anguish: the affection, to wit, inclines and overwayes the judgment. If
thou did bear any love to humility, thou would easily judge thy self the
worst of all others. The proud man out of a desire of being exalted prefers
himself before all; as also because he regards not so much in others their
perfections as defects: thou if thou were truly humble would account thy self
the worst of all; thou would consider thy own imperfections not another,
fixing thy eye wholly and solely upon their virtues.

O majesty of the supreme truth, what needs any interpretation? I consess
before thy Angels before men and malign spirits, without any tergiversation,
that I am the unworthyest of all creatures; the moral dignity of a rational
creature which grounds his chief praise, worth and virtue, consists in the
knowledge and advertence of his obligation, and his proceeding according to it;
these in no body are obnoxious to greater abuses then in me. Although many
virtuous men have been more illuminated, and some to the outward appearance
have for number outgone my sins, but this juncture, to have sind more
grievously and les cooperated with my obligations in such knowledge of them,
such remorse of conscience, such inspirations from heaven, all these concur in
no body besides my self. If any one perchance have committed fewer sins then I,
he has received also fewer inspirations, and had les obligation: if any be
found more called upon and favored by God, he find les and corresponded more
faithfully: but if perchance, which I can scarce believe, some one may be found
who sind more heavily, and had a profounder knowledge of his duty; I do not for
all this deem him worse then me, because such a one will not know nor ressent
such obligations as I do: and although another had in very deed greater ties,
though I think it cannot be; yet acts of virtue are to be weighd by the
conscience they proceed from; and since I am persuaded that my obligations to
serve him are greater then all others and yet serve him les, I may well be held
the vilest and ungratefullest of all. Although the sins of Antichrist exceed
mine in number, yet his knowledge, light and obligation will not exceed mine: for
he shall not obtain pardon of his trespasses so often as I have done, nor will he
be urged with such efficacious and present benefits and inspirations, nor
preserved from so many occasions of offending: Although Lucifer had greater
light communicated to him, yet he was damned but for one only sin, nor had he
so many ties upon him as I: the Son of God became not man for his sake, nor
shed his precious blood. Judas also had fewer obligations from Christ then
press me; for as then he had not felt the stings of death. O humble and meek
immensity of God, how can thou tolerate me, for not being confounded and
swallowd up, in the gulf of my own baseness! Let me not I beseech the prefer my
self before any one, since I find no ground to suspect any body worse then my
self.

Acts which render one sinner greater then another, are but of a limited
number: how then am not I worse then any of them, who can without any stint
add sin to sin; and have poison enough in me to infect the whole world? for
after so many benefits received, after such an excess of Gods love, so many
divine inspirations, I am still extreme wicked: and what if he by his grace in
me and others had not curbed the unbridlednes of my malice? I am daily by
addition of new sins more and more disposed to deprave both my self and others
more perniciously. If one sin of Adam was able to infect his whole innocent
posterity, if one theft of Achan could render all Israel liable to divine
vengeance such an infinite multitude as mine are what must they needs effect? I
see not, o infirm spirit, how thou can choose but be confounded, considering
thy own despicable meanenes together with the vast multitude of thy offenses,
if thou confrontest these with Gods immensity, with the excess of his benefits,
the incomprehensible work of Christ's redemption, with his ineffable love and
loialty toward thee; in comparison of which last, all the stupendous things
he has done for thee are little regardable, and by which alone he was as it
were forced to do what he did. But all this is nothing and much short of truth
whatsoever can be conceived concerning thy baseness and infamy: yea esteem it
nothing; for thou would still find thy self more and more contemptible if
thou were but thoroughly enlightened by God. O most precious truth, if the case
stand thus with me, why do not I despise my self, disdaign my self, abhor my
self so far as not to know what either to do or think of my self? I wonder that
I endeavor not to reverence God more profoundly, I am amazed that I seek not
my own contempt more fervently!

One sole crime renders him that commits it infamous, even among sinful men,
who cannot penetrate the malice of sin, nor conceive a worthy detestation of
it. How then must so many defaults of mine, so many culpable neglects disgrace
and deforme me before the sanctity of God, his pure Angels and glorious Saints.
For although I may well hope that many sins through the mercy of God are
forgiven me; what I was once of my self I am always, nor shall ever of my self
be more. If I had once of my self, for what I might account my self
contemptible, why not allwaies? for of my self I never have more: rather shame
must increase in me, and how much the more I have received, so much ought I to
humble my self for my sins past. Since I have learnd by experience the divine
mercy, shame ought I say, to increase for having contemned so good a Lord, and
still persisting in my ingratitude. O most vile and wretched spirit, why in so
great ingratitude do thou not deem thy self unworthy of all grace? how dare
thou be so bold as to beg any? why, if it were voluntarily given thee without
thy demanding it, do thou not tremble so far as almost to doubt, whether it
were not better to want that gift of God, then be exposed again to a hazard of
abusing what thou have so often contemned? but hoping in thy mercy, o Lord, I
will be bold and forward, yea importune to the whole court of heaven, discovering
to it my baseness and ulcers: neither will I cease to cry to all and each Saint
in particular, till I be even troublesome to them s and at least by my
importunity, since I have no better title of my self, I will obtain greater
grace and mercy of my JESUS, that he desert not me for deserting it.

The XX. Chapter. What it is to style ones self nothing and a great sinner.
Thou will abuse others by tearming thy self nothing and a great sinner, if
thou really think not so: but thou will deceive thy self if thou think
so, and proceedest not accordingly, treating and demeaning thy self as such.
What think thou is it to be a nothing! to be no more sollicitous over thy
self, that thou may atchieve Gods greater glory, then thou art over those
things which are not touched at all nor moved for wholly relinquishing and
evacuating themselves. Would thou fret at him that should beat the air or
chafe at another, who being placed in those vacuities of the imaginary spaces
should spend his tongue and fists in chiding and striking that empty nothing.
So thou, if thou esteemst thy self also nothing, and have evacuated thy self of
thy self, thou must not, as much as may be, resent any injuries; otherwise by
so doing thou will esteem thy self something. It will be as ridiculous and
childish for thee who tearmest thy self nothing to seek thy own repute and
interest, as if thou should be extremely anxious how to wish honor and
prosperity enough to one that is not as yet created nor ever shall be. Wherefore
thou must be no otherwise affected toward thee and thine, then if thou had
not as yet a being.

But by truly and seriously holding thy self nothing, thou do wonderfully
purify thy self, and put thy soul in a fit disposition to receive without
stop or let, the gifts of God and God himself. Nature cannot endure a vacuity,
nor can God suffer the humble man to remain evacuated but he must forthwith
replenish him. That God might become man he evacuated himself and that man may
become God, one spirit with God, must not he do so too? it will be an evacuation
of thy self, to esteem and regard what concerns thee no otherwise then if thou
were a mere nothing, to let no thought which favors of thy self or earthlines
be predominant, to divest thy self of all evil habits and affections,
dispoiling thy self of thy self, as much as if thou were but newly created of
nothing. God evacuated himself for thee, demeaning himself as if he had not
been God, and procuring thy salvation in such sort as if thou alone were to be
saved: thou must take divine things, as much as lies in thee, so to heart, as if
thou were God himself. Thou must evacuate thy self in the highest degree and
recede from thy self almost to an infinite distance, more then if thou were not
at all: which thou will compass, if thou becomest quite another creature by
grace and love, passing from thy self to God who is infinitely remote from
nothing and all essence. There are two glorious prerogatives of the divine will,
love and power; but love seems in some sort more powerful then that very power
which can, it is true, reduce thee to nothing, but cannot promiscuously make thee
another thing, nor the nature of a man the nature of an Angel; in which case
thou would be more distant from thy self then if thou did become nothing:
but he that is beloved by God and reciprocally loves him, that fire eating off
the dross of all self-affection and humbling and annihilating his will, he
becomes in a manner a God breathing nothing but the divine will and pleasure;
for although he remain still in his own essence, yet he remains not in
self-affection, but is conform to Gods appointment, as far distant from
himself as if he were another thing. One man feels not the smart of another
wounds nor resents the affronts that are put upon others: in like manner thou
must not, as much as is possible, be ressentive at all of thy contempt for Gods
glory, no more then if it concerned not thee but another.

Again, if thou reputest thy self a great sinner, thou must consequently
persuade thy self that all the crosses and calamities which befall even others
are caused by thy defaults and negligences. What affliction soever God inflicts
is for a punishment and redress of sin, and in the course of this life he many
times chastizeth the sins of one upon another. Therefore since I am the greatest
of sinners, they are my offenses which occasion all miseries; and being they
are the effects of sin, why of others and not them that are the most heinous?
wars, plague, famine, are penalties and remedies of my delinquencies, they are
all to me both favors and punishments: in my behalf the divine mercy and
justice are every where engaged; justice and peace give a mutual kiss, mercy
and truth embrace each other, that every where and in all I may o Lord, fear
thee and love thee, be confounded in my maliciousnes, and hope in thy goodness.
I wonder not at all that the world is plagued with so many calamities since it
harbors me: I like another Jonas am the occasion of this shipwreck and that
tempest which involves many, For one sin of Achan the innocent people of God
was pitifully scourgd: I am a greater delinquent then he; why may not I
presume that many innocent people are for my sake afflicted with general
calamities. I, o Israel, am an anathematizd person in the midst of thee; I
alone suffice to profane the whole world. I am so impudent that though I share
the deepest in sin, I make the least satisfaction for my self and others whom I
behold groaning under such miseries, believing my self to be the occasion. I
have wronged all men by my sins, I am a debtor to all and guilty of all their
punishments and humiliations.

The XXI. Chapter. That Gods glory is always to be sought.
THou must acknowledge great obligations to Gods glory; and it is but meet that
thou be grateful and a fervent zealer of its advancement: We are endebted to
Gods glory for our essence, for our redemption, beatitude, and all the good we
have. God wrought all for his own glory; and being he was so beneficial to us
for its sake, it is but reason that we consecrate all our endeavors solely to
it. O God of majesty, thou seek our honor upon all occasions; is it not
meet that man endeavor thine in all he can? Thou did honor man in his
creation, making him thy own task above other creatures, and moulding him with
thy own hands: nor did thou content thy self with creating him as thou did
the heavens and other creatures by a word of command, but thou would as it
were labor in it, being obsequious to him even before his being. Thou did
honor man in the provision thou made for him, preparing him the magnificent
palace of this world, and subjecting all creatures to his beck, that he might
use them as so many servants. Thou did honor man in his conservation
allotting him an Angel Guardian a most noble creature who sees thee face to
face, and stands in a perpetual fruition of thy beatitude: and this thou did
to honor us in all respects deputing for our custody one adornd not only with
the endowments of nature and grace but also of glory. Thou did honor man in
his redemption, elevating humane nature to the fellowship of thy throne and
majesty. Thou did honor man in his remuneration, affording him for his light
and momentary afflictions no les salary then thy own kingdom, and preferment
into thy family. Thou have through all a studious regard to man's greater glory.

Let it confound thee, o ungrateful spirit, that thou seekst not the greater
glory of thy God. Procure his glory by thy own contempt: he will be so much the
more exalted in thee, by how much the more thou art depressed. God and man
stand proportioned as does a continued and severed quantity. A number may be
augmented without end: a stick may be lessend to an infinitude: the more a
stick is diminished by an ablation of its parts, the more the number is still
enhaunced: the meaner conceit thou have of thy self the sublimer will be thy
knowledge of God. Thy knowledge of God may be augmented without end: self
contempt and the knowledge of thy unworthines may increase to an infinity,
because thou art infinitely despicable. Employ thy self in pondering thy own
ignominy, and how thou art nothing but dust and ashes; so shall thou behold the
glory of God which was the end of thy creation. Thou will spend thy time much
les profitably in other subtilties which rather hinder then further the
knowledge of God. It is certainly known by a wonderful experience that a vessel
filled and stuffed with ashes will hold as much water as if it contained nothing
at all; which notwithstanding being taken up with other materials, is so much
les capable of that liquour for whose reception it was made. Knowledge of thy
self does not hinder thy knowledge of God; these two stand very well together,
the one drinks in the other as ashes do water. The beholding of thy own
ignominy will make thee seek the glory of God for which thou wast created, and
hinder thee from intrenching upon it. A tree at one and the same time spreads
its root downward and its branches upward; so much it aspires in hight as it
gains ground in depth: thy mind will be elevated if thou keepst it under. Will thou plainly know that praise and glory are not thy goods, nor any of thy
appurtenances? consider that praise ads nothing intrinsecal to thee nor
superads any perfection although thou be a beggar and imperfect: thou standst
more need of a redress which will rather better thee then only term thee such,
thou still remaining wretched and needy. Praise then and glory are properly
only found in him who is in no kind of indigency: for that very respect that
praise availes him nothing to whom it is exhibited, we conjecture that it ought
to be bestowd on him only who knows not what it is to want. Give glory to him
to whom nothing is profitable, and that will be most profitable to thee. God
seeks thy advantage in all not his own; do thou desire all glory to God, none
to thy self. As no creature is conducible to God, so no self-honour is
appetible to thee. Let all the glory of thy actions be entirely referred to
God, as all the profit of his works redounds to thee. The glory of God and
benefit of man are sisters and mutually embrace each other, God orders nothing
to the amplification of his own glory, which makes not also for the benefit of
man. God is not inconsiderate to put his hand to work he knows not why: he is
not vain to work unprofitably without any advantage; he is infinitely perfect
immensly good. By reason of his perfection he is indigent of nothing; and
therefore it remains only, that the end of his working be his own glory, and
praise to be exhibited by creatures which is a thing altogether extrinsecal: by
reason of his goodness all he does is beneficial, but because he himself wants
nothing, all the benefit redounds to creatures. As he can do nothing
prejudicial to his own honor so neither does he to thy profit. Thou being a
man all compounded of imperfections and wickedness, thou must in nothing at all
aim at thy own credit. One must first be perfect in himself before he deserve
praise from another; exterior glory is consequent to interior goodness
accomplished in it self: but by doing all to Gods honor thou shall do all also
to thy own advantage.

That only is advantageous to man which is glorious to God: if thou will seek
thy own profit, seek not what is profitable to thee, but what is honorable to
God: yea if thou will not be unprofitable both to the world and in the world,
make Gods glory thy whole task and employment, that being the end of thy
creation. As soon as man declined from this, he immediately became
unprofitable. He is superfluous and a supernumerary in the world who makes it
not his business to advance the honor of God. All things take their
profitablenes from their end: if they swerve from that they become
unserviceable. If thou take a plain to warm thee withal, it will not only be
useles for that end, but thou also foolish: if thou take fire to smooth a
table, that which is serviceable above all other things, will not only be
unserviceable but also pernicious; it will burn and destroy what thou intendedst
to polish and perfect. All the utensils of arts take them besides their proper
ends and they are all disproportioned and to no effect: so man who consecrates
not himself to the glory of God, the end for which he was ordained, he is
wholly useles and superfluous. Thou expectest grapes from the vine thou have
planted; thou covettest to reap some benefit from all thou have, why will thou
thy self only remain unprofitable? that fig tree which bore no fruit was
accursed, and so shall that man be that is unserviceable. How great is thy
madness, o man, in not seeking Gods greater glory? greater then if thou should
take ^now to warm thy self withal, or a painter make use of a carpenters saw
instead of a pencil. Nothing can be imagined more dissonant, more from the
purpose, more absurd, then to seek, I will not say, thy own credit but only thy
profit if thou seekst not together Gods greater glory by thy virtuous practices.

Propose to thy self an end in thy manner of life, and understand it well, that
thou be not like a blind archer. Thou desire to know the proper ends of all
things that thou may be able to use them in order to it; so, not to err in
the use of thy self have thy end always before thy eyes. Thou undoest thy self
if thou endeavor any thing that makes not for Gods greater glory. Fix thy
attention upon nothing else, prefix this as the scope and butt of all thy
actions. Regard not whether they be painful or pleasant, but whether they be
acceptable and honorable to the divine majesty. A sick man that longs for
health refuses not a potion because it is bitter, nor takes a draught of cold
water because delectable, but he only reflects upon this, whether it be
conducing to health: and upon that account accepts of what is unsavory and
sweet. Thou must be equally indifferent to all. When a traveller inquires the
way, he accounts it all one whether he be directed to the righthand or the
left, so it lead to the place he goes to: he that plays at tables determines
not to move this man rather then another, but only that by which he may win the
game: so must we stand in the course of this life, inclined no more to health
then sickness, to plenty then poverty, to the point of credit then to disgrace.
We must use the things of this world no further then they conduce to the glory
of God; they are only means and are not to be used for themselves. Embrace
nothing which tends not to its end, although it be never so desirable: refuse
nothing which makes for it though otherwise harsh, for that will prove but too
pernicious. All will be vain and unprofitable which conduces not to Gods
greater glory. Can that be profitable to a tree which helps not to make it
fruitful? what will it avail if its leaves be gilded, its stock wrapped up in
silk, its boughs hung full of sparkling diamonds? all these will be to small
purpose and wholly unserviceable; a little dung is of far more consequence. All
the tresures and riches of the world will afford thee no commodity, unles they
help to glorify God.

O Lord, let all be as dung to me upon condition I may gain thee: let me esteem
this one thing in all, if I know them base in comparison of thee; if I seek
thee alone in them and in my self. All things are nothing in thy sight; why
then shall I prefix any other end to my actions besides thee who art all? shall I
not (...) good as nothing, and all I do will be to ^mall purpose? o light of
truth, grant that (...) of my mind may be sincere, beholding the^ simply and
singly in all, that my whole body may be lightsome, and all my works ^cceptable
to thee. Deceive not thy self, o ignorant spirit; he that errs in his intention
^^rs small; and he that performs a laudable work if the intention of Gods
honor be w^^^ing, he will reap but small fruit: for he that mistakes his way,
the further he goes the more he mistakes. He that after a long journey ^^
navigation has ^issed of his desired port and knows that he is out of his way
by finding himself in a contrary coast how sensibly and deeply is he afflicted?
o how often after the course of this life do many find themselves in an error,
frustrated of all their conceived hopes, and dispoiled of all their good works
because a zeal of the divine glory was wanting. If thou will not be deceived
seek Gods glory and not thy own.

To the king alone of ages immortal and invisible be honor and glory: it is
honor enough for me that thou will o Lord, be honored by me. Let me esteem it
a great honor to see thee honored. Honor exhibited to a parent redounds to
his child: respect done to the head of an unjuersity or rector of a college
has influence into all their members and subjects. Thou art the head and
source of all things, thou art the rector of this universe, thou art my parent,
all thy honor is also mine. A creature cannot truly be said to receive honor
otherwise then by participating of the honor of his Creator. Let me see thee o
Lord, honored, and I shall be honored; let me seek thy glory and I shall be
glorious. Not only my profit, o Lord, but also my honor is linkd with thine:
grant that as thou did seek in all thy works only my honor and my profit; so
I and all creatures may only seek thy honor; and from thence alone will
redound to us both honor and profit. Whatsoever I shall do, say or think I
sacrifice it all to thy glory. If I chance through negligence or inadvertence
to do otherwise, even from this moment I retract it and blush at it. The Angels
apply themselves with all their affection to sing thy praises, they highten
their voices, and rest notwithstanding still confounded; how then shall not I be
ashamd of my tepidity and great negligence.

O man consider the dignity to which thou art raisd; from the deepest pit of
non-entities, from an abiss of nothing, from thy native dirt and clay to the
glory of a God of infinite excellence and purity. Raise thy intention, purify
it: deceive not thy self; thou will persuade thy self sometimes that thou
seek the pure glory of God, and thou tacitly desire thy own gust and
commodity. What makes thee so anxious and out of patience when things fall not
out as thou did intend, but because thou soughtest thy self? the glory of God
is peaceable, it is joyful, it is never frustrated of its effect in those that
seek it. Although things happen not as the just man expected, yet they will
happen as he desired, to wit, as the will of God disposed them, and that
suffices. If I loved God with the whole extent of my affection in all and
through all. I should desire only his goodness, seek his praise, be replenished
with zeal, and breath his glory. He that is past breathing, is dead; and he is
no better then a dead man who does his actions for any other end but God. All
time is lost which is not spent in seeking eternity. How can we choose but loose
the future eternity which is not ours, if we loose the present time which is
ours, by not working with a pure intention.

THE III. BOOK.
The I. Chapter. How careful we must be to do our actions well.
THY whole days task must be a doing of good and sufferance of evil: make it
thy whole employment to suffer evil, and do good. Neither is it enough that
thou be cheerful and prompt to this, but thy alacrity must extend it self even
to evil and harsh things, that thou be not affrighted with their greatness and
noysomenes; as also to patience in good and laudable things that thou be not
cloyd with their multitude and continual exercise. The necessity of patience is
more transc^ndental then any function or casualty of our whole life. Upon all
occasions there is a necessity of suffering; but it ought to be pleasant and
according to thy pallat to suffer in order to the doing of good: in this there
is a twofold merit, both of patience and the good work. Thou can never shun
the undergoing of some labor, and indeed without labors nothing exquisite
will be a^chieved. We often faulter in our virtuous purposes out of a hope of
non-suffering; which leaves us in the lurch while it makes us forbear to
embrace the labor and difficulty which accompanies our good purpose, as if
perchance at another season the way of virtue would be less thorny. Thou
deceivest thy self if thou be not persuaded that it is more necessary to suffer
then to live; or that there can be any part or parcel of our life void of
sufferance. One affliction is heir to another; if thou eschewest this another
will not be wanting to succeed: be thoroughly possessed of this, and a false
hope will not make thee remiss in thy pious endeavors, by presuming upon some
fitter opportunity wherein thou think to accomplish thy virtuous exercises
with less pain and toil. It is impossible to live with out some labor, do ^o^
refuse any that is fruitful of virtue: if thou declinest this, thou will be
forced to embrace another more harsh and untoothsome. We can only exchange
labor not avoid it. Thou may notwithstanding eschew many defects and faults,
if thou seek not curiously to avoid what is unavoidable, labor is certain;
either it must be embraced with patience, or repentance, or pain and
punishment. Love and repentance is not sufficiently perfect and such as beseems
thee, and the infinite goodness and mercy of God exacts at thy hands, unles thou
be content to suffer for many years space, and as much as in thee lies, the
very pains of hell for the least venial transgression^: yea to render one
venial trespass uncommitted thou ought willingly to undergo all the
torments of the damned. If therefore it be behoofful to embrace such a hell to
render undone what is done: what must thou do by way of prevention eer it be
done, that it be not done at all? o wretched spirit! be confounded, be
confounded: it will not cost thee so dear to eschew sin; it will be enough to
shake of slothfullnes.

Many make but a slender advance because they persuade themselves that such an
endeavor toward perfection is not requisite to salvation. O ungrateful and
pusillanimous creature! why do thou frame such a miserable conceit of thy
beatitude, or settle such dangerous principles concerning thy eternal weal, and
have so narrow and ignoble thoughts of Gods glory which is immense? I beseech
thee, if thy salvation depended not only upon the keeping the commandments but
also the counsels, and on it did hang the salvation of all men, Angels, and the
most sacred Virgin, and Christ's reprievement from the cross, would thou not
use all possible endeavor to compass it? certainly thou would: consider then
that something of main consequence, to wit, the glory of God and his good will
and pleasure (which is of higher concernment then the salvation and happiness of
the whole world considerd by it self, then the life of Christ's humanity) exacts
perfection at thy hands. If then it be so very important have a care to be
exquisite in each minute action, and this according to the manner of Gods
proceeding, whose workmanship is most admirable in little things, as an emmet,
a gnat, a be; and the cunning he showed in the composure of the heavens and
stars surpasses not them in point of art.

Commence each action with a resolution to perform it, Christ's grace assisting
thee more perfectly then ever hitherto, to the benefit of the Church militant
to the glory of the Church triumphant, to the greater honor of God; as if he
expected no other benefit from the creation of the world, from the redemption
of man, from the goodly furniture of heaven where he is to be glorified by all
the blessed, besides this action of thine; no otherwise then if thy salvation,
the weal of the universe, and glory of the divinity depended upon each thy
least work; as if thou were not to iterate it again nor hence forth to do any
other, but forth with to give up the ghost. Be not sparing then of a little
labor with loss of such a commodity. God desires that thou should perform
this work most exactly; and if thou considerest this his desire, thou will show
thy self extremely perverse if thou compliest not with it, or dare reflect
upon any annoyance of thy own. Sufferance is of it self desirable only to
imitate Christ our Savior, without the juncture of any other good: neither
will it be less acceptable toward the avoiding some fault, and accomplishing
all most absolutely to Gods greater glory.

Man's emploiment is doing good: for this end had thou thy being to do good:
but remember that man is born to labor because without it no good work can be
durable or of continuance. Do not frustrate thy self of thy end but endeavor
by the assistance of Gods grace to imitate the brave attempts of nature, which
strives always what it can to yeald thee her fruits most complete, that thou
may serve God in the compleatest manner thou can. Be allwaies mindful that
thy services are in all respects extreme slender, nor carry any proportion at
all with that glory which is promisd thee, nor with the pains of hell which
thou have deserved by thy sins, nor the labors which thy redeemer did undergo
for thy sake, nor the divine benefits which he has heapt upon thee, nor the
immense goodness of that God to whom thy services stand consecrated.

The II. Chapter. That we must shake off all negligence.
BE ashamed, o lukewarm spirit to sit still upon the race when time and place
requires thy running. Behold how puddles and standing pooles do putrify, and
iron that lies useles becomes rusty: go to; the way of spirit is like the
eagarnes of racers; one must not lag, and how much les stand still? how will
one have leisure to sit, when he has time neither to be weary nor so much as
to fall. All indeed run, but one only wins the prize; run so as to reach the
goal. If God had created all men at the same instant endowed with the use of
reason, and equal in the enrichments of grace, and showed to them all, on the
one side the treasures of heavens glory, and on the other the hideous torments
of hell; and let them know by revelation that one only of all that number were
to be saved, to wit, he who served God with most fervor and diligence, who
surpassed the rest in sanctity and charity; and that all others were to be
sentenced to damnation: which of all these contemplating the horror and
terror of that infernal pit, would not bend all his forces to excel his
competitors in sanctity, and so escape those dreadful punishments and obtain
happiness, becoming that one, who were to be saved? with how much zeal of
serving God would each ones heart be replenished? Every one striving to exceed
others, none would be found who would not employ his whole endeavor to the end
he might out do the rest. There would be no place then for loyterers, tepidity
would not dare to show her head. But with how much more powerful incentives
ought thou to be inflamd to serve God with greater fervency then any saint
has hitherto ever been who trod the paths of this mortal life. The glory of
God, and compliance with his holy will ought in reason to be beyond all
comparison a stronger motive and more pressing endearment to the service of
God, then that incumbency of thy salvation. O eternal truth, why should my
profit move me more then thy will? why should self love be more urgent then love
of thee? it is a benefit incomparably greater, that many are entitled to
heaven, and for this my obligations to thee are much hightned; why then art
thou now, o infirm spirit so tepid and sloathful? be mindful of the labors
which Christ embraced for thy sake; put before thy eyes so many youths who
forestall thy victory, and tender Virgins who lead the way: behold the fervor
of the ancient Fathers, the penance; humility, charity and torments of
Martyrs: why art thou so lazy since thou have so many precedents?

Yea although thou aymedst more at thy own commodity then the glory of God, yet
it behooud thee not to slacken the raines so much to tepidity. Thou needst not
fear least thy advantage be les, then if thy fervor were eminent above all
others, and thou that one who were to be saved: nay it impots thee now to be
more fervourous and more intensely bent upon Gods glory. No services now are
frustrated of their salary, and the better they are the greater glory will thou
purchase* This would not be so in case one only man were to be saved; since
one might undergo great labors and reap no profit at all, neither would a
greater reward be corresponding to greater services; which as then would run
hazard of being null and ineffectuall though they were great, for this respect
that they were not the greatest: nay although thou did outrun a great many,
almost all, if one alone outstripd thee the prize would be lost and all as good
as nothing. Now our merits are at a greater certainty and more fruitful, now
not the least of our works perishes, now all our services are recompensed
according to the degree of their fervor. Why then should we now be so
pitifully sluggish with certain forfeyture of a secure reward? what? if thou
were ascertaind that none at all should be damned, but all partake of
salvation, that ought not to give thee a pretense of being negligent but rather
highten thy fervor toward a more ample enrichment of merits and increase of
glory.

Go to, the sufferings of this life are not condign or commensurate to the
future glory: suffer not lazynes to reside in thee, for it is the moth of
merits and scab of virtues taking away all the grace of our actions, rendering
them so light of weight, and distastful to God, that his stomach will not
digest them. If thou yealdst thy self to sloth, sadness will not a little annoy
thee, being forced to sustain the heat and burden of the day without any
comfort the sting of conscience bereaving thee of that: but promptitude and
alacrity will make thee insensible of the encumbrances of this life, and is
highly pleasing and acceptable to God. What master of a family loves not to see
his servants pleasantly merry and going cheerfully about their work? If man
love to behold a pleasant countenance, so does God a cheerful mind. Let not the
sad look of thy negligence contristate Almighty God, neither do thou superadd
to the bitterness of this life the wormwood of sluggishnes: a sluggard partakes
neither of the joys of God nor of this world. A tepid religious man in most
things is in a worse condition then a wordling. This, though he share not of
spiritual comfort, yet he does of temporal, the tepid for the most part is
deprived of both. He that is habituated in sin is not without hope of being
coverted and acquiring sanctity; but he that grows tepid after his conversion,
has forfeyted part of that confidence, there being greater hopes of a sinner
then of him. Great sinners very often become great Saints; but it is a piece of
a miracle, if he that is tepid become such a one. Experience teaches us that
it is more difficil for the lukewarm to become fervorous then for a sinner to
become a Saint: for a tepid man is far from resenting his condition as evil;
and because he deems himself secure, and that a mediocrity in virtue suffices
to salvation, he does acquiesce in this: he must notwithstanding be wary and
dread his security, for the danger is very eminent. But which is no mean
subject of terror, God calls and makes enquiry after sinners, Christ takes his
refection with them; but as for the frigid they turn his stomach and he
loathingly vomits them out of his mouth. Shall I say something no les frightful?
the tepid obstruct the current of Gods mercy, and suspend the influences of his
profuse liberality, while he is bountiful toward the greatest sinners; but
toward the negligent he is as it were sparingly parcimonious, not
communicating to them what he oftentimes more willingly confers upon the other.
I will add something yet more formidable, which ought to make each bone of our
body shiver and quake. God who is still giving to all, erecting every where
trophies of his bounty, with the tepid he is on the taking hand, depriving them
of those talents which he had mercifully lent them before. What more noxious
then to debar him, as much as in us lies, from being beneficent? what worse
then not to suffer him to be good, impeding the activity of his goodness and
munificence. Is not he accursed who is the occasion of such a curse? how
deservedly then is he accursed who does the work of God negligently!

Many things which are evil are at least serviceable in some respect; but
slouthfulnes is so naughtily naughty, that it is in no sort conducible. What
can be imagined worse then heinous sins? yet these many times through the
wonderful wisdom and goodness of God who knows how to extract good out of
evil, conduce to our conversion and sanctification, we seeking him after such
foul lapses with greater fervor and humility. Slouthfulnes obstructs all this;
it is so hurtfully evil that it shows it self in part less good and proficuous
then the very malice it self of greater sins, Slouthfulnes is the worm of time,
it eats and spoils the choicest things we have, yea it is an enemy to
eternity, lessening life eternal by lessening our merits, and it also wastes our
temporal by its mortiferous idleness. If thou demand whose life is shorter, I
will undoubtedly reply, that of the negligent, though he protract it to a
hundred years: if thou ask whose is longer I will answer that of the diligent,
though he live but for a short space: death and slouthfulnes is equivalently
the same thing. What merchant would sit idle at home, if by one days pains he
could compendiate the return of a thousand years? do not thou set light by
time; one day of fervor is more available then a million of remisnes and
tepidity. A short life full of a vigorous ardency is equivalent nay prevalent to
a long one if it be cold and phlegmatique. If thou covet to live long, live
diligently.

But how shameful is the shame of sluggish idleness? how ridiculously infamous
would he be, who being picked out from among all the peers of the realm to
fight a duel in his kings behalf, having before boasted much of his valor
should now in the very lists of combat, where his sovereign and all his court
stand spectatours, not have the courage to draw his sword, nor move his arm to
make a thrust but bend all his forces to flight, leaving his adversary an
unbloody victory. O sluggard, thou maintainst Gods quarrel, many Angels
beholding and envying thy happiness, who would take it for a great honor to
suffer and combat for the glory of God as thou may; this favor is done thee
to be his champion: thou art become a theater or spectacle to God, the B.
Virgin, his Saints and Angels: thou have often promised to behave thy self
valiantly, why art thou now, being come to the push, so dastardly cowardish? o
infamy of nature! do not defame the grace of God, nor frustrate those supplies
which are kept for a reserve: why art thou so hartles in this work? consider
how fervently God desires that thou perform it with fervor.

The III. Chapter. How incommodious a thing is sleepines.
WHAT more seemly to season the first thoughts of the day, then the ancient of
days my God, that so our mind in its first undertakings may be consecrated to
him? The thought and love of God must not be intermitted, and how much less
denied at a seasonable time? Pay the first fruits of life to the Author of
life presenting thy self in the morning before him. We must prevent the sun to
thy benediction, and adore thee, o Lord, at the rising of the same in the midst
of our sleep, it being as yet night, when the pulse of the bell or some
inspiration calls us to rise, and behold, thou our spouse come and it is
requisite to go forth to meet thee.

To make this encounter fruitfully, it conduces not a little to prepare oil
over night, least the lamp of thy love, o my soul, want fuel to feed its flame
and thou like a foolish Virgin be shut out which is too terrible. Premeditate
what language shall deliver thy first salutes to thy spouse, and what affairs
thou art to negotiate in time of prayer: this being done if thou betake thy
self to rest with sorrow thou will rise with cheerfulnes; if thou have a
loathing of sleep, thou will covet watching with much alacrity. How can a soul
enamoured upon God choose but grieve that it must cease to love him, praise him,
improve its stock of merits, and that all advantages of increasing his glory
and its love toward so dear a spouse, must be suspended? how can it endure to
see it self sustained by God loved by him, and regaled in this interim with
innumerable benefits, and not to be able to relove him, or as much as be
thankful for such high favors. Wherefore it is requisite both before and after
sleep, to make amends for that suspension of love and merits with more ardent
affections and celestial desires, supplying that loss of life, wherein we cannot
power out our whole hearts upon God, and be absorpt in him. We must procure by
this very cessation of merit and love, to merit as much, if it were in our
power, as if we were awake. Usurers even while they sleep increase their money;
and thou will do the same if conforming thy self to the disposals of heaven
with obedience and resignation, thou make an ardent oblation of thy self, and
bear with patience this misery and the incident necessities of man's life. He
that embraces patiently a necessary death, whether it proceed naturally from
some disease, or be violently caused by another man, he merits by it; and so
shall thou if it be harsh and noisome to thee to repose and sleep, as it is to
those that serve and love God fervently; if, I say, thou accept of this
necessary burden with equanimity, it being wisely so ordained by the author of
all wisdom. Perchance if thou consider things in themselves, and how much more
burdensome sleep is then death to a true lover of God, thou may merit by
sleeping patiently for his sake, as by dying for patience. Merit resides amidst
great patience, and patience is there greatest, where greatest aggrievances are
born most patiently.

Among all the burdens of man's life and all the annoyances which besiege it so
closely, none is greater then that of sleep or more worthily to be repented,
sin being excepted. Other calamities are only tormentours of life; sleep for
its interim bereaves us of it: other calamities are only opposite to the
commodities of life; sleep for a time impugnes its substance: other calamities
are in such sort noisome to our temporal life that they exceedingly conduce to
eternal by affording matter of merit, by raising our minds toward God, and
drawing our affections as by an attractive quality; sleep in it self during its
reign, is an enemy both to corporal and eternal life, for as much as it causes
a vacancy both from merit and all thought of heavenly things: other calamities
are most welcome to Gods zealot, because in them he doubles his spiritual
advantages, love is put to the rest, God is glorified; but sleep has nothing
at all desirable, a cessation both of loving and honoring God attending it,
step by step: wherefore sleep is more noisome and for a two fold yea manifold
reason more burdensome then death it self to one that is enamoured upon God.
Death tyrannizeth only over the body; sleep over both body and soul: sleep on
this behalf seems so much worse then death, by how much the soul is better then
the body; nay much more, to wit, as much as the whole man soul and body is
better then the body alone: for death only deprives thee of thy body, but sleep
of thy soul also as well as of it. Death aims only at the destruction of our
body a thing frail and corruptible; sleep at the soul also, a thing eternal and
immortal which gives life to the body, it being wholly insensible but for it:
death destroies a man, sleep does as much for a space of time as annihilate
him. Death is not to be dreaded, for it leaves the best part of man untouched,
to wit, his soul which makes him a man by which he loves God and apprehends his
mercy and goodness, which is the glory of a man and ought to be his sole content
and joy; yea it leaves it more refined, without impediment, that it may honor
and love God more expeditly: sleep overwhelmes and enters the noblest part of
man, unsouling, as it were, the soul it self. Tell me, I pray, which would
thou resent most, to die or to be annihilated? if thou give glory to God by
dying because such is his B. will; will thou not do the same, if thou covet upon
the same motive to be annihilated? therefore if a patient acceptance of death be
meritorious, so will also a patient acceptance of sleep, if thou relish it as an
equal burden. If thou merit by embracing with patience the vexatious
encumbrances of this life, why shall thou not also merit by sleep if it be the
greatest encumbrance of all, yea it being the sole and only thing which living
and dying we must deem cumbersome: for neither in this life nor after death is
there any thing, sin being set aside, more burdensome to one that is feelingly
devoted to the service of God. What are accounted the burdens which press so
heavily upon this life, but its sufferings and miseries? but one should be so
far from esteeming sufferance a burden that it ought to be the scope and but of
his desires: next after God there is nothing more expetible then to suffer for
God, exhibiting this as the credentials of our love: for by so doing we perfect
the knot of true charity being more straightly united to him, we dilate the
confined rays of his glory, and merit to be partakers of the same. No body
knows thoroughly how burdensome sleep is to us besides him who is able to make
a true estimate of the immensity of Gods glory, the invaluablenes of his love,
and the least degree of grace, in order to all which for this interim there is
a dead surcease, and a suspension of all traffic for new merits. After the
cloze of this life what is noisome to the just besides purgatory; but if thou
be then in a condition of suffering it ought not to be resentive at all, thou
being thereby refined and purified, thy spouse trimming thee up in such a dress
as may well beseem his bedchamber. If he leave it then wholly in thy power to
love God, what cause of tergiversatio^, since he leaves arbitrary to thee what
thou wishest and desire? where thou have opportunity to suffer and love,
there is no just ground of complaint. If it were put to thy choice whether thou
would sleep or die for half an hours space; a soul truly inflamed with the
ardours of charity, would of it self prefer death that it might not be reduced
to a cessation of love: yea it would not, thirst more after the resurrection of
the body then after avoiding all unnecessary excess of sleep though but for a
quarter of an hour, as much as might be without impairing its corporal health.
For the mean of discretion is every where to be observed, and we must take a
necessary repose though against our will that the functions of our mind may be
vigorous and masculine, fitly disposed for all enterprises to Gods glory, as
also for prayer: least if we indiscreetly deprive our selves of it, we be heavy
at our devotions, too drowzy and languishing, and so by little and little quite
benumd; and what then will be the issue, but that we perform them with little
fruit. But to be too indulgent to sleep beseems the dead rather then the
living; and a soul weighing things in themselves, that is, with an impartial
balance, and siezd with the heat of divine love, to avoid this inconvenience,
all acts of love and praise surceasing for that interim, it would perchance
rather make choice of a perpetual death of the body; because in that case one
may love and enjoy God, which alone suffices and is the chief desire of an
enamoured soul but being so charmed and stupifyd it cannot: although one will
not easily conceive this who does not experience in himself the avaricious
incentives of divine love and its restles longings and motions, nor how
contemptibly an enflamd heart spurns at all self commodity. But we must not
measure the ardour of true love and a devoted affection by the ell of our
lukewarmnes: rather by what we behold in those that fondly dote even to madness
upon a perishable beauty, we may guess at the feelings and flames of a
pretender to an eternal and never fading one. But if thy breast harbor not
fuel for such a heat, shun at least as much as thou can the chilnes of
tepidity and sleepines.

If it were intimated to thee that forthwith thou must be annihilated; such
tidings would fill thee with horror why then will thou so joy in sleep, it
being all one as if for such a respit thou were annihilated. Apprehend the
incommodities of sleep which is an evil and manifold death, it being very
opposite to a 4. fold life; for sleep deprives us of the chief life of our
body, in which it is equivalent to death it self: it takes away the life of our
soul, which is then as if it were not at all, and in this it surpasses death:
sleep is also in some sort injurious to the life of grace, and the eternal
life, by causing such an interruption of merit. What then can be more
prejudicial to us? wherefore one that burns with the true flame of divine love,
and is siezd with an ardent desire of praising so great a good, is hugely
covetous of the least advantages of time, and deems any unnecessary expense in
that kind an irreparable loss: and consequently he goes to sleep with much
regret, accepting with patience this necessity imposed by God upon life and
making to him an oblation of it; taking in good part, since his holy will is
such, to be deprived for this interim of what he much more covets, which is to
love and praise God and be restles in his service; and as much as in him lies
he covets not to sleep but rather busy himself in the former actuations,
thinking every hour a day til he return to his wonted employment. Thou also
must put on this disposition of will and offer it to God and compose thy self
like one ready to give up the Ghost saying with Christ, into thy hands o Lord I
commend my spirit. By thus behaving thy self thou shall after a manner merit by
that death and vacancy of sleep so untoothsome and distastful to thy relish.

Conceive also ardent desires of that ever during life, when without
interruption thou shall enjoy God, and bewail the miseries of this life, since
thou must seek repose and relaxation for thy exhausted spirits in a thing of
all others most burdensome to thee and prejudicial to all, to wit, sleep. How
can life it self choose but be noisome, its very rest being so restles, and its
advantages so disadvantageous? it is a lamentable thing, that life must be
repaird at the very charges and expenses of life, since the lover of God
esteems sometimes a short sleep more dammageable then the loss of a long life.
When thou art laid to repose, endeavor to seal up thy eyes and heart with the
ferventest act of love which ever thou did make in thy whole life, and even
before thou fallest a sleep desire to rise as soon as may be, purposing at thy
first waking to unseale thy heart and actuate it in more fervent e^aculations
then hitherto thou have done, so to compass in that instant a new purchase of
grace. It will not a little conduce to this to beg the concurrence of thy Angel
Guardian as also to use a spare and frugal diet. Strike up this bargain with
thy body; in the mean while repose, take thy penny-worths, but be sure to rise
as soon as the bell calls thee to work. Like as the soul for the good of the
body dies as it were by night and is buried, so must the body die by day for
the good and benefit of the soul: while it is awake let the body be dead to
this world as when the soul is a sleep it is dead for that respit to heaven,
that is, to meritorious actions and pious thoughts. Procure in the mean while
that thy body as much as may be supply the elevations and obsecrations of thy
soul, the which not being as then in a capacity to pray, the body must do it by
lying modestly in a be seeming posture, and for more decency not right upward.
We compose coarses and embalm them against corruption, though they must shortly
be the food of worms, and spoil of time: so let us compose and dispose our
selves in this death of sleep that we may be fit for the chaste embracements of
Christ. Lie with thy arms or fingars a cross: such treasures as these must
thou coffin up together with thy self till the morning revive thee; for
treasures were wont to be buried and deposited with the dead. Be sure thou
never desert the cross; but whilst thy mind cannot cling to it thy body must,
carrying always about with it the mortification of JESUS. Christ when he was
dead would bequeath to us a pledge of his love by receiving a wound with a
spear: thou also in this short death must give such an earnest-penny of thy
affection. And by this means as Christ in his sleep of death merited at thy
hands by shedding water and blood, a special pledge of love, at his hearts wound:
so thou also in thy death of sleep shall even then merit at the hands of Christ
for such a precedent desire and disposition. Let this be an argument that while
thou sleep thy heart wateheth; not unlike cranes who while they sleep carry a
stone in their tallon, the fall whereof forthwith awakes them.

The IV. Chapter. That we must rise fervorously to our morning prayer.
IF with loathing thou did betake thy self to rest, thou would with a
cheerful alacrity rise in the morning to thy task; neither would it be
necessary for the master of the family to hire so early his workmen. Thou will
show thy self too effeminate if thou be not valiant against sleep, but suffer
thy self to be vanquishd by a thing of all others the most unmanly, being
chaind hand and foot like a captive without tie, in such sort that thou can
neither help thy self nor others, but must be content to sit in the shadow of
death. It would not be needful that the voice of thy beloved knocking at the
door of thy heart should rouse thee; conceive the sound and pulse to be the
noise of thy spouse calling and inuiting thee with most sweet and amorous
language to open the door; and he calls thee his sister, his love, his dove, his
unsported. Open to me, says he, o my sister, my love, my dove, my unblemishd.
Love makes him call thee so often his, neither can he be satiated with calling
thee so. O Lord, what beholdst thou in me that can so transport and enamour
thee! can it be reasonable that I disgust thee for a little ease? but if thou
hasten not, o my soul, to open because thou art his and for love of him, do it
at least out of mere compassion. To move thee more forcibly he presently adds;
because my hair is full of dew and my locks of the drops of the night. Thou
would not demur to open even to a stranger and an enemy in this pitteous
plight, and why not to thy God, thy lover, who does it all for thy sake. Beware
he depart not if thou linger. What can be imagind more attractive and
comfortable then this voice of the spouse, knocking so friendly, that he may
bannish all lazynes from a pious soul? who will not be more confounded then was
Vrias to lie in bed, while Christ stands expecting not under a pavillon but in
the open air, exposed to the injuries of the night.

Robbers stick not to rise by night to make their booty and massacre others;
and will thou when the good of thy soul and Gods glory lies at stake be so
tardy? the Angel caling Peter when he was a sleep, said, rise quickly. Thou art
more then dead when thou art buried in sleep, imitate at least the dead in
rising. In the twinkling of an eye, in a moment shall the dead bodies arise at
the command of an Angel: JESUS will not have thee be flower when he calls then
when an Angel. The heavenly spirits take it ill they being by nature most quick
and agile, to see any one whom they awake any whit sluggish, or fearing
themselves with stretchings and yawnings; and they waken us most willingly,
be^^use the very sight of this drowzines, so op^osite to their agility is not a
little offensive to them. A certain servant of Christ one of our society, by
name John Carrera, was every morning before day called by his good Angel to go
to prayer: but this heavenly monitor once absented himself for many days, till
being appeased with continual prayers and long fasts he returned at length to
his charitable office, admonishing John that for this reason he with drew his
comfortable presence, because being once overcome with the drowzy wearines of
the precedent days labor he had not risen with such speed to his accustomed
devotions. So inconsiderable a fault (if it were a fault) so highly offended
the Angel although it were not perceived by his conscience which was so
tenderly nice and delicate. They esteem the fervor and prayers of us miscreants
so much, that they deem not their own officiousnes to equalize the others
worth; and give us a gentle correction, that there may not be so much as a
false shadow of idleness where we traffic in such real goods.

Therefore be not slow at the hour of rising; labor with great speed to
overtake any one that is before thee, that thou may be the first that our
Lord coming laden with his gifts shall light upon, so to have the first choice
and handsale of his graces, he disburdening himself upon the first he meets.
Thou should run toward Christ charged with his cross to ease him of it and
be crucified in his place run to him fraught with grace to be enriched by him.
What soul can be so sensles and prodigal as not to rise with all speed to
receive so many gifts, and impart kisses to her spouse? how can she be said to
love God, if she return not swifter then any thunderbold to love her beloved,
whom over night she desired so vehemently. One must rise more expeditly then if
the bed and bed clothes were all in a flame: one will rise more expeditly if
the fire of love be enkindled in his heart.

Procure at that instant to make amends for the vacancy of sleep, wherein thou
could not actuate thy self in the love of God, by a most fervorous elevation
of mind, by a most flagrant charity and a total holocaust of thy self, the
perfectest that hitherto thou ever did offer upon the altar of thy heart.
Suppose thy self in such a condition as if in that moment of thy awaking thou
were newly created by God to love and serve him for that day alone: for that
sole end is this days life granted to thy use. If one that is in a state of
beatitude were annihilated by God, and forth with created anew with all his
qualities and former perfections, with what impetuousnes of will in that very
moment would he engulph himself in the abiss of the divinity? do thou endeavor
to put on a like fervor after this thy annihilation by sleep and resuscitation
by awaking. How deep a sense and profound reverence did Adam and the Angels
conceive ^^wards their Creator in the first instant of ^^eir perceived
creation? imitate the B. Vir^^n who being in the first moment of her con^^ption
created in grace, and priviledgd which ^e perfect use of reason; with what
inten^^nes of affection did she cast her self into the ^^mes of almighty God?
what thanks did Christ our Lord render to his heavenly Father ^^ the first
instant of the hypostatical union? yea with how great love did he then
particu^arly think upon thee by name? when it stood ^ritten in the front of the
book that he was to do the will of God, he said, o heavenly Father even for
that contemptible Caytif John will I also undergo a whipping a crowning a
cross, ignominy, even death it self; I give, I offer, I sacrifice my self
wholly for his salvation. And will it not be also thy duty to reflect upon
Christ and say, o my God, this day for my Saviors sake will I embrace all
corporal labors and anguish of mind, that I may love, serve and glorify him
with all the extent of my affection?

If God had created thee in the state of grace in an ample freedom of will,
and had by divine revelation indoctrinated thee in all the mysteries of our
faith; and thou did see thy self dear to him and his B. Son become man and
crucified with unspeakable love for thy sake; were it not thy duty in these
circumstances to give thy self wholly to God and power thy self forth upon him?
it is all one as if he had but just now created thee: be o^ good courage, thou
shall awake in the state of grace: behold thou findst thy redemption
accomplishd to thy hand by the death and torments of thy God; and this with so
early a love, that Christ sufferd for thee a thousand and so many years before
thou were born, that he might have plenty of grace in store for thee. Neither
Adam nor S. Michael nor Gabriel, nor any other of the Angels, no nor their
queen her self the sacred Virgin found such preventing diligence, such a feat
of love, to wit, that God had already died for their releasment. Be inflamed
then forth with with a recipocal love and burning desires toward so
magnificent a goodness, so speedily provident over thy affairs and do not
contemn such an anticipation in what concerns thy eternal weal. Adam stood in
expectation of this benefit the space of 4000. years: but the benefit it self
has expected thee already above 1600: and it is neither right nor reason that
thou requite such sedulity and quicknes with so much sluggishnes and delay.
Procrastinate no longer thy conversion to God, who has so long expected thee
in a great deal of patience.

Put case a proffer of coming to life were made to the souls which now are
only in a possibility of existence; and this upon the same conditions helps and
favors which God has daignd to bestow this day upon thee; how would they joy,
how happy would they esteem themselves; how officiously would they spend that
day, how would they in the very entrance of life sacrifice themselves to such a
benefact or. And what if he should make this proffer to those whom this very
night he has sentenced to hell fire, while he so lovingly stood centry over
thee in thy repose, with what incredible fervor would they at their first
return to life consecrate themselves to Almighty God, as also the remnant of
that day and their whole life, if they did but once behold themselves adornd
with divine grace with supernatural habits, and such opportunities of serving
so beneficial a God. Be thou confounded for not sacrificing thy self more
fervently to him who is much more munificent toward thee: it is a greater
matter to have preserved thee from damnation, then to have reprieved thee being
once condemned. Spur up thy self to outstrip the fervor of many just souls,
and be thankful that thou findst not thy self this morning plungd in hell, but
freed from it, as also from so many dangers and sins which innumerable others
have this night incurd. Do thou alone wish to give him, if it were possible,
that glory which all the Saints will be still rendering through the great day
of eternity: which desire thou must unfaignedly iterate in the course of the
whole day, and that with sighs from thy very heart; neither in the morning only
but oftener as if then newly set on foot and created, begin the journey of Gods
service always with a fresh and vigorous courage.

The V. Chapter. That our daily fervor must be retained.
THOU providest but fondly for this days life, neither art thou secure of
that, if thou delayst it till to morrow. If the use of this days life be
granted thee, live well and perfectly; for he only is said to live who lives
well. Thou die miserably being yet alive if thou leadest not a good life. Each
morning when thou awakest purpose to live that day as well as possibly thou
can, as if thou were undoubtedly to dye the same night. Delay not the
amendment of any defect till another day which perchance thou will never see:
either the day or thy will will fayl thee. The day to come will go well with thee,
if the present do. One must never hazard a thing so good as is a good life, but
be always in an active fruition of it. Thou art industrious in avoiding any
thing that may endanger life; and why do thou by delaying prepare and call
danger to a good life. Live to day, and protract not to amend what is amiss
after this week or month or the disposal of this affair. To day God is our
Lord, and to day must thou be the servant of God; for he is thy servant to day*
since he to day makes the sun rise to thy behoof. He delays not his gifts
till to morrow neither must thou thy services. To day God heaps benefits upon
thee which thou can not challenge: be not thou wanting to services which he
exacts* The services of another day will not suffice for the beneficence of
their day; why will thou have them satisfy for the day past and for the
benefits of the present? its own goodness is not sufficient to pay its debt; why
will thou make it pay for the malice of another, God especially redoubling thy
debts and his graces? to day God is God, and to day thou art his creature: to
day Christ is thy redeemer, and thou to day his redeemed. JESUS is Christ
yesterday and to day: thou have a being to day and shall perchance not have one
to morrow. To day and every moment art thou a debtor to God, who impends
continually his omnipotency to thy behoof; thou also must each moment impend
all thy forces in his love and service. How dare thou incur the loss of one
hour, since thou can not make recompense for the least benefit which thou
receivest this instant, flowing from the ocean of Gods infinite love. How
dare thou suspend the quitting thy obligation for the interval of one day or
hour? for if God suspended his munificence but for a piece of an hour thou
would not be in the world; or if he suspended his indulgence, thou would be
in hell. An eternal salary is promised thee, thou must not merit by interrupted
services. If thou will truly live never intermit to live well: this is an
eternal truth. O Truth, give me grace to serve thee truly henceforth for all
eternity: and that I may eternally live with thee, teach me how I may truly
live to day.

Thou must, o remiss spirit, daily arm thy self to combat, and awake with
great chearfulnes as one would do to battle, the sign of falling on being
given, as it were, by this trumpet; thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy
heart with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength. Let this
precept alarm thee in the morning, and persuade thy self that each day of thy
life is not only a day of warfare but a set day for combat. How cheerfully do
soldiers rise that morning wherein they receive orders to prepare for batail; a
soldier is not found unarmd in the day of combat: thou must make account thou
art to fight every day: arm thy self early in prayer with a most fervent
charity, with a most profound self contempt, with patience, mortification, and
all the stratagems thou can invent. The sole suspicion of a batail arms a
soldier and makes him continue so for many days, because he expects to fight
one day; what ought the certainty and belief of a daily conflict to operate in
us? dispose all thy actions in the morning, and depose them in the hands of
God; and purpose to be twice as good to day as thou wast yesterday, least in
the day time the devil interpose himself, and prevail so far as to make thee
abate of thy fervor.

Rise well animated against all the difficulties which attend this life; and if
any of them ^ccost thee, or thou become slouthful, be not faintharted but
rather joyful. For why? ^n occasion is presented of a greater victory: assail
them undauntedly like one valiant soldier encountering another; who is not
dismayed at his presence nor seeks a starting hole, but stands his ground and
joys to have met him, whom otherwise he would have sought. Fight stoutly all
day long and at night expect to die. The life of man is a warfare in which life
is allwaies hazardous and labor certain. As often as thou art but a little
foild fight more eagerly; and persuade thy self that such foiles will be
frequent, for the just man is foild 7. times a day: but rise forth with with
redoubled courage. as a soldier who having received a wound flies more keenly
at his adversary. Where thou perceivest any breach make it up incontinently,
and fortify it more strongly by calling a squadron of reasons to thy assistance
which must be at hand like a valorous and approved reserve, mustered from thy
morning meditation, repentance and humility leading them up. And delay not to
repair that negligence, for otherwise thy vigor of spirit will easily slacken.
He that receives but a slight wound will faint unles he stop the effusion of
blood; and by delay that which is otherwise but an inconsiderable hurt will
become mortal. Apply a remedy out of hand, and differr it not till night or
another day: for although it seem nothing it will hinder the progress of thy
other actions. If any one have got a thorn in his hand or foot he pulls it out
immediately; he lets it not alone till night or some few days after; otherwise
he will be able neither to walk nor do any thing else: and the delay may be
such that by festering it may prove a canker, and cannot be cured but by
cutting of.

Yet for all this be not so contristated for any small defect as that it smell
rather of pride then repentance, and thou be hinderd thereby from performing
thy other exercises which require a great deal of alacrity. B. Aloysius Gonzaga
had reason to say, that those who were too anxious over their small defects did
not sufficiently know themselves. Thou art all misery, but thou hopest one day
to be happy. be les contristated and more humble. If thou acknowledge thy misery
a fixed hope in almighty God will lessen thy anxiety; and despair of any good
will increase humility in thee. Many are therefore dejected because they grieve
not so much for having offended God as for their own infirmity and vileness,
while they find themselves so impotent and faint hearted; and because this
affection naturally sympathizeth with self love it is more resented, and
sometimes occasioneth no small harm. Grieve only for having offended God; but
rejoice forth with by a confidence in JESUS: and congratulate with thy self for
thy own vileness; for thou art nothing of thy self but only by God, which is
much better for thee. By this means the defect it self will more animate thee,
and render thee more confident by putting thy trust in God, since thou do
actually experience and as it were by groping palpably perceive, that by thy
own strength thou can do nothing, but only by God and with God, on whom thou
may much more securely rely: for he is far greater in goodness then thy good
will can be in constancy.

Persuade thy self that perchance each hour thou will faulter a hundred times;
but purpose, Gods grace assisting thee, to rise again a thousand. By how much
more frequent thy lapses are, rise so much more confidently because thou art
more conscious of thy own insufficiency. Then is our hope more purely and
sincerely fixed in God when we despair totally of our selves; and then
experience it self will teach us this when we see our selves without end to
fail in our good purposes: God permits that because we do not sufficiently
humble our selves. If thou were truly humble thou would redress many
inconveniences, and speak nothing but victories Humble thy self in the presence
of God; mistrust thy self and trust in him; and being armed with this, live
this day with much circumspection, diligence, and desire, as if the whole
multitude of men were created this day, and of all that world one only were to
be saved, he who attaind to the highest pitch of charity and most resignd
indifferency of will: for which end though to others were alloted the space of
a hundred years, yet thou should have but this days respit. Thou art obligd
to do more now to honor and pleasure God, then in any contingency and
supposition whatsoever for any other respect, even that of salvation.

The VI. Chapter. Of maintaining our fervor.
Our spiritual life depends no les upon the heart then our corporal: our heart
being kept untainted and well guarded our spirit will be in safety. Man's heart is
the consecrated altar of God and the throne of the H. Ghost. Thou must preserve
it with all solicitude, that it may be free from this world and not defiled
with the images of terrene and impertinent things, with which the world and the
devil by the windows of thy senses batter thee as with so many engines. Thou
must be more careful of thy heart then of an altar, an Oratory, and consecrated
chalices, where we offer sacrifice, worship, and keep the very Body of Christ
in the Sacrament. With how much diligence, and under how many locks do usurers
keep their money and the instruments of death? with how much nicenes do those
that delight in rarities keep any choice jewel, or foreign noyelty, making
presently a cabinet for it that the least grain of dust may not tarnish it? and
can thou think that the gemm of the Divinity and the H. Ghost can be
preserved with requisite decency, without an exquisite carefulnes? If thou
did carry the most H. Sacrament of the Eucharist in thy hands, how
sollicitous would thou be not to let it fall; and if thou carry God in thy
heart, why will thou be less attentive? The heart is a most delicate member any
little offense to it is extreme prejudicial, any trifling wound is mortal to
the body: and in like manner any negligence in the custody of our heart does
much prejudice the spirit.

The kingdom of God is within us: why do we beg miseries abroad by our senses?
an unblemishd heart is the oracle of God: he speaks within us: how can we harken
attentively if we be gazing and wandering abroad? while thou conversest with
one thou give not ear to another that interrupts thee: how can thou hear
God, being distracted with so many affairs? Why do thou desire to gaze
abroad upon any beautiful object, to tickle thy ears with pleasing sounds, to
feed thy fancy with foreign news, since thou have God within thee in whom all
beauty is comprizd, all pleasure resides as in in its center, and a perpetual
newnes is discoverable even to the B. Angels themselves, though they be in a
perpetual fruition even from the very infancy and nonage of the world? they
beheld him before the prevarication of Adam and still he is new to their eyes.
Which of the blessed would relinquish the vision and conversation of God, and
separate from him to behold any curiosity upon earth, or who, that is placed
but at the gates of heaven, would for that end recede thence? o how much also
is he to be pittyed, who in expectation of this earthly trumpery, hinders his
progress in spirit, forsaking the portal of heaven, which is a well guarded
heart; leaves God alone, and sometimes his own heart too, expelling God from it,
in such sort that he can neither know him perspicuously, nor hear him expeditly
that thou may be able to contemplate thy self in a myrrour thou first of all
wipest off the dust: how can thou hope to see God in thy heart, if thou daube
it over with the clay of terrene affections?

If one should tell thee that S. Paul the Apostle newly come from the third
heaven, were in the streets explaining and unfolding hidden mysteries, thou
would leave all though never so pleasing and profitable, and would run with
much speed, though far distant to hear and see him. Behold thou needst not go
one step to hear God inculcating things salutiferous, and teaching hidden
secrets while he comes to thee and sejourns with thee: why do thou not leave
these exterior things so fruitlesly burdensome, overcoming all itch of
novelties and vain curiosities, by which thy fervor does so evaporate? this
ought to be so highly prizd that the servant of God F. Francis Villanova was
wont to say, that although it were told him that an Angel were come from heaven
and stood in the market place disclosing wonderful and stupendous mysteries,
and that great concourse were made thither, he would not stir one foot, only to
overcome curiosity. And certainly it were much better not to see an Angel, then
to be overcome by it, if that were the only motive of seeing him. What retainest
thou now of all the vanities thou have beheld besides some impediments
perchance of contemplating God, thy mind being burdend with vain fancies and
images of things both false and frivolous. The les thou see the more thou
lessenest thy desire and occasions of error. A heart shut up to the world is
the open gate of truth, which gate is shut by giving free scope to our
exterior senses: they are these material things that shut it: Wherefore thou
must always keep within at home and not go forth to externs but with leave
from God, and for obedience and his glory. Then they will cause no hindrance:
but forthwith as soon as ever thou have done thy business retire home again,
resaluting and speaking to God who is there expecting thee: yea recolect thy
self now and then privily in the very dispatch it self: steal thy self from thy
employments, and put thy self in the presence of God. Whatsoever thou art to
enterprise weigh it well before hand, and offer it up to God, and as much as
thou can have perpetual recourse to him: visit him in thy heart, ask his
advice, and implore with humility his favorable assistance.

But the chief gate which man must set a guard upon, is his mouth least its
words prove the outlet of devotion. O how often do many sell God at a lower rate
then did Judas, since they sell him for one word! Simon Magus was cashierd for
covetting to buy the H. Ghost with money: others loose him not for money but a
little breath and air of their mouth. O most holy spirit, who utterst nothing
but Oracles of truth, how can I relinquish thee to attend to the forgeries of
men, or my self to speak vanities: conduct me with my JESUS into the desert of
my heart, that there thou may instruct, illuminate, and streng then me to
bear thy cross. O God, o Christ of my heart, grant me grace to follow thee out
of the world and worldly crowds, that I may dye with thee out of the city.
Thou, chargd with thy heavy cross, did walk out of Jerusalem to dye for me,
and accomplish my salvation in the solitude: instructing me how I am to go out
of this world and seek thee in my self and bear thy cross and be crucified to
the world in the solitude of my heart. I wish my life could be said to be like a
warfare upon earth! a soldier forsakes parents, allies, friends, country,
commodities, and embraces as it were a voluntary bannishment in a foreign
land exposing himself both body and soul to most evident danger for a little
base pelf: why will not a soul desirous of Christ, in order to gain the
chiefest good and lock it up in the cabinet of its heart, with draw it self from
the tumults of men, and quit the miseries which attend their affairs, so to
evade more present dangers both of body and soul and be replenished with
heavenly consolations.

The VII. Chapter. How constant one ought to be in the practice of good works.
MEN toil many years with great constancy for the inconstant and fleeting goods
of this world: why then are we so variously sickle in the pursuit of a constant
and eternal glory which never will fade? men though they cark and care, toil
and moile their whole life long cannot get temporal goods, albeit they pursue
them without respit: how can we presume to gain eternity, since we are as
changeable as any weather cock? what pains do robbers, usurers, and the
lecherous undergo to compass their wicked designs though they attempt things
both unknown and uncertain? why can we for love of virtue and the honor of God
sustain nothing with constancy? he that hopes for a continual and eternal good,
unjustly shuns labors in its pursuance: he that is to be always happy must be
always good: for Each day condemns man's irreligious facts;
All seasons open are to virtues acts.
as says S. Prosper. The greatest grace of all other is to preserve the grace
which is given thee, and thy chief work not to surcease from doing works. As a
creature would be very deformed without head and life, such a monster is a good
life without a corresponding end. We have received grace without any pains,
but we must conserve it both by grace and pains. The beginning of a thing is
accounted half its accomplishment; but unles it end well all comes to nothing.
In the matter of perseverance the end is all in all: for nothing is done so
long as any thing remains undone. It imports little to have labored hard all
ones life long, if he faulter in the end. The sole last moment of perseverance
is more available then all the years by past; for all their fruit proves rotten
if it did not borrow thence a preserving soundnes.

Thou will think it a hard task to persever, but it is much harder to begin
again, and much more then that to begin often. Wherefore it is both more easy
and more conducible, to persever once then to begin often. Horses force
themselves les in a continued course of drawing a chariot, then, after having
stood still, when they are to move it again. Water which has been once heated,
being taken of the fire, becomes more cold then at first. If fervor be wanting
in thy proceedings thou also perchance wilt be more tepid then in the
beginning. Many grow faint-harted in the course of perseverance because they
find difficulty in doing good; but they do not therefore evade that difficulty;
for it is only perseverance that makes all easy. If thou had the courage to
begin a hard task, thou may well continue it, that being much more easy. Thou
have found so long by experience that it is neither disproportioned to thy
strength nor grace; why then contrary to so long proof art thou now diffident,
thinking thy self unable to bear it? what is either past or to come is not
burdensome for the present: do not grasp the difficulty all at once, for it
comes not so but by piece meal, co^mensurate to the parts of time. As thou
wast able before to support it so art thou now, and will be henceforth. It will
not be more noisome then it was, but the heat of the difficulty will remit by
length of time and custom. Accustom thy self to do well, and thou will forget
to do ill. Custom overcomes difficulty because it overcomes nature, and what
then will grace do? if custom overcome nature much more will a wel-orderd
charity in thee overcome the deordinations of nature.

It is better many times to fulfill a good purpose or consummate a work already
begun then to begin another though otherwise more perfect; because by inuring
thy self and yealding to a ficklenes of mind, neither will thou perform that
other. Seldom can any work occur which is better then constancy in fulfilling
a good purpose. Good purposes are to be kept although they be not of any great
regard; because albeit in themselves it imports but little whether they be kept
or no, yet it is extremely important to be constant and no ways changeable.
Who is more constant in making good purposes then he who least intends to keep
them. If thou learnst a firm perseverance in one good against another, thou will learn it more firmly against evil, and wilt not vary like time in this
time of serving God. O eternal truth, grant me grace to serve thee eternally:
help, o Christ my weakness, thou who with such indefatigable love tookest upon
thee all our infirmities; thou who never art weary with tolerating my impudent
negligences, grant that I may never be negligent any more, nor desist
impudently from thy service, but may learn to brook and swallow all morsels of
difficulty. Let me learn, o Lord, perseverance by thy love, who when thou
lovedst thine, thou did love them even to the end: thou who did persever
hanging upon the cross, and would not desert it, though the Jews promised
upon that condidition to believe in thee the Son of God: who being full of
irksomnes anguish, and a bloody sweat did persist nevertheles, and seek
redress by red oubling thy prayers.

Go too, o remiss spirit, tell me, what must thou covet to do for thy JESUS, who
persevered for thee amidst the sorrows of death and the cross: who when he
loved thee loved thee even to death, what, I say, must thou covet, but to do
good and suffer evil. These are the chief ambition of a soul that loves JESUS,
that which makes most for perseverance. A good work presents it self; what
hinders thee from doing it but the trouble which accompanies it? but mark well
that here concurs a second commodity of suffering evil, and attend now that the
good is doubled: there is superadded to this work both to suffer evil and do
good. Thou can pretend no excuse for thy non-perseverance, because that only
hinders thee which ought to be the sum of thy desire, to suffer for thy
beloved. If the love of JESUS were enkindled in thee, all backwardnes
tribulation, and extrinsecal impediments would no more oppress thee then fire
is with wood, which forthwith more inflames it. But if thou be so coldly chil
that the love of God finds no fuel to feed on, let thy own advantage and hope
of future joy incite thee. Despair of coming off with life is wont to add
valor to soldiers and make them way through the thickest dangers: divine hope
of eternal life is yet more forcible, and will make thee more valiant and
daring. With this hope attempt thy enterprises, and persever cheerfully. A
cheerful acceptance feels neither labors nor trouble, though otherwise the
thing be laborious enough. He that exercises himself in military games or at
ball is wont to take more pains then one that hires himself forth to day-task;
and yet he feels it not, because he takes it by way of pleasure and content.

If thou will conclude happily in the last hour, be sure to begin each hour; if
thou intend to persever, begin always a new. Excuse not thy negligence by
indisposition of body: self love for the most part deceives thee, and makes
thee do thy actions remisly. Thy body is able to do more then thou think if
thy fervor of mind were but vigorous, its force infusing strength even into
weak and feeble limbs. A lunatique person though exhausted with sickness can do
more then 4. that are sound: the vigor of our mind sometimes communicates it
self to the body. If the infirmity of a malady can make one strong, how much
more the strength of grace and health of soul when he loves God and confides in
him.

The VIII. Chapter. How sollicitous we must be to increase grace.
GO to the covetous man, o remiss spirit, and learn solicitude and arts of
industry. No great matter is demanded of thee if to become the best thou be set
to imitate the worst. No greater diligence is exacted of thee to please God
then many use to please no body, yea to displease all. Be confounded not to do
for the kingdom of heaven what is ordinarily done for a trifle of money. No
more is required of thee to obtain great grace and glory, then the sinner of
his own accord undergoes for vice and hell. Thou may with credit be covetous
of grace; and can not be too minutely attentive in improving thy spiritual
stock* studious habits incline to action: for which reason it is proper to
virtue to reflect not what is don but what is to be done, not what is acquired
but what is behind: and therefore it never is in a stable possession but
always in pursuit and solicitude. It delights not in things past, but takes
incentives from things to come. It is covetous, it thirsts, it burns; seeming
still to it self more indigent the more it gets.

Those that hunger after temporal things incur the hatred of all men; because
they are profitable neither to themselves nor others: yea they endammage others
either by usurping or hindering or denying them transitory goods, and depriving
themselves of eternal. Contrary wise those that hoard up spiritual treasures
are deemd harmles, they are in the favor and esteem of all, because they
enrich themselves without the prejudice of another. True goods are of this
nature that they are able to satisfy all parties without fear of consuming, or
causing impeachment to another wealth. In spiritual goods avarice is
commendable, in temporal it is detestable: for the first are to be hoarded up,
the latter to be distributed abroad; otherwise they are not goods unles they be
emploid after a good manner: but spiritual avail not unles they be conserved;
yet nevertheles they are not diminished but rather augmented by communication.
Disdain not then to do that with credit and profit which others forbear with
the general dislike and disadvantage both of themselves and all. The miser
prizeth one half penny as dearly as his life, and if he chance to loose it he
takes on pitifully: and so must thou, if through thy negligence thou sustain
any detriment of grace, or slip any opportunity of improving it. The covetous
rack their brains to invent new ways of gain; and thou must employ thy wits in
devising how to advance in grace. Esteem nothing little, but have a most high
conceit of all that stands in the rank of heavenly goods. Even as reason
corrects the eye judging the stars to be as little as they seem, and convinces
it that each of them is much greater then the whole globe of the earth: so must
thou rectify thy dictamens in a false estimate of these things, and persuade
thy self that the least improvement of grace is more valuable then the
sovereignty of the whole world. Let thy eye lids all ways precede thy steps,
that thou may be able to distinguish and pick up the little Margarits of
merits amidst the dung of humane employments.

Let this be thy chief care, next to good works, in the frequent and fervent
use of the Sacraments. O immense liberality of God, which have left those
immense treasures of thy Church unlockt, that every one might take as much as
he listed. Let us rate the treasures of the Sacraments duly, and let the
appetite of our avarice discharge and disburden it self upon them, for they are
the mines of grace. A miser that loses whole nights sleep for a trifle of
money, that sets so many engines on work for that end, that puts himself upon
the tenter hooks of a carking pain, if he should see the exchequer of a most
wealthy king standing open, and the king himself begging of him to take thence
as much and as often as he would, and should still importune him to carry away
more and more, would he let slip this fair opportunity of enriching himself?
this is Christ's proceeding with thee in the institution of the Sacraments. Thou
must not only dispose thy self in such sort as not to be frustrated of their
effect; but thou must love them, and frequent them often, and dispose thy self
worthily to receive more copious grace. Disposition is the vessel that receives
it and the greater that is, and more ardent thy affection, the larger portion
shall befall thee; the least grain whereof is more to be valved then all
kingdoms and natures universe. The blood of Christ distills into these vessels
as did the oil from the widows oylpot; neither will it stop its current til
they be all fully replenished.

Use also this little craft in thy holy avarice, and procure by all thy works
to gain, if thou can, a double grace: offering them to beg a worthy access to
the Sacraments; and by so doing thou shall both receive grace for the merit of
thy work and thou may hope to receive yet another in regard of thy better
disposition, which God will give beholding thy affection and solicitude for a
good preparation. Beg likewise of thy Ghostly Father that all thy works may be
enjoynd thee for satisfaction of thy sins. Be also devoutly affected toward
all the sacrifices of Christ's sacred Body and blood that are offered through the
whole world; covetting if it were possible to be present at them all; however
offer them up to God; being thus disposed thou shall reap more ample fruit.
Carry also a semblable devotion to all the general prayers of the Church for
her children, as also to those of the faithful, that being thus piously
disposed thou may partake more plentifully of them. Yea he that is in mortal
sin which cannot be thought on without horror, must not omit to do all this in
token of the reverence he carries to a worthy reception of the Sacraments, with
a good purpose and earnest desire of confessing his sins. By this means his
good works which otherwise are barren of grace in respect of merit, will
afterward in some manner be fruitful in the Sacrament by reason of the
disposition to which they conduce: for although grace shall not be given for
their regard, yet it will for the good disposal which he may hope for by so
diligent a preparation. This soar being thus cured, covet also to dispose thy
self worthily toward the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, that thou may have it
in store when thou shall chance to stand in need of being anneald.

The servant of God must be attentive over such small nyceties, and not permit
one crum of grace to fall which he may save; and using this industry all his
life long he shall gather a vast treasure: neither must be suffer that
instrument of gain, a desirous will, to lie idle; let him be desirous to do what
he is not able to execute. Let him be most wealthy in good desires: when he
sees, hears, or reads any signal act of virtue let him wish to have enterprized
it; let him burn with a holy and emulous envy; perchance he shall obtain like
grace. To approve sin is the self-same as to commit it, in like manner to
desire earnestly an act of virtue will not want its due reward. God is more
facil and forward in rewarding then punishing. The covetous man leaves nothing
which he comprizeth not in desire, although that make only for his greater
torment: what would he do, if no sooner desird but forthwith possessed. This
felicity and facility of usury is only to be found in a holy and spiritual
avarice. Desires will not prove a torment to the servant of God but a fruit and
comfort: he shall presently be made partaker of like merit. Let us covet eternal
goods with advantage, since worldlings covet temporal with grief and
disappointment. How easy a gain is it which is purchased at the cost of a sole
desire! consider the ample revenue of desire, and how rich thou may be by
only willing, and suffer not that which yealds such a plentiful incoming to
lie vacant. Be upon all occasions wishing to have not only the actual but even
possible merits of all the Angels and Saints in heaven, so to be more pleasing
to God; and thou shall reap a most rich harvest from the labors and services
of others. Wish likewise to thy utmost power and unfaignedly to suffer what is
possible for a creature to endure: and since all the voluntary actions thou
can do for him, considering the excess of thy obligation, are but very few,
glean here and there some more; and make advantage even of thy necessary works
seating, sleeping, and the like; and of them also make an oblation. Procure
moreover to elevate works of themselves but inconsiderable to the highest pitch
of virtue: and by so doing thou shall acquire more copious grace. Do all what
thou do for the love of God. What greater felicity imaginable then together
with so great gain not to be separated from him whom thou covetest and oughst
to covet above all. Be ambitious of the advance of grace and use of the
Sacraments, that thou may be more pleasing to God, more comely and gracious
in his eyes. Neither must thou be more sollicitous to increase grace then
fearful to loose it through idleness by light defects and lazynes. Unite all thy
works and labors and offer them jointly with those of Christ; for so they will
deserve a more gracious regard at the hands of God. Money which is les current
being mixed with store of current passes for such and receives its full value:
a drop of water falling into a vessel of wine puts on the nature and relish of
wine. And to the end thou may serve God in all cleannes of heart, be devoutly
affected toward Indulgences. Purpose daily at thy rising to gain them all, and
to use for that end thy utmost endeavor: offer and consecrate them to God,
having first dedicated thy self and all that is thine to his sole glory; and
thou must reiterate this thy intention frequently through the day: if thou
considerst what he is toward thee and what in himself, thou will find that
thou have not as yet given him a satisfactory discharge of thy obligations.

The IX. Chapter. How God is to be praised.
IF he be accursed that does any work relating to God negligently, what will he
be that prayseth him negligently? and such is he who performs this task of the
divine praises, wherein Gods business is chiefly concernd, with southfulnes and
impudency. Men are wont to be a little troubled out of a reverential respect, if
they be to speak to the King in their own behalf: and shall we be more sluggish
and disrespectful in the kings own concern, he himself being both spectatour
and auditour? deservedly shall he be accursed who praises not God with such
diligence as beseems him. Behold the Angels and all creatures busied in
praising and honoring their Lord and Creator be thou ashamed by sloth,
silence, or sinfulnes to contemn him. How absurd and extravagant a pallat has
he that is allwaies disliking what all the world besides extols and magnifyes?
o Lord, let not me by my distractednes and negligence make my prayers and thy
praises evil and sinful, all evils being to be redressed by them. How can I
find any place for distractions, since it behooves me to make amends in this
hour for the distractednes of so many men who scarce lend thee a good thought?
with what respect must I behave my self, since thou will have me supply for all
sinners that dishonor thee, for all infants that are ignorant of thee, and all
creatures that are speechles. But why; o Lord, do thou so much esteem the
praises of so vile a miscreant? is the master of a family any whit more
glorious for being praysd by his children or meanest servants? that may be so,
because they show the content they find in his service and house, where all
from the highest to the lowest are extremely pleased with such a master. It was
David's glory that his victory was celebrated not only by his courtiers but
hand-mayds also. God is glorified by being praised by his Angels whom he
glorifyes, and sometimes much more by men whom he humbles and mortifies. How
good indeed art thou, o Lord, that even those, to whom thou show thy self
harsh and bitter, are loud proclamers of thy goodness! each day will I magnify
thee and in all seasons promiscuously* without distinction of day, of joy, or
affliction.

Learn, o man, how acceptable it is to God to be truly praised and with desert,
by that joy thou thy self conceivest when thou art praised falsely and without
desert. It is much alike to praise God as if thou gave him his divinity. God
is wont to accept the affection in lieu of the effect, when this implies an
impossibility. He takes so much content in having a holy soul gaze upon him,
that he begs of her to look another way, because her eyes make him as it were
proud, and force him to withdraw his presence: but how much more will she
afford him when she stands admiring his perfections as one absorpt, seeking
access by love songs and Panegyricks full of sweet affection? we offend thee, o
Lord by our tongue as an University which makes profession of all iniquity: let
me purge and reform it by the regulated University of thy goodness and
attributes. Let me wipe off that infamous stain of man's tongue which cried thee
to the cross, and let me extol thee above the Cherubins and Seraphins. Thou
did loose, o Lord, many Angels whose sole employment was to praise thee: I am
bound to give thee many thanks for choosing me a poor miscreant to supply some
one of their places even among the blasphemies of those that offend thee. O how
grateful is to thee the praise of a pious soul amidst the curses of so many
infidels, as if one should hear a nightingal warble amidst a confused quire of
chattering sparrowes. Thou demandest o Lord, that thy voice may sound in my
ears: how can I deny my voice to God speaking to me and giving his word. O
immense Father, who gave me thy Son thy word to be a revilement to all for my
sake; all my words are due to thee, that thou may be praised in all by me. By
thy word thou gave all things their being; it is but equitable that by words
at least we acknowledge and be grateful for what thy word did.

If I were a laboring beast I would carry a burden; if a fat beast I would go
to the shambles; if an ox I would stoop to the yoke; I would comply with the
duty of all these: but because I am a rational creature; I will do what is proper
to me, that is, praise God: this is man's duty, this is the task of a reasonable
soul, the song that it must sing, and I will invite all creatures on all
occasions to join in quire with me. My task is not a task of burden and labor
but of tongue and song, of that which lessens and eases labor. Husband men
and artificers are wont to sing so to mitigate the irksomnes of their work: why
am I negligent in a thing so easy and delightful.

If I were a nightingal I would take pleasure in singing and do my duty: I am a
man; why shall not I take pleasure in magnifying God, complying in this with my
nature? I will practice my self here in the school of humane miseries in this
exercise of the B. Angels, which must be my task through all eternity; and now
as it were by way of trial I am to show how I will act my part in that scene of
glory. I will intrude my self into the quires of Angels that the jarring
discords of my song may be drowned in the melodiousnes of their harmony. If
Angels have been seen to consort with men while they religiously sing in the
quire; I will consort my self with the quires of Angels, and imagine my self
present there while I sing divine praises; or among the Disciples and Christ
when having supped they recited a hymn of thanks giving. O most sweet IESV, who
will be able to imitate the affection with which thou saydst or sungst that
hymn? it was equivalent to that, though it showed not it self exteriourly which
thou shortly after did exhibit in thy bloody sweat when thou stoodst in need
of an Angel to comfort thee either by praising thee or compassionating thy
case. Grant, o Lord, that I may laudably perform the office of an Angel by
praising thee laudably. Grant, o Lord, that in memory of thy passion I may at
all times compassionate and comfort thee. But thou much more covetest this small
solace of thy affliction to see me attentive, humble, and fervently zealous in
discharging thy praises, chiefly in the divine Office that I do it not with
precipitation, but at a fit and seasonable hour.

We must be always praising, and magnifying thy holy name at al times* what
is the reason that no convenient time is allotted to that which requires all
time? all things have their season: only prayer and praising thee which should
have most, are wont to find none at all. Because the divine Office is recited
in private that must not be a pretense to perform it more remisly or
negligently: but thou must endeavor by a devout observance to supply the fruit
which redounds from prayer in common or public, in such sort that thy very
reverence may attractively invite thither the Angels; as did that devout
servant of God John Fernandius a Father of our Society who by a special favor
from heaven said divine Office with an Angel: do thou at least imagine one to
be present and recite with thee, that thou may learn reverence of him, and
how thou art to discharge that obligation both worthily and profitably.

O soul, how useles art thou to God whilst neither his praise nor glory
possesses thy heart nor mouth! he denies himself to be the work of God who
neglects to praise God, to whom each creature is barren that yealds not this
harvest of praise. Divine praise and glory is the fruit of man; God can or
rather daignes to reap this increase and advantage his benefit, from his
creatures. O immense goodness to be magnifyd by all. If thy creature owe thee
praise because he is the work of thy hands, how much will he owe thee because
thou praysedst him first? thou createdst all things, o Lord, as well as
praysedst them by approving them as good, and giving them thy blessing: why
shall not I bless thee, and announce and see how good thou art? how great a
dignity is it, o man, that God should covet thy approbation and praise! thou
must praise him with as much seriousnes, as if all his reputation depended upon
thy praise and approbation. Procure to be good and just: for praise from the
unjust is held by wise men disprayse, and they account it the same to be praysd
by the lecherous and for lechery. One had good reason to say that our credit
was les beholding to a slack and faint prayser then to a bitter detractor: may
it not happen now and then that a blind ignorant and blasphemous heathen may
les obstruct the exaltation of Christ and glory of God then some religious man
who performs his duties of devotion with drouzines, immodesty, distraction,
and irreverence. A frigid commendation is esteemd among men no better then a
plain reproach: and perchance such an irreverend manner of praising God may
sometimes be held next to blasphemy.

The first inventer of praise was God; and the first doctrine he taught me was
to praise him: the first benefit he bestowd upon creatures in their infancy,
was praise and commendation of their goodness. O the dignity of praise which God
alone was worthy to invent! he would have other inventions to be ascribed to
man, but he himself would own that of praise. Thou did not only create us but
also indoctrinate and instruct us in our duty which is to pr^yse thy works and
thee in them: A tender ^arted parent does not content himself to have be gotten
his child but he moreover provides carefully for his education. Thou, o Lord,
did praise thy creatures as soon as thou had made them; and because they
cannot retaliate praise to thee, ^^ being dumb, they imposed this burden upon
me for the services they do me, to praise thee in lieu of them: they demand no
other salary of me for their obsequiousnes, then that I with my tongue supply
for their infancy. My praise is the praise of the elements and heavens, as when
one is thankful to a benefactour in an infants behalf, the acknowledgment is
attributed to the Infant: Thou, o Lord, requirest my praise as a reward of thy
works: let me not be so unjust as to defraud thee of so just a demand.
Atchieve, o Lord, great things and wonderful; and I though ill versed, will be
careful to celebrate them. Be thou o Lord exalted in thy virtue, and we will
sing and sollemnize thy virtues.

The X. Chapter. How great a dignity it is to offer the sacrifice of Christ.
THE chief glory of the servants of God is to imitate Christ, how glorious then
will it be for a Priest to be equal with him? it is a matter of great joy to
suffer for God, but how great would it be to dye in lieu of God? o what an
inestimable favor would it have been judged, if when Christ crowned with
thorns, steept in his own sweat and blood, laden with his cross, pinioned
with cords, exhausted in his strength, through weight of the tree and feeblenes
caused by the foregoing torments, fell to the ground, if, I say, thou had
then heard the voice of this Father speaking from heaven most lovingly to thee
in these words: my will is that thou dye for mankind in place of my only
begotten Son, and accomplish the work for which I designed my own beloved
child. O the desire of my heart, how come I to be worthy of this? who would
confer such a blessing upon me, which I am much more ambitious off then to be
in a present possession of glory? how unspeakable a curtesy should I repute it
if I were thought worthy only to help thee with Cyrenaeus in carrying thy
cross? I would esteem it an immense favor to receive but one stripe for thy
sake: what would it be to carry thy whole cross, and put my self in lieu of
thee to be crucified? melting into tears out of mere joy, I would go to my
JESUS and demand of him his crown of thorns, and would press it feelingly upon
my temples: I would demand his cords, and would pinion my self with them; I
would demand his cross and load my self with it, marching under that standard
to the mount of Calvary. O how all the Angels and the very queen of Angels her
self would envy my happiness, how the heavenly spirits would environ, accompany,
and reverence me for this work of redemption! if this honor were granted to S.
Michael the Prince of Angels to suffer in place of Christ our Lord, with what
fervor would he accept the ^ery pains of hell, and burning with a zeal of
Gods glory would cry out with greater ardour then before, who is like to God?
the rest of the Angels would esteem it the greatest glory that could befall
their nature, and would attend upon that vicegerent of Christ. A much greater
favor and more special grace is granted to a priest.

Consider in the mean time when the priest comes to sacrifice, that thou
receivest a precept from the eternal Father to be Christ's substitute in order
to dying: when thou put on the sacred vestments thou do nothing else but
transplant the crown of thorns from Christ's hand upon thy own head, put on his
garment, bind thy self with his cords, and carry his cross. Consider what thou
go to do, and take those sacred ornaments as if thou receivedst from Christ's
hands the ensigns of his passion which he preferred much before the heavens
thou contemplates. Now when the priest comes forth thus vested what atrain of
Angels does attend him? if fewer had been created then de facto are, persuade
thy self, they would sooner have left heaven vacant and the guardianship of
men, then the attendance and assistance of him that celebrates. When a king
deputes a Viceroy or sends an Ambassador about his affairs or public
concernments, all the peers and nobles accompany him, though for that interim
they relinquish both king and court: such a concourse make the Angels to honor
and assist Christ's deputy; and they are the more forward since by so doing they
honor the Person it self of their king and Lord of glory, who becomes after a
wonderful manner present in the mass. With what humility and modesty ought a
priest to approach the altar* but now when the time of sacrifice is at hand,
let him redouble his wishes of dying in lieu of Christ for the ransom of all
mankind. He may contemplate the whole world hanging in a deep suspense, the
doleful cries of the souls in purgatory, the endless sins of men, the
innumerable dangers of the just, the necessities of the distressed, the
inflamed desires of the blessed, the profuse joy of the Angels, and all these
contemplating his sacrifice: and the priest then knowing that his own death
cannot be satisfactory for all, let him rejoice exceedingly that Christ is
again allotted for the sacrifice, he who alone was able to make a full
satisfactory amends; as also for that God accepting of the priests good will, as
he did formerly of that of Abraham and Isaac, would again substitute for
victime an innocent ram and lamb who takes away the sins of the world: one that
will abundantly satisfy for all, freeing the priest from becoming an oblation
or being immolated; but conferring nevertheles upon him the honor and dignity
of so great a function and embassy. The victime that is to be offered for the
sins of the world must be without blemish of sin: but because none but Christ
is so qualified, it was requisite that that high priest and Prelate should
offer himself, he who needs not to make an oblation first for his own
misdemeanors, and then for those of the people.

I see not, o priest vicegerent of Christ, how thou can choose here but melt
and evaporate away through an excess of joy and love, if any one did lie in
prison as being liable to some great crime or debt which he were not able to
clear or cancel, and another should come and as bountifully as unexpectedly
bestow upon him what were requisite for a full discharge, how would he be
overwhelmed with joy. Behold thou art wholly incapable of making God any
proportionable satisfaction either for his favors or thy own fault, thou being
infinitely obliged to him upon so many other scores, and hopeles of thy self
ever to quit them; and if thou love God after a sincere manner this ought to
be an afflicting corrosive to thy heart: what jubily must needs sieze thee when
Christ comes into thy hands, and makes himself thy oblation to his Father for a
plenary satisfaction? certainly he that loves God ought both day and night to
be in expectation of this hour wherein poor miscreant man offers to an infinite
God that which will be infinitely pleasing to him, insomuch that he needs not
now dread the debt of his own sins as not having wherewith to discharge it. Pay
thy self, o Lord, for my sins, and restore to me what is overplus and I shall be
rich enough, the residue amounting to an infinitude. I offer moreover, that to
thee in all their behalf for whom Christ offered himself upon the cross for thy
glory, for thy mercies imparted to the whole world, for the coming of the H.
Ghost that he may breath upon my soul and inflame it with his lightsome ardours.

But with how great charity and obedience must I make this oblation of Christ?
with so much greater then Abraham did when he was to sacrifice his dearest Son,
by how much Christ exceeds Isaac, and the common cause of all mankind the
particular of one single man. If God should have commanded the most B. Virgin
as he did Abraham to sacrifice for man's redemption her only and dearly beloved
Son; and she full of a motherly affection were to nail his hands and feet to
the cross; with what vehement flames of love amidst a torrent of tears, with
what quicknes, promptitude, and obedience would she have done it, deeming her
self happy for such a task? o priest, consider what an office is deputed to
thee, that thou thy self art the sacrificer of the Son of the Virgin the Son of
God. But a greater favor is done to thee then would be done in that case to
the most H. Mother of God: for thou never can thank God sufficiently for
inventing a means how thou might sacrifice the Son of God without any pain
to him, without expense of blood or the torments of death, and may offer all
the pains of JESUS, all his blood and deadly pangs to his Father, in the
selfsame manner as if they were here really exhibited.

Stand amazd, o Priest, at thy function, behold the world all in suspense over
thee! how dreadful is it to see thee stand void of all attention, where thou
should be replenishd with an awful veneration, and immersed in the dregs of
creatures, while thou performest an office next in dignity to the divinity it
self? when thou elevatest the body of Christ thou drawest all the Saints to
such a spectacle, and engagest (as I conceive) the eyes and knees of the
admiring Angels; and yet for all this can thou be distracted? the very dead
themselves adore God in thy hands, as a devout servant of God F. Peter Savedra
beheld the body of S. Didacus to arise and worship Christ in the hands of the
priest: and can thou thy self who elevatest him, be in the mean time
unmindfull of so redoubted a majesty, and not reverence him from the depth of
thy heart? contemplate round about thee the Hierarchies of Angels with bended
knees and multitudes of devils forced to an humble acknowledgment: for if each
knee both celestial, terrestrial, and infernal bend at the name of JESUS, how
much more will they at the presence of JESUS?

Consider how signal thy purity ought to be who art appointed Christ's
substitute to cleanse the world by him from its sinful ordures. Thou should
not appear like a man but a very Angel, and shine more purely then the heavens
themselves. What do I say? o how mean and disproportioned is the comparison of
an Angel to a priest! since the power of priestly dignity is higher exalted
above the prerogatives of a nature Angelical, then is an Angel in its kind
above a worm. God who is so profusely good was pleased to honor his creatures
by calling them into part of his charge and providence: he designd the Angels
chiefly for his coadjutors and Vicegerents in natural things; and therefore
made them public ministers of nature not dispensers of grace and his
substitutes in the work of our redemption. They preside over the parts of the
earth and chief quarters of the world: it is their task to conserve the kinds
and natures of things: but as for producing in others the supernatural gift of
grace they have no lawful nay nor any ordinary authority, as Priests have, whom
he chose for his immediate coadjutours in the stupendous work of our
redemption and justification: they as the Vicars of Christ dispense forth grace
and make men the children of God. They exercise a kind of power over the
natural Son of God himself JESUS while they consecrate his Body and offer
sacrifice. They work prodigious miracles. The Angels take complacence in
serving a Priest, as they did Saint Eusebius, esteeming this service a high
piece of honor. How much is grace elevated above nature? certainly more
sublimely without comparison then the nature of an Angel is above dung. How
much will guarding a man fall short of making a man God by elevating him to a
divine state. Which is more honorable to have a care of one or of all; to
provide for one or all; to govern some particulars or appease God for the
generality? thou may hence conclude how eminently a Priest is priviledgd in
power above an Angel. The sole dignity of Christ is only worthy of Priesthood:
JESUS alone as being the first begotten of God obtaynes by title of right a
dignifying dignity. Notwithstanding this, o Mary most loving Mother, Mother of
Christ and all sinners, cloth me in the garments of thy first begotten by a
perfect imitation of life, as Rebecca did Jacob, that I may at least with less
unworthines offer that lamb to his eternal Father which thou gave me for a
delicious dish, on which thou know him to feed with much gust and appetite.

The XI. Chapter. That God is to be desired and received with longing in the
Eucharist.
O Desirable truth, what do I hear from thy mouth the oracle of all truth? with
a desire have I desired to eat with you this Paschal. How comes it to pass that
a man of desires obtaines of God whatsoever he covets; and the God of desires
cannot obtain of miscreant man his just demands? the abstemious Daniel obtaind
grace of God by desiring; and thou, o Lord, the replenisher of souls and
divider of the bread of heaven, shall not thou prevail so far with me by so
many desires, and engines of love, as to make me yeald up the citadel of my
heart to thee who seekst entrance by so many stratagems and services? o languid
spirit, what can thou desire but what God desires desiringly? but what, o
Lord, desire thou by entering into my body? do thou covet to become
identifyd with me, whilst thou covetest to be united to me? what object
suitable to the greatness of thy majesty can thou desire besides thy self?
thou covetest o Lord, to be with me; but after such a manner that I may be
transformd into thee, becoming one body or concorporeal with thee as the
members are with their head: as also one spirit adhering to God that he may be
with me and I with him. Charity used a strange disposal when it ordaind that I
should be thy mansion house and thou should remain in me and I in thee, I
living for thee as thou for thy Father; thou desiring nothing of me nor for me
besides thy self, nor ceasest thou to covet upon so due a score or just
pretense, though prescinding from thy self, thou find nothing in me
desirable.

Come, o Lord, come and take possession of my heart, which thy desires most
justly challenge. O how much do I betray my nothing, nor can I resist this
claym of desires! was it not sufficient, o benesicent truth, to have obligd me
with deeds and gifts; why was it necessary to engage me with thy desires? my
miseries have bereaud me of all comfort: for seeing my works to carry but small
proportion with thy benefits, it was some relief to endeavor satisfaction by
wishes and desires: but they also becoming due to thee, what now is remnant? o
Lord, how worthily art thou the butt, of all desires who desird so desiringly!
how can I have leisure to fix my desires upon any thing else besides thee, the
God of desire! how can my thoughts or concupiscible powers suspend themselves
from the desire of thy most H. Body where the whole man becomes Christ? In
other Sacraments and participations of grace, he is made one spirit with God;
but in this he moreover becomes one flesh with Jesus, such a strict union
interceding that it is tearmd by the H. Fathers substantial, natural and real:
in so much that now I am wholly thine and one with thee, and regard and
reverence my self as flesh partaking of thy flesh, which the most B. Virgin
handled and worshipd with so much devotion: being jointly two in one flesh; I
being able to glory and say, I am now flesh of Christ, and a bone of the bones
of JESUS. This is a great Sacrament in Christ and his Church, by that mystery
in which we become concorporeal with the king of glory, the Son of God and the
Virgin Mary. Now loving thee, o Lord, I will love my self; for no body ever
hated his own flesh: and thou loving thy flesh, lovedst me also making both
thine and mine joynt-sharers of the same favors, treating mine as thy own by
the privilege of the resurrection: for although other just men both ancient
Prophets and Patriarchs, were not to enjoy a resurrection, yet those should who
dye partakers of this Sacrament of our Lords Body; neither shall this befall
them only in regard of the merits of their soul, but also for the dignity of
their flesh. O Lord, thou wast desired by all nations that common nature might
share of thy communications: why do not I desire thee, that thou may become
individual to me and one with me by that admirable inconfused conjunction with
my particular flesh and spirit?

Therefore, o Lord because we do not desire as we ought, thou did vouchsafe to
do it, least so great a benefit should be deprived of its due love and esteem.
Thou causedst other blessings to be sought, and chiefly that of the
Incarnation; but thou would have the institution of the venerable mystery of
thy body and blood to come merely gratis without the expense of the desires of
all nations. That Sacrament came as an unexpected boon and unlookd-for charity,
that all our desires might be reserved and employed in a due reception of it,
and yet for all this we are not enflamed! a desire of this mystery is so
acceptable to thee, that thou wonderfully secondest it, and condescendest to a
soul that longs to receive thee. B. Stanislaus a novice of our Society being
more then once in such acondition that he could not satiate his longing desire
by feeding on this celestial bread, with much ardour of devotion desired what
he could not then enjoy, and forthwith the Angels brought what he desird, and
made him eat of that sacred banquet. Because the Body of Christ is seldom
received with a due desire, God would not let this occasion of a worthy
reception slip or frustrate it, beholding that B. soul in such a spiritual
famine and eagernes of appetite.

Thou taughtst us, o IESV, teacher of all truth, to come to this Sacrament with
much tenderness of devotion: but we do not imitate the devotion thou exhibitedst
toward it, by desiring. I know not how we can, if we love Christ, behold this
mystery without weeping eyes: for a spouse cannot behold the pledge which her
fellow-spouse, bidding adieu toward a long journey, left her for a memorial,
without a longing desire of his return. We must not only endeavor to receive
it worthily but even as worthily as possibly we can. For besides that an
infinite majesty requires all possible reverence, and the immense sanctity of
JESUS all purity imaginable, we shall derive thence a great increase of grace.
Thou gave us, o Lord, 3. documents to make us approach it with greater
worthiness; a fervent love in desiring, an exquisite purity, a profound humility
which thou did exhibit in washing the feet of thy Disciples. What shall I say
of purity? thou ought, o lover of Christ, in thy access to this table, to
possess it in such eminency, that its beams must be no less refined, then if
thou were presently to give up the ghost. Thou must endeavor with more
earnestnes, desire, and solicitude to prepare thy self to the Eucharist then
to death; nay, in some respect of profit, more then if thou were about to enter
into the glory of God. JESUS washed the feet of his Disciples being to impart
his Body to them although they were already clean; and notwithstanding when he
sent them like lambs in the midst of wolves, in such a present hazard of death;
and when he took them along with him to Mount Tabor as eyewitnesses of his
glorious Transfiguration he used no such preparative; nor when in glory he eat
with them after his resurrection. One would be pretty well disposed for death if
he were but in the state of grace: for although he were not altogether free
from tax of pain or venial culpablenes, yet before he stood in the presence of
God he would be purifyd by cleansing flames. I wish with all my heart that a
Purgatory did precede the receiving of this Sacrament! but because it does not,
it imports me to look most narrowly into my self, and prepare and refine my
self from the least blemish of imperfection or debt of any penalty, and supply
as well as I can by diligence and an ardent love the fire of purgatory: and
although all immunity both from pain and fault be requisite to gain admittance
into glory, nevertheles no respect is had but to precedent grace and works;
neither is the divine indulgence doubled in regard of the disposition as it is
distinct from merit: but in the Eucharist a more ample claim and title to
glory will be acquird even in regard of each ones disposal, over and above that
which is allotted to his merits: and he that makes it his task to till the
soil of his soul and dispose it better and better, the richer Crop shall he
reap thence, besides the reward of his good works: one ought to be much more
ambitious of pleasing God and standing gracious in his eyes which is the effect
of grace then of joying in the fruition of his glory, if the amplenes of his
beatitude were not commensurately corresponding to his grace and the proportion
which God holds. All mediums that dispose us to glory by good works, distinct
from the Sacraments, obtain grace under one only title; but preparation to the
Eucharist under a double and gains afterward a double degree of beatitude.

Purity is so beseemingly requisite in order to this Sacrament that the divine
providence has ordaind, that, even as it precedes the sacrifice of Christ, it
be propitiatory for our sins, it having virtue to remit the very pain due to
their fault; Christ himself whom we receive is pleased first of all to cleanse
us, as he did the feet of his Disciples, cer he would give himself to us or
deliver himself for us. He showed by that washing, that not any kind of purity
was sufficient but that a special one was necessary; for he would not only have
the hands of his Disciples clean, which suffices for ordinary banquets, but
their feet also which signifyes a very extraordinary diligence. God declard
hereby that we are to come to the Eucharist not only with clean hands, that is,
works devoyd of all fault, but also with clean feet, that is to say, without so
much as any print or sign of fault, viz, the pain due to tepid actions or sins
remitted being quite abolished: and in this sort grace proper to this sacrifice
is powerful to cancel the penalty due to sin.

How shall I come worthily, o Lord, to receive thee? what a treasure of sanctity
was bestowd upon S. John Baptist that his mouth might figuratively entertain
not thee but thy name, saying behold the lamb of God; and he express the shadow
of one of thy Sacraments? but what purity ought to invest me who am to approach
that venerable Sacrament, and receive thee truly and really into my mouth? o I
wish I could entertain thee with as much reverence, as the most B. Virgin
Mother did in her sacred womb in that stupendous hour of thy Incarnation; or
as she embraced thy most H. Body in her bosom when it was taken down from the
cross, and thy heavenly Father received thy spirit at thy expiring, when it was
recommended into his hands. What thou dividedst o Lord, in thy death betwixt
thy Father and Mother, all that do I here adore in this Sacrament after thy
resurrection: for thy soul remaynes not separate from thy Body. Thou affordest
me that body which thou bequeathedst to thy Mother, together with thy spirit
which thou recommendedst to thy Father. O that any one could have applied his
mouth to that of the expiring JESUS, and gatherd thence his sacred breath
worthy to be gatherd by the hands of God that it might animate and steer my
body! o that any one could with the effusion of his own blood wash the
disfigured Corpse of JESUS, and make himself the viol of Christ's blood shed for
my sake, to cleanse my soul so ill-favourd and ugly! o that any one would hold
his mouth to receive and taste the water and blood which flowed from the side of
Christ, that not so much as one drop of it might fall to wast! but thou, o
Lord, desirous and desirable complyest with my wishes in this dreadful mystery.
How great joy did the Angels conceive in thy Ascension when thou entredst
triumphant into heaven, what longing desires preceded thy return thither? o the
desired of all the Hierarchyes of heavenly spirits, with what jubily of heart
ought I to exul^ when thou entrest into my breast.

I alone upon many scores owe thee all the reverence which all the Angels
exhibited when they entertaind thee returning from this world and passible
life: for thou frequently enterst into me, that thou may delight me alone,
thou who once only enterd into heaven to cause joy to all the Angels. Thou
frequently do for me alone what thou did but once for all the quyres of
blessed spirits. If this favor were imparted to one alone of all the
multitudes of men, that once only through all eternity Christ should enter
after this most amiable manner into his sole breast, what a stupendous benefit
would it be deemd? whosoever should hear of it, ravishd into ecstasy with this
excess of bounty, would scarce believe it: he that received him, absorpt in
admiration would stand like one besides himself without voice, without motion,
yea without life, through amazement, fear, joy, and love, unles he were
miraculously sustaind, by reason of such unheard-off benevolence: why then do
not I worthily reverence and admire a greater benefit conferd not once but
often, not on me alone but all, wherein I acknowledge the favor done me much
hightned. O that I or any one could entertain thee, o amiable JESUS, becoming
my guest, as thy Father entertaind thee entering into heaven after a world of
torments and death! for the sanctity of all the Angels, their devotion, their
joy, pomp and celebrity fell far short I will not say of thy majesty but even of
that humility wherewith thou daignest to shut thy self up in the narrow cottage
of my heart: grant me grace by so rare an example to humble my self below
nothing. I that cannot humble my self sufficiently in respect of thy humility,
how can I do it in respect of thy majesty and glory? o how happy is that soul
that shall humble it self before this Sacrament, what honor will accrue to it?
how will the Angels reverence and honor such a one, that it may receive its
Lord with honor! S. Teresa oftener then once beheld the Brothers of our
Society, when they went to communicate in our Church, accompanyd with Angels
and these holding a most rich and beautiful canopy, over their heads that like
royal and consecrated souls they might more honorably entertain their
sovereign: but when others approachd that heavenly Table, she beheld no such
obsequiousnes in these B: Spirits; and the reason was want of humility in their
devotions. Let us then procure with all humility, devotion, fervor and charity
to receive that supersubstantial daily bread. Let us so receive it daily, as if
we were never more to receive it; though we come very frequently, let us come
so, as if it were to be but once in our whole life: Let our daily communion be
so performd as it ought, to be the first day of our life and last at our death.

The XII. Chapter. That in time of refection we must not be more indulgent to
our body then necessity requires.
THE Angels expect thee at their supper, glut not thy self like a beast with
corruptible food. He that is invited as a guest to another table eats nothing
at home: thou art invited a guest to heaven do not at least glut thy self upon
earth. If one that is cloyd with earthly food cannot be a competent guest at an
earthly banquet, how can he be at a heavenly one? fulness hinders the relish of
material meats, how much more then of divine? the fasting Lazarus who could not
so much as feed upon crumbs, is now a constant guest at the heavenly supper; but
that glutton who cramd himself with exquisit daintyes is shut forth. Men at a
banquet abstain from several dishes reserving their appetite for some choice
one intending to make their repast upon that: o Lord, if I shall be satiated at
the appearance of thy glory, I reserve my self for it and will refrain from
these grosser meats of the earth. Upon hopes to feed more savourly at a well
furnishd table, the guest is content to protract his fast: it is but meet that
upon hopes of the divine supper we at least keep abstinence. Remember that
Christ has made thee equal with the Angels, and will it not then be a shame to
do like a beast? he that cannot wholly wipe off an infamy, lessens and
dissembles it as much as he can; let it confound us to renew daily the brand we
received by gluttony in our first fall from a state of happiness, and that with
so much gust and savor. If we had heaven either in esteem or hunger, we should
loath earth and earthly things: where, when we are to eat, for as much as
concerns gust, we must carry our selves as if there were none at all.

God himself invites thee a guest to the supper of eternal glory: in the
interim sitting down to table let Christ be thy fellow-guest and thou will be
abstemious, if thou suppose thou art to divide with him. What soever thou
subtractest from thy necessary sustenance, offer it to JESUS. The Pharisees and
Publicans invited JESUS; thou being a Christian must not think much to do the
same. He that invites another, labors not so much to please his own palate as
his guests, for whom he carves the best piece: so when thou sit down at
table, strive not to content thy own relish, but study how to pleasure Christ
and the only way to please his gust is to take no gust at all. Consider him
where he refreshed those 3. days when his Mother lost him in the Temple:
prepare a banquet for him together with Saint Matthew. Contemplate Christ and
his disciples when through want of necessaries they pulled cares of corn: call
him and making him share of thy provisions prepare him a feast together with
Zaccheus. Behold him fasting 40. days for thy sake: and if thou will not
minister to him with the Angels, invite him with Simon; and he will be as much
refreshed with thy abstinence, as if a table were furnished for him by the
Angels. He begd a draught of water of the Samaritan; do thou give him of thy
cup. I thirst, cried he, from the cross; let him taste of thy Chalice. O that
any one would give me gall and vinegar, and I would exchange cups with Christ,
relieving his thirst with my drink! how could I choose but relieve thee, o Lord,
in such extreme necessity? now I am able to do it, and undoubtedly thou will
relish my good will and desire of abstinence more savourly then if I offered
thee a most delicious draught. How unnatural were he that would not relieve
thee? now I may do it, if I drink not more then is necessary. Why shall I not
refresh thy thirst? behold, o soul, thy JESUS desirous to eat his Pasch with
us: accompany the Apostles that thou may partake of so desired a table. Carry
thy self there with modesty and humility: seek the lowest place, but choose not
for all that the place of Judas. Thou art not worthy to sit at such a table;
place thy self at the feet of thy companion the betraier: the most humble JESUS
will even there also find thee out. Contemplate how he fed so many years with
his most H* Mother and S. Joseph: she perchance sometimes eat very sparingly
and defrauded her own mouth of many bits purposely to give them to her most
loving Son their poverty not sufficing for both: deprive thy self of some
parcel and give it as an almest to the Virgin wherewith to feed her dearest
child. Remember how this Mother of love gave suck to her Infant JESUS: how the
Son of God even then would fast for thy sake, and abstain sometimes from these
sweet breasts: do thou also for his sake refrain at least from some particle,
and offer it to Christ with a most ardent charity, with such, to wit, as she
nursed him: imitate to thy utmost her love. In this manner thou shall stifle
with pious meditations and forestail thy appetite by an affection to things
divine. One desire will drive out another, and one relish drown another.
Perchance gluttony will be no les extirpated, and thy mind by ruminating what is
read at table and such pious employments more purged then by fasting it self.

If the motive of doing a thing acceptable to Christ do not urge thee, the
dignity of abstinence and the profit which redounds from it ought in all reason
to prevail. Nothing is more contrary to the spirit then an unmortified
appetite. Eat to refresh thy body not to overcharge it. Many when they eat do
rather oppress then nourish their bodies; making that which ought to be the
refection of life its oppression. Is it not very absurd to load and stuff ones
belly as one would do an asses pack, since our flesh is elevated above the
Cherubins? if the kingdom of God and tabernacle of the H. Ghost be within us,
why are we so base-minded as to make our stomachs the charnel-house or
Sepulcher of dead beasts? he that ought to be the Temple of the living God,
called to a divine life, why does he debase himself to the meanest of all lives?
to wit', a dead life and the very dregs of all life. Plants having only a
nutritive life, are void of all sense. We loose so much of our mind as we
bestow of it upon meat: what more unworthy then the loss of an Angelical life
and mind? if thou feedst too greedily and sensually, thou have reason to fear
least thou degenerate not so much into a beast as into a tree or a stock. Adam
being overcome with gluttony clad himself with leaves like a tree, as if he
meant to become one, carrying its shape in his flight from God. Gluttony and
nutrition is not only a life proper to unreasonable creatures but to the very
insensible plants, nutrition being only peculiar to them. Therefore a full belly
obstructs all sense, it evacuates the mind, it disposes one to insensibility
by hindering the use of reason which after dinner is dull and sluggish, it
induces sleep in which a man differs nothing at all from an elm or plain
tree, save only that this at set times affords the benefit of a shade: but the
life of gourmandizers is the life of sleepers and the life of sleepers the life
of a gourd which is allwaies in a lying posture. Hence it follows that he who
is les abstemious is les obsequious to reason, as being more insensible: the
sole life of trees is incapable of command. Nutrition it self is not in the
power of a creature. When we check our desires or curb savage beasts they
become tame and pliable to their keepers: but plants which regard nothing as I
may say but their belly, that is, to feed themselves, they harken to no body
nor regard reason. This kind of life is the scum and refuse of all lives, and
most remote from a soul endowed with reason; how much more from a spirit which
breaths God. A dog will hear his masters call so will not an oak or fig tree
the husbandmans, nor he that over feeds himself the voice of God. He to keep
Adam to his duty enacted the first law of fasting, and the only one of that
most happy state; so to recommend more earnestly to us the virtue of
abstinence, as if it alone were sufficient to preserve innocence and other
virtuous endowments, putting man in a fit disposition to hear and adhere to
God. Our Lord would commit the tuition of his beloved child Adam and his
Benjamin of creatures to no nurse but fasting; into whose faithful hands he
entrusted him, that it might be the foster-Father of man and his instructor to
obedience. But this precept being violated Adam forth with fled from the voice
of God, caring so little to adhere to him that he would not only not seek nor
approach him but sought to avoid God who sought him. He renders himself wholly
unfit for all who is not abstemious: he will resist Gods holy inspirations and
withdraw himself from his familiarity, being weand as much from the divine
breasts as he yealds to these sensual appetites.

What commerce betwixt God and ones belly? how can God affect him who affects
only his gut as his God? How can thou endure, o divine truth, to dwell in him
who is such an arrand idolater? it was anciently held a high strain of folly
for men to kneel by way of worship to those things that were the handiwork of
men: and how fond a thing is it for thee an intemperate man to set thy heart
upon that which thou destroiest and will destroy thee, towitt, meat and its
relish. How intendest thou to feast with God, to lead a celestial kind of
life, to fly with him upon the wings of the winds to immortality; if thou
take complacence in the life of those things which stick to the earth, and
are rooted and half-buried in it. The life of self-pamperers is extremely
mortal: for such is the life of plants which are in part overwhelmed with
earth. Those that feed their belly increase their mortality by fatning what is
mortal in them, becoming more mortal by hindering eternal life, by defiling
their mind, and so contracting their soul as to render it only corporeal. Adam
by breaking his fast became forthwith mortal: thou becomest every day more
mortal by stuffing thy self with dead things, and feeding greedily on
slaughterd creatures, and seasond for this end that they may be entombed in
thee: but so much more happy shall thou be by how much thou partakest of
immortality; and thou shall partake so much the more of it, if thou inure thy
self to a spare diet and to feed on unsavory meats. All our life in this world
is bitter, full of labor and afflictions: wherefore it is impertinent to go
about to repayr and maintain it with sweet things. Eat only that thou may
live: let thy meat be such as is the rest of thy life. Thou live not to eat,
but to dye; and thou eatest that thou may not dye quickly. Death assailes him
sooner that feeds too plentifully and delicately. Food must be the medicine of
life not its poison and destruction.

Let thy own hunger and the gall and vinegar of Christ be all thy sauce and
seasoning: who for that end drunk it upon the cross, because whosoever combats
against sin must not seek after savory meats: and the adjoining of hyssop with
a sponge signifyes the virtue of cleansing, that we might have a model how to
purge our souls. By frugality and untoothsome meat, the divine character which
is engraven in us becomes more resplendent and the holy purity of our mind is
refind, that it may be united to God, and made more capable of divine
impressions: for if fasting drive out the stubbornest dive is from another
body, much more forcibly will it attract God so facil and benign into our own.
If such be the virtue of fasting that by it thou can purify others; much more
will it sanctify thy self. He breaths somewhat divine who breaths abstinence and
hunger: the body it self is in a certain manner elevated by the force of a
disengagd spirit. Iron is ponderous; but it becomes light by the spirit and
virtue of the loadstone: and if thou also fasten and hang thy self upon God he
will sublimate thy body by the vigor of thy spirit rendering it intellectual and
incorporeal. The composition also of thy body is rarefyed by abstinence, in
such sort that divine irradiations penetrate more easily into the soul* and she
more dexterously steers the other squard more fitly to it by a proportionable
demolishment, as being disbarked of that fat rind that environd it; for a great
weight is no ways weildy or commodiously mannageable.

Lastly abstinence contains so great a good that there is nothing to which it
is not extreme beneficial. Other virtues adorn the soul, but abstinence is
salutiferous both to body and soul. Both Saints and Philosophers by embracing
it protracted their life to a fair old age. We men designd to be immortal had
contented our selves in that most happy state of innocence to feed only upon
herbs and the fruits of the earth: now temperance also restores to man that
golden age. Spare diet conduces to the health of the body, it is a natural
restaurative, an universal medecin fit to be applied to al kinds of diseases.
The skilfullest Physicians prescribe it for the first recipe in all maladies:
for oppletion is the metropolis or head-city of diseases and deaths chief
sergeant. All the untimely deaths of young people are in a manner caused by
excess in diet. But if frugality be effectual against all the indispositions of
the body, it will also give redress to those of the soul. Hunger makes the proud
to stoop, the covetous to disburse, the lazy and slouthful it forces to work;
it renders the luxurious chaste and the angry man calmely patient. If then
frugality even when it is forced, makes head against all vices; if when it is
no virtue it can engender virtues; what remains, when it is a true and sincere
one, but that must needs associate God to a soul and make him its constant
sejourner. God took complacence in conversing with Moses and Elias when they
were both in a long fast.

But after the same manner that it expels and puts the devils to flight,
saturity bereaves us of God. Unless thou resolve to banish this vice and
establish in thy soul the virtue of temperance, thou may well despair of the
rest. It will be the same as if one being desirous to beat away a troublesome
dog should in steed of a stone throw at him a crust of bread. A domestique
enemy must first be vanquishd, ere, we can fall abord with a foraign.

The XIII. Chapter. That one must take account of his proceedings by a frequent
examen of himself.
MEN do seldom cast a reflex eye back upon their life, and therefore frequently
they find it very bad: for the most part they never deliberate about their
actions: if now and then, at the most it is what they are to do, seldom what
they have done; and yet they can scarce know how it is to be well done, unles
they reflect what has been amiss. Future gains arise from the consideration
of losses by past. Merchants sum up their days traffic, and if they find
themselves loosers, they purpose to make it up another day by other advantages.
Masters exact an account of their servants even to a minute busynes; and why is
the soul of man, more precious then heaven and earth, slighted as a thing of
no reckning? in the expense of a three penny matter they are precisely
scrupulous; but can easily digest the loss of an eternal gain. The commonwelth
without magistrates will become the mere sink of villainy; a field untild, a
nursery of brambles. The sin of Adam corrupted our heart more then it did the
earth. If thou do not cultivate thy conscience it will branch forth into
innumerable vices.

Thou must o remiss spirit, be unmerciful in exacting an account of thy self,
that thou may deserve mercy at the hands of God. Many have run evident danger
of miscarrying by reason of their hidden sins. The world is involved in darkness
thou will scarce be able to know thy self when thou searchest into thy self,
how will the case stand if thou search not at all? but if thou know not thy
self, why art thou sollicitous either to know or have any thing else? for
although thou possess the whole world, and be expert in all sciences, thou will
both be a fool, and poor, and despicable, because thou do not possess thy
self, who art better then all things, and by whom thou shall have all: and not
possessing thy self thou will possess nothing, and thy knowledge will serve to no
other purpose but make thee err and abuse creatures. The sole wise man is rich:
happy is he who is master of himself acknowledging his own vileness, and makes
that his search, and comes as it were to finger it. One loves to know the horse
he is to ride on, one will have the number of his cattle and sheep, and is
content to be only ignorant of himself, and sin without number. Why will man be
such a great enemy to himself as not to regard himself? but if thou will hate
thy self to thy advantage, do it, I pray, by abhorring thy self not by
forgetting. By looking into thy self thou will abhor thy self, by abhorring thy
self thou will correct thy self, and by correcting be acceptable to God.

Although we will not examine our selves, God will leave nothing unrevengd. But
if we would judge our selves, we should not at all be judged. But while we are
judged we are chastizd by our Lord that we may not be condemnd together with
this world. O meekest truth, who appointest us judges of our selves in a case
of delinquency against thee! what more merciful? o unspeakable clemency, that
the divine justice rests satisfied with our humane verdict! if any one that is
assoild for some heinous fact, expected a judge to be designd by his Prince to
determine the cause and give sentence, how desirefully sollicitous would he be
that some one of his kindred, or country, or acquaintance should be deputed?
how would he rejoice if one allied by blood or intimately familiar with him
were appointed? behold thy happy lot and the divine benignity, who will have
thee to be judge of thy self! if two courts of judicature were proposd to a
criminal, in one whereof presided an uncouth and rigid man who proceeded with
the strictest severity; in the other his kinsman and of a milder temper, who
used a more favorable interpretation of the law; if he would choose to be
arraignd at that most rigorous tribunal, what would such a choice differ from
madness and despair? o how madly desperate would that man show himself, who
should refuse to be brought to a bar, where I will not say his friend and allye,
but even the criminal himself shall be judge; but would stand to the verdict of
that other most impartially just, where God shall be the severe inquisitor and
offended judge. If thou were to have thy wish in choosing an umpyre of thy
misdemeanors either thy partner in the same fault, or thy accuser and the
party offended, would thou refer thy self to this latters arbitration? not
thy companion but thou thy self or God offended must be thy judge, and he who
is undoubtedly to punish thee. It is impossible for thee to avoid some
punishment and condemnation: either judge thy self, or our Lord will severely
adjudge thee to torment. Do not then shun thy own judgment; for so thou shall
shun the divine, and not be condemned at that tribunal.

Be sure not to make greater account of any temporal thing, then of exacting an
account of thy self; neither is there any thing more reasonable then this. If
we be desirous to reform others, why will we leave our selves deformed and
irregular? summon thy self at least twice a day to the bar, and judge thy self
most impartially, as if that were the dreadful day of the last doom. If at that
hour, when all mankind standing appalld with horror and perplexity before the
judgment seat of Christ to receive their definitive sentence, the judge should
deal so favorably with thee alone as to separate thee from that huge mass,
content thou should on this condition be thy own examiner, that if thou judgd
and punishd thy self in good earnest, he would stand to thy judgment; but if
superficially, thou were to be added to the main heap to be adjudgd without all
mercy together with them to torment; what immense thanks would thou deem this
favor of Christ worthy off? with what solicitude would thou search, prye,
and sift into thy self not sparing thy self in the very least? such a favor is
now granted thee; negotiate in thy daily examens and Confessions Gods cause,
seeking seriously his greater glory and thy own confusion. Next consider Christ
judging with all severity the rest of mankind, and pronouncing the concluding
sentence of damnation: beholding him on the other side crucified for thy sake,
and thy self alone busy in discussing thy self at his feet on Mount Calvary
together with the Mother of JESUS, John, and Magdalen melting into tears, even
the beloved JESUS himself weeping and crying, father forgive him for he knows
not what he does. Employed in the self-same thoughts come to thy Confessors feet
in full hope of pardon if thou be not too indulgent in pardoning thy self;
considering thy JESUS little regarding thy sins and their punishment, and only
sollicitous to sign thy pardon, laying aside all thought of their number and
greatness, as being only desirous to show favor and indulgence, because he had
committed to thy care and trust a diligent enquiry into them and a due revenge
by way of satisfaction. Be faithful to Christ, and let nothing pass unpunished,
and he most faithful to thee, will exhibit nothing but mercy.

Reduce first of all into thy mind the matter whereof thou art to give account,
to wit, all the benefits heaven has conferred upon thee: next examen in what
thou have abused them together with thy ingratitude: lastly humble thy self, be
sorry, bewail even thy least defects, and purpose firmly by Gods assistance
never to fall into the same Strengthen this thy purpose as men are wont to
strengthen their contracts, first before witnesses: renew it in the presence of
the Angels and Saints, and then security for performance being given, call the
B. Virgin and thy special Patrons, and appoint them suerties, adding also a
penalty of forfeiture. Impose upon thy self in case of relapse some voluntary
affliction by way of penance; strive allwaies to advance in goodness; for if
the Angels conceive joy for one sinner becoming repentant, why will there not
be much more jubily for the just in his progress from virtue to virtue? wax not
negligent in this search into thy self, it being the key which unlocks all the
treasures of fervor. Many religious men become tepid by reason of their
remissnes in this exercise: hence many grow lukewarm: hence diverse old
soldiers in the service of piety have forsaken their colors after a
lamentable manner, because contenting themselves with a slight and superficial
search and sorrow, what they seemd to bemoan this hour, they committed the next.

Thou neglectest not daily to renew and reenforce the decayed spirits of thy
body twice a day by corporal refection: it imports thee to be no les
industrious in recruiting the forces of thy soul and good purposes by sifting
into thy actions: yea not twice, but at the end of each work, whether thou have
performed it well or no? God who was no way obnoxious to error considered and
examined all his works as soon as he had made them. He created light and
presently taking a view of it, saw that that fair creature was good. He made
the luminary bodies, and forthwith contemplating them, perceived they also were
good. He daily entered into examen of each work in particular and then a
general survey of them all* and found that they were very good. So must thou
view each of thy actions apart, and then all of them together. If thou have not
performed them well, thou will by the line and square of a due discussion of
thy conscience discover what is amiss, to amend it for the future. Moses in
the bosome-retirement of his breast cleansd that hand which he found coverd
over with leprosy. This serious examen of ones self is the storehouse of
virtues: there the fear of God, there humility, self-knowledg, compunction,
perseverance, fervor, there prudence is minted to a current coin. Lay wait
chiefly to intercept some one vice, which thou must with importunity both
prosecute and persecute till thou have utterly vanquishd it: and after this
manner by little and little must thou endeavor to subdue them all.

The XIV. Chapter. How we must be affected toward others.
LET this be thy employment all the day long in all thy own actions, even those
that are commendable, to accuse thy self, and in thy neighbors, though
discommendable, to excuse others. It fares not with our conscience as it does
with our countenance; we see other men's faces not our own, but we behold our
own conscience not another: wherefore we ought and are only able to judge and
condemn our selves. If thou thy self who art only able to discern thy own
conscience findst it a difficult business to pass verdict upon many of thy
actions whether they be good or bad, whether thou have given consent or no; how
dare thou judge others, whose hearts are unfolded to none but God? If thou
can not discover thy own mind, why do thou judge of another? if thou art
unable to discern thy own, how dare thou pass sentence upon thy neighbors?
If thou weighest not thy own proceedings, why do thou draw others into thy
balance? but for the most part those that stand idle in the marketplace are
the people which busy themselves in murmuring and slandering others: so he that
neglects his own soul spends his censure more freely upon his neighbors. We
might long ago have learnd by experience how liable our judgments are to
error. Even in corporal things and those which have but an extrinsecal
appearance and color, our senses are very frequently deluded; how much more
obvious is it to err in judging the hearts of men, of which they have no
perceivance at all, whose motions are swaid by free will, and in which Gods
grace works secretly so many miracles. Although one seem to have clear
arguments to ground a sinistrous suspicion, yet one ought not to judge
sinistrously, because he may easily judge amiss. While the companions of S.
Boniface were busy in his search, they suspected not without ground according
to the tenor of his former behavior that he was in the company of some lewd
harlot: but he in the mean time burning with a far different flame of the love
of God, was suffering cruel torments for the faith of Christ. So fallacious was
a probable judgment: how much then will thou miscarry in thy groundles and
improbable suspicions? he that is in superiority over another, and is by office
to judge, must not condemn him, unles he prove evidently faulty; in things
doubtful the criminal is absolved: how dare thou of thy own uncertain and
erroneous brain condemn him who is better then thy self, and by whom thou art
to be judged?

If thou did love others as Christ commands thee, thou would not judge them:
charity covers a multitude of sins. ^or this reason thou forbearest to judge thy
self, because self love inclines thee to excuse thy self: and if thy love
toward thy brethren were such, thou would not censure but excuse them.
Christ being to judge mankind, he himself became man, and vested himself with
our nature: and thou also if thou will judge or reprehend another must put on
his person, and proceed with him as thou would be proceeded with all. Let
this be the first feat of thy charity not to be scandalized or offended with
thy brother; the second not to offend him; the third to help and assist him in
what thou art able; nevertheles because thy love is but lukewarm thou art often
defective in thy duty, and take offense unjustly even at the innocent,
disdaining them many times that are acceptable to God. Where is thy charity
toward him, where is thy love to JESUS, if those be a displeasing eye sore to
thee who are so pleasing to him, so deep in his favor, and do him better
service then thou a sinner? if thou lovedst God and his immense goodness, thou
would love all for his goodness; the good because they are good, the bad
because they may be good. Not only an elaborate piece of workmanship, but the
very materials of which it is made are had in no small request. Of evil many
become good, we must not disdain them: this is to love all for goodness: this is
to love all in God when we love for that which cannot be loved without God, as
goodness, justice virtue and the like.

If thou did love the goodness of God thou would love all in God, and covet
that all loved him, and would put to a helping hand and be sollicitous in
this behalf. Of a much different strain is the zeal of humane and divine love.
Humane goodness is finite and narrow bounded not suffising for all, nay not even
for many but les will fall to each ones share: and therefore men endeavor what
they can that none else love what is dear to them: but because the goodness of God
is infinite and more then abundantly sufficient for all, and our love of such a
limited condition that it cannot correspond to so great goodness; therefore Gods
desire is that each one love it, and approve our love, and cooperate toward
it, to the end they may discharg and satisfy for that goodness which we are not
able with any love of ours to equalize. Thou love God imprudently, unles thy
desire be that all love him; for thou must love him more then thy self, and thy
desire is that all love thee though thou be so very bad; why are thy wishes on
Gods behalf more barren and bounded, he being so extremely good?

O infinite goodness of God, who loved me so much the meanest and very outcast
of sinners, that being not content to love me, thou would moreover that all
should love me, and commanded it too; why shall not I covet that all love thee
and procure it to the utmost of my power? yea thou have obliged all by thy
precept and blood, that they should love me no less then thou lovedst me, and
every one loves himself. Give me grace, that I also may observe these examples
of love that I may love all. Thou said; this is my precept that you love one
another as I loved you. And again; thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Thou, o Lord, lovedst me eer I loved thee; thou, o Lord, lovedst me not for any
commodity redounding to thee but to me: thou lovedst me with an immense love,
for none has greater charity then this that one give his soul for his friends:
thou did love me with a perseverant love: thou art he who when he loved his
who were in the world he loved them to the end. These are the conditions with
which thou lovedst me, and must be the rule conformably to which I must love
others. O my soul, learn love from the love of Christ, and love them as thy own
life whom Christ loved more then his, and will in then be loved and worshipd.

If Christ lay sick in bed (thou will not deem it indecency that he be supposed
languishing for our good, who for our salvation took really upon him our
languours) or pinchd with hunger; and some other poor body lay also sick in
another bed and were pressed with the same want; and thou should demand of
Christ whether of the two he would have thee to relieve first, himself or that
other party; I believe he would piously answer, that other: for Christ himself
would defraud his own mouth of meat to assuage a poor man's hunger. Serve then
and reverence Christ in such a one: if thou can not do it in fact, do it at
least by prayer and compassion; not only in corporal necessities but much more
in spiritual. God prizeth so highly an alms bestowd on the body, that he
promises heaven for its reward, nor assigns any other cause of acquitting
them in the dreadful day of doom; how much more will he esteem an alms bestowd
on the soul, for which he daignd to dye? o the infinite charity of God, o most
loving Savior who gave thy soul for sinners, grant that I may love their
souls as thou lovedst them. I will take a pattern from thy love to know how I
am to love those whom thou lovedst and not from my own; neither will I love my
neighbor as I loved my self for then I shall love him but untowardly. I knew
not how to love my self, how can I love others. How could I love my self who
loved my own will, who loved iniquity? but I will love my neighbor as I ought to
love my self, desiring thy will may be accomplishd in him, and he more
plentifully enrichd with thy grace; that all may serve thee most fervently, and
adore thee in spirit and truth.

THE IV. BOOK.
The I. Chapter. How ungrateful we are to God.
HOW unhappy is our heart in thy benefits, o happiness of Saints, since a slender
courtesy afforded us by some poor miscreant, yea even by a savage creature
stirs us up to an act of benevolence, and yet we are not struck through love
into an amazement of the immense beneficence of thy benefical nature! how comes
this to pass, that if a man had done it we should deem it a huge favor, and
for this very reason that God does it, though he do incomparably more, we
slight the benefit and seek not to show our selves grateful? does water loose
its nature because it is in its center the sea and not in some sorry vessel?
shall it forfeit the nature of a benefit because God is the author of it whose
nature is to be beneficial? we should rather argue thus; it is water because it
is drawn out of the sea. Can heat, because it is in the fire, be thought not to
becalefactive, and that only to be so which is in a foreign and violent
subject) the ardour of fire is more effectual and warmes more intensely then
heat in wood: so the blessings from God are more benefical then those from men
because God sourceth them. It is the nature of g^^^nes to be benefical, as it
is of fire to heat. ^^neficence in men is nothing so vigorous or taking;
because it is not so proper to their nature, indigence only being connatural to
them. Water is purer in the fountain then in the stream, and benefits derived
from God are more refined then those from men, who for the most part mar the
nature of a benefit. Why then shall blessings loose their prerogative and
respect because they are imparted by God; which, though much meaner, if they
proceeded from any contemptible man, unles we expressed our gratitude for them,
we could not have the face to appear before men, but should blush with
confusion, so far as to be ashamed of ourselves, and become infamous in our own
conceit: and yet because they are from God, we hold our selves priviledgd to be
ungrateful and dare without blushing appear before him and his Angels. Why are
gifts les valuable and of an inferior rank because they come from God since
in them alone are verified all the conditions of being truly beneficial and
giving us relief in our greatest distress? is a benefit more unhappy for
flowing from the fountain of all happiness?

Why do we not love thee, o Lord, who gave us our whole creation, and are
grateful toward robbers who pillage us but in part, yea even toward dogs for
guarding what is ours? we love him that supplies us in our want, and we melt
not into love of thee who gave as both essence and life when we were no
better then nothing. What greater want or penury then to have nothing, yea to
be nothing? if God relieved us then by giving us a life and being, why are we
not mindful of such an alms, since we are grateful to him who affords us but a
mean support of life? can it be judgd a more signal mercy to give wherewith to
live then to give life it self? benefits are esteemd much greater for coming in
the nick of time when our indigency was most pressing, and when what is given
comes voluntarily and without paying so much as a begging for it. What greater
penury then to have nothing which is the greatest of all? God then did us a
great good turn worthy of the greatest love, in relieving so urgent a
necessity: it is an inestimable benefit that he gave it so freely of his own
accord, when nothing of ours preceded which could exact it. The more pressing
ones want is, although what is given be but a trifle, it is more highly valued
then when more is given in a less exigence: thou, o Lord, when we were
extremely penurious in our nothing did not bestow a little upon us but all
whatsoever we are.

Let us sum up all the benefits conferd upon men and because it were too prolix
to recou^t all, let us consider that which in the judgment of all nations is
held the greatest and beyond all recompense, and let us compare it with the
least divine benefit of our creation. Nature teaches and preaches that we can
render no equality of recompense to our Parents: and they what have they given
us? a stenchy body subject to sin and diseases, and all the miseries of this
life; insomuch that they are in a certain manner more benevolent toward
loathsome worms then toward their children: for they produced them undefiled
with any fault nor liable to the divine wrath; but they bring forth their
children, accursed, wearing the badg of sin, worthy of death and imprisonment.
How, o Lord, can we be unmindful of thee, and impudent in our carriage toward
thee, since thou gave us all our being; a body at that instant sitly
accommodated, unblemishd, qualifyd with diversity of endowments; a soul of a
most excellent nature, pure, immortal, spiritual? the benefit we receive from
our parents cost them but little, for they gave us only of their superfluities,
not a whole body but a small parcel of most loathsome matter and corruption:
thou, o Lord, gave us all our selves, our whole body, our whole soul, pure and
unspotted; which benefit cost thee no less then the expense of thy omnipotency.
Moreover what we have from our Parents they gave it not but thou by their
means: they of themselves gave us only a lyablenes to sin and an ill o men of
future miseries. What they afforded us was ^ot out of pure love to us, but to
their own ^mpure pleasure: thou, o Lord, out of an excess of charity to us,
createdst us. Per^hance our parents begot us against their will, they having
many times a positive desire to the contrary: it was not an effect of their
affection that they begot us and not some other, that being neither in their
power nor choice: thy love, o Lord, created me and no other, it was thy
election; thou, o Lord, beholding an endless multitude of men which thou could
have created, who would have servd thee much better then I, picked me out, a
poor miscreant, for no merits of my own: neither was thy love impeded by
foreseing that I would prove more dissoyal then any of the rest, and the
greatest and wretchedest of sinners, more ungrateful then Lucifer the first
begotten of sin, and Judas the betrayer of thy Son, and Antichrist his
opposite.

Behold, o Lord, for one only of thy benefits I stand not only endebted and
owing my self to thee, but am upon many scores end ebted: how then shall I be
able to acquit my self of others? I owe my self wholly to thee, because thou
gave me wholly to my self; I owe my self wholly, because thou disbursedst thy
omnipotency upon me: I owe my self wholly, because thou gave me my self not
repiningly: I owe my self wholly, because thou did it lovingly: I owe my self
wholly, because thou did it calling me by design out of millions; I owe my
self wholly, because thou did it foreseing that I would surpass all in
ingratitude. O Lord since I stand endebted my whole self under so many titles
for one sole benefit, grant that once at least I may pay my share for thy
endless ones; grant that I may make by way of discharge an oblation to thee of
my whole heart: and since thou conferredst not once only this one benefit so
variously manifold, but art still continuing and daily enlarging it by a
perpetuated conservation, this debt of my whole self is daily doubled to an
infinitude: be then endlesly taking my heart, not for the good thy benefit works
in me, but for the good it effects in thee by making thee beneficial to me, as
also for the fruit I reap from it. If therefore this least of thy favors be so
great that I owe no les then my whole self upon so many several claymes for it;
what shall I do for my redemption, that excelling my creation as much as God
excels man? in my creation thou gave me to my self, in my redemption thou
gave thee and restoredst me.

The II. Chapter. That Gods benefits are without number.
BLess yet more and more, o my soul, our Lord, and be not unmindful of his
retributions, whether toward his enemies or toward his friends, toward his
Angels or the beasts of the field: whether toward the blessed in remunerating
them or the devils in tormenting them: all his retributions are so many thy
peculiar favors. O God, how am I engulphd in an Ocean of thy beneficence!
whatsoever thou do is a benefit, yea and my peculiar benefit. The actuations
and productions of light are light: and a light that is exposd for one man's
direction, illuminates all that stand about him: so do thou, o light of
truth, o nature of goodness; and therefore because thou art beneficial, thou
can do nothing which is not beneficial: and it is necessarily consequent that
the benefit thou bestowest upon one is not only proficuous to him but all. Each
best gift and perfect blessing is descending from above from the Father of
lights; because thou diffusest them like unto the diffusions of light, thou
communicating thy self to all and for all without any decrease or
impoverishment. A light remaining still intyre divides its beams to all, and
another, without any prejudice to it, may borrow some from its flame.
Whatsoever the sun darts forth is light; all may see by means of it, unles
they wilfully seal up their eyes. All the effects which God produces are so
many benefits; and by them each one may help and profit himself, unles he will
be foolish and perverse. Thy ardent love does always, o Lord, accompany thy
gifts as heat does light: this is an immense privilege concomitant to them,
that they are so many pawns and pledges of thy love: although this be not
patent to the eye, yet it discovers it self in the benefical effect. For though
we see only the light which the sun communicates not the heat, yet this does
still attend the other.

O Father of lights what thanks am I endebted to thee for the university of thy
benefits conferd upon all, those credentials of thy love, which love I chiefly
embrace and adore in thy works! who will not stand amazd at the inventivenes of
thy goodness, making the benefit of all, the benefit of each one, and the
benefit of each one the benefit of all, private ones public and public
private? all the works of nature, all the wonders of grace, all the
predestinate, all the blessed are my benefits: all the prosperity, all the
calamityes that befall man, are so many favors which thou lovingly bestowest
upon me. O ungrateful man, would thou not love God with the whole impetuosity
of thy heart, if he should exempt thee from damnation, thou carrying the guilt
of hell fire by dying in some damnable sin; but should create another much
better then thee, deputing him in thy place to suffer for thee that hell of
torments? God did much more then this: I omit that he fatherd our faults upon
himself daigning to dye for our sake; this now amazeth me, although it be
incomparably less, that he would shut the gates of mercy against many and
sentence them to damnation to save thee: for if thou did see but few
condemned, thy fear would be much less and thou perchance thy self make one in
that heap: if two only or three; thy fear would yet be more lessend, and thou
might presume with more certainty, one of them would be thy self: if none at
all; thy fear would be none; and may well think that thou alone would incur
that misery; or which is worse be much more frequent in sinning and less
observant toward God. Therefore the torment and damnation of so many souls is
to me a great benefit. O light of my heart, with how bright beams does thy love
shine toward thy elect! thou made other creature^ for man, and him thou
damnest for other men whom thou have elected to salvation. Angels become
servants to men, yea thou thy self being made man: what if thou would have
one man serve another? If for some respects of temporal life thou permittest
man to serve man, and a slave his master: for the attainment of eternal life
and increase of glory a reprobate must serve an elect. Behold, o ungrateful
spirit, if an evil so prejudicial as that of punishment is, proves thy
advantage, the advantages also of others will turn to thy benefit.

With such skill does God manage his works that each one redounds to the good
of all, and the very pains of the damned are so beneficial to all, that they
are beneficial even to them themselves: for in that height of misery their cup
is not temperd merely with malice, but has some mixture of divine justice,
which is very savory. God is so bountifully good, such a skilful Alchymist,
that he turns dross into gold, that is, our very miseries into mercies; and
which is yet more, out of the worst minerals of sinfulnes, they alone being
only bad, he extracts precious metals, and sometimes even the most precious.
Thou, o Lord, conferrest thy benefits with such a strong and open hand, that
even from sin, where thou have neither power nor activity (thou being both
impotent to act in it or concur to another acting) thou both drawest and art
able to draw great good. Thy skill knows how to extract immense blessings and
virtues out of sin. Light reverberating upon a condense and obscure body
incapable of its operations is so far from being eclipsed that it doubles it
self by reflection: neither is thy beneficence ever defeated or renderd
ineffectual. Out of sin, where nothing is but preposterously bad, thou
rectifyest all to my good, decreeing thence thy beloved sons Incarnation. As
well from my own sins as those of others, thou know how to take an occasion
of being beneficial on my behalf: when I hear of a crime committed by another,
I am sorry for the misfortune of my brother, but take an occasion thence of
thanking thee, because I hope for mercy at thy hands either for him or me. I
yeald thee thanks because thou will derive thence no small good to me, unles I
will become quite blind and shut my eyes against the light.

Sing praise once more o my soul to the Father of lights, and be not forgetful
of all his retributions: for they all are his gifts, even those that seem to
flow from men, and thou receivest immediately from them: for if thou must
persuade thy self that all the cross aggrievances which befall thee from men,
come from God, why will thou not also be of the same mind concerning good, his
nature being goodness it self, and he so prone to communicate it? all the light
which beautifies the heavens though some little star or the moon by night do
dart it forth, proceeds from the sun though he the Author be not seen: in like
manner each blessing and benefit though receivd from man, flows from God, and
is but a ray of his goodness. This is the main comfort which sustaines man's life
amidst such a world of miseries as attend it, that nothing can happen but by
Gods permission; and whatsoever he permits can be no other then a benefit
according to the nature of his goodness: and what benefit soever befalls us
proceeds from him, and whatsoever proceeds from him is my benefit, and orderd
to me and my good* Corporal afflictions and the miseries of this life, whether
I or any other tolerate them general dearths, diseases, pestilences, all these
are my benefits, o Lord, thou afflicting others for my good. O God, how deeply
am I endebted to thee, who to the end I poor miscreant may receive thence some
good inspiration stickst not to strike the very kings and Monarchs of the world
dead, being little or nothing moved with the tears and calamities of so many
kingdoms, that I may draw thence some good document. A congruous thought of
some poor peasant becoming contrite, is more prevalent with thee then the
diadems of some kings, and sometimes whole nations of people. Grant, o Lord,
that I may be thankful for these, and both in my own behalf and others, love
thee in all thy works, as thou lovedst me in all thy benefits.

The III. Chapter. That Gods love in our Redemption appears infinite.
O Immense love, how do thou exhaust thy self in deserving well at my hands,
since thou have left thy self no power to act, nor wisdom to invent, nor will
to wish greater matters then what is already done for me! for no remedy more
noble and effectual could be invented to give redress to mankind then the
Incarnation of the Son of God which was a mercy beyond expression. O immense
beneficence and excess of love to which the divine omnipotency submitted and
yealded it self as it were overcome! thou have gone beyond all the stratagems
of God, and put a stint to these his sacred and unlimited desires; why do
thou not make use of my infirmity, suspend my thoughts, bounding my desires in
such sort, that I may endeavor, think, and wish nothing besides thee? we thy
children, o Lord, whom thou have nurturd up by creation, despised thee; how can
we, whom thou have honored and exalted even to be sharers of thy majesty, how
can we I say, contemn and rather not love thee who for love of us vilified thy
self so far as to partake of our vileness? o Lord, how comfortable is this
benefit of our redemption to me, when I behold thee groaning under a heavy
burden of afflictions, joynt-sufferer in our miseries and all this out of mere
love and affection to us: could not thou contrive some other means of
redeeming us with less lyablenes to the rigor of justice? could not thou
have created some nobly-qualifyed Angel who might undergo at least the pains
of hell? yea could not thou thy self, even complying with the strict tenor of
justice have accomplishd it without such a world of torments? but thou did it
to take up and possess the whole extent of our love. Perchance if our redeemer
had been different from our Creator, that is, one redeemd us another created
us, we should have had more love for our Redeemer then Creator, and for that
reason thou would be both the one and other, so to become the object of all
our love and that this thy love might be more conspicuous thou did not aim
at a bare sufficiency or equality, but at an over-abundance and inundation;
that in such a boundles sea we might see thy love which knows no bound.

Thou who made all things in number weight, and measure, thou who being
Author of nature rejectest superfluities, why would thou, as it were,
confound all in thy redemption? transported besides thy self and thy ordinary
manner of proceeding thou observedst no number of torments, no weight of thy
precious blood, no measure of necessary satisfaction; but in an overmeasure of
thy sufferings thou gave us a superabundant redemption measuring out all
without any measure at all. Surely the reason was because an immense love was
chief Architect in so great a work, in which work thou intendedst to render thy
love conspicuously visible, we* that are so incredulous, not believing it out
of other thy feats and benefits. But though thou proceededst with such a loving
extravagancy, thou art not changed from thy former principles, and what thou
wast before: thou keep proportion in all thy works, and here also did thou
observe a mean, but it was to do all without mean, because thy love is so,
and otherwise there would be no exact equality. In like manner I behold here,
thy infinity, for as much as thou carryest thy self without any restriction or
proportion at all. This benefit forces love from me, because it convinces
thee to be a lover: out of thy other benefits I conjecture thee to love, in
this I see it. The rest hinder not but that one may judge them to proceed from
some other motive then love; of this none can suspect other but that it is done
with immense love. Although the rest excluded love, nothing would be derogated
from thy majesty, nor the divine honor suffer detriment: here would be a
defect of congruency, if we regard the authority of the divinity, supposing they
should flow from any other fountain. The rest though done without love, would
yet be worthy of praise and reverence: but this, if love interceded not, would
seem an eyesore, I will not say in God, but even in man, and a thing worthy of
dispraise and contempt. But because it implies an impossibility that thou do
any thing less beseeming thy self, I am ascertaind beyond all peradventure that
thou love me. It would be deemd a kingly business to maintain, uphold, enrich,
and be each way beneficial even to those who deserved no love; this, I say,
would well become the highest majesty: but if a great monarck should debase
himself to mean drudgeries, should consort with scullions and cooks and the
grooms of his stable, and dressing himself in their liveries should sit at
their table; who would not slight him, and account him no better then a mad
man? nothing could be pretended for his excuse but that he were transported
with love, and yealded for a time to this transportment, so to work upon the
affection of the party beloved, or used it as a stratagem to bring his desires
to a happy issue. The Philosophers themselves confess love to be so
privileged, that it can never be blemished with infamy, yea that it wipes of
all these stains which if contracted without love, would be held undecent and
ugly: but love turns them all into merit, and transformes infamy into glory*
Thou, o Lord, can do nothing unbeseeming thy divinity: wherefore whatsoever
thou did by evacuating thy authority and stooping to the condition of an
abject creature, all was done out of love to me.

Lock up in thy heart, o my soul, this illustrious pledge of divine love, divine
humility; which by loves prerogative is the highest glory. Love excuses the
majesty of God, the same exalts the humility of God. This love forces a
reciprocal love from me: fire enkindles fire, and love provokes to love: let
thy love, o Lord, inflame me with love of thee; thou who came to send this
fire: but could thou not, o Lord, send it without coming thy self, and
becoming Incarnate? why was it necessary that thou should become man to
inflame men? was it because fire does not operate but upon an approximated
subject? for fire in the purity of its nature and in its element is said not to
be active nor enkindle any solid matter; but it is requisite that it be in a
foraign subject and renderd visible: so thou o Lord though in the refindnes of
thy purest nature thou be love and a burning fire, yet thou did not inflame
man but by becoming man: like as elementary fire is not active upon wood unles
it be first enkindled in wood or some other matter more gross and condense then
is the firmament: as then it will enkindle other wood, it becoming a conspicuous
and visible flame. Thy visible love, thou being made man, cannot but inflame
and set man all on fire.

That benefit is much heightened which anticipates all entreaty, and is conferd
without any intercession: and much more if it come unhoped for or unexpected;
for blessings unlookd for affect one more feelingly, and most of all if they
prevent all wishes and desires: for nothing befalls us more agreeably and to
our harts-content, then what is given without the expense of so much as a wish:
now what must that needs be which forestals all kind of expectancy: what will
that be which could not so much as enter into our thought? such a one is this
benefit and unexpected Sacrament of our redemption, which if any one, before it
was intimated to us, had begd to be done after the manner it is done, his
prayers would have been thought blasphemy, his hope a mad rashness, his wish a
sacrilegious will, his fancy impiety. An unexpected gift is most grateful: what
will that be which was never so much as conceyted? thy beneficence indulgently
granted what our indigency fancyd impossible.

But above all, the frontispice and inscription of love which this benefit
carries engraven (that being the prizer and taxer of gifts) does most affect
me: all gifts are testimonials and credentials of love; what more creditable
then this? Gifts are not rated according to their bulk, but the remonstrance
of love that accompanies them. This is an immense favor, which that it may
stand in the rank of benefits not of disgraces, it carries in its front in
capital letters the immense love of God. O Lord, if I be endebted to thee
whatsoever I am for my creation, what shall I owe thee for thy love? I
acknowledge my self to owe more then my self, yea as much more as thy greatness
exceeds my nothing, thou who gave thy self to me in thy nativity, in thy
life, in thy death, in thy resurrection, and lastly in that sacred banquet of
thy most holy body. Effect, that whatsoever was thine by creation, and thou
repairedst by redemption, I may make it all thine by love. I were not able to
make condign recompense for the least of thy benefits, though by way of
tha^ksgiving I should endure all the pains of hell for all eternity; the
reason is because it proceeds from the infitude of thy love, which infinitely
exceeds any infinity of recompense from creatures: what then shall I be able to
do for so many and those so signal, and chiefly for this in which thy boundles
charity reflects more perspicuously then do the sunbeams.

The IV. Chapter. How deservedly God is to be loved and chiefly for himself.
I Will sum up the titles by which thou most justly exacts my love, and the
delinquencies of my tepidity and ingratitude. I ought with all ardency to love
thee, o most amiable Lord, both because thou art good, and because thou art
loving; both because thou art a benefactour and my benefactour; both because
thou art my maker and a patient endurer of my imperfections.

God is so good and beautiful in himself, that though he had not made us the
object of his love nor the subject of his beneficence, nor the issue of his
creation, yet he were to beloved above all lovers, benefactours, and Creators
whatsoever; yea although he should hate us and be injurious on our behalf; for
that bottomless Ocean of goodness and beauty would expiate any injury whatsoever,
and much more effectually then does beneficence. If God had beheld thee hereto
fore as an object of hatred, and being at enmity had offended and sought
revenge, would thou not pardon and even love him, he making so large
satisfaction by so many benefits, so far as not to spare his own son but give
him up to death suffering a privation of that, the absence whereof causes the
greatest grief: one must pardon an injury in him who is beneficial; for the
force of a benefit ought to extinguish revenge and anger: but Gods previous
merits being so great, he deserves more then pardon. If then his beneficence
would suffice to clear him of alinjuriousnes; much more would his goodness the
cause of beneficence, it being more noble, and sufficiently effectual to make
amends for all losses and injuries sustaind by him. Gods goodness is greater
then his beneficence because this flows from that; and effects rather fall
short of their cause then otherwise. One said of an ill deserving man; I have
receivd no good from thee but much harm, and yet for all that I cannot but love
thee. O true goodness, let me rather say of thee then thy image of clay: I
cannot but love thee although I should receive no good from thee but much evil:
what then shall I say now when thou love me without mean and art beneficial
above measure.

We sometimes love men whom we never saw nor heard off, nor they us, nor do
they rank us in the legend of their love; but we affect them merely for the
report of their honesty: we could take content in their conversation, rejoice
at their sight and honor the very memory of them: and can the goodness of God
be unworthy of that which a mere humane goodness claymes as its due? A man's
honesty may be such as to deserve love without any obligation of piety, he not
being our parent; without any obligation of thankfulness, he not being our
benefactour; without any obligation of love, he not loving us at all; and shall
not the authority of the divine goodness suffice of it self to the same effect?
who is not moved with some sense of benevolence toward Ionathas for the
loyalty of his friendship, notwithstanding the emulation of his Fathers
kingdom? or toward David for his clemency in sparing the life of his enemy
Saul, though it had purchased him no les then a good empire? who has not some
affection for Judas Machabaeus for his singular love toward his law and
country? and it is not any alliance with them or other particular interest, but
mere virtue that gains this good will. Sum up into one man the perfections of
all others and suppose him composed all of miracles; let him have the wisdom
of Solomon, the fortitude of Sampson, the beauty of Absolon, the fidelity of
Ionathas, the meeknes of David, the fortune of Iosue, and as loving toward his
people as Moses: who would not be ambitious of that man's friendship, or covet
once at least to treat and converse with him? of how dull a relish would that
man be thought, who did not take gust in his acquaintance, even prescinding
from all hopes of gain? o immense God, thou art an aggregate of all good things
and the total sum of all goodness; why do not we love thee and aspire to thy
familiarity? o Lord he that loves not thee upon the mere score of thy goodness,
how ill-rellished is he, how baseminded, how unwise! he that admires not it
alone to the full, how ridiculous? let us suppose our selves created
independently of God, and that we should hear of him, as of one that ruld in
another world, what we now believe; who would not covet to have such a God, who
would not admire and love his goodness and carriage toward the men of that his
world, whose happiness we might well envy? his goodness then is not one whit the
les for his being Creator, neither ought our admiration and love toward him
to decrease upon that pretense.

A very forcible motive also to make us love God is because he is of a loving
nature. No ingredient is more operative in producing love then love it self: we
carry a good will toward wicked men merely upon this score that they seem to
love us; and we take a kind of complacence in being loved by dogs: although God
were not good, nor our benefactor, nor Creator yet because he loves he were to
be loved, and chiefly because he is such an ardent lover. The greatness of which
love is renderd perspicuous by the greatness of its gifts: what a love must
that be by which he so loved the world, as to give his only-begotten Son for
its redemption? o men, what can you admire if you do not admire this, that God
should love the meanest of creatures with such a tender and feeling heart.

But let us grant that God neither had loved ^s nor made us, nor been
beneficial to us; it is our part at least to love him because he was so to
others If the virtuous actions of men deserve praise at the hands even of a
stranger or Barbarian, and force a kind of benevolence from them; shall so many
feats of Gods beneficence deserve les their excess both in number and quantity
amounting to an infinitude? an upright and beneficial man is loved by every
one, even those that have not tasted his beneficence: but although God had left
no great monument of his liberality to others, yet because he has toward us,
although it proceeded not from the motive of love (which cannot be done without
some love) we were still bound to love him yea although he were neither good,
nor loving, nor beneficial to us or others (which nevertheles implies an
impossibility) for that sole reason that he made us, he were worthy of all love
and respect? Our Parents although they be wicked, though they themselves nursd
us not up, yet they are to be loved and reverenced: soldiers spend their lives
and blood for their lawful king though otherwise notoriously naughty: God is
Father of all things and the lawful head of the world.

Neither is his patience a light shaft to wound us with love, he tolerating and
pardoning us by it while we play the impudent delinquents. The patience of an
offender and harmer in accepting punishment and standing in a preparation of
mind to admit revenge and penalty for the wrong, turns the anger of the party
offended into benevolence: and how can the patience of an unjust offender force
benevolence from one justly displeased, and not the patience of the party
offended obtain love of him that offends unjustly? O Lord with how good title
does my ingratitude and thy pardon exact my love! but if this alone be not
weighty enough to sway the balance, add to it that he is our Father, our
benefactour, yea and beneficial toward all: how much am I bound to love thee,
whose merits on my behalf are innumerable, and love boundles.

But these impulsives are not the most convincing, though they be severe
exacters of my love: I am much more engaged to love thee for thy sole
benevolence wherewith thou love me then for all thy other benefits besides:
for that is the source of them all, and consequently more to be prizd: and thy
love is so far from being exhausted, that it is forcible enough, if need were,
to redouble thy benefits and multiply them without stint, if they which already
abound, suffised not for my salvation. Thy love is equivalent not only to thy
benefits already conferd, but even to those in possibility, if any greater be
possible, and comprizeth them all in it self; yea if we may use the manner of
speech, even impossible ones: for true love is not confind to the limits of a
real power but imaginary wishes; which though they have no place in God by
reason of the perfect fecundity and allpowerfulnes of his nature, the excess of
his love is not therefore any whit diminished; but ^e are as much endebted to
him as if they were. The sole love then of God alone is a more convincing
motive of love then his boundles beneficence: for that comprehends all his
benefits not only now actual but possible and impossible, if any such were
unfesible to God.

There is yet another more pregnant cause of loving him then all the precedent:
for if we owe him more love for his love to us then for his benefits, because
these are only its issue and so many sparks leaping from that glowing furnace
of divine charity: much more must we love him for his goodness, this being the
cause of love. How great must that goodness be which is mother of so numerous a
progeny of loves, and the stock from whence sprout so many benefits! yea we owe
not only incredible love to the divine goodness for the present affection he
bears us, but much greater on our parts, for the love he would bear us, if we
would but dispose our selves better and become less ungrateful, and
consequently more capable of a more ample charity. We are not only endebted to
the goodness of God one infinite love of God, but as it were infinitudes of love
to an infinite God. Wherefore we must love him more ardently for that he is
good in himself, then for that he is good and beneficial to us. O Lord, I love
thee for thy benefits because I read, reverence, and embrace in them thy love:
and I also love thee for thy love, because in it I behold, adore, and love thy
goodness. The love of God is one perfection in God: but there are many more for
which he is amiable, all which are comprised in the infinite divine goodness and
perfection which is for infinite respects most worthy of love. I see not, o
Lord, how my heart can cease or suffer any interruption in loving thee, since
thou who art infinite, purely out of thy own goodness lovedst us so incessantly
from all eternity.

The V. Chapter. That we are not able to satisfy the goodness of God.
HOw do I loose my self, o Lord, in the consideration of thy goodness, which
neither pen, nor tongue, nor thought is able to comprehend! if all the spirits
both of heaven and hell, all souls created and creable, should make it their
task to describe it; and if each one had a sea for their inkhorn and a heaven
for their paper, both the one and the other would be exhausted ere they could
make a fit expression of its least parcel. If each star and drop of rain were
so many tongues their breath would fayl them and they grow mute eer they could
utter a congruous elocution. If all the minute sands of the sea were changd
into so many intelligences, all their conceptions would prove but shallow even
in respect of its least particle. But what am I doing while I dare declare thy
goodness by these similitudes? I confess, o infinite God, that all these
exaggerations are ridiculous, although they be ownd by most grave Doctors;
they are all ridiculous in order to express it, and they destroy themselves:
and he will show himself to be ridiculous who hopes to express himself
competently by them. I am afraid, o Lord, least while I go thus to work to
praise thy goodness, I may be thought to jeer and deride. Would not one that
took upon him to set forth in magnifying words the wisdom of Solomon: be
judged to scof if he should say; so great is the wisdom of Solomon that the
lame-handed can not describe it, nor the dumb utter it, nor the distracted make
a true estimate of its greatness? if this commendatory be thought derision these
other comparisons in respect of thy goodness are much les to the purpose, in
order to whose expression each creature is lame, dumb, and senslesly foolish. O
Lord, my desire is to love thee in the simplicity of my ignorance; and I will
brook it patiently if I do not clearly understand how thou art, which is not
possible for me to do in this life: and although I can conceive nothing worthy
of thy goodness, for as much as my conceptions of it are obscure and
incongruous, yet I solace my self in this, that thy goodness is too great ever
to be equalized by love: I solace my self, o Lord, that although thou had not
created us, nor been beneficial to us, nor made us the object of thy love but
hatred, as my deserts at least exacted, yea although it were impossible for
thee to be beneficial, and repugnant to thy nature to love us as thou do:
nevertheles by reason of thy perfection and goodness and its matchles worth no
body could love thee to the full. Although all the leaves of the trees and piles
of grass, all the sands of the sea and motes of the sun were all hearts, yea
although they were so many wills of burning Seraphins; yea further, though all
these and all other possible creatures were each one a Hierarchy of Seraphins
whose love at each instant redoubled it self through all eternity, all this
love of them all would be as nothing in recompense of thy goodness, nay it would
blush to appear in its presence, neither is my meaning that it would love thee
congruously for the whole extent of thy goodness, but not so much as for thy
sole patience wherewith thou toleratest me, not only while I so heynously
offend thee, but am so defectuously languid and remiss in loving thee so great
a good.

But in this also I solace my self that though thou art not sufficiently loved,
neither can thou be sufficiently loved by creatures. Accept, o Lord, for my
share a small pittance of love in wish and desire: I offer up to thee all the
love of all creatures, even of those that are as yet but possible, sumd up into
one oblation: I my self alone would for each instant have all that their love,
which will actuate them through all eternity; and though I were thus furnishd
yet still should I have cause of shame and confusion. Pardon, pardon me, I most
humbly beseech thee great Lord, nor resent these my slender votes and desires,
as affronts put upon thee; but let my infirmity and thy greatness plead my
excuse. Accept of this my wish which cannot worthily be stild a love worthy of
thee: accept also of the pain I am put to in grieving that all creatures are
not enamoured on thee I grieve that so many souls espoused to thee by the ring
of faith, and so many hearts of men fit to love thee most ardently, who might
make themselves kings of the world and overtop the heavens, should lie
wallowing in their own ordures, and perish by loving themselves and the frail
and loathsome goods of this earth, neglecting thee, o beauty of creatures and
love of the universe.

The VI. Chapter. How great a benefit of glory we hope for.
GOd is so good and beneficial that he suffers us while we set a false rate
upon his benefits and our own good. Men are vexed with toyling and moyling all
their life long to purchase some temporal good, and at length are frustrated of
their expectation, reaping little or no fruit at all of their labors: how can
they hope to gain eternal, it being no part of their solicitude, they scarce
ever admitting it into their thoughts? the goods which they make their daily
business are not obtaind with all their endeavors; and those which are distant
as far as heaven, they hope the earth will afford them without any labor: they
are deeply afflicted for trifling goods, and are not so much as shallowly
affected for the most important. How is it possible that one can proceed so
ridiculously in a joy most serious, and so stupidly about a stupendous good? o
most humble majesty of God, when I consider this last miracle of thy love, I
loose my self in a maze of amazement!

How great is that good, whose greatness made it an unseemly thing in God to be
liberal; but was to expect the additional worth of virtue and our services,
though they also be divine benefits. In our creation and redemption thou wast
munificent when we least expected it, anticipating the wishes and intentions of
man; but to enter upon a state of glory thou expectest our joynt-concurrence
with thy grace. Good God! how vastly great must that good needs be, which
obstructs by its greatness the full current of the divine benignity, and
requires our endeavor and labor. And God sels it at a dear rate, though he
love otherwise to give all gratis: he sold it to S. Laurence for a broyling, to
S. Paul for the price of his head, to S. Felicitas for her children, to S.
Peter for the death of the cross. Yea that he might sell it us so dear, he
himself would buy it at an intolerable rate, to wit, his own death and the
ignominy of the cross. God was pleased to bestow and confer his other benefits
to make us covet and acquire this; how great must that needs be for the
coveting whereof his gifts and deeds were so stupendous? and yet for all this
our hearts dilate not themselves sufficiently, nor are raised to a congruous
strain of desire. If God attempted so many means to make us covet it; what
ought we not to attempt to enjoy it? if God did and sufferd so great things to
legitimate us to a true title of such a gift, what ought we to do and suffer
to enter upon it? it is plain nonsense to persuade our selves that we can
attain glory without labor, since God labored so much to be able to give it.
Notwithstanding all this we incur here a double delinquency in this gift more
then in others; being liable both to ingratitude, and an action of contempt;
for as much as we endeavor not to acquire that for the acquiring whereof God
was at such expense, yea steerd to that end all his actions. For his other
benefits we are ungrateful, for this comtemptuous, while we pursue it not with
all the cagernes of our heart and spirit, but prefer a momentary pleasure before
the grand affair of eternity.

What is it that we are so ambitious off? unles we be very greedy of glory what
hunt we so earnestly after? one moment suffices for the purchase of eternity.
If the largest extent of the earth be but a point in respect of heaven which is
limitable, what will the narrow bounded life of man be in regard of an
unlimited eternity? and is it possible that time can be spard from the pursuit
and attainment of glory? if having exposd a full exchequer of gold, God should,
say to some needy beggar; thou art yet to live a thousand years and shall have
nothing to sustain thy want for so long a respit of time, but what thou can
carry out of this treasury in the space of an hour, would he think thou, play
the trewant in that short interim or spend that remnant in play or sleep? why
do we not bestir our selves? an eternity expects us; nor can we lay up
provision for it but in the short interstice of this life: why do we interrupt
so laudable a commerce and sit still with our hands in our pockets? a thousand
years carry les proportion to an eternity then a moment to a thousand years:
what then will ten or twenty years, the utmost term of thy life, be in regard
of an endless duration? why ceasest thou from doing good? life flies from thee,
death runs toward thee, eternity stands still, and thou nevertheles art slow
in coffering up eternal riches.

What a tedious journey under took the queen of Saba for no other end but to
enjoy the sight of Solomon; her intention aimed not at any long stay, but to
return presently to her country? many come from remote lands to behold a man
whom fame has cried up for some rare talents of wit or art: and with how much
more reason ought we be content to employ before hand prolix endeavors, to be
able but once to contemplate God in the height of his majesty? if permission
were given to all of making our journey to heaven on foot, and nothing else
were prerequired but only a pilgrimage of a thousand years, no body I believe
would decline the enterprise. Thy journey thither is much more compendious;
thou needst not lift thy foot over thy threshold nor out of thy bed; and why
dare we not aspire with all our might to compass a good which is so nigh us?
the sole luster of gold or flashings of a gem are able to make men brook the
roughnes and danger of the seas; and the clarity of God strikes us no more then
if we were insensible, neither do we prize an invaluable good at so much as the
value of a little labor. But what do I insist upon eternity? although glory
were not eternal but momentary, yet it is a good so boundlesly great, that an
eternity of suffering should not be deemd too much to purchase it but for a
moment, we beholding God intuitively in that instant.

O how exquisite must that needs be which God has provided for his friends, if
he prepared and gave himself to be crucified even for his very enemies? how
exquisite must that needs be which cost God so dear, for which he was at so
great expense, at no les then his life, auctority, passion, and omnipotency. If
Gods manufactures as the heavens, the motions of the stars, the nature of
beasts, orderd only for the use of man be to us such an object of admiration;
what will that be which he exhibits to the ostentation of his majesty? if we
admire the artifice of an eye though in a loathsome creature or carriage-beast,
what will that be which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into the
heart of man? if he has made the fabric of this world which is but the cottage
of miserable Adam, a bridewel of sinners, acave of brute beasts, of such an
admirable structure, that heathens at its contemplation were rapt into ecstasy,
what shall we think of his own royal Palace? as much as a nasty stable falls
short of the court of some great Monarch, which is adornd with gilded roofs,
paved with precious stones, hung with most rich tapistry; yea as much as the
magnificence of the heavens exceeds the horror of a stinking prison; so much
and far more must thou imagine the dwelling place of the blessed to surpass the
beauty of this universe, which respectively will be found but an object of
loathsomenes. All the comelines of this world falls so far short of the seat of
the blessed, that all this artifice, which the Philosophers admired with so
much astonishment, is in respect of it but an eye sore and blemish of
deformity. If heaven and nature, which God provided as it were by the by, and
with as much ease as one can speak, be so ravishing; what will that be which he
has from all eternity on set purpose prepared for those that make him their
love? In the gifts of nature God carried himself master-like, he made them all
with a commanding word; but in his glory he resembles an industrious servant
passing to and fro, seeking as it were to give content. If the beauty of this
visible world where he was not so sollicitous to please, be so winning and
enamouring; how much more pleasing will he be in that, where he made it his task
and study to please. The whole machin of the world was no more chargable to him
then the expense of one voice; he made it with a word: but glory made him as it
were set his wits on work, and as obsequious as a servant, yea most patiently
to brook disgraces, torments, and death it self.

If thou should bestow a hundred years in speculating the greatness of glory
and should frame some high conceit of its worth, thou might well deem all to
be nothing and thy conceptions to fall so far short of comprehending it, that
thou can not so much as conjecture thy self to have come nigh it. But in that
imperfect idea which thou have conceived, raise thy self to the gates of heaven
and beholding it open, take as clear and exact a view of it as thou can; that
being done, cast thy eyes upon the earth and what is remarkable in its
rarities: compare then the goods of both together, and see whether earthly
things will abide the test. Wonder then at so many unfortunate endeavors of men
in purchasing a little worldly pelf or rather nothing, and their trewantly
sluggishnes in seeking after the true good. Contemplate thence from the top of
the stars the frustrated labors of mortals and their certain hazards in
obtaining an uncertain good: and do thou hear thy sovereign inviting thee in
such like words; come enter into possession of my kingdom and heavenly
treasures. This is a most certain gift sealed with no les a promise then that
of divine faith, and recommended to us by the diligence and death of Christ,
heaven having so voted it. Where is our ambition, our desire, if it do not
display and power it self forth upon this harvest of joys and magazine of true
riches.

I should take it for no small dignity to be a sharer of Christ's ignominy; what
then will it be to partake of his glory? if the ignominy, of JESUS be glory, the
glory it self of God what will that be? if he so magnifyd the contumely of the
cross as to exalt it upon the diadems of Emperors, if he did so honor his
torments, what will he do to his faithful friends? if he impart greater honor
to the bones of Saints here among us, then all the Monarchs of the world enjoy,
how much ^il he impart to their souls while they are re^^dent with himself?
will thou make a rude ^ssay of the greatness of glory how much it ^xceeds our
labors. Calculate how much ^he celestial globe exceeds in magnitude the
^errestrial, this latter being but a point in regard of the first heaven, and
the first heaven another point or rather nothing in regard of the highest: in
whose circumference to one fingers breadth of earth (so vast is the
disproportion) thousand thousands of miles are corresponding in that heaven.
The self-same God is author both of grace and nature, and in point of bounty he
would have his gifts in heaven much exceed our labors on earth.

Let the expectation of this so great a good be to thee always a satiating
repast. Whatsoever thou see good on earth contemn it, as persuading thy self
that thou shall enjoy others in heaven excessively greater. What evil soever
annoyes thee fear it not as hoping to be out of its reach for all eternity.
Whatsoever is violently plunderd from thee grieve not, as believing that all is
depositated for thee to be made good out of the treasures of heaven. Whatsoever
thou do contemn or relinquish for the love of God, deem it not lost or cast
away, as supposing that it is not only to be laid up but also restord with a
hundred fold: seek not to shun transitory labor, thou who hopest for a
permanent good. Thou whose desire should animate thee to suffer in conformity
with Christ upon the Mount Calvary without all hope of quitting cross; be sure
not to quit patience, that thou may be conform to God in glory, with an
assurd confidence of arriving to so great joy. If we believe all this to be
true, why put we not hand to work, but stand like people in a dream.

How is it possible to have terrene things in any esteem if we make heavenly
things a part of our belief. Perchance we believe not so rightly as we ought.
Will thou know how thy mouth belyes thy heart when thou affirmest that heavenly
things are only great? if thy fortunes amounted to the value of a thousand
pounds, would thou not willingly give them all, if thou were persuaded that
by so doing thou could enhance them to a hundred thousand? but how does it
appear that we hold heavenly goods more valuable since we are loath, even being
put in mind of the advantage, to give, what men both joyfully and of their own
accord give for the base trumpery of the earth? a hireling toils all day long
for a poor salary; a soldier exposes himself to a thousand deaths for
another kingdom; and we for the glory of God and our own purchase of the
Empire of heaven, cannot watch sometimes one hour and pray with Christ as it
behooveth. Let us despise base and petty trifles, that we may receive immense
rewards. It is not so estimable in it self to receive little as to expect great
matters. O lover and zealot of God, be sure to thirst and breath after so great
a good; but regard not so much thy own repose and commodity, as that thou shall
there securely love God without fear of interruption: and the greater thy glory
is the more shall thou love him. I am bound to thank thee, o God of truth, for
joining the reward of our labors with the love of thee, and the desire of my
will which is nothing else but thy love.

The VII. Chapter. Of suffering death.
HOW much, o Lord, does thy beneficence transcend man's hope and expectation,
since those very things which he accounts the greatest of evils, and natures
penalty, prove to thy faithful an unparalleld benefit. He esteems it the worst
of evils to dye, and it is a great good, without which we shall never arrive to
the fruition of all good. Thou do very fondly, o man, in declining death
which is indeclinable, and not declining tepidity and faultines which may be
declind. For death has no evil it which life gave not: the sin of Adam caused
in death, but was not so powerful as to make it evil: this damage only
proceeds from thy sin. Avoid sin and culpable negligence, and death will be a
thing desirable.

Men fear little and regard les the death of the soul which only is evil and
may be avoided; but the death of the body which is not evil and cannot be
avoided they seek to shun, though it be rather to be desird then that we adhere
to this wicked world. O the madness of men, who abuse and play as it were bopeep
with that precept of Christ about loving our enemies, while they care for none
but the world who hates us and is our professd enemy! why do we affect this
fleeting life which flies us, and do not affect that permanent life which
expects us? Why are we so sollicitous for our temporal life which we cannot
retain, and neglect eternal which we may obtain? we may have life everlasting
if we will; we shall loose this transitory whether we will or no: and
notwithstanding all this, men will not do profitably for eternal, what they do
unprofitably for this temporal: they covet not the first, and they dread the
death of this second as one would do a mischief.

Death moreover is a rare invention of Gods mercy: for it eases us of all the
molestations of this life, and takes away an eternity of miseries. What a
pitiful thing would it be, if we were for all eternity subject to the
necessities of rising daily and going to bed, of eating, of cold and heat, of
toil and sickness, of seeking our sustenance of carking, and caring, of
suffering affronts, or spending our whole life in a sordid and laborious
drudgery? what a misery would it be if one were to be a ^orter, another a
husband man, a third a smith, a fourth a servant, and this for term without
all end or respit? many that were ^otoriously wicked sought death and made away
with themselves merely to avoid these inconveniences: at least let us not
dread it that it may be a passage to future felicity, and for both these
respects let us patiently accept it. When God beheld us involved by the sin of
Adam in such a labyrinth of woes, he in his most indulgent clemency invented
for our good the devise of dying, that our calamities might not be perpetual,
combining in the same thing a penalty and a benefit, justice and mercy.
Therefore because death is so great a good, so proper and secure an effect of
his goodness, he would not have it liable to man's free will, or the hatred of an
enemy. For although it be in any ones power to bereave thee of life, no body,
not even the uncon troulable violence of kings can bereave thee of death. This
is the property of things of the best quality, to be out of the reach of humane
power, and not to be obnoxious to another pleasure. If one were entangled in
any one danger or encumbrance, it would be no small content to find a means how
to evade it: why do we then grieve or dread death, which, is the gate whereby we
may rid our selves of the hazards and encumbrances of this life. Many for a
mere puntillio of worldly glory have sought and covetted it; at least for the
glory of heaven let us not fear it.

O immortal God, who wast born not to live (for thou wast life eternal as now
thou art) but to dye a most mortal and bitter death for me: why should I that
am mortal be unwilling to dye, to live a vital, eternal, and most pleasant life
with thee and for accomplishment of thy will? since the desire of a christian is
to be with Christ, I know not why he should not desire death, since but by it
he cannot come to that fruition. What misery can death bring or what happiness
can it bereave him of, who is not besotted upon the world, but has placed all
his felicity in heaven? but besides this ocean of content which flows from the
sight and fruition of our beloved, it has moreover this advantage that it puts
us out of further danger of offending God. Death then is not evil, which takes
away all evil.

But if it be evil and an enemy to mankind, why do not men treat it like an
evil, and as one would treat an enemy? I wish we would proceed in this manner
with it, and deal no otherwise then with a foe, forecasting that we carry
nothing about us, which he may make booty of, or give him cause of triumphing
over us. Soldiers are wont to secure their provisions and baggage or else quite
spoil them, that they may not be serviceable to their enemies. We must leave no
plunder for death; but if there be any thing subject to its rapine, it must
either be wholly abandoned, or sent before us with a safe convoy to heaven,
where all will be thoroughly secured. We must keep no spoils about us in which
it may glory but the luggage of our flesh; and we must extenuate it by fasting,
labor and other pennances that he sieze it not entire. If death be evil and
adverse to us let us resist it, and object a buckler by relinquishing things
and all affection to them, that its wounds may bite the les upon us: if death
be evil let us make it good by doing good. Why should we dread death more then
our selves, since it cannot be worse then we are evil? yea it is we that make
it bad, because we do not become good. Let us do this now when we have time and
may do what we shall wish at its hour we had don and cannot. A little respit
only remains for labor, and in comparison of eternity not so much as an
instant. Behold now so many years of our life are past and those which remain
are no longer.

But death is not evil in it self but rather good: and we should be very good
if we did imitate it, and practiced what it puts in ure, by dispoyling our
selves of all things: so that if nothing were grateful and delectable in this
world, it would be pleasing and savory to our pallat. He only needs fear death
who loves other things and not Christ. He is not a faithful servant who
refuses to appear in the presence of his master. If I did love thee, o Lord, I
should not have such a horror of death: for it would be contentiue to me to
behold thee face to face, and cast my self into thy embracements, rejoicing
that thy will were accomplishd in me: otherwise I play but the hypocrite when I
daily beg that thy will may be done in earth as it is in heaven. Thy pleasure
was to dye not that we might be immortal in this mortality, but that we might
dye well by leading a better life. Grant me grace, that as thy will is to be
fulfilld in my death though against my will, so I may will and death fulfill it in
a good death by a better and more perfect life.

I give thee thanks, o most benign Lord, for this benefit of death as thy
wisdom has disposed it: I give thee thanks that I am to dye: and that I know
not when, or where, or how I am to dye. The certainty of death is good and
comfortable to me, it being a secure passage to bring me to thy sight, and rid
me of the miseries of this life, and make me despise its deceitful and
counterfeyt goods. What man, if he have but any one grain of wit, although he
were sure never to experience any adversity, but were to be successful in all
the contingencies of this life, would not contemn it and all its goods, since
he must needs see that he is to quit them all in death which is wholly
unavoydable. In which moment all past joys, all present goods now to be
relinquishd are no more then if they never had enjoyd a being; nay they are les
conducible, for their very relinquishment will prove a torture. That only which
man neither loves nor possesses will not afflict him in that hour of
affliction. The uncertainty also of the manner, place and time of dying is
acceptable to me, that I may more certainly serve thee, o God, in all requisite
manner, time, and place as thy worth and dignity does require. This is a divine
disposal which breeds in us a certain solicitude of a better life, by reason
of the uncertain condition of a contingent death.

I am thoroughly persuaded, o Lord, that I know not whether I am worthy of love
or hatred, and how it will fare with me after this life: neither do I covet to
know, because it is expedient for me to be ignorant of it according to the
ordainment of thy wisdom. But I will not therefore more dread death then desire
thee, and confide in thy mercies. I accept most willingly its great
uncertainty, this being most certain, that it is enough for me that thou art
most merciful, and a cordial lover of me, and both can and wilt save me if I
but humbly trust in thee. What imports it that I know not how and when and
where I am to dye, if I be assurd that thou dyedst for me, and dyedst the death
of the cross, and at noon day, and betwixt two thieves upon Mount Calvary to
clear all doubt of thy love toward me, that I may fully confide in thee? Of my
self, o Lord I am able to do nothing, neither to live well nor dye well; but by
thee I can do both, I hope for both and will effect both; and if I have not
lived well thou have given me a desire, o Lord, to become truly penitent, and I
hope by thy means to amend henceforth my future life; why then shall I not also
hope to dye well? my hope will not be entire, nor my confidence sufficient if I
hope the one and despair of the other. I both have been and am an enormous
sinner: but is it not perchance in thy power to dispose of thy creature as thou
thinks best? Thy desire is, o Lord, to save me, thou will I know, be merciful
to me.

The VIII. Chapter. That man must give himself to God for his benefits.
AMong all the Gods there is none like thee, o Lord, there is none according to
thy works. Thy goodness was sufficient to make me love thee, why do thou force
me with works and benefits? thou createdst me when I had no being; thou
soughtest me when I was upon the point of perishing; thou foundst me when I was
lost; thou redeemedst me when I groand under the curse of sin; thou savedst me
when I was condemnd; thou had patience with me when I was obstinately
refractory to thy commands; thou chastizeth me when I offend; thou art
indulgent when I plead guilty; thou instructest me when I do amiss; thou
feedest me when I am hungry; thou give me drink when I am thirsty; thou
warmest me when I am cold; thou coolest me when I am too hot; thou guardest me
when I am awake; thou preservest me when I am a sleep; thou helpest me up when
I arise; thou rearest me when I fall; thou supportest me when I sit; thou
hold me when I stand; thou carryest me when I walk; thou entertainest me
when I come to thee; thou bring me back when I recede from thee; thou
recalst me when I go astray; on every side within and without the ocean of thy
benefits surrounds me with a boundles inundation. That very thing which I have
not I account my benefit, because thou, o Lord, art the giver who dividest
according to each ones expedient and exigence, and deniest nothing but for our
good. Whatsoever also thou conferst upon others all that I reckon as a benefit
done to me. Thou obligest me with so many good turns that I cannot but love
thee, o fountain of Goodness, although thou were not good, yea although thou
were evil. Thou, o Lord, art in very deed so good, that although in lieu of so
many benefits as thou have conferd upon me, thou had heapd so many injuries,
I could not choose but love thee. It is not need full to make me love thee to
have bin so beneficial, it is not needful to have loved me: thou art so good,
that although thou did hate me, I were to love thee, and ought to love thee
more then all my lovers and benefactours, albeit thou had been injurious and
malevolous.

Why was it needful to overwhelm him with innumerable blessings, whom by one
thou extractedst out of nothing? thou demandest nothing more of me then my self
alone. I owe my self now to thee for the first benefit because by it thou
gave me wholly to my self: why then do thou superadd so many more? why
after the giving of me to my self, do thou over and above give thy self to
me? I my self and all that is mine am no trifling debt of thine; neither have I
any thing besides my self: what I have I most willingly give to wit my self.
But why will thou enhaunce the debt which I am not able to defray, by giving
thy self? Go too, o infirm spirit, find means to discharge this also. Thou
may restore God to God if thou have God. God seeks thee and whatsoever thou
possessest lawfully; neither can thou lawfully possess any thing but God.
Possess God, and thou shall possess thy self lawfully, and so be able to
discharge both these benefits. God gave himself to thee; for thou can not
give thy self to him unles thou be thy own; and thou will not be thy own unles
God be thine; for by having him thou have thy self: so when thou give thy
self to God, thou may also give God who becomes thine. But thou shall neither
have God nor thy self unles thou love God; for by loving him thou possessest
him; and thou alienatest him by not defraying the debt by which thou owe thy
self to him. Christ gave himself to the end thou might labor to become
Christ's, if thou would pay thy debts by giving thy self. For by so doing thou will give Christ crucifyd a thousand times the day, while thou dyest daily so
often to the world and all its pleasures.

The IX. Chapter. That God alone is to be loved.
THou committest injustice against thy self, o miserable man if thou love
those goods which cannot love thee, or men who can, at least, not love thee:
and although they do, thou may well doubt of it, or they cease to do so. It is
much better to love God who loves to his utmost, and without any stint, who
cannot but love thee if thou love him. O immense goodness, why do, thou love
me whom all creatures have reason to detest? Why do thou covet to be loved by
me, picking me out from among so many lovers of thine? me who am moreover
unworthy to be rankd among the devils, to whose service I mancipated my self,
in so much that a peculiar and more raging hell is due to me for contemning thee
after so signal and shameless a manner, who vouchsafedst to dye for me and not
for the Angels.

It is but meet that I at length begin to love him who from the beginning loved
me without beginning, and loves me to the end without end, expecting from all
eternity that I should love him. I have loved some that love not me; now I will
love him who loved me before I knew him; who being loved never fayles to
correspond in love, and by loving forces others to love him: whom to love is
the flower of virtue and by whom to be loved is the top of felicity. Why
doubtest thou, o my soul, to love him who is forced to love thee faithfully, if
thou love some, who perchance will love thee perfidiously. Thou will have but a
hard bargain in loving goods, which, if thou have a rival do vex thee; or men,
who, if they love any other, do make thee jealous. The love of God is free from
all sorrow and care; that it loves others will occasion thy joy; that others
love it, will be thy harts-desire. This is the all sufficing goodness of God,
that it both loves and is beloved by all without any ones prejudice either the
lover or beloved, but with the great content of all. Other things are
narrow-bounded and needy, they suffice not to love two or be loved by two
without detriment to one party.

Settle not thy affection upon things perishable for thou will daily perish in
them without end. Settle it upon things eternal that thou may live happily
for all eternity, and contentedly in this interim till it commence. Quit thy
self of all love of corruptible things, and thou shall quit thy self of all the
miseries which befall man. Thou who seek to be happy by loving, why do
thou love those things, which by merely loving them render thee miserable? love
him rather who will make thee fortunate even among the misfortunes of this
life. Why do thou love those goods whose fruition makes thee evil, whose
desire makes thee unhappy? why do thou love men, whose non-correspondence
makes thee angry, whose correspondence, ridiculous and effeminate. Fix rather
thy love upon God, whose desire will make thee good whose fruition will make thee
happy. Love not those beauties which deforme thee; but love him, whose love will
render thee beautiful. It is a great fondnes to love those goods, the sole love
whereof deprives thee worthily of their possession; and not to love that good
which is only to be enjoyd by love. The goods which thou love are not thine
but thou theirs; wherefore thou art in want of them: God being beloved by thee
becomes thine; whom if thou love thou can not want, and only want him
when thou do not love him: by not bestowing thy love upon other things, God
in himself bestows them upon thee.

Why do thou love a good which is needy of another good, and not that which
abounds with all goods? when a good is loved which needs another good, the
misery is augmented not the want diminished. All the goods of this world are
necessitous, none of them is all-sufficient by it self, but requires the
adjunction of another: love that good which is so good of himself as to be
indigent of no other good: All good things are good by goodness, and
consequently all stand in need of it to make them good. Goodness suffices of it
self and requires no additional consort: if thou love it, thou will both be
good and happy: love him alone who alone is all things. Do not love those goods
which covet not to be loved by thee; but love him whom all things covet to
love, thy Creator who both loves thee and covets to be loved by thee, and
created all good things for thy sake. It is a kind of absurd stolidity not to
love God who covets to be loved by thee, and to love a piece of clay which has
no such resentment. Why art thou so inquisitive after what may please thy eye
and delight thy pallat, and art so insensible of what does perfect thy will?

Love is to be squard out only according to the rule of God; and therefore it is
to be regulated by no other line, nor does it acquiesce in any thing else. The
shoe of Golias will never exactly fit the foot of Zacchaeus. Love is the first
gift; to whom is it due but to the first good and prime benefactor? love is a
gift by it self; on whom is it to be bestowd but on him who is good by
himself? love is a gift by its own nature, to whom is it to be offered but to
him who is good by his own nature? love is a gift which is the source of all
other gifts; to whom is it rather to be consecrated then to that essence of
good which is the source of all essences. Love of it self without the access of
other gifts is acceptable, and others without it are little pleasing; to whom
does it square better then to God, who of himself is amiable and pleasing, and
without him nothing must be pleasing? o Lord, how can I love thee worthily
since I cannot serve thee worthily, I being not able to afford thee any
competent service* All things are thine; and whatsoever I have it is from thee,
becoming as it were a servant to me. Thou who love me as much as thou
artable, grant that I may love thee more then I am able.

The X. Chapter. That self love must be rooted out.
TO the end thou may love and honor God as it behooves thee, it is not
enough not to love thy self and the world, but thou must hate thy self, and
esteem thy self the meanest of creatures, and an object provoking all their
hatred. When a ship sails too much on one side the mariners ballast it to the
other. Thou doatedst on thy self in an extremity of love, now thou must change
it into an extremity of hatred. To be able to improve ones leap to the best he
must go back some paces and take his race from a further distance: to be able
to approach God with a more impetuous love, yea to be able to love thy self
truly and rationally, thou must gather force from self disdaign. A racer is so
much nigher the goal the further he leaves the stand behind him: and thou shall
approach the nigher to God the further thou recedest from thy self. Thou must
depart from thy self to come to God the final end and conclusion of all things.
Thou have no greater opposite then thy self: thou must be at a deadly enmity
with thy self, because thou art more then a deadly enemy to thy self: thou art
more offensive to thy self then all the world besides. We resent an affront
more feelingly at the hands of a friend then of a stranger, because it happens
beyond expectation and will sound more ill-favourdly and relish more rankly of
hatred, that thou should be thy own undoer, who oughtst to be furthest from
any such thought. We take it ill if we suffer any bodily hurt from an enemy,
and worse if from a friend of whom we expected a protection: how can we brook
it patiently if our soul be endomaged and that by our selves and our own
exorbitances. it would vex us to the heart to have our bodies enslaved though to
a great Prince or potentate; and we have no difficulty at all to enslave our
mind to a vulgar creature, or base dung, when we are passionately troubled for
any affront or injury or other loss. O what a burden and discredit are we to
our selves! shame and discred it follow those properly that do amiss; trouble
and burdensomenes those that suffer: both these miseries attend our condition:
we are evil toward our selves, and we suffer evil from our selves: we are a
misery to our selves and unmerciful, violent and violated, proud and
base-minded. O how pitifully pittiles and mercifully merciles are we to our
selves when we soothingly compassionate our follies, and take not revenge upon
them. Commiseration and self love in such a case is all one as if out of
compassion one should cherish a frozen snake in his bosom, which being revived
will kill the benefactour with its poisonous sting.

Most evident it is that in all reason we ought to carry a greater spite and
deadlier feud to our selves then all our enemies: and for as much as concerns
self-affection the les it makes thee regard the glory of God, and comply with
his holy will, and seek the advance of the divine honor, thou oughtst in all
reason to be more immeasurably cruel against thy self then against any enemy or
the whole camp of hell; although in effect, and in the exterior maceration of
thy body a discreet mean is to be held, according to the direction of thy
superiors and ghostly Father and the prescript of right reason; to the end
that in this also thou may seek Gods greater glory, for whose sake it is
expedient not to be immoderate in chastizing thy self; as for the same reason
and our own salvation we are forced to pardon our other enemies and afford them
a place in the list of our charity: for that which God exacts chiefly of us,
and wherein we ought to take revenge of our selves is the death of our will not
of our body. And according to this, I say it is most evident, that thou have
more reason to be displeased with thy self then all thy enemies and ill-wishers
whatsoever. Suppose a man, who had many capital foes who sought his life, were
delivered into a strong and safe castle, there to be kept and defended by his
intimate friend, one assured to him by all the ties of alliance and friendship,
who alone were both esteemd and should be most faithful to him; and that there
were no sanctuary elsewhere for that man nor place of refuge; and that it were
in his power to let no enemy hurt him nor wrong the least hair of his head,
unles that friend did introduce him thither, and deliver to him the keys of
the castle, giving his consent by subscribing letters with his own hand. If he
who ought to be both faithful and friendly should prove so perfidious as to
unlock ^he gate to all his persecutours and give them entrance with intent to
let them abuse him, wrong him, and exercise the utmost of their cruelty upon
him; and he himself moreover who were to shield him, should be more raging and
malicious then the rest; should impede any benevolence that were intended him,
permitting nothing good nor conducing to his health to come to his hands, which
he intoxicated not first with poison or some other noxious ingredient: against
whom then ought this miserable man to conceive a spleen? against some one of
his enemies, or that friend and allye who proves so treacherous, whose malice
alone is equivalent to all the rest? it being certain that without him all
their hatred would have availed nothing at all. What an incredible brand of
perfidiousnes, cruelty, and in humanity would fall upon that man, he would
incur the detestation of all, as being much more blame worthy then all. O most
beneficent truth! thou have committed my safety only to my own trust as who
would be trustyest to my self; but I prove most dangerous above all others,
devils, men, hell, and the world, all of them are my sworn enemies, but they
all remain disarmd, if I my self do not arm them, they all will be innocent, if
I to my self be not nocent. All the prejudice I can receive is within the reach
of my own power, neither can any body really hurt me but by my permission,
unles my will be such, unles I betray my self. I alone am the Architect of all
the injuries which befall me from others, though I impute them falsely to
others* I stop the influences of Gods beneficence, I hinder the effects of his
gifts; I infect his graces and corrupt his virtues, abusing both the one and
the other; how then shall I flatter my self who am so burdensome to my self, how
shall I cherish and sooth my self who am such a mortal enemy to my self? All the
hatred I can vent is not equivalent to my own injuriousnes. How often have I
cheated my self, how many faults have I contracted? I have defrauded my self of
heaven, I have neglected the blessings of Gods grace; and not to number up all
my spiritual losses which are without number, what pensivenes of heart, what
affliction of mind, what disasters in my goods, what losses in my temporals,
how many bodily diseases, contempts, revilements, derisions have I brought upon
my self, by the disordinatenes of my passions, by my little circumspection and
following the gust of my appetite? If just occasion being given any one
contristate me I am highly offended; and why am I not so with my self since
upon alloccasions I am injurious to my self? If thou, o lying man, had but
once catchd one in a lie thou would never trust him afterward; and having so
often belyed and cozend thy self, thou yet trusts thy self, and art not at all
suspicious of thy proceedings.

But why do I recount my own injuries? it is a sufficient motive to make me
abhor and prosecute with a pious hatred whatsoever is mine, for that all have
proved as so many obstacles to retard my endeavors in loving God. O most holy
and faithful truth, I ought to loath and hate my self for being so wicked and
disloyal to my self; how much more for being wicked and perfidious to thee? for
my own sake it behoovd me to detest my self; how much more, o Lord, for thine?
because I loved not my self orderly I should in reason have hated my self; how
much more because I loved thee not at all, who alone should be loved in all. I
loved not thee because I knew not how to love my self; yea I loved not my self,
because I loved not what in reality I was, but some what else les considerable.
I loved not my soul which is my chief and noblest portion; but only my body, as
if I were nothing but it, which is absurdly false: for I have also a soul for
whose ransom the Son of God by way of exchange gave his. To love a part of my
self I loved not my whole self; and what is more to be lamented I loved not
that which to me is all in all, God my Savior.

If thou be carried with a zeal toward God, o perfidious man, thou can not
but be fraught with hatred toward thy self; I permit, that so far as thou have
prejudiced or wronged thy self, thou be indulgent to thy self; there remains
yet sufficient cause of selfrevenge for not loving God and transgressing his
commands. Thou art not a little moved when thou hear the perversenes of
Caiphas and the treachery of Judas, and the very naming them puts thee into
chollar: why then will thou be partial and soft-natured to thy self? tell me, o
proud spirit, if thou have but one dram of true humility, that is, of truth,
do thou not hold thy self the worst of all sinners? nay this is nothing
extraordinary since S. Paul framed no better conceit of himself. Wherefore thou
must deem thy self the perversest of creatures, and when thou have done so,
thou proudly rankest thy self above thy degree. Nevertheles I demand of thee,
if thou holdst thy self such, then by consequence worse then Judas or Caiphas
or any other: but if thou judge so in very deed, proceed consequently lest
thou be taxed and derided by the Angels; and either out of love, or hatred, or
zeal take severe punishment of thy self as being the ringleader of all that
crew: Consider now out of this, whether the sin of Judas, and those of
Antichrist deserve love yea or no? if God had committed to thy charge the
doing justice upon him who gave JESUS that injurious blow, or him that spit
first in that face on which the Angels love to gaze, or on the accursed Arrius
and Nestorius, or the malignest of men Antichrist, or the Father of lies
Lucifer, to punish condignly their sins, as justice and equity should dictate
to thee; how would thou carry thy self toward them? would thou perchance
sooth and flatter and seek to humor them to thy ability; or rather strive to
show in the sight of all creatures, how much the glory of God and his honor so
often violated were prevalent to a just revenge? thou oughtst to exercise no
les severity against thy self: for thou must needs hold thy self worse then any
of them, if thou make not a counterfeyt estimate of thy own baseness; and I
suppose thou intendest not to cozen either God or thy self. It behooves thee to
be moved with a more severe and fruitful indignation against thy self then
against the perversest of devils. The devil committed one sole sin and that in
thought only, for which he incurd eternal damnation: thou have committed
innumerable and those of fact also. He sind against God to whom his obligations
were not so binding: for an Angel did not become God, nor did God suffer
torments for them; he did not at any time pardon them, as he became man for
thee, shedding his most precious blood for thy sake, sealing thy pardon, and
ready to seal it for the future, not seven times only but seventy seven and
more. Consider now whether it would be accounted laudable to contract
familiarity with that great Prince of devils, and seek his honor and content
in all? why holdst thou too strict a friendship with thy self desiring thy
honor procuring thy ease, and seeking thy will and pleasure in all? I demand of
thee once more, if God should deliver into thy hands that malign spirit who
has so often deceived thee, tempted thee, and induced thee to sin, misleading
thee from the way of salvation, and then another who were les hurtful,
commanding thee to punish both according to the qualities of the losses
wherewith they damnifyd thee: against which would thou be more cruel? against
him that were les noxious or the other who proved thy heavier enemy? But how
can thou be so indulgent to thy self, thou being more insolent toward thy
self and more pernicious, I do not say then the worst of these devils, but then
both, since neither of them could endammage thee in the least, unles thou
cooperatedst and gave consent? thou have often played the seducer and enemy to
thy self; thou have often tempted and proved a stumbling block of scandal to
thy self; I know not then with what eyes thou can look upon thy self, thou
being more prejudicial and a greater undoing to thy self then Caiphas, Arrius,
Antichrist or Lucifer: O soul, I conjure thee by the love of JESUS, to consider
these things, whether they be not true: if it be true that thou art a greater
cross and loss to thy self then the accursed Lucifer could have been, love not
thy self disordinately, if thou be touchd with any sense of promoting the
honor of God or amplifying his glory: for by how much thou swelst with the
tide of self esteem and self affection by so much in order to the effects of
grace and virtues does God flow in thee at a lower ebb: and by how much thou
drainest thy self of thy self by an humble self hatred, so much the more will
God replenish thee with his waters of grace even to a great profundity. Who
then is a greater enemy to thy self then thou thy self, who wilt not let God be
exalted in thee?

But if thou will not hate thy self, o unworthy man, more then the rest of thy
enemies; at least look upon thy self as upon an enemy, and bear thy self as
little good will, nor take too much complacence in that fit of self-prosperity
and corporal delight. When any adversity befalls him whom thou owe a spite,
thou art not a little contented therewith; and so must thou proceed with thy
self: when thy enemy is slighted or derided it causes joy and complacence in
thee; and so must it do when thou thy self art so treated. One will not make
much of an enemy, nor feast him at a table of delights; neither must thou do so
with thy self. One would always be vexing and molesting an enemy, sitting
close upon his skirts and taking all occasions of revenge: so must thou also do
if thou will act that part, for this is properly to be spiteful. If thou do
not hold this tenor, thou art pitifully seduced, as thinking thy self not
sick of self love. Where Gods divine pleasure interposeth not it self thou must
with a masculin courage for his greater glory kill all self affection in thee.
Yet out of the same motive in the practice of exterior austerities, one must
permit himself to be guided by some discreet person zealous of the divine
honor, that so he may also offer in sacrifice an oblation both of his will and
judgment.

Yet thou must not frame such a conceit as if the life of self denying people,
and those that loath and persecute themselves were harsh and insupportable: yea
of all others it partakes most of joy. The love of God is much more
light-harted then is self love. If self hatred brought no other advantage
besides loving God, that were sufficient. It is much more available that God
love thee ardently then that thou love thy self. God can be much more
advantageous to thee, and he takes content in communicating joys, to give us a
fore-tast of his inebriating and beatifying sweetness, comforting us amidst the
troubles of this life and recreating us by exhibiting an experiment of his
deliciousnes. The Apostles went rejoicing from before the face of the council,
because they were made worthy to suffer a contumely for the name of JESUS. Call
to mind that admirable but true saying: deem it all joy when ye fall into
several remptations. God could draw relief for the children of the Babilonian
furnace from their very flames and turn their scorching heat into a refreshing
dew; he is also able to make adversities no ways burdensome. Further more if
we rejoice in their evils whom we hate, thou will do no les in the miseries
which befall thee: and since thy crosses are much more numerous then thy
crowns, there must necessarily be more frequent occasions of joy, then self
love could ever minister. Incommodities are always ready and at hand;
commodities rare and long to be sought for: wherefore he must needs have
frequent occasions of rejoicing who rejoices in his adversities, since he shall
never want matter of suffering in this life. Evil things are not so obnoxious
to casualty^s as good. The fruition of good things is said to be casual,
because they happen casually and but seldom: so does not the multiplicity of
evils; wherefore his joy will suffer les interruption who joys least in wordly
solaces. O what a content is it to disburden ones self of himself, and to live
exempted from all importune and carking care of self seeking interest! I
conceive that he who has quitted and relinquished himself, has evaded in
greatest part the miseries and vexations of this life.

Neither is it a mean fruit of a serious and sincere hatred of our selves, that
it causes us to love others. Consider how insolent and powerful an enemy self
love is: it has so much of the tyrant that it intrencheth upon charity and
outing it, supplies its functions both toward man and God himself, it alone
consuming and devouring all the affection intended for both. He that loves
himself disordinately knows neither how to love God nor his neighbor: he that
truly hates himself will love even those that annoy and persecute him; he will
rejoice if any one do wrongfully oppress him, knowing that to be depressed in
him which is his main obstacle and opponent, and ought in all reason to be
hated and persecuted by him: and since no body takes it ill, if one jointly
together with him molest and infest his deadly enemy, but rather holds him
worthy of thanks; so he that is a hater of himself will rather love then be
otherwise affected toward one that lends a helping hand to persecute him.

Another and no sorry fruit of self hatred is, that it makes us detest sin: all
that viperous brood descends lineally from self love which is the parent and
nurse of all vice and concupiscence, and from it all the rest of that gang
derive their pedigree. He that rejoices at an injury, will not offend by being
angry; nor he that covets to be contemned, by pride; nor he by impatience who
esteems himself worthy of all punishment. It is no mean fruit that it removes
all impediments in the love of God; it is no small benefit that it subdues thee
to thy self, and puts thee in a full and peaceable possession of thy self.
Lastly if thou will know what huge advantages arise from self hatred thou must
consider how much grace surpasses sin and virtue vice: it is so much more
excellent to hate ones self out of virtue then to love out of vice. If men even
to their utter undoing hate those that have much les endammagd them then thou
thy self; thou who of all others have been thy saddest foe, must out of the
motive of virtue, praise, and recompense, do no les.

The XI. Chapter. How we are to love our neighbor.
O Amiable Truth, grant that I may love thee above all, and all others for
thee: give thy self and not riches nor deceitful goods, unworthy of love, to my
friends and all those whom I wish well. Learn, o infirm spirit; to love
creatures without being injurious. Many times the manner of loving stands
parallel with that of hatred or contumely. Thou will do a friend whom thou
love a great injury, if thou wish him riches as a real and solid good; for by
so doing thou show thy self to love them better then him: for them thou
love as being all sufficient, him as needy: wherefore thou will rather choose
to want him then them. Hence fortune is the umpyre of friendships; and its
vicissitude is the death of love and birth of treachery. Hence an equal danger
arises to sincere fidelity, whether thou love thy friend for riches, or
riches in thy friend. As it is also a like tenor of true friendship, when thou
love all for God, and when thou love him alone in them, because he alone is
the object of thy love. Thou would love nothing else but God in all, if thou
lovedst nothing but him. This must be the touch stone of thy love to try
whether it be true charity or no. He that loves not riches at all, cannot love
them as good to another. Let God be the common benefit which thou intendest to
bestow upon all; whom alone if thou give, thou will make them rich enough. And
be sure to regard more such benefits in which thou love all, then such by
which thou shall be loved by all: for he that loves all truly as it behooveth,
shall be saved; but he shall not therefore be saved because he is loved by all.

We must not be so base-conceyted of love as to hold it saleable at any rate:
it must always be given gratis. He sels God who bestows a charity upon
another, out of any other motive then charity. Cast thy courtesyes into no
bodies dish: but as thou esteemst whatsoever is conferd upon thee by others as
so many blessings coming from God, and thankfully attributest them to him
alone; so must thou esteem it Gods blessing not thine whatsoever thou impartest
to others: yea reckon this as the greatest of all, that he would be pleased to
use thee for his instrument and Almner in dividing his benefits. Ground thy
love toward others not upon temporal motives but spiritual; for that
foundation which is laid upon them and not upon the H. Ghost is covetousnes not
charity, not love toward man but list and lust of creatures. In like manner be
as forward in doing good offices to others, as thou would have God to be
toward thee: proceed upon no other terms with others then he does with thee.
Grant, o love of loves, that I may love all as thou lovedst me and all: grant
that I may love all for thee, and none love me for my self. I could rather wish
if it might be done without sin, that each one should hate me rather then love
me, if they would love me for my self: for if each one did hate me I should
have but my due; if they loved me for my self I should usurp what is thine. All
that love is impure which is not purely for God. The sole love of God alone is
only sincere and refind from ^ll dregs, since it neither mixeth it self nor
suffers mixture with contrary affections. Other loves are wont to occasion
either envy, or anger, or hatred against the party beloved or some other: the
love of God is immutable and eternal; other loves are flitting and ^^eeting.
Therefore I shall reckon it among my gains to be loved for thee, my God and not
for my self.

The XII. Chapter. That nothing is to be covetted but what God wills.
Which is more conform to reason, that thou by conformity subject thy will to
the divine, or that it servant-like become conform to thine? will thou
perchance be so self conceyted as to think, that thou either art better then
God in thy wishes, or more sound in giving advise? remember how often thou have
preferred evil before good, how often thou have stood in thy own light; and on
the contrary what a sure and certain proof has God given of his good will? was
it perchance a sinister will to become Incarnate for love of thee? was it such
to remain with thee in the ever B. Sacrament? was it such for thy sake to
embrace death? lo, it is one and the self same will which has done all this for
thee, and which now orders that thou suffer this affliction, trouble* grief,
or injury. He ordaines both out of the same motive of love and for the same
end; attending with much solicitude what will make most for thy good. But if it
made well for thee that God daignd to suffer torments, want, and ignominy, that
thou might not suffer them: thou must also persuade thy self, when he calls
thee into the lists of suffering, that it is very expedient and will prove for
the good and advantage of thy soul. That most excellent act of his will which
made him become man for our sake, merited thoroughly at our hands a preparation
of mind to undergo some hard task, if he should think it expedient; why does it
not also merit, that we be conformable to him, since he covets nothing but for
our good? it was our duty to suffer much that in something at least we might
comply with his will; we seeing it now accomplished in much, why shall we not
willingly suffer somewhat? what can thou wish better then to wish and have
what is best? and this alone is that which he, thy God who is best both in
himself and to thee, wills and covets. God is infinitely powerful, infinitely
wise, infinitely good and benevolent: he loves thee far more then thou do thy
self; he desires far more and seeks thy good; he knows much better how to
compass it, he is of force to remove all obstructions and to effect what is
conducing to that end: what is thy meaning then, when thou take on and
grievest for some cross event, when thou repinest at some malady, wrong,
vexation, misfortune, whether appertaining to thy self or another, whether
public or private? does God err and is deceived, or does he afflict us out of
envy and malice? did his omnipotency fall short that he could not go through
with what he intended, to avert this which thou deemst a loss? it happend not
through any weakness in God, or malice, or deceit, but out of his power,
providence, and immense goodness: why do thou reject and seek to annul what
the divine attributes ratify and make the subject of their employment?

Put thy self into the hands of God, that he who created thee to his glory may
conduct and govern thee; he orders all to this end, and without all doubt will
bring thee thither unles thou frustrate his designs. Covet not to be governd
according to thy own fancy. He that makes a journey by sea takes not upon him to
steer the ship, but leaves that entirely to the Pilot; and when a storm arises
then is he most tractable, and will neither do nor permit any thing to be done
contrary to the others appointment. Do thou hold God les skilful in ruling
the world then a pilot in steering his ship? what thou permittest then to a man
who is to land thee safely in thy harbor, why will thou not permit to God who
is to carry thee to the port of heaven? God knows most exactly well how to
manage his family, the world I mean; he needs not thy advise; leave all that
care to him, he will carry thee to the land of salvation.

God is either propitious or angry when he sends thee these crosses so
disrellishing: if propitious, why will thou not acquiesce to thy own good, and
add thy own suffrage to those things which make so much for thy advantage? if
he be angry, thou must give way, if it be but to mitigate it. An angry man if
any contradict him waxes more angry; if no body cross him he is presently
calm: in like manner God will be pacified if thou not only hold thy peace and
brook it, but also be conform and thankful. O sensles man how dare thou say,
I will not have this, or I will have that, being thou know not what will make
for thy good? why do thou refuse to suffer crosses, injuries, and
humiliations? perchance thou have forgotten that thou art a sinner, or
rememberst not that God can turn these afflictions and humiliations into
instruments of glory? the hatred of the brethren, and that inhumane sale of his
dearest child occasioned safety to Jacob, and glory and a kingdom to Joseph
that was sold. for although Consuming envy made the brethren sell
Their brother; to the just all falls out well:
This is the work of grace etc.
as devoutly says the great Alcuinus. God in the heavenly chimistry of his
beneficence knows how to extract great good out of ewil; and this is the chief
art and masterpiece of grace. Why do thou repine at the loss of thy health
or goods, or of any ones that concerns thee? for either they were to be
laudably expended; and then God will accept of thy good will in lieu of the fact,
and will also augment the merit of thy patience; or to be sin fully wasted in
riot and vanity; and then thou have reason to congratulate with thy self
because such a stumbling block of offense is to thy hand removed out of the way.

Esteem thy self to stand in a superior degree to thy will and content* and
that thou art created for much greater matters. Thou art not made to thy own
glory, nor to enjoy thy own will nor pleasure, nor to save thy self alone, nor
to enrich thy self, nor advance thy fortunes, nay nor only to enjoy God in his
kingdom: thy end is more sublime then all this: thou art, to wit, created to
the glory of God, which was the but and scope of his will and power in creating
all things. O end of a high elevation! and it may thou compass by suffering,
whether it be in ordinary labors or extraordinary torments. Thou art not thy
own but Gods; nor born to thy self but to him: so neither must thou aim at any
thing but the glory of God and how to pleas him, and that his will be
accomplished in thee. That will only prove fuel for the fire of purgatory
whatsoever nourishes in thee thy own will. Covet nothing whether it be
spiritual consolations or other gifts though very holy, but what God covetteth
above all; since he wishes thee more happiness and sanctity then thou can thy
self; and by this means thou shall enjoy, though it be not to be sought for
continual comfort. All the afflictions and miseries which annoy man in this
life's intercourse consist in the will, because it stands not in a true
conformity with the divine. The hearts of men are disquietted either because
they have not what they would have, or because they would not have what they
have: wherefore he that quits himself of all self will, quits himself also of
all trouble. He that stands parallel with God in willing or not willing shall
possess perpetual joy, because he shall perpetually enjoy his wish: for that is
always done which God will have done according to his order or permission.

The XIII. Chapter. That we must give no ear to our own will.
HIs triumph over himself will not be complete who leads pleasure captive, unles
he can master his own will: it is not enough to be rigidly severe against our
senses, but we must carry our selves also after the same fashion toward our
soul and its free will: neither must we debar our selves only of unlawful
pleasures, but also of lawful desires; nor mortify only our flesh but loose
also our soul, that so we may gain it totally at long running. Both our flesh
and our spirit have been found delinquents to almighty God. It were a piece of
injustice to punish one co-partner and quit the other; to fine the servant and
let the master go scot free. We must do justice both upon flesh and soul; not
as many, who contenting themselves with outward austerities, are not
sollicitous to reduce the interior. But since the soul is the prime criminal,
she in the first place must smart for it; and there is no other way of
sequestring her but in her will, by denying or cutting short whatsoever she
likes or takes gust in. The soul which has been contemptuous toward God is
worthy of death; therefore it must die to its own will in all things, and suffer
in that wherein it has been delinquent. In nothing at all neither little nor
great must it procure or regard its interest: otherwise if it be thus open-eyd
it is not to be numberd among the dead. Be mindful in nothing of thy own will.
Do the will of God, do the will of thy brother, do the will of thy enemy and him
that injures thee rather then thy own, if it may be accomplished without sin.
Thou will not arrive to a sufficient degree of mortification, unles thou resign
and transmit thy will not only to God but also to man, yea even to thy very
enemies.

Be not too credulous in those things to which thy will is carried with an
impetuosity without having regard to the rule of reason; but hold them all
suspected, although they hold forth never so fair a show of good: they are for
the most part but a mere officiousnes or branchings of the sensual part which
the devil makes use of to cloak his craft. Let thy will seek the glory of God,
and not grieve at the contempt of men; let it attend and be sensible of the
divine pleasure not thy own affliction: let it be wholly emploid upon God, and
it will find enough to do: let it learn to wave all self content and proper gust
though spiritual. Although God relinquish thee to thy self in thy hardest
pressures, in thy spiritual desolations amidst the very powers of darkness,
assaild on all sides with tribulations and temptations, thou must still persist
faithful, seeking no redress of comfort, being ready to sustain that shock and
any other inculpable calamity of thy soul, so long as God shall be pleased to
continue it, though even to the day of judgment or for all eternity. He that
covets to serve God in truth must serve him gratis, rather wishing and begging
to be debard of all comfort; deeming this abundantly sufficient if he can but
conserve that place of his soul, where God has fixed his residence, pure and
unblemmished; not permitting any thing else to enter and appear there as in the
holy of holyes. Thither must the high Priest JESUS only find entrance* Some
servants of God who were deluged with a sea of comforts obtaind by prayer the
shutting up of these heavenly sluices, and to be deprived of all sweetness:
neither would they afterward admit of any such infusions though from heaven:
for some have not been wanting who refused Angels for their comforters. For
what great matter do thou in rejecting acorporal gust which will rather prove
an affliction? that bodily solace which hinders divine joy and sweetness of
spirit is too afflicting: God deserves more at our hands then this. For him
thou must contemn all jubily of spirit, and whatsoever is pleasing to nature
and self will. The service of a hireling is neither constant nor faithful. If
thou serve God out of hope of comfort or relief though it be spiritual, thou
love not God himself, and this comfort failing thee, thou will often become
slouthfully tepid. Hence it is that we are subject to so many mutations, that
we are remiss, that we make small progress; for as mariners hope for the wind so
do we for the spirit of devotion and consolation, without which we are becalmd,
and any adversity, like a contrary blast, beats us back: yea we are much worse
then mariners who know how to make way with a side or adverse wind. Let us
learn to advance forward even amidst oppositions, aridities, and tribulations.
It imports not whether thou serve God for the sensibility of interior comfort;
or for some corporal commodity, but only that thy service comes of les freely;
because requiring this gust of spirit thou sellest it at a dearer rate. God is
more valuable then thy gust: it is better to have God then joy: and yet where
can thou be, o most delicious and sweet-rellishing God, and the spirit shall
not exult, if thou discoverest thy self to it? where shall thy benignity display
it self and the soul shall not be replenished with excess of joy? but grant me
that I may never wish my own joy, but that thou may be it; never seek the
gust of my own will, but the good pleasure and accomplishment of thine.

O afflicted spirit, if thou would never seek thy own content and comfort,
how much content would thou find! he that leaves house or land for God shall
receive a hundred fold reward: there is no equity that he who relinquisheth
more should receive les. He that relinquisheth his own will and its content,
shall receive a hundred fold more in the same species for denying it, then if he
had given way to it; for he does the will of God and shall deservedly receive a
more ample recompense. The more thou divorcest thy self from all gust of self
will and interest the more deliciously will thou relish the divine will; a
heavenly kind of taste and joy will be infused into thy heart. If God had made any
one man so happy as to be in a perpetual fruition of his own will, no sooner
said but done; and so powerful as to be able to compass all his designs and
that lawfully; yea and were securely certain of the continuance of this power
and good hap: I am persuaded such a one would enjoy les content then another
who followd his own fancy in nothing, but renounced it in all for the love of
God. A certain contentive relish of the will does accompany its fulfilling: and
there is no content nor complacence greater then that which God has in the
performance of his will. If God should communicate to thee one drop of that
delight of his will which he imparts to those who only do and desire his will;
thou would take incomparably more joy in a total denial of thy own, then if
it were always accomplished: for he that enjoyes his own will has only the
joy of a humane will: but if he renounce it to do the will of God, he will
partake, mediating the grace of the divine goodness, of the gust of the divine
will. To be always doing what one lists is esteemd the height of humane
felicity; what will it then be to do what God lists. Man's will is impure, it is
accompanied with anxiety and sprinkled with the hysop of unsavory
contrarieties; the divine will is most pure, and in a continual possession of
joy: Will and pleasure are one and the self same thing in God, wherefore he that
has the former must needs have the latter. In God appetite is not
distinguished from joy; in creatures it is much otherwise. In the elements
motion to a place is one thing, and repose in a place another; in heaven they
are all one: light and heat in the fire are two things, in the sun and stars
the self same: so man's will and joy are things distinctly different, in God
uniformly the same. Neither can one safely place his joy else where but in the
fulfilling of the divine will and total renouncement of his own: for a man
having then in wish and possession the divine, is so priviledgd that joy
inseparably attends him; for all falls out according to his hearts desire.
Therefore it is no such sad business to stand at a defiance with his own will, to
dispoil himself of all propriety, and wholly deny himself in all. No body
stands in such an utter abnegation of this, nor dies so entirely to it, nor
renounceth so fully all self-interest as do the blessed in heaven, who are
without the least touch of willing or not willing: and nevertheles in such a
rigorous mortification of it they find a special gust, and live most
contentedly. Why then do thou refuse to deny thy self who seekst salvation in
that heaven where there is the highest self denial? train thy self up to glory
and relinquish thy self. Persuade thy self that thou can not be happy there
but by doing that which now thou esteemst a great unhappines. Go to then and
begin that, which if thou be saved* thou shall never cease to prosecute. Do
that at length, which, if thou come to a state of happiness, thou shall do for
all eternity. In that endless perpetuity of bliss thou shall never seek thy own
will, being for ever and ever not only conform to the divine but also
transformd into it through the ardours of charity.

Who is there that being thirsty and having an earthen pot and it empty, had
not rather have a golden one and full of some sweet and refreshing liquour? who
is there that being ill at ease and having a crazd body, would not rather choose
to have one sound and robustious? who is there that being dull of capacity and
doltish in conceiving things would not covet the intellect of an Angel, and to
be as quick of comprehension as a Cherubin? O man, why will thou not exchange
thy unhappy, frustrable, diseasd, foolish will for the will of God infrustrable,
joyful, and consummated in happiness? if thou desire to understand as does an
Angel, which thou art not able to compass: why do thou not desire to will as
God wills, this being within thy reach? he that will be always in joy let him
never seek it in himself nor to himself, yea he must extirpate all private and
created love; otherwise whither soever he flies, whatsoever he goes about, he
carries lets and encumbrances along with him, yea multiplies them; insomuch
that the further he flies, and the more he undertakes, the more he is
entangled, being les capable of the repose he seeks. Who goes once astray from
the right path the further he goes the more he wanders: how much the more a man
busyeth himself in choosing this or that in order to joy or acquiescency, the
les shall he find it, because he is in a greater exercise of self will, which is
the cause of his disquiet and trouble, and makes him stray further from the way
of joy and repose. A sparrow falling into a net, the more it struggles to free
it self, the more it is entangled.

God is so good that an overplus of his goodness remains for a more capacious
will then thine and all the Seraphins: why do thou then strayten thy humane
will busying it about thy self, as if in half of it self it could sufficiently
satisfy the divine goodness? if God be to be loved, there is no room left
neither for self love nor any thing else. Take, o Lord, my whole love take my
whole will: nor let me slip this happy exchange, by which for this my naughty
one I may own thine the best of all others.

The XIV. Chapter. That we must continually be mindful of God.
HOw can thou, o ungrateful spirit, be at any time unmindful of God who is so
mindful of thee as if he were forgetful of the rest and thou the only object of
his thoughts; who is always sollicitous for thee and thine, registring in the
table of his sweetest memory all the good thou ever do? it is held a matchles
favor if an earthly king be mindful of any one and admit him to his presence:
and I esteem it scarce an obvious favor that the king of heaven never is
forgetful of me nor absent from me. A sick person is not a little comforted if
any one give him a visit; and why does not a sick and miscreant soul exult with
joy that her God has her continually in his eye and providence. If a Prince
cast but once a favorable look upon his servant it rejoices him to his very
heart; and I, o Lord, am nothing moved though thou never cast thy eyes off me
nor divert thy hands, being wholly taken up and busyed in mercy toward me. Men
run through have to behold a temporal king as he passes by: and I am slow in
reflecting upon thee an eternal king being present and permanent with me. Men
are sollicitously curious to behold a monster and stick not to give money for
that end and I though gratis care not to behold thee the beauty of heaven and
earth, on which the Angels themselves love to gaze. The queen of Saba made so
many days journey to see the magnificence of Solomon and his court; and I
regard not thee, my God, though so nigh me as to sejourn in my house. If my
very slave gave me but a cup of cold water I would look him in the face and
daign him my countenance: and yet I will not look upon thee, but desist from
praising thee, the Lord of Angels, who art perpetually serving me in all, and
replenishing all for my sake with thy blessings. O Lord, thou who art so
operative as to work all in all for me, why am I so useles in thy behalf as not
only not to make thee the subject of my action, but not so much as the object
of my memory. O most loving God, how could I behave my self worse toward my
capital enemy then I do toward thee: not so much as daigning thee a look when
thou meetest me and meetest me so often, though thou be still ingratiating thy
self by new favors and services.

O how continually, o God, art thou present in me, and yet I so little present
to thee, and take so little notice of thee! thy essence penetrates each part of
me much more entirely then the sun beams penetrate each part and parcel of a
transparent crystal, more perfectly then our soul is diffused through our
body. The presential assistance of thy wisdom provides for me and plays it
self the purveyer that nothing may be wanting, and if I do any good, that it
may impart a reward: thou committest not this to the intercourse of thy Angels
only and their relation, but thou thy self becomest my overseer. Thy power
carries me in thy bosom as a nurse or motherdoth her dearest child: and
because these duties of being in me, of seeing me, of preserving me in my being,
are necessarily annexd to thy divinity, thou would have me engaged to thee, o
good IESV, for a voluntary presence; and there being but one way wherein thou
could necessarily be absent, thou did invent a means even in that to be
also present in thy most holy body, that thou might be present with me both
corporally and spiritually. O ungrateful soul, why will thou not be thankful to
so loving a Lord? and if thou can not bodily be present with this divine
Sacrament, be not forgetful at least in spirit and thought of so benefical a
sovereign, who has made thee his tabernacle and place of residence.

Carry, o soul, respect to thy self and the Altar of thy mind, where God dwells
by grace, which thou perchance now partakest of, and woe be to thee if thou
do not, the divinity being there communicated. We reverence inanimate things,
and deservedly which are imbrued in the blood of Christ: but why do we not the
same to a part of our soul and spirit, where the H. Ghost diffuseth himself? we
dare do no unseemly action before an Altar where the sacred body of Christ our
Lord is kept nor dare thou do les before thy self, because thy mind, as thou
may well hope, is by grace the Altar and throne of God, he residing in it with
greater pleasure then in a Pix of gold. How do thou compose and recollect thy
self when thou art to receive the Body of Christ? habituate thy self always
in such a modesty, such a decency, since God is thy guest, lodging not in thy
body only but within thy soul. If the Body of Christ being thy guest, thou
compose thy self with such decency; thou must still retain the same, since the
spirit of God becomes resident in thy spirit, since the Father and the Son come
to thee, and take up in thee their dwelling place.

Whether in public or private comport thy self always after the same manner:
God beholds thee, God is nigh thee, God is with thee, God is within thee. If
Christ should come visibly to thee when thou art all alone in thy chamber,
would thou in his presence put thy self in any les seemly posture, or rather
stand in a reverend, submissive, composd manner, trembling at the aspect of
such an awful majesty? Behold the divinity is always present with thee, and
we owe it no les duties of respect. The divinity is present not after one
manner but many, by filling and surrounding thee with his boundles essence as
the ocean does a sponge; by carrying thee in the eye of his all seeing
providence, by sustaining thee by his power, by cherishing, embracing, and
adopting thee for his child by his heavenly grace. O soul, why sendest thou thy
desires, in so long a pilgrimage, since God is so nigh at hand; why do thou
aspire to other joys he being present? thou have a speedy redress for all thy
miseries, why art thou contristated? a refuge and sanctuary against all thy
calamities is close by; what needst thou fear? let all thy affection spend it
self in embracing and kissing this thy most loving parent, in whose bosom thou
art nurturd and brooded up. Consider thy self more nearly allied to God then to
thy brother, then to thy Father, then to thy mother: for the kindred and
alliance betwixt thee and God is greater then betwixt a child and his parent.
Let him then be always present to thee who is present after so many ways. As
a mirror becomes the image of that which is present to it; so a holy soul in
some manner will become divine, if it have the divinity present with it.

This presence of God is the vital action of grace: a holy soul is so long in
an actual and waking exercise of life as it loves God and is mindful of him*
whether it be employed in the contemplation of his perfections, or seek actively
to advance his greater glory. For as God is not only present to us by his
essence and knowledge, but also by his power and activity; so the best method of
framing the presence of God, is to consider him playing the good Operarius, and
directing his actions to our behoof. Who will not become active on Gods behalf,
since he works all in all for ours? but yet though a soul surcease from this,
she shall not therefore dye by sin, but will be like one that is a sleep, not dead
but yet scarce alive, as not enjoying the use of life: so a soul that is in
oblivion of her God though she be not void of life yet she is in so sound a
sleep that she reaps no benefit of her spiritual vitalityes. O how long-lifd
will one be that is still mindful of God! o how many ages will he complete, which
even those that otherwise are held spiritual do ordinarily forfeyt! this
presence of God is also the sense of grace; for without it the soul lies like
one in a palsy. The palsy is a disease not a death; but it deprives ones
limbs of all sense and vital motion: life and grace are then to small purpose
when the memory of God is benumd and obstupifyed whether it be in action or
contemplation.

One palm tree becomes fruitful merely at the presence of another; and the soul
at the presence of God is laden with all variety of fruit. Without the
presence of the sun all is buried in obscurity, nothing does partake of beauty;
by the presence of God a soul is illustrated and is made most comely to the
eye. The elements cannot brook to be absent from their center; and no les is a
soul carried to her center of repose God. As a stone if it be detaynd in the
air keeps always a propension to the earth, and if it be left to it self
tends thither without any more ado; so a soul enamoured upon God, even when it
is detaind from its repose, by reason of occurrent duties either of life or
state of life, even in that kind of violence, it breaths with tacit but
connatural aspirations after God: and these employments being ended and she
left to her self, she hastens to her center, recollecting her self in her
closest retreats with God, that to her utmost she may become like the Angels
who see always the face of their Father, and covet to see it more and more:
which desire ought to be as connatural and recreative to our hearts as is the
air in which they breath.

The XV. Chapter. That the incomprehensible goodness of God is to be loved.
WHAT am I who am but an abyss of malice in comparison of thee, O ocean of
goodness, that thou should love me? like loves its like: why then do thou
who art the best, love me who am the worst? things more amiable are loved by
others: thou being most amiable covetest to beloved by me the vilest and loath
somest of creatures. O love of the world, what am I in comparison of thee who
deserve to be the hatred and horror of the world? what is the reason that thou
commandst me to love thee? why was it needful to lay an injunction upon this?
what necessity to entreat and solicit it by so many ways? o solicitation, o
most sweet voice! child, give me thy heart! o petition iterated and reiterated
to deaf ^are^^ thou make an exhibition of thy self in each of thy creatures,
that thou may be seen at all turns through the cazements of nature, melting
away in this most amiable demand, in thy search after me. Thou accostest me in
each creature that thou may beg it by them all; dividing out thy love in so
many ways to gain mine. What window soever I open thou as a suitor occurrest
to my eyes standing behind the wall, looking through the windows, looking
forth through the grates. If I see, if I hear, if I smell, if I taste, lo, thy
lovely face presents it self, thy sweet voice, the odor of my God, a honey
comb with its honey is forthwith at hand; every where suit is made for love. If
four or five grave men should avouch any thing, or invite others to an
enterprise, each one would do and believe what they said: why give not I ear
to so many creatures while they all invite me to the love of my God? since he
has so many vouchers of his comelines why am I so backward in belief? if men
allurd with the beauty of things thought them endowed with a deity; how much
art thou, the sovereign and aggregate of all beauties more beautiful then them?
for thou being the source and author of it al I, thou allottest to each one the
pittance it has.

All creatures represent thy love and beauty with silent cries, and invisible
colors, but what voice or pourtraiture will bring us to thy knowledge? creatures
are not able to paint thee forth. All the perfections they contain seem nothing
else but so many blemishes. Who art thou then, or where, o my beautifully
fair? who though thou be every where present with me, yet I find thee no
where; and though thou comprizest all, yet thou art none of that all. Creatures
object themselves to my view as if they carried a resemblance of thee, but I
look upon them as a riddle. Thou art not that, o Lord, which they delineate
thee to be; who though they tell not a plain lie, yet they chalk thee so forth,
that thou art not truly what they represent. In this manner I sought whom my
soul loves: I sought him but found him not. I will rise and make a turn about
the city, through the lanes of nature and the streets of the heavens, I
enquired of the forms of creatures, of the consorts of music, of the
fragrancy of parfumes, the tastes of inebriating rellishes, the embracements of
lovers; and they all said we are not thy beloved: he shines in such sort that
no place is capable of his splendor, he sends forth a sound but such a one as
no wind does carry a long: he yealds a sent, but so as that no air disperseth
it; he gives such a relish that no hunger can bite upon it; he is so inherent
that no satiety can cause a separation. I enquired of the earth, and it made
answer I am not he; if the heavens of beavens do not contain him, why art thou
so inquisitive of me? I enquird of the sea, and it trembling said I am not; his
abyss much exceeds mine, and it is no ways to be waded through. I enquird of
heaven, and it said I am not thy God; he mounts much above my sphere. If none
of all you creatures be he, tell me where I may receive some ^ydings of him? the
watchful intelligences and guardian spirits of this world made reply; he made
us seek him above us. When I had passed a little beyond them I found the beloved
of my soul, whom I could not find among creatures. In this respect only I
behold and find thee, o light placed in the midst of lights, that I am able
neither to behold nor find thee: for how can I comprehend what is
incomprehensible? fly fly my beloved: in this respect I will comprehend thee
because thou fliest me: I know so much the more of thee the more I know thee
not to be knowable: and I approach nigher to thy knowledge, the more thou
recedest from my comprehension. I sought in my bed and the retirednes of my
solitude night by night the beloved of my soul. The splendor of things
beautiful in respect of thee is a night: the seemlines of the heavens is a
night: the very beauty of the sun, its refulgency, and any other, I will not
say, created but falsely imaginable comelines is a night. If each star were more
resplendent then the sun, and the sun himself did by as many degrees exceed
these stars as there are sands of the sea and motes illustrated by the sun, he
would be an eye sore in respect of thee, nor would be more conspicuous then the
stars now are in presence of the sun.

But to what purpose do I bring these deformed beauties of visible things,
these rustic forms even of the sun, and morish lights. Let us draw into
resemblance these spiritual and candid ones, whose lovelines is such, that an
Angel appearing to the devout Father John Fernandez of our society, the sight
so affected him that he fainted through excess of joy, and was not able to
support himself: affirming that all the beauties of this world were but
blemishes and deformities in regard of this. Imagine then that the comelines of
that Angel were as much greater then it is, as there are ^^omes in the air,
and that each Angel were endowed with such comelines; and there being millions
of millions of them, or in a manner a number numberles, sum up all this
comelines of them all into one; it would be ill-favourd and ugly in comparison
of the beauty of God, and I say not would seem a mote, but a mere nothing. O my
heart why art thou not extasied with such amiablenes, and set on fire with such
an abyss of light? o my heart thy hardness and heavines is greater then one of
iron, if this immense loadstone of love do not elevate and attract it.

But art thou perchance, o Lord, that clarity and seemlines which I conceit, in
regard of which, so great light of the sun or an Angel multiplied to such an
infinity seems no more then darkness? no; but thou art infinitely seemlier: nor
after so great light do I see thee, though thou be most refulgent. I only know
that that refulgency is not thee, because compared to thee it is darkness: but
what a one thou art is wholly unknown to me, thy light dazlingly blinding me:
and the brighter it shines it leaves me in greater darkness: But I never behold
thee more clearly then in this mist; nor do I find true day, that is, the
ancient of days, but in this night at noon day; clear to me by reason of its
obscurity and mid night. O eternal love, take now my hartand all my love. But
why do I say take it, if thou have forcibly siezd it: why commandst thou me to
give thee my heart, if thou have already robbed me of it; not in one hair or one
eye of thine, but in my blindness and the hair-braindnes of my extravagancies.
Thou have robbed me, because so great thou art that I cannot discern thee: thou
have robbed me, because though I so contemptibly dwarfish, have offended thee,
thou so majestically great covettest to be loved by me. But thou, o Lord, who
have wounded my heart with thy goodness, must out of the same, power into it the
oil of thy mercy, that it may be a healing salve to the wounds of my sins.

O hidden God, if thou, even in this ignorance of thee, be pleasing to me above
all I know; what will thou be when I shall know thee intuitively and face to
face in thy clear sun shine. Sieze and dispoil me of my heart; take all my will
and never restore it to me again; permit not a knife to be in the hands of a
madman, but reserve to thy self mannagement of it, for what remains for me in
heaven, or what do I covet besides thee on earth. I rejoice that my heart
fails me, because thou have taken it from me. Let my heart be always upon
thee because my treasure is placed in thee. O truly God of my heart, because now
thou art Lord of it! but because thou art mine, though my heart has faild me,
yet a better then mine will not: thou will supply its room: thou o God, art my
heart, thou art that part which has faild me. To wit, thou shall be my heart
eternally; and therefore supply for the functions of my heart, Thou can actuate
my will for me, and provide what thou know expedient in my behalf: it shall
only be my task and emploiment to love thee. Thou shall love me instead of my
self, that all my love may be wholly bestowed on thee, in such wife that self
love may no way impede me. O happy loss of my heart, if God supply in lieu of it!

The last. Chapter. Of the superessential light of the most B. Trinity.
O Most clear shining light of the divine Unity, if thou be so great that thou
dazlest the eyes even of the strongest understandings by thy dim shadow
appearing in creatures, and renderst them more purblind then the sun beams do
the owl, what an abyss of light will invest thee in thy Trinity, a shadow whereof
is not afforded by creatures, but it was to be reveald by JESUS? if thou be
here so refulgent to our eyes, how will these splendours of sanctity which never
break forth shine within thee? if the shadow of thy unity be so illustrious,
how radiant will the light of thy Trinity be which cannot be shadowed? O most
lightsome darkness when some clarity of such a mystery is communicated to a
soul! that light is an abscurity because a soul sees not it self but is lost as
in a maze. Like as one that walk: in darkness and knows not where he is; so the
mind surprizd in that light is ignorant what becomes of it self: and having
regaind it self in that brightness (which must needs be so, it being in God)
there it loses it self because it finds God which happens when being
sequestered from the traffic of inferior objects and becoming conform to
Christ crucifyd by a constant mortification and crucifixion of its will, it
fixes an undazled eye and humble mind upon the stupendous secret of the
Trinity; there it rellisheth life in its original purity as in its fountain:
there it admires the nature of a most simple simplicity in all points consonant
with a Trinity.

When we know any thing worth our admiration: we are touchd with a pleasing
desire of beholding it. What more admirable, and consequently more pleasing
then to know that most simple unity into which the Trinity of Persons combines
it self; as also that Trinity which a most simple simplicity does not destroy?
Unity does shine distinctly in the Trinity; the Trinity, for as much as it
relates, to what is within, is conspicuous in Unity. The Father is the source of
the Son: the Son issues from the Father according to the distinction of a
Person, and remains in him according to the unity of Essence: from the Father
and the Son proceeds the H. Ghost, and his substance remains both in Father
and Son: where a Trinity hinders not Unity, nor Unity impedes Trinity: yea
where Trinity furthers Unity, and Unity favors Trinity. Therefore God is more
one because he is also three.

What more pleasing then to see those things mutually conspiring, which seem
repugnant to one another? There would not be in God the greatest simplicity
imaginable unles there were the greatest efficacy: there would not be the
greatest efficacy unles there were a Trinity of Persons; there would not be a
Trinity of Persons unles there were an Unity of Essence. The divine simplicity
is so far from obstructing a Trinity that both Trinity contributes to unity,
and a most united Unity requires a Trinity. Therefore the more simple God is in
his nature the more is he triplifyd in Persons: and as no greater simplicity is
conceptible then that of the Divine nature; so there can be no truer
distinction then that of the Persons in that Unity. The more things partake of
simplicity and purity, the more efficacious they are according to the tenet of
Philosophers. Because fire shares more eminently of these two qualities, it is
the most active amongst the elements; and upon this score the heavens more then
sublunary natures, and spirits then bodies. Virtue the more it is united and
condensd the more forcible it is in its operations: and the more simple a thing
is the more it has of the form, which is both its act and activity: now in an
infinite simplicity which is a most pure act, and a form the simplest of all
others, as being most refind and remote from matter, there must needs intercede
an infinite efficacy in the production of an infinite Person by the
communication of an infinite substance from all eternity. My soul stands amazd
while it contemplates this simplicity, and transported out of its self it
adores this divine perfection in the equality and eternity of the Persons: for
the more simple things are, as they are more effectual, so are they also more
perfect in themselves. Perfection is not taken from the matter but the form:
wherefore the more any thing partakes of the form, the more it also partakes of
perfection; and by consequence being the simpler things are the more they have
of the form, the more also they have of perfection: and for this reason Angels
are more perfect then sensitive creatures. Seeing then that the greatest
simplicity is the chiefest, sole, and total form or act, it must by good
sequel be the most perfect: wherefore the Son of God is equal and Coeternal to
his Father by reason of the immense simplicity of the divine nature. Among men
the Father is greater then the Son, because to make a creature capable of
engendring it is requisite that he be in a perfect state: and since God from
all eternity is immensly simple, he is from all eternity perfect, and
consequently from all eternity generating, and the Father is not greater then
the Son. Among men no body is born a Father: God from all eternity is Father,
nor was he sooner God then a Father* Among men it is highly prizd if the Son
produced carry a resemblance with his Father in the lineaments and features of
his face; and that child which most resembles him is most in his love: what a
fecundity does it intimate where the Son is produced not only like in accidents
but the same in substance? how great a subject of love where the Son so
resembles his Father, that the Father is not liker himself, nor more himself;
and after so great similitude the Son is only one, and begotten by him without
intermixture: where the Father is a Virgin and begets him a Virgin, and the Son
not an infant, and born without a Mother? wherefore the Son does not lessen
affection as dividing it with a Mother, there being none here, nor the Father
with a spouse. But the Father loves intimately his only Son, and the Son loves
intimately his only Parent. Where the Son is not begotten of a particle of his
Father but of his whole paternal substance: and whatsoever the Father, beholds
in his Son is own and of himself; and whatsoever the Son bebeholds in his
Father, he knows him to have communicated without envy or partiality. How can
they choose but infinitely love one another, they being so infinitely one? while
these and such like are after an ineffable but intelligible manner, by a
profound silence thunderd forth to a soul and are made apparent to it; how can
it choose but be all set on fire, when in so great light and with all its powers
it shall be enamoured upon that superessential and superexcellent perfection of
Unity and Trinity, challenging all the Angels and Seraphins in that smoke which
replenisheth the house arising from this furnace of ardent charity; and crying
Holy, Holy, Holy, flying thither with the spread wings of its heart, partly
refrigerating this heat of love and partly raising new flames?

But there chiefly it remains like one extasied, wholly inebriated with divine
love, when it considers that Ocean of goodness wherewith an infinite nature is
communicated to the Son, and those ardours of love in which is made the
Procession of the H. Ghost. Here a created Spirit is at a nonplus, and through
excess of affection perishes as it were in it self, becoming a prey both to
fire and water: it is drowned in an Ocean of so great goodness, it burns in the
pile of that stupendous love. Nothing can be imagined more efficacious to
convince and attract our hearts to a pure and sincere love of God then that
inconceptible goodness wherewith the Father communicates himself to the Son and
both of them to the H. Ghost. Nothing can be imagined more devoutly, more
tenderly, more sweetly affecting, then that out-burst and excess of goodness in
the eternal emanations: nothing more cheerful, more pleasing, more delectable
to a soul, then the Nativity of the eternal word. For if it be goodness in it
self which is allective, and the booty which welorderd love preys upon, that
toward which the will is carried with all the poyze of its affection, what
greater goodness imaginable then that the infinite goodness it self which
according to the nature of good is diffusive, communicate not a part but all it
self entirely, not only what it has but also what it is. This prosutenes of
communication is a greater subject of admiration then any other infinite
perfection of the divine nature. If a man had some new and out landish jewel or
some other exquisite rarity, for which all esteemd him hap^^* and had nothing
at all but it, that being the sum of his treasures; verily though that pearl
seemd strange to thee, yet this would seem much stranger, if he without any
hopes of gain should give it gratis to another. The divine nature is an object
of wonder; but will not this seem a greater wonder, that it should be gratis
bestowd upon the Son by that admirable communication; and yet a greater then
this, that it should be done after such a manner as still to remain in the
giver. Besides if love be an argument of goodness (for diffusion and
communication never proceed but from love) where can greater love be imagind
then where all that is, is love. Love seeks equality in the lover and beloved;
and here is so great love, that the parties beloved carry not only a similitude
but even an identity betwixt them, in so much that both their loves are one and
the self-same. From whence necessarily follows the greatest fidelity and joy
conceptible, since they cannot choose but love and be beloved equally. This
their love is so efficacious and legitimate that though the Father and the Son
were not by their eternal generation one and the same nature, the H. Ghost
would make them such. This is the aim of charity, this is the function of love,
to make the lover and beloved one, and since that love is of a God most
infinitely perfect toward him that is also God, it must needs be most intense
and wholly efficacious. But if it wrought not an Unity it would not be
altogether perfect but like the love of a thing limited and toward a thing
limited, not toward an infinite only begotten, equal to his infinite Father;
where both the lover and beloved are infinite. Where there is such an excellent
and genuine love how much goodness must needs intercede? so that the Trinity is
a most pregnant argument of an infinite good, and consequently of a divine
perfection, (that being good which is perfect) as also of Gods simplicity:
wherefore the Trinity of Persons is an authentical testimony of the divine
Unity. What complacence does a soul take in knowing this! not as I have rudely
explicated it, or as it can be explicated; for this is only felt by an
inexplicable manner: for as there are no natural species which can bring us to
this knowledge, so neither are there words significantly expressive of what is
manifested to some pious souls concerning the word eternal. Therefore the soul
of a creature is so over joyd when the mutual proportion and harmony of the
increated Trinity and Unity, and the necessity of both to the accomplishment of
the divine perfection, is communicated to it, that it is all in jubily and
exultation, transported besides it self, and quite spent through amorous
desires and the languishments of true charity, thirsting earnestly to discover
in the other life this stupendous goodness of the Trinity.

Why longst thou, o my soul, to see any thing else besides this great spectacle
of the world, for whose sight alone the Seraphins and all the Hierarchies of
Angels and Saints were created, and introduced into heaven, as so many
spectatours. Where is thy curiosity? where thy desire of knowledge, if thou
covet not to be dissolved and contemplate that mystery and to dive into this
hidden secret? but thy longing must remit thee to the other life, and not put
thee upon inquiry in this, how he is three and one. Thou must not search the
cause why he is so, since thou art not able to give the cause of what he is.
Thou seekst in vain a cause in him who has no cause. God were not to be styled
great, if he were not greater then our capacity. Thou must not ^nquire after
what manner he can be so, who never could be before he was so. Philosophers
could never sufficiently penetrate into the nature of diverse worms, and no
body knows himself thoroughly, how then can thou hope to make a full discovery
of the divine nature, thy Author? wherefore thou must captivate thy reason to
the simplicity of faith in this supernatural mystery: for that perspicuity
which the divine indulgence daignes sometimes to insinuate belongs not to all;
but only to whom God calls out of the number of those who dwell with his Son in
the mount Calvary, and in a total ejurement of themselves: who denying self
will have taken up their cross and followed JESUS to that mount, and will have
them follow him thence to the mount Olivet and glory: those he priviled geth
sometimes in such sort as to make them partakers of his majesty. Where I am
says JESUS there also shall my servant be. He that shall partake with Christ in
suffering shall also partake of this extraordinary light and joy. So when our
Holy Patriarch Saint Ignatius had wasted and exhausted himself with corporal
pennances and austerities, it was more copiously and clearly imparted to him
then one is able to express. So that mirror of fervor F. Didacus Martinus did
almost always behold himself environed with a glorious light of the Trinity
or some one of the three Persons. Nevertheles it appertains to all to covet
with most ardent desires the sight of this ancient and eternal novelty in the
life to come. It was reveald to that holy servant of God F. John Fernandius
that a certain religious man of our society was long detaind in purgatory,
because he had omitted to wish with ardency the sight of the most B. Trinity. O
my soul, why art not thou more enamoured upon the sight of this theater of the
blessed, to whose spectacle all minds are summond, allrational creatures are
invited?

What a joy will it be to behold that which now by reason of the narrownes of
our thoughts or ignorance, through an excess of jubily and love we are not able
to comprize? how exultingly shall we rejoice while we contemplate these first
fruits of the divine perfection, that fore-tast and new expression of the
divine goodness where it communicates it self to the Son, and that primitive
bounty of God? what a pledge and assurance will a soul receive of the divine
benignity toward it self, when it beholds this profusenes of benevolence? if
God without deliberation gave all that he is, will he not by the advice and vote
of his goodness grant that we may at least see what he is? if he permit us not
to be what he is, he will permit us to admire what he is: if not to possess him,
at least to enjoy him: if not to live by the same life, at least by such
another, and that eternal, of which a soul has a pawn when it beholds a
generation excluding death. How can we choose but love God with all our mind and
strength, consid^ring that purple morning of ardent charity which he displaid,
where the first and Virgin dew of his gifts is the furnace it self of charity,
love it self in the same substance; so that the love is as great as God and in
the same gift of love he gives his own infinite essence: for love it self is
the first gift and all that infinite being which is in God. What assurances of
benevolence will a soul take hence, beholding such a happy and ominous essay of
Gods future bounty, and such a promising beginning of his goodness? insomuch
that it takes huge complacence in being loved by that unparalleld love, and
does what it can to love him reciprocally, by imitating so great goodness, by
giving it self to God, by leaving it self nothing, since the Father leaves
himself no parcel of his substance which he communicates not to the Son, and
both of them to the H. Ghost. In the excess ^^ this consideration and the
consideration of this excess, by means of a mysterious darkness, there passes
an ineffable communication and intimate union betwixt God and a soul. The soul
passes into God by grace and love; which though she remain in herself by
nature, yet not by affection: and God passes into the soul by indulgence and
charity, though he still remain in his majesty.

O immense goodness of the Father, immense wisdom of the Son, immense sweetness
of the H. Ghost, grant that I may reverence thee in thy Unity, adore thee in
thy Trinity, admire thee in thy goodness, imitate thee in thy love: grant that I
may humble my self to thy ^uperexcellency, that I may enjoy thy Vision,
^dhering to thee through all eternity, becoming one spirit with thee, and in
this interstice ^n adorer of thy majesty. In spirit and truth ^et me desire
truth, and spirit, and to contemplate face to face the more then most true, the
more then most spiritual and superessential excellency of thy Trinity and Unity.

To the honor of the ever B. Trinity; the word Incarnate, and his V. Mother,
S. Joseph and all Saints.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS
Contained in the I. Book.
1. THe deceitfullnes of a secular life. fol. 1. 2. Of the Truth of the Spirit.
fol. 8. 3. Of Purity of Spirit. fol. 13. 4. How Truth is made manifest by faith
and of the fruit and practice of this virtue. fol. 19. 5. Of the hope of pardon
and zeal of penance. 25. 6. The model of a sinner is set before our eyes. 30.
7. The ^^ part of the Parable: and how we must use Creatures. fol. 38. 8. The
affections of a true Penitent. fol. 45. 9. Of the ardent desire of those that
serve God. 55. 10. Of contemning and relinquishing the world. 58. 11. How peace
is to be obtaind. fol. 62. 12. Of the excellency of one that is in the state of
grace. fol. 69. 13. How penances and corporal afflictions help us. f. 85. 14.
That too much love of our flesh hinders the Spirit. fol. 90. 15. Of the loss of
temporal things. fol. 94. 16. How profitable temptations are. fol. 98. 17. That
we must fear God and hope in him. 102. 18. That we cannot but suffer something
and of the good of patience. fol. 108.


In the II. Book.
1. OF diligence in Prayer. fol. 114. 2. That we must not intermit our practice
of Prayer. fol. 122. 3. How efficacious the grace and favors of Christ are.
fol. 127. 4. How devoutly we ought to be affected toward the most B. Virgin
Mary. fol. 142. 5. That we must imitate Christ, and of the sorrow and suffering
of his most B. Heart. fol. 156. 6. How far we are to follow Christ. fol. 166.
7. That necessities and afflictions sent by God are to be born patiently. fol.
176. 8. How purity of body helps the Spirit. fol. 183. 9. That our practice of
mortification must be continual. fol. 187. 10. Of the sufficiency and good of
poverty. fol. 193. 11. That Patience is necessary in all occasions. fol. 201.
12 What a great good it is to be subject to another. 206. 13. How great harm
proceeds from daily and light defects. fol. 213. 14. Of exactnes in small
things. fol. 225. 15. That self-praise is to be avoided. fol. 231. 16. Of the
baseness of man. fol. 235. 17. What things ought to humble man and that he can
have nothing besides God alone. fol. 243. 18. How much we owe to the grace of
God and Christ. fol. 248. 19. That man must not only esteem himself nothing,
but also a great sinner. fol. 256. 20. What it is to style ones self a nothing
and a great sinner. fol. 262. 21. That Gods glory is always to be sought. fol.
266.


In the III. Book.
1. HOw careful we must be to do our actions wet. fol. 275. 2. That we must
shake of all negligence. fol. 280. 3. How incommodious a thing sleep is. fol.
287. 4. That we must rise fervorously to our morning prayer. fol. 297. 5. That
our daily fervor must be retaind. fol. 304. 6. Of maintaining our fervor.
fol. 310. 7. How constant one ought to be in the practice of good works. fol.
315. 8. How sollicitous we must be to increase grace. 321. 9. How God is to be
praised. fol. 328. 10. How great a dignity it is to offer the Sacrifice of
Christ. fol. 335. 11. That God is to be desired and received with longing in
the Eucharist. fol. 343. 12. That in time of refection we must not be more
indulgent to our bodies then necessity requires. fol. 354. 13. That one must
take account of his proceeding^ by a frequent examen of himself. fol. 364. 14.
How we must be affected toward others. fol. 371.


In the IV. Book.
1. HOw ungrateful we are to God. fol. 377. 2. That Gods benefits are without
number. 382. 3. That Gods love in our redemption appears infinite. fol. 388. 4.
How deservedly God is to be loved, and chiefly for himself. fol, 395. 5. That
we are not able to satisfy the goodness of God. fol. 402. 6. How great benefit
of glory we hope for. 405. 7. Of suffering death. fol. 415. 8. That man must
give himself to God for his benefits. fol. 422. 9. That God alone is to be
loved. fol. 425. 10. That self love must be rooted out. fol. 429. 11. How we
are to love our neighbor. fol. 442. 12. That nothing is to be coveted but what
God wills. fol. 445. 13. That we must give no care to our own will. 448. 14.
That we must continually be mindful of God. 456. 15. That the incomprehensible
goodness of God is to be loved. fol. 463. 16. Of the superessential light of the
most blessed Trinity. fol. 469.


FINIS.

