REFLECTIONS UPON Coll. Sidney's ARCADIA; THE OLD CAUSE, BEING SOME
Observations Upon his Last PAPER, Given to the Sheriffs at his Execution.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Sign of the Harrow at the end of
Chancery Lane in Fleet Street, 1684.

REFLECTIONS UPON Coll. Sidney's LAST PAPER.
THere can certainly be nothing which does more clearly Evidence the truth of
an Almighty Providence, by whose wondrous Power the whole System of this Lower
World is guided, and strangely directed, then those remarkable Retaliations of
Divine Vengeance which are most commonly in this Life repaid to those
unfortunate Persons who have been guilty of Notorious and Flagitious Crimes. It
is the common Observation, that Murder, the blackest of all Sins, will out. And
if Common Murders of inconsiderable Persons have afforded such remarkable
Instances, of wonderful Discoveries, whereby the Bloody Actors have been as it
were by the immediate Finger of God brought to the deserved Stroke of Justice;
how much more reasonable is it to expect, that when wicked Men advance to those
daring Heights, as to commit the most Execrable of all Murders upon the Sacred
Persons of Sovereign Kings who are Gods anointed, Gods Vicegerents and
Representatives, and as he himself styles them Dij hominibus, I have said ye
are Gods, that Vengeance should rouse up its Almighty Arm to punish the
Criminals? For if Kings bear the most immediate Character of the Almighty
Monarch of the Universe, the Sacrilegious Hands that are lifted up against
them, do, so far as it is in the Power of their Feeble Malice, offer Violence
to that Supreme Majesty whose Substitutes they are, and who has entrusted them
with the Government of the People and Nations, over whom he has placed them.

It was a smart salutation with which that ill woman Iezebel accosted the
furious Iehu at his Triumphant Entrance into Iezreel after he had cleared his
way to the Throne by the Death of his Sovereign, Had Zimri Peace who slew his
Master? And though the Execution which he did, was by the immediate direction
of Heaven, and he and his Posterity to the Fourth Generation, were by Promise
secured as well against the Crime as the Punishment of Traitors and Usurpers,
yet whoever will, or has consulted the Histories of the World, will easily
receive Satisfaction that very few of those Audacious Men who have by Treasons
and Murders attempted to Establish their own Usurpations upon the Blood and
Ruin of Lawful Kings and Governments, have escaped the Signal Stroke of Divine
Vengeance and humane Justice; and indeed who ever writes his Title to a Crown
in the Blood of his Lawful Prince and Predecessors, does at the same time set
his own Head and Crown at the same rate, to the next bold adventurer for the
Prize, and Purchase.

There cannot be a clearer Demonstrative Instance then in this very unfortunate
Gentleman Mr. Sidney. For this very Gentleman, was not only an Actor in that
Unatural Rebellion which with the Effusion of so much Blood was carried on
against his late Majesty by his Traitorous and Disloyal Subjects of both
Houses, assisted by the Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists and other wild
Enthusiast and Dissenters from the Church of England, but he was also one in
that infamous Commission for the pretended High Court of Justice, by which they
Tried, Condemned, and put to Death one of the most Excellent Men and most
admirable Princes for Learning, Virtue and Piety, that ever wore a Royal
Diadem. He was not only Named in this Execrable Commission, but was actually in
the Court, and upon the Bench as a Coassessor with that Villain Bradshaw and
the rest at the Trial of that Illustrious Sufferer, as I am able to make appear
from a true Transcript of every several days Proceeding, in the Trial; the
Original whereof is attested under Phelps the Clerk of that pretended Courts
own hand, and was by him drawn up, and the Names of all that were Present each
Day entered, By order from the Jaylors, or as they termed themselves the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, that so it might be kept in perpetuam Rei memoriam.

It is true he was not present when the Sentence was passed, nor the execrable
Warrant for the barbarous Execution signed; but for what reason I am not able
to say, doubtless the Passion, he expresses for that Old Cause which was then
in the Meridian of its Glory, did not permit him out of Remorse of Conscience
to withdraw himself. However merciful Heaven gave him a long time of
Repentance, almost forty Years; but when he was become so obdurate, to be so
far from Repenting of his being Accessory to the execrable Murder of one King,
as upon the Resurrection of his Good Old Cause, to become a Conspirator how to
effect that Horrid Crime upon another, lingering Justice, was turned into Fury,
and he was taken in the Pit which he had dug for others. And truly, to me
this appears very Remarkable, and though I can hardly hope it, yet I wish the
Dissenters would not, as sure those foolish People did, who made such haste
after his Execution to get Hand-kerchiefs dip't in his Blood, look upon him as
a Martyr, but as, he really is, a Monument of that Divine Justice, which ever
pursues, and will certainly overtake Traitors, Murderers, and impenitent
Rebels, and Regicides: And let them be assured who makes Saints and Martyrs of
such Monsters of Men, that Hell is crowded with them, and indeed Heaven being a
Monarchy, a republican Rebel cannot be thought a Friend to that Glorious
Government, or capable of being Happy, under the Divine Right there, which is
so odious to him here below.

It were Happy for those murmuring Tribes of our Factious and Anti-monarchical
Dissenters, if at last; either, the severe or merciful Proceedings of God and
the King were capable, of opening their Eyes; and truly if they will not see
such Wrondrous and Miraculous Providence, and Preservations, such a
Resurrection of this Monarchy from the Grave, and such visible Demonstrations
of the immediate care of Heaven to support it, against all its Enemies and
Opposers, they must wilfully seal up their Eyes against the clearest Beams of
Truth and Wonder; and most certainly where Old Sinners and Rebels will not see
the Finger of God, to bring them to Conviction and Repentance for their former
Guilt, but will still be running further upon the Score, they shall feel the
Terrible weight of his avenging Hand of Justice, who has told us, Vengeance is
mine and I will repay it, and whoever sheds the Blood of man, by man shall his
Blood be shed. Much less then can any man lift up his hand against the Lords
anointed and be Guiltless.

There is a pretty odd Passage in the Life of the late Lord Russel, which upon
this occasion I cannot but recount, both because I have it from credible
Authority, and that it shows his Lordship was unfortunately tinctured with this
King killing Principle from his early Years, as also that God Almighty is
displeased even with murdering his Vice-gerants in Pageantry, and that it is
dangerous jesting with the Misfortunes of innocent Majesty, during the late
execrable Rebellion, when Justice was turned into Wormwood, and Loyalty was
accounted the most Capital Offense, one Mr. Wimpew an Orthodox, Loyal Minister
of the Church of England, was, as Thousands more of the Clergy then were,
sequestered and ejected from his Benefice of Totnam-High-Cross, and one Lewis a
Factious and Pragmatical Presbyterian intruded into his Living. This Lewis
being a notable Zealous stickler for the Cause, was so high in Reputation, with
many great Men of the Rebellious Faction, that they entrusted him with the
Education and Principling of their Children, and among others, it was the
unhappiness of the late Lord Russell to be trained up under his Care and
Government; and that vile Wretch, that he might enter their tender and easy
Minds with those Traitorous Impressions which were then esteemed, those Truths
which Mr. Sidney now says pass for Treason, to divert his Scholars, he
composed a Farce, wherein he and they were all Actors, there was all the
Formalities of a High Court of Justice President, Solicitor, Witnesses, etc.
the Criminal was an Old Shock-Water-dog, upon whom the impudent Villain
bestowed the Name of Charles Stuart, who was there Arraigned, Tried, Condemned
and Executed by cutting off his Head. The Profligate Wretch thereby, with the
highest Degree of contempt instilling the deadly Poison of the Lawfulness of
Deposing and Murdering Sovereign Princes, and inspiring those tender Minds with
mean contemptable Thoughts of Majesty the most sacred thing on Earth, as of the
Murdering a King were no more then the cutting off a Dogs Neck.

I confess I am not much addicted to that Presbyterian Humor, of making every
Extraordinary accident that happens to any Person a Judgment, and presently
according to their Proud Familiarity with Eternal Decrees and Purposes,
Assigning Reasons for the strange Dispensations of the Omnipotent Will: but yet
I cannot but make some such Reflections as the foregoing, when there appears
such a Resemblance between the Crimes and Punishments. And however since we
live in such an Incredulous Age, wherein Men can very difficultly be persuaded
to believe even their own Eyes and Ears, especially the Factious and Dissenting
Party who live like Moles, continually working under Ground to undermine the
Government, but have no Eyes to see the brightest Beams of Truth. I think it is
a fair Presumption to introduce the Belief of Men's future Actions, when it
makes it apparent that they bear an exact Conformity to their very almost
innate Principles; for it is a most rational Inference, that if Mr. Sidney by
his own Confession, was from his Youth engaged for that Old Cause, which was
the most damnable Conspiracy that ever was formed, not only against the Person
of the King then Reigning, but against the very Monarchy, and the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government, and Mr. Sidney is known to Persist in, and
obstinately adhere to the very same Principles, I say it makes it more then
probable that he should be ready upon the first opportunity to engage himself
in the very same Counsels and with such Confederates, as in his opinion might
again remount that Old Cause into the Triumphant Chariot of Government, which
could never be Effected but by the Rush of the King and Monarchy. And if my
Lord Russel was so early taught the Doctrine of Contempt and Murdering Kings,
and has in the following Course of his Life ever since he Writ Man and entered
upon Public Affairs, Associated himself with those who were Notoriously
disaffected to his Majesty's Person and the Government both in Church and
State, if he made himself one of the Popular Patrons of the Discontented,
Factious and Disaffected Party; if in all things of Public concern he set
himself in the Front of those, who for these late Years have opposed the King,
and by giving Countenance to the Dissenters, the known Enemies of the King and
Government, endeavored the Subversion of it, no Rational Man can look upon it
as strange or unaccountable, upon the detecting of a Conspiracy against the
King and Government to find him engaged in it.

I confess it is much more Surprising to me, that after the clearest Evidence
in the World of this wicked and damnable conspiracy, so fortified with the
falling in, of so many Circumstances known to the whole Nation, there should be
found any unbelievers, so Audacious, as not only to doubt, but to endeavor to
persuade others to a disbelief of it. And truly they who do, of which there are
too many, have a greater Proportion by far of Malice, then either of Honesty or
Policy, for certainly whoever endeavors to persuade the Nation, that this
Conspiracy is false, or those who have fallen by the Stroke of Justice dyed
Innocent, declares himself an open and avowed Enemy to the Kings Life, Person
and Government, all which were at Stake; and to Ridicule this Plot as a Sham
and Forgery, is the best way they can possibly contrive to cover another, and
to prepare the People for it, by persuading them into the worst Opinion that
can possibly be entertained of any King or Government, viz. That they are so
far from preserving, that they lay Trains to destroy the best of their
Subjects. But let these confident Traitorous Bigots for the Old Cause be
assured, that they do but lay Snares for themselves, and that one time or
another, their busy Tongues will be their Ruin; for Kings have long Hands, and
the Justice of God and Men will certainly find out and punish these Common
Enemies of our Peace, the Tranquillity of the Nation, and the Safety of the best
Government under the Sun.

But there is nothing in the World more remarkable in my opinion, nor more
Convictive, then that the Conspirators themselves have every Man of them given
Evidence of the Truth of it, in their last and dying words. Nay, even those
Papers which have been written, with a perfect design to put a Fucus and
Varnish over the ugly Face of that deformed Hag the Old Cause, have yet
contrary to their Intention, given the clearest Proof of the Truth of this
Execrable Conspiracy; insomuch that there needs little more to manifest their
Guilt, and the Justice of their Sufferings, then those very Papers which were
by them intended as a Vindication of their pretended Innocence.

Much of this Nature has been made appear by several Hands, both upon the
Speech of the late Lord Russel and this Paper of Mr. Sidney's; I shall not
therefore take it in Pieces and Examine every Period, but rather endeavor to
show what the main Scope and Design of the Writer was; and truly this is to be
said of him, that his Life and Death were all of a Piece, for he Lived a Rebel
and a Regicide, and it is no wonder to find a Person that is such out of
Principle dye a Traitor in Fact, nor is it strange that he who breathed nothing
but Hatred of Crowned Heads, should endeavor to spread the Poison wherewith
his very Soul was infected, and with his Expiring Words convey the Contagion
unto others; but like the Viper, the most Noxious and Poisonous Animal whilst
living, there is an excellent Counterpoyson to be found in this Dying Speech.
For the very End, Scope, Aim and Drift of this odd Address to Men, Brethren and
Fathers, Friends, Countrymen and Strangers is first an appeal ad Populum, that
Sovereign Tribunal of all People, Kindreds, Languages, Tongues and Nations,
which his crazed Imagination had set up in his Fancy as the dernier resort, the
last High Court of Justice, from which, like that whereof he was a Member,
there was no Appeal, being the ultimate Authority of Mankind in Nature.

2 ly.It is an Arraignment of the Justice of the Nation, as pressing the
Innocent, and denying Justice, which is in Effect a most severe Charge against
the King, who is the Fountain of Justice, and a calling upon the People with
the powerful Voice of a dying Martyr for their Cause, to re-asume their
Sovereign Power of judging their Sovereign for the Breach of that Fundamental
Contract, which he wildly talks of.

Thirdly, It is a magnifying of the Old Cause, to make the People inclinable to
it. An Enthusiastic Incentive to a new Rebellion upon the Old score of
Reformation.

And what is the Result of all this but to set us all together by the Ears, to
Embroyl these Nations again in all the Calamities of a Civil War, and to reduce
us to those deplorable Extremities of unavoidably falling either; under Tyranny
or Anarchy, the two greatest Mischiefs that can possibly happen to any People?

Indeed he makes a mighty flutter about those Treasonable Papers found in his
Study, as being only some private things written in Answer to Sr. Robert
Filmer's Book, which yet remains unanswerable, and lays down that wild Position
of the Sovereignty of the People, as the Foundation of all Governments, which
is not only in it is own Nature perfect Nonsense, but destructive of all
Government: For it confounds the Relata of Governors and Governed, making the
Governors and Governed the same, which is an Error contrary to the most easy
and natural Logic. For I may as well be said, to be my own Father and my own
Son too; as that I, or the Collective Body of People or Nations, can be said to
be at the same time the Sovereign Power, and yet Subjects to that Sovereign
Power: And besides this lays an eternal Foundation for perpetual Changes and
Alterations in Government, for by this Position, which how true a Protestant
soever Mr. Sydney was, is the perfect Spawn of Bellarmine and the Popish
Doctors, all Governments ought to be Elective, and there can be no such thing,
as any Heriditary or successive Right to Crowns and Governments. And then there
will never fail to be as many Aspiring Pretenders, to the Delegation of this
Sovereign Power, as there are Popular and Ambitious Men, who will not have the
Patience to attend the Regular and common Course of making a Vacancy in the
Throne, but will endeavor to remove the present Possessor, by all ways per fas
and nefas, to instate themselves in the Sovereign Authority: This we see in the
declining State of the Roman Empire, when the Military men undertook this
Sovereign Power of choosing and creating Emperors, which is exactly the Case
before us; and in this Principle, as in the very Materia Prima the Mother
Cause, is to be found the Root of all the Rebellions, Plots, Conspiracies,
Faction, Sedition and Disorders, with which this Anti-monarchical Faction have
of those late Years, so miserably distracted these three Kingdoms; which if
there were no other Arguments to confute it, is certainly sufficient to render
it detestable not only to Sober, Wise, and judicious Persons, but to all
Degrees, Estates, and Conditions of Men, who must of necessity feel the Dismal
Effects of this Horrid Principle wherever it prevails.

But after all this Popular flourish of Mr. Sidneys, and tickling the People
with their imaginary Sovereignty, over their King; after all his mighty Care
for settling the Title of Kings upon the sure Basis of being the willing
Nations, and Peoples Trustees, and Slaves to their Subjects; and after all his
Traversing his Ground and fencing off the Treason, while he tells us that what
was said in his Book of Nero, Domitian, etc. That it was applied to him by
Invendo's, he very fairly slurs his false Die upon the Credulous, and tells us
not a Word of what was proved upon him at his Trial out of the same Papers, and
concerned the King without an Invendo, viz. That the General revolt of a Nation
from its own Magistrates is not Rebellion, that the Power of calling and
dissolving Parliaments is not in the King. Trial of Algernon Sidney Esquire Page
26. Here Is the King dethroned, and no way to help himself, for this Revolt of
the People he says can never be called Rebellion; here is Treason by Wholesale
without Inve^^do's or Constructions, at which he seems to be so much offended
as contrary to the stat. 25. Ed. 3. Sidneys Paper page 3.

And if this be not plain down right Treason, without any straining or
Construing, and Writing it an overt Act, and far beyond Compassing or
imagining, which that Act makes Treason, truly People may both do and say what
they will, break the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy without Perjury, call
Parliaments without the Kings Writ, continue them against his Will, and not
dissolve them but at their own Pleasure; they may shake off all Obligations of
Obedience, Associate, Covenant, Arm, Fight against him, Subdue him, Dethrone
and Murder him, if they prosper in the Attempt, and yet be no Rebels; for all
this is included in this Teeming Expression of Peoples Revolting from their
Magistrates, which he says can never be called Rebellion; and by consequence
is no Crime, but on the contrary Lawful and Commendable. Nay this is not a
Fiction, a Story of a Possibility of such Consequences from this Principle, but
a Series of sad Truths, all which were, to the Everlasting Infamy of the
Actors, of which Mr. Sidney was no small one, having from his Youth by his own
Confession been engaged in them, Acted here in these Nations upon the late King
and his Loyal Adherents, by those Bloody Rebels, Traitors and Regicides, this
Gentleman's Confederates and Accomplices in the late Execrable and dreadful
Rebellion.

In the next place the Paper aims chiefly at his own Vindication, which he
endeavors by lessening the Reputation of the Witnesses the Jury and his
Judges. Now though the Printed Trial is a sufficient Vindication of the whole
proceeding, which was Managed with much Coolness and Temper, as any Trial I
have seen; yet it is worth our while to observe, that such as were Saints
whilst Traitors and Conspirators, become Devils and Perjured when once they
become Discoverers and Witnesses; and that Point of the Lord Howard so much
insisted upon both in this and the Lord Russel's Trial, and attested by so many
Witnesses, is so sufficiently answered by himself in the Lord Russel's Trial,
and is so natural for any Person to conceal his own Guilt by Vouching the
Innocence of his Accomplices, that it looks like a very great Weakness in Mr.
Sidney to repeat a thing which so easily brings its own Answer; and is a
greater Weakness, or however wilfulness in those who will believe it lessens
any thing of the Truth of the Lord Howard's Testimony. For let any Person put
himself under the Lord Howard's then Circumstances, and his Heart will tell
him, he would have done the same thing in all Companies, and not have run to
the Earl of Bedford, and before so many Witnesses have proclaimed his own
Guilt, when as yet he did not hear he was accused, or his Name brought upon the
Stage. But Mr. Sidney forgot the most Material Witness against him, which was
himself, his whole Life, his Words, his Actions, his Writings, evidence
sufficiently his Guilt, for it is no wonder to see him in a Conspiracy, who
thinks a Revolt from the Magistrates cannot be called Rebellion, and who has
Actually set in Judgment upon his Natural Liege Lord and Sovereign, and helped
to bring his Sacred Head to the impious Stroke of the Executioner.

And for the Bench which he says, was filled with such as were Blemishes to
the Bar. I think the Tongue of Traitor not the least Slander, and it is their
Glory, not their Shame, that their Faith and Loyalty to their Prince and
Country, in opposing such as Mr. Sidney and his Commonwealth Faction, when
they began to be so Rampant, as to be thinking of a Revolt from their
Magistrates, and hatching this Conspiracy, are those Blemishes which Mr. Sidney
is so much offended at, and which have deservedly removed them from the Bar to
the Bench. But that Period as before was intimated, was intended through the
Judges Coif to strike at the Crown. For says he, lest the means of Destroying
the best Protestants in England should fail, the Bench must be filled, etc.
Every Body knows who fills the Bench, and it is easy to Guess the meaning of
this Malicious Paragraph, but the barking of the Dogs does not hurt the Moon,
nor the Fools or Madman's throwing Dirt at it blacken the the Sun, but returns
upon the Face of him that throws it. But if Mr. Sidney and such as he, are the
best Protestants, bless me God! what a sort of People are the worst? If
Traitors, Rebels and King-killers come to be the only Saints, we are even in a
fair way to set up the God of this World, and the Moloch of the Old Cause, for
the Object of Religion, for the Devil was the first Rebel against Monarchy, and
a Murderer from the beginning, and truly the Old Cause is as like him, as if
She had been spit out of his Mouth.

And by the last Prayer of this Paper, which is the third thing Considerable,
one would think, this Idol of the Old Cause was the Object of Mr. Sidny's
Religion, for he may be a Turk, a Jew or a Papist, for any Account he here
gives us, of his Faith or Religion, which is usual for dying men to do.
Protestant is a large Denomination, for there are Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptist, Quaker, and a matter of a hundred and fifty more sorts of People
that call themselves so; certainly he was not of the Church of England, but it
is to be supposed he was one of the best Protestants, who were therefore as he
tells you to be destroyed; so that from hence we may infer, that Traitors are
Mr. Sidney's best Protestants, which being as the Logicians say simply
converted, is, that Mr. Sidney's best Protestants are Traitors: Now let which
of the dissenting Brethren like him upon these Terms, take this Martyr for the
Old Cause into the Calendar of their Church, and much good may the Reputation
they will get by it do them.

But because he prays so heartily for this Old Cause, that he forgets to
forgive or pray for this Enemies, the King and Government as Christianity
Commands, and the true Martyrs always did, Let us see the true Visage of this
sweet Mistress of his Soul, which he so Zealously recommends to God and the
World, praying God, to defend his own Cause, to defend those that defend it,
stir up such as are Faint, direct those that are Willing, confirm those that
Waver.

And that we may take a short survey of it. This Old Cause, in which he was
from his Youth engaged, was that Pretense of Reformation of Religion, Defense
of the Liberty of the Subject, and Privilege of Parliament; which the Puritan
Faction had been so long hamering in the latter end of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, the whole Reign of King James, and which being accoutred with all
her Formalities, was set up in the Reign of King Charles the First, like
Nebuchadnezar's Golden Image in the Plain of Dura, and all people Commanded to
fall down and Worship.

'Twas this that taught the Scottish Presbyterians first to rebel, or as they
called it, to Petition their King with Swords in their hands.

It was the Old Cause, which with the Hypocritical Promises of making him the
most Glorious King in Christendom, wrought upon the most excellent Temper of
King Charles the First, to pass the Act for perpetuating the Factious
Parliament of November the 3 d. 1640. It was the Old Cause, which by popular
Tumults brought the Noble Earl of Strafford to the Block. It was the Old Cause,
that inspired the Schismatical Rabble, to those Insolences and Tumults, which
first banished the King from the City of London; It was this Cause that seized
the Kings Navy, Forts, Magazines, and the Militia of the Kingdom, that wrested
the Sword out of his hands, and then turned the point of it against his Royal
Breast. It was the Cause, that purged the two Houses of all their Loyal
Members, and that inspired the remaining Dregs of a Parliament, to raise Arms,
Men and Money, against the King: It was the Cause, that led those brutish
Rebels into the Field, where with flying Colors, Drums beating, Trumpets
sounding, Cannons roaring, they fought with their Sovereign. It was this Old
Cause, that taught these Rebels to enter into Protestations, Vows, Covenants,
Confederacies and Associations, contrary to their repeated Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy. It was the Cause, that under Pretense of Reformation, abolished
the Apostolical Government of Episcopacy, turned St. Paul's Cathedral into a
Horse-Guard, robbed and defaced Churches, turned the Lawful Pastors out of
Doors, and Committed the poor Sheep to the Care and keeping of the Wolves, of
Sectaries, Schismatics and Heretics. It was this Cause that first brought up
those Taxes, Excise, Monthly, Weekly Assessments, before wholly unknown to us
and our Ancestors. It was this Cause, that set up the Bankrupt, public Faith
to pick the Pockets of the Nation, to maintain this Bloody and unnatural
Rebellion. It was this Cause, that murdered the admirable Prelate, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and so many of the Nobility and Gentry, and in
Conclusion, that Illustrious Martyr King Charles the First, before the Gate of
his own Royal Palace of White Hall. It was the Cause, that sequestered,
plundered, oppressed the whole Nation with free quarter; Military, and the most
Arbitrary Government of the Sword; that consumed Forty Millions of Treasure,
and above two Hundred Thousand Lives, that subverted Monarchy and Parliaments,
Church and State, that set up a Democratick Commonwealth, that rolled us from
that to the absolute Tyranny and Slavery under the Usurper Oliver, whose Will
was the only Magna Charta and Law of the three Nations. It was this same Old
Cause that banished our present Sovereign and the whole Royal Family, that
Bandied the Government from Pillar to Post, till we were all in Confusion, from
which, Providence rescued us by the Miraculous Restoration of his Sacred
Majesty, under whose Auspicious Reign how happy were we, till this Old Cause
began again, about Coll. Sidney's return into England, in the Year 1677, to
Discompose the Peace and Tranquillity both of Church and State, and by this
happily detected Conspiracy to endeavor the Ruin of them both.

In short, this Old Cause of Mr. Sidneys is the Daughter of the old Serpent,
who was for a Reformation in Heaven, and made the first Conspiracy against the
Almighty Monarch. She is the Mother of Sedition, Hypocrisy, Perjury,
Rebellion, Murder, Rapine, Sacrilege, War, Slaughter, Tyranny, Oppression,
Slavery, Confusion, and Ruin, and if these Qualifications, and all that can be
said, that is Wicked and Impious on this side Hell, which may literally to a
tittle, be Justified against Her, be not sufficient to recommend this Old
Beldam to the Eternal Detestation of all Mankind, Lucifer, Beelzebub, Satan, and
all the Infernal Crew, may in due time hope too, to be recommended to the
World, for certainly they are the Great Patriots of this Old Cause. For let Men
call themselves by what Names they please, best Protestants, or true
Protestants, or what other Titles of Reputation they can Coin, to gain Popular
Applause, the Rule of the Eternal Son of God will be of perpetual Truth and
Conviction, which assures us from what Stem we ought to derive the Pettegree of
all such va^^ Pretenders to Sanctimony and this Old Cause, That most infallibly
they have the Devil for their father, who do his Works.

FINIS.

