TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, And every individual Member
thereof.

THE GREAT COMPLAINT AND DECLARATION OF About 1200. Freeholders and Commoners,
within the Manor of Epworth, in the Isle of Axholm, and County of Lincoln,
setting forth the Plot and Design of Mr. John Gibbon, and his
Fellow-Projectors, to gain a Possession of the said Freeholders ancient
Inheritance, in their commonable grounds there, contrary to Law.

Humbly presented, and desired to be perused.

London; Printed in the year 1654.

The Great Complaint and Declaration of about 1200. Freeholders and Commoners
within the Manor of Epworth in the Isle of Axholm, and County of Lincoln.
THe business of the Isle of Axholm, under the notion of a Riot, has been
rendered famous by that exception in the Act of Oblivion of the late Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, wherein there is an exemption from pardon,
touching the pretended Riots committed in the said Isle; as also by the
proceedings that have been upon a Petition of certain Undertakers, who call
themselves Participants in the Level of Hatfield-Chase, prosecuted by Mr. John
Gibbon, the visible Prosecutor for himself and his Fellow-Participants, which
Petition was by that Parliament referred to a Committee thereof, and from
thence strange proceedings have grown, and by high crying up of a Riot, and
noysing it all abroad, the whole case of the Isle of Axholm is misrepresented,
and endeavored to be rendered odious, though as just, honest and warrantable by
the Law of England, in point of Title at Law, or matter in equity, touching the
grounds in controversy, as any; and therefore because the Freeholders there
foresee some reports drawn up concerning the Manor of Epworth in the nature of
a Riot, attending a Bill to be brought into Parliament for settlement of
Hatfield-Chase by an Act of your Honors, they humbly crave leave to acquaint
you, that there is no report comes or made, that mentions their Title at all
to the grounds in question, neither that truly ^^^eth the equitable part, as
indeed it is, but are drawn up and dressed in the ugly form of a Riot (to gain
a possession) with all advantage to the Participants, on purpose excluding the
Title and proceedings that have been now within these nine years in the
ordinary Courts of Justice, and to remove a possession of thirteen years now
late continuance, from the ancient and true owners (the Freeholders) who are
now legally invested in it, to give it to those that never yet legally had it;
and therefore in order to the discovery of the whole truth in this business of
the Isle of Axholm, it is necessary to be known, that there are about 60000.
acres, (said to be drained ground) lying contiguous within the several Counties
of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, and that the grounds in controversy are
7400. acres, lying in the Manor of Epworth, in the County of Lincoln only,
and not extending into, or being parcel of Hatfield-Chase, and the rest of the
grounds in the other Counties. It is also necessary to know the situation of
the Manor of Epworth, which lies in length about six miles, having
Hatfield-Chase, and diverse other wastes (parcel of the said 60000. acres, and
belonging to other Manors) on the West, and the River of Trent adjoining and
running all along toward Humber on the East; so as by consequence (as well as
by Proof in the depositions) it appears, that without cutting through the
Manor of Epworth, Hatfield-Chase, and the other wastes lying on the West could
not have been drained; and therefore the Participants did but at their first
coming into those parts, desire to cut through the Manor of Epworth, without
any further or other incroachment upon the Inhabitants there, for drawing the
waters into the said River of Trent, through the said Manor, to drain the said
Chase.

And although the Freeholders had such a right in the said grounds within the
Manor of Epworth, as hereafter will appear, could not by Law be improved
against by any Lord of the Manor; yet upon the draining of the said Chase, and
the other Manors lying on the West of Epworth, the Participants by color of
the late Kings illegal Patent, did about twenty years since, by force of Arms,
murdering some, and wounding and imprisoning others of the Commoners, violently
enter upon their said grounds, and have for diverse years much abused, and
grievously oppressed them, forcing from them the said Lands, (being the
Freeholders ancient inheritance, and lying without the said Level of Hatfield)
granted to them about 300. years since by a former Lord of the Manor, in
confirmation of the ancient right, which the Freeholders in those times had,
(for it is observable, that the Deed makes mention, that at that time they had
had right in those grounds, time out of mind) and these Participants detained
the same Lands from them in the times of tyranny, by means of the Councel-Table
and Star Chamber, not suffering the Commoners to enjoy the benefit of the Law:
yet some of the said Participants by their Agents so much abused the Commoners,
that even in those times some of them were censured in the Star Chamber to
stand in the Pillory, and by duress of imprisonment, sore Fines, issues
estreated, threats and menaces against the Commons, and bribery (for they
bribed the Solicitor with 80. l.) some few of the Inhabitants (the major part,
and those of the most considerable, being free) were forced to subscribe to
Papers, the Contents whereof many of them never knew, as they answer upon their
oaths in the Exchequer, but the substance thereof indeed was, that they should
stand to the award of the Kings Attorney General, whose award (without hearing
the merits of the cause) was ratified and confirmed by the Decree of Court of
the Exchequer, in the twelfth year of the late King, as by the Decree it self,
if Mr. Gibbon durst but show the inside of it, would appear; for further then
the outside of it, it has not be shown to any Committee: and yet there is some
mention made of it in the late Councels Order, wherein Mr. Gibbon was certainly
beholden to the Clerk that drew it; as if that Decree should hold place,
notwithstanding the Participants own last Decree of the 10. of Febr. 1650. and
the Freeholders verdict at Law to the contrary. Now though Mr. Gibbon cannot
abide to hear of the Title, and the proceedings that have of late been at Law
in this business (thinking to dam all up with the noise he has made of a Riot)
and though the Title has hitherto been refused to be heard or meddled with by
any Committee of Parliament, yet the Freeholders rely upon that as their main
strength, and do look upon your Honors as the only refuge they have under God
to preserve their rights according to Law, from the violation of those, that
against Law endeavor to usurp a possession: and having several rights to the
ground in question, as not only common appendant, but also common in gross,
(though the former be certainly included in the latter) they humbly lay down
their several Titles as follows) and first as to common appendant.

The Freeholders and Commoners within the Manor of Epworth, have time out of
mind, had common appendant to their several Tenements, for all manner of
Cattle, Levant and Couchant thereupon, at all times of the year, in and through
all the wastes and commons within the said Manor, (whereof the grounds in
controversy are the greatest part, and was always of the best nature) and in
confirmation of this their ancient right, Sir John Mowbray, sometime Lord of the
said Isle, having in his time made an approvement of part of the said wastes to
himself, as Lord, did about 300. years since grant unto the Freeholders by an
ancient Charter in French, but here translated into English by William Riley,
Keeper of the Records in the Tower, as follows.

THis Indenture between their thrice Honored Lord Sir John Mowbray, Lord of the
Isle of Axholm, and of the Honor of Brember, of the one part; Rawlin of
Brumham, William of Brumham, Roger of Brumham, John of Thetilthorp, Thomas
Melton, Jeoffrey Laundels, Vincent Bavant, John Gardner, John Cutwolfe, Richard
of Belwood, and John at Hagh, his Tenants of the Isle of Axholm, and all the
tenants and resiants within the said Isle, on the other part, Witnesses, that
all the said tenants and resiants have supplicated their said Lord Sir John
Mowbray, to have remedy of diverse claims touching their right, and diverse
debates and grievances to them made by the Ministers of the said Lord Sir John
Mowbray: upon which supplication it is agreed, that the said Sir John Lord
aforesaid, has granted for him and for his Heirs, to the said Rawlin, William,
Roger, and John, Thomas, Jeoffrey, Vincent, John, John, Richard, and John,
tenants aforesaid, and to their Heirs, and to all, having their estate, or
parcel of their estate, and to all the other tenants and resiants within the
Isle of Axholm, and to their Heirs, and to all that hereafter shall have their
estate, all the things underwritten, that is to say, that the said Sir John,
nor his Heirs, shall not approve any Waste, Moors, Woods, Waters, nor make, or
shall make any other approvement of any part within the said Isle of Axholm;
and that the said Rawlin, William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffrey, Vincent,
John, John, Richard, and John, and their Heirs, and those that shall have their
estate, or parcel of their estate, and all other tenants and resiants within
the Isle of Axholm, shall have their common, which is appendant to their free
tenement, according to that which they have had, and used, time out of mind.
Note, that 33. Edw. 3. the Freeholders had then had Common time out of mind.
And also that the aforesaid Rawlin, William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffrey,
Vincent, John, John, Richard, and John, and their Heirs, and all those which
their estate, or parcel of their estate shall have, and all other the tenants
and resiants within the aforesaid Isle, may dig in the Moors and Marshes,
turfs, trees, and roots, found within the soil of the said Moors and Marshes;
and that one pound, containing one half acre, be made at the cost of the said
tenants, and maintained hereafter by the said Lord and his heirs in Belton-car,
and one other in Haxey-car, containing as much, and that they be made in places
for the most ease of the said tenants; and that no Chase of Beasts of Commoners
be made, but once a year; and that the said Beasts be not otherwise driven, but
to the pound of the Pasture where they shall be taken, and there the Beasts of
the said tenants to be delivered by the tenants aforesaid, or by their
servants: and saving always to the said tenants, and to their heirs, and to
their servants, that they may take their Beasts, and receive them in the drift,
or before the drift, so that the drift of Beasts of strangers, be not thereby
disturbed: And that in the severalities of the said Lord adjoining to the
places in which they have Common, which are open, and not enclosed, no Beasts
of the said tenants and Commoners be taken, nor impounded, but easily driven
out: And that the said tenants and resiants, and their heirs, and all those
which their estate, or parcel of their estate shall have, may dig, and take
turf, or other earth, for the walls of their houses, and for all other
necessaries of the said houses, and for to enclose the walls of their Messuages
or Mansions; and to dry Flags in all the said wastes, for to cover the ridges of
their houses and walls, and for bringing of trees to repair the river of Trent,
where cause of repairing is, and to make them new. And that the said Rawlin,
William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffrey, Vincent, John, John, Richard, and John
aforesaid, and all other the tenants and resiants, their heirs, and all those
which shall have their estate, or parcel of their estate hereafter, be not for
the future amerced, or troubled for default of not appearing to ring their
Swine. And that they may put Hemp to be rated in all the Waters of the Isle,
(except the Skires, which are severed to the said Lord Sir John Mowbray) and
that the said Lord, nor his heirs, nor his Ministers, make no molestation nor
grievance to the dogs of the forenamed tenants and resiants aforesaid, nor to
their heirs, nor to those which shall have their estate, or parcel of their
estate, and if they do, the tenants shall have their remedy at the Common Law;
and that the aforesaid Rawlin, William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffrey, Vincent,
John, John, Richard and John, tenants aforesaid, and all the other tenants and
resiants, their heirs, and all those which hereafter shall have their estate,
or parcel of their estate, may fish through all the Waters and Wastes of the
said Isle, without impediment of the Ministers of the said Lord Sir John
Mowbray, except the Skires aforesaid: And also that they may dig Turf, and all
other manner of Earth in all the Wastes aforesaid, to carry and improve their
Land at their pleasure, and that none of the tenants aforesaid, or of their
heirs, or of those having their estate impeached of trespass by the Ministers
of the said Lord, be amerced for trespass, without answer given in Court, and
then by their Peers to be fined and taxed if they be amerceable; and the said
John grants, that all the tenants, and their heirs, and all those which shall
have their estate, which are bound to enclose the Woods of the Lord, may take
under-wood to make them new hedges, or to repair them as much as shall be
necessary, that is to say, Age has worn out the words in this blank.
(...) in the places of the said Woods (...) of the said tenants, their heirs,
and of those which shall have their estate, without being impeached or grieved
by the Ministers of the said Lord Sir John Mowbray: And the said John grants
for him and his heirs, that all the things and Articles aforesaid be of effect
and force in the Law, as well to those which are generally named tenants, and
their heirs, as those which shall have their estate, or parcel of their estate;
And if in the Articles aforesaid there be any point which may have diverse
interpretations, or intendments, that it shall be taken to the best advantage
of the names, or of the tenants aforesaid, and of their heirs, or of those
which shall have their estate, and not otherwise: In witness whereof, the
Parties aforesaid have interchangeably put their Seals. Given at our Manor of
Epworth the first day of May, in the year of the Reign of Edward the Third,
after the Conquest thirty three.

Now by the testimony of ancient Witnesses upon Record in the Exchequer, it
clearly appears, that all things have gone according to this Deed within the
said Manor till now of late, that the Projectors came in against Law, neither
did the Freeholders undertake to prosecute Suit for recovery of their right to
the grounds in question, without the advice of good counsel upon that Deed, for
they had the several opinions of Mr. Hale, now one of the Justices of his
Highness Court of Common Pleas, and an Honorable Member of Parliament; Sir
Robert Berkley, and Mr. Sergeant Maynard, not acquainting any of them with the
others opinion, because they desired to ground a certainty of the validity of
the said Deed in Law; and the chief question which was put to them was, Whether
the Deed did debar the late King of improvement as he was Lord of the Manor:
to which their several judgments were given, that it did, Mr. Hale giving it
under his hand in writing, yet extant; thus: I conceive, (says he) the Deed is
a real discharge, and binds the Land into whose hands soever it comes, and
consequently the King cannot improve. And he further adds, That he conceives
the benefit of this Deed extends to all the tenants, as well those that are
not named, as those that are named, and gives his reasons.

1. Because the Lord cannot enclose against those that are named, and
consequently there can be no improvement against any.

And 2. That which he says he does principally rely upon; is, because it is a
real discharge of the Waste of that liberty of improvement which the Statute
gave him; and though tenants be not a sufficient name of Purchase at this day
in point of interest, it is in point of discharge.

Matthew. Hale.

Sir Robert Berkley gave his opinion thus: I think, says he, it does, if the
Lord Mowbray had estate in Fee; for as I conceive, it is more then a Covenant,
and makes the improvement by the King unwarranted by Merton or any other
Statute.

To. Berkley.

Mr. Maynard's opinion was, that it past an interest, and therefore the King
could not improve against it.

Escaet. de anno Ed. 3.43 pars, n. 7. and so anno 6 R. 2. number. 58.
Now it is clear by several Inquisitions extant upon record in the Tower, that
the said Sir John Mowbray died seized as Lord of all the said Isle; as also,
that the Mowbrays Dukes of Norfolk, by a long-continued Race, were Lords of the
Manor of Epworth.

The manner of keeping the Deed, has been in a Chest bound with iron, in the
Parish Church of Haxey (the greatest Town within the Manor) by some of the
chief Freeholders, who had the keeping of the keys: which Chest stood under a
window wherein was the Portraicture of Mowbray set, in ancient glass, holding
in his hand a Writing, which was commonly reputed to be an emblem of the Deed;
till now of late that the glass was broken down: as appears also by the proofs
in the Exchequer.

It appears also by other ancient Deeds, before this Deed, that the said
Mowbray did make an approvement to himself of the said Wastes, before he made
the said Deed to the Freeholders.

Now as to the proceedings that have been within these nine years in the
ordinary Courts of Justice, the Freeholders give your Honors this brief, but
true account, as follows.

In Hilary-Term, 1645. they commenced Suits at Law, to try their right to the
ground in question.

And in Trinity-Term following, which was in the year 1646. (and not in 1642 as
the Participants in their Petition to the late Parliament falsely suggest) the
Participants exhibited an English Bill in the Exchequer, pretending Equity, to
stay those Suits at Law, and to have the possession of the whole 7400 acres in
controversy established with them.

In Michaelmas-Term, 1650 the Cause came to full hearing, (till when, the
Freeholders were not permitted a Trial at Law:) and the Decree thereupon made,
does but establish the possession with the Participants as it was at the time
of that Bill's exhibiting. Where pray note, that 4000 acres of the said 7400
acres in controversy, had been then about five years before in the possession
of the Freeholders. And that Decree does also give leave to them to go to a
Trial at Law.

And accordingly, in Michaelmas-Term 1651. the Freeholders in pursuance of that
Decree by special Order of the Court of Exchequer, proceeded to a trial at the
Bar of that Court, and had a Verdict, Judgment, and Execution for them, in the
name of Thomas Vavasour, a Freeholder, and owner of an ancient Capital
Message and Land within the Manor of Epworth, called Belwood, and a
Gentleman of an ancient Family, Son of Henry Vavasour, Son of Thomas Vavasour
the Grandfather, Son of Henry Vavasour the Great Grandfather, who married
Joane, one of the Daughters of Robert-At-Hall, to whom by Partition, made
between her and Elizabeth, and Mary her Sisters, the same place called Belwood
did come. Robert At-Hall was Son and Heir to Oliver At-Hall, who was Son and
Heir of Margery, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Thomas Beltoft, and Emot
his Wife, to whom by partition with Elizabeth her Sister, the said place called
Belwood came: Emot was Daughter and Heir to Richard de Bellewood, who is one of
the eleven specially nameed in the said Deed of Mowbray, and lies intombed in
the Parish Church of Belton, within the Manor of Epworth, in a Tomb called
Belwood-Tomb; so as it is clear, the said Thomas Vavasour, in whose name the
Freeholders had their Verdict, has both the same estate that Richard de
Bellewood now about 300. years since had, derived to him by Deeds under Seal,
and is also of blood unto him lineally descended from him.

This was the first Trial that the Freeholders could ever obtain in twenty
years time, at which Trial it did also appear by the testimony of ancient
Witnesses, that they had as well Common in Gross, as Common Appendant, which
certainly makes the improvement by the late King still more illegal.

And two things are observable touching that Windmill mentioned in the Act of
Oblivion, wherein the Inhabitants are exempted from Mercy, as touching the
pretended Riots committed in the Isle of Axholm: The f^rst is, that it was
taken in Execution at the Suit of the said Vavasour, for 80 l. cost, and 12 d.
damages given unto him by the Jury, and the money paid. The second is, That a
Tenant to the Participants, who was owner thereof, did in his heat of blood
presently after it was thrown down, bring his action of Trespass at Law against
a Freeholder in the Isle for throwing down that Windmil, three Houses, and one
Barn, to which the Freeholder being Defendant, having pleaded, the
Participants durst neither let the Plaintiff (their Tenant) try the cause
himself, nor the Defendant try it, but pray upon Record to discontinue and let
fall their own action, and to pay the Defendant costs, and 40 s. was
accordingly paid.

So as now, Right Honorable, the case in short is this:

The Land in controversy is 7400. acres of ground, whereof 4000. acres have
been now thirteen years in the possession of the Freeholders, and is left unto
them upon the full hearing of the cause, by the Participants own last Decree in
equity, of the 10. of Febr. 1650. which Decree gives way to the Freeholders to
go to a Trial at Law; and in pursuance thereof, they have had a Verdict by
special Order of the Court of Exchequer, in the name of one that was no Rioter;
and since that Verdict, the Freeholders have been in possession of all the
7400. acres (being their ancient inheritance, and they the true owners thereof)
now three years this Michaelmas-Term 1654.

It is therefore now humbly submitted, whether after the said Decree in equity,
and proceedings at Law, the miscarriage of a few in a pretended Riot shall
occasion a quiet possession of the Lands in question (of so long continuance,
and so recovered) to be given from the Freeholders to the Participants, who
never yet legally had it: Or that the Freeholders, who are willing to stand or
fall by their title, either in Law or equity, shall not be admitted in a just
and equitable way to improve the said grounds themselves for the best advantage
of the Commonwealth, having now testified their willingness thereunto, under
the major part of their hands, subscribed to a Petition ready to be presented
to your Honors for that purpose:

And now, Right Honorable, since Mr. Gibbon will not set forth his Title, or
indeed dare not let it appear, be pleased to take notice of what he tells all
abroad, and that is, that they have the late Kings Patent, and that 370. of the
people have consented to a Decree in the Exchequer.

The answer is soon given to them both: For as to the first, The late King
could not by Law improve (causa patet) The second is, first, as to the
consents, there is not one person that in a legal way consented: For by the
Statute of 43. Eliz. it ought to be under their hands and Seals indented for
the draining of such Lands as are hurtfully surrounded, not Lands of 15 s. and
20 s. an acre: for therein is the cheat, that under pretense of draining a
little moorish ground, they (the Projectors) ingross ten times more of the best
ground from the people, and all must go under the notion of draining: And
besides, near half of those that are named in the Decree, never had right of
common, and some are named two, three, and four times over, to swell up the
number; but admit that they all had had right, yet they were all forced and
constrained, and there are above 1100. Commoners, so as there are more then
twice as many that never consented at all, and diverse of the most considerable
in estate. Indeed Mr. Gibbon has been very busy to show the outside of that
Decree to every Committee; and it is true, the Parchment, and the Seal annexed,
are very fair to look upon, and strange things Mr. Gibbon labors to persuade
with the sight thereof: but to show the inside thereof, how it is but the award
of the Atrorney-General, that was in those times decreed, without ever hearing
the merits of the cause; or to show their own last Decree of the 10. of Feb.
1650. which shows how the first was obtained, of these things Mr. Gibbon will
never speak: but give him his due, he tells (and rings it all abroad) of great
and notorious Riots committed in the Isle of Axholm, and calls the Inhabitants
there Rioters, and notorious Rogues (though honester men then ever will stand
on his legs, if they were good ones) and many of their actions, that they have
really done for the Parliaments service (such is his impudence) he calls them
Riots, and no doubt but if it were in his power, would make all the Parliaments
battles Riots, witness his giving out, that the King of Scots should not want
for 300. men, he himself would furnish him with them, together with horse,
arms, and ammunition; and saying, If the Scotch Army prevailed, and got the
better of it, he would then take a course with the Isle-men, and put them to
fire and Sword; and witness the report of raising a Troop of Horse upon the
Level in aid of the Scotch King when he came against Worcester: are not these
things proved? Yes, and much more, but he may thank his good friends Mr.
William Say, and Mr. Henry Darley, who have drawn up a report (none but Mr.
Gibbon knowing a third man that was at the doing thereof) as partial, and with
as much advantage to him and his fellow-Participants, as possibly they could,
and that report, together with other reports that have been drawn up merely
about pretended Riots, without taking notice of any title or proceedings that
have been at Law, are now foreseen to be approaching your Honors consideration,
to fetch away the possession again, now recovered at Law, from the ancient true
owners, and give it to those that never yet legally had it: Now to remove a
possession in 4000. acres of thirteen years continuance with the Freeholders
(being their ancient inheritance) left unto them by the Participants own last
Decree of the 10. of Febr. 1650. and a possession of the whole 7400. acres, now
of three years continuance, after a Verdict at Law, in the name of one that is
no Rioter, surely this cannot but be thought strange, and therefore worthy
notice taking, how the design was first framed, and whether it is not much
savouring like those in former times (times of Tyranny) for then it was the
manner to make the People Rioters, even before they had ever lost the
possession, on purpose to weary and vex them, to bring them under fines, and to
base submissions, to give away their right; and it is humbly submitted, whether
this be not a plot of the same nature, upon perusal of the Participants last
refuge, in their Petition to the former of the late Parliaments, which
follows in these words, verbatim:

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The humble Petition of the Participants, in the draining of the Level of
Hatfield-Chase, in the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, on the behalf
of themselves and others.
Shows,
THat the Petitioners, and those under whom they claim, did about twenty years
since, at the expense of near two hundred thousand pound, drain and lay dry
sixty thousand acres of ground in the said Level, then drowned, and of small
value, and made the same worth 10s. 12s. and 16s. the acre: And as a recompense
for their said charge, hazard, and travel, in so public a work, the
proportion of about 24000 acres of the said Lands, whereof 7400. acres of the
wastes of the Manor of Epworth was part, was settled upon them by This is a
falsehood, for they have no assurances good in Law, neither durst they produce
any at the time of the examination.
good assurances in the Law, as will appear to your Honors upon the examination
thereof, and are too long here to insert; and according to the said assurances,
the Petitioners had quiet and peaceable possession of the Lands, and so enjoyed
the same for many years, and divided, improved, and planted the same; and in
particular, upon the 7400. acres of Epworth built a This Church is yet unpaid
for: Bedloe the man that built it, was undone by it.
Church, and about 160 Houses more like Dogkennels, then for men to live in.
habitations, and have constantly paid the Rent of 1228l. per annum, which was
then reserved upon the said whole proportion, and now payable to the State for
ever.

That in the year 1642. in time of the War, some of the Inhabitants of the
Manor of Epworth, by the instigation of one Daniel Noddel an Attorney at Law,
did rise in tumults, and laid wast about 4000. acres of the said 7400. acres,
demolished the buildings, and destroyed the crops of Corn and Rapeseed growing
thereupon; for redress whereof, and establishing their possession, the
Petitioners exhibited their This is another falsehood, for the Bill was not
exhibited till Trinity-Term, 1646. When the Freeholders had had possession
four years before, and had commenced their Suits at Law for the recovery of the
rest.
Bill in the Court of Exchequer, who granted several Injunctions, and made
several Orders to the Sheriffs for quieting the possession; but the tumults
growing too great to be suppressed by the ordinary Courts of Justice, the
Petitioners had recourse to the Parliament, They never had any Order of
Parliament, but out of the House of Lords, upon a supposed Riot, which being
heard at the Bar of the Lords House, the Parties complained against were
dismissed, and are now for that very thing complained of again.
who were pleased to make several Orders therein for relieving the Petitioners,
which likewise were contemned, and the Petitioners by force still kept out of
the said 4000. acres.

That the Rioters seeing them go unpunished for their former insolences and
rebellions against the Law and Government of this State; and having now got the
countenance of Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, and Major Wildman, did in October,
1650. whilst the cause was hearing in the Exchequer, rise in tumults, and
destroyed the Corn and Crops growing upon the residue, being about 3400. acres
of the said 7400 acres: whereof the Court being informed, granted a This Writ
gave no power to the Sheriff, but against such as were Parties to a Decree in
the Exchequer, in the twelfth year of the late King, which Mr. Gibbon dare not
produce: and those which then put down the banks, did it in a peaceable and
legal nay, and were no parties to that Decree.
Writ of Assistance to the Sheriff to quiet the possession; who comes upon the
place, and is there resisted, and in his presence the Fences thrown down.

In Hilary-Term 1650. the Court upon full hearing, This is also a falsehood, for
the Decree does leave 4000. acres of the 7400. with the Freeholders, for it
does but establish the possession as it was at the time of the Bills
exhibiting, which was but in 1646.
decree and establish the possession with the Petitioners, which Decree coming
to be published on the place (having now the influence of Mr. Lilburn) these
Rioters with high and reproachful language contemn it; and being advised to
give obedience, or else the Parliament must be acquainted with it, they
answered, That it was a traiterous Order, and that they would obey neither
Barons nor the Parliament, and that they could make as good a Parliament
themselves; and that if the Parliament sent Forces against them, they would
raise Forces and resist them, and then proceed to demolish the houses of the
Town of Santoft, with a And was not the Windmil, and all the houses worthy to
be removed (though not in that manner) when there was neither Law nor equity
they should stand? Alas poor Commoners! the fault (if any) was in this, that
after twenty years time you could have no trial; and Mr. Gibbon saying, you
should never have any so long as you were quick: I say, your fault (if any) was
in this, that you did it in so great a number.
Windmil, and deface the Church, all built by your Peti ioners, and their
tenants: Then your Petitioners applied themselves to the Council of State, who
were pleased to send an Order to the Sheriff of the County of Lincoln, on the
Petitioners behalf; but during these transactions, the Rioters in contempt of
Authority and Law, break the houses, fetch away the tenants Cattle, and impound
them, and would admit of no The Participants dare not try the cause, either by
Replevin, or otherwise.
Replevins, but forced them to redeem them at what rate they pleased, and
proceeded to demolish both houses and Barns, and all other buildings, and
destroy all the Corn there growing, and fetch away the materials of those
buildings by force, to the What damage can be done to those that have no title?
damage of the Petitioners and their Tenants, in the whole 40000 l. besides
the damage to the Commonwealth in general, by destruction of so many
habitations and Plows for tillage and husbandry.

The whole proportion of 7400. acres within this Manor, being thus laid
waste, the said Lilburn, Wildman, and Noddel, with diverse of the Rioters, ride
and view it, and then they make I refer this to the contradiction of the
Participants own Witness in the Depositions, and upon a fair examination, shall
produce many Witnesses, that there was no such agreement: And how Mr. Say, in
that point, wrested the testimony of some.
agreement with diverse of the most notorious Rioters, that for 2000. acres of
that Land to be given to Lilburn, where he would make Election, and 200. to
Noddel, they would defend them against all Fines and other troubles, concerning
the Riots before mentioned, and defend them against these Petitioners for the
other 5200. acres. And presently after this, they took the same 2200. acres
into their possession, worth at least 1600 l. per annum, and so made at the
charge of the Petitioners, and have contracted to let proportions, and have
entered upon one house, and re-edified the same, and keep the possession
thereof: And on the 19. of October last, being the Lords Day, Lilburn with a
great number armed came to the Church, and there Every man had free liberty
given to come and hear, as appears by the test money of their own Witnesses.
forced away the Minister and Congregation; saying, He should not Preach there,
unless they were stronger then he; and now makes it a place to lay his Hay, and
a Slaughterhouse to kill Cattle in; and during his abode in the Country,
practiced with the Inhabitants of other Manors to do the like, as Epworth had
done; saying, That Decrees were illegal: and to make the present Government
odious, speaks high, reproachful and seditious language against the Parliament
and present Government, as will appear upon examination.

The Petitioners most humbly beseech your Honors to take into your
consideration:
1. The great disobedience to the Parliament, and Courts of Justice, and
contempt of present Government. 2. The great damage to the Commonwealth in
general; and in particular to your Petitioners and their tenants, to the value
of at least 40000 l. 3. The consequence of such unparalled and rebellious
Riots; and to direct such a way for the Petitioners reparation, and damage,
and future preservation of this Level, as to your grave wisdom shall be
thought meet.
And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
This Petition being referred to a Committee at least of fifty of the late
Parliament (for it was the Committee in the business of Sir Arth. Haslerig and
Primate) to hear and report the whole matter when it came to examination: the
Freeholders offered to make out a good title, and some worthy Gentlemen of the
Committee gave way to it, but (Mr. Gibbon laboring to prevent the title)
others overvoted it in the Negative, and so M. Gibbon hath-with credit failed
to make good the words toward the beginning of his Petition, wherein he
tells the late Parliament, that the Lands are settled upon them by good
assurances in the Law, as will appear upon examination; and so has rendered his
Petition in that point no better then a cipher. But at the last, after three
quarters of a year, or thereabouts, attendance in London, of near thirty
Witnesses for the Freeholders, a Report was cunningly and privately drawn up
by Mr. William Say, and Mr. Henry Darley (none of the rest of the Committee
that was ever heard of, being privy) the former being a Lawyer, a Drainer, and
Mr. Gibbons usual Chapman for Land in those parts, and Chairman, and Penman of
the Depositions (for he would not suffer the Clerk chosen by the Committee to
pen them, such was his zeal to promote the Participants complaints) and the
other his great Coached and familiar friend. Now surely this report of theirs,
is worthy some examination: First, to know how they have reported the equitable
part of the Freeholders case (for that was heard.) And secondly, the pretended
Riot: And lastly, touching the concealing of Papers that were given into Mr.
Say, as Chairman, and the delusions thereby drawn upon those that should judge
in the case. Never could any have thought, that two men entrusted should deal
so treacherously, as almost to omit all the equitable part of the Freeholders
defense. As for example, whereas it is proved on the Freeholders part, as
follows.

Witnesses Names. 1. That the grounds which the Participants took from the
Freeholders, was most of it before the pretended draining worth 20 s. and 15
s. an acre yearly, and 10 s. an acre one with another throughout, and
concerning the nature and goodness of the ground. Thomas Far, the elder. Tho.
Tailor, Tho. Philips, Tho. Tod, John Brown, John Tompson, li. C. Rob. Dyneley,
Esquire John Clark, Isaac Chapman, John Jervise, Tho. Far, jun. li. C. 2. That the
Freeholders cannot keep half the Cattle Levant and Couchant upon their several
tenements, as they could before the pretended draining, but are forced to turn
their Meadow ground into pasture, and to joyst their Catrel out in foreign
places. Tho. Far, Sen. Tho. Far, Jun. li. C. Tho. Todd, li. C. 3. That diverse
Freeholders sold their estates in the Isle, and went and lived elsewhere in
foreign places, merely because of oppression drawn upon them by the
Participants; and diverse were begger^d and undone. John Plompton, Gent. li. C.
Tho. Far, Tho. Todd. 4. That the very best ground was taken from the
Commoners, one acre of that which the Participants took, being worth three of
that which was left to the Inhabitants. Isaac Chapman, Tho. Tailor, Tho. Far,
John Tompson, li. C. 5. That the Participants by plowing and burning the
ground, have taken away the very heart thereof. 6. That the Undertakers at
their first coming into those parts, did but desire to cut through the Manor
of Epworth; and that without cutting through the Manor of Epworth, they could
not draine Hatfield-Chase. Tho. Tailor, Tho. Todd, Tho. Far. 7. That the
Manor of Epworth is in length five or six miles, having Hatfield-Chase, and
diverse other Mannours lying on the West, and the River of Trent, running all
along toward Humber on the East, into which the Waters descend from
Hatfield-Chase through the Manor of Epworth. Tho. Tailor, Tho. Todd, Tho.
Far. 8. That the South part within the Manor of Epworth, is still as subject
to be surrounded with waters, as before. Tho, Tailor, Tho. Todd. 9. That the
Participants have been at no more charge within the Manor of Epworth, then in
cutting a four miles draine in length, and scouring an old drain. Tho. Tailor,
Tho. Todd. 10. That diverse of the Commoners were murdered and shot to death,
when the Drainers first gained possession; and the Inhabitants, were many of
them, constrained to fly from their houses, and to lie in the Fields under
hedges, being terrified, and frequently affrighted by Pursuivants and Sergeants
at Arms: and how Freeholders Cattle have of late been shot to death. William
Wells, Tim. Ellis, John Francis, John Tompson. 11. That it has been M. Gibbons
usual saying, That the Freeholders should never have Trial at Law so long as
they are quick. John Plompton, Gent. Richard Glue, upon his cross examination.
12. That in former times the course of Justice was obstructed by an Order of
the Exchequer, prohibiting Replevins to be granted to the Freeholders; and how
in those times the Participants bribed the Freeholders Solicitor. Roger
Walker, Gent. li. C. Exchequer Order.

All those twelve Heads (and many more) whereof Nine concern the equitable part
of the Freeholders defense, has Mr. Say not at all reported: which being
compared with all that he has Reported, will show which way he set his bias.
Now to set down his own words in the report verbatim, consisting but in ten
lines, which is all he affords the Freeholders, for almost thirty witnesses,
half a year here in London.

1. The Inhabitants (says he) in their defense say, That the Lands before the
draining fed Cattle fat for the Butcher; but the Witnesses being cross
interrogated, say, that it was overflown with water in Summer before the
draining, and that in May, June, and July, and all the Summer long they took
Fish there in several places, unless in a very dry Summer.

2. They also say, that Snow Sewer was pulled up to defend the Isle from the
coming of Sir Ralph Hansby, then of the Kings Party.

3. They also say, That the Sass was pulled up by the command of one whom they
knew not; but he told the Inhabitants, he was a Captain of Sir John Meldrums.

Those three Heads are all that Mr. Say has reported. Now the Freeholders
humbly beseech your Honors to note but how he has darkened and imprisoned the
truth in all those three Heads.

As to the first, It plainly appears by those nine Heads before mentioned, to
be by him omitted in his report.

And as to the second and third, was it not plainly proved, that the
inhabitants of the Isle rose in Arms for the Parliament, raised two
Foot-Companies, and maintained them at their own charge for them; and that what
was done as to the Sewer and Sass, was clearly for the Parliaments service, and
by command? And was it not offered to be proved by the Freeholders, (but
denied by Mr. Say) that the Participants raised upon this Level a Troop of
Horse for the late King, against the Parliament, and how they hazarded the life
of the late-brave General, now Lord Fairfax, being upon his return through that
Level in his sad condition from Adderton-Moor, by taking up the Bridges, and
preventing his passage in those parts?

Now as touching matter of Riot, if it be put to the question between God and
the Conscience, who have been the grand Rioters in the Isle of Axholm, that is,
Whether the Participants, that came in against Law, when diverse of the
Commoners were murdered and shot to death, and many wounded, who did but turn
again (as worms trod upon will do) in the just defense of their undoubted Right
of possession, which was wrested from them by Councel-Table, and
Starchamber-Orders, their persons many of them imprisoned, and many enforced by
Pursuivants and Sergeants at Arms to lie from their habitations in the fields
under hedges, having their houses broken to be apprehended, being usually
termed Rebels, and threatened to be hanged at their doors; and plagued with
multitudes of Starchamber-Proces, some forced to flee out of the Kingdom at
that time, having their goods illegally distrained and sold, for Issues
estreated our of the then-Kings Bench; others, to sell and mortgage their
Lands, to purchase an unjust peace, against the villainous, tyrannical, and
forcible entries, and intrusions, arrests, and imprisonments, brought upon them
by the said Participants, contrary to Law. And their possession thus forced
from them, was as unjustly detained for diverse years. Whether therefore now the
Participants or the Inhabitants be the Rioters, who all along have desired
Trials at Law, but could not have them; nay, Gibbon himself several times
saying, (as is proved) they should never have any so long as they were quick.
Certainly, let but Self-interest be laid aside, and Conscience must needs
conclude the Participants to be the Rioters, and the cause both of former and
late disturbances. And Mr. Gibbon and his first fellow-Participants in these
parts, or whosoever they were that had their hands in these horrid things, are
well they have hitherto escaped the Rope, for committing such unparalled
actions against the Law.

All which notwithstanding, be pleased to see the impudence of him, how under
the notion of Riots he condemns the Parliaments service, and seeks to gain
damages to himself, even as for Riots, though things done for the Parliaments
service. And his good old chapman and friend, Mr. Say, in the drawing up his
Report, has helped him all he can. To instance one particular: let his Report
it self, about the middle thereof, show his partial dealing, where he says
touching the possession, That upon full hearing of the Cause, the possession
was established with the Participants: whereas it is but established as it was
at the time of the Bill. Wherein he tells the truth, but not the whole truth,
as appears by the very Decree it self, of Feb. 10. 1650. which also gives way
to the Freeholders to go to Trial at Law; and they accordingly had a Verdict,
and both were returned in to Mr. Say as Chairman; but he, in stead of sending
them in to the Council, lets them lie in the Clerk's hands, and by delusion
has caused others (honorable persons) to approve of his Report, and to
certify their opinions against the Freeholders possession, answerable to the
Participants design, which is, to reach the possession in the grounds in
question, and fetch away the same by your Honors extraordinary power, upon the
score of a pretended Force committed by the people, and to make null, or at
least drown all mention of the proceedings that have been at Law, and take away
the benefit of the Freeholders Verdict, under pretense it was but a Verdict by
default: whereas indeed, the Participants can never make any good Defense, and
therefore seek holes and corners, and cover their naked Title with excuses no
better then fig leaves: For, was it not a Verdict at the Bar? nay, at the
Exchequer-Bar too? and by special Order of that Court, after a tedious Suit in
Equity upon the Participants own Bill fully heard? And were not their Counsel
at Law all present? But if this be not answer sufficient, it is offered to be
tried again and again.

Now what is it that these Participants would have? If it be but as they at
first desired, to cut through the Freeholders grounds to drain Hatfield-Chase,
the Freeholders are not against it; for they desire to do the Drainage no hurt,
(nor ever did:) but to yield the Participants an Inch, and they to take an Ell,
this the Freeholders deny: for they, under your Honors favor, will cut out
their own Cloth themselves, and improve the grounds both for the good of the
Commonwealth and themselves.

And for any charge that the Participants have been at within the Manor of
Epworth, although it might be answer sufficient, that they did it for their own
ends; yet, upon a just Account, the Freeholders will allow them for every penny,
twopence, out of the profits which the Participants have received and taken:
and when that is done, they must needs be still great debtors to the
Freeholders. For as to the great charge that the Participants pretend they
have been at in the whole Drainage, let them take it again upon the whole
Drainage, where they laid it forth: for they prove no particular charge they
have been at that way within Epworth, And as to Damages, what damages ought to
be given to those that have no Title, nor have made any Improvement in the
grounds? and if no Improvement, this turns the scale of recompense to be given
to the Inhabitants, for all the time they were illegally outed of the
possession. And if it be true, (as is affirmed) that the Participants did raise
a Troop of Horse, and fought for the late King against the Parliament, and so
were the original cause of the Sluice and Sass taking up, mentioned in Mr. Says
Report, whereby they pretend a great deal of damage done to them by the
Inhabitants, who raised two Foot-Companies for the Parliament, and for their
defense, and the Parliaments service, and by their authority, took up the
Sluice, and drowned their own Corn as well as the Participants. And if it be
also true, that the Sass was taken up, upon a design which Sir John Meldrum
had against the late King's party; then certainly it is as clear, that the
Participants and their tenants ought to have no damages allowed for those
things, till Mr. Gibbon, according to his saying, with his 300 men and horse
armed in assistance of the Scotch King, come to put the Isle of Axholm to fire
and sword.

By this which has been said, it may appear, that the Manor of Epworth
differs much in the Title from other draynings, which no doubt in some places
are lawful and laudable, as being created by Law of Sewers, which this of
Epworth never was; or by lawful and warrantable ways, according to the Statures
of Improvement; which this never was: for neither had the Lord a power to
improve, neither was there any legal consent of any of the Freeholders to make
it good.

And now if Mr. Gibbon, according to his usual manner, cry out of Scandal or
Riot, (for he is excellent at it) thereby to blemish or undermine the Truth,
the Records that have been cited are extant, (if Mr. Say have yet returned them
in) whereby it may appear whether these things be so.

The nature also of the Grounds in controversy within this Manor, differs
much from those in many other places, most of it being a clay and sand, and not
so much Moory and Marish as elsewhere in other places.

Now these things being so, the Freeholders pray and hope, that your Honors
will not interpose with your extraordinary power, to remove a possession of
their ancient Inheritance, or any part thereof, thus by Law recovered,
continued, and settled, without due course of Law; whereunto they shall humbly
submit, and therein willingly acquiesce.

The Lord direct your Honors to hold forth the Law to them; for there is
nothing in this Case, that is not determinable at Law. So shall the hearts of
many thousand men, women, and children, in the Isle of Axholm, have occasion to
bless God for his deliverance, when they see that through your means the Law of
the Land is become their protection in their estates, against usurpers and
wrongdoers.

Signed by me Daniel Noddel, Solicitor for the Freeholders.

25 Edw. 3. Chap. 4.
Amongst other things, it is thus enacted, Viz.

Item, 10 Edw. 4. fol. 6. Dyer fol. ^04. Cook l. 5. fol. 6. l. 10. fol. 74.
Cook l. 11. fol. 99
Whereas it is contained in the great Charter of the Franchises of England,
That none shall be imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold, nor of his
Franchises nor free Customs, unless it be by the Law of the Land: It is
accorded, assented, established, that from henceforth none shall be taken by
petition or suggestion to our Lord the King or his Council, unless it be by
Indictment or presentment of his good and lawful people of the same
Neigbourhood where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by Writ
original at the Common Law; nor that none be out of his Franchise or Freehold,
unless he be brought in answer, and forejudged of the same by the course of
Law. And if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed, and
holden for none.

Stat.
5 Edw. 3. cap. 9. 28 Edw. 3. cap. 3. 7 Hen. 3 cap. 9.


Diverse precedents may be produced in former Parliaments, showing that no
matter for which there is relief in the Courts of Justice, ought to be
complained of in Parliament.

PROVE. 23. Verse. 10. Remove not the old landmark, and enter not into the fields
of the fatherless.

Verse. 11. For their Redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.


FINIS.

