AN EMBASSY Sent by the EAST INDIA Company of the UNITED PROVINCES to the GRAND
TARTAR CHAM or EMPEROVR of CHINA.

Delivered at Pekin by Peter de Goyer and Jacob de Keyzer Ao 1655.

W. Heller fecit. 1655.



AN EMBASSY FROM THE East India Company OF THE UNITED PROVINCES, TO THE Grand
Tartar Cham EMPEROR OF CHINA, Delivered by Their Excellencies PETER de GOYER
and JACOB de KEYZER, At His Imperial City of PEKING WHEREIN The Cities, Towns,
Villages, Ports, Rivers, etc. In their Passages from CANTON to PEKING, Are
Ingeniously Described, By Mr JOHN NIEVHOFF, Steward to the AMBASSADORS.

ALSO An Epistle of Father JOHN ADAMS their Antagonist, Concerning the Whole
Negotiation.

With an APPENDIX of several REMARKS taken out of Father ATHANASIUS KIRCHER.

Englished, and set forth with their several Sculptures, By JOHN OGILBY Esquire His
MAJESTY'S Cosmographer, Geographick Printer, and Master of the Revels in the
KINGDOM of IRELAND.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by the Author at his House in White-Friers. M.DC.LXXIII.

A Description of CHINA Taken by the Author M. John Neuhoff in his Iourneys
with the Batavian Ambassadors, from Canton to the Emperors Court at Peking.
map of China

AN Exact Relation OF THE EMBASSY SENT BY THE East India Company OF THE UNITED
PROVINCES TO THE GRAND TARTAR CHAM, OR Emperor of China, Delivered at PEKING
the Imperial City, etc.
THE Lacedaemonians were a People, The severe Laws of the Lacedaemonians.
who by their Laws and Customs were strictly prohibited from Traveling out of
their own Country, lest so degenerating in Manners, (as they supposed) they
might fall into a more loose and irregular course of Life, and by the
acquaintance of the various Modes of several foreign Nations, slight the
strictness of their own severer Establishments.

Neither would they permit that any Strangers should reside amongst them, lest
they by Conversation should be imbued with their Novelties and Opinions. Which
more to strengthen, What Citizen soever that did not Educate his Children
according to their own settled Laws, was immediately pronounced incapable of the
Privileges belonging to his Country. So great a love had this Nation to their
native Soil, and such the aversion engraffed in them from their very Cradles to
foreign Parts, that a Youth only once asking the Way to Pilea, by order of the
Magistracy suffered condign Punishment presently upon the Spot.

But these severer ways and starched Formalities were, both by the other Greeks
and the Romans, utterly exploded, who knowing better things, readily indulged
License to Travel where they might best improve their Wealth, Literature, or
Observation. And also we find by their most ancient and accurate Writers, that
they neither spared Cost, Study, nor Pains, to be replenished with remote and
transmarine Imbellishments, both of Arts, Science, and Industry.

When the Emperor Trajan, after the Parthian War, busied himself in a
Philosophical Inquisition concerning the Wonders of the Deep, and occult Nature
of the Ocean, a sudden Storm happening, hurried him from Coasting far into the
Offin, where he beheld a Fleet standing in for India; whereof being informed,
he fetching a deep Sigh, said, Ah that I were young again, and could resume my
former vigor, then would I visit those distant Regions, and penetrate the
Avenues of the Oriental World.

King Mithridates, who after a long Contest with the Romans, having resetled
himself in his Throne, resolved not only upon the well managing of the Affairs
at home, but the enlarging his Dominions abroad; whereupon he made himself
Master (of which not any Prince had done before) of the neighboring Scythians,
who had never till then been absolutely subdued. This great Work finished, and
so mighty a Nation brought under, he diverted himself to Travel, not only to
make a superficial view of Cities and Situations, Vulgarities and various
Humors adherent to several Nations, but also of their Scolastick Knowledge, and
Politic Governments: on which account he passed through all Pontus,
Cappadocia, and most Parts of Asia.

Tacitus, the famous Roman Historian, enumerating the many Virtues of
Germanicus, says, That he, greedy of Knowledge, especially of foreign
Transactions, made his Tour through Greece, Thrace, Asia, and Armenia: but thus
much not satisfying the Curiosity of this Prince, he Voyaged into Egypt, under
pretense of settling the Government of that Kingdom, but rather of having a
visual Speculation of the Antiquities reported to be there.

Democritus no less sollicitous of making search beyond his own Home, after the
Death of his Father Damasippus, parted with a no unplentiful Patrimony for a
scarce considerable Sum, to furnish out the Expenses of his outwardbound
Travels in quest of Science; he first addressed himself to the Egyptian
Priests, next the Chaldaeans, after to the Gymnosophists in India, from whose
Magazines, and the then Fountains of Learning, he returned rich, being
Freighted with a full Cargo both of Divine and Moral Principles.

Let Plato, Prince of Philosophers, stand for all, who in like manner
penetrated the Bowels of Egypt, and other more distant Countries, returning as
plentifully furnished with their several Observations an Acquirements.

Inclinations no less vigorous have of late been observed in Europe, but with
more success; who not being bounded by Herculean Bars, passed so far through
the (till then) unmeasured Atlantic, that they lighted upon a new World, a
flourishing Hesperides, Regions whose Sands were Gold, Earth Plate, and Rivers
Silver, a Paradise extended to the Arctick and Antarctick Circles, with several
other Countries and Islands, that reach almost the utmost latitude of either
Poles, out-shining all the Fables of Antiquity, and boldest Tales of their
Poetic Dreams; so that the Ancients are not to stand in competition with our
modern Discoverers, who found out in less than one Century, more than they in
their many thousand years.

Whilst I contemplated the laudable Actions and great Enterprises of famous
Navigators, I conceived my self obliged to put in my Mite, and not to conceal
some special Remarks, being taken by me with no small Care and Pains, in a
Country as little known to Europe as any.

After my Return from the West Indies, where I had sometime remained, my
Occasions invited me from Home (a contrary Course) to the East Indies; where,
not long after my arrival at Batavia, it was ordered by the General Maatzuyker,
and the Honorable Council then residing there, to send Peter de Goyer, and
Jacob Keysar as Ambassadors, with Credentials, and a considerable Train of
Attendants, to Peking in China, to the Grand Cham of Tartary, the now Emperor
of China, impowering to Negotiate concerning a free and mutual Commerce with
them in his Kingdoms and Territories.

Whereupon receiving also Commands to attend this Embassy, I had thrown into my
hands (as I conceived) fit opportunity to make a more exact Discovery of the
Genius and Manners of the People, and Customs of the Place, and Countries
supposed by all Geographers to be the richest in the World, and where any
Stranger formerly durst never attempt. And herein (without breach of Modesty) I
dare boldly affirm, that nothing considerable slipped my observation relating to
my Design, and that in taking accurate Maps and Sketches, not only of the
Countries and Towns, but also of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Plants, and other
Rarities never divulged (as I am informed) heretofore.

But now to remove some Obstructions, and to clear the way, that Posterity may
not be bereaved of the Fruit of these my Endeavors, I find my self highly
necessitated to relate what passed in this Undertaking, with as much candor
and brevity as the Work may possibly require.

But before I engage my self, it seems also not amiss to set forth briefly the
Division of the universal Globe, and likewise the Etymology or Derivation of
the word China, the Condition of the Soil, and the Extent thereof, and lastly
the ten Provinces of the fifteen into which that County divides it self, and
the Towns and Cities through which we did not pass.

The Terraqueous Globe comprehending Sea and Land, The Division of the Globe.
Rivers and Lakes, stands divided by modern Geographers into two Semi-Orbs,
viz. the Old and New World: The Old contains Europe, Asia, and Africa; the New,
America, not much less in Extent to all those vast Regions discovered before;
named so from Americus Vesputius a Florentine, but indeed first found out by
Christopher Columbus a Genoese, furnished out for so great an Expedition by
Ferdinand and Isabel King and Queen of Castile and Aragon, in the Year 1492.
But five years after Americus Voyaging, made his Approaches higher into those
unknown Confines, and so got by a lucky Hit, or something in his Name, the
Honor of Denomination of the Moiety of the World from the prime Discoverer, to
whom so great a Glory belonged: since vulgarly called The West Indies, not
improperly, the East being by Sea found by us about the same time.

Under our new World may also be comprised those vast Southern Coasts and
Straights of Magellan, first lighted on by Ferdinandus Magellanus in the Year
1520. in his Circumnavigation of the Universe; which forty five years after Sir
Francis Drake, and next Sir Thomas Bendish, Englishmen, made a farther
Inspection into; and in the Year 1600. Oliver van Noord a Hollander passed; but
of later years a Spaniard, Ferdinand de Quier, out-shot them all by a more
ample Discovery than all the former.

Asia (not to make mention of any other Divisions of the World, Asia divided.
being impertinent to the following Discourse) stands bounded on the North by
the Tartarick Sea, on the East with the great Indian Ocean called Eous, and on
the South with the same; on the West with the Arabian Gulf, and the Slip of
Land situated betwixt this Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea; the Extent of which
from the Hellespont as far as Mallassa, the utmost Town of Traffic in India,
consists of 1300 Dutch Miles; the breadth from the Arabian Gulf to the Cape of
Tabin 1220 Dutch Miles.

All Asia, which the Ancients divide into Asia the Great, and Asia the Less,
modern Computors part into five Divisions; Persia, the Turkish Empire, India,
(to which they cast in the adjacent Isles) Tartary, and China.

What concerns the Name of China, The Name of China.
or the farther part of Asia, much Time and Pains have been spent and taken by
several Historians both old and new, as also by the Natives of the Country and
Foreiners, to give the true Derivation thereof, and the several Names by which
China has been formerly called, to whom I shall refer my self to satisfy the
curiosity of the Reader in this particular.

That these are the People whom Ptolemy calls Chinese, both the Constitution
of the Country, and the Name by which it is known at this time, may suffice to
prove the truth thereof: for that which in Spanish is writ China, in Italian is
called Cina, in High Dutch Tschina, and in Low, Dutch and Latin, Sina. The
difference in the pronunciation of the word China and Sina betwixt us and the
Spaniards is not much; but in regard it falls somewhat hard to those People to
pronounce the Ch, they therefore make use of the Greek Letter chapter The Tartars
call this Kingdom Catay, and sometimes Mangin; but this Name rather denotes the
Inhabitants themselves then the Country: for Mangin signifies in their
Language a wild and unciviliz'd People; and with this word the Tartars often
deride the Chinese. This Country was likewise formerly called Catay by Marcus
Panwelz a Venetian, who was the first Discoverer thereof in part. But the most
known Name by which that Kingdom is called at present by those of Europe, is
China. The reason why that Kingdom has been called by so many several Names,
may be supposed to be this, from an ancient Custom observed amongst them, That
whosoever gets the Sovereignty over them, Presents the Kingdom with a new Name
according to his pleasure. Amongst the rest we read, that formerly this farther
part of Asia, or China, was called Thau, You, Tha, Sciam, Cheu, as also Han,
Thau, which signifies Boundless broad; You, Rest; Tha, Great; Sciam, Curious;
Cheu, Perfect; Han, The Milky-Way.

Long before the Conquest of China by the Tartars in their last Invasion, and
the Deposing of the Emperor of China, (viz. when the Sovereignty of the Kingdom
was in the Family of Ciu) China was called by the Chinese, Min, which
signifies Perspicuity or Brightness. Afterward they added to the word Min the
syllable Ta, and called it then Tamin, or (as some write) Taming, which
signifies The Kingdom of great Brightness. For above 300 years this Kingdom
bore the Name of Tai^jven, and at this time is called by the Tartars, who
possess the Kingdom under the Great Cham, Taicing.

But though this Kingdom of China does often change its Lord and Name, the
Chinese however have Time out of mind called it by two other particular Names,
as Chungchoa, and Chungque; the first whereof signifies The Middle Kingdom, and
the other The Middle Garden. The reason why the Chinese gave their Kingdom
these Names, may be supposed to be this; in regard that formerly they did
verily believe that the Heaven was round, the Earth apiece, and in the
middle Point thereof lay their Kingdom. Wherefore when they first saw the Maps
of Europe, they took it very ill that their Kingdom was not placed in the
middle, but in the farther part of the East. And therefore when Matthias
Riccius a Jesuit, had in China made a Map of the whole World, he so ordered his
Adulation, that the Kingdom of China fell to be in the middle. But most of the
Chinese do now acknowledge this their great Error, and blush, convinced of so
much Ignorance. And though the Chinese themselves have thus called their
Kingdom by several Names (according as the Family which Governed over them
happened to change) yet their Neighbors that live upon the Confines take no
notice of their Alterations, neither follow the Chinese therein; for those of
Couchenchina and Siam, call this Kingdom Cin; the Islanders of Iapan, Than; the
Tartars, Han; and the Turks, Saraceners; and other Western People, Cataium.

Some conceive that this Name is originally from Sioni, China, whence so named.
in respect Sina in their Language signifies A most brave and famous Country.
Others opposing, will have this Kingdom to derive its Name from the Inhabitants
of the City Chincheu, because these People drive only a constant Trade by Sea
to most Places of Asia; so that the Portugueses and Indians, by leaving out the
same Letters of the word Chincheu, might easily give it the Name of China.

But those are in a very great Error, that will have the word China to be
derived from a certain word Cinch, which by the Chinese is very much used. The
falseness of this Assertion will clearly appear from hence, in that the
Chinese, who Trade with the Indians or Portugueses to those Places, and go
with their Ships to India, used on the score of Civility and kind Respect, to
Greet each other in their Mothers Tongue, not with the Name of Cinch, but Sia.

Now that which appears to me to be a most probable Truth amongst the various
Opinions of Writers, is that which the Jesuit Martinus Martinii (a Man of great
Learning and Skill in the Antiquities of China) has asserted in the sixth Book
of his History of China; the words whereof are as follow:

I shall not (says he) let this pass unmention'd, which seems to me most
likely, That not only by the Indians, but also by Strangers, the Name China
took rise and original from the Generation, Family, or Branch of Cina, who
Governed in China in the 246. Year before the Birth of Christ: So that we ought
not to call it China, but rather The Kingdom of Sinen or Cinen: for in the time
of those Kings which proceeded from this Branch, the Name of Siners was first
made known by Strangers, and especially by the Indians. By the Indians the Name
of China afterward came into use, and was followed by the Portugueses after
the Conquest of India: for this Family of Cina Governed over the greatest part
of the Siners, who lived toward the West, and continually had Wars with
Foreiners: When afterward the Court or Seat of the Kingdom was Planted there,
received the Name of The Kingdom of China. This Family of Cina being risen to
the highest pitch of all Prosperity, proved after a great Invader of others
Territories; insomuch that it seems no wonder that Strangers and remote Nations
had the Name of Cina so frequent among them. And though the Sineses call this
farther part of Asia or Cina by several Names, according to the Governing
Families that happen to change, yet however Foreiners do reserve the first Name
which they heard. And this is my Opinion concerning the Original of the Name
Sina; and according to this Assertion, the first Letter of the word ought to be
writ, not with an S but with a C.

All China was formerly divided by the Chinese Emperor Xunus into 12 Provinces;
The Division of China.
afterward the Emperor Yva, who took upon him the Government after the Death
of Xinus, about 260 years before the Incarnation of our Savior, reduced all
China into nine Provinces, which only at that time comprehended the Northern
Parts of China, and had for their Confines the River Kiang. But after that they
had Conquered the Southern Parts by degrees, and somewhat Civilized the
Inhabitants, the whole Kingdom of China was divided into 15 Provinces: Amongst
these also they reckon the Province of Leaotung, which is situated on the West
of Peking, where the great Wall begins, and the Hanging-Island of Corea; both
which pay Tribute to the Emperor. There are several other Islands beside, which
pay also Tribute: amongst which the Island Haman is the chiefest, lying in the
Sea over against the Province of Quangsi, Among the Islands which are Tributary
to this Kingdom, is also accounted the Island Formosa, which the Chinese call
Lieukieu, and situated over against the Province of Foken; and also the Island
Cheuxan, over against the Province of Chekiang, a very famous Place for
Trading. But of this more at large hereafter.

Six of the 15 Provinces verge upon the Sea, as Peking, Xantung, Kiangnan or
Nanking, Cheaiang, Foking, and Quantung. From hence toward the North lie the
Midland Countries, as Quangsi, Kiangsi, Huquang, Honan, and Xansi; and toward
the West the other four, Xensi, Sucheu, Queicheu, and Iunnan.

Lastly, this Empire which comprehends 15 Kingdoms, is also divided into the
South and North-China: South-China the Tartars call The Kingdom of Mangin, and
North-China, The Kingdom of Catay. In the first are nine Kingdoms, and in the
last six, or eight, if you will reckon amongst them the Kingdom of Leaotung,
and the Hanging-Island of Corea.

By what has been already said, it does clearly appear how far those are
mistaken, who write of another Empire beyond China, which they call Catay; as
likewise of several Towns, as Quinsey, Cambalu, and many other Fictions;
whereas in truth, beyond the great Wall no other People live but Tartars, who
have no fixed Abodes, but wander up and down the Countries in Wagons, and so
travel from Place to Place, as may be found at large in the Writings of those
who have sufficiently confuted this great Error and Mistake, as Virgantius, and
Martinus Martinii, in his Atlas of China. Amongst the rest, the Jesuits have
likewise found by experience, that beyond the Empire of China no Monarchy of
Catay is to be found; insomuch that the same People whom we call Chinese, are
by the Persians called Cataians. This same Mistake has been likewise
sufficiently and Learnedly confuted with undeniable Arguments, by the most
Learned Jacob Gool, a Person of extraordinary Knowledge in all Arts of
Literature, and especially in the Oriental Languages, and at present Arabic
Professor in the University of Leyden in his Appendix to the Atlas of China.

The Kingdom of China is so enclosed with several Islands, and on the East and
South with Seas, that it seems almost to be apiece, only two great
Mountains thrust themselves out toward the Sea, which in the Chinese Language
are called Tung. The one lies by the Town of Ningpo, from whence you may Sail
in 40 hours to the Island of Iapan: the other great Hill is in the Province of
Xantung, near to the Town of Tengoheu.

China, situated in the farthest part of Asia, The Situation
borders toward the East, South, and West, upon the great Indian Sea, and is
called Tung by the Chinese, which signifies Easterly. And on the North it is
separated from the Kingdoms of Ninche and Nicolhan, by that Famous Wall which
was made by those of China against the Invasion of the Tartars. Higher up
toward the North it has for Frontiers the Kingdom of Taniju, and a Wilderness
called Samo, which separates the North side of this China from the Kingdoms of
Samahan and Cascar. Upon the other Provinces situated toward the South, join
the Kingdoms of Prester-Iohn, Geo, (which by the Chinese are called by one
common Name Sifan) as also Tibet, Laos, and Mien. Likewise China reaches as far
as Brangale, and to some part of Tartary, and the Mountains of Damascus, which
separates it from Tartary and India.

The furthest Extent of China (taken in the breadth) begins in the South upon
the Island Hainan, The Extent.
which lies in 18 Degrees Northern Latitude: from thence it reaches toward the
North to 42 Degrees; insomuch that China in the breadth extends to 22 Degrees,
990 English Miles.
that is, 330 Dutch Leagues. Its length begins in the Province of Iuunan, at
120 Degrees, and ends in the East at the Mountain of the Town Ningpo, called by
the Portugueses, Nampo, at 132 Degrees: 1350 English Miles.
So that this Part consists of 450 Leagues in Longitude.

China is not a little secure in regard of the adjacent Kingdoms, and the
natural and strong Forts whereby this Kings Realm stands so entirely protected
against all violence from without, that the like is hardly to be seen
elsewhere; neither are there any Avenues found leading to this Monarchy,
insomuch that it is so well provided and guarded, that it seems to be a World
within it self, and separated from all the rest, as well toward the South as
East; and where the Sea borders, it has so many Islands, Banks, Flats, and
blind Rocks, that it is altogether unsafe to approach China on the side with
any great Ships of Men of War. On the West, and somewhat toward the South, lie
the Woods and Hills of Tamessus, which are so thick and high, that it is
altogether unpenetrable on that side, and which separate China from the next
bordering Asia, and the lesser neighboring Kingdoms; all which adds to the
Defense and Protection of this Empire. Toward the North and West it is also
sufficiently secured against all Invasions by the Sandy and dry Flats of Samo,
which endanger all Vessels that attempt any Landing in those Parts. Lastly,
this Kingdom has toward the North a great Wall, which the Family and Branch of
Cina built against the Invasion of the Tartars 215 Years before the Birth of
Christ; but in what condition this Wall is at present, and how far it extends,
we shall treat at large in the Description of the Province of Peking.

In respect the Sovereignty over the fifteen Kingdoms of this China belongs at
present to a Monarch, the Great Cham of Tartary, I shall give you an Account of
the number of all the great and little Cities situated in all these Dominions.

First of all, they sum up in this whole Empire 145 Capital Cities, which
outshine the rest both in Greatness and Glory. Under the Command of this
Emperor are 1331 small Cities, amongst which 148 may be compared, in
Magnificence, Beauty, and People, with the chief Cities. Beside these, there
are 32 great Cities more, which are not subject to any other, yet they must not
bear the Name of Capital, though they Command over 36 small Cities. Beside all
these, there are 3 Cities more, for the Officers and Commanders of the Militia
to dwell in. The Forts and Castles are 159. beside which 17 great Garrison
Cities, and 66 small Garrison Towns, which are never without full Companies, and
of Soldiers, who are permitted to inhabit promiscuously amongst the Burgers.

There is no distinguishing by the greatness and largeness of the Cities, the
one from the other; for some of the small ones exceed some others of the great
and prime Cities, both in Largeness, Wealth, and People: but according to the
Worth and Dignity of the Governors, and the Privileges of the Place, she bears
the Precedence, and is reckoned amongst the chief Cities. No Place must presume
to take up the Name of a City, but what is Walled in; for every inferior Town
or Situation subjects to the next adjacent Capital City. Most of the Cities in
China are built after one fashion and form, commonly apiece, with broad
and high Walls, adorned with quadruple Towers, placed at an equal distance;
round about which runs a deep Moat, and that also is surrounded with a Mud or
Earthen Wall. Each City has a double Gate, and two double Doors, whereof the
first stands directly over against the second, that there is no seeing through
the last, though you stand in the first: Betwixt these two Gates opens most
commonly a large Court, where they Discipline their Militia: Upon the Gates are
likewise built great Watch-Towers, where the Soldiers keep Night-Sentinel. Most
of the Cities have great Suburbs belonging to them, which are as full of People
as within the Wall. Without the Battlements each Metropolis has a delightful
Plain, curiously adorned with Towers, Trees, and other Embellishments, most
pleasant to the Eye. The Country every where swarms with People, so that
wheresoever you Travel, you shall meet continually with Crowds of Men, Women,
and Children.

As now these 15 Kingdoms seem not only to exceed all other Parts of the
World, for the number of most rare Edifices and rich Cities, so they are
likewise no less abounding in People: for the most populous Country of all
Europe stands not in competition with this.

Those that will take the pains to look into the Chinese Pole or
Register-Books, wherein is exactly set down the number of the People of each
Province (except those of the Royal Family) will find that it amounts to the
number of 58 Millions, 9 hundred and 40 thousand, 2 hundred and 84 Persons:
Neither need you wonder which way this can be made out; for every Master of a
Family is obliged upon a great Penalty to hang out a little Board over his
Door, upon which he must set down the number of his Household, and their
Condition, etc. And to prevent all Fraud, one is appointed over every tenth
House, whom they call Titang, which signifies the Tenth-man, or Tyther: His
Office consists in taking an Account of the number of the Persons upon the
Board; and if the Master of the Family fail to make that known truly, he is to
acquaint the Governor of the City with the Abuse.

Having spoken thus much of the Situation, Division, and Extent of China; I
shall add in short what these fifteen Provinces pay annually in Taxes one with
another; as also how many Capital, great, little, and Garrison Cities are in
each of the Ten; and lastly, what each Province, Division, or Shire, disburseth
yearly in Taxes to the Emperor of China.

No Man possesses a Foot of Land in all this Empire, without paying to the
Emperor something out of it; so that we need not wonder, that over and above
the common Expenses which are made upon the account of petty Kings, Viceroys,
and Military Officers, there are more then threescore Millions of Crowns
brought yearly into the Emperors Coffers, The whole Sum amounts to 150 Millions
of Crowns, whereof he cannot dispose as he pleases, but the Money is brought
into the Treasury; and if the King at any time desires a Supply, in writing to
the Treasurer he is not to deny the payment of it.

The Provinces bring in yearly in Taxes 32 Millions 2 hundred 7 thousand 4
hundred and 47 Bags of Rice, and one Bag is enough to serve 100 Men for one
day; 40 hundred 9 thousand 9 hundred 49 Pounds of Raw Silk, 71 hundred 2
thousand 4 hundred and 36 Rowls of Cloth made of Hemp, 36 thousand 7 hundred
and 70 Bales of Cottons, 1 hundred 91 thousand 7 hundred and 30 Rowls of
wrought Silk. But the City of Hucheu buys off this Tax yearly for the Sum of
500 thousand Crowns.

The Provinces bring in likewise 1 Million 7 hundred 94 thousand 2 hundred and
61 Weight of Salt, The Revenue by Taxes.
each Weight is to be reckoned at 1 hundred 24 Pounds, amounting in all to 1
hundred 87 Millions 6 hundred 88 thousand 3 hundred 64 Pounds; 32 Millions 4
hundred 18 thousand 6 hundred 27 Trusses of Hay and Straw for the Kings
Stables, beside all other Taxes.

The other ten Provinces of China I did not see in my Journey, yet however I
shall give you an Account of the Taxes which the great and lesser Cities
thereof pay yearly to the Emperor; their Names are these: Zansi, the second
Province of the fifteen, Xensi the third, Honan the fifth, Sucheu the sixth-
Huquang the seventh, Chekiang the tenth, Fokien the eleventh, Quangsi the
thirteenth, Quicheu the fourteenth, and Immam the fifteenth.

The second Kingdom of Zansi.
THis Province lies Westward of Peking, The Situation of Zansi.
and is neither so large nor populous, but more Fruitful, and of more
Antiquity, because (if credit may be given to the Historians of China) the
Chinese derive from hence their first Rise and Original.

On the North this Province has for Confines the Great Wall, which reaches from
East to West through the whole Country; behind which lies the Kingdom of Tamyn,
and the Sandy Wilderness of Samo. The West side of this Province lies upon the
Yellow River, which runs from North to South, and is separated by the same from
the Province of Xensi.

This Province produces the sweetest and fairest Grapes of all Asia; but the
Chinese make no Wine of them, but only dry them, and so bring them to the
Market through all China. In this Country of Zansi (which is very remarkable
and worthy of observation) are through the whole Country great store of
Fire-Wells, even in the same manner as the Water-Wells are in Europe, which
they use for the dressing of Meat after this manner: the Mouth of the Well is
stopped very close, and only a place left open to set the Pot upon, by which
means the Pot boyls without any trouble. This Province likewise produces good
store of Coal, which they dig out of the Hills, as in England, and at Luyk in
the Netherlands, which serves the Inhabitants for Fuel, who likewise use
Stoves in their Houses, made after the manner of those in Holland.

In this Country of Zansi are 5 Capital Cities, 92 small Cities, and several
Forts. The 5 Capital Cities are Taiyuen, Pingiaen, Taitung, Lugan, and Fuencheu.

1. Taiyuen Commands over 20 Cities, Taiyuen, Tayven, Iucu, Taco, Ki, Sinkin,
Congyven, Ciaoching, Venxui, Loping, Che, Tingsiang, Tai, Utai, Kiechi, Cofan,
Fan, Hing, Paote, and Hiang. 2. Pingiaen Commands over 31 Cities, as Pingyaen,
Siangling, Hungtung, Feuxan, Chaoching, Taiping, Yoiang, Ieching, Kioiao,
Fuensi, Pu, Lincin, Yungho, Yxi, Vanciuen, Hocin, Kiai, Ganye, Hia, Venhi,
Pinglo, Iuiching, Kiang, Yuenkio, Ho, Kie, Hiangning, Cie, Taning, Xeleu, and
Yangho. Among these, Pu, Kiai, Ho, Kie, and Cie, are the chiefest. 3. Tai^ung
Commands over 11 Cities, Taitung, Hoaigien, Hoenyuen, Ing, Xanin, So, May,
Guei, Quangling, Quangchang, and Lingkieu: whereof Ing, So, and Guei, are the
chiefest. 4. Lugan Commands over eight Cities, Lugan, Caeneu, Timlieu,
Siangheng, Luching, H^quan, Liching, and Pingxun. 5. Fuencheu Commands likewise
over eight Cities, Fuencheu, Hiaoy, Pingiao, Kiakieu, Ning^iang, Lingxa,
Inugning, and Lin.
Beside these great Cities there are three other Corporations in this City, as
Sin, Laao, and Ca. These Towns are not much inferior to the Cities, and so
esteemed by the Chinese; but yet they are not preferred to that Dignity of the
Cities, though they have a Command over some lesser Towns.

For the safety of the Ways, and defense of the great Wall, there are 14 strong
Forts in this Country, which are surrounded with strong Walls, their Names are
these; Gueiguen, Ieuguei, Coguei, May, Vanglin, Ianghon, Caoxon, Tienching,
Chinlu, Cuigyuen, Pinglin, Chungtun, Geutung, and Tungxing.

The Pole or Register-Book of this Province reckons five hundred eighty nine
tho^sand nine hundred fifty nine Families, and five hundred eighty four
thousand fifteen Fighting Men. That which this Country pays in Taxes yearly to
the Emperor, consists of twenty two hundred seventy four thousand and twenty
two Bags of Rice, fifty Pounds of fine Linen, four thousand seven hundred and
seventy Silk-Stuffs, four hundred and twenty thousand Weight of Salt, and
thirty five hundred forty four thousand eight hundred and fifty Bundles of Hay,
beside several other Taxes.

The third Kingdom of Xensi.
AMongst the Northern Dominions is this Xensi, The Situation of Xensi.
which is very great, chiefly situated toward the West in 30 Degrees, and
borders upon the Kingdoms of Prester-Iohn, Prester-Iohn in Asia.
Casker, and Tibet, which are called by one Name in the Chinese Tongue, Sifan.
Westward the Borders extend beyond the Tartar Kingdom of Taniju; betwixt which
and this Country, the Great Wall and some Forts make a separation, which does
not run through all this Country but only to the side of the Yellow River. The
remaining part of this Country situated on the other Bank of the River, has no
Wall for its defense, but dry and barren Sand-fields, and the Yellow River, and
sufficient Fortifications.

Eastward this Xensi is likewise Bounded with this Yellow River, which runs
through the Country. Southward lie very high Mountains, which are as strong
Bulwarks, and separate this Province from the Provinces of Honan Sucheu, and
Huquang.

Want of Rain makes this Country very dry; but yet it produces great store of
Wheat, Barley, and Turkish Corn, but very little Rice, The Beasts feed all
Winter upon Corn. It abounds with Sheep and Goats, which they shear three times
ayear, in the Spring, in Summer, and in Harvest; and of the Wool they make
themselves Clothes. In this Country they make great store of Musk, which grows
in the Navel of a Beast not much unlike to a young Hind; the Flesh whereof the
Chinese eat as other Meat. When this Deer goes to Rutting, the Cod swells like
a Boil that is full of Matter; which Exuperation consisting of a thin hairy
Purse, is then taken out with all its precious Stuff by the Natives. True it
is, that all the Purses which are brought to us, are not the right and pure
Navels; for the cunning Chinese know very well when they empty the Purse, how
to fill up the same again with counterfeit Musk. There is likewise Gold found
in this Country, which is not fetched from the Mines, (for those the Emperor
will not suffer to be opened, there being both Gold and Silver Mines) but from
the sides of Rivers and shallow Waters.

In this Country are eight Capital Cities, a hundred and seven small Cities,
beside Castles and Forts: The eight Capital Cities are these; Sigan, Fungciang,
Hangchung, Pingleang, Cunchang, Linijao, Kingyang, and Iengan.

1. Sigan Commands over 36 Cities, Sigam, Hienyang, Hingping, Linchang,
Kingijang, Caolong, Hu, Lantien, Liuo, Xang, Chingan, Tung, Chaoye, Hoyang,
Cheng, Pexuy, Hanching, Hoa, Hoyan, Gueinan, Puching, Conan, Hoxanijang,
Xangnan, Yao, Sanyuen, Tungquoa, Fuping, Kien, Fungciuen, Vucung, Iungxeu,
Fuen, Xunhoa, Xanxuy, Changvu. 2. Fungciang Commands over eight Cities,
Fungciang, Kixan, Paoki, Fufung, Muy, Linieu, Lung, and Pingijang. 3. Hanchung
Commands over 15 Towns, Hanchung, Paoching, Chingu, Yang, Sihiang, Fungmien,
Niengkiang, Lioyang, Hinggan, Pingli, Xeciuen, Sinijang, Haniju, Peho, and
Cuijang. 4. Pingleang Commands over ten Cities, Pingleang, Cungsin, Hoating,
Chinyven, Kuyven, Knig, Lingtai, Choangleang, Limgte, and Congning. 5. Cung
chang Commands over seventeen Cities, Chungchang, Ganting, Hoeining, Tunguei,
Chang, Ningyven, Fokiang, Siho, Ching, Cin, Cingan, Cingxui, Li, Kiai, Ven,
Hoei, Leangtang. 6. Linijao Commands over five Cities, Linijao, Gueoyven, Lan,
Kin, Ho. 7. Kingyang Commands over five Towns, Kingyang, Hoxi, Hoan, Ning, and
Chuining. 8. Iengan Comands over 19 Cities, Iengan, Gansai, Canciven, Ganting,
Paogan, Y^huen, Ienchuen, Ienchang, Cingkien, Fen, Cochuen, Chungpu, Ykiun,
Suite, Miche, Kia, Upao, Xinmo, and Fuco.
Beside these great and small Cities in this Province, there are likewise
several Magazines which lie scattered up and down, some within the Great Wall,
and some without. The chiefest of these Forts are these eight, Xacheu, Xancheu,
Iungchang, Leangcheu, Choanglang, Sining, Chiny, Culang. These following 14 are
small ones, Hingnia, Ningniachung, Yaocheu, Nincheu, Hocheu, Cinglu, Yulin,
Chinfan, Xetu, Hantung, Pinglu, Mingxa, Guei, and Sengqui.

The Chinese Register reckons the number of Families in this Province, to be no
less than eight hundred thirty one thousand fifty one; and thirty nine hundred
thirty four thousand one hundred seventy six Fighting Men.

The Taxes which this Country pays, are nineteen hundred twenty nine thousand
and fifty seven Bags of Wheat, three hundred sixty and five thousand Weight of
fine Linen, nine thousand two hundred and eighteen Pounds of all sorts of
wrought Silks, seventeen thousand two hundred and seventy Pounds of Cotton,
eight hundred and twenty thousand seven hundred and seventy Pounds of
Callicoes, beside fifteen hundred and fourteen thousand seven hundred and forty
nine Trusses of Hay for the Kings Stables.

The fifth Province of Honan.
THe Province of Honan lies East and South-East with Nanking, The Situation of
Honan.
North and North-East with Peking and some part of Xantung, and South
South-West with Hucang; but Westward it borders upon the Province of Sucheu,
and with the remaining part of Xensi.

In this fifth Province we find eight great Cities, a hundred small Cities,
beside Forts and Castles: The eight great Cities are Caifung, Queite, Shangte,
Gueiheoi, Hoaiking, Honan, Nanijang, and Iuning.

1. Caifung bears the Command over 30 Cities, Caifung, Chinlieu, Ki, Tunghiu,
Taiking, Gueixi, Gueichuen, Ienlin, Fuken, Chungmen, Iangvu, Iuenvu, Fungkieu,
Iencin, Laniang, Chin, Xangaxui, Sihoa, Hiangching, Ienching, Chaggio, Iu,
Sinching, Mie, Shing, Iungiang, Iungee, Hoin, Suxi, Isung. 2. Queite Governs
over nine Cities, Queite, Ningling, Loye, Hiaye, Iungehing, Ciu, Iuching,
Hiahching, and Xeching. 3. Changte Commands over seven Cities, Changte,
Tanchin, Linchang, Lin, Cu, Vugan, and Xe. 4. Gueihoei Commands over six
Cities, Gueihoei, Coching, Sinchiang, Hoekia, Ki, and Hoei. 5. Hoaikuing
Commands over six Cities, Hoaikuing, Ciyven, Sievun, Vuche, Meng, Ven. 6. Honan
^ommands over 14 Cities, Houan, Iensu, Cung, Mengciu, Yyang, Tenfung, Tungpe,
Nanchao, Tengo, Nuihiahg, Sinije, Chechun, You, Vuxang, and Ye. 7. Kingyang
Commands over five Towns, Kingyang, Hoxi, Hoan, Ning, and Chuining. 8. Iuning
Commands over 14 Cities, Iuning, Hanchai, Sipnig, Sincai, Siuping, Chinijang,
Sinigang, Loxan, Kioxan, Quango, Quangxan, Cuxi, Sce, and Xangching,
The great City Iu, which though not preferred by the Chinese to the Dignity
of a Capital City, yet however Commands over five small Cities, as Iu, Luxan,
Kia, Paofung, and Yyang. The yearly Revenue, according to the Toll-Book of the
Emperor, which this Country brings in, amo^nts to five hundred eighty nine
thousand two hundred and ninety six Families, and fifty one hundred six
thousand two hundred and seventy Fighting Men.

The Income of the Revenue amounts yearly to twenty four hundred fourteen
thousand four hundred and seventy seven Bags of Rice, twenty three thousand
five hundred and nine Pounds of unwrought Linen, nine thousand nine hundred
fifty nine Pounds of several sorts of Silk, three hundred forty one Pounds of
Cottons, which are very scarce in this County, and lastly, twenty two hundred
fourscore and eight thousand seven hundred forty four Trusses of Hay for the
Kings Stables.

The sixth Kingdom of Sucheu.
THis Territory of Sucheu is very large and fruitful, The Situation of Sucheu.
which Eastward bordereth upon Huquang, Southward upon Queicheu, North-East and
by North upon Xensi, North-West upon Prester-Iohn's Country, Westward upon
Ti^et, and Southward upon the Province of Iunnan.

In this whole Province are eight chief Cities, a hundred twenty four great and
little Cities, four Garrison Cities, beside several other Towns and Places.

The eight Capital Cities are Chingtu, Paoning, Xungning, Siucheu, Chunking,
Queicheu, Lunggan, and Mahu.

1. Chingtu Commands over 30 little Cities, Chingtu, Xaanglieu, Veukiang,
Sinfan, Sinlu, Kintang, Ginxeu, Chingping, Pi, Cu, Nuikiang, Quou, Peug,
Cuugning, Began, Kien, Cuyang, Cungking, Sincin, Han, Xefan, Miencho, Teyang,
Mien, Changning, Lokiang, Mieu, Vencheuen, Guei, and Pao. 2. Pagning Commands
over 10 Cities, Pagning, Cangki, Nanpu, Quangyven, Pa, Chaoboa, Tungkiang,
Kien, Cutung, and Mankiang. 3. Xunking has under its Command 9 Cities, Xunking,
Sike, Iungxan, Ylnug, Quanggan, Kin, Tacho, Gochi, and Linxui. 4. Siucheu
Commands likewise over 10 Cities, Siucheu, Kingfu, Fuxun, Nanki, Hiuguen,
Changning, Iunlien, Cung, Cao, and Lukehang. 5. Chungking Commands over 18
Cities, Chungking, Kiangein, Changxeu, Taco, Iuncheuen, Kikiang, Nancheuen,
Kiukiang, Ho, Tungleang, Tingguen, Piexan, Chung, Fungtu, Tienkiang, Fen,
Fulung, and Pinxui. 6. Queicheu Commands over 13 Cities, Queicheu, Coxan,
Tachang, Taming, Iunyang, Vau, Cai, Tai, Sinning, Leangxan, Kieuzi, Tunchiang,
and Taiping. 7. Lunggan Commands over three Cities, Lunggan, Kiangyeu, and
Xeciven, and also over several Forts. 8. Mahu is alone, without having any City
under its Command.
The great Cities are six, Tungcheuen, Muicheu, Kiating, Kiung, Lincheu, and
Yacheu. Though these six great Cities might very well deserve the Name and
Dignity of Capital Cities, in regard of their largeness, and number of
Inhabitants, yet they do not enjoy that Dignity, because this Province is to
have no more Capital Cities then Peking and Nanking.

The first great City Tungcheuen, Commands over 8 other Cities; the second
Muicheu, over four; the third Kiating, over seven; the fourth Kiung, over
three; the fifth Liucheu, over four; and the sixth Yacheu Commands likewise
over four.

The four chief Garrison Cities are Tinchnen, Uniung, Usa, and Chinhiung; beside
which there are 35 small Garrison Cities and Forts.

This Province produces much Silk, and other rich Commodities. It is very large
and fruitful, having the great River of Kiang running quite through it: in some
places it is Mountainous, but wants neither for Trees nor Valleys. From hence
only comes the right Radix-China, or China-Root; for that which grows in other
Places of China is wild and good for nothing. From hence comes likewise that
incomparable Root called Rhubarb, which the People of Tibet and Mogar, who
drive the Trade in this Province, send from thence into Europe. Here are
likewise found two sorts of Amber Stones, namely the red and yellow; which last
is found also upon other Coasts. The People here are very cunning in
counterfeiting of Amber, which they do with so much skill, that they sell it
sometimes for the right, it being impossible to discern it, being not much
inferior unto it either in sight or goodness. Iron, Tin, and Lead, are likewise
fetched from the Mountains in great quantities; among which (the wonder is) are
great store of Salt Pits, that produce so much Salt, that the Inhabitants know
not how to spend one third part of it.

The Toll-Book wherein the number of the People of the Country is set down,
mentions no less than 4 hundred 64 thousand 1 hundred 29 Families, and 22
hundred 4 thousand 1 hundred and 70 Fighting Men, without reckoning the
Soldiers, who are very numerous in the Country.

That which this Province pays in Taxes to the Emperor yearly, consists of 61
hundred 6 thousand 660 Bags of Rice, 6 thousand 3 hundred and 39 Pounds of
wrought and unwrought Silk, 74 thousand 8 hundred and 51 Pounds of Cottons, 1
hundred 49 thousand 1 hundred 77 Weight of Salt, beside other Taxes paid to his
Imperial Majesty in some parts of this Province.

The seventh Kingdom of Hucang.
THe Province of Hucang borders toward the North upon the Province of Honan,
The Situation of Hucang.
North-West upon Xensi, Westward upon Sucheu, toward the South upon Quangsi,
South-West upon Queicheu, Eastward upon Kiangsi, and South-East upon Quantung.

In this Province are 15 brave Metropolises, above a hundred small Cities, and
a world of Villages and Cottages, beside the Garrison Towns and Forts.

The 15 chief Cities are these, Vuchang, Hanijang, Syangyang, Tegan, Hoangcheu,
Kingcheu, Yocheu, Changxa, Paoking, Hengcheu, Changte, Xincheu, Iungcheu,
Chingtien, Chinchiang.

1. Vuchang Commands over 10 Cities, Vuhang, Vuchang, Kiayn, Puki, Hienning,
Cungyang, Tungching, Hingque, Taye, and Tungxan. 2. Hanijang Commands over two
Cities, Hanijang and Hanchuen. 3. Siangyang Commands over seven Cities
Siangyang, Iching, Nanchang, Caoyang, Coching, Quanghoa, and Kiun. 4. Tegan
Commands over six Cities, Tegan, Iommung, Hiaocan, Ingching, Sui, and Ingxan.
5. Hoangcheu Commands over nine Cities, Hoangcheu, Lotien, Maching, Hoangpi,
Hoanggan, Kixut, Ki, Hoangmui, and Hoang^i. 6. Kingcheu Commands over 13
Cities, Kingcheu, Cunggan, Xexeu, Kienli, Sungki, Chikiang, Iling, Changyang,
Itu, Iuengan, Quei, Hingxan, Patung. 7. Yocheu Commands over eight Cities,
Yocheu, Linsiang, Hoayung, Pingkiang, Fung, Xemuen, Culi, and Ganhiang. 8.
Changxa Commands over 11 Cities, Chanxa, Siangtan, Siangin, Ninghiang, and
Lieuyang, Liling, Ieyang, Sianghiang, Xeu, Ganhoa, and Chaling. 9. Paoking
Commands over five Cities, Paoking, Sinhoa, Chingpu, Vuchang, and Sining. 10.
Hengcheu Commands over nine Cities, Hengcheu, Hengxan, Luiyang, Changning,
Gangin, Ling, Queiyang, Linnu, and Langxan. 11. Changte Commands over four
Cities, Changte, Taoyven, Lungyang, and Iuenkiang. 12. Xincheu Commands over
seven Cities, Xincheu, Luki, Xinki, Xopu, Iuen, Kiuyang, and Mayang. 13.
Iungcheu Commands over seven Cities, Iungcheu, Kiyang, Tan, Tunggan, Ningyven,
Iungning, and Kianghoa. 14. Chingtien Commands over seven Cities, Chingtien,
Kingxan, Cienkiang, Mienyang, Kingling, Kingmuen, and Tangyang. 15. Chinchiang
Commands over seven Cities, Cinchiang, Fang, Choxan, Xancin, Choki, Chingsi,
and Paokang.
There are also in this Province two great Cities, Cingcheu and Chincheu: The
first Commands over four small Cities, Cingcheu, Hoeitung, Tungtao, Suining;
the second over six, Chincheu, Iunghing, Ychang, Hingning, Queiyang, and
Queitung.

The Garrison Cities are eleven in number, Xi, Iungxun, Paocing, Nanguei,
Xiyung, Xangki, Lankiang, Sanpin, Iungting, Tienkia, Iungmui.

The Chinese Register of Toll-Book reckons in this Country Five hundred thirty
one thousand six hundred and eighty six Families, and Forty eight hundred
thirty three thousand five hundred and ninety Fighting Men, beside all such as
are of the Royal Blood, which amount to at least Three hundred thousand in all
China. These are all the Offspring of one Hunguvus, the first Founder of the
Family of Taiminga, who long after the Expulsion of the Tartars conquered the
Kingdom, and settled himself in the Throne. But this Family of Taiminga had the
misfortune not many years since to be wholly extirpated by the Tartars, as will
appear hereafter.

The Product of the Revenues of this Province which are paid to the Emperor
yearly, consists in One and twenty hundred sixty seven thousand nine hundred
and fifty nine Bags of Rice, and Seventeen thousand nine hundred and seventy
seven Rowls of wrought Silk.

The tenth Province of Chekiang.
THis Province lies Eastward toward the Sea, The Situation of Chekiang*
South and South-West it borders upon the Province of Foking, but the rest
joins to the Provinces of Kiansi and Nanking.

In this Province are eleven Prime Cities, all of them not much inferior to
some Provinces; for the Metropolis of Hangcheu is fit to make to make a Kingdom
of. The eleven chief Cities Command over sixty three small Cities, which have
likewise abundance of Towns and Castles under their Command, beside the
Villages, which are all full of People.

The eleven chief Cities are these, Hangcheu, Kiahing, Hucheu, Niencheu,
Kinhoa, Kincheu, Chucheu, Xaohing, Ningpo, Taicheu, and Vencheu.

1. Hangcheu Commands over eight Cities, Hangcheu, Haining, Fuyang, Iuhang,
Lingan, Yucieu, Sinching, Changhoa. 2. Kiahing Commands over six Cities,
Kiahing, Kiaxen, Haiyen, Pinghu, Cungte, Tunghiang. 3. Hucheu Commands over six
Cities, Hucheu, Changhing, Gankie, Teching, Hiaofung, and Vukang. 4. Niencheu
Commands over six Cities, Niencheu, Xungan, Tunglui, Suigan, Xenchang, and
Fuenxi. 5. Kiuhoa Commands over eight Cities, Kinhoa, Lanki, Tungyang, You,
Iuugkang, Vuy, Pukiang, and Tanki. 6. Kincheu Commands over five Cities,
Kincheu, Lungyeu, Changxan, Kiangxen, and Caihoa. 7. Chucheu Commands over 10
Cities, Chucheu, Cingtien, Cinyun, Sungyang, Suichang, Lungcinen, Kingyven,
Iunho, Sivenping, and Kingning. 8. Xaohing Commands over seven Cities, Xaohing,
Siaoxan, Chuki, Iuyao, Xangyu, Xing, and Cinchang. 9. Ningpo Commands over five
Cities, Ningpo, Cuki, Funghao, Tinghai, Siangxan. 10. Taicheu Commands over six
Cities, Taicheu, Hoangnien, Tientai, Sinkiu, Ninghai, and Taiping. 11. Vencheu
Commands over five Cities, Vencheu, Xuigan, Locing, Pingyang, Taixun.
The chief Garrisons are 15. Chinxan, Kinxan, Tinghui, Quo, Ninghai, Cioki,
Sinho, Xetie, Puontun, Cumuen, Tunchi, Haigan, Sining, Haifung, Nan.

The number of the People in this Province mentioned in the Chinese Toll-Book,
appears to be 12 hundred 42 thousand 1 hundred and 35 Families, and 55 hundred
25 thousand 4 hundred and 70 Fighting Men.

The public Revenues paid to the Emperor consist of 25 hundred 10 thousand 2
hundred and 99 Sacks of Salt, 3 hundred and 70 thousand 4 hundred and 60 Pounds
of unwrought Silk, and 2 thousand 5 hundred and 74 Rowls of wrought Silk:
Beside all which, the great Ships of his Imperial Majesty called Iungychuen,
come every year to lade with Silk, which is very rich and curiously wrought for
his Majesty's own use. The Silk is interwoven with Gold, Silver, and the
Feathers of several Birds, very artificially mingled with all manner of
Colors: None are suffered to wear any of these Silks, called Dragon-Silks, but
the Emperor and his Courtiers.

This Province furnishes the Court likewise with 80 hundred 4 thousand and 91
Trusses of Hay, and with 4 hundred 44 thousand 7 hundred and 69 Weight of Salt.
The whole Revenue of this Province is reckoned by some, to amount to 15
Millions of Crowns.

The eleventh Province of Fokien.
THis Province, The Situation of Fokien.
which is the least of all the Provinces, lies toward the East South-East and
South, upon the great Indian Sea; toward the South-West it borders upon
Quantung, West and North-East upon Kiansi, and the remaining part upon the
Kingdom of Chekiang.

In this Province are eight Chief Cities, and 48 small Cities, and a great
number of Forts which were built for the Defense of the Sea and Harbor.

The eight Chief Cities are these; Focheu, Civencheu, Changcheu, Kienning,
Ienping, Tincheu, Hiughoa, and Xaovu.

1. Focheu Commands over eight Cities, Focheu, Cutien, Mincing, Changlo,
Lienkiang, Loyuen, Iungfo, and Focing. 2. Civencheu Commands over seven Cities,
Civencheu, Nangan, Hoeigan, Tehoa, Ganki, Tungan, and Iunchung. 3. Changcheu
Commands over 10 Cities, Changcheu, Changpu, Lugnien, Nancing, Changtai,
Changping, Pingho, Caogan, Haicing, and Ningyang. 4. Kienning Commands over
seven Cities, Kienning, Kienying, Cunggan, Puching, Chingho, Sungki, and
Xeuning. 5. Ienping Commands over seven Cities, Ienping, Cianglo, Xa, Yenki,
Xunchang, Ianggan, and Tatien. 6. Tingcheu Commands over eight Cities,
Tingcheu, Ninghoa, Xanghang, Vuping, Cinglieu, Tienching, Queihoa, and
Iungtung. 7. Hinghoa Commands over two Cities, Hinghoa, and Sienlieu. 8. Xaovu
Commands over four Cities, Xaovu, Quangee, Taining, and Kienning.
In the Province of Fokien is also a great City called Foning, which Commands
three Cities, Foning, Fogan, and Ningte.

In this Province are likewise several brave Forts and Towns for Trade, as
Ganhai, Hiamuen, Pumuen, Foning, Tinghai, Muihoa, Xe, Haiku, Vangan, Chungxe,
Tungxan, Hiuenchung, and Iungting.

The Island Formosa, or The Fair Island does also belong to this Province, as
likewise the near adjacent Island called Taiwan, which the Hollanders possess,
who have built a Fort there called New-Zealand. But of this Island more
hereafter.

The Toll or Register-Book of these People, mentions no less in this Province
than 5 hundred 9 thousand and 2 hundred Families, and 18 hundred 2 thousand 6
hundred and 77 Fighting Men.

The Revenue of this Province consists of 8 hundred 83 thousand 1 hundred and
15 Sacks of Salt, 1 hundred 94 Pounds of fine Linen, and 6 hundred Rowls of
wrought Silk: But the chiefest Revenue consists of Ships, which pay according
to their Burden so much a Tun.

The thirteenth Province of Quangsi.
QUangsi is the thirteenth Province, The Situation of Quangsi.
and borders toward the East upon the Province of Quantung, South-West upon
Tungking or Ganan, Westward upon the Country of Iunnan, toward the North-West
upon the Country of Queicheu, and the remaining part upon Huquang.

In this Province are eleven Capital Cities, one Chief Garrison City, and one
Principal City.

The 11 Chief Cities are these, Queilin, Lieucheu, Kingyven, Pinglo, Gucheu,
Cincheu, Nanning, Taiping, Suming, Chingen, and Tiencheu.

1. Queilin Commands over nine Cities, Queilin, Hinggan, Lingchuen, Yangso,
Iungning, Iungfo, Yning, Cinen, and Quonyang. 2. Lieucheu Commands over twelve
Cities, Lieucheu, Coyung, Loching, Lieuching, Hoaiyven, Yung, Laipin, Siang,
Vuciven, Pin, Cienkiang, and Xangling. 3. Kingyven Commands over nine Cities,
Kingyven, Tienho, Sugen, Hochi, Hinching, Nanchuen, Lypo, Tunglan, and Pangti.
4. Pinglo Commands over eight Cities, Pinglo, Cunching, Fuchueu, Ho, Lipu,
Siengiu, Iuggan, and Caoping. 5. Gucheu Commands over ten Cities, Gucheu, Teng,
Yung, Cengki, Hoaicie, Yolin, Pope, Pelieu, Lochuen, and Hingye. 6. Cincheu
Commannds over four Cities, Cincheu, Pingnan, Quei, and Vucing. 7. Nanning
Commands over six Cities, Nanning, Lunggan, Heng, Yunhiang, Xangsu, and
Sunning. 8. Taiping Commands over 22 Cities, Taiping, Ganging, Yangli,
Vanching, Co, Civenming, Suching, Chinyven, Sutung, Kielum, Mingyng, Xanhia,
Kiegan, Luging, Tukie, Cungxen, Iunkang, Loyang, Toling, Lun, Kiang, and Lope.
9. Suming Commands over five Cities, Suming, Xangxe, Hiaxe, Pingciang, and
Chung. 10. Chingan has no City under it Command, nor is subject to any other
City. 11. Tiencheu Commands over five Cities, Tiencheu, Xanglin; Lung, Queite,
and Cohoa.
The Garrison City is Sugen, and Commands over three Cities, Sugen, Vuyuen, and
Funghoa.

The great City which is not preferred to the Dignity of a Principal City, is
Suching, and Commands only over one City called Ching.

There are some other Cities in this Province, as Sucheu, Siping, Fulao,
Fukang, Funy, Li, Queixum, and Hiangun.

The Forts are only two, Zanglui and Ganiung.

In the Toll or Register-Book of this Province, is set down 1 hundred 86
thousand 7 hundred and 19 Families, and 1 Million 54 thousand 7 hundred and 60
Fighting Men. The Revenue thereof consists of 4 hundred 31 thousand 3 hundred
and 59 Bags of Rice.

The fourteenth Province of Queicheu.
THis Province of Queicheu borders East and South-East upon the Province of
Quangsi, The Situation of Queicheu.
North and North-West upon Sucheu; toward the North-East it reaches as far as
the Province of Huquang, and the remaining part borders upon Iunnan.

Formerly this Province was not reckoned among the fifteen, but a part thereof
belonged to Sucheu, another part to Huquang, and the neighboring Provinces
possessed the rest; at last the Family of Taiminga (in regard Ivena, the
foregoing Branch of the Tartars, had caused several Castles and Forts to be
built therein) made thereof a particular Province.

In this Queicheu are 8 Chief Cities, which are not very large, 10 small
Cities, four Chief Garrison Cities, and four small Garrison Cities, beside
Castles and Forts, which are very many.

The eight Chief Cities are these; Queiyang, Sucheu, Sunan, Chinyven, Xecien,
Tunggin, Liping, and Tucho.

1. Queiyang Commands over 19 Forts in stead of Cities, Queiyang, Kiukiun,
Moqua, Tahoa, Cingfan, Gueifan, Fangfan, Hungfan, Golung, Kingxe, Siaolung,
Lofan, Talung, Siaoching, Xangua, Luxan, Lufan, Pingfa, and Mohiang. 2. Sucheu
Commands over four Forts, Sucheu, Tuso, Xiki, and Hoantao. 3. Sunan Commands
over two Cities and five Forts, Sunan, Vuchuen, Inkiang, Xuite, Manii, Langki,
and Ieuki. 4. Chinyven Commands over one City and four Forts, Chinyven, Xikien,
Kinyung, Pienkyao, Inxui, and Taiping. 5. Xecien Commands over three Forts,
Xecien, Miaomin, Lungeiven, and Coihang. 6. Tunggin Commands over seven Forts,
Tunggin, Sengki, Tiki, Vaxan, Ulo, Pingten, Pingnan, and Pingchai. 7. Liping
Commands over 4 Cities and 11 Forts, Liping, Iuncung, Tanki, Pacheu, Hung,
Caotie, Cu, Sixau, Huul, Leangsai, Geuyang, Sinhoa, Chunglin, Cheki, and
Lungli. 8. Tucho Commands over three Cities and nine Forts, Tucho, Toxan, Maho,
Cingpin, Panxui, Pinglang, Pingcheu, Lotung, Hokiang, Loping, Pingting, and
Tungning.
The four great Cities are, Pugan, Iungning, Chinning, and Ganxun.

Pugan is the Key of the three Provinces. Iungning Commands over three small
Forts, Iungning, Muyo, and Tinging. Chinning Commands over two Forts, Kangco
and Xeul. Ganxun likewise Commands over two Forts, Ningpo and Sipeo.
The four Chief Garrison Cities are, Putting, Sintien, Pingyve, and Lungli.

1. Putting Commands over no other City, 2. Sintien Commands over four Forts,
Pingfa, Paping, Cheuping, and Cheuing. 3. Pingyve Commands over two Forts,
Yengi and Loping. 4. Lungli Commands over two Forts, Pingfa and Taping.
The Forts which lie up and down in this Province to hinder the Plundering of
those upon the Mountains, are Picie, Gueieing, Chanchoang, Chingping, Pingpa,
Cannan, Usa, Hinglung, Cherni, and Kaili.

The chiefest Places in this Province, are Iunguing, Xuitung, Lokeu, Xanglang,
Vatien, Hoanglien, and Cugin.

In the Chinese Toll-Book of this Province, we find set down 45 thousand 3
hundred and 5 Families, and 2 hundred 31 thousand 3 hundred and 65 Fighting Men.

The Revenue of this Province consists of 47 thousand 6 hundred 58 Bags of
Rice; 5 thousand and 9 hundred Pieces of Cloth. But all this not being
sufficient to maintain the Forts, the Emperor is necessitated to supply what is
wanting out of his other Revenues.

The fifteenth Province of Iunnan.
TOward the East and South-East this Province of Iunnan borders upon Quangsi,
The Situation of Iunnan.
toward the South upon the Kingdoms of Laos and Tunking, toward the West it
reaches as far as the utmost Borders of the Kingdom of Mien and Pey, toward the
North-West upon the Kingdom of Sifan, Northward upon the Province of Sucheu,
and toward the North-East reaches as far as the farthest Pales of the Province
of Queicheu.

In this Province are 12 great Cities, 8 Chief Garrison Cities, 88 small Cities,
beside several Castles and Forts.

The 12 Chief Cities are these; Iunnan, Tali, Lingan, Cuihung, Chinkiang,
Munghoa, Kingtung, Quangna, Quangsi, Chinyuen, Iunning, and Xuning.

1. Iunnan Commands over 13 small Cities, Iunnan, Funun, Yleang, Caoming,
Cynning, Quehoa, Chingcung, Ganning, Loco, Lofung, Quenyang, Sanpao, and Ymuen.
2. Tali Commands over six Cities, Tali, Chao, Iunnan, Tenchuen, Langkiung, and
Pinchuen. 3. Lingan Commands over 10 Cities, Lingan, Kienxui, Xeping, Omi,
Niug, Sinpin, Tunghai, Hosi, Siego, and Mungcu; as also over nine Chief Forts,
Naleu, Kiachoa, Vanglung, Hieyung, Kichu, Sulo, Coneng, Locung, and Gannan. 4.
Cuhiung Commands over seven Cities, Cuhiung, Quantung, Tingyven, Tinpien, Okia,
Nangan, and Chinnan. 5. Under the Command of Chinkiang are five Cities,
Chinkiang, Kiangheu, Sinhin, Yangcung, and Innan. 6. Munghoa Commands over two
Cities, Munghoa and Tinglung. 7. Kingtung has no City under its Command. 8.
Quangnan Commands over the City Fu. 9. Quangsi Commands over four Cities,
Quangsi, Sucung, Mile, and Vimao. 10. Chiyven Commands over the Fort Loco. 11.
Iungning Commands over the Forts Iungning, Lacu, Ketien, Hianglo, and Valu. 12.
Xuning has no City under it, and lies surrounded with Hills.
The eight Garrison Cities are these; Kiocing, Yaogan, Cioking, Vuting, Cintien,
Likiang, Iuenkiang, and Iungchang.

Kiocing Commands over six Cities, Kiocing, Yeco, Chenye, Loleang, Malungo, and
Lochiung. Yaogan Commands over three Cities, Yaogan, Yao, and Tayao. Cioking
Rules over three Cities, Cioking, Kienchuen, and Xun. Vuting Commands over four
Cities, Vuting, Hokio, Yuenmeu, and Lokiuen. Cintien Commands only over seven
Villages. Likiang Commands over five Cities, Likiang, Paoxan, Lan, Kiucin, and
Linsi. Iuenkiang Commands over the Fort Lopie. Iungchang Commands over seven
Forts, Iungchang, Lay, Likiang, Iungping, Fungki, Xitian, and Lukiang.
There are two Garrison Cities, Pexing and Sinhoa, which are not subject to any
other Cities.

The Forts which are not Commanded by any other Cities, are fourteen, Chelo,
Tengheng, Cheli, Laochua, Lungchuen, Gueiyven, Vantien, Chincang, Taheu,
Nieuki, Mangxi, Langchang, Mopang, Mien, with the City of Langkiu.

Mopang Commands over nine Villages, Mopang, Mengyang, Mengking, Menglien,
Mengli, Mengting, Mengtieu, Mengco, and Menchang.

Mien Commands over six other Villages, Mien, Pape, Santihiung, Sochung,
Mungyang, and Mitien.

The yearly Toll-Book in this Province of Iunnan, makes mention of 32 thousand
9 hundred and 58 Families, and 14 hundred 33 thousand 1 hundred and 10 Fighting
Men.

The Revenue of this Province consists of 14 hundred thousand 5 hundred and 68
Bags of Rice, and 56 thousand 9 hundred 65 Weight of Salt, beside several other
great Imposts and Taxes, which we shall forbear to mention.

Thus far having treated (though but briefly) of that which at first I proposed
for the better understanding the Relation of our Voyage, I now proceed to give
an Account of what passd during our Travels to and again from Canton to Peking.
You must know, that the Chief Government at Batavia, long before any thing was
concluded by the East India Company in Holland concerning an Embassy to the
Great Cham at Peking, did send some Persons with laden Ships to China, to
desire free Traffic in those Parts; therefore I suppose it will not be amiss,
to relate in short what Success they met withal in their Voyages.

From the time that the Netherlanders had Commerce with their Ships into
several Parts of India, they continually sought unto the People of China to
Trade with them upon the Island of Iapan, in such Wares and Commodities as the
Country of China produces: but in this their fair Undertaking and reasonable
Request, they have still met with Opposition, and no Access would be given them
into that Kingdom.

Some impute the cause of this aversion in those People to the Hollanders, to
an old Prophecy, which made no small impression on their Fancies, That a
strange Nation, Fair of Complexion, and Clothed all over, should come thither
from a far remote Country, to Conquer the Kingdom of China, and possess it as
their own.

But in process of time, the Jesuit Martin Martinsen, who had concealed himself
ten years together in China for the propagation of the Roman Catholic Faith,
came from Macassar to Batavia in a Portuguese Vessel; and there related, How
that the Great Cham of Tartary had Conquered the Empire of China, and all the
Kingdoms belonging thereunto, with the slaughter of some hundred thousands of
People, and had proclaimed a Free Trade in the City of Canton to all Foreign
People.

Hereupon it was concluded by the chief Government of Batavia, after due
Deliberation first had, that a Trial should be made of the truth of this
Report, by sending a Vessel with several Goods from the Island of Taiwan to
some part of China.

So upon the 20. of August Mr. Frederick Schedel a Merchant, set Sail in the
good Ship called The Brown-Fish, very richly Freighted with all sorts of
Merchandises from Taiwan to Canton, and after nine days Sail Landed in the
Canton River, at a Place called Heytamon.

Hereupon the Mandorin Haitonu, Admiral of the Sea, came Aboard their Vessel,
to receive and Salute Frederick Schedel, in the Name and in behalf of the whole
Canton Magistracy. After that he had been well Treated the^e, he took leave of
Mr. Schedel, who out of Respect to his Person, thought good to accompany him on
Shore; but being come near the City, he Landed in great State, without speaking
one word to Schedel, who was put into another Vessel in a very slight manner,
with the Presents which he had brought with him for the Viceroys, and was
carried to the other end of the City, where he was narrowly searched by one
Emanuel de Lucifierro a Portuguese, and treated likewise with ill Language. In
the same manner he was used by some mean Officers, who told him that they were
sent by the Viceroy to show him a Lodging without the Walls in the Suburbs.

Toward Night came the Interpreter Tienqua (whom the same Haitonu had brought
with him Aboard) with several other Tartars, to give Mr. Schedel a Visit, who
after a while was carried by them to a Temple of one of their Idol Gods, where
the Priests had spent the whole Night at their Devotions, to foretell the
Success of the Strangers Arrival. In the mean time whilst Schedel was absent
from his Lodging, some Mandorins came thither by Order of the Viceroy, and
made bold to open his Chests where the Presents lay; and after they had taken
an Account of them, they flung them about in a scornful manner: they took
likewise the Letter which was writ by the chief Governor of Batavia to the two
Viceroys, and were carrying it away; but meeting with Schedel, they flung it
unworthily in his Face, giving him reproachful Language, as if the Hollanders
were come for no other end, but to betray their Country. Schedel finding
himself thus unhandsomly dealt with, began to consider which way he should be
able to pacify and undeceive these People: Among other Presents, he had
brought with him some Bottles of rare Wine, whereof he desired the Mandorins to
taste; which pleasing their Palate, they turned their Cups off very freely, and
at last were so well satisfied with Schedel, that they begged his Pardon for
their Misdemeanor and Mistake; acknowledging that the Portugueses had infused
strange Stories into their Heads concerning the Plots of Hollanders against
their Country; but now they were full convinced, believing the contrary,
excusing what had happened, and promised, that for the future all manner of
Civility should be showed unto him during his Abode there.

The next day early in the Morning by Sunrising Mr. Schedel was suddenly sent
for to the Court, to appear before the ancient Viceroy Pignamong: thousands of
the vulgar sort of People followed crowding at his Heels to the Palace Gate,
giving him ill Language, saying, How finely Iron Fetters would become his Legs;
others pointed at him with their Fingers in derision, and some others blew Lice
upon his Followers; however, at last two Mandorines brought him to the Court:
The Viceroy, to give him Audience, sat upon his Throne, which stood in the
middle of the Palace upon a high apiece place, and was covered with rich
Silk: round about him stood above two hundred Gentlemen (amongst which was the
forementioned Haitonu) all very rich dressed after the Tartar fashion. The
Viceroy having received the Letter and the Presents from Schedel, and heard
what he had to say for himself against the Calumnies which had been raised
against the Hollanders, he was so well satisfied with him, that he caused him
to sit down next unto his Throne amongst the best of his Court, and afterward
invited him to a splendid Dinner, made on purpose for his Entertainment; where
a particular Table appointed for Schedel and his Followers, was covered with
thirty two Silver Dishes, heaped with all manner of extraordinary Dainties; the
Cups in which they drank were of massy Gold, and nothing was wanting to add to
the greatness of the Entertainment. During which, the Viceroy sent to Mr.
Schedel to resolve him several Questions, concerning the Condition and present
Government of Holland; and after that he had fully answered the Viceroy, he
was dismissed by him with all manner of Respect, and conducted from thence by
the Mandorine Haitonou, with the Letter and Presents to the young Canton
Viceroy called signamong, who received him likewise very friendly, and civilly
invited him to a Dinner, but yet seemed to side rather with the Portugueses.

His Mother, who came out of Tartary the Year before, was very desirous to see
the Hollanders, and sent for Schedel with his Followers (notwithstanding that
he was in the middle of his Speech) to appear before her: Whereupon he brake
off abruptly to go to her, and found her with her Gentlewomen in an open Hall
expecting his coming, where he was very courteously received by her. During his
stay there he commanded his Trumpets to sound, which much delighted the Ladies,
who showed him all manner of kindness for his civility in that respect. After
he had satisfied the curiosity of the Viceroy's Mother, he returned back to
the Viceroy, who stayed for him all this while. Then he re-assum'd the former
Discourse; which having ended, and taken his leave to be gone, he was conducted
in great State by Haitonu to the House of the great Mandorine Teutang, who has
the third Place in the Government of Canton: But when this Teutang had
privately taken a view of Schedel through a Window, or the like, he suffered
him to depart, without offering him the least civility in his House, insomuch
that he was forced to find out another Lodging for himself and this Followers,
where they lay that Night, and the next Day sent for their Goods from Aboard
their Ship.

The Governor and Council in Maccoa, to stifle in its Birth the progress of
this Negotiation, did endeavor not only to corrupt Haitonu with Presents and
contrary Arguments, but they sent likewise a considerable Embassy to Canton;
where they remontrated at large in Writing, How that the Portugueses in Maccoa
were informed, that a certain Foreign Nation, known by the Name of Hollanders,
had sent away a Ship to the chief City of Canton, to desire free Traffic in
China; but they, as in Duty bound, did find themselves necessitated to acquaint
the Governor, that these People were of a cunning Nature, deceitful in all
things, and without any Country or Habitations of their own; And that they got
their Livings by Stealth and Piracy; That they by the number of their Ships and
Guns, had made themsolves very considerable at Sea, and were now only
endeavoring how to get sure Footing in China, that so by that means they might
the better enrich themselves; That they had taken Taiwan, had made an Assault
upon Manilba and Maccoa, and had also Blocked up Aunui with a Fleet. They
likewise added, That these People were those, who about twenty three years
since appeared with two Ships and great Presents in the Mouth of the River of
Canton, but the Magistrates of the Place, who were well acquainted with their
Villainies, did wisely refuse them; That they had totally destroyed Heytaimon,
and laid their Houses in Ashes, and consequently no King in China would ever
have any thing to do with them, since they were held by all wise and knowing
People as the ruin and plague of that Empire; That they had made a Peace with
the Pyrate Coxinga, and for that reason were to be looked upon no otherwise
then as Enemies to the Tartar Crown. Last of all, They desired that this their
faithful Admonition might be taken in good part, as proceeding from a real and
upright Inclination which they bore to the Empire.

The Chinese Philosophers of Canton produced likewise to that end an old Story,
thereby to demonstrate, How that the Hollanders, time out of mind, were never
permitted to Traffic there, being always reputed to be deceitful in their
Dealings; wherefore they found themselves obliged to acquaint the Government
therewith, that so they might take the same into their serious Consideration.

But both the Viceroys, by advice of the said Haitonu, whom Schedel had
engaged on their side, gave this Answer to their Proposals:

That their Majesty's had quite another Opinion of this Business, and judged,
that the Holland Merchants would bring great Advantage and Profit to the
Inhabitants of all China, in regard that through the mutual Commerce of ^oth
these People, the Defects of the Country would be supplied, and what was
superfluous would be Exported, which must necessarily very much advance the
Trade thereof, and increase the Revenues of the Country. They withal declared,
That they could not conceive the Hollanders were such a sort of People as
hitherto they had been described unto them in China; but whatsoever Character
they lay stigmatized under by former Reports, they were for their parts
resolved to think better, and speak accordingly of them, believing now no
otherwise, but that they were brave Merchants. Last of all, They desired that
some trial might be had of their Dealings, and returned however their Thanks to
the Governors of Maccoa for their good Care and Counsel.

The Viceroys hereupon published in Writing their Consent to a free Trade, and
withal gave leave to Schedel to erect a Factory: They themselves likewise
bought a good part of his Imported Lading, whereof they made no small Gain,
which without doubt would have been far greater, if so be the ordinary
Merchants might have bought the same. It was also agreed, for the better
vending of the remainder of the Goods, That one Peter Bolle an Under-Factor,
with four Hollanders more, should have leave to continue at Canton. But after
that Schedel had taken his leave of the old Viceroy, and went to pay his
Congees to the young Viceroy, there happened a Business whereof he had not the
least thought of, and which did not a little surprise him.

A Commissioner who lately arrived from the Imperial City of Peking at Canton,
did highly dissuade the Viceroy from granting a free Trade to the Hollanders;
alleging, That it was one thing to grant a Port to a Foreign People, and
another to allow a constant Habitation in their Country, without informing of
the Supreme Authority, and that the Emperor ought to have notice, that so no
blame might light upon his Majesty. This did so much perplex the Viceroy, that
first of all he advised Schedel to depart, afterward to be gone forthwith, and
to take all his Company with him for this time, that so the King of Batavia (by
whom he understood the Holland General) might not think they were kept
Prisoners in Canton; adding withal, that this was done upon Schedel's Reasons,
and for their Good. Hereupon two days after Schedel departs with all his
Company, and whatever else, in the Brown-Fish for Batavia, taking with him two
Letters from the Viceroys, to Nicholas Verburgh, Commander in Chief at Taiwan.
In these Letters the Viceroys offer their Friendships to the General, and
advise him, if he desired in China a Free Trade, to send an Ambassador with
rich Presents to the Great Cham.

The Government of Batavia perceiving the good beginning of this Deputation,
thought fit to write to their Principals in Holland about it, and to expect
their Answer concerning this Embassy to the Great Cham. In the mean time, to
keep the Business on foot, they likewise thought good to send some other Person
to Canton, and so made choice of Zacharias Waggenaar for that Employment, who
departed from Batavia with two laden Vessels, the Shellfish and Brown-Fish;
which after a Months Sailing arrived at the Island of Heytamon, in the Mouth of
the River of Canton, and Sailed from thence to Wangsoe, within three Miles of
the City of Canton; where being arrived, they continued for some days in their
Station before they sent any one ashore; but at last (no body offering to come
Aboard) they thought good to send one of the Company thither, who immediately
applly'd himself to the Heytenu, who sent him to the Toutang; but not finding
this Toutang, or his Secretary at home, he returned late to the Sea side, not
knowing where to Lodge that Night: whereupon some of the Viceroys Followers
came running after him in great amazement, and desired him to return Aboard
forthwith, otherwise he would be in danger of losing his Life; but he refused,
and chose rather to lie all Night upon the Ground; which the Interpreter of the
Viceroy understanding, he offered him his own House, and led him homeward; but
coming near the Walls of the City, and mistrusting the Carriage of this
Interpreter, he desired that he might remain where he was till the Morning,
then he would venture into the City; which was accordingly done: and notice
thereof being given to the Viceroy, he presently ordered him a Lodging,
whither he went, and after some short stay applied himself to the Secretary of
the Toutang; who acquainted him, How that the Portugueses with their Followers,
had prevailed so far in the Imperial City of Peking, that a Letter was sent to
the Magistrates in Canton concerning them, intimating, That the Hollanders were
a treacherous lying People, and that for fear of being known in China they
durst not appear at Peking; insomuch that those in Canton ought to have a
watchful Eye upon them, especially if they were come without bringing with them
an Ambassador to the Great Tartar Cham.

At the same time came also from Maccoa to Canton a Commander, with a Request,
that by Provision, and till farther Advice should come from Peking, an Embargo
might be laid upon the Ships of the East India Company lying there;
insinuating, That the Hollanders had formerly in a Pyratical way taken several
of their Ships, to the utter ruin of their Country. The Portugueses likewise
to prevent the Hollanders from driving a Trade in China, paid an Arrear of four
years Tax. In short, this Business seemed to draw much Trouble after it, and
likewise to end with bad Success, though great hopes was given of the contrary
by those in Power, and much Art and Industry was used by them, to persuade the
Messenger that this Delay would in the end turn to his Advantage, and was only
occasioned through the coming of a certain Field-Commander from Peking, with
some thousands of Foot-Soldiers, to join and receive the young Viceroy, who
had been a while in pursuit of some Commotioners.

In the mean time Waggenaar expecting with great impatience the issue of his
Business, was so narrowly Guarded by two or three of the Viceroy's Vessels,
that no body was suffered to pass to or from him; at last, after long
expectation came the Messenger back, and presently after the Secretary of the
Toutang, with the Mandorins Taycoetsin and Thiapang, with Orders to bring the
Ships within half a Mile of the City, and there to lie till such time as the
said Commander (who was not to know for several Reasons of the Arrival of the
Hollanders) had taken his leave and was gone. During which time Waggenaar was
Presented with several Rarities, in token that the Hollanders were received as
Friends; in requital whereof he gratified their Kindness with Guinee Linen,
Bottles of Rose Water, and several other Returns. The next day the Ships being
come higher up the River, several of the Company would have gone ashore to
refresh themselves, but were prevented by the Viceroy's Ships of War, which
lay there to watch the Designs of Waggenaar.

Afterward came the Mandorin Haitonu Aboard with several Attendants, to conduct
Waggenaar Ashore; and when he had been civilly Treated, he desired him that he
would prepare himself to go to the Court: but just as he was taking Horse,
there came two Mandorins to him with an unexpected Message, putting several
strange Questions to him, viz. Why Waggenaar was desirous to speak with the
Viceroy? and what his Business was? and whether he had brought any Letters or
Presents for the Great Cham at Peking, and for the Mandoring Toutang at Canton?
adding withal (wherewith he ended his Discourse) That the Portugueses were the
occasion of all this misunderstanding. But that which seemed most pleasant,
they declared, That if the Hollanders would appear before the Viceroy in
Person, they must ^e very liberal to all that were about him. Whereupon
Waggenaar made answer, That he was not willing to Bribe the Viceroy or his
Courtiers, to take the Letters and Presents of his Lords and Masters, contrary
to his and their Inclinations; but yet he would give a good Sum of Money to him
that should procure a Free Trade for this Year at Canton. During this
Conference, the same Haitonu returns with Advice to Waggenaar, That he must not
appear before the Viceroy, who notwithstanding would read his Letter. Hereupon
Waggenaar delivers him the Letter; and not long after an Answer was brought him
by the Viceroy's Interpreter, which was to this effect: That in regard the
Hollanders had not brought with them any Letters nor Presents to the Emperor at
Peking, though sufficient Advice had been given thereof to the Hollanders at
Batavia, and highly recommended unto them; therefore it was to his great
sorrow, that he could not suffer them to have any Speech with him.

Now when Waggenaar saw that he could not effect any thing with him, he
departed from Canton with both the Yachts, and returned back to Batavia,
nothing being done. In the mean time, these barbarous People were not ashamed
to demand ten thousand Toel of Silver, only to render the Letter and Presents
acceptable to the Viceroy, before any Conference could be had about driving a
Trade with them.

Now according to the Proposal of the General John Maatzuiker, and the Council
of India, the Governors of the East India Company at Amsterdam, concluded and
ordered an Embassy to be sent from Batavia, to the Grand Tartar Cham at Peking.
Whereupon Peter de Goyer and Jacob de Keyzer, both Merchants, were chosen
Ambassadors at Hurkos, with a suitable Train of fourteen Pesons, namely two
Merchants, six Waiters, a Steward, a Surgeon, two Interpreters, one
Trumpeter, and one Drummer. Beside these, they took two Merchants more with
them, who during their Voyage to Peking, were to take care of the Traffic at
Canton, namely Francis Lantsman as Chief, and Henry Gramsbergen his Companion;
two Yatches were appointed to Transport them from Batavia to Canton, and from
thence to the Imperial City of Peking. The Presents which the Ambassadors took
with them for the Great Cham, consisted of several rich Piece-Goods, as Cloth,
Kersies, and other Woollen Manufactures, of fine Linen, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Coral, little Trunks of Wax, Perspective-Glasses, Looking-Glasses,
great and small Swords, Guns, Feathers, Armor, and several other Wares. The
Contents of their Credentials were to this purpose, that the chief end and
design of this Embassy was to make a good Agreement and firm League with the
Emperor of Tartary and China, that there might be a Free Trade driven
throughout his whole Kingdoms betwixt his Subjects and the Hollanders, and that
the same might be confirmed under the Hand and Seal of both Parties.

Having put Aboard the Merchandises, Presents, and other Necessaries for our
Voyage, the Ambassadors went Aboard on the 14. of June 1655. with all their
Followers, we set Sail that same Night with a South-East Wind from the Coast of
Batavia, steering our Course Northerly. But before I relate what happened to us
upon our Voyage, after we came in sight of the firm Land of China, I will give
you an Account in brief of this famous and eminent City, a Draught whereof I
toook before my Departure from thence, and is thus here represented in the
adjoining Print.

This City Batavia, The Description of the Island Iava.
so called from the Netherlands ancient Name, is situated in the Island of
Great Iava, and so fruitful in all manner of Cattle and Corn, that the Learned
Scaliger extolled this Island for one of the most fruitful and comprehensive
Places in the whole World: for from hence comes not only Pepper, Ginger,
Cinnamon, and other Spices in great abundance, but also all manner of tame and
wild Cattle, which are Transported from thence to other Parts. It produces also
all manner of Gems, Gold-Mines, Precious Stones, and rich Silks in great
quantities; but yet so subject to stormy and tempestuous Weather, that they are
seldom free from Commotion'd Skies.

The ancient Natives of this Island are originally sprung from the Chinese,
who for the most part fearing the Incursions of the Tartar, fled out of their
own Country, and settled themselves here in Iava and other adjacent Isles, which
they chose for their security against their Enemies. The Natives of this
Island, who call themselves by the Name of Iavaners, are generally of a middle
Stature, and round Visag'd; most of them go naked, having only a Cloth about
their Middle to cover their Secrets. They are counted the most civilized People
of all the Indians; but yet they are great Gluttons, Proud, Deceitful,
Impudent, and not to be trusted when they have Passed their Words: for when a
King of Iava had falsifi'd his Word and his Promise, and was handsomely rebuked
for it, he returned for answer, That the Tongue of a Man was not made of Bone;
as if he had said, It ought to be more pliant to the flexibility of the Mind
and various Resolutions. They are also represented to be Cruel, Blood-thirsty,
and hardly appeased when once offended; as also that they were wont to eat the
dead Bodies of their Friends. As to their Religion, they are all of them
Mahumetans or Idolaters, according to the several Persuasions of their Kings,
who are many in this Isle, where Paganism, as the most ancient, was spread
universally, and most of them were Idolaters: but within these 140 years
Mahumetanism seems to outstrip the other, having more Proselytes.



The chief Cities of this Island are, Bantam, (which is very famous for Trade,
Choribon, and Iapara, from whence the English and Hollanders fetch their Pepper
in great quantities. There was formerly in the place where the City of Batavia
is built (which the Hollanders took by force of Arms from the Natives) a City
called Caloppa, which in the time of Cornelius Houtman (the chief Promoter and
Contriver of the East India Navigation) was replenished with more than three
thousand Houses, beside several Forts and Bulwarks. But the English, who
endeavored to make themselves absolute and sole Masters of the Trade in this
Island, suborned several of the Inhabitants thereof to gain them on their
sides; and by this means caused the whole City to be totally destroyed. The
Hollanders on the other side, to frustrate this their Design, built two strong
Forts, whereof one is called Mauritius, situated upon the River, and the other
Nassau, in memory of that great Captain. Both these Places were always well
provided against the continual Assaults of those of Iava, who were still
endeavoring to drive the Hollanders out of this their Plantation. At last,
after some years, the Hollanders, the better to withstand the violent
Incursions of the Natives, built a new City fare stronger than the other, where
formerly the old Caloppa, or Iacatra was situated, and called it Batavia. This
Batavia, which lies in the height of 6 Degrees and 10 Minutes, is apiece,
a River running through the Town, which makes as it were two entire Cities. The
lesser half exceeds the other in Strength, in regard of an invincible Castle in
it, which for its better defense is encompassed with four Bulwarks with deep
Moats round about. The City is very populous, and consists of Natives,
Chinese, and Hollanders, and adorned with stately Structures, and the Streets
planted with several sorts of Indian Trees, so that you walk cool in the
greatest Heats. On the Seaside (which is narrowly Guarded) lies a safe and
commodious Harbor for Shipping. The Arms of the City is a naked Sword with a
Laurel Garland. Here the General (who Commands in the Name of the United
Provinces over all the Forts and Castles in India) has his Residence; who is
provided with no less Power and Authority than formerly the Stadtholder and
chief Commander of these Parts were wont to enjoy, and lives in no less Pomp
and State than the Princes of Europe: And this great Honor and Authority is
conferred upon him, that the Natives, dazzled with the splendour of his
Greatness, may so be the better reduced under Obedience. But with this
Commander in Chief is joined a Council, whose Advice is always to be taken in
Matters of Peace and War, the Protection and safety of the Country, and the
Commerce thereof. The Judicature consists of a President and several Aldermen.
There is one general Guild or Chamber of Accounts, to which all the rest which
are in India under the Command of the Hollanders, are responsible. The whole
City lies surrounded with thirteen strong Bulwarks, which have been often
Attempted and Assaulted by the Natives, but are not to be Mastered.

The Hollanders made formerly a Contract at Iava with the Kings of those Parts,
about the Business of Commerce; but when they began to deal treacherously,
contrary to the Articles of Agreement, in raising the Imposts, it was thought
fit to erect a Castle or Fort in the City. The English at that time held a
straight Correspondence and Amity with the Hollanders; but it so happened, that
Fears and Iealousies, and Misunderstandings arose between them; so that after a
bloody Fight of eleven English Ships against seven Hollanders, which continued
from Morning till Night, our Party was forced to fly, and to retreat to
Amboyna, and there to Rally more Force. The King of Iacatra upon this Occasion
made an Agreement with the English, and joining their Forces together, laid
close Siege to the new Fort, which defended it self gallantly for six Months.
In the mean time the Hollanders brought several of their Ships from the Malava
Islands, to the number of eighteen, which came thither to relieve their
besieged Countrymen. The English having advice of their coming, left the Siege,
brought the Cannon Aboard, and set Sail through the Straight of Sunda. The
General John Peterson Koene (who was newly arrived with a Fleet from Holland,
not doubting of the Treachery of the King, though he endeavored to excuse
himself, laying all the blame upon the English) Landed his Men with good Order
and Conduct; who after a few hours Refreshment, prepared themselves to assault
the Besiegers; which they did, and after some little opposition broke through
the Trenches, and got into the City. The King finding his Forces defeated, and
the Town relieved, saved himself by flight, leaving the residue of his Army to
the Mercy of the Hollanders, who put all to the Sword, except Women and
Children; yea, the City of Iacatra it self was laid in Ashes, and the Walls
levelled with the Ground. After this great Victory, the Hollanders strongly
fortified themselves in those Parts; which the Emperor of the Island Iava
perceiving, concluded to Besiege this our new erected City of Batavia; and in
the Year 1629. he Encamped himself under the Walls, making several Assaults
upon the Place, but was still beaten off with considerable Loss. The greatest
Attempt which the Enemy made, was upon September 20. in the Night; but they
were likewise forced to retreat with a great slaughter; whose dead Bodies was
no small annoyance to the Besieged: Against this Inconvenience they burnt
several odoriferous Gums, to prevent the Contagion which might proceed from
thence.

Amongst other remarkable Passages that happened during this Siege, is that Storm
most to be admired, which the Enemy made upon a Fort situated at the farther
corner of the City, which was only Guarded by sixteen Soldiers, who showed far
greater Courage in making their Defense, than the Assaulters in the Attempt
with their whole Army; for after that they had spent all their Powder and Shot,
they until'd the very Fort, and with the Shards thereof did very great
Execution upon the Enemy; which Ammunition being likewise spent, and having
nothing offensive, they at last emptied the House-of-Office with Chamber-pots,
and flung the Excrements, and so at once both perfumed and painted the naked
Bodies of the Enemy; who at last perceiving that those of the City intended to
Sally out and relieve their Fellow Soldiers, they raised the Siege, crying out
in their Language, O you stinking Holland Devils, you Fight with Tantoblins,
and your Arms are Turdy-Pistical.

But the Hollanders mistrusting the Iavaners, continued within the City till
the Morning, then sending out some Foot to observe their Motion and Intention;
who found that they were all fled, and had left more than eight hundred dead on
the Spot behind them; some of them were beheaded, others run through, and laid
in Rank and File one by another. The occasion of this Murder is said to be
this: The Emperor had the Year before (for this was the second Siege)
dispatched one of the chiefest Princes of the Kingdom with an Army to Batavia;
who finding great Opposition, returned re infecta: The Prince of Madura (which
Island lies about half a Mile from Iava, under the Power and Command of the
Emperor) had made great Brags in contempt and disparagement of some other
Princes, what great Feats he would have done upon the City with such an Army as
this was, of two hundred thousand Men, or else he would never have returned
alive. The Emperor hearing this, sent for him, and made him Commander over
new-raised Forces, together with the former, who had been sole General the
foregoing Year, a Person of a good Nature, Prudent, Valiant, and well beloved
among the Soldiers: This General finding himself very much slighted by the
Prince of Madura, who was joined in Commission with him, looked upon himself as
bound in point of Honor to be revenged upon him; and having communicated his
Intention to some of his Friends in the Army, they immediately concluded to put
his Design in execution, being all of them made sensible of the Affront. The
Prince of Madura in the interim, not dreaming of the Mischief that was intended
him, came accidentally into the Chamber to confer about some Business with this
General: who thereupon told him, That his Word should now prove true, for from
Batavia be should never return alive; which having said, they presently killed
him: Word thereof being brought to the Emperor, who had a particular Respect
for this old General, he seemed to like well enough of what had been done, and
gave him his Pardon. Thus much for Digression.

After the space of eight days, we came upon the 22. in sight of Paulo Teymon,
which is a pleasant, wondrous, and delightful Island, (as is expessed in the
adjoining Print) full of Woods, Hills, and Dales. Here we sent our Boats Ashore
to fetch Wood and fresh Water, wherewith we had not at first so well provided
our selves as we ought to have done.

In this Island grows the Leaf Betel in great abundance, much in request
amongst the Iavaners, who fetch whole Boats-full.

We made no long stay here, but as soon as we had got our Provisions Aboard, we
set Sail to pursue our Voyage, and on the 1. of July came in sight of the large
Continent, leaving Couchinchina North North-West; and about Noon we h^d the
height of 20 Degrees and 6 Minutes: we Sailed along the Coast, which was very
pleasant. This Couchinchina is part of the Kingdom of Gannan, which is one of
the neighbor Countries that are situated out of the Kingdom of China, but yet
belongs to the Chinese; for under this Gannan is situated the Kingdoms of
Tungking and Kianchi, or Couchinchina, both which were formerly called Nankiao.
The Emperor Haionus, who was of the Family of Hana, being a valiant Prince,
conquered first of all these Countries, which he Planted, and afterward
Governed the Inhabitants thereof according to the Laws and Manners of the
Chinese. This same Emperor was also the first who named these Countries and
the Inhabitants Kiaoch; but afterward the Family of Tanga called them by the
Name of Kiaochians. But it seems that the Chinese never made any account of
these Countries, in regard that the Inhabitants, according to the Saying of the
Chinese, were wild and uncivil in their Conversation: but others say they did
it more out of fear, because they knew very well, that the Inhabitants far
exceeded them in strength of Body, and were desirous rather to live conformable
to their own Laws and Customs, and have their own King, than submit their Necks
under the Yoke of the Chinese. At the beginning of the Reign of the Family of
Taiminga, for the space of 290 years, these People were brought under the Lash
of the Emperor Hunguus. But this Country was afterward made over to a petty
King called Chin, who soon was made away by his three Governors, who were of
the Family of Ly, and so possessed themselves of the Realm. When the Emperor
Iunglos observed the troublesome Condition of that Kingdom, he caused two of the
Governors to be put to Death, but the third escaped by flight; and the Emperor
afterward reduced the Kingdom of Gannam into a Province; but he had no sooner
laid down his Arms, but the Fugitive Ly began to appear again in the Field, and
made himself Master of the Kingdom: which done, he speedily sent Ambassadors to
pacify the Emperor. At that time Sivanteus was Emperor, a peaceable Man, and
more a Slave to his Pleasure than a Prince of his Countries: This Emperor being
weary of all these Mutinies and Troubles, made over again this Country to this
same Ly, and installed him as a petty Prince, upon Condition that he should
send to him every three years an Ambassador with great Presents. And in this
manner these Parts were divided from the Empire of China about the Year 1428.
But these Countries, notwithstanding all this, grew very troublesome, being full
of Divisions; so that at last they came to be divided into three Parts: the
first was called The Kingdom of Laos, the second The Kingdom of Tunking, and
the third Couchinchina, which at present are no other than part of the
Provinces of Quangsi and Iunnan.

The Inhabitants of these three Kingdoms, Laos, Tunking, and Couchinchina,
follow the Religion of the Chinese. They likewise use the Chinese Characters,
but yet differ very much in Speech and Pronunciation from them. These Countries
are very fruitful in every thing belonging to the sustenance of Mankind; among
other innumerable Trees and Fruits, there grows a Bean, which makes an Oil or
Juice, by the Portugueses called Rosamalia. From hence comes likewise in great
abundance the Eagle-Wood, which is of a Purple color, and is known to the
Spaniards by the Name of Lacca, and used in China to dye and color
Silk-Stuffs. It produces likewise good store of Linen, Silk, and Cotton.

Among other sorts of Monkies, here is also found one called Singsiing: the
manner of taking them in the Woods, is to set Wine before them, with which they
being Fudled, fall asleep, and so are taken napping; their Blood makes an
excellent Purple Dye.

Upon the 10. of the same Month we had a most violent Tempest, to our great
amazement and terror, in which we lost sight of the Yacht Bloemendael; during
which there happened such perpetual Lightning, and hideous Thunder, mingled with
a Hurricane, that there was hardly any standing upon the Decks, so that we were
hourly in expectation of the loss both of Ship and Goods. By the Way we saw a
Ship driving without Masts, but could not discern what she was. The next day
about Noon the Storm began to abate, insomuch that toward Night we were able to
make some small Sail, and saw at a great distance a stout Ionck driving, which
had lost all her Masts and Rigging in the Storm; coming near unto her, she told
us that she came from Cambeya bound for Taiwan, and that the Wind had so far
driven them, that they had quite lost their Course, desiring to be directed by
us what Point to steer; we willingly answered their Request, and showed them
the Streak which runs up to the Island Formosa; for which they thanked us, and
steered their Course accordingly. In the mean time we repaired our Leaks and
Disorders; which done, we Sailed with a West-Wind North-West.

Upon the 14. we came in sight of the Island Maccoa, and kept us by the height
of 21 Degrees and 10 Minutes: in the Evening we Anchored, and the next Morning
we set Sail. We saw lying upon the Shore several Boats, but not one would come
Aboard, notwithstanding all the Signs we made to invite them, so wondrous
fearful they are of the Pyrate cokesing them, who at that time held the Coast
in continual Alarm, and whom they undoubtedly took us to be.

Two days we Sailed under this Island, thence passing by the most famous and
wealthy City of Maccoa; The Description of the City Maccoa*
and though we came not near it, yet I shall relate what I have understood from
others, concerning the Magnificence of this Place, whereof you have a Draught
as it was taken at Sea.

This Seat (which for many Ages has been held for the greatest Trading City in
all Asia) lies upon a little hanging Island, fixed to a greater, and is built
upon 2 very high Rock, which rises out of the Water, whose Wall is washed round
about by the Sea, except on the North-side, where it joins to the Land by a
little Slip, so that by the Sea on the one side, and the Mountainous Situation
on the other, it is held invincible against the Power and Strength of any
whatsoever. The Sea which surrounds this Place is not very deep, so that there
is no Harbor near (...) any great Ships. This City exceeds all others for great
Cannon, which are to be had there at a reasonable Rate, and wherewith they
drive a considerable Trade, for they are held to be the best of all India,
being Cast of Chinese and Iapan Copper, and are sent for far and near. On the
side of the Land stand only two Castles upon two small Hills, which are however
a great defense to the City against any Invasion. This Seat has nothing of
Trees, or the like, to hinder a fair Prospect toward the Sea. The midst of the
old Foundation, ere this City was built, an Idol possessed, called Ama; and
because of a safe Harbor there for Shipping, which the Chinese call Gao, these
two words being conjoined, they named it Amacao, and for brevities sake
contracted it to Maccao, or Maccou. This Place (which lay waste and unbuilt)
the Portugueses, with the consent of the Chinese, did reedifie and inhabit,
which in a short time grew very populous and renowned for Commerce, whither the
Portugueses sent great store of Merchandises out of Europe and India by Sea, as
also from China. Likewise the Portugueses in Maccao (which does not a little
advance and increase their Trade) have obtained that freedom from the Chinese,
that they may come twice ayear to the chief City Canton, at their annual Marts,
and there Barter, Buy, and Sell, and Transport then from thence abundance of
several Wares to Maccao: for there is found entered into the Custom-Books (when
the Commerce flourished in that Place) how much they Imported and Exported;
they Exported above three hundred Chests of all sorts of Silks, in each Chest a
hundred and fifty Pieces of Velvet, or the like: they brought likewise from
thence 25 hundred Ingots of Gold, each Ingot weighing thirteen Ounces: they
likewise commonly Exported eight hundred Pounds of Musk, beside great
quantities of Gold-Thred, fine Linen, unwrought Silk, Precious Stones, Pearls,
etc.

Sailing thus by the City of Maccao, we came to an Anchor under the Island of
Goyers, so called by the Name of Peter de Goyer.

Opon the 18. of the same Month we arrived about Sunset, only in company with
the Yacht Koukerken, (for we lost the Yacht Bloemendael in the Storm, upon the
Coast of Couchinchina, which came not till 48 days after us to Canton) very
safe into the Harbor of Heytamon, and dropped our Anchor in the middle of the Bay
at six and a half Fathom Water. This Place is exceeding pleasant, and most
commodious for Trade; on the Water side delightful Hills, and Dales behind, as
is to be seen by the an^^xed Print.

We were no sooner at Anchor, but a Barque full of Soldiers Boarded us, who in
the Name of the Governor were sent to ask the occasion of our coming. Hereupon
the Ambassadors sent Hendrick Baron Ashore, to acquaint him by word of Mouth
with the occasion of our Arrival; who when he came on Shore, was conducted into
his Bedchamber, where he was received very courteously and Treated by him; who
asked why the Hollanders did return? and whether they were not about two years
since expressly forbidden to come to Canton.

Six days after, on the 24. came two Mandorins from Canton to view the
Credentials they brought to the Great Cham; and to that purpose they sent for
the Ambassadors to the Governors House. Hereupon the Ambassadors, with all
their Followers, made up the River, and came about Noon to the Village of
Lamme, where they went Ashore, and were from thence conducted by the Master of
the Ceremonies to the Governor's Palace.

At their Entry they found the Governor sitting at a high Table in the Hall,
betwixt the two Mandorins, Guarded with Soldiers, who civilly treated us, and
were serviceable unto us. After Complements passed, the Ambassadors showed
their Credentials at a distance, against which the Mandorins had nothing to
object; and then Chairs were set for the Ambassadors to sit down: which being
done, the Mandorins and Governor began to ask several Questions concerning the
Trade and Condition of the United Netherlands; which being answered by the
Ambassadors, they seemed satisfied, and returned to the Ship with all their
Followers.

Upon the 29. came again a new Heyton, with a Vice Admiral (as Commissioners
from Canton) to receive the Ambassadors, and to conduct them thither. Whereupon
the Ambassadors at their Invitation went again Ashore, and were conducted to an
Idol-Temple; where being received after the usual manner, they spread their
Credentials upon the Table: Then Heyton began to propose several Questions,
namely, Whether we did not Sail from Canton about two years? What manner of
Wares and Merchandises we had brought with us? Who was Aboard the other Ship,
and how they came to separate from us? How many Men and Guns were in each Ship?
Why they did not come the last last Year? And why we staid away one Year, and
then came the second? When, by whom, as also to what end the Letters were
written, and the Ambassadors addressed themselves? What Presents we had brought
in particular for the Emperor? They seemed to wonder very much, that the
Ambassadors had brought no Letter to the Teutang in Canton, and that the
Letters were put up so meanly: for they let them understand, that the Letter to
the Emperor ought to have been put up in a Golden Purse, or Box at least. At
last they thus made a Conclusion, That the next day they would come Aboard our
Ships to receive the Presents. Hereupon the Ambassadors departed, and went
Aboard again.

The next day the same Commissioners, with a great many Courtiers, came Aboard,
bringing with them several Vessels, very handsomely set off with Silk Flags and
Penons, to take in the Presents, as well for the Emperor as the Canton
Viceroys and the Teutang, which they received with great civility. The Heyton
came himself Aboard to bid us welcome, and carried the Ambassadors, with their
Secretary Henry Baron and four of their Followers, in one of their Vessels to
the City of Canton, being accompanied with the Vice Admiral; where being
arrived, the said Commissioners went into the City, without speaking one word
to the Ambassadors; and after that the Retinue had staid at least two hours at
the Gates of the City, they were sent for in the Name of the Viceroy, and
conducted to a Lodging without the Walls, where formerly Mr. Schedel had
Lodged, and there Guarded and taken care of by the City Marshal.

The next day, being the 31. there came to our Lodging with Commissioners, the
Mandorin Poetsiensin, the Emperor's Treasurer, having the fourth Voice of the
Government in the City. They began again to move several Questions to the
Ambassadors, asking them, How many years they had been Married? Their Names and
former Employments? as likewise, If they had no Copy of the Letter to the
Emperor? And whether that Letter was not writ upon better Paper than the
Epistle to the Viceroys? Wherefore, and to what end they were chiefly sent?
How their Prince and King was called? with several other Questions: Then they
seemed to Mutter, and be displeased at the slight Fashion of the Credentials.
To the Request which the Ambassadors made, That they might have Audience of the
Viceroys, and have leave to go for Peking, they gave no Answer; but going with
the Letters to the Viceroys, they returned again about Noon, and then began to
ask, Whether the Prince and Government of Holland had no Stamp not Great Seal
for their Letters? and from what Age of the World they were Dated. And as
concerning the Desire of the Ambassadors, they gave them to understand, That
neither the Viceroys, nor the Teutang, nor any body else in Canton, had the
Power to give Audience to any Ambassadors, before they had first received an
Answer to the Letter which they had sent to Peking concerning them: However,
they gave order that the Yacht Koukerken should be brought near to the City,
and promised that the Viceroys (to welcome the Ambassadors in a more then
ordinary manner, and to view the Presents which they had brought to the Great
Cham) would appear personally at their Lodging.

Wherefore upon the second of August we received Order to follow the Ambassador
with our Yacht, four great Men of War of the Viceroy's being appointed to
conduct us up the River. About the Evening we came to an Anchor near a small
Castle, where the River is above two Miles broad, and has lying upon both sides
several little Islands. On the left side of this River, upon a small Hill,
stands a high Tower, very curiously adorned with nine Rounds. The like Tower
also shows it self upon a certain Island, over against the chief City of
Canton. The Countries situated on both sides of this River, abound very much in
Villages, which are mighty populous, and fruitful Fields, affording twice every
year the laboring and diligent Countriman a very rich Harvest.

Upon the fourth of the same Month we came before the famous and Chief City of
Canton, which is called by some Quancheu, and the first Capital City of the
Province of Quantung. After our Devotions, and the taking order about every
thing Aboard our Ship, we went that day Ashore to the Ambassadors, whom we
found Lodged in a stately Edifice, situated upon the River side (over against
which lay our Yacht) and formerly had been an Idol-Temple. The Viceroy had
ordered two Mandorins to Guard with a good number of Soldiers the Gates for our
Security.

But no sooner was the Yacht come to the Ambassadors Lodgings, but they must
immediately (though against their wills) return Aboard again, under pretense,
that no Ambassadors which are sent to the Emperor are to reside at Canton,
without an express Order from his Imperial Majesty: They likewise alleged for
their excuse, That the Governors of Canton would not be able to answer to the
Emperor concerning any Mischief or Accident which might happen to the
Ambassadors, being Ashore. Afterward the Mandorins, Poetsiensin, and Heyton,
brought the Credentials opened Aboard, saying, That the Viceroys durst not
accept or keep them, before they had received Advice from the Imperial City of
Peking.

As at the beginning, for the better understanding of the whole Relation of our
Travels, I gave an Account in short of all the great and small Cities of the
ten Provinces in China through which I did not travel, so now I find my self
necessitated, for the more particular information of the whole Empire of China,
to relate briefly the remaining five Provinces, each in his due place, and the
number of Cities into which each Province is divided; all which I saw my self.

The Province of Quantung, which is the twelfth in number (amongst the fifteen
into which all China is divided) is encompassed on the West with the Province
of Quangsi, on the North-West and North with that of Kiangsi; on the North-East
it borders upon Foking, from which it is separated by steep Hills and
Mountains, and the River Ting: All the rest of the Province borders on the Sea,
which causes so many safe Harbors and Roads for Shipping in these Parts. The
Country is in some places flat and even, and in others Hilly and Mountainous,
especially toward the South, as we often found to our great inconvenience upon
our Voyage.

This Province produces all things necessary for the sustenance of Man, as
likewise several sorts of rich Wares and Commodities, as well Artificial as
Natural: It likewise yields the Husbandman Fruits twice ayear, as Rice, Corn,
and other Products; for in it you have no cold Weather all Winter, so that the
Chinese have a Proverb among them, that there are three very strange things in
Quantung, viz. The Heaven without Snow, Trees green in Winter as in Summer, and
The Inhabitants spitting Blood: for first of all, it never Snows here, the
Trees are never unperwig'd, and the Inhabitants continually chewing the Leaves
of Betel and Areka, prepared after their way, makes their Spittle red. From
hence comes likewise great quantities of Gold, Pearl, Precious Stones, Silk,
Quicksilver, Copper, Steel, Iron, Saltpeter, Eagle-Wood, and several other
odoriferous Woods.

The People in these Parts are very ingenious, laborious, and nimble, and can
imitate any thing which they see made before them: and whatsoever the
Portugueses bring thither out of Europe woven of Gold, Silver, or the like,
which is strange unto them, they will immediately endeavor to work the same,
and in a short time will accomplish what they undertake: for I gave a Chinese
Goldsmith a Silver Button to make a Set by, and the next day he brought to my
Lodging what I had bespoke, very curiously wrought, as if he had been used to
such work, though he had never done the like before; which argues their
Ingenuity to be very great.

Among other Fowls which are to be seen in this Country, are great store of
Ducks, which the Inhabitants have the art and way to raise and increase, beyond
all the rest of their Neighbors.

This Province is Governed (as also each of the other Provinces) in the
Emperors Name, by Governors, who by those of Europe (because their Offices and
Employments much resemble Viceroys) are called petty Kings, who commonly
reside in the first Chief City of the Province.

When we were at Canton, Quantung was Governed by two Viceroys, whereof one,
in regard of his Years, was called the old, and the other the young Viceroy:
The Portugueses called the young Viceroy Halick Mancebo.

The Viceroys of Quantung take place of all the Governors of the other
Provinces, because situated upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom, and far remote
from the Imperial City Peking, and borders also upon the Sea; by which means
the Highways are troubled with Robbers, and the Sea with Pirates: therefore
the Emperor orders that the Viceroys of Quantung shall Command over the
Province of Quantung, though this last, as the other Provinces, has also
particular Viceroys.

This Country was formerly a Kingdom of it self, and called Nainve, and first
brought under the Command of the Chinese Emperors at the end of the Reign of
the Race of Cheva; yet however it did not continue long under that Power, but
revolted, and would be Ruled by none but the Kings of Nainve. The Emperor
Hiaorus (of the Family of Hana) at last conquered this part, since which time
it has been subject to the Emperors of China.

In this Province are ten Chief Cities, and seventy three small Cities,
Quantung and her Cities.
without reckoning among them the City of Maccao, famous for Traffic and
Commerce.

The ten Chief Cities are these, Quancheu or Canton, Xaocheu, Nanhiung,
Hoeicheu, Chaocheu, Chaoking, Kaocheu, Liencheu, Lincheu, and Kiuncheu.

The Chief City of Quancheu Commands over fifteen small Cities, among which I
do not reckon Maccao, though it lies under the Command of this Chief City. The
15 small ones of this great City are these; Quancheu or Canton, Xunte, Tangvon,
Cengching, Hiangxan, Sinhoei, Cingyven, Sinning, Cunghoa, Lungumen, Sanxui,
Lien, Iangxan, Tienxan, and Singan.

The second Capital City Xaocheu Commands over six small Cities, Xaocheu,
Locang, Giughoa, Iuyven, Ungyen, and Ingote. The Country about this Chief City
is for the most part full of Hills.

The third Chief City is Nanhiung or Nanhung, and Commands over two Cities,
Nanhiung and Xihing.

The fourth Chief City is Hoeicheu, and Commands over 10 small Cities,
Hoeicheu, Polo, Haifung, Hoiven, Lungchuen, Changlo, Hingning, Hoping,
Changing, and Iunggan.

The fifth Chief City is Chaocheu, and Commands likewise over 10 small Cities,
Chaocheu, Chaoyang, Kieyang, Chinghiang, Iaoping, Tapu, Hoeilai, Cinghai,
Puning, and Pingyven.

The sixth Chief City is Chaoking, and Commands over eleven Cities, Chaoking,
Sinhoei, Sinhing, Yangchun, Yangkiang, Caoming, Genping, Teking, Quangning,
Fuchuen, and Kalklen.

The seventh Chief City is Caocheu, and Commands over six small Cities,
Caocheu, Tienpe, Sing, Hoa, Vuchnen, and Xeching.

The eighth Chief City is Lieucheu, and Commands over four small Cities,
Lieucheu, Knig, Lingxan, and Xelien.

The ninth Chief City is Luicheu, and Commands over three small Cities,
Luichtu, Sniki, and Siuven.

The tenth Chief City is Kiuncheu, situated in the Island of Hainan, and
Commands over twelve small Cities, Kiuncheu, Lincao, Tingan, Veuchung,
Hoeitung, Lohoei, Chen, Changhoa, Van, Linxui, Yai, and Cangen.

In this whole Province are ten Forts or Castles, which serve for the Defense
of the Province and the Sea, the Names whereof are these; Taching, Tung,
Hanxan, Ginghai, Kiacu, Kiexe, Ciexing, Hiung, Iunching, and Ciungling.

The Chinese Toll-Book (wherein the number of the People of each Province is
set down) makes mention of Four hundred eighty three thousand three hundred and
sixty Families, and Nineteen hundred seventy eight thousand and twenty Fighting
Men in this Province.

The Taxes which this Province pays yearly to the Emperor, amounts to Ten
hundred seventeen thousand seven hundred and twenty two Bags of Rice, and seven
thousand three hundred and fourscore Weight of Salt.

CANTON.
CAnton, the first Chief City of this Kingdom, lies upon the height of twenty
three Degrees Northern Latitude, and is surrounded toward the East, West, and
North, with very fruitful and delightful Hills, and borders toward the South so
much upon the Sea, that on that side there is no part of all China so
commodious to Harbor Shipping, where they likewise arrive daily fram all
Quarters of the World, with all manner of Goods, wherewith they make a
considerable Gain. It lies likewise upon the right-side of the River Ta, where
it grows somewhat narrow; but lower toward the Sea it spreads to such a
breadth, that it seems more like an Ocean than a Stream. For three Miles upon
this River is the City of Canton Walled in, and some Places adorned with rich
and populous Suburbs, which are not much inferior to the ordinary Cities both
in bigness and number of Inhabitants.

On the Water side the City is defended with two rows of high and thick Walls,
which are strengthened with Bulwarks, Watch-Towers, and other Forts: and beside
these Works there are two other strong Water-Castles, which being built in the
middle of the River, render this City invincible. One of these two Castles,
which I saw my self, and which does not much differ in any thing from the
other, I took an exact Draught of, which you have here presented, showing the
Strength of the Place, and in what manner built.

The City is likewise defended and surrounded on the Land side with a strong
Wall, and five strong Castles, whereof some are within the Walls, and others
without upon the tops of steep Hills; so that this City is sufficiently both by
Sea and Land defended against all the Invasions of any Enemy whatsoever, and in
the opinion of some seems invincible. What concerns the Idol-Temples, Courts,
and Palaces of Great Lords, and other rare Edifices, which are to be seen here,
there is no City in all Asia that shows the like.

Here also are several Triumphal Arches, which have been erected to the Honor
of such as have done their Country Service. They are no small Ornament to the
Place; for from the Watergate, going directly on to the King's Palace, I told
in that Line only, no less than thirteen stately Triumphal Arches made of hewn
Stone, which are so set out with Figures and Inscriptions in Carved Work, that
all who behold them, admire them as Wonders.

And this being one of the greatest and most considerable Ornaments wherewith
the Chinese adorn their Cities, I have for the better demonstration of the
Workmanship, set before you the following Printed Draught of one of them, that
you may take a full view of every part, and so judge of all the rest, which are
generally built after one and the same fashion.

These Arches are commonly built with three Stories, so artificially, that we
may very well say, that neither Wit nor Ingenuity were wanting in their
Contrivance. Round about the Pillars, and in other places, were writ several
Chinese Characters, and also cut several Flowers, Beasts, Birds, and other
curious Ornaments, as I suppose, Emblematical.

This Canton exceeded formerly in Shipping all other Chief Cities in China,
whose Ships likewise were counted the best Sailers; for the Inhabitants went
beyond all other Chinese in Navigation, to the Islands of Formosa, Iapan, and
other Parts, which did very much increase the Wealth and Commerce of the Place.

That you may the better take a view of the Situation of this most famous City,
I here present two Draughts, the one the Prospect as upon the Water, the other
Ichnographical, of their Streets, Ground-plats, Temples, Walls, Castles,
Houses, and whatsoever else. They say this City before the last War, was so
wondrous populous and full of Traffic, that daily there were at least five or
six Men crowded to death in passing through the Gates; which will not seem
altogether incredible, if you consider the number of the adjacent Villages,
which abound with People constantly resorting thither. This City has been
twice subdued by Arms; and they say, that in the last Siege there were slain
above a hundred thousand Men. I shall relate to you in short what happened to
Canton during that terrible and bloody Invasion.

After that the Tartars had made themselves Masters of all China (except some
few Sea-Towns) they fell with such a formidable Army into this Province of
Quantung, that hardly any City, how strong and populous soever, durst withstand
them; but every one endeavored (for prevention of her total ruin) to receive
the Conqueror upon the best Terms they could. This Canton (relying upon her
invincible Forts and Castle) only bid defiance to the Tartar: the Strength of
the Place did not a little encourage the Chinese Inhabitants; but that which
chiefly gave them a Resolution to withstand the Enemy was, that they had one
Iquon on their side, who Commanded a powerful Fleet, whereby he daily furnished
the City with all necessary Provisions; which the Tartars could not hinder,
wanting Sea-Forces, and being unskilful in Maritime Affairs: But the Besiegers
being Masters of the Field, spared neither pains nor cost to reduce it by
force; they Stormed the City three times, but were courageously beaten off by
the Besieged, with great loss of Men and Arms. This brave Defense of the
Inhabitants made the Siege to last a whole year; and their strong Garrison
enabled them to make so many Sallies upon the Besiegers, that they at last
found themselves necessitated, either to make one general Assault with their
whole Army, or else as Baffled to raise their Leagure.

But among those which did most prejudice to the Tartars, were two Holland
Gunners, who had Marrid Chinese Women, and Settled themselves there; and THE
GROUND PLAT OF KANTON
a A Pagode Temple, b. a Fort, c. The land Gate, d The Wall of the City. e the
Place where the Tartars are exercised, f The Quarters of the Tartars. g. a
Fair Chinese Tower, h. The Old kings Palace i. the young kings Palace* k. the
first Watergate, l Second Watergate. m. The Ambassadors house, n. Artillery
house, o. the Plain where the (...) was, p. Two Water Ch^tlas, q. The
Dutsh-Ships.


through their Advice and Conduct the City held out some Months longer: but at
last the Tartars having made a great Breach with their Ordnance in the Wall of
the City, which might have encouraged them to have made a general Storm; yet
they thought convenient to delay it, until they had corrupted some of the chief
Heads of the City, and had formed such a Conspiracy therein, that so they
needed not to fear any Miscarriage in the Attempt.

The Viceroys who Governed over this Kingdom at that time when we were there,
had then the chief Command over the Tartars: These endeavored to corrupt the
Governor of Canton with great Promises, and Sums of Money, signifying withal
unto him these words; That he should consider into what extreme Danger he was
brought, and what Disasters were hanging over his Head; That if so be he either
loved himself or his Relations, he should forthwith surrender the City; and
this his Favor they promised to requite with eternal Friendship, higher
Preferment, and forty thousand Toel of Silver.

The pusillanimous and faithless Chinese Governor, whether that his Heart
misgave him, or the Money and large Promises tempted the Man, so it was, that
though he might very well have defended the City, yet contrary to his Oath and
Honor he made a Promise to the same Tartarian Commanders, to set open a Gate to
the Besiegers at an appointed hour; which accordingly he performed.

It was upon the 24. of November 1650. when the Tartars upon this Advantage
rushed with their whole Army into the City, which was soon subdued by them, the
Besieged not being in a Condition to make any resistance; for no sooner was the
Tartar Horse got in, but they rid with great swiftness through all the Streets,
to hinder the Chinese from gathering together; and though the Chinese were
not inferior in number to the Tartars, yet they effected nothing, being in
Disorder, and surpised by the Treachery of their Governor; so that the best
course any could use, was to save himself by flight. The whole Tartar Army
being got into the City, the Place was soon turned to a Map of Misery; for
every one began to tear, break, and carry away whatsoever he could lay hands
on: The Cry of Women, Children, and Aged People was so great, that it exceeded
all noise of such loud Distractions; so that from the 26. of November to the
15. of December, there was heard no other Cry in the Streets, but Strike, Kill,
and Destroy the rebellious Barbarians; all places being full of woeful
Lamentations, Murder, and Rapine: Those that were able to Ransom, bought their
Lives at dear Rates, and so escaped the fury of these inhumane Slaughterers. At
last the Viceroys, and Chief Commanders of the Army, upon the sixth of
Winter-Month did strictly forbid any such cruel Murder to be committed
thence-forward. I was credibly informed, that during the space of 80 days,
above eight thousand were killed in cold Blood by the Tartars. Some (amongst
which the Jesuit Martinus is one, in his Book of the Tartar War) say, that
there were slain above a hundred thousand; which is not altogether improbable,
in regard of the great number there penned up. But although this City was thus
lamentably laid waste, yet through the great care of the Viceroys, it was in a
few years after restored to its former luster.

After that the Ambassadors had been three Weeks Aboard, without coming Ashore
all that while, they had leave given to Land with all their Followers, and were
most nobly received in their former Lodgings; but yet were so narrowly Guarded
by a great number of Foot-Soldiers, that they were not permitted to go into the
Streets.

Two Days after there came a Mandorin to them in the Name of the Viceroy, who
proposed to them, That they (to obtain their Ends in China) could not Present
and give to the Emperor's Council at Peking, and the Governors at Canton, less
than three hundred Toel of Silver. But when the Ambassadors returned him in
Answer, That it was not their Design and Intention to buy the Permission of a
Free Trade in China; and that it would be much better for them, if their
Business must be bought out with Bribes, to depart forthwith out of China.
Thereupon the Mandorin departed from them much discontented, saying, that he
had no farther Order, but would report back what they had declared; and withal
advised them to stay till they should hear farther from Peking.

When now the Ambassadors for the performance of this heavy and unreasonable
Demand, were called upon Day after Day, they concluded to ease themselves of
the continual Clamours of these People, A ^toel is 13 Ducatoons in Silver.
by promising 135 Toel of Silver; but finding that they demanded Interest for
the disbursed Moneys, the Ambassadors resolved to depart; but they were
prevented by order from the Viceroys, who sent express word, that they must
not go away until further Advice were come from Peking.

But they in the mean time hearing no farther mention made of the Interest,
gave a Note under their Hands for the payment of 136 Toel of Silver; wherewith
the Viceroys seemed so well satisfied, that they invited the Ambassadors to a
most splendid Feast, upon the 19. of September: In an open Plain were pitched
ten rich and stately Tents by order of the Viceroys, a Draught whereof you
have in the adjoining Print: In the Tent which stood in the middle sat both the
Viceroys and the Teutang next to one another, upon a very rich and curious
wrought Carpet: The first Tent on the left hand was appointed for the
Ambassadors, and the other upon the right for the Musicians: Upon the corners
of the Tent of the Ambassadors were placed several Iuglers and Fiddlers, who
made such a hideous noise with Trumpets and other Wind-Instruments, that there
was no hearing one another speak. The concourse of several sorts of Persons
(who came out of curiosity from the City and the adjacent Villages) was so very
great, that the whole Plain was covered with People. The Ambassadors were
conducted from their Tent in great State and Pomp, by two of the chief
Mandorins, into the Presence of the Viceroys; from whence, after some
Complements had passed between them, they were re-conducted to their Tents by
the same Mandorins.

In the mean time came the Steward of the eldest Viceroy crowding through the
People, to whom every one gave way, he being in no small esteem among them: he
had a brave Skie-colour'd Silk Coat on, richly Embroidered with Gold and Silver
Dragons; and about his Neck hung a Chain of the best Coral. After this manner
the Mandorins are Habited, and other Great Persons; for none of low Degree are
suffered to wear the like Color and Habiliments.

This Steward gave order immediately to two of his Attendants to Serve the Meat
up; and caused likewise a particular Table to be covered for the two Viceroys,
as also for the Teutang, which were spread with very rich Carpets. There was
likewise another Table prepared for the Ambassadors, heaped with several sorts
of Dishes and Sweetmeats, most delicately ordered to please the Palate. Upon
each Table stood above forty Chargers, all of massy Silver; some whereof were
very artificially wrought, and in each Dish were several sorts of Viands. The
Music Entertained us all Dinnertime, as well Vocal as Instrumental, much
ravishing the Ear. And to show that we were no Novices in this Science, but
knew very well how to handle the like Instruments, the Ambassadors caused one
of their Followers to give the Viceroys a Lesson upon their own Harpsical,
which exceedingly pleased them. The chief Instrument which the Chinese use is
small, with a few Strings made of Silk, for Guts or Wyre are not in use among
them. The Cittern, or something like it, which some of them handle well, is
very common there: and they use also a nobler Instrument, much like our Violin,
but differing in Sound. Beside these they have another Instrument called Zunga,
which is much in request, and often used by them to work upon the Affections of
the People. But above all, they are wonderful expert in the use of
Castinetta's, with which they always Dance. At the beginning of the Dinner
there were several Bottles of The or Tea brought to the Table, whereof they
drank to the Ambassadors, bidding them welcome. This Drink is made of the Herb
The or Cha after this manner: They infuse half a handful of the said Herb in
fair Water, boiling it till a third part be consumed; to which they add warm
Milk about a fourth part, with a little Salt, and then drink it as hot as they
can well endure. The Chinese boast as much of the excellency of this Infusion,
as the Alchymists of the Virtues of their pretended Elixir. After the
Ambassadors had drank of this Liquor, the Steward desired them to fall to:
Opposite to them sat the Viceroys and Teutang, who were very merry at Dinner,
asking several Questions concerning the Condition of Holland, the Constitution
of the People, their Customs, Manners, Traffic, and Government, with many
other Particulars; which the Ambassadors having fully answered, the Viceroys
by their Comportment seemed to be well satisfied. At Dinner they drank to the
Ambassadors, desiring them to excuse their mean Entertainment, and to call for
whatsoever they had a mind to. About the middle of the Treatment the
Ambassadors began the Healths of the Viceroys in a Glass of Spanish Wine,
which pleased them so well, that they utterly forsook and relinquished their
Liquor called Samzou, which is very pleasant to the Taste, and not much
inferior to any of our Wines: It is made of Rice, and drank by most of the
Grandees in that Country: for the common People use only for their Drink, the
beforementioned Infusion of Beans; and by the Health and Constitution of such
as use the same, it appears to be a most sovereign and wholesome Drink. Both
these Liquors are drunk very hot, and never offend the Stomach, though taken
even to excess.

It would seem to any a thing almost incredible (unless they had seen it) in
what State and Pomp these Idolaters and Heathen Princes live, and with what
good Orders their People are Governed: for as well superior as inferior
Officers in the Courts of the Viceroys, which are betwixt two and three
thousand, manage their Affairs with so much quietness and expedition, that all
things were dispatched with as much dexterity as in a private Family. Amongst
others that Dined at the Tables, were the Viceroys Children, who were so
civilly Educated, that I never saw any in Europe better brought up. A little
before the Dinner was ended they rose from the Table, and as they passed by the
Tent of the Vioe-Roys, fell upon their Knees, and bowed with their Faces three
times to the Ground. Dinner being ended, the Ambassadors took leave of the
Viceroys, giving them thanks for the great Honor they had received; and
thereupon they were dismissed, and conducted to their Lodgings by some of the
Courtiers, where they spent the rest of the Day in Mirth and Iollity.



In the mean time the Teutang writ to the Imperial Court at Peking, that the
Ambassadors were come to offer an Alliance to the Emperor, and had brought with
them very considerable Presents for his Majesty; but receiving no Answer, the
Viceroys writ the second time about this Business to the Court, and signified
in plain terms, that the Ambassadors were come thither, not only to Salute his
Royal Majesty, but likewise to procure leave to Traffic with their Ships in
his Territories, and to have Residence there as his own Subjects.

To these two Letters, after four or five Months expectation, came his Imperial
Majesty's Answers; the Contents of the first were: That the Holland
Ambassadors, with some few of their Followers, and four Interpreters, should
have License to come to Peking, to Treat with his Imperial Majesty concerning
the number of Ships they intend to bring to Canton, and the time of their
coming; but with this Condition, That the rest of their Followers should remain
in their Ships at Canton, without raising any Commerce till the return of the
Ambassadors. But the Contents of the second were more moderate and pleasing:
for in that his Imperial Majesty was pleased to grant a Free Trade in China to
the Hollanders, at the Request of the Ambassadors; for which great Favor his
Imperial Majesty did expect the Ambassadors to come and give him Thanks. Upon
this the Ambassadors were Lodged in a far greater House, more commodious for
them and their Goods, whilst they prepared themselves for their Voyage to
Peking.

Upon the second of November came the Tutang of Heriju (hearing of the Royal
Reception and Entertainment which had been given to the Ambassadors) with
several Vessels, very bravely adorned with Silk Flags and Penons, to honor and
attend upon them, Anchoring before their House: which the Ambassadors
perceiving, with some of their Followers, went Aboard the Vessel of the Tutang,
which was very artificially built, and richly Hung within. This brave Person
immediately desired the Ambassadors to sit down, declaring withal, That he was
heartily glad of their coming, and that he was come on purpose to see and bid
them welcome: Then he began to ask with great curiosity after several weighty
Affairs; to which the Ambassadors returned him an Answer, wherewith he seemed
sufficiently satisfied. The Discourse being ended, they took leave and returned
to their Lodging: but not long after they were followed by this Tutang,
accompanied by a great many gallant Persons that waited upon him; who Landing
at the same time with the Ambassadors, conducted them to their Lodging solemnly
in State. This Tutang having visited every thing, gave order for his Drink to
be brought Ashore, and Presented to the Ambassadors, whom he Entertained with
the show of such a strong Inclination and Affection, as if a perpetual Amity
had been confirmed between those Nations: At last, after he had taken leave, he
returned Aboard his Vessels.

About this time the Inhabitants of the Province of Quangsi began to Rebel and
Mutiny against the Grand Tartar Cham, or Emperor of China; so that for their
suppression and reduction to Obedience a great Army was raised, and the Command
thereof given to the young Viceroy; who like a prudent and expert Captain, had
provided all things requisite and necessary for such an Expedition: and because
order was given to Transport the Army by Water, this Viceroy caused several
Tents to be pitched upon the Margins of the River, on purpose to accommodate
there, at a Treatment, the old Viceroy and Noblemen of the Court at his
Farewell: He rid to the Water side, being mounted on a dapple-gray Horse, with
his Quiver of Arrows fastened about his Middle, and his Hanger by his Side, as
is to be seen in the annexed Print, taken from the Life: The Coat he had on was
Lined with Sables, and the wrong side outward: He wore a red Cap Lined with
Sables, behind (which signified the Royal Dignity, no ordinary Person being
suffered to wear the like) hanging the end of a Peacocks Tail: The Saddle-Cloth
was Gold-Tissue Embroidered; and about his Neck hung three great Tassels, which
touched the Ground.

Thus richly Accoutred, he rid to the great Ionck, to take his leave there;
which was performed with much State and Hilarity. The Grandees were Treated in
several Tents: The Ambassadors had also a Tent provided for them, where they
were most nobly Caressed. The Feast being ended, they took leave of each other,
wishing his Majesty Health and good Success; for which he returned thankful
Acknowledgments, and so parted.

A few days before his Departure, whilst they were making Preparations for the
Army, this Viceroy sent to his Wizards, Sorcerers, and Soothsayers (to whose
Responses the Chinese give no small credit) who drawing their Predictions from
the Configurations and Position of the Stars, and from the Inspection of the
Entrails of Fowls, and the like, for the most part Astrologically foretelling
good or bad success to the intended Expedition. These Iugling Augurers
consulted, and positively told the Viceroy, both by Birds and malignant
Aspects, that the whole Undertaking would be unfortunate, and extremely
prejudicial both to himself, the Army, and the Country.

But this young Prince being wholly bent upon the Design, to purchase himself
immortal Honor by Prowess and force of Arms, was resolved to proceed,
notwithstanding all those great Discouragements from his Fabling
Fortune Tellers; for so they proved, the Success falling out quite contrary, he
bringing under absolute Subjection the whole Province to the Tartar: upon which
account their Vaticination not only proving frivolous, but quite contrary, they
fled, absconding themselves, lest they might suffer at the return of the
Viceroy, who would have handled them very severely; but however, they being
absent, the Storm fell on their Idols and Temples, which he rased to the very
Ground, and burnt the Images. In the mean time we returned with the Ambassadors
to our Lodging, where we saw the whole Fleet under Sail (having the Army
Aboard) following the Viceroy.

Both these Viceroys were of Noble Families, Born and Educated in the Imperial
City of Peking. We thought at first that the young Viceroy had been the Son of
the old Viceroy, but we understood afterward that they were nothing akin, but
only great Friends, and Princes of one and the same Power, and who had both
undergone one and the same Misfortune: for the Chinese Emperors (for what
reason I know not) had beheaded both their Fathers. The Sons therefore to
prevent the like Disaster (which it seems they dreaded) fled to this Province
of Quantung, which at that time the Great Cham had Invaded with a powerful
Army, and had brought most of the Country under his Obedience. This occasion
afforded these young Princes an opportunity to revenge their Fathers Deaths
upon the Emperor. To effect this, they endeavored to get some Dependence upon
the Tartars, and grounded their Complaints to the Great Cham upon the
Misfortune of their renowned Families, desiring withal Help and Assistance to
recover the same by force of Arms. The Great Cham found so many testimonies,
and good ground for faithful Dealing in these Princes, that he conferred upon
them both great Honor and Dignity: the eldest he honored with the Title of
Pignowan, and the other with the Name of Synowa; which amongst the Chinese are
Names of the highest and chiefest Offices of the Kingdom: and such chief
Officers Command and Rule with the same Power over some Provinces, as the
Viceroys here in Europe. That these warlike Princes have since that time
sufficiently revenged the Deaths of their Fathers upon the Chinese, is very
apparent, in regard that in the Province of Quantung you may ride in some
Places for several Miles together, and not see a Town or Village standing, only
great heaps of Stones, and the Ruins of many Places, which have been formerly
very famous for Trade.

In the mean time we continued here for the space of six Weeks without doing
any thing; so that the Year 1655. was not only expired, but two Months of the
next were likewise spent, before any thing remarkable was undertaken: But soon
after the Ambassadors sent to the old Viceroy to desire Audience, and a Pass
to go to Peking; who thereupon appointed when they should come. The manner of
our going to Audience was thus: Each on Horseback, accompanied with the
Mandorin Poetsiensin, and the old and new Heyton: The Followers and Attendants
upon the Embassy were ordered to ride before at a distance: The Ambassadors
having presented the Letter writ by the General John Maatzuiker to the
Viceroy, it was given to the Heyton, to be delivered to the Great Cham, in
regard the Viceroy was not to receive any Letter before the Ambassadors had
Saluted his Imperial Majesty at Peking. The Audience being ended, they took
leave of the Viceroy, and were re-conducted to their Lodging after the former
manner; and the next day a Pass was sent to carry us to Peking. The Viceroy
understanding that we were ready for our Journey, sent to invite the
Ambassadors upon the 27. of the same Month, to a Farewell Dinner: The Galleries,
Courts, Halls, and other Places of this Court, were very artificially and
curiously built, and most richly furnished with Pictures, Silk Hangings and
costly Carpets. The Viceroy for the greater splendour of the Feast, had invited
the Mandorins of Canton, who were placed next to one another upon a rich Carpet
spread upon the floor: At the entrance into the Room on the right hand sat the
Ambassadors with their Followers; and over against the Ambassadors the Viceroy
sat alone opposite to the Ambassadors, being placed upon a broad apiece
Seat, covered with a curious Carpet, according to the Draught in the annexed
Print, in a Lemmon-colour'd Gown, Embroidered with Golden Dragons; and behind
in his Cap he wore the Badge of Royalty, a Peacocks Tail, about his Neck a
Chain of white Saphirs of great value and in much request, being scarce among
the Chinese, and worn as an Ornament of high esteem only by their Nobles and
Persons of great Quality; on his Thumb also he wore an Ivory Ring, as an Emblem
signifying the undaunted Courage of the Tartar People, who likewise use Rings
upon their Fingers for the defense of their Hands when they draw their Bows.

During Dinner, which was ordered in great Pomp and Solemnity, the Viceroy
sported with his Children, who were instructed with childish Questions, taught
wanton Reparties, and such Complacencies, to dissipate their Father's
Melancholy. Several young and beautiful Ladies were likewise seated near the
Viceroy, to cheer up his declining Fancy; who also had the Care and Government
of his Children. The Interpreter told us, that this old Viceroy maintained
several Married Women, by whom he had fifty six Children, all then living. The
Entertainment being ended, and the Ambassadors highly Caressed in solemn
manner, took their leaves and departed to their Lodgings. The next Day the same
Persons who had been Treated the Day before at the Charge of the old Viceroy,
were invited to the Court of the young Viceroy: and although himself (as
abovementioned) was then departed, and in his March for Quangsi, to reduce
those Commotioners there to his Great Masters former Obedience, yet his
Secretary had order to receive and Treat them in a most splendid manner;
neither omitted he ought that concerned the Honor of his Royal Master: for
beside the variety and store of well condimented Dishes, they were Presented
with a Farce of various Entries, Masquerades, Dancing in the shapes of Lions,
Tigers, Leopards, and other strange Creatures of their Country, to the
extraordinary satisfaction of his Guests.

In the Withdrawing-room where the Ambassadors Dined, was a Window on purpose,
to which the Mother of the young Viceroy often resorted, to take a view of the
Company: She was very neatly and richly Dressed after the Tartar fashion,
middle sized, slender, of a brown Complexion, of a pleasing and taking
Countenance. At our entrance, before we sat down, we found standing a very rich
painted Chair, which was appointed for her Majesty, to which in Honor of this
great Lady we humbly paid our Respects. Dinner being ended, and the Complements
performed, they took Horse and returned to their Lodging.

The Ambassadors having prepared themselves for their Journey, resolved to be
delayed no longer at Canton with any farther Entertainments; so that within two
days after they went by Water until they came within four Miles of the City of
Peking. The Ambassadors had hired a very brave Vessel to themselves, having
procured fifty more at the Emperor's Charge, to carry their Followers,
Presents, and Goods: and in regard it was thought unadvisable to bring our
great Ships any higher up the River, we left them at Canton, under the Commaud
of Francis Lansman. A certain Mandorin named Pinxenton, had by order of the
Teutang at Canton the Command of this whole Fleet, with whom were joined two
Mandorins more for his assistance, beside the Mariners, and such as tugged at
the Oar. These Vessels were Manned with good store of Land-Soldiers, over whom
Commanded two considerable Persons to convey us with the greater safety to
Peking. No sooner were the Ambassadors Aboard, but they caused the Princes Flag
to be hung out, and the Trumpeters to sound the Tune of Prince William of
Nassaw. There were likewise some Post-Boys (which is very ordinary in China)
dispatched away before to give notice to the Magistrates of the respective
Towns, of the coming of the Netherland Ambassadors, with Orders to have them
well received; which was accordingly done, till they came to the chief
Metropolitan City of Peking.

We departed upon the 17. of March with all our Train from the chief City of
Canton, and were Rowed up the River of Tai, close to the side of the City,
which shows a most delightful Prospect upon the Water. The small Towns, which
are very numerous in Peking and Canton, signified our kind Reception by the
thundering voice of their Cannon as we passed by.

Having Sailed and Rowed several Reaches of this broad and spacious River, we
at last left the Channel, and struck into another (an Arm of this great one,
that disembogues it self into the same) toward the North. The Chinese call
this Branch Zin, but those of Europe, The European Stream.

We made so much speed that Day, that toward the Evening we came to a Village
called Sahu. This Place, though not very large nor famous, yet is of pleasant
Situation, and about six Miles from Canton: the Soil is very fruitful, and
encompassed with Trees, Hills, and Vales. There are several good Edifices in
this Place, though most of them inhabited by Peasants and Handicraftsmen, which
are chiefly Silk-weavers, who live by Weaving great quantities of Silk-Stuffs
for the Merchants at Canton. We stayed here all Night, and in the Morning early
set Sail.

Upon the 19. of March we came to an Anchor before the City of Xantung, being
the eleventh small City belonging to the Chief City of Canton, and lying
distant from thence about twenty Miles.

This City on the right side of the River lies in a very pleasant Vale, and is
surrounded on the Land side with delightful Pastures and Hills: It is not very
large, but was formerly exceeding populous and full of Trade. We got thus far,
sometimes with Rowing, Sailing, and Towing against the Stream, which had so
tired the Chinese, who were put to this slavish Labor, that we were obliged to
stay by the Way till they had rested and refreshed themselves. The Magistrate
of the Place caused the side of the River to be Guarded with two
Foot-Companies, to welcome and receive the Ambassadors with the more State: They
sent likewise a few Presents for the Ambassadors Table; but they understanding
it was all upon the Emperors Account, and by his Order, who allowed ten times
more than what they sent, thought good to refuse their Civilities both here and
in all other Places where they came, which they did with great Respects. Here
we went Ashore, which was the first time since we came Aboard, and pitched a
Tent at a little distance from the City, upon the side of the River, in an open
and plain Field. The Tartars in the mean time, to show some Pastime, Exercised
their Arms before the Tent of the Ambassadors, which was performed by them with
much dexterity.

Among the rest there was one with a Bow and Arrow, who was so rare a
Marks-man, that he shot thrice together through the White, no broader than the
Palm of a Hand, at the distance of thirty five Paces; for which he was rewarded
with a small piece of Money.

The Secretary of the Viceroy (for the more safety, and for the greater
splendour, having conducted us thus far) took leave and went back for Canton;
but was most nobly Treated by the Ambassadors the Night before. We on the other
hand made all things ready, and set Sail again with fair Wind and Weather, but
were forced to be Towed up the River, being against the Stream, and narrow,
into which fall several Torrents from the adjacent Hills; so that we went but
very slowly, and that with great labor and trouble, which these poor Creatures
are fain to undergo.

Here we saw into what a miserable Condition the Chinese were reduced by the
last War of the Tartars, who put them upon this slavish labor of Towing and
Rowing their Boats, using them worse than Beasts at their pleasure, without any
exception of Persons, either young or old.

Often the track'd ways on the River side are so narrow, uneven and steep, that
if they should slip, they would infallibly break their Necks, as many times it
happens: now and then they walk up to the Middle in Water, and if any of them
grow faint and weary, there is one that follows, having Charge of the Boat, who
never leaves beating of them, till they go on or die. But these poor Creatures
are no where so miserably harassed out, as in this dangerous and steep
mountainous part of Sangwanhab; on which account perhaps none will or dare live
there: for we saw there but one poor despicable Village, where some few People
dwell, whose Countenances sufficiently declared what Hardships they underwent.

The most ancient Greeks and Romans, who formerly subdued whole Countries,
never dealt so barbarously by those whom they conquered, as these unmerciful
Tartars, who by their cruel usage in this last Invasion, have not only laid
waste abundance of noble Cities, Towns, and Villages (which are now places for
Birds and Beasts to roost in) but they have likewise made Slaves of the best of
the Natives.

Upon the 21. of March about Midnight, we came with all our Train to Sanyvum.
The Magistrates of this Place met us on the Way, and with their respective
Salutes Presented us for the Table, which for the reason aforesaid, were not
accepted. This Place is not very large, lying about forty Miles distant, from
Xanxui, and was formerly for its Situation potent and populous, but in this
last War wholly ruined by the Tartars, who gave the same usage to all such
Cities as were not able to withstand them.

Here we got fresh Track-men (our old ones being quite tired) to draw us up the
River against the Stream and Torrents, which fall from this wonderful Mountain
Sagwanhab.



The height of this Mountain is very observable, for the tops thereof are
envelop'd with Clouds, which makes the Passage at the bottom of the Hill
obscure.

On one side of this prodigious Mountain stands an Idol Temple, richly adorned,
and most artificially built; to which these poor Creatures resort, conceiving
all their welfare to consist in Offering to this Idol, adoring it as their
Preserver. (...) up by Steps to this Temple, which stands on that side of the
Mountain next the River.

There are several strange Mountains and Hills found in China, but none are to
be compared with this of Sangwonhab, in regard of its Stuation, and
extraordinary height.

Near to Xunte, (...) second small City of Canton, lies a Mountain called
Lungnien, from where runs a Torrent as clear as Crystal. Upon this Mountain are
found certain rough Stones of strange and wonderful shapes, which the Chinese
make use of in their way of Trade.

Near to Tangnon, the third small City of Canton, lies the Mountain Tahi, upon
the East Side, where lie 36 small Islands. Near to this City likewise lies the
Mountain Heuteu, which serves such Skippers as are bound for the Province of
Quantung for a Landmark.

Near to Cingyuen, the seventh small City of Canton, lies a great Mountain
called Talo, which is surrounded with steep and sharp Tops; among which lie
rich and pleasant Meadows, where dwell several wild and unciviliz'd People, who
oftentimes make Inroads upon the adjacent Places, to steal what they can. These
wild and irregular People live according to their own Laws, without any
subjection to the Chinese.

Near to the sixth small City of Canton lies a Mountain called Yaimuen. From
this Mountain the last Emperor of the Race of Sunga (after that the Tartars had
Conquered him, and driven him out of the Country) flung himself headlong out of
despair into the Sea.

We were three days hovering up and down before we could get from among these
strange and solitary Mountains, and saw in all that time but one poor Village,
called Quantonlow, which lies so lonely, that it is strange how any People durst
live in it. In some places of this Island, between the Hills (which is very
remarkable) lie several pleasant and fruitful Cornfieldsd.

Upon the 24. of March we came to a certain small City called Yntag, the sixth
small City of the second Chief City of the Province of Quantung. Here we were
necessitated to let fall our Anchor, in regard of the violent Stream, and the
great Torrents which fall from the Hills; for those that Towed the the Boats
being quite spent, we were forced to give them some rest to recover their
Strength again. This violent and strong Stream had driven the Vessel of the
Ambassadors against a blind Rock, which did very much endanger the loss both of
Ship and Goods.

This small City lies very pleasant upon a corner of the River on the right
side, over against the Mountain Sangwonhab: It is fortified with high and
indifferent strong Walls, and beautified with stately Houses, and magnificent
Idol Temples, surrounded with pleasant Hills, delightful in Prospect, the
Suburbs well and sufficient: It was formerly very rich and populous, and is
provided with a safe Harbor for Vessels against the impetuous Current of this
River; which is a great protection to them in Stormy Weather, passing up and
down. At the entrance of the Harbor on the right side, appears a very high
Tower, built with great curiosity.

The next Day, being the 25. of March, we came in sight of that wonderful and
strange Idol Temple called Koniansiam, which the Chinese hold in great
veneration, bringing as rich and fat Offerings thither, as to that of
Sangwonhab: It lies on the River side, in a solitary, wild, and mountainous
Country: your first Approaches conduct you up with convenient Stone Steps;
after you make your Way through blind Paths and cavernous Passes, forced with
much Art and Industry. These Idolaters believing as the ancient Heathen, that
Groves and high Places were most venerable Mansions, and yielding a more
reverential Awe to their Gods, and less discovering under a Shade their Priests
juggling Impostures. We continued here a while with all our Fleet, till the
Natives had performed their Devotions at this Temple, which afterward our
Ambassadors visited. It Is incredible to relate, with how much superstitious
Zeal, wanting our true Lights, they pour forth there their Ejaculations, and as
freely their Bounty, offering prodigally their Country Products of all sorts of
Fruits, Birds, and Beasts.

Upon the 27. of March in the Evening, we Landed at a Place called by the
Chinese, Mongley, with a most pleasant Prospect at a distance, and
accommodated with stately Sone Steps, conveying you from the Waterside to the
Gate entering the City, which is vested with high Walls, and fortified with tall
Bulwarks and Watch-Towers. It is wondrous pleasant to view from the Battlements
of this City, the adjacent Countries, thick shrouded with delightful Woods and
mantling Pastures. In regard our Drudges were quite tired out with Towing their
Boats against the impetuous Stream, we got fresh Yoke-men from hence; but we
were no sooner under Sail, but the Ambassadors Vessel run against a blind Rock
under Water, which had like to have endangered the loss both of Ship and Goods.
The next Day having passed some Villages, we came to an Anchor in pleasant
Riding, where the Mandorin Pinxenton Treated us with their beloved The.

In the Night following happened a most hideous Tempest, that wonderfully
terrified and amazed us all; such peals of Thunder, such flashes of Lightning,
that we supposed them to be dreadful Ushers to the Day of Judgment; insomuch
that the Vessel in which were the Emperor's Presents, drove from her Anchors, I
my self being in imminent danger: With the approaching Dawn we had a sad review
of our several Disasters, many Ships shattered by the Storm, some Mastless
Hulls, all their Tackle and Rigging torn and spent, others driven Ashore, there
stav'd and beaten in pieces, and all their Men drowned.

It was upon the 29. of March, when we came with the remainder of our Fleet
before the second Chief City of Xaocheu. This City lies about thirty Miles from
Yntag, upon an Angle near the side of the River: In regard of its Situation and
safe Harbor of Shipping, they have a very great Trade by Navigation. Toward the
South this River has several Names, and is called Scian, and sometimes Scio,
and has its Source out of the River Chin and Va, which both run into one not
far from this City. The Place where these two Waters meet, is well known by the
Chinese Skippers to their sorrow, because of the impetuous violence of the
Streams, and the many blind Rocks which skulk under Water, on which in stress
of Weather they often suffer Shipwreck. The Chinese to avoid this Danger
(according to their Custom) have built here an Idol Temple by the Waterside,
which is always first visited by such as intend to pass this Way; where they
offer what they have, to be protected in their Voyage, by the indulgence of
this their favoring God. The City lies surrounded on one side with high and
delightful Hills; and on the East side over the Water has a Suburb, which is
very populous, rich, and well built: in the middle of the Water stands a Tower
artificially built upon a small Rock, according to the old fashion of the
Chinese.

In view of this City spreads a most pleasant Valley, which seems Walled in
with various Fruit-bearing Trees: Not far from which, upon the Mauhoa, stands a
Cloister, neighbor'd by a spacious Temple, in which reside many of their
Idolatrous Priests. A Person called Luzu (who had by his Fasting and austere
Life, got himself so great a Repute among the vulgar Throng, that after his
Death they honored him as a Saint) built this Cloister at his own Charge. This
St. Luzu (as they reported) wore Day and Night upon his naked Body Iron Chains,
and spent all his time to Grind and Sift Rice for the Monks: These Iron Fetters
had made deep impressions into his Flesh, which was thereby so putrifi'd for
want of Dressing and looking after, that Nests of Worms crawled in the
uncleansed Wounds, of which he would not suffer one to be taken off: for
whenever any of his verminous Brood dropped off, he would take it up again, and
say, Have you not sufficient to Feast your selves left? why then forsake you my
Body where you are welcome, and thus run away? Whose Corpse, as the Inhabitants
inform us, is still preserved in this Place.

That this was formerly a noble City, full of stately Buildings, the many great
Ruins signify: there yet remains an indifferent Wall about it, but within
nothing but Ruin and a heap of Stones. We pitched our Tents near unto the
Walls, where we had a fair Reception by the Magistrates and Governor, who
brought several Presents for the Ambassadors Table; which were accepted by the
Ambassadors, being not put upon the Emperor's Account. After they had Saluted
each other, and discoursed of several Affairs, they were most nobly received by
the Ambassadors, who Treated them with so much Respect, that they were highly
pleased, and promised to requite their Kindness upon all occasions; which done,
they took leave, and returned again to the City.

In the Morning early we weighed from thence, and had not long been under Sail,
but we drew near a Mountain, which the Tartars for its strange shape and form
call Five Horses Heads.

Upon the Pinacles of these Hills, which are envelop'd with Clouds, we saw here
and there several strange, as well small as great Edifices standing; some of
them were entire, others decayed and ruinous, built time out of mind. But that
which seemed most remarkable, was the Situation of those Buildings, which were
erected upon such high and steep places altogether inaccessible, that none
could imagine a possible Way for these People to carry up their Materials. We
were very desirous to have had a nearer view of these Houses and Inhabitants
there; but we found by experience after some small trial of clambering up, that
our Attempts were in vain.

We were no sooner past this Mountain of the Five Horses Heads, but we fell
among other Rocks and steep Ascents, which we made a shift to escape, though
with great danger, the River being full of lurking split Ships lying under
Water; therefore the Inhabitants call these Rocks The Five ugly Devils.

At last we got safe to the last Country of Suytjeen, where the Mountain of the
Five Horses Heads shows it self very wonderfully to the Eye at a distance; but
much more the tops of the Hills of Suytjeen, which stand in such order upon the
River, as if Art and not Nature had placed them there. Amongst these Mountains
lie several pleasant Vales in most delightful Prospect, being well replenished
with Fruit Trees and Herbage.

Upon the fourth of April we came in sight of the famous City of Namhun (the
third Chief City of this Province) and immediately went Ashore. This Metropolis
lies about forty Miles from Xaocheu, and is the outward Frontier of the
Province of Quantung, which we had thus traversed from South to North.

The Governor and Magistrates of this City having notice of the coming of the
Ambassadors, sent a Letter full of Complements, to assure them of a cordial
Welcome. Not long after they addressed themselves in Person; who (after that the
Ceremony of Complements had been reciprocally returned) earnestly desired of
the Governor and Magistrates, that good order might be given for the speedy
furthering of their Journey to Peking; which they promised should be done, The
Ambassadors to requite their Civilities, Treated them nobly; for which they
returned their Thanks, and having taken their leave, went back in the Evening
to the City.

The next day the Ambassadors, The Ambassadors noble Entertainment in this City.
with all their Followers, were invited by the Governor to a most splendid
Dinner, who sent them his Gentlemen to meet them at the Gate of the City, and
conduct them to his House, where he waited their coming, with the rest of the
Magistrates, and some of the chief Commanders of the Army. The Entertainment
was every way answerable to the Quality of the Persons, as well of the Guests
as the Inviters: The Governor and the Magistrates sat all at one side of the
Table, that the Sewers might the better remove the Dishes and Chargers, without
any disturbance to the Company, which were not Served up all at once (according
to the custom of the Chinese) but only two at a Course, which was the single
Allowance for one Person: And when the Steward, who waited always at the
Governor's Elbow, had given the Word, every one fell to what he most fancied;
and when he observed a cessation at the first Course, he made a Sign, and
immediately the Dishes were shifted, which was done at least sixteen times,
observing the same order as at first.

During the Feast, there was both Vocal and Instrumental Music, the better to
Entertain the Invited to their satisfaction. A little before the Banquet was
brought in, they arose and recreated themselves in the Garden, till the Dishes
were placed, and then they returned and sat down as before: And when all was
taken away, every one drew out a piece of Money, which together was to be
divided among the Musicians and Attendants: This Collection or Gathering they
laid at the Governor's Feet, to be by him disposed of. The Ambassadors likewise
Presented them with six Toel of Silver, and some Silk-Stuffs, which the
Governor at first refused, but at last at their Entreaty accepted it.

This City of Namhun is very large, well situated, and fortified with Walls and
Bulwarks, and divided by the River, over which is a Bridge, for the convenience
of passage from one part to another: It is also full of Idol-Temples, and brave
Structures. We saw here several Houses, whose Doors were inscribed with the
Letters of the Name of our Savior. Here is also the Emperor's Custom-house,
where they receive his Dues for all Goods Exported or imported; their Bills of
Lading being usually accepted on their Words, saving the double diligence and
charge of Searchers, and discomposing their Goods as in Europe.

There is no better Mold in all China for the making of any Earthen Ware, than
is about this City. Not far from hence is a River, by the Chinese called
Mekiang, which signifies Ink-Water, whose blackness it much resembles. The
Chinese much esteem of the Fish taken in this River, which are commonly very
white, considering the darkness of the Water.

It is very troublesome Traveling by Land in those Parts, because of the high
Hills and rugged Ascents: but the most troublesome Mountain of all to Travel
over, was that which the Inhabitants called Muglin, which one of the Governors
levelled at his own Charge, and is now very passable either for Horse or Foot;
for which the Inhabitants erected to his Honor a stately Temple, Presenting
rich Offerings and costly Perfumes to the Idol there residing.

We were four Days preparing for our Journey from Namhun to Nangan, because of
the troublesome, and almost inaccessible Mountains: At last having got all
things ready, we set forward upon the eighth Instant, with some of the
Emperor's Presents: But before we began our Journey, we sent the Mandorin of
the young Viceroy of Canton before, to provide Lodgings and other Necessaries
at Nangan for their further Journey; and some of their Followers were ordered
to stay till next Day, to look to such Goods as could not be carried the Day
before with the Ambassadors: There was likewise order given, that each Carriage
should have a yellow Flag, with the Emperor's and Ambassadors Names written
upon them, to save Strangers Inquisition; and, for their greater ease and
accommodation, they were carried over the Mountains in Horse-Litters: And in
regard the Ways were dangerous, and much molested with Robbers and Highway-men,
the Governor appointed them a Lifeguard of 150 Horse, to conduct them safe
over the Mountains; so that, what with those that carried the Goods, and this
Guard, we made a Regiment of at least 600.

The next Day, being the ninth, such as were left behind at Namhun set also
forward. The Ambassadors Lodged upon these Mountains, in a Village called
Susan, about half way over, but found no body in the Place, except an Officer,
with some Soldiers that kept Watch there; who could hardly furnish us with a
little Rice, Hogs-flesh, and strong Drink, the Inhabitants having forsaken
their Houses, frighted by the Hollanders.

The next Day, early in the Morning, they took Horse, and rode from thence, and
about Noon came to that strange and narrow Mountain which lies betwixt the
Provinces of Quantung and Kiangsi, and separates both these Provinces from each
other. Upon this Mountain we saw several fair Idol-Temples, very curiously
built. This Mountain, though no better than a Wilderness, yet is very
delightful, by reason of the variety of Woods and Valleys.

We made so much haste that Day, that we got by Night to Nangan, the thirteenth
Chief City of the eighth Province of Kiangsi. But before I proceed I shall
relate unto you the number of the great and small Cities, and the Con^dition,
Qualities, and Humor of the Inhabitants of this Province of Kiangsi.

Toward the East and South-East this Province has for Frontiers the Provinces
of Chekiang and Foking; South and South-West, Quantung and Quangsi; toward the
West, Fukang; and toward the North Nanking. Toward the South appear in this
Province mighty broad and high Hills: for the Mountains of three Provinces, as
Kiangsi, Quantung, and Fokien, join and meet all in one here: And upon these
Mountains live a wild and barbarous sort of People, who maintain themselves
most by Plundering and Stealing from the Chinese.

This part is full of Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, and Tin-Mines, and environed
with very steep Mountains, replenished with several Lakes and running Rivers:
It Is a very fruitful Soil, and exceeding populous, insomuch that the Province
is not sufficient to contain the Inhabitants; and therefore many of them leave
their native Country, and for want of convenient Dwelling-places, Seat
themselves in other Parts of China, where they use some mean Handicraft Trade,
or else turn Soothsayers or Iuglers, to which they are naturally much addicted:
They are generally possessed with a belief of the Pythagorean Doctrine of the
Transmigration of Souls; for they hold it a mortal Sin to kill any living
Creature, or to eat any thing that is dead.

In this Province of Kiangsi are thirteen Chief Cities, which Command over 67
small ones; and through the midst of it, from South to North, runs the River
Can, from whence spring several Navigable Streams, so that you may take
Shipping from or to any part thereof.

The thirteen principal Cities are these; Nanchang, Iaocheu, Quanglin, Nankang,
Kienkiang, Kienchang, Vucheu, Linkiang, Kiegan, Xuicheu, Iuencheu, Cancheu, and
Nangan.

1. Nanchang Commands over seven lesser or inferior Cities, as Nanchang,
Fungching, Cinhien, Fungcin, Cinggan, Ning, and Nuning. 2. Iaocheu Commands
also over seven Cities, as Iaocheu, Yukan, Loping, Feuleang, Tehing, Gangin,
and Vannien. 3. Quanglin Commands likewise over seven Cities, as Quanglin,
Ioxan, Ieyang, Queiki, Ienxan, Iunfung, and Hinggan. 4. Nankang Commands over
four Cities, as Nankang, Tuchang, Kienchang, and Gany. 5. Kieukiang Commands
over five Cities, as Kieukiang, Tegan, Xuichang, Hukeu, and Pengce. 6.
Kienchang Commands also over five Cities, as Kienchang, Sinching, Nanfung,
Quanchang, and Luki. 7. Vucheu Commands over six Cities, as Vucheu, Cunggin,
Kinki, Yhoang, Logan, and Tunghiang. 8. Linkiang Commands over four Cities, as
Linkiang, Sinkin, Sinjin, and Hiakiang. 9. Kiegan Commands over nine Cities, as
Kiegan, Taiho, Kiexui, Iungfung, Ganfo, Lungciven, Vangan, Iungsin, and
Iungning. 10. Xuicheu Commands over three Cities, as Xuicheu, Xangcao, and
Sincuang. 11. Iuencheu Commands over four Cities, as Iuencheu, Fueny,
Pinghiang, and Vancai. 19. Chancheu Commands over twelve Cities, as Chancheu,
Utu, Sinfung, Hingque, Hoeichang, Ganynen, Ningtu, Xuikin, Lingnan, Xeching,
Changning, and Tingnan. 13. Nangan Commands over four Cities, as Nangan,
Nankang, Xangyen, and Cungy.
According to the Chinese Account, there are in this Province 1363629 Families,
and 6549500 Fighting Men.

The Revenue paid yearly out of this Province to the Emperor consists of
1616600 Bags of Rice, 8230 Rowls of raw Silk, and 11516 Rowls of wrought Silk,
beside several other Taxes and Imposts.

Thus much concerning the Province of Kiangsi, and the number of the great and
small Cities; I shall now relate what happened in our Travels through this
Province to that of Nanking.

No sooner were the Ambassadors arrived at the Gate of the Chief City of
Nangan, but a Gentleman was immediately dispatched to Complement them in the
Name of the Magistrates, and conduct them to those Lodgings which were provided
for them. A while after came the Governor himself, with some other Persons of
great Quality, who after Civilities interchanged, fell into some Discourses of
small importance; and having thus spent an hour, they took their leaves and
departed, sending a handsome Treatment that Night at the Charge of the City.

Afterward came to us two Tartar Gentlemen, who were newly arrived there from
the Imperial City of Peking; and after they had Saluted the Ambassadors, they
told them that they were sent to Congratulate the Viceroys of Canton, upon
their Victory obtained the last Year against the Chinese, in the Province of
Quangsi; they then took their leaves and departed, seeming much to admire the
large and tall Statures of the Hollanders, and that they should come from the
end of the World to Salute their Emperor; adding withal, That his Imperial
Majesty expected them with great impatience.

During our abode here, we were often visited, and received the friendly
Salutations of the best and chiefest of the City.

The Ambassadors were here very much troubled to procure Vessels to carry them
to Nanking; for though they did earnestly insist to prosecute and hasten their
Journey, yet the Commissioner appointed to furnish them with Boats, could not
get them ready so soon as he desired: whereupon the Mandorin Pinxenton rated
him with such bitter Expressions, that taking it to heart, he drew his Knife,
and would certainly have stabbed himself, had he not been prevented by one of
the Mandorin's Servants.

The Country about this City (which is the farthest City of this Province) is
very pleasant and fruitful, surrounded with Hills and Mountains, which serve
for a Fence to Guard the Country. One of these Mountains far exceeds the rest
for delightfulness, being called Sihoa, which signifies A Place of Pleasure.

This City is divided into two equal Parts, by an Arm of the River Chang; which
being situate on the Stream, causes great Trading there for all the Goods and
Merchandises which are brought out of China, and carried to the Province of
Quantung, or from thence to the other Places of Trade which lie higher up in
the Country, are for the most part unladed in this City, from whence they are
carried to other Parts by Land or Water.

The South part of this City is close built with several goodly Houses, and is
full of Commerce and People: On the North side stands an Idol-Temple, very
curiously built, and so richly adorned, that a second Dedalus may be said to
have shown his Art in the contrivance of this Edifice. However, in bigness and
strength this City stands not in competition with that of Nanhung, although the
Tartars in their last Invasion were more favorable to this than to the other;
for in Nangan they forbore to destroy such Fabrics as were of any note, but in
Nanhung all were ruined. Besides, the great Commerce and Traffic which has
been of late Years driven here, has been a means to enrich the Inhabitants
thereof, who have continually contributed toward the re-edifying of this City.

After four Days abode in this City, the Ambassadors Embarked themselves with
all their Followers, to pursue their Voyage to Peking. From the City of Canton
to Nanhung we were Towed all the way against the Stream by Track-men, not
without great danger of Shipwreck, by reason of many Rocks that lie hid under
Water; but now we were carried down with the Stream, though yet not without
great labor, and danger of often losing both Ship and Goods. The River Can runs
here as swift as an Arrow from the Bow, and is full of Banks, Sands, and
Shoals, which requires much care and experience in the Mariners. It happened in
this Passage among other Accidents, that the Barque in which Jacob de Keizer,
one of the Ambassadors had Embarked himself, with the Presents to the Great
Cham, fell into a Whirl-pool, and turning and winding amongst unsteady Eddies,
drove at last on a hidden Sand, where she stuck fast, and could not be gotten
off until they had unladen her: they then perceived that she had two great
Leaks in her Hull, which they made shift to stop, putting the Goods Aboard
again, and so we proceeded on our Journey. The Mandorins commanded the
Watermen to be severely Lashed with a thick Leather Whip; and the Master
himself had not escaped the same Punishment for his neglect, if the Ambassadors
had not interceded for him.

The next Day being the 14. of April, we passed by the second small City called
Nankang, but did not Land as we went; but in our Return put Ashore.

This Nankang lies upon the left side of the River Chang: It is built
apiece, being invested with a strong Wall twenty five Foot high, and was
formerly rich, and famous for Commerce: It has four Gates, each about a
quarter of a Mile distant one from another. This City was totally subverted by
the Tartars in the last War. On the River side stands a strong high Tower, the
Structure well built. At our return we lay with our Vessels before Nammon,
which signifies The South-Gate; from whence a Street leads to the House of the
Governor; and at the end of the Street stands a Chinese Triumphal Arch, an
elaborate Piece, which the Tartars left without any demolishment: At the end of
this Street is the Marketplace, to which is brought daily all manner of
Provisions, as Flesh, Fish, and Fruits of all sorts in great abundance.

Upon the 15. we came to Cancheu, the twelfth Chief City of the Province of
Kiangsi, where we took up our Lodgings for that Night; and were visited Aboard
our Vessels by some great Mandorins, who welcomed us in the Name of the
Magistrates; after which the Ambassadors addressed themselves to the great
Tutang of this City, returning him the like Complemental Civilities, who
received them with singular Courtesies and seem Affection, and conducted them
into his private Apartment, where he placed them on his right Hand: Then he
asked them several Questions concerning the Constitution of Holland, viz. Of
how many Provinces it consisted, and how remote from Portugal? How long their
present Government had been Established? When that Power began? Whether they
were all of one and the same Religion? and Whether they used Beads in their
Ejaculations after the Portugese manner? To each of which Particulars the
Ambassadors returned them a brief and satisfactory Answer. By these Questions
we guessed what a near Community and Commerce there was between this Lord and
the Portugueses; and we were likewise afterward told, that his Wife had been
Baptized by them. Whilst we were drinking of Thea in the Withdrawing-room, he
desired to hear our Trumpets sound in the Hall, with which he was exceeeingly
pleased; and also seemed much to admire our Arms: And because this Tutang (who
held his Residence and Court in this Chief City) had the Command over the
Provinces of Kiangsi, Fokien, Hucang, and Quantung, and consequently was not
much inferior to a Viceroy; and that the Ships of our East India Company,
bound from Iapan to Taiwan, often supplied themselves here with much fresh
Water; (for the Province of Fokien is all Maritime, lying opposite to the other
Island of Formosa) therefore the Ambassadors concluded to offer him some
Presents; but he refused them with great Civility, alleging, That the Tartar
Government would not permit any Presents to be received from any Foreign
People, till they had made their Appearance at the Court before his Imperial
Majesty. He likewise added, That he did not refuse them out of a Chinese
Dissimulation, but only to observe the Custom of their Country; and assured the
Ambassadors, that in their Return from Peking, all manner of Friendship should
be shown them.

This Cancheu, in regard of the great Income and Revenue arising yearly from
the Trade that is driven there, is one of the Chief Cities in the Province of
Kiangsi, and Commands over twelve small Cities: It lies about sixty Miles from
Canton, close to the side of the River Can, which takes its source near to the
eighth small City called Xuikin, and flows from thence Northward up to Cancheu.
The City is apiece, as Nankang, and is surrounded with a high Stone Wall
about two Miles compass: There are four Gates also to this City, which are
called after the four Winds. We lay all Night in our Barques before the Western
Gate. The Streets of the City are handsomely Paved. On the East End stands a
high well built Tower, from the top of which you have a full Prospect of the
City and adjacent Countries, which are wondrous pleasant. The Burgers Houses
and Dwellings are built in good order, among which are some very large ones
well furnished; but the Palace of the Governor exceeds all the rest.

Among other stately Edifices, this Place abounds in curious Idol-Temples, very
richly adorned with Pictures and Graven Images; but there is one especially
(whose Top stands higher, crowning all the rest) which may be reckoned among
the chiefest Temples in all China, and is called Kuil, Kiasti, Miao; Miao
signifying A Church, and Kuil Kiasti being the peculiar Name of the Idol they
here worshipped.

On the Verges of this Idol-Temple stood several Bedsteads for Travelers, and
Priests that come to Offer, to Lodge in; as in most Places the Idolatrous
Edifices serve for Inns to receive and harbor Strangers in. In the Porch of
this Temple stood on each side two Giants of Plaister-work, the one Fighting
with a Dragon, and the other having a Dwarf lying under his Feet, with a drawn
Sword in his Hand: The signification of these two Figures may be easily
understood by those who have but small skill in the Chinese Characters and
Emblems. On the other side of the River stands another Temple upon a high Hill,
which I went to see early in the Morning, and found the same situated in a very
pleasant Place, to which you ascend by Stone Steps. Not far from hence stands a
small Chapel rarely built, according to the Chinese Model; whereas such as
Travel this way, Offer something to this Idol for a safe Passage, and
preservation from the hidden Rocks and Sands, whereof there lie many in the
River Can; which if they escape, they attribute their Success solely to these
Offerings; but if they happen to miscarry, then they lay the blame on
themselves, that either they made no true Confession, or brought Gifts too mean
for this their Deity.

At the Place where the two Rivers Chang and Can meet and conjoin, cross the
Stream lies a long Bridge of Boats, covered over with Planks: At the end of the
Bridge stands a Toll-house for the receipt of Custom.

Upon the 18. of April we passed by the ruinous and deplorable City of
Van^^ngam. This City lies close to the side of the River Can, on the right
hand, in a very fruitful and pleasant Soil. The Tartars were so cruel to this
Place in the last War, that they left nothing standing that was any ways
remarkable: It appears to have been a wondrous delightful Place, very
accurately built, and full of Inhabitants. The Country round about this City,
produces twice a year great store of Fruit to the Husbandman: And not far from
hence lies a Hill which has Silver-Mines, but the Chinese are forbidden by
their Laws to dig for any Silver.

On the East Side of this City is a Mountain called Chao, whose Top reaches up
to the Clouds; and though of this vast height, yet from the bottom to the top
there grow all sorts of Trees and Herbs, which made us a delightful Prospect at
a distance.

About half a Mile from this Place we saw lying the sixth small City called
^^ngeiven, which has a small Inlet of the River Can running up to it; but this
City participated of the same Misfortune with the rest, and was totally ruined
and sacked by the Tartar, who left nothing standing but one Triumphal Arch,
which serves for some Ornament to the Place; but the Houses and great Buildings
lie all in a Heap of Ashes.

We left immediately this miserable Town, and came to an eminent Village called
Pekkinsa, whose Situation is most pleasant, and where a good Trade is driven in
all Naval Materials, to the great benefit of the Inhabitants. At a great
distance before you come to this Village, you see several Cliffs, which have
been so wonderfully cut and ordered by Art and Labor, that the very sight
thereof filled us all with admiration; but the last War has much defaced the
beauty of them, and there is now only left the Ruins whereby to judge what a
brave Ornament they were formerly. The very destruction of these artificial
Rocks sufficiently declares what vast Devastations befell the whole Empire of
China in the last War of the Tartars, who did not only ruin the greatest
Cities, Towns, and Villages, but neither suffered any Ornaments to continue
eminent in the Country; for not any Place of note escaped the fury of those
barbarous People, except the Imperial City of Peking, which the Tartars favored
after they had taken it, where yet are to be seen most rare and exquisite
Curiosities, whereof we shall make mention hereafter.

In regard of the extraordinary strangeness of these Stone Cliffs made by Art,
I took the Altitude of one of them which had suffered least prejudice by the
Tartars, and found it at least forty Foot. The like artificial Rocks are to be
seen in the Emperor's Court, where the Great Tartar Cham often refreshes
himself in the heat of Summer.

We departed at last from this Village Pekkinsa, and came late in the Evening
to the small City Taiko, which is the second small City under the Jurisdiction
of the ninth Chief City Kiegan, and situate on the side of the River Can.

Early in the Morning I took a view of this Place, which has toward the Water
side high and strong Walls: The Country round about is most delightful and
luxurious; but the City it self lies wholly ruined by the Tartars: The Streets
are well enough Paved, but very small and narow, yet were replenished formerly
with stately Edifices, which now lie waste and uninhabited: all that was left
remarkable, is a high Tower, with some Idol Temples. We were visited here by a
certain Mandorin, who was come thither not long before from Peking with two
thousand Horse, upon the Account of the young Canton Viceroy: He told us that
the Emperor, with several Lords in Peking, long expected our coming.

Upon the 29. of April we came unto the most famous City of Kinungam, called by
some Kiegan, which is the ninth Prime City of this Province of Kiang^i: It lies
about forty Miles from Taiko, being built upon the Western side of the River
Can, not far from the Place where those terrible and dreadf^l Cliffs called
Xepatan discover themselves, and is defended with tall Battlements, by the help
of which she was enabled to make resistance against the Tartars when
beleaguered by them. Here were also formerly many stately Structures; but they
are now generally ruined and destroyed by the Enemy, some few Idol-Temples only
remaining. Over against the City lies an Island, where stands a curious Temple
of modern Building, hung round about with great and small Images.

The Country round about this City is full of Hills and Dales, in which are
said to be Gold and Silver Mines; but the Chinese are prohibited by their Laws
to dig for any, only they are permitted to take what of either they can find
upon the sides of the Rivers. These Parts are also pregnant and delightful; for
in this Country (which is seldom known in other Places) there is no want of
Water either Winter or Summer, nor too much Drought.

Near to Ganto, the fifth small City under the Jurisdiction of Kinungam, a
mighty high Mountain called Nucung, lifts her Head toward the Clouds, and is
as remarkable for bigness as any in those Parts.

Most of the Chinese Rivers are very dangerous, being so precipitate, that all
Vessels are liable almost to continual Attaques, and sudden surprizals of
Rocks, Banks, and Shoals in ambush; so that the Masters ought to be skilful and
circumspect in their Steerage from Port to Port. But the River Can is near this
City most hazardous, there residing those unmerciful Bilgers, called by the
Natives Zepatane. The Vessels bound hither take commonly very expert Pilots,
and such as are by Custom better acquainted with the fixed Rocks, and still
varying and unsettled Shoals.

The Inhabitants of this Place and the adjacent Parts, recounted to us with
much regret and reluctance, how barbarously they had been used by the Tartars,
who burnt and destroyed their Houses, carrying many into perpetual Slavery;
others they put to Death with rare and exquisite Tortures, making no
discrimination either of Sex or Age; and when they had glutted their salvage
Inclinations with Ruin and Plunder, they exercised their more inhumane Cruelty
upon innocent Virgins, of whom four thousand, all choice and singular Beauties,
they carried into Captivity, and for inconsiderable Sums sold them to make
Bawds and Madams of Pleasure-houses, so prostituting them to be comprest and
devirginated by libidinous Courtiers and deboist Hectors, for their own Profit,
at what Price soever they pleased to put upon them.

That same Day we made such good speed, that we got beyond Kiexui, the fourth
small Town under the Jurisdiction of Kiegan. This Place is situate on the side
of the River Chang, and is in circumference a Mile and a half, surrounded with
Hills, and built after the Chinese fashion, with Idol-Temples: On the Water
side stands a strong Wall fifteen Foot high.

The next Day, being the 20. of April, we past by Kiakia, the fourth small City
under the eighth Chief Metropolis Liukiang. This City lies about thirty Miles
from Kiexui, at the bottom of the Mountains, and upon the North side of the
River Can, which waters this City, to the great accommodation of the
Inhabitants.

The Country about this Place produces Oranges and other Fruits in great
abundance: A good part of its Wall is built upon the Hills, and the Ground
lying within the Wall is Manured by the Inhabitants. Here is standing an
ancient Idol-Temple, which is famous for having two Gates, each being of one
entire Stone; but the Houses were most of them demolished by the Tartars. Not
far from these Walls lies a Mountain called Mung, whose Top reaches so high,
that it seems to be invested with Clouds: yet the sides of this Aspirer
flourish, being clothed with stately Woods, and mantled with verdant and
delightful Pastures.

That same Day toward the Evening we got to the City Sinkin, the second small
City under the eighth Chief City of Linkiang, which lies about twenty Miles
from Hiakiang; and it is situate also on the side of the River Can, having a
pleasant Prospect of Hills and fruitful Fields behind it. This Place does not
differ much in bigness or beauty from Hiakiang, only it lies in a more even
Soil, and not so near the Mountains. Toward the Water, in the middle of a Wall,
stands a very high and well built Gate. Most of the Buildings within had been
destroyed by the Tartars. We lay all Night Aboard our Vessels over against the
City near to an Idol-Temple, where the Governor came to Salute us, and brought
some few Presents for the Kitchen.

Upon the 22. we set Sail early in the Morning, and arrived by Noon before the
Chief City of Fungching, which is the second small City under the Jurisdiction
of the first Chief City of Nanchang. This City lies in a flat and even Soil,
built apiece, and situated upon the said River Can, and is surrounded with
a high Wall above a Mile about.

On the North side of the City is a populous Suburb, well and close built with
goodly Buildings.

There are also two great and high Triumphal Arches, which had been much
defaced with the rest of the brave Structures in the last bloody Invasion.
There are likewise several Mountains not far from this Place; one is called
Pechang, from whence there falls a mighty Torrent of Water with a most hideous
noise.

The next Day, being the 23. of April, we came in sight of the first Chief City
of Nanchang, which is also called by some according to the Name of the
Province, Kiangsi, where it is situated. We were hardly come to an Anchor, but
the Magistrates sent four very commodious Boats Aboard to fetch us Ashore, for
there is no Landing or coming near the shore with great Vessels, by reason of
the Sands. The Mandorin Pinxenton took presently two of the best of these Boats
for himself which was ill taken by the Ambassadors: Not long after came the
Magistrates themselves to welcome them, and caused Pinxenton to restore to the
Ambassadors one of the Boats which he had taken for his own use.

The next Day one of the Ambassadors, namely Peter de Goyer (for Jacob de
Keyser found himself ill) with the Secretary Henry Baron, and all our
Followers, went to visit the Tutang, or Governor of this City; who received us
with great Civility, and showed his Displeasure at his Interpreter for bringing
the Ambassadors a foot, saying, That such Persons as came from so remote and
strange Parts, to Congratulate his Imperial Majesty upon his Victories and
Prosperity, ought to be received in great State: He was also very much offended
at the Mandorins of the Canton Viceroys, calling them Asses. After the
Ambassador had taken his leave, and was come into the Street, one of the
Governor's Gentlemen came and presented both him and his Secretary each with a
fine Horse, upon which they rid to the Water side; and when the Ambassadors set
Sail, they were Saluted with the great Guns from the Walls of this City; and
they to requite this civil Reception of the Governor, sent him a few Presents,
but he refused them, saying, That no Person in China was permitted to receive
any Presents from Foreign Ambassadors, before they had seen and Saluted the
Emperor.

The Chief City of Nanchang is distant about five Miles from Funching, situated
near that great Lake called Poyang, which has a Current round this City, so
that she stands amidst an Island: Her Building is apiece, with high Walls
and seven Gates, whereof four are very handsome; before one of which we lay at
Anchor. This City also boasts four stately Temples, which are very richly
adorned; but amongst them that is the most famous which the Chinese call
Thisiking, being covered with glittering or glazed Pan-Tyles: At the Entrance
stand three Buildings together; in the first of which appears an Idol, by the
Chinese called Kouja, believed to be the Guardian and Preserve of this his own
Mansion; he sits amongst a great many other Images upon a rich Seat, Clothed
Al' antique, after the manner of the old Romans, with a Crimson Mantle hanging
upon his Shoulders: On each side stands upon a bigh Pole two terrible Dragons,
much admired among the Chinese, which with extended Necks seem hissing and
breathing defiance against the Gods. In the second Structure you have a broad
Gallery reaching round the Temple, hung full of Idols, which are much adored by
the Chinese. The third Building is also adorned with the like Images.

At the Entrance of the first of these Edifices, on the right side, stands a
Well, which is twelve Paces in the square over, and curiously adorned with
white Stone, and always brim full of Water.

The Chinese fancy to themselves wonderful Stories from this Idol Kouja and
the Well, believing that formerly here he dwelt, and in his Life was very
Charitable to all poor People, dispencing freely what he had among them; and
his Treasure was never to be exhausted, because he being a great Alchymist, was
possessed of the Elixir, and converted all Metal into Gold. Likewise they
imagine that this Kouja, through their Gods Direction and Power, did once
overcome a most hideous Dragon, which threatened the Destruction of this City;
which he afterward bound to an Iron Pillar and flung into this Well, and so
delivered the Inhabitants from the grand Destroyer, as a second St. George; and
that he at last with all his Family was taken up into Heaven. Therefore these
Idolaters (who held this for a good and holy Deed) erected this Temple for him
after his Death. Many other Stories were told us of this their Deity. Most of
the other rare Buildings which had been formerly in this City, were totally
destroyed by the Tartars, only there is still left standing one well built
Tower.

The Fields about this City are very fruitful, and well manured, which furnish
the Cities and Towns round about with all manner of Provisions and Corn.

The greatest destruction which befell this City in the last War, was occasioned
thus: One Kiuns, a famous Commander, born in the Province of Leaotung, was made
Governor by the Great Tartar Cham over this Province of Kiangsi; for the
Tartars much trust the Leaotungers, because they lie next to Tartary: but this
Kiuns revolted from the Tartar, with this whole Province of Kiangsi, and owned
one Iunglieus for Emperor.

The Tartar to stifle in the Birth the Design and Intention of this Commander,
and to reduce the said Province under his Obedience, raised a formidable Army,
Listed under famous Captains. In the mean while this Kiuns had Fought several
Battles with good success against the Tartars, and put to flight the chief
Commander of the Southern Provinces with his whole Army, which was sent against
him. Hereupon this Kiuns went and besieged the City of Cancheu; but when he
understood that the Tartar was coming against him with a powerful Army, he
raised his Siege, and marched toward the Frontiers of the Northern Provinces,
to hinder the Inroads of the Tartar: and at first Kiuns Fought with good
Conduct and Success, having a great Army with him, that understood well the
Tartar Discipline; but finding his Enemy to be too strong, and ready to
overpower him, he was necessitated for his safety to retreat into this City of
Nanchang. The Tartars though they had a very formidable Army, yet durst not
venture to Storm the City by close Leagure, but resolved to force an Entrance
by their Necessities: and the better to effect this their Design, they
commanded the neighboring Villagers to assist, causing them to dig a great
Trench on the Land side of the City; but the River was blocked up with Vessels,
to prevent all manner of Provision from coming by Water to their Relief. This
Place was then exceeding full of Inhabitants; so that Kiuns, af a Siege of four
Months, was reduced to great extremity by Famine; and though several daily
suffered Death, yet they would not deliver up the City, still expecting that
Iunglieus would come and relieve them: But when Kiuns saw himself brought as it
were to the last gasp, it is said he thus encouraged his Men; Most valiant
Fellow Soldiers, we are to expect no other Help than what our Swords and
Courage will afford us; we must therefore force our Way through the Tartars:
make ready and follow me. Thus having ended his short Speech, and put himself
and those with him into the best posture he was able, he Sallied out
immediately; but coming to the Trench (which was large and deep) they began to
see the difficulty of their Attempt; yet being in despair, they at last got
over the Trench, notwithstanding all the opposition of the Tartars, and fought
their Way through the Army, with the slaughter of a great number of their
Adversaries: Kiuns himself came off with his Life, and hid himself among the
Mountains. He was no sooner gone out of the City, but the Inhabitants
immediately set open the Gates to the fury of the Enemy; who being got in,
never left destroying till they had ruined the whole City; and when they had
done with the Buildings, they fell upon the Citizens, whom they put all to the
Sword: for it is a Maxim among the Tartars, That such Cities as revolt against
them, and are subdued by force of Arms, should be served after this manner; but
such as yield without any opposition, have no hurt done unto them.

Upon the 25. of April we came to a Village famous for Shipping, called
Ucienjen, where lay great store of Vessels of several sorts and sizes, which
were come thither from all Parts of China, to lade with China Earthen Ware,
great quantities whereof are sold in this Village, which lies near to the Pool
called Poyang, upon the side of the River Can, and is above a Mile long: It is
a Place full of Trade, and very handsomely built. Upon the side of a Mountain
near this Place, stands a well built Idol-Temple, behung with great and small
Images. I found hanging also in this Temple a great many black Lamps, which the
Inhabitants kept continually burning Day and Night. The Chinese and Tartars
that at any time are to pass over this Pool Poyang, Offer up first some Present
or other to the Idol of this Temple, for a safe and speedy Passage. The
Sacrifice which I saw here, is performed after this manner: The ordinary sort
of People take a Cock, but the rich a Hog (wherewith the Country abounds) which
they bring alive to the Image, which is Pictured in a most terrible Posture,
and there they cut the Throats of those Creatures, and with the warm Blood
besprinkle the Claws of the Idol (which generally resemble the Claws of
Griffins) and some part of his Body; so that their Idols are always bedawb'd
with Blood, on purpose to make them look with a more grim Aspect. They Offer up
likewise to the Idol the Feet of the dead Swine, and the Spurs and Comb of the
Cock; the rest they reserve for themselves, and make Merry therewith, Feasting
in Honor of this Idol.

Quite through the middle of this rich Village runs a broad Street, full of
Shops on both sides, where all manner of Commodities are sold; but the chiefest
Trade is in Porcelane or China Ware, which is to be had there in great
abundance.

The Inhabitants of this Village told us (to our great admiration) that there
was no better Porcelane made in all the Kingdom of China, than in the Village
Sinktesuno, which lay at least a hundred Miles Eastward from hence, near to the
City Feuleang, the fourth small City of the second Chief City of Ioacheu: and
they added withal, (which increased our wonder) that they did not fetch the
Earth whereof this Porcelane is made out of the Province of Kiangsi, wherein
this Village is situated, but from the Chief City of Hoeicheu, in the Province
of Nanking; and that the Inhabitants there were not able to make it, though
they dug the Earth in great abundance, because they knew not how to temper
it with the Water, which they alleged to be the only reason why they could not
attain to this Art. And though I saw not these Cities Hoiecheu and Iaocheu, nor
how they dug this Soil in one Place, and made Porcelane thereof in another,
yet I will briefly relate to you what Account was given me by Persons of
credit, resident in this Village of Ucienjen.

The Earth whereof this Porcelane is made, is dug in great quantities out of
the Mountains situated near the Chief City Hoeicheu in the Province of Nanking,
from whence it is brought in apiece Clods to the abovementioned Village,
which have the Emperor's Arms stamped upon them, to prevent all manner of
deceit. The Earth is not fat, like Clay or Chalk, but like to our fine Sand,
which they mingle with Water, and so make it into the forementioned Clods. They
likewise beat into Powder the broken China Dishes, and make new ones of them;
but such as are made of broken Ware never take so fine a Color and Gloss, as
those which are made of fresh Mold: The Earthen Clods which are thus brought
from the Mountains, are afterward framed into what fashions they please, after
the same manner as our Potters in Europe form their Earthen Ware. Upon the
greatest sort of Pots which are made of this Earth, they have an Art to
themselves to paint all manner of Creatures, Flowers, and Trees, which they do
very curiously only with Indico. This Art of Painting upon the Pots is kept so
private and secret, that they will not teach it to any but their Children and
near Relations; wherein the Chinese are so dexterous, that you cannot show
them any thing, but they will imitate it upon their Pots and Dishes; which
being framed and made of this Earth, are first dried in the Sun before they are
baked in the Oven; and when they are thoroughly dried, they are put into an Oven
and stopped very close, there baking for fifteen days together with a good Fire
underneath: the time being expired, they are continued in the Oven fiften days
more without any Fire, only the Oven all that while is kept close stopped, and
not opened till it be quite cold; for if they should take the Ware out red hot,
it would endanger not only the breaking of it, but also the losing of the
Gloss. After thirty days the Furnace is opened in the presence of an Officer,
appointed by the Emperor to take an Account of this Earthen Ware, and to
receive his Duty, which is of each sort the fifth piece, according to the Laws
of the Kingdom; the rest they afterward sell to the Inhabitants of this
Village Ucienjen, where (as they say) is the Staple of this Porcelane Trade,
which is sent from this Village, not only through all China, but also through
the whole World.

We departed the same Day from this Place, and upon the 26. came to the Chief
City of Nankang, which lies upon the West Side of this Lake, which is very
broad and long.



This City is built upon a mountainous Soil, about fifty Miles from Nankang:
the Walls are both high and strong, and fortified with Bulwarks. Within the
City stands a well built Tower; the Streets are very full of Windings and
Turnings, which makes them very troublesome to such as use them. The first
Street, which lies on the left hand as you come in, has several Triumphal
Arches standing in it, very artificially built according to the Chinese
fashion: Beside these Ornaments there is nothing rare in this City, for the
Houses are but mean, and slightly built.

In prospect of this City lie several stately Temples, whereof the biggest and
chiefest are built upon the Mountains Quangliu and Iuenxiu. The Inhabitants
round about worship these Mountains, upon which dwell a great company of
Priests and Friars; each of which has a little Hutch, where he daily cruciates
and afflicts himself, by scourging and disciplining his Body; the enduring of
which Castigation makes him a Miracle to those People of implicit Faith, who
fancy these their Sufferings to merit after Death the highest Felicities in
another World: for they believe, that their Souls are transmigrated into other
Bodies. The Inhabitants told us, that upon the Mountain Quanglu there are as
many Cloisters as Days in the Year. They said likewise, that this Mountain was
always covered with Clouds and Fogs, though round about the Weather were clear
and serene. The Country produces store of Hemp, whereof the Inhabitants make
themselves Clothes for the Summer, which very much keep off the scorching Heat
of the Sun.

On the West Side of this City lies a Hill, which the Chinese call Kien. The
Water that falls from the Brow of this Hill, is held by the Chinese very
sovereign for several Diseases.

The Pool Poyang divides the Territories belonging to this City into two parts,
both which are very fruitful in Rice, and Corn of all sorts.

Upon the 29. we made for the City of Hukeu, being the fourth small City of the
fifth Chief City Kieukiang, to furnish our selves with Provisions. This City
lies forty Miles from the foregoing Chief City of Nankang, upon the narrow of
the Lake Poyang, and upon the right-side of the River Kiang, which mingles with
it, and receives no small share of its Water. On the North-side of the City
does appear a very pleasant and antique Rock, which hangs somewhat over the
River, and appears a most delightful Prospect, being overgrown with Trees. At
the bottom of this Mountain stands a large and beautiful Idol-Temple. The Walls
of this City are very thick and high, and for the greater safety of the City,
are Guarded in several places with Foot-Soldiers. This City drives a handsome
Trade, is full of People, and well built; all manner of Provisions are sold
very cheap, especially Fish, which yields but a small Price.

About this City lies a Hill called Xechung, which signifies A Stone Bell; for
the Waves and Billows which rise out of the Pool Poyang in foul and stormy
Weather, beat against this Hill, and occasion thereby such a strange and
ringing noise, that it very much resembles the sound of a Bell.

We were no sooner come to an Anchor, but the news of our Arrival filled the
whole City with joy, so that both old and young came running to the Shore to
view us and our Vessels, who beheld us with great admiration, and fain would
have been talking to us, if the difference of Language had not hindered: We
caused our Trumpets to sound that old Tune of William of Nassaw, supposing to
have delighted them; but on the contrary, they were so much affrighted with
their brazen Voice, that they ran roaring with full speed for shelter to the
City.

Having provided our selves with Necessaries, we departed from this Place and
came to Pengce, the fifth small City under this Capital one of Kieukiang. Thus
far had we proceeded in our Voyage upon the River Can from Kancheu to Nanking;
from whence we passed over the Pool Poyang, and so came into the River Kiang,
which, to prosecute the remainder of our Voyage to Peking, we were to Sail up
Eastward. This River Kiang, which signifies The Son of the Sea, divides all
China into Northern and Southern, gliding from West to East, and receives
several Names from the Provinces through which it runs.

The forementioned City Pengce lies thirty Miles from Hukeu, behind an Island
on the East Side of the River Kiang, and has behind it high and famous Hills:
it is a well built Place, but far less than Hukeu.

Not far from this Pengce lies a Mountain called Siaocu, which is so steep,
high, and inaccessible, that none could ever scale the top: It is surrounded
with Water, and has on the South Side a small, but very safe Road for Ships in
foul Weather.

Upon the South Side of the River Kiang lies also a Hill called Makang, talked
on with terror through all China for the abundance of Shipwracks which happen
near this Place: for if the Pilot miss never so little his Steerage, they
seldom escape bilging on the neighboring Rocks.

The Ambassadors with some of their Followers went Ashore upon the said Island,
but were forced immediately to return, having observed the footing of a Tiger,
which sort of Beast is very numerous in this Country.

When the Chinese Pilots saw our Cook going to make a Fire to dress Dinner,
they came into the Cabin to the Ambassadors, fell down upon their Knees, and
earnestly entreated that they would forbid any such thing to be done, for that
(as they said) there was a certain Spirit who kept himself under Water about
this Pool, and appeared in the shape of a Dragon, or great Fish, and had the
Command over this Country, whose Nature and Constitution was such, that he
could not endure the scent in his Nose of roasted Poultry, boiled Bacon, or
other savory Smells; for so soon as he was sensible of any such thing, he
immediately raised a Storm, which did infallibly cast away the Vessel. The
Ambassadors at their earnest Entreaty sent word to the Cook, that they should
be content with a cold Dinner for that Day. During the Discourse, there
appeared playing above the Water two or three Tunny Fishes, which put the
Chinese into no little fear, in regard they imagined the Water-Spirit had
already given order for the casting away of their Vessel.

Thus far we had traveled through the Province of Kiangsi, when about Noon we
came in sight of two Columns which stood in the middle of the River, and divide
the Province of Kiangsi from that of Nanking, into which we were now come. But
before I relate the Sequel of our Journey, I shall give you in short the number
of the great and small Cities of this Province, and the farthest Extent thereof.

This Province of Nanking (which is reckoned for the ninth among the fifteen)
is washed with the Sea on the East and South-East: On the South it borders upon
the Province of Chekiang; on the South-west, upon Kiangsi; on the West upon
Hupang; North-West, upon Honan; and the rest upon Xantung.

In this Place formerly they kept the Court of the ancient Chinese Emperors;
and though the Imperial Palace be removed to Peking, yet till the last Tartar
War, the Court of the Emperors did continue in the Chief City of this Province
called Kiangning: but the Tartars in the last Invasion, did not only totally
destroy and deface all Royal Palaces, and Imperial Courts, which were most
noble Edifices, but also altered the very Name of the Province and of the Chief
City: for the Province which formerly bore the Name of Nanking they called
Kiangnan; and the Chief City which was formerly called Ingtien, they named
Kiangning; and deprived this City also of all its Royal Splendour and Privileges.

As this Province far exceeds all the rest in goodness and richness of Soil, so
likewise in Trade and Commerce; for here are the Chiefest Cities of all China,
each being famous for Traffic. No less does this Kingdom abound in Shipping
above all the rest; for the number of all manner of Vessels is so great, that
it seems as if all the Shipping of the World were Harbor'd there: but it is no
wonder, considering the Situation of the Rivers that run through this Country;
for by them they can pass by Water into any part of China, and all Vessels
which are bound higher up, must meet there, which lessens the wonder of so
great Fleets of Ships together in that part: And besides, all Vessels come to
this Province out of the River Kiang through broad Navigable Waters, made
either by Art or Nature, which are called The Royal Channels.

The Natives of this Place are generally very Civil, Witty, Serviceable, and
Mannerly: It likewise breeds great store of able Handicrafts-men, who prove
most excellent in their several Arts. There are likewise here very Learned Men,
brought up in their Schools of Literature.

It produces great store of Cotton and Silk, which maintains there abundance of
Weavers, who work in either Commodity; but this is the Women's Business, and the
Men follow Husbandry and other Employments, or else look to the Children whilst
the Women Spin.

This Seat of Nanking is so famous through all China, that whatsoever is made
in it, is preferred before any thing of the like nature wrought in other parts
of the Country.

In this Province lie fourteen Chief Cities, which Command over a hundred and
ten small ones; the Names of which fourteen principal ones are these which
follow; Kiangning, Fungyang, Sucheu, Sungkiang, Changcheu, Chinkiang, Yangcheu,
Hoaigan, Lucheu, Ganking, Taiping, Ningque, Chicheu, and Hoeicheu.

Kiangning, called also Ingtien and Nanking, Commands over seven Cities, as
Kiangning, Kiuyung, Lieyang, Liexui, Caoxun, Kiangpu, and Loho.

Fungyang Commands over eighteen Cities, as Fungyang, Linhoai, Hoaiyven,
Tingyven, Uhu, Hung, Xeu, Hokieu, Mungching, Su, Hiutai, Tienchang, So, Lingpi,
Ing, Tacho, Hao, and Ingxan.

Sucheu Commands over seven Cities, as Sucheu, Quenxan, Changxo, Ukiang,
Kiating, Taicang, and Cungming.

Sungkiang Commands over three Cities, as Sungkiang, Xanghai, and Cingpu.

Changcheu Commands over five Cities, as Changcheu, Vusie, Kiangyn, Gniking,
and Cinkiang.

Chinkiang Commands over three Cities, as Chinkiang, Tanyang, and Kintan.

Yangcheu Commands over ten Cities, as Yangcheu, Ychin, Taihing, Caoyeu,
Hinghoa, Pacyng, Tai, Iucao, Tung, and Haimuen.

Hoaigan Commands over ten Cities, as Hoaigan, Cingho, Gantung, Taoyven,
Moyang, Hai, Canyu, Pi, Sociven, and Ciunning.

Lucheu Commands over eight Cities, as Lucheu, Xuching, Lukiang, Vuguei, Cao,
Logan, Iungxan, and Hoxan.

Ganking Commands over six Cities, as Ganking, Tungching, Cienxan, Taihu,
Sufung, Vangkiang.

Taiping Commands over three Cities, as Taiping, Vuku, and Fachang.

Ningque Commands over five Cities, as Ningque, King, Taiping, Cingte, and
Nanling.

Cicheu Commands over six Cities, as Cicheu, Cingyang, Tungling, Xelai, Kiente,
and Tunglieu.

Hoeicheu likewise over six Cities, as Hoeicheu, Hieuning, Vuyven, Kimuen, In,
and Cieki.

There are beside all these four other ordinary Cities in this Province, which
the Chinese call Cheu, and some other less Cities which they call Hien: The
four Cities are these; Quangte, Hocheu, Cheuceu, and Sincheu.

Quangte Commands over one City, which is called Kienping; Hocheu, over Hanxan;
Cheucheu over two others, Civenezao and Taigan; Siucheu over four, Siao,
Tanxan, Fung, and Poi.

The Chinese Poll-Book of this Province makes mention of 1969816 Families, as
also of 9967429 Fighting Men.

The yearly Revenue which this Province pays to the Emperor, consists of
5995034 Bags of Rice, 6863 Pounds of unwrought Silk, 28452 Pieces of Cloth, and
2027 Rolls of woven Hemp-Cloth.

This Province likewise furnishes the Emperor's Stables with 5804217 Trusses of
Straw or Hay, and 705100 Pounds of Salt: All which being valued together, will
amount to an incredible Sum, beside what is paid in Money, which amounts to
32000000 of Ducats, as I was credibly informed by some of the Grandees of the
Province; which is not incredible, considering the vast Customs which are paid
to the Emperor for all Goods Exported out of the Chief City of Nanking.

The City of Xanghai alone pays yearly to the Emperor for the Toll of Wool, the
Sum of 250000 Ducats. All great Shops and Inns pay monthly thirty Toel of
Silver, or else the Tartars come and Quarter upon them in their Houses, and
misuse them at their pleasure.



Upon the 29. we came to Tonglon, or Tonglieu, the sixth small City in the
Jurisdiction of the thirteenth Chief City Chicheu, and the first Place we came
at in this Province of Nanking. This is a small City, and lies close to the
South Side of the River Kiang, in a very pleasant and delightful Soil, which is
encompassed about with fine little rising Hills and Vales: It is surrounded as
well on the Waterside as toward the Mountains, with a reasonable strong Wall,
fortified with Bulwarks. This City shows very beautiful as you approach it upon
the River, but within it lies in a most lamentable Condition; for the Tartar
proceeded with so much fury against it, that they left nothing defaced that
deserves any notice to be taken of, only there is one Street that has some
Houses standing in it, the rest are all destroyed, except the Governor's House,
which is in reasonable good order.

The Magistrates or Governors of the City Tonglieu, sent a congratulatory
Letter to the Ambassadors upon their Arrivals, as also some Presents for the
Table, which were not accepted. The Traffic of this City was only Timber, so
that the Place more resembled Norway than China. About two Miles beyond this we
saw an Island lying in the Bosom of the River Kiang, called Sanglo.

Not far from Tonglieu, near the River side, rises a Mountain called Kieuhoa,
or The Nine-headed Mountain, much like the Sun-Flower when hanging down the
Head.

Two Miles from this Tonglieu we saw in our Passage the tenth Chief City
Ganking, the most famous City of this Country, which abounds in Wealth and
Trade, because no Goods are brought out of other Parts to the Chief City of
Nanking, but they must first pass by this.

Upon the 30. we passed by with our whole Fleet to the City of Anhing, called
by some Chicheu, and the Chief City of the Royalty of Nanking, lying upon the
South Side of the River Kiang, and is about two Miles in circumference. Upon
the River lies a very fine Suburb well built, with good Houses and
Idol-Temples: The Walls which invested the City were above twenty five Foot
high, and artificially raised with Watch-Towers and Redoubts: Near the River
side lies a very pleasant Hill, adorned with Fruit Trees, which renders the
Prospect very delightful; upon which stands a Heathen Fane, where the
neighboring Inhabitants round about come to Worship, and present Offerings to
the Deity of that Place. This Temple is crowned with a stately Steeple,
aspiring with seven Rounds.

The Country, though Hilly, yet abounds with most sorts of Provisions, and is
plentifully supplied with what they want from the adjacent Markets, by the
River Kiang.

Toward the Evening we came to Tungling, the third small City under the Command
of the Metropolis Chicheu, which is situated most delightfully, being
surrounded with variety of Woods, Hills, and Dales. This City, though but
little, is well built, and encompassed with Walls, having in the Front a
Land-lock'd Harbor, for Vessels to shelter in stormy Weather, which very much
enriches the Place. The Corner of this Port is Guarded with a strong Castle,
which not only defends the City against any hostile Invasion, but also serves
to protect the Harbor and Vessels that ride there.

Whilst we were taking a view of this Place the Inhabitants told us, that not
far from thence on a Hill, was a very rare Echo: Out of curiosity to hear this
Novelty we clamber'd up the Hill, and there sounded our Trumpets, where we
heard their Notes return most distinctly, to our great admiration.

Near to this City rises the Mountain Hing, so named from the Apricocks which
grow thereupon in great abundance.

Having satisfied our Eyes with the view of this Place, we set Sail the next
Day, and came on the third of May to a Castle called Upun, near the River
Kiang, not far from the following City of Ufu, being built apiece, and
begirt with a large Stone Wall: Amidst this Fortress is a strong well built
Temple, with a high Roof, whose inside is curiously adorned with Pictures.

The same Day we arrived at Ufu, the second small City under the eleventh
Metropolis called Taiping, lying with our Vessels close under the Walls of the
City. This Town is situate in an Island of the River Kiang; the Suburbs of it
are very populous, and full of Commerce: Upon each Angle of this Island are
strong Block-houses, but are neither Manned, nor have any Guns mounted on them.
This City is cried up through all China for Arms, the Inhabitants being most
dexterous and exquisite in making all manner of Military Utensils; they are
likewise very skilful in making Lamps of all sorts.

Upon the fourth we passed by the third Chief City, called Teytong, which some
also call Taiping, lying upon the side of the River Kiang, in an Island there
made by the same Stream. The Country about this Island is in some places very
Rocky, and full of Hills; in others again, as smooth; but in both exceeding
fruitful.

On the South Side of this City we saw at a distance a high Mountain, by the
Chinese called Tienmuen, which signifies Heavens Gate, because the River Kiang
runs through here between two small Hills of this Mountain, as through a Gate.
Sailing forward, we observed lying in the River over against this City, another
Island called Hiao, all of one entire Stone: In this Rock were several Holes
and Concavities, wherein bred abundance of Night-birds; the Isle from thence
denominated Hiao. Not far from hence toward the South-East, is a large Lake or
Pool called Tanyang, which as well as the River Kiang, divides it self, and
waters the whole Country of this Chief City, which very much enriches the
Grounds round about, making them satisfy the greedy Husbandman.

We understood by the Chinese that this had been a stately City, well built,
and full of Trade; but the Tartars totally ruined it in the last Wars. Three
gallant Towers we saw upon the River side as we Sailed along; by which we might
understand in what a famous Condition this Country had formerly been.

Upon the same Day we came in sight of that renowned and Royal City of Nanking,
which is justly called the Chief City of the Province of Nanking; we came to
Anchor in the Harbor, and lay with our Vessels before the Gate Susimon, which
signifies The Watergate.

The Ambassadors went the next Day to visit the three Governors of this City,
being carried in Palakins, or Sedans, and their Followers waited upon them on
Horseback: They were conducted thither in great State by the Agent of the young
Viceroy of Canton, who resided in this City, and by two Mandorins, who came
from Canton in the absence of Pinxenton, who lay still behind.

The chief Governor showed the Ambassadors his Withdrawing-room, and made them,
after accustomary Complements, to sit down next to him: He was a Chinese, born
in the City of Leoatung, but of a very civil behavior. The Ambassadors showed
him a Letter of the Presents which were designed for him, but he would not
receive them, they having not yet seen the Emperor.

After they had discoursed a while with this first Governor, they took leave,
and went to the second, also a Chinese, and born at Leaotung; who showed
himself no less courteous than the former: He caused the Ambassadors to sit
down with almost the same Complements, and received the Letter with great
Civility from them, which nominated his allotted Presents; but he being
illiterate himself, gave it to one of his Commanders to read, and on the former
account refused to accept of them.

From hence they went to the third, who dwelt in the Wall of the old Imperial
Palace; he sent for the Ambassadors, who came to him in his Chamber, where his
Wife was with him: The Apartment was apiece, with Benches round about
covered with Silk, and a Stove to warm the Room in Winter, in which they burn
Reed, Wood being there very scarce. This Governor was by Birth a Tartar, a
young well-set Man, but understood not the Chinese Language, therefore his Sons
were Interpreters: His Wife, a proper and comely Dame, spoke more than her
Husband, and seemed very inquisitive about Holland: She was not dismayed at our
strange Arms, but, like a bold Virago, drew ont our Swords, and discharged our
Pistols, which much delighted her. The Room was presently filled with Tartar
Gentlewomen, who belonged to and waited upon this Lady, and brought a great
Silver Kettle full of Thea, mingled with Milk and Salt, placing it in the
middle of the Chamber, and serving it about with Wooden Ladles to all the
Company. The Thea thus mingled, they drink in Wood; but the clear Thea, made
only with Water, they drink in little China Cups; and other Drinks, as Chinese
Beer, and Zamsou made of Rice, in Silver.

The Ambassadors, after they had been thus civilly received and treated, took
leave, and went with the Canton Agent to visit a Tartar Gentleman, who was
newly arrived from Peking: He was a young lusty Man, and had his Lodging in an
old ruinous Court, which also belonged to the Imperial Palace; but all things
were in disorder, and in a decayed condition, without any Furniture but two or
three broken Benches, some Kettles, and a few little Dishes for Thea. His
Horses, Mules, Asses, Dromedaries, and Camels, went up and down in the Court,
the Stables being all ruined and spoiled.

From this Tartar's Lodgings the Ambassadors were conducted by the Agent to his
own House, to a sumptuous Dinner, then made ready by his order for them; where
he entertained them till Night with all manner of Dainties: Which done, they
thanked him for his great kindness and civility, took their leaves, and
returned aboard their Vessels, in which they lay all their Voyage, both to and
from Peking, except at Canton, Nangan, and Peking.

This stately City, which without parallel is the Diadem of all China, lies
about thirty five Miles from the forementioned Taiping, on the East Side of the
River Kiang, and in 32 Degrees of Northern Latitude. Her situation is most
pleasant, and the Soil luxuriously fruitful, the River running quite through
this City, whereof some Streams are navigable for great Vessels. Here was
formerly kept the Court of the old Chinese Emperors, the Residence of the
ancient Kings of U, Cyu, Cung, Ci, Leang, Chin, and Tanga: Here also Reigned
many Lustres the Race of Taiminga, till they removed to Peking, the better to
prevent the Invasions and Designs of the Tartar.

The Founder of this City was Gnens King of Cu, who named it Kinling* which
signifies A Golden Country: Afterward the first Branch of the Race of Cina
called it Moling. The Kings of U, who kept their Courts in this City, called it
Kienye: The Race of Tanga gave it the Name of Kiangxin; but that of Taiminga
called it Ingcien: And last of all, the Tartars, who not many years since
overran and conquered all China, gave it again the Name of Kiangxing.

Where this City borders on the River Kiang, it has a broad and deep Gra^^,
into which you come out of the Kiang up to the Town, about half a Mile within
the Land. Here they pass over on a Bridge of Boats, which brings them
conveniently into the City, whose East Side, which runs far into this Country,
covers a Flat, with several Navigable Channels running through, so that you may
come with large Vessels up to the Town on that side. Over these Channels are
several Stone Bridges, very rarely built.

According to all Chinese Geographers, this City exceeds all the Cities of the
whole World, not only in Bigness, but also in Beauty, and handsome Decorement;
and is at least five Hours going about, being round, close, and well built: but
the Walls are full six Dutch Miles in length, the Suburbs excepted, which run
out much further. Besides this, the City has another strong Wall, for the
better defense and safety of the Place.

The Chinese describe the Circumference of this later Wall by two Horsemen,
who in the Morning setting forth at one and the same Gate, parted, riding
contrary, and, they say, met not till the close of the Evening; by which they
would have us guess at the vast Circumference of their City. The first Vesture
of the City is above thirty Foot high, built Artificially of Stone, with
Breast-Works, and Watch-Towers.

There are thirteen Gates in this Wall, whose Doors are plated with Iron, and
guarded continually with Horse and Foot: Some of these Gates rest on four or
five Arches, through which you pass before you come into the City. We lay with
our Vessels before the Gate Suisimon, or Watergate: So great a number of
People pass daily to and again through this Gate, that there is no getting in
or out without much crowding.

The chief Streets of this City are twenty eight Paces broad, very neatly
paved, and strait. In the Night there is such good order observed for the
preventing of House breaking, or disturbance in the Streets, that there is not
the like in any other part of the World.

The ordinary Citizens Houses are but mean, built without any convenience, and
stand all with the cross Ridges next to the Street: They have but one Door to
go in and out, and but one Room to eat and sleep in. Next the Street appears
only a apiece Hole, serving in stead of a Window to let in Light, which
is commonly covered with Reeds in stead of Glass, to prevent Gazers from
looking in.

The Houses are but one Story high, being covered with White Pan-Tiles, and the
outsides whited over with Chalk.

Such as dwell in these ordinary Houses, drive very mean Trades; but the Shops
of the chief Citizens and Merchants are filled with all manner of rich Chinese
Wares, as Cottons, Silk Stuffs, China Dishes, Pearls, Diamonds, etc. Before
each Shop stands a Board, upon which is inscribed the Name of the Master in
Gold Letters, as also what Goods he sels: Beside these Boards stands a high
Pole, which reaches above the House, upon which they hang Pennons and Flags, or
something whereby they (as we in Europe with our Signs) make known their
Habitations.

They have not here, nor in all China, any Coined Money; but use in stead
thereof small Pieces of Silver, which are of different value and weight; and
though you buy never so little, you must always have a Pair of Scales about
you, if you will not be cheated in the weight by these crafty Chinese: for
they have commonly two sorts of Weights by them, and are so nimble and
deceitful in their Balancing, that you had need of Argus's Eyes when you buy
any thing of them.

This great City is also so Populous, that there are above 1000000 People
dwelling in it; and yet Provisions of all sorts are to be had there in great
abundance, at a small rate, all the Year long: the reason whereof is the
fertility of the Soil round about. Amongst other Fruits, there are most
delicious Cherries sold very cheap in this City.

Beside the vast number of People, there lies a Garrison of 40000 Tartars: Here
resides also the Governor of the Southern Provinces, in the Name of the Emperor.

This City likewise exceeds any other in China for stately Idol-Temples,
Towers, rare Edifices, and Triumphal Arches: But the Emperor's Court or Palace
formerly exceeded all the rest of the Buildings; wherein the Emperor of China
was wont to reside, with the same State and Pomp as now at present the Great
Cham does at Peking.

This Palace was situated on the South Side of the City, built apiece, and
surrounded with a Wall which contains the greatest part of the City. Each side
of the Square wherein this Palace was included contained in length one Italian
Mile, and three parts of a Dutch Mile; and as near as could be guessed by the
decayed Walls, or might be learnt from the Inhabitants, this Court, or Palace,
with all belonging thereto, was as big as Haerlem in Holland. Within the first
great Gate lay a large Court, which led to the four Squares, and was paved with
fine smooth Stone.

The Tartars seated themselves near an Idol-Temple called Paolinxi, where they
built themselves several Huts, leaving the Chinese to dwell in the City, and
there to drive their Trade. The Buildings are all of a hard sort of Stone,
which the Natives have most curiously painted with a yellow Color, so that
when the Sun reflects on them, they shine like Gold.

Over the Gate of the second Court of this Palace hangs a great Bell, about 10
or 11 Foot in height, and three Fathom and a half in Circumference, whose
thickness contains near a quarter of a Yard. The Chinese made great Brags of
the sound of this Bell, as if the like were not to be heard of again in all
China, yea, not in the whole World; but when we came and struck upon it, we
found it sufficiently dull, and the Metal not so good as that of ours in Europe.

And though the Tartars in the last War did not much deprive and impair this
City of its former Luster and Splendour (no City escaping better than this
Nanking) yet however the stately Palace of the Kings was total destroyed by
them. It is supposed that the Tartars did this for no other end or cause, but
out of a particular Hatred and Grudge which they bore to the Family of
Taiminga, who Governed till the Court was removed from thence to Peking.

But though this City, by the removing of the Imperial Court to Peking, was
thus deprived of its ancient Glory and Splendour; yet its former and ancient
Magnificence, as well as Obedience, is shown by the extraordinary Presents
yearly sent to the Emperor, beyond all the rest of the Cities.

First of all, Every three Months five Ships are sent from thence, laden with
all manner of Silks and Woollen Cloths, to the Emperor at Peking: These Ships
are called in the Chinese Language Lungychuen, which signifies Ships with
Dragon-Cloths, because they are sent to the Emperor, whose Blazonry is full of
Dragons. I must confess, that in all my lifetime I never saw any Ships to
exceed these for Riches and Bravery; for they are so very much Gilded and
Painted on the outsides, that it made our Eyes dazzle to look on them: and
within they were likewise most curiously contrived and adorned with Images.
This one thing alone is enough to discover the Ingenuity of these People.

The City sends likewise for a Present to the Emperor, certain Fish, which are
taken before her Walls in the River Kiang, in May and June, and are by the
Chinese called Siyu; but by the Portuguese who live there, they are called
Savel; and though the Way from Nanking to Peking be more than two hundred Dutch
Miles, yet they have a Way to Transport them to the Emperor's Court fresh and
good; for a great number of Men are appointed to draw the Boats Day and Night,
who are relieved upon the Way with fresh Men; so that they perform the Journey
in eight or ten Days at the farthest, which is in a manner with as much speed
as riding Post in Europe. They likewise signify by Letters from Place to Place
the Hours of the Day when the Barques are arrived; and if the Emperor be
pleased, they never fail to send twice a Week.

As we were Riding out one Day to take the Air, and to view the City, we passed
by the Gate of the old Imperial Court, where sat a great Tartar Lady, with her
Servants waiting upon her, about forty years of Age: she very civilly sent to
our Interpreter to invite the Ambassadors into her House: Jacob de Keyzer
hereupon lighted, and the Lady then made toward him: She was very debonair and
free, looked upon our Swords, and much admired their bending without breaking:
She took the Ambassadors Hat, and put it on her own Head, and unbutton'd his
Doublet almost down to his Waste: Afterward she led the way into the House,
and desired him to follow, appointing one of her Attendants to conduct him, who
brought us into her Apartment, where we found her with her Daughter, who was
about half her Age, waiting our coming, in great State: The Daughter was
Clothed in a Violet-colour'd Damask Gown, and the Mother in black Damask, and
both of them had their Ears hung with Rings, and their Hair braided and twisted
about their Heads with Strings of Pearls; but over their Hair they wore little
Caps made of Reed, with a Tassel upon the Crown, of red Silk: Their Clothes
reached down to their Heels, tied about the Middle with a broad Ribbon, and
buttoned down from the Neck to the Waste: Their Shoes were of black Leather,
their Faces unmasked, without any Painting: They had us into a large
Withdrawing-Room, unfurnished, only a few Benches covered with Silk, upon which
they desired us to sit: They drank to us several times in their Liquor made of
Beans, which is very strong, but agrees wondrous well with their Constitutions:
They set before us also some of their Sweetmeats, much entreating us to Eat,
excusing the meanness of the Entertainment, her Husband being absent.

Having taken leave of these Ladies, we Rid to see a famous Temple, which the
Chinese call Paolinxi; but this Name of Paolinxi, not only denominates this
Structure, but also a great Plain, which contains several Fanes, Edifices, a
Porcelane Tower, and other Rarities. Amongst other Buildings erected upon this
Plain, they showed us one great Structure, which exceeded the rest in Art,
Beauty, and Cost, wherein hung at least ten thousand Images, all made of
Plaster; some were six Foot long, but the most were only one, which were hung
round about the Galleries and the Walls, in handsome and exact order. The
Heathen Priests received the Ambassadors with great Respect and Civility, and
set open all the Doors of their Temples.

In the middle of the Plain stands a high Steeple or Tower made of Porcelane,
which far exceed all other Workmanship of the Chinese in cost and skill; by
which the Chinese have declared to the World the rare Ingenuity of their
Artists in former Ages.

This Tower has nine Rounds, and a hundred eighty four Steps to the top; each
Round is adorned with a Gallery full of Images and Pictures, with very handsome
Lights: The outside is all Glazed over and Painted with several Colors, as
Green, Red, and Yellow. The whole Fabric consists of several Pieces, which are
so artificially cemented, as if the Work were all one entire Piece, Round about
all the corners of the Galleries hang little Bells, which make a very pretty
noise when the Wind jangles them: The top of the Tower was crowned with a
Pineapple, which (as they say) was made of massy Gold: From the upper Gallery
you may see not only over the whole City, but also over the adjacent Countries
to the other side of the River Kiang, which is a most delightful Prospect,
especially if you observe the vast circumference of the City, reaching with her
Suburb to the River side.

This wonderful Pile (as they inform us) the Chinese built at their own
Charges by the Command of the insulting Conqueror the Tartar seven hundred
years since, as a Pillar of Honor to them, and when, in like manner as lately,
they overran all China, bringing the whole Country under absolute Obedience.
The now prevailing Foe, whether conquered by the extraordinary Beauty and
Magnificence, or whether they designed by it to perpetuate the Memory of their
first Conquests, and also to add to their Fame this their second subduing of
them, would not permit the demolishing or defacing in the least of this noble
Structure; so that now it stands firm and entire as at first.

Round about this Plain are also Woods of Pine, where formerly were built
goodly Edifices, which were the Places of Enterment of their former Emperors,
but are now by the Tartars totally demolished.

According to all outward appearance, we found these People to exceed not only
all the rest of the Nation in Candor, Sincerity, and civil Demeanor, but as
much excelling in Science and Understanding. There are also several of the
Inhabitants of great Estates, keeping like Port both in their Habits and
Hospitality. They enjoy here far greater Privileges than in a less City, which
the Tartars allow them, supposing that to be a Bridle to Rebellion.

We found in this City of Nanking a Jesuit, his Name Manuel Van Lisbon, who
came Aboard the Vessels of the Ambassadors, to Complement and invite them to
Dinner; but they civilly excused themselves: however, my self and the Secretary
accepted of the Invitation, and were very handsomely received and Treated next
Day by him, with some of the better sort of Chinese, who were pleased with our
Company; and to signify that they were Christians, struck upon their Breasts,
and Crossed themselves. This Jesuit was a very free, gallant, and open Spirit,
earnestly desiring that we might have free Commerce in China: He came often to
see the Ambassadors, and Presented them with several Provisions for the Table,
inviting himself to Dinner at the same time.

The Ambassadors were very desirous to have writ from hence to Iapan, but were
informed that that Passage was forbidden; the reason said to be this: The
unshorn Chinese had complained three Years before to the Emperor, that the
Chinese of Snitjien and Amei (who belonged to the famous Pyrate Coxinga) had
done them some Injury in Iapan, so that they desired the Emperor to right them;
who thereupon ordered, that they should go no more to Iapan.

These unshorn Chinese are those who will not submit to the Government of the
Great Cham, nor cut their Hair after the Conqueror's fashion: for when this
Emperor had conquered all China, he issued forth a Command, That the Chinese
should wear their Hair after their manner, all cut off, except one Lock behind;
which caused some thousands of the Chinese (who are very proud of this
Ornament) to sacrifice their Lives to the rigor of the Laws, rather than part
with one single Tress.

Having spent about a Fortnight in receiving and giving of Visits, we departed
from this famous City upon the 18. of May, early in the Morning.

The Ambassadors had made use by the Way of ordinary Barques and Boats, till
they came to this Place; but now they were accommodated by the Governors, with
the Emperor's own Vessels, to carry them on this their Journey. These Vessels
were very large and commodious, all Gilded and Painted with Dragons
open-mouthed, and looking fiercely. On one end of these Imperial Bottoms was a
place for Music, to recreate the Passengers on the Way; but the Ambassadors
desired to spare them that trouble, and appointed that Place for some Chinese
Soldiers that came with them from Canton, to Lodge in.

They have severe and corporal Punishments, whoever dares presume to Paint any
Yellow or Golden Dragons on their Vessels, or any thing else without leave,
this Color being made use of only by those whom the Emperor's particular Favor
admits to that high Honor.

Two great Imperial Vessels were appointed for the Ambassadors: the Chinese
Officers, as Pinxenton and the two Mandorins, had also two others; and the
Canton Soldiers were put Aboard with the Ambassadors, who were likewise
accompanied by several Persons from Nanking.



After we had taken leave of the Governor and Magistrates of the City of
Nanking, we set Sail, and passed by the Ship-Bridge of fourteen Arches. On the
farthest Point of the Walls of the City, about two Miles from the Watergate
called Suisimon (where we first arrived with our Vessels) there stood a very
famous and eminent Idol, to which the Mandorin Pinxenton, with the whole Fleet,
applied themselves, and Offered up to this Demon or Genius of the Place,
Swine, Goats, and Cocks Blood, to the end we (which they verily believed) might
have a safe and prosperous Voyage.

The Sacrifice was performed after this manner: The Swine and Goats were first
killed and cleans'd, and afterward laid upon the Altar: on the side of this
Altar stood several little Images, and behind the Altar the chiefest Image,
which is held for the Protector and Defender of this Temple, and to whom it was
Dedicated. The Cocks which I saw Offered, were killed, and their Blood kept and
sprinkled upon the Images, which afterward they wiped clean. During the
Ceremony of the Sacrifice, the Priests upon their Knees made several Grimaces
and Mutterings to themselves, as if they and the God had been in some earnest
Contract or Dispute, great Tapers burning all that while.

After this Sacrifice we Steered our Course Eastward, and Sailed down the River
Kiang with great speed, having the Stream with us; so that in the Evening we
came to a famous Village called Wanksien, where we stayed all Night, and in the
Morning early we set Sail, and came upon the 20. of June to the City of
Iejenjeen, which some call Loho.

This Iejenjeen being the sixth and last small City of the Capital City of
Nanking, lies about sixty Miles from Nanking, on the North-side of the River
Kiang, whose Streams run into the large and open East-Indian Sea. Here came
several Beggars Aboard us to show their Tricks; amongst the rest there were
two, who knocked their Heads with so great force one against another, that we
looked every moment to see them fall down dead upon the Place; and in this
Gesture they continued till the Company had bestowed their Charity on them: for
unless they give them something, they never cease rencountring Head till they
kill each other, which has often happened. I saw likewise in this City another
Beggar kneeling down, and seeming to mutter something to himself; after which
he struck his bare Head against a round black Stone with so much fore and
violence, that he made the Earth to shake under him: Several other such Feats
they use, to win remorse from Strangers.

This small City of Iejenjeen, situate near to the River Kiang, is very
delightful, though but small within the Walls, which are not very high, but
strong and thick: It is built mighty close, and adorned with several Temples
and Idolatrous Edifices; and has likewise a populous and well built Suburb, and
much Trade, by which its Inhabitants are much enriched.

Whilst we stayed in this City, the Interpreters told us, That the famous
Pyrate Coxinga had Landed some Forces, with an Intention to have surpised this
Place, and to have brought the same under his Subjection; but through the care
of the Inhabitants he not only lost his Design, but also a great number of his
Men, and was forced to retreat to his Ships with shame and confusion: yet to
show his Malice, and to revenge himself upon the Citizens, he burnt several of
their Vessels which lay at an Anchor before the City, and carried away others
with him to a considerable number. They also told us, that about twenty Miles
from this Place, there were five great and fruitful Islands in the same River
Kiang, in which this Pyrate had chosen to harbor and shelter his Ships in
stormy Weather.

Having lain all Night before this City, we set Sail early in the Morning, and
the next Day we found upon the North side of the River Kiang, near to a Castle
called Ruancheu, a large Stone Sluice, at the Head of a Channel, the Work only
of the Spade, forced quite through the Country, to get into the Yellow River.
so to avoid the trouble of Sailing round about out of one River into another.

These Artificial Channels, by reason of their wideness, and the greatness of
the Undertaking, and being made at the Emperor's Charge, are called The King's
Waters.

We then passed by this Sluice, and so came into the first Royal Channel, and
from thence we got into the Yellow River, Well may this Channel bear the Name
of The Royal Water, since there is nothing more pleasant to be seen in all the
World; both sides of the Aquaeduct having not only smooth large Banks, but
planted also with stately and shady Trees. On the West and East of this Royal
Channel (for it reaches from South to North) we saw rich Pastures and
delightful Woods, the like not to be seen in all Asia, intermingled with
abundance of Wealthy Towns, Villages, pleasant Seats, and opulent and stately
Dwelling, insomuch that nothing can be more delightful; as if Art and Nature
had strove to please the Passenger upon his way through this famous Channel. On
one side thereof stood a famous and renowned Image of the Idol Kinkang, who is
highly adored by the Chinese.

In the Passage we saw at a distance another great and artificial Idol-Temple,
which was adorned with a very brave Tower of six Rounds, and by the Chinese
called Quangguamiau. A particular Person out of a mistaken religious Zeal,
erected at his own Charge this Idol, in honor of this Temple, which stands in a
large and pleasant Field, and is surrounded with many Houses, whose Inhabitants
and their Neighbors Offer up to this Idol with great Devotion, all manner of
Fruits, besides Beasts, Cocks, Hogs, Swine, and Goats, that so they may be
successful in their Labors, and enjoy a plentiful Harvest. All Travellets who
pass this way, bring commonly with them fat and rich Offerings to this Idol,
their Temple Protector. The Chinese and Tartars who accompanied us from Canton
to Peking, were very desirous to have stayed here a while, till they had
performed their Devotions (according to the Custom of the Country) in Offering
up Cocks, Hogs, and Goats, for the procurement of a prosperous Voyage; but the
Ambassadors were unwilling to stay their Journey, and could not be prevailed
with to lose so much time, but resolved to hasten their Voyage, being weary of
their vain Superstition: However, they gave leave to some to go ashore to see
this famous Structure, which shows very handsomely at a distance, being
artificially built after the Chinese fashion; and within adorned with abundance
of great and small Images (for amongst all other Idolaters, the Chinese exceed
in decoration of their Temples) which are fixed to the Walls. At the upper end
stood a great Altar, where they Present their Sacrifices to the Idol: Round
about (as is to be seen in most of the Structures) hang abundance of heavy
Lamps, which burn Night and Day in honor of this God, and the Departed.

Upon the 24. we came to the brave City of Iamcefu, which is called by some
Yaucqeu, and is reckoned for the seventh Capital City of this famous Province
of Nanking. This City lies about twenty Miles from Iejenjeen, is built
apiece, and surrounded with Walls and strong Bulwarks: It is very large,
being at least five Miles about, exceeding most Cities in China for Wealth and
Trade.

The Inhabitants of this City deal in several Commodities; but that wherein
their chief Trade consists is Salt, Transported from thence into most Provinces
of China. This Salt is made of Seawater, after the manner of ours in Europe.
On the East Side of the City we saw standing a great many Salt-Pans, wherein
they boil Sea-Liquor Day and Night. This Trade alone has so very much enriched
the Inhabitants of this Town, that they have rebuilt their City since the last
destruction by the Tartars, erecting it in as great Splendour as it was at first.

In no Place of all China are found more comely, and better humor'd Women, than
in this City: The Virgins, as also the married Women, have very small Feet, and
handsome Legs; so that it passes for a common Proverb among the Chinese, That
if a Man will have a Wife slender of Body, brown Hair, and with a handsome Leg
and Foot, he must come to this City of Iamcefu. But yet in no Place in all
China Women bear so inconsiderable a Rate; for it is lawful both to Parents and
Masters to sell their Servants and Daughters to Gentlemen that will buy them,
to be their prostituted Harlots.

No sooner were we Landed in this City, but the Mandorin Pinxenton went in
great State to Salute and Complement the Commissioner of his Imperial Majesty,
and Presented him with four Pieces of red Cloths in behalf of the Ambassadors.

The Emperor has here a Toll-house, where the Customs are paid for all such
Wares as pass. The City is well built, and has several Channels running
through it, over which are many Stone Bridges. On the West Side are very large
Suburbs, which were formerly full of goodly Structures, but were most of them
destroyed in the last Tartar War, yet have begun since to be reedifi'd. There
are also several Temples, curiously built, and most richly adorned. Near this
City is a very high Mountain, called Heng.

Next Day being the 25. we departed from this Place, and upon the Verge of this
Royal Channel we saw twelve Stone Ovens; and not far from thence, on the other
side of the Channel lies the famous Burial-City of the Great Sultan, much
adored and worshipped by the Chinese. About Noon we came to a Village called
Saupoo, where at the same time the Chinese were celebrating the Feast of the
new Year on the New Years day, being then also Full-Moon, great Acclamations
and Expressions of Joy, signified by their lighting of so many Candles and
Bonefires, as if the whole City had been in one great Flame. They run likewise
up and down the Streets in their Nocturnals like so many distracted Bacchanals,
with Tapers in their Hands, twisted together in the form of Dragons. We were
forced to stay here a while, till the Mandorin Pinxenton and his Lady also
assisted at the Solemnity of this Feast.

We found lying about this Village, in this Royal Channel, a great number of
all manner of strange built Vessels; but the most to be admired at were two
Barques or Sloops, which by the Chinese are called Longschon, which signifies
A Serpent-Boat. These two Vessels were built after a particular fashion, very
curiously Painted with all manner of Colors, that they seemed much to exceed
those Boats which carry the Fish from Nanking to Peking for the Emperor's use.

The Mould or Cast of this fair Bottom was much like the Form of our
Water-Snake: The Stern hung full of strange Serpents, fastened with Ribbons of
several Colors, which made a gallant show. At the Stern of one of these
Vessels hung likewise two nimble Boys, who played Tricks and Gambols to delight
the Spectators both above, and by Diving under Water. Upon the top of each
Mast, which were three in all, stood an Idol, very curiously adorned with Silk
Flags and Pennons: In like manner stood on the Poop an Image dressed with Ducks
and Drakes. The Stern was also filled with Standards, set out with Tassels of
Hair, Silk Flags, and long Feathers; the Boat covered round with Silk. Under an
upper high-rais'd Desk, full of Flags and Standards, sat twelve lusty Seamen,
with gilt Crowns upon their Heads, Clothed in Silk, their Arms naked; these
were so dexterous at Rowing, that the Boat went at an extraordinary rate: They
came Aboard of the Ambassadors, and seemed to be overjoyed at their Arrival:
The Ambassadors requited their Kindness with a return of some Presents; which
they willingly accepted, wishing them good Success in their Voyage, and a safe
Return into their own Country. Near the Ducks stood a Chinese with a Fork in
his Hand, and long Feathers in his Cap, who continually tortured these poor
Creatures, putting them in perpetual Disquiet.

The next Day, being the 26. of May, we came to the City of Cajutsia, which is
also called by some Caoyeu, and is reckoned for the fourth small City of the
Capital Yancheu. This City we found lying upon the side of this Royal Water,
near a great Pool which the Chinese call Piexe, out of which runs plenty of
Water into this famous Channel. Formerly all such Vessels as came from Nanking,
bound for Peking and the Northern Provinces, were glad to pass over this Pool,
to the great hindrance of Commerce and Navigation; for oftentimes in a foul
Season, they lay Weather-bound before this City of Caoyeu, there being no
venturing over the Pool, till the Wind were more silent, and the swelling
Billows more calm; so that for the benefit of Commerce and safety of their
Voyage, on the East Side of the Pool this Navigable Channel was made sixty
Fathom long, Walled in with white Stone: A Work so noble and excellent, that it
is much to be admired, especially considering the great quantity of white
Stones there used, there being no such Quarry in the adjacent Parts.

This Caoyeu is very populous, and has stately Suburbs, built very close, and
full of great Houses.

The Country round about produces great store of Rice, and is so full of
Buildings, as if it were all but one continued Village. Toward the West the
Country lies much under Water; but upon the Sides and Banks grows store of
Reed, which brings in a good Revenue yearly to the Public, and is the only
Firing they have; for no Trees will grow in this part of the Country. They
boast likewise of store of Windmills, whose Sails are made of Mats. The great
Product of the Country consists of Rice, which the Peasant stands obliged to
look after very narrowly, lest it perish upon the Ground by too much Moisture,
or too much Heat and Drought; so that their Eyes are continually upon the Crop,
otherwise it suddenly withers to nothing, or a small Increase: The Windmills
therefore are to draw out the Water in a moist Season, or to let it in as they
think fit, to keep their Hopes from burning up in a dry and hot Season; so that
by this means the Chinese enjoy twice a Year a plentiful Harvest.

Upon the 27. of May, after that we had Lodged all Night before the City of
Caoyeu, we set Sail, and came to the City of Paoing, which is held for the
sixth small City under the Jurisdiction of this Capital City Yangcheu. This
City is situate upon the East Side of the Royal Navigation, and surrounded with
strong Walls, built in an orbicular form, and containing about a Mile and a
half in circumference: It lies twenty Miles from Caoyeu; toward the East
bordering upon the Pool of Xeyang, and toward the South-West on the Pool of
Piexe.

By the Ruins of the Wall and great Edifices, this City appears to have been
formerly a very famous Place, rich and populous, but was totally destroyed in
the late War by the Tartars. Amongst other Edifices which are yet standing, is
a most famous Idol-Temple, without the Wall on the North-side of the City,
built after the fashion of the Chinese. The Royal Channel runs quite through
the Country up to the very Walls, by which means they water their Grounds in a
dry Season. This part of the Country is also full of Draining-Mills, to be used
upon occasion.

Upon the 28. we came to the famous Sea-Town of Hoaigan, which is reckoned for
the eighth Capital City of this Province of Nanking: It lies on the East Side
of the Royal River, about thirty English Miles from Pancien, in a flat and
Morish Soil: through the midst thereof runs a Wall, seeming to make two
distinct Towns; but another Wall which surrounds both Divisions, takes away the
distinction, and renders it one entire City: That part which lies toward the
South is called Hoaigan, and the other toward the North-East, Yengehing: The
former of these has stately Suburbs, well built, and full of People. On one
side of this City we saw the Fields full of Tombs and Grave-stones.

In this Capital City the Viceroy keeps his Court in great Splendour and State;
he has full Power over the seven Southerly Provinces, and only owns the Emperor
for his Supreme Head. His Office is to look after the Grand Cham's Revenue,
consisting chiefly in Provisions of Rice, etc. which when got in, is afterward
Transported to Peking in his Majesty's own Vessels.

On the North-side of the City we saw three great Torrents of Water; the first
of which, and nearest to the River Hoai, is very dangerous, and by its
Inundations has often done great harm. To prevent this River from overflowing
the adjacent Countries, they have raised and made two great Sluices, with strong
Banks on both sides, which confine him in his highest Tide.

In the Suburb of Hoaigan stand two Toll-houses; in the one the Custom is paid
of all Goods and Merchandises which pass this Way; in the other, of the Ships
which belong to the Subjects: and with some part of this Money they maintain
their Dikes and Sluices for the defense of the City against the sudden and
violent Ruptures of Water.

Though this City be built upon a Morish Ground, yet the Country about it is
very fruitful in the product of Rice and Corn: The City is well built, and full
of wealthy Citizens.

Not far from hence lies a famous Mountain, which shoots to the Sky, by the
Chinese called Yocheu, upon which stands a stately Temple, with Cloisters to
Lodge those who daily Offer to the Idol of the Place. The Chinese come from
several Parts with Presents to this their God, supposed the Protector and
Defender of their Country.

This Province of Nanking abounds with strange Mountains; for in the Country of
the second Chief City Fungyang, near the seventh small City Xeu, upon a Hill
called Cukin, was found a great lump of massy Gold, said to be sovereign in
several Distempers. Some will have it, because this Gold cures so many
Diseases, that Chemists made it. In the same Country, near to the City of
Hintai, there is a notable Mountain called Moyang, and known by the Name of The
Shepherdesses Hill, because, as they say, a very fair Virgin formerly kept her
Flocks there.

The whole Country of this Hoaigan has several Rivers running through it, and
is also replenished with many Lakes. Amongst other Pools, you have here the
great Pool of Xeho, which toward the North is situated next to the great Indian
Sea, and waters various Parts of this Country, which abounds with Fish.

Toward the East of the Chief City lies also a great Pool called Hung,
producing great store of Reeds, which serve them for Firing, Wood being very
scarce through the whole Province.

No sooner were the Ambassadors arrived before this Capital City, but they sent
for Horses, Palakins, and Litters, to go and salute the Viceroy and the
Magistrates; but because the Weather was foul, the Governors sent a Messenger
to the Ambassadors, to thank them for their intended Visit, desiring to be
excused from giving them the like trouble. The Mandorine Pinxenton, according
to his wonted custom, gave us a very Noble Dinner upon that Day. In the Evening
came Father Gascomer (a Jesuit, who lived in the City) to salute the
Ambassadors aboard their Vessels, and to bid them welcome into those Parts. He
was very pleasant and civil, but did so admire at our arrival, as if we had
dropped out of the Sky, being very inquisitive to know whither we were bound, and
upon what account we came thither. The Ambassadors showed themselves courteous
and civil to him, giving him a handsome Entertainment for his Visit. He seemed
to be a very open-hearted Person, and made protestation of a particular
Inclination and Affection to our Nation, offering the Ambassadors his House, if
they pleased to accept thereof, or any other Service he could do them. He gave
them likewise darkly to understand, That upon their Request and Desire of Free
Trade in China, or any thing else, they would meet with great opposition at
Peking from the Portuguese, who would do their utmost to hinder it, as we found
afterward in the Sequel of our Business. The Ambassadors were very thankful to
this Good Father for his kind and faithful Admonition, who thereupon took
leave, wishing us a prosperous Voyage.



We staid not long in this City, but departed the next day early in the
Morning; and in our Passage we saw on both sides luxurious Fields, well
manured, as likewise a great Company of small Boats lying up and down in this
Royal Channel. About Sunset we came to a famous Village called Siampu, at the
entrance whereof lies a very great Sluice, through which we past.

This Village is situated betwixt the Royal Channel and the Yellow River, and
is of a very great length, handsomely adorned with Temples, and fair Houses on
both sides of the Water: It has some Privileges belonging to it, as also a
Toll-house, where the Toll-masters appointed by the Emperor reside, to receive
Toll of all such Goods and Vessels which pass out of the Yellow River into the
Royal Channel, or out of the Royal Channel into the Yellow River; or such as
are brought out of the Province of Honan and other Parts, and are carried up
higher or lower. One of these Toll-masters showed himself far more scrupulous
than all the rest, searching all our Vessels, except those two in which the
Ambassadors were, to see what was in them; for he could not believe that they
were all laden with Goods belonging only to the Emperor. We Lodged all Night in
this Village, and set Sail early in the Morning, and came that Night to another
Village called Neynemiao, into which we were let by two great Sluices, one after
another: The Inhabitants told us, as indeed appeared by the Ruins, that in
this Village formerly stood a great Castle, which protected three Rivers, as
the Yellow River on both sides, and the Royal Channel behind it: But the
Tartars, who made it their business to destroy all Inland Places of Strength,
had likewise pulled down this Castle. We Lodged there all Night, and the next
Day at Sunrising we set Sail again, and came into a part of the great Yellow
River, which is so thick and muddy, that it is scarce passable.

This River is called by some The Saffron, from the yellowness of the Water: at
a distance it seems to be a thick Morish Plash, but when you come upon it, the
swiftness and great force of the Stream declares a running River, whose Current
has so much violence, that no Boats are able to Sail against the Stream, but
are Towed up by a great number of Bargemen. In some places this River is half a
Mile broad, and in some more; but in length it reaches above eight hundred
Miles: The Chinese Sailors, when employed here, make this Water fit for use,
and very clear, by flinging Allom into it, which sinks ^he Mud to the bottom.



Upon the first of June we came to the little Town of Tanjenien, which is the
fourth small City under the Jurisdiction of the Chief City of Hoaigan: It is
situate on the side of the Yellow River, and fenced with a broad, strong
Earthen or Mud Wall, replenished with handsome Buildings, and full of rich
Inhabitants, who drive a very great Trade.

The Country round is very fruitful in the product of Pears, Apples, Prunes,
Cherries, and the like. We bought here some Provisions for the Kitchen at a
very reasonable Rate. These Parts likewise abound in Quails, Pheasants, and
other sorts of Fowl.

We made no long stay here, but departed before Night, and Sailed at least
three Days upon this Yellow River, before we came to any considerable Place: at
last, upon the fourth of the same Month we drew near to the small Town of
Tsisang, situate in a very delightful Soil, and at the Foot of a high Hill.
This Town has no remarkable Buildings, nor Walls, only one strong Castle; but
yet of great Trade, and has many rich Inhabitants, who Traffic much with their
Shipping. At the entrance into the Town stands a stately Temple upon a steep
Summit, seen in Prospect at a great distance.

We saw likewise upon this Yellow River, which is continually plowed with all
manner of great and small Vessels, not far from the Town, several floating
Islands, which were so artificially contrived, that the best Artists in Europe
would scarcely be able to make the like of the same Stuff; being a common Reed
which the Portuguese call Bamboes, twisted so close together, that no Moisture
can penetrate. Upon these Reeds the Chinese set up Huts, and little Houses of
Boards, and other light Materials, in which they live with their Wives and
Children, as if they had their Dwellings upon the Firm Land. Some of these
Floating Islands are large enough to contain at least 200 Families; and those
that live in them subsist for the most part by Commerce and Trafflck in all
manner of Commodities, which they carry from Place to Place upon the River,
being hurried down with the Stream, and towed up again by toilsom Bargemen.
Wherever they intend to make any stay, they fasten their Floating Town with
Poles fixed in the Ground. They keep and feed aboard their Island all manner of
Tame Cattle, but especially Hogs. Wheresoever they come, they continue lying
for some Months before they remove; and though they are People of several
Languages, yet they make up one common Tongue, whereby they understand one
another; for throughout all China there are several Dialects, each Province
having a particular one; yet there is also one common Language, which they call
the Mandorins or Court-Tongue, being spoke here both by the Grandees and their
Followers.

After some hours Sailing we came into another Royal Channel called Iun,
issuing out of the Yellow River toward the West through the whole Province of
Xantung: We were to pass through this Channel to the City of Peking. The
Province of Xantung into which we entered, is much enriched by this artificial
Channel running through it; for all Goods and Commodities which are Transported
out of China for Peking, must pass this Cut.

This great, broad, and Navigable Stream begins at the ninth small City Socien,
upon the side of the Yellow River, and reaches to the City Cining, and from
thence to Lincing, there breaking into the River Guei. This Channel has at
least sixty Stone Sluices to force back the Water, which in some places runs
very low, and would not be Navigable, were it not for these Waterworks: On
each Sluice eight Men attend to help through with the Vessels, who are
maintained at the Public Charge.

As soon as we came into this Channel, we were presently in the Province of
Xantung, and upon the sixth of June came to a famous Village called Kiakia. But
before I give you a Description of this Province, I shall continue my Method,
and first relate unto you the Confines thereof, and the number of great and
small Cities, etc.

The Province of Xantung is the fourth in number under the Northern Countries,
and is washed on the South, East, and North, by the Sea, and on the West Side
is environed with Rivers, insomuch that you may come by Shipping if you please.
On the North of Xantung lies the Province of Peking, and on the South that of
Nanking, separated by the Yellow River; the remaining part is encompassed with
the Channel Iun, and the River Guei.

This part produces abundance of Corn, Rice, Beans, etc. The fruitfulness of
this Country is such, that one years Harvest, as they say, supplies the
Inhabitants sufficiently for ten Years with Provisions. All manner of Poultry
is wondrous plentiful, and sold for very little, because the People there take
great delight in Hunting. The Rivers, Pools, and other Waters, abound with
extraordinary good Fish, which you may have for a very small Price, I my self
purchasing ten Pound for a Halfpeny. The Country produces likewise store of
Silk, another sign of her Fertility; and abounds in all manner of Fruit Trees,
especially Pruines, which they dry and carry thence to sell in other Provinces.

The Inhabitants are generally very dull of understanding, and few of them
addicted to Learning; but they are for the most part very strong bodied, fit to
undergo any Labor. The Children do not only go naked in the Winter, but will
leap into the cold Water: Several of them live by Theft and Robbery; and these
Companies are oftentimes so numerous, that they break through all opposition
whatsoever, when they make Inroads to plunder the Country, which is already
much ruined by the late Invasion.

In this whole Province of Xantung lie six Capital Cities, twenty nine small
Cities, and thirteen Carrisons. The six great Cities are, Cinan, Yencheu,
Tungchang, Cingcheu, Tengche^, and Laicheu.

Cinan Commands over thirty Cities, as Cinan, Changkieu, Ceuping, Chagxan,
Sinching, Ciho, Citung Ciyang, Chihuen, Iuching, Li^ye, Changcing, Fiching,
Cingching, Ling, Taigan, Siniai, Laivu, Te, Teping, Pingyven, Vuting, Yangsin,
Haifung, Laling, Xangho, Pin, Lioin, Chenhoa, and Putahi.

Yencheu Commands over 26 Cities, as Yencheu, Kioheu, Niuyang, Ceu, Teng, Ye,
Kiuhiang, Yutai, Tan, Chingvu, Cao, Tingtao, Cining, Kiaciang, Kiuye,
Kiunching, Tungping, Venxang, Tungpo, Pingyn, Iangco, Xeuchang, Wy, Tanching,
Fi, and Suxui.

Tungchang Commands over eight Cities, as Tungchang, Tangye, Poping,
Choangping, Kieu, Sin, Cingping, Ken, Lincing, Quontao, Caotang, Gen, Hiacin,
Vucing, Po, Fan, Quonching, and Chaoching.

Cingcheu Commands over 14 Cities, as Cingcheu, Linchi, Pohing, Caoyven, Logan,
Xeuquang, Changlo, Linkiu, Gankiu, Chuching, Mungin, Kiu, Yxui, and Gechao.

Tengcheu Commands over eight Cities, as Tengcheu, Hoang, Foxan, Leuhid,
Chaoyven, Laiyang, Ninghai, and Vemeng.

Laicheu Commands over seven Cities, as Laicheu, Pingtu, Vi, Changye, Kiao,
Caomi, and Gieme.

The thirteen Garrisons are, Nincing, Cinghai, Chingxan, Gueihai, Sanxan,
Kixan, Civenxan, Mauan, Siaoye, Haicang, Punglai, Cin, and Xechin.

In this Province there are also several Islands, amongst which these three are
the chiefest: as first, Feuxeu, which lies toward the West, is but small, yet
exceeding well built. The second is Teuhang, situate in the Sea near to Caomy:
This Island is very famous, by reason of a sad Accident of five hundred Chinese
Philosophers, who drowned themselves in the Sea, because the Emperor Xuis hated
all Learned Men as mortal Enemies. The third Island is Xaumen, the biggest, and
fullest of People.

The Chinese Accompt-Book, which comprehends the number of People in each
Place, mentions in this Province, Seven hundred and seventy thousand five
hundred and sixty Families, Sixty seven hundred fifty nine thousand six hundred
and seventy Fighting Men.

The yearly Revenue of the Province, belonging to the Emperor, consists of
Twenty eight hundred twelve thousand one hundred and nineteen Bags of Corn,
Fifty four thousand nine hundred and nineteen Rolls of Throw'd Silk, Fifty two
thousand four hundred and forty nine Pounds of Cotton, and Thirty eight hundred
twenty four thousand two hundred and nineteen Trusses of Straw and Hay for the
Emperor's Stables, besides several Tolls paid upon the Royal Channel of Iun,
which amounts yearly to ten Millions of Golden Crowns.

This Village Kia-kia lies encompassed with pleasant and fruitful Fields, most
delightful to behold; and is very rich, well built, and handsomely adorned with
indifferent large Structures. The Fields round about are full of Rosemary,
which are not only very pleasant to the Eye, but also cast a fragrant smell at
a great distance before you come near them. We saw likewise not far from the
City several Herds of Stags and Bucks, and abundance of all sorts of Fowl,
especially Pheasants. We took great delight in Hunting the Stag, whereof we
killed several, with the assistance of the Tartars, who are skilful at the
Game. They were very much pleased with our way of shooting Pheasants flying.
The Flesh of these Deer tastes so much of Rosemary, as if the Venison were
seasoned with the Sprigs.

We were three days upon this Channel Iun, before we reached any other
considerable Place; but upon the eleventh of the same Month we arrived at a
famous Village called Iax-Hinno, situated upon the Royal Channel.



In and about this Village stand 36 stately Towers, built rarely well, on
either side of the River. Here we lay all Night, but the next Morning set Sail
by Daybreak, and that Day and the next we saw upon each Bank of the River,
great store of good Corn-Ground.

Toward the East of this Royal Channel lie several high and great Hills,
whereof these following are the chiefest.

Near to Taigan, the sixteenth small City of Cinnan, appears a Mountain called
Tai, which is very steep and broad: the Chinese Geographers say, that it is at
least five Miles in height from the Basis to the Crown. Upon this Mountain are
several Temples, to which belong great store of Priests, who live after the
same manner as the Calvisians in Europe.

Not far from Laivu, the eighteenth small City under the Jurisdiction of this
Place, arises the Mountain Tax, in which they find great store of Iron.

Near to Ciohu, the second small City under the Chief City Yengcheu, is the
Mountain called Fang, very famous for the Tomb where the Ancestors of that
Learned Chinese Philosopher Confutius lies Interred.

Not far from the fourth small City Ceu, lies a Mountain called Changping, upon
which (as the Chinese report) Confutius was born, in a Town also called
Changping, the Ruins whereof are still to be seen.

Near to Tunping, the eighth small City of the said Capital City, stands a
great Mountain called Fung, full of Wood and goodly Pastures.

Upon the thirteenth of the same Month we came to Cinningsin or Cining, the
fourteenth small City under the Command of the second Chief City Yengcheu.

In this Cining the Ambassadors were nobly Treated in the absence of the
Governor, by the Agents of the young Canton Viceroy, he being gone from home,
to order the making of a Fence-work against the breaking in of the Yellow River.

This City is encompassed with flat and Morass Lands, lying about a hundred and
thirty Miles from Tanjencien, situate about the middle of the Royal Channel
Iun; so that all Vessels which use this Pass, must pay Custom both for Ship and
Goods. It exceeds not only all the other twenty six small Cities situate in the
Jurisdiction of the forementioned Capital City, in number of People, greatness
of Trade, and Gentry, but also the Chief City it self. Among other stately
Edifices, there are two famous Temples, richly adorned with great and small
Pictures: On both sides of the Royal Channel are great Suburbs, full of People
and Trade; on both sides of the River are also two great Sluices, which keep off
the out-water, which sometimes rises six Foot higher than the Water within.

The Country round about this City lies low and plashy, being full of Pools and
Rivers, which abound with Fish.

Near to Cao, the twelfth small City, is a Lake called Lui, which signifies The
Thunder-Pool; in the middle whereof appears a Stone, representing a Dragon with
the Head of a Man. The Chinese call this The Spirit of Thunder, and affirm,
That when any one strikes upon the Belly, he draws a hideous sound from the
Monster like Thunder.

Near to the third small city Nynyang, which is likewise under the Command of
the Capital City Yengcheu, and about two Miles from Cining, runs a small River
called Tao, out of which the Chinese report, That the great Philosopher
Confutius refused to drink, though ready to die of Thirst, because it was
called The Water of Thieves; so great an aversion had this Ethnic Philosopher
to the very Name of wicked Villainy and Robbers.

About this City we saw them catch Fish with a Bird, which they call Louwa,
being somewhat less than a Goose, and not much unlike a Raven: it has a long
Neck, and a Bill like an Eagle. Because this way of Fishing seems notable, and
no where used but in China, I thought good to relate the manner, which is thus:
They have small Boats, very artificially made of Reeds or Bamboes, with which
they Sail upon the Chinese Rivers and Pools, and place the Bird perching upon
the outside of the Vessel, from whence she suddenly shoorts, and diving, swims
under Water as fast as they can thrust forward their Cables with a light Pole:
As soon as she has caught her Prey, she instantly appears above Water, the
Master of the Boat standing ready to receive her, who opens her Bill by force,
and takes out the Dainty: Afterward he turns her out again to catch more. To
prevent these Birds from swallowing down the Prey, they hang a Ring about their
Necks, which hinders them from gorging: Such Fish as are too big for them to
bring up in their Bills, they discover to their Masters, by making a noise in
the Water, who then helps to pull them out. Such Birds as are slothful and loath
to dive, are broken of that ill habit by beating. When they have caught enough
for their Owners, the Iron Ring is taken off, and they are left to fish for
themselves, which makes them the more willing to work for others. The Fishermen
pay a yearly Tribute to the Emperor for the use of these Birds, which are in
much esteem with the Chinese; and such as are nimble, and well taught, are so
dear, that oftentimes one of them goes at 50 Toel of Silver, which is about 150
Guilders. We offered to buy of an old Fisherman a couple of these Birds; but he
refused, alleging, That they served to maintain him and his Family; neither
could he inform us whence those Birds came, nor how they were first instructed;
only he told us, That they were left him by his Ancestors. We asked him
likewise whether they ever bred with him; who answered, Very rarely. We bought
a Dish of Fish of this old Man, which were most of them Carps of a Span and
half long.

All the Inns and Public Victualling-houses have their Fiddlers and Comedians
belonging to them, to recreate their Guests at Meals. Provisions of all sorts
are very cheap in those Parts: We paid but two Shillings a piece for our
Dinner, which consisted of several Dishes; out of which the Players were
likewise discharged by our Host.

The next day we departed from Cining, and, after a few Hours Sailing, we past
by a Village called Nanwaig, lying on the Bank of this Royal Channel, where
this and the River Luen meet and mingle their Waters. The Tartars and Chinese
told us strange Stories of this River: amongst the rest, That if you fling in
nine Sticks, six would drive toward the South, and three toward the North. We
seemed much to admire at the Report, but scarcely believed it, till we made the
Experiment our selves, by flinging so many Sticks into the Water, which
convinced us of the truth of what had been told us: But neither the Tartars,
Chinese, nor other Inhabitants, were able to give us any account of this
Wonderful Mystery of Nature. This I tried over against an Idol-Temple called
The Royal Serpent, concerning which the Chinese told us several Wonders.

Upon the 19. of the same Month we came to a small City called Xantsui, being
the 23. under the Command of the Chief City Yengcheu. This Place lies abont
thirty Miles from Cining, on both sides of this Royal Channel, and is guarded
at each end with a strong Castle.

The City is apiece, well built, and surrounded with high Walls and strong
Bulwarks. Here we saw the Ruins of several great Buildings uninhabited, and
which had been much defaced by the Tartars.

The Country round about lies often under Water, by the overflowing of the
Yellow River, which sometimes rises to that height, that it drowns and carries
away whole Towns and Villages.

The next Morning we set Sail from Xantsui, and by the way we saw several fair
Villages and Cornfieldsd on both sides of this Royal Channel, as also several
strong Sluices, which did not a little hinder us in our Passage; for between
Xantsui and Lincing we past through 58 Sluices.

Not far from Xantsui stands a famous Idol-Temple called Teywanmiao, which is
held in such great esteem amongst them, that they reckon it for one of the
chiefest in all China. It is built very high, with strong Walls of gray Stone,
and gallantly adorned after the Chinese fashion. The top of this Temple is
covered with Yellow glazed Tiles, and the Walls are also colored after the
same manner; so that when the Sun shines, it glisters like Gold all over.

Upon the twentieth of June we came to Tuncham, the third Chief City of the
Province of Xantung, built in a foursquare form, and environed with Walls and
Bulwarks; the Streets thereof are large, and well built. In the middle of the
City stands a high and curious Fabric, with four brave Arches, having strong
Walls and Bulwarks, with several Gates leading into it. On the North-side runs
a broad Water, which encompasses the City; over which is a Wooden Bridge of 137
Foot long, by which they pass into the North part of the City. On the
South Side are stately Suburbs, which, in respect of the Inhabitants, and the
greatness of their Trade, may very well pass for another City: It is well
built, with goodly Houses, and Idol-Temples. Toward the East the Inhabitants
showed us a very large Iron Tomb, which they told us was erected at least 700
Years ago, for some Great Lord, whose Memory the Chinese had in much Honor,
having done his Country some signal and remarkable Service, and for which he
lost his Life in the Wars.

Round about this City the Land is very low and flat, but wondrous fruitful in
the product of all things necessary for Humane Sustenance. No part of China
produces so much Silk as this, the Inhabitants thereof living chiefly by this
Manufacture, wherewith they Trade into other Countries.



Here, the Inhabitants told us, is sometimes found a Stone in the Maw of the
Cows, which the Chinese call Nieuhoang, which signifies The Yellow of the
Cows. This Stone is about the bigness of a Goose Egg; outwardly it seems to be
of a soft chalkie substance, only of a yellowish Color, and is by some thought
to be the Bezoar Stone. The Chinese Chyrurgeons highly commend it, and use
great diligence for the procuring of it; they write, That it is of a cold
temper, and very sovereign in fainting and swooning Fits.

In the Country of this Chief City, near to the eleventh small City called
Laotung, lies amongst the rest a Hill called Mingxe, which signifies The Stone
of Noise: Upon the top of this Hill, as the Inhabitants related to us, stands a
Column of 100 Rod high, which as soon as touched with the Finger, sounds like a
Drum, from which Noise the Hill derives its Name.

The Chinese also told us, That near to Quonching, the seventeenth small City
of this Chief City, is a Pool called Ho, wherein formerly the King of Guei kept
and fed his Cranes with great care and delight. The Chinese in this Country as
likewise through all China, feed this Bird in their Houses, as they do also the
Stags, which being Creatures of long life, they fancy to themselves, that in
having of them to breathe upon them, they shall likewise live long.

We continued all Night in our Vessels before this City, and set Sail the next
Morning, and past over the Pool Nanyang, which abounds with Fish, and that
Night came to the City of Lincing, which lies about thirty Miles from the City
Tungchang, and is situated on both sides of the Royal Channel: We lay at the
end thereof, where that and the River Guei separate the Province of Xantung
from that of Peking, and mingle and unite their Waters.

We were no sooner arrived at this City, but the Governor appeared upon the
Wall, near the Place where we lay with our Vessels, to welcome and receive the
Ambassadors with all manner of kindness. Pinxenton and the other Mandorins went
first ashore to him; whereupon the Governor sent for some Chairs for the
Ambassadors, who followed the Mandorins, and were most civilly received by him,
intimating that he could not entertain them at his Court, because they had not
yet appeared before the Emperor at Peking. The Ambassadors sent some Presents
to the Governor, who for the same Reason refused them.



Because this Lincing lies at the end of the Yellow Channel, near the River
Guei, and so consequently a very commodious Harbor for Shipping, all manner of
Goods and Wares are brought from all Parts of China to this City, for which
they must pay Custom there; and for this reason the Emperor has three
Commissioners resining in that Place to receive his Dues. This Navigation
occasions so great a Trade in Lincing, that it exceeds the other eighteen small
Cities which belong to the Chief City of Tunchang, in Number of People, Plenty
of all manner of Things, Gallantry of Buildings, and Greatness of Commerce;
neither gives she place to any Inferior City in the whole Empire. On both sides
of the Royal Channel, near to the City, stand two strong and large Castles, one
against the other, which are no small Strength to the Place, by which no Vessel
whatsoever can pass without paying their Duties. In this Channel are likewise,
just before the City, two strong and heavy Sluices, to force back the upper
Water which runs from the River Guei, and is sometimes two or three Foot higher
than the Inland Water. On the North side of the City lies a Wooden Brige of
nine Arches, over which ^ou may pass conveniently from one part of the City to
the other; in the middle whereof is a Drawbridge, to let through such Vessels
as have paid their Custom.

The City is well built, and is adorned with several stately Temples; it lies
in a flat sandy Soil, and is surrounded with an Earthen Wall, the top whereof
is covered with Stones; it is also very large, and well Peopled. We had here
great abundance of all manner of Fruit; amongst the rest, some well-relish'd
Pears, which keep a great while.

Without the Wall, on the North-side of the City, stands a most famous Temple,
with a high Tower, exceeding rare in the manner of Building: You climb up to
the top of this Tower by a Pair of Winding Stairs, which are not built in the
middle of the Tower, but between two Walls.

The fashion or form of this Tower consists of eight Corners, and nine Rounds
or Stories, each thirteen Foot and a half; so that the whole height of the
Tower is above 120 Foot, and according to the height a proportionable
thickness. The outward Wall is made of the same Mould that the China Dishes are
of, and full of Fret-work; the Walls within are polished Marble of several
Colors, and so smooth, that you may see your Face, as in a Mirror. The
Galleries or Rounds, which are nine, adorning the Structure, are of Marble, cut
in Figures or Images, and have hanging at their Corners very fine Copper Bells,
which when the Wind blows amongst them, make a very pleasant jingling murmur.
The Lights or Windows belonging to these Galleries are full of gilded Bars,
which when the Sun shines upon them, return Beams as bright as they receive.
Upon the top of the Tower stands a Figure, signifying the Goddess of the Place
to whom this Structure is Dedicated. This Image is made of Plaister-work thirty
Foot high, and wrought with Gold and Silver. Round about this Tower stand
several great and small Images, which are so curiously wrought, that they may
be reckoned amongst the greatest Curiosities in China.

Pinxenton left his Wife and Children in this City of Lincing, but he himself
continued the Voyage with us to Peking. Here also died one of our Trumpeters,
named Verman, who was buried in an Idol-Temple, with the consent of the
Magistrates, who seldom suffer any Strangers to be interred in their hallowed
Ground.

Having got through the River Iun, we entered into the Guei, which divides the
Province of Xantung from Peking, whose Head springs on the West Side of
Gueihoei, the fourth Chief City of the Province of Honan, running from thence
with many Meanders and Turnings toward the East, betwixt the Provinces of
Xantung and Peking, disemboguing into an Arm of the Sea, about ninety Miles
from this City.

We Sailed Eastward up this River, and arrived upon the 25. at the City of
Utin, which is accounted the fourteenth small City of the great Tunchang,
thirty Miles from Lincing, situate upon the South Side of the River Guei, upon
the utmost Confines of the Province of Xantung, and handsomely vested with a
apiece Wall. Upon the North-side of it are large Suburbs close built, with
stately Houses.

The great Edifices, and other eminent Ornaments of this City, were all ruined
by the conquering Tartar, and the Inhabitants most miserably abused, a great
many of them being put to the Sword, and others carried away Captive, as those
that were left related unto us with great reluctance. The Situation seems
delightful, being pleasantly varied with the prospect both of Hills and
Valleys, and luxurious in the product of all manner of Fruits. The River Guei
running close by this City, abounds with Fish, and serves to water the Fields
in a dry Season, to the great increase thereof.

I find my self again necessitated, before I proceed in my Relation, to
describe the Condition, Confines, and the Number of great and small Cities
through which we passed in this Province of Peking.

Peking, which is reckoned the first of the fifteen Provinces, exceeds all the
rest in Dignity, because of the Imperial City of Peking, where the Emperor
resides at present, and from whence it has Denomination: for the Chinese
Emperors, especially those who Commanded since the Incarnation, settled their
Abodes in this City. The Race of Taming first transferred the Imperial Court
from Nanking to Peking, the better to oppose the Inroads of the Tartars; but
though the Imperial Residence was thus removed to Peking, yet to this day the
Court of the Emperor, and all Sovereignty and Magistracy, stands firm in the
same manner at Nanking as at Peking, though all the Royal Palaces were totally
destroyed by the last Invasion.

The East of this Province is bordered by an Arm of the Sea, which divides the
Islands Corea and Iapan; on the North-East lies the* Province of Leaotung;
toward the North, the great Tartarian Wall; and toward the West, the Province
of Xangsi, where a long ridge of Hills, called Hengi, separates these
Countries. The Yellow River which runs through Xansi, parts this Province
toward the South from that of Honan, and toward the South-East of the River
Guei, unites this with the Province of Xantung.

And though this Province of Peking lies in the Latitude but of 42 Degrees, yet
the Cold and Frost is so great and intense there, that oftentimes for four
Months together all the Rivers and Waters are frozen up in such a manner, that
they commonly ride their Horses on the Ice; all which time the Vessels lie fast
frozen in and Winter-bound. The Frost begins commonly in November, and seldom
is gone till March; twenty four Hours freezes up all, which is not thawed in
many Days.

The Country lies low, but is dry and healthful, though very barren in
comparison of the other Provinces, because of the great sandy Places and
Wildernesses; but in respect the Court keeps there, and so draws great store of
People and Traffic, this natural Defect is much repaired. This place produces
store of Corn, but little Rice, which the Courtiers and their Followers devour.

In this Province are white rough Cats, not unlike the Malteeza Dogs, with long
Ears, which are there the Ladies Foisting-hounds or Play-fellows; they will
catch no Mice, being too much made of: There are other Cats that are good
Mousers, but they are very scarce, and had in great esteem.

They have here a convenient way of Traveling by Land, in a Wagon with one
Wheel, which only holds three Persons, one in the middle, and on each side one.

Formerly this Province was divided into several Parts, and had particular
Names, as Ieu, Ki, and many more: It contains eight Capital Cities, each of
which Commands over several small ones, insomuch that one Capital City alone,
with the lesser under its Jurisdiction, is in effect a whole Province. They
reckon in this Province a hundred and thirty five Cities, great and small,
which are Walled and Fenced; for the number of the undefended are so great,
that the Chinese themselves take no notice of them in their Maps, neither are
they numbered by them.

The eight great Cities are, Xuntien or Peking, Paoting, Hokien, Chinting,
Xunte, Quanping, Taming, and Iungping.

Xuntien or Peking (the Imperial City, and where at present the Great Cham
keeps his Court) Commands over 26 Cities, and prescribes them their Laws, as
Xuntien, Xuny, Chanping, Leanghiang, Mieyun, Hoatjo, Kugan, Iungcing, Tungan,
Hiangho, Tung, Sanho, Vucing, Paoti, Cho, Fangxan, Pa, Vengan, Taching,
Pooting, Ki, Iatien, Fungjung, Cunhoa, Pingko, and Que. Amongst these, Tung,
Cho, Pa, and Ki, are the chiefest, and may be compared with Capital Cities for
bigness and magnificence.

Paoting Commands over 20 small Cities, as Paoting, Muonching, Ganso, Tinghing,
Sinching, Thang, Poye, Kingtu, Iungching, Huon, Ly, Hiung, Khi, Kince, Tunglo,
Began, Caoyang, Singan, Ye, and Laixui.

Hokien Commands over 18 Cities, as Hokien, Hien, Neuching, Soning, Gnikien,
Kiacho, Cing, Hingci, Cinghai, Ningcin, King, Ukiao, Tungquang, Kuching, Cang,
Nanpi, Ienxan, and Kingyun; amongst which Cang is the chiefest.

Chinting Commands over 32 Cities, as Chinting, Chinking, Hoclo, Lungxeu,
Khoching, Loching, Vukie, Pingxan, Heuping, Ting, Snilo, Kioyang, Hintang, Ki,
Nancung, Sinho, Caokiang, Vuye, Cyn, Ganging, Iaoyang, Vukiang, Chao, Pohiang,
Lungping, Caoye, Lincing, Ganboang, Ningcin, Xui, Hengxui, and Yuenxi; amongst
these Ting, Chao, and Xin, are the chiefest.

Xunte Commands over nine Cities, as Xunte, Xabo, Nanbo, Pinghiang, Quangcung,
Kiulo, Thangxan, Ninkieu, and Gin.

Quanping Commands likewise over nine Cities, as Quanping, Kiocheu, Fihiang,
Kioe, Hantan, Quanpung, Chinggan, Guei, and Cingho.

Taming Commands over eleven Cities, as Taming, Yaming, Nanlo, Guei, Cingfung,
Nuihoang, Siun, Hoa, Cai, (which is the chiefest of the eleven) Changyven, and
Tungming.

Iungping Commands over six Cities, as Iungping, Ciengan, Vuning, Changly, Lo
and Lotung.

Besides these, there are three Cities more, as Yenping, Iunping, and Paogan,
which are situate upon very advantageous places, and were built to resist the
Forces of the Tartars when they should march beyond the Wall.

In this Province are fourteen Garrisons, which were chiefly contrived for the
defense of the Wall; the Names whereof are these, Siven, Vansiven, Hoaigan,
Caiping, Cungnuen, Chang, Began, Cheching, Iuncheu, Vunin, You, Iungping, Xangas,
and Tiencin.

The Chinese Register, wherein the number of the People of this Province is set
down, makes mention of Four hundred eighty thousand nine hundred eighty nine
Families, and Thirty four hundred fifty two thousand two hunered and fifty four
Fighting Men.

The Revenue of this Province paid yearly to the Emperor, consists of Six
hundred thousand eleven hundred fifty three Sacks of Salt, Rice, and Corn, Two
hundred and twenty four Pounds of unwrought fine Flax, Forty five thousand one
hundred and thirty five Pounds of wrought Silk, Thirteen thousand seven hundred
and forty eight Pounds of Cotton, One hundred and eighty thousand eight hundred
and seventy Weight of Salt, Eighty seven hundred thirty seven thousand seven
hundred and eighty four Trusses of Hay or Straw; beside several other Taxes,
which are paid in Money.

Upon the 26. of June we came to Kuching, the first Place we came at in this
Province of Peking, and the fourteenth small City under the Jurisdiction of the
third Chief City of Hokien in the Province of Peking.

This City, which we found situated upon the side of the River Guei, lies about
twenty three Miles from Vuching, in an even and flat Country, yet very
delightful in Prospect; her Walls are high, well built, and abounding in People
and Trade, her Suburbs very magnificent. We made no stay here, but hastened on
toward Peking; and by the way we saw on both sides of the River Guei, whole
Fields full of Trees upon with the Cotton-Wooll grows, which occasions a mighty
Trade in the adjacent Parts.

Upon the 28. we came to Tacheu, which some call Ukiao, accounted the twelfth
small City under the Command of the same H^kien, lying about eighteen Miles
from Kuching, situate on the side of the River, and surrounded with a Wall of
thirty Foot high, strengthened with Bulwarks and Watch-Towers, well built, and
adorned with several Temples, having also a large Suburb, which reaches far
upon both sides of the River.

In this City is the Staple of the Drink Zamsou, made of Rice, and drunk in
stead of Wine. The Inhabitants export this Liquor through all parts of China,
which occasions a great Commerce in this Place; for both Tartars and Chinese
come with their Vessels far and near to be Fraighted with this Drink, which
they afterward Transport to other Places.

The Chinese told us, That about ten Miles from this Tacheu, near to the
second small City called Hien, was a Pool called Vo, whose Water turns as red
as Blood, if you fling a Stick into it; and that from the Leaves which fall
from those Trees which grow about this Lake, come forth immediately living
Swallows.

Upon the 28. of June we Sailed by Tonquam with fair Wind and Weather: It lies
likewise upon the side of the River Guei, about a Musket Shot from the Stream,
and is accounted the thirteenth small City under the Chief City Hokien. This
Place (a Privilege not granted to any other) has a Guard only of Chinese:
built as the rest, square, and fenced with a thick and strong Wall, encompassed
also with a deep and broad Moat or Trench. The Fields near the Town are
curiously planted with all manner of Fruit, Trees.

The adjacent Country of this, as also of the Chief City Hokien (within which
Jurisdiction this Tonquam is situate) lies flat, and much upon a Clay. Toward
the East lie large and flat Fields, being washed by the great Indian Sea, from
whence is continually fetched great store of Salt.

Upon the desire of Pinxenton, the Ambassadors sent me and some others of their
Followers, with twelve Tartar Soldiers, into the City, to see a Lion made of
Iron, which they reported to be extraordinary large and terrible, standing in
the middle of the Marketplace: But the Chinese, when they saw us coming, shut
their Gates upon us, and hid themselves in their Houses, being struck with
terror for fear of the Hollanders; so that we were necessitated to return back
to our Vessels, without entering into the City. Pinxenton and the rest of the
Chinese told us of several other strange things which were to be seen in this
City; but in respect of the unwillingness of the Inhabitants to give us
entrance, I saw none of them, and so could only take a view of the outward
Structure of the same, as it lay vested with large Walls.

Upon the second of July we came to an Anchor before the City of Sanglo, about
fifty five Miles from Tonquam, upon the side of the River Guei. This City lies
a little distant from the River, and has very brave Suburbs on both sides of
the Banks, which are well built, and full of People and Trade. Here dwells a
great number of Tartars, and of a more considerable Quality than any we found
in our whole Voyage; who no sooner heard of our arrival, but they immediately
came aboard in great State to bid us welcome. Upon this their Friendly
Reception and Entertainment we went ashore, where on the East Side of the City
we saw five old Triumphal Arches, through which we past. The City is both
handsomely Built, and well Peopled, being also environed with an old high Wall.

The Governor's Lady sent a Soldier to me, and some others of our Followers,
desiring us to come to her: We were conducted into a very large Parlor, where
she, like a Goddess, was expecting our coming, attended by several Tartar
Ladies, in very rich Habit; but she exceeded them all for Beauty and Gallantry.
On her left hand stood a stately Alchove, upon which she caused me to sit down,
and acquaint her with the Character of Holland, concerning which she asked me
several Questions: To all which I returned my Answers with much freedom,
wherewith she seemed very well pleased.

Having satisfied her Curiosity, we had a noble Banquet set before us, and were
treated with much civility; which being dispatched, we thanked her for the
Honor she had done us, took our leaves, and returned to our Lodgings. As we
were going out of doors, she desired us to excuse the meanness of the
Entertainment, by reason of her Husband's absence, who was gone for Peking;
otherwise she told us she should have treated the Ambassadors for a day or two,
to refresh themselves after so long and tedious a Voyage. But they
understanding by the Interpreter, that her Husband was in great Credit and
Favor with the Emperor, sent her a Present of some small Rarities, which she
both civilly and thankfully received.

The same day we departed from Sanglo, and came in the Evening to the Village
of Tonnau, situated over against a strong Castle, guarded by a great Garrison
of Tartars. The Houses of this Place are built of Mud and Dirt, fitter for
Dog-kennels, than for People to inhabit in; yet fit enough for the Inhabitants,
who being of a sordid nature, and very loose and uncivil, deserve no better.
They live by pilfering and stealing from one another; and none escapes
plundering that passes that way without a Guard to defend themselves from their
violence.

Upon the third of July we came to the small City of Sinkicien, which for
brevity some call Cing, the seventh small City under the Chief City Hokien,
lying also on the side of the River Guei, in a flat and pleasant Soil, and
about ten Miles from Sanglo.

This Place is not very large, yet full of people and Trade, as most of the
Cities are which lie upon this River: Several famous Edifices which are yet
standing in and about this City, clearly evidence that this was formerly a most
stately and magnificent Place.

The Country round about lies low and flat, but very fruitful: It abounds with
store of tame Cattle, and Fish, in respect of the several Rivers which run
through it. There are very few Hills in all this Country of Hokien, to which
this Cing is subject; only there is one not far from this Place (though the
City it self lies upon a Flat) worthy the observation, called by the Chinese,
Si. The top of this Hill, being a delightful Plain, which by reason of the
Fruitfulness they highly esteem, extends it self to a very great length, upon
which lies a small Village, inhabited only by Cow-herds and Husbandmen.



The next day, being the fourth of July, we Sailed by the small City of
Sinkocien, the eighth small City under the Jurisdiction of the same Chief City,
and situated about eight Miles from Sinkicien. This is a small Place, but very
strong, having several Watch-Towers and Bulwarks for its defense: It is not
Populous, nor has any great Trade, though adorned with some brave Building;
but most of the Houses belonging to the Inhabitants are very mean and little.

Within the Walls are several Temples, which are an exceeding Ornament to the
Place; but one, which stands without the Walls of the City, in an open Field,
exceeds all the rest for Bigness, Beauty, and Art. This Building indeed is so
rare a Piece, that we may well admire their wondrous Skill in Architecture,
which they boasted of formerly. The whole Fabric consists of three Rounds, the
lower part whereof stands upon a Pedestal of Stone, into which you ascend by
Steps. The first is adorned with great Gates, and each Corner supported with
most curious Columns and Pillars: The second Round has stately Windows, and
large Pillars, like the first, by which the Roof is also supported: The third
is likewise beautified after the same manner. The whole Building on the
outside is adorned with Fret-work, and at each Corner hang little Bells. The
inside of this Fane seems not so beautiful as the outward decorations of the
Walls thereof, being only hung with great and small Images.

Through the whole Country, as well Temples as Dwelling-houses, pay
extraordinary great Taxes, which does exceedingly lessen the Revenues of the
Priests.

It seems that the Idolaters here (so far as we could by the outward show judge
of them) are nothing near so devout in the Worship of Images, as those in other
Parts; for in some Places we saw their Idols wholly deserted and left quite
naked, without any Ornaments upon them; others being only covered with Mats,
and having Straw Hats upon their Heads, so to defend them from the injury of
the Weather, and make them hold out and last the longer.

Upon the same Day we passed by the small City of Singie, the ninth under the
Jurisdiction of the Chief City Hokien. This Place also lies by the River side,
twenty Miles from Sinko, enriched with noble Suburbs. On the Westside of the
City stands a great and high Temple, fenced in with a Wall, having also a very
curious Garden or Orchard, most rarely Planted. We were very desirous to have
seen this Curiosity; but the Interpreter told us, that i^ could not by any
means be permitted, it being a Cloister for Nuns, into which no Men were
admitted. On the other side of the City stands another stately Fane, besides
three curious Obelisks or Pyramids, which were erected by the City, in Honor of
a great Commander, who lay Interred there, for his faithful Services done to
his Country.

Toward Night setting Sail, we saw a strange Uprore among the People, who were
all up in Arms, and had divided themselves into several Troops, to defend their
Country against the Grasshoppers (which occasion oftentimes a very great Dearth
and Scarcity.) These Creatures come once a year (about that time when we were
there) with an Easterly Wind, in such mighty Swarms or Squadrons, that they
devour all they meet with, and that in a few hours, leaving the Fields utterly
dismantled. To prevent these Invaders, and sweep-clean Plunderers, the
Inhabitants march to and again through the Fields with their Colors and
Ensigns flying, shouting and hollowing all the way they go; by which means
these Destroyers are kept from fixing and doing such execution upon their
Grain. And thus the Peasants continually endeavor to preserve their Labor and
Product, who otherwise would certainly lose the whole benefit of their Harvest
for that Year. They never leave them when they see a Party coming, till they
have driven them into the Sea, or some River, where they fall down and are
drowned; and so it happened, that they drove a flying Regiment so long, till they
fell down upon our Heads, and our Vessels were covered with them, which we
afterward flung into the River.

The same Day we arrived at the Seaport of Tiencienwey, accounted for the most
famous Sea-Town of all China, their chiefest Harbors being three; the first is
the Chief City of Canton or Quancheu, situate in the Province of Quantung; the
second Iejencien, in the Province of Nanking; and the third Tiencienwey,
situate upon the utmost Confine toward the East of this Province of Peking,
near to an Arm of the Sea Cang, in a corner where three Rivers of this Province
meet, and upon which stands a strong Fortress. The Country round about is very
low and Marshy.



The City of Tiencienwey it self lies thirty Miles from Singlo, built also with
strong Walls twenty five Foot high, full of Watch-Towers and Bulwarks, and the
Place much set forth with Temples, very populous, and so full of Trade, that
hardly the like Commerce is to be found in any other City in all China; for
whatsoever Vessels are bound for Peking from any other part of China, must
touch here, which occasions an extraordinary Traffic to Shipping which lie
continually before this City. Here is also the Staple of all Commodities, this
being a free Port, and no Custom paid for any Goods Exported or Imported.

The Castle, which stands upon the Point of three Rivers, has very high Walls
and Towers, much for the defense of the City and adjacent Country. We lay all
Night close to the Wall in our Vessels, to be in a readiness to pursue our
Voyage in the Morning.

The Governor and Magistrates of the City came Aboard to welcome us, and receive
the Ambassadors: but Pinxenton, to show that he was likewise to be honored so
ordered the matter, that they made him their first Salutes. And because the
Mandorin of the old Canton Viceroy was ordered to hasten over Land for Peking,
to signify to the Emperor the coming of the Ambassadors, they gave Pinxenton
Entertainment in a magnificent Idol-Temple, to which the rest of the Company
was invited; And this was done only to this end, to Confer together after what
manner they were to manage the Business upon our arrival at Peking. The
Ambassadors having thoroughly instructed this Mandorin how he should make the
Grandees of the Court to be of our Party, and by what means he should endeavor
to procure for us a free Trade in China, he took his leave, and departed late
in the Night for Peking; we made what haste we could after him with our
Vessels, and upon the 11. we came to Ioeswoe, the eighth small City under the
Imperial City of Peking, and lies about forty Miles from Tiencin.

This small City is well built, and full of Trade, and has a wealthy Suburb
belonging to it. All Ships or Vessels which pass this way, pay Custom here,
which brings a great Revenue to the Crown, and also store of Trade; and for
that end the Emperor has his Officers residing here, to receive the Toll of all
such Vessels. There are several Temples and other curious Edifices, which are
magnificent Ornaments to the Place.

We have added to each Province of the fifteen, what Revenue each pays yearly
to the Emperor, without the Incomes of the Custom-houses, where they pay for
all Wares and Vessels. These Excise-places are very numerous through all China;
but what each may bring in yearly, I could not well discover, neither was it
easy, because the Emperor appoints his own Officers, from whom he receives
their Accounts. The Ambassadors were received here by the Governor of the City
with great Civility, and Entertained at his House in much State: which to
requite in some measure, they sent him some Presents, which he civilly refused,
in regard they had not yet seen the Emperor; but some Glasses of Rose Water
were afterward at his Request sent unto him, which he accepted.

The next Day, being the 12. of July, we past by Focheu, which is also called
by some Que, and reckoned for the twenty sixth small City under the Chief City
of Peking: It lies on the side of the River, about fifteen Miles from Ioeswoe,
in a very pleasant Soil. This Place is not very large, but well built, and full
of brave Edifices, being surrounded with a high Wall, and strengthened with
Watch-Towers and Bulwarks.

On the East: side of the City without the Walls, stands a very fine Temple,
with a Tower of nine Rounds high, very curiously built. There are likewise in
this Place several Triumphal Arches, much adorning the same.

Upon the 16. of July we came to Sancianwey or Sanho, about twelve Miles from
Focheu, and four from Peking. This is the twelfth small City under the Imperial
City Peking, and stands upon the side of the River: It is very populous, and
well fortified, having a strong Castle for Defense. In the middle of the City
stands a Triumphal Arch, very artificially built, of gray Stone: The South Side
has a broad Stone Bridge, which rests upon five Arches, and is forty two Paces
long, with Houses on each side.

This City of Sancianwey, and the following Tongsiou, are within four Miles of
Peking, and so to the Imperial City you make no nearer approach by Water; for
commonly all Goods thither designed, are unladed either at Sancianwey or
Tongsiou, and so carried by Land in Wagons, or upon Mules and Asses, which are
always to be had, and stand there ready. This way of carrying Goods by Land to
Peking maintains a great many poor People, who have no other manner of
Livelihood but carrying Burdens, which they trudge under at a very reasonable
Rate.

To this City came the Mandorin back, whom the Ambassadors had sent out before
to Peking: The next Day came likewise twenty four Horses, with several Wagons
and Carts, which the Council sent to fetch the Emperors Presents and our
Carriage. All things being ready, the Ambassadors began their Journey by Land
to Peking, after this following order: Two Trumpeters rid at a distance before;
then followed the Standard Bearer, with the Prince of Orange's Blazonry; next
to him the Ambassador's, accompanied with several Tartar Lords and Gentlemen
well Mounted; the Captains and Soldiers, who had thus far conducted the
Ambassadors, and were about fifty in number, came after in good order with the
Emperors Presents, and the Ambassadors Goods. The Road to Peking was so full of
People, Horses and Wagons, as if an Army had been upon the March. The Ways are
exceeding bad between this Place and the City, being very deep and uneven, so
that the Horses are up to the Belly almost every step.

The next Day, being the 17. we rode through Tongsiou, by some called Tung, and
reckoned for the eleventh small City under the same Jurisdiction, situate in a
very low and deep Soil, upon the side of the Highway which leads to Peking.

This Tongsiou is very large, and Fenced with strong Walls, having likewise a
Wall dividing it in the middle. Here are no Streets, but several brave
Buildings and curious Temples. The Country is very pleasant, full of
Cornfieldsd and Fruit Trees. Near to the Road stands a Temple, where the
Ambassadors refreshed themselves, and then continued their Journey in the
forementioned order, the Way being thronged with People on each side of us. In
the Afternoon we came to the Suburbs of the Imperial City of Peking, accounted
the first Chief City of this Province, and is distant from Canton 1530 Miles.
We passed through two magnificent Gates into the City, and lighted at a very
famous Temple, into which the Ambassadors were invited, the conducted to repose
a while, and to expect their Carriages which were behind. The Ambassadors were
no sooner entered, but they were presently welcomed, and Saluted by the
Emperor's Capado, who carried a Falcon upon his Hand, and also by the Agents of
the Canton Viceroys, who reside here, and by several Grandees of the Court.
After they had a little refreshed themselves with Meat and Drink, and several
sorts of Fruit, and their Carriages had been visited by the Capado, and the
Wagons and Carts told, they were conducted from thence in great State to their
Lodgings, provided for them by the Emperor. This House was not far from the
Palace, and had a high Wall about it, with three stately and broad Gates,
between each of which were very large Courts.

The Ambassadors immediately caused the Emperor's Presents, and all their own
Goods, to be brought into their Lodgings, where they found all things in good
condition, without the least loss or damage. At Night came two Tartar
Commanders, with twelve Soldiers, by the Emperor's Order, to guard the Gates of
their Lodgings, and take care that the Command of his Imperial Majesty might be
duly observed, and the Ambassadors supplied with all things convenient.

The next Day, early in the Morning, appeared the Mandorin Pinxenton, with two
other Commanders, who were likewise come thither from Canton, as also the two
Agents of the Canton Viceroys, who had their Residence in this Court. Not long
after came some Lords of the Imperial Council, attended with the Chief
Secretary Thouglovia, who was a Chinese by Birth, and a very civil Person,
having likewise in their Company two other Mandorins, called Quanlovia and
Hoolovia, the last whereof was Secretary to the Council, though a Stranger to
the Chinese Language. After they had passed some Complements to one another,
they acquainted the Ambassadors, that they were come to bid them welcome in the
Name of the Emperor and his Council, and to enquire after their Healths, and
the number of their Followers, the quality and quantity of their Presents; and
lastly, concerning the Person and Place from whom and from whence the same were
properly sent? Whereupon the Ambassadors delivered a List to the Mandorins,
consisting of twenty four Persons, who all of them belonged to the Embassy;
wherewith they were satisfied.

Next they narrowly examined the Catalogue of the Presents, curiously
questioning the Quality of each, from whence they came, after what manner they
were made, to what use, and in what part of the World; as likewise how many
Months Voyage it was from Holland to Peking? The Ambassadors having fully
satisfied the Curiosity of these Office^s, they began highly to extol the
Presents which the Ambassadors had brought with them, saying, That the like
being brought thither the last Year by the Liquesen, were wholly spoiled upon
the Way, and so were sent back again without being seen by his Imperial
Majesty. They inquired likewise whether the Hollanders were bred and born upon
the Sea? if they had any Country? how and where situated? from whom, and why
they were sent? what Name and Age their King was of? To which Questions the
Ambassadors returned for answer, That they were a People bred and born upon the
Land, and had a Country commonly called by the Name of Holland, which had been
possessed by them for above a hundred Years; and that they were no ways given
to Plundering or Stealing, as some disaffected Persons had reported of them.
The Mandarins were further inquisitive to know of them in what Part of the
World their Country lay? how far from Peking? and whether there was any
traveling thither by Land? if so, through what Regions they must pass? To all
which the Ambassadors gave them such Answers as they saw requisite. But in
respect they seemed not therewith fully satisfied, and could not be persuaded
to believe that the Hollanders had any firm Country, but lived and dwelt upon
the Sea, or at least in Islands; therefore, for a more clear demonstration,
they desired to see a Map of our Country: Whereupon the Ambassadors produced a
Map of the Seven United Provinces, with the Territories thereunto belonging,
which they took with them to show the Emperor. They asked likewise after the
Government of Holland, and the Power of those that had sent them? to which the
Ambassadors returned for Answer, That Holland was never Governed by any one
single Person, but by a select number of the chiefest of the Country. They
specified also the Names of the Councils by which Holland was Governed, and
said, That besides this high Council, there was yet another, which had received
their Power and Authority from the Supreme Council, and the Prince of their
Country, to Govern the Indian Affairs; and that the Ambassadors, upon their
Order given to the Governor-General of Batavia, were expressly sent to
congratulate the Emperor of Tartary, unto his Viceroys in China, and to wish
him a long and happy Reign.

But in regard these Commissioners could not well understand nor apprehend this
Form of our Government (because the Tartars and Chinese know no other than
Monarchical) neither could they tell what the Name of Prince signified, the
Ambassadors had no little trouble to work them into a good Opinion of our
State: therefore they were forced to make use of the Name of the Prince of
Orange, as if they had been sent by his Highness; concerning whom they asked
several Questions, and among the rest, Whether the Ambassadors were allied to
their Prince? for they have a Custom, That no Foreign Ambassadors are to bow
their He^ds before the Emperor's Throne, unless they be such as are a Kin to
him that sent them, as the Ambassadors of Corea and the Liquese Islands, who
came hither the last Year, were the Brothers and Kindred of those Kings that
sent them, without which they would have no great Credit and Reputation with
the Emperor: To which the Ambassadors replied, That they were not in the least
allied to their Prince; for besides that the Governors of their Country knew
nothing of this Custom, so likewise such Persons as were related to their
Prince, were employed at home in the most considerable Charges. But these
Gentlemen were of opinion, That the Dignity and Majesty of the Emperor would be
much lessened, if he should give Audience to such as were not so related to
their Prince. They then asked the Ambassadors, What Offices do you bear in the
Court of your Prince? How runs your Title in your own Language? How many Men
have you under your Command? And how do you live? To all which Questions the
Ambassadors returned particular Answers.

They asked likewise, Whether all the Presents they had brought with them came
directly out of Holland? Whereupon the Ambassadors told them, That some of
those Goods came out of Holland, as the Cloths, Looking-glasses; Corral,
Perspective-glasses, all manner of Arms, and the Furniture for Horses; but the
rest were added by the Governor-General of Batavia, by Order of the Council for
the Indian Government in Holland. Hereupon arose another Question, namely, What
manner of Place Batavia was, and what manner of Man the Governor? The
Ambassadors replied to this, That the Governor-General, in regard of his
Command, might be compared with the Viceroys of Canton: And in regard the
Hollanders were not subject to any King, nor their Country a Kingdom, therefore
he could not have the Title of Viceroy, but only be called by the Name of
Governor-General, as one that had the Command over other Places and Countries.
And as for Batavia, that (they said) was a Place which for its convenience was
appointed for a Rendezvous for all Ships which should come out of Holland and
other Parts; and consequently held for the Chief City of the Netherlands in
India.

The Ambassadors having satisfied the Curiosity of these Persons, in giving
such a full Answer to all their Demands, they took leave, and presented to each
of the Ambassadors fifty Toel of Silver. But not long after, these Gentlemen,
one after another, came again to ask after some Particulars. The first came by
Order of his Imperial Majesty and his Council, to fetch the Credentials, which
were carried to him in great State, being put into a large Silver Dish, covered
with three Pieces of Scarlet. Another came to see our Arms, about which they
were very inquisitive to know how and where they were made. The third asked
what manner of Arms the Hollanders used in their Wars, and against whom they
had warred. He asked likewise particularly, Whether we had War or Peace with
the Portuguese, and with those of Maceao? and whose Country lay nearest to
China?

The Ambassadors having fully answered all these Questions, they departed, but
returned at least six or seven times, and asked, among the rest, after the
Quality of the Ambassadors: At last they asked Pardon for the trouble they had
given them, saying, That they had done it by the Emperor's Order, who was
always very inquisitive in things of this nature.

After the Chief Governor of this Imperial City had been made acquainted with
the Report of the Commissioners, he sent the next day two Gentlemen to the
Ambassadors, with expr^^s Order that they should appear with the Presents
before his Majesty's Council; but it proving a very rainy day, the Ambassadors,
left the Presents might be spoiled, desired to be excused from coming till
another time: yet it would not be granted, notwithstanding all their Endeavors:
For though the Ambassadors went to Court without the Presents, they were not
admitted till such time as they had brought them; for the Emperor was resolved
to see them that day. As soon as the Presents were come, they were admitted,
and ordered to sit down, without showing any manner of Respect to that great
Assembly. The Chief Commander sat at the upper end of this Assembly, upon a
broad low Bench, with his Legs across, like our Tailors in Europe: Next him, on
his Right Hand, sat two Tartar Lords; and on the left hand a Jesuit, Father
Adam Schaliger, a Courtier in Peking almost fifty Years, living in great Honor
and Repute; he was, as he told us, born at Cullen, and went shaved and clothed
after the Tartar Fashion; a very comely old Man, with a long Beard. All the
Lords who were at this Assembly sat one among another, without any Splendour,
Order, or State; the Benches were only covered with an old white Linen Cloth,
upon which sat likewise his Highness himself, with his Legs naked, and a
little slight Mantle about his Body.

No sooner had the Providore made a short Harangue to the Ambassadors, and had
ordered them to sit, but Father Adam the Jesuit came likewise to salute them,
which he performed with great civility in his own Language, asking them
(amongst other things) after several Roman Catholics, whom we knew to have
lived at Amsterdam; a sign that he had formerly been conversant in those Parts.

In the mean time the Canton Mandorins, and Pinxenton himself (who had carried
it so high upon the Voyage) were as busy as Porters, to help away the Chests
and Cases in which the Emperor's Presents lay.

The Rix-Providore himself took the Presents out, and asked particularly from
whence they came, how they were made, for what use, and where they were bought?
as also, how many days Voyage between Holland and Peking? Father Adam was his
Interpreter, and affirmed the Answers which the Ambassadors made to the several
Questions, to be real and true. As often as the Rix-Providore took out any
thing that was very rare, Father Adam fetched a deep sigh. The Rix-Providore
asked also, among the rest, after the Value of the Alcatives; and receiving for
answer, That they were worth above 200 Ryals, he said, That they were both
brave and large, and would be very acceptable to his Imperial Majesty: He also
commended the Saddles, Arms, Corral, and the like.

Mean time came an Order to the Council from his Imperial Majesty, That Father
Adam should ask the Ambassadors that Night several Questions, and set down
their Answers in writing for his Majesty's satisfaction; which were to this
effect: Whether the Hollanders had any Country or no? where situated? and how
far from China? how their Prince was called? and what Form of Government they
had among them? The Jesuit therefore asked the Ambassadors, at the Command of
the Rix-Chancellor, Whether the Prince of Orange was yet in being? and whether
their High and Mighty Lordships did still Govern the State of the United
Provinces? To all which they returned him such Answers as very well satisfied
the Chancellor. The Jesuit having taken in writing the Answers of the
Ambassadors, carried them to his Highness, who caused him to blot out some
Passages which he supposed might give offense to the Emperor; for he had added
of his own, That the Country which the Hollanders did now possess, did
formerly, and does by right belong unto the Spaniards: Which Words he made to
be put out, telling him, It is enough that you know that these People are
possessed of a Country, and have a Form of Government among them.

Whilst the Clerks were taking several Copies of the Writing which the Jesuit
had brought into the Assembly, his Highness found himself hungry, and sent for
a piece of Pork to satisfy his Appetite, which was half raw, whereof he did
eat most heartily in so slovenly a manner, that he looked more like a Butcher
than a Prince. No sooner had he stayed his Stomach with this Collation, but he
ordered the Son of the old Canton Viceroy, who had his Residence in this
Court, to provide an Entertainment for the Ambassadors; which was accordingly
performed, in some better order and fashion than the former. When Dinner was
brought up, his Highness and the rest of the Tartar Lords fell on again as
greedily as if they had eat nothing all that Day; but neither the Ambassadors
nor Father Adam could eat of their Cookery, most of the Meat being raw; which
his Highness perceiving, caused the Dishes to be taken off, and a Banquet of
Fruit and Sweetmeats to be set upon the Table, earnestly urging the
Ambassadors to send home to their Lodgings what was left, which they civilly
refused.

Father Adam informed the Ambassadors, that about four Months since there came
an Ambassador from Muscovy with a Train of a hundred Men, to desire leave to
come once a Year into China to Trade with the Subjects thereof; but as yet had
not prevailed with the Great Cham, who seemed very unwilling to agree to any
such thing. Night coming on, the Ambassadors took leave of the Assembly, and
returned to their Lodgings, conducted by the Jesuit in great State, who was
carried by four Men in a Palakin or Sedan, attended by several considerable
Persons on Horseback.

The next Day came the first Secretary Thouglouja, with the two other Tartar
Mandorins, Qualouja and Hoolouja, to the Ambassadors, in the Name of his
Highness, to direct the Presents in writing to whom they particularly belonged.
Afterward they returned immediately with Order, that the Secretary of the
Ambassadors should appear with the Presents before his Highness and some of the
Council, to make a farther Declaration upon the same: Whereupon Secretary Baron
went with them, and having answered their Desires, the Mandorins came back to
the Ambassadors Lodgings, with the Agents of the Canton Viceroys, to acquaint
them that the Presents were very acceptable to his Majesty, his Mother, and his
Empress; and that his Imperial Majesty had ordered them to enquire whether
there were not fifty Pieces more to be had of the white Linen, because the
Emperor, being much taken therewith, had a Design to Present the same to the
Wives of the Sons of the Canton Viceroys. At his Request they made a shift to
furnish him with thirty six Pieces, wherewith the Tarnars were satisfied, and
departed.

Afterward the Commissioners came several times to visit the Ambassadors, and
to inform themselves further about the Character of Holland, and the Extent of
that Country.

Upon the third of August we understood, that an Ambassador from the Great
Mogol was likewise arrived at Peking with a great Train of Attendants, to
accommodate and determine the Difference lately risen between these two People;
and also to desire that their Priests might Preach freely, and without any
molestation in China, which had for some time been forbidden upon high
Penalties.

The Presents (without which never any Foreign Ambassador appears in this Court)
which he brought with him for the Emperor, the better to effect that which he
came about, consisted of Three hundred and thirty six very brave Horses, two
Ostriches, a Diamond of an extraordinary bigness, and several other Precious
Stones. All these Presents were no less acceptable to the Emperor, than what we
brought him; so that the Mogol had quick dispatch of his Business.

The Ambassadors being visited by some Tartar Lords, together with the Mandorin
Pinxenton and others, who had conducted them from Canton to Peking, thought
good to show them the Credentials which they had brought to the Emperor and to
the Viceroys of Canton, which they had delivered upon their arrival both at
Canton and in Peking; and after they had opened the same, the Tartars asked
what the meaning of the word July was; whereupon answer was made, That it was
the Name of the seventh Month, according to their Account, or the last Month of
the Year, according to that of the Tartar. They asked moreover, whether the
Netherland Government had lasted 1655 Years? and if it began at that time? The
Ambassadors made answer, That Holland from that time to this had been always
Inhabited and Governed by one and the same People, and that the number of those
Years only put them in mind of the Birth of our Savior, born at that time.
Hereupon (...) departed, taking the Credentials with them, without speaking one
word.

The Emperor being thoroughly informed concerning of the Affairs of the
Hollanders, sent upon the 31. of July, a Mandatory Letter to the Lords of his
Council, wherein he declared, That his Imperial Majesty did admit of the
Ambassadors as such, and would give them Audience, as soon as he could sit in
his new Court upon his Throne. And after his Majesty had caused the Credentials
of the Ambassadors to be once more Translated by Schaliger the Jesuit, and read
unto him by some of his chiefest Counselors, he seemed so well pleased
therewith, that he sent a second Summons to his Council, to be assisting and
serviceable to the Ambassadors during their abode in his Empire. The first of
these Letters or Orders is as follows.

Great and Worthy Lypeos, (Counselors,)
THe Holland Ambassadors are come hither with their Presents to Congratulate
the Emperor, and to show their Obedience unto him, which was never done to this
Crown before: And because this is the first time, I think fit to accept of them
as Ambassadors, and have promised them, that they, whenever I shall be seated
upon my Throne in my New Palace, shall be brought before me, to do their
Obeisance, that so they may be well received, and upon their Request obtain a
favorable Answer, in order to their Return; the more, because they being come
from a far and remote Country, both by Sea and Land, will be able to spread the
Fame and Renown of my Person and Empire: Therefore we think fit not to deny or
refuse any thing to such Foreign People, who are come such a long Voyage, from
the furthermost part of the World, which in reason they can desire of us.


The second Letter was almost verbatim as the former, to quicken his Ministers
of State, to dispatch them with a satisfactory Answer to their Proposals.

The Chancellor hereupon desired to know of the Ambassadors, whether the
Hollanders could not send every Year to Peking, or at least every second or
third Year, to do Obedience to the Emperor? To this they answered, That for the
more certainty they could better make Addresses every fifth Year at Peking,
desiring in the mean time that they might come annually with four Ships to
Canton, to Trade there. Afterward the Chancellor summoned the Tartar and China
Councils together, to consider of the Proposals of the Hollanders, alleging
(he being President) that they ought to give them leave every fifth Year to
come and Salute the Emperor. Most of the Tartars were of this Opinion; but the
Chinese seemed outwardly willing to show far greater favor to the Hollanders,
namely, That they should come but once every nine Years to Peking, by reason of
the vast distance from Batavia to the Imperial City: But herein they thought to
have outwitted the Tartars; for they understood that the Hollanders were not
to be permitted in the mean time to Trade at Canton. They proposed also to the
Assembly, Whether under the notion of Hollanders the English might not likewise
appear, who about thirty Years since came with four Ships into the Harbor of
Heytamon, where they took away four Vessels laden with Salt, the Mandorin
Prisoner, and shot down a Fort, committing several other Violences, for which,
from that time they were held and declared Enemies of the Empire? therefore
they should be satisfied of the Integrity of the Hollanders, before they were
permitted to Trade in China: for b^^^de that it was contrary to the Custom of
the Country to let them have a free Trade in any part of the Empire, it did
not appear by their Credentials that any such thing was desired; so that they
concluded they had exceeded their Orders.

The Ambassadors were not a little surpised at these Proceedings of the
Council; for they understood no otherwise, but that the Emperor had, according
to the Contents of the second Mandatory Letter, formerly procured by the
Viceroy of Canton, fully agreed to the Request of the Hollanders concerning a
free Trade in Canton; and that they were only thereupon to go and return their
Thanks to his Majesty at Peking. The Ambassadors were well enough informed of
the Designs and Practices of Father Adam and some other Jesuits, who had lived
there for some Years, and had been Bribed underhand by the Portugueses, to
oppose the Hollanders in this their Design of free Commerce in China; therefore
they endeavored to persuade the Tartars, That the Hollanders under color and
pretense of Merchandising, designed nothing less than to get footing in their
Country, and then to make use of all opportunities to Plunder, and carry away
whatsoever was portable. The Ambassadors were also informed, that these Jesuits
had likewise persuaded the Council, That Maccao would be utterly ruined and
impoverished by such a Trade; and withal, that they had told the Tartars, to
make them the more averse to the Hollanders; That they were a People made up of
several Nations, without any Habitations, and only subsisted upon what they got
by Pyracy at Sea.

But that which most of all surpised the Ambassadors, was to find themselves
deceived of their Money by the Canton Viceroys, unto whom they had paid thirty
five hundred Toel of Silver; which Sum the Viceroys promised to pay the
Chancellor and some others of his Majesty's Council, to procure their Favor and
Assistance for a dispatch of their Business. Now perceiving that they were
Trepanned by the Viceroys, they were forced to consider of some other way to
obtain their Purpose; wherefore they first thought good to propose to the
Council the Point of coming to Trade yearly at Canton, and to endeavor to
effect the same. Afterward the Ambassadors sent the Mandorin of the old Canton
Viceroy to the Prime Chancellor, to enctreat him to stay so long in Peking,
till his Majesty should be fully assured that they were Hollanders, and no
others. They likewise desired of the Emperor and the Council, That they would
favor them with some Token or Emblem cut in Brass, to Seal therewith all the
Passports of their Shipping, which should distinguish them from any other
Nation, and empower them either to pass by, or come to an Anchor upon their
Coast. At last they proposed to the Council, That they would be pleased to
admit of the Hollanders to Live, Converse, and Trade in China as their own
Subjects, paying the usual Duties and Impositions, as had been formerly granted
to those of Lieugiow, Amiam, and Siam, according to the ancient Chinese Laws;
adding farther, That if they might be admitted to Trade upon equal Terms with
those three Nations, they would in acknowledgment thereof, every third Year
come and Salute his Majesty, bringing Presents; but with this Proviso, That the
Ship or Ships which brought the Ambassadors, might have License to depart in
due time, without staying for the return of them; because the Vessels which
were used to salt Water, could not be continued in fresh, without very great
damage.

But the Ambassadors, after all their Endeavors, were not able to effect any
thing, being not well furnished with Money, the Key of the Work, and that which
gives a quick dispatch to all Affairs in China; for they had already disposed
both of their Presents, and Silver, and to take up Money at Eight or Ten per
Cent. for a Months time, they did not think it convenient; and therefore they
resolved to apply themselves to the Emperor himself, who was pleased to send to
know how far the Council had proceeded in the Business; and understanding that
the Ambassadors offered every five years to come and Salute the Emperor, he
himself was pleased to put out with his own hand the number of Five, and to
insert that of Eight, out of a particular Inclination to the Hollanders,
alleging, That they had need have five whole years to go and come, if so be
they would only Travel by Day; for said the Emperor, How is it possible for
them to continue such tedious Voyages, if you allow them no longer time?
Beside, why should we straiten them in such a Point, who do not stand in need
of me, nor fear me, but out of a singular Respect and Affection come to Salute
me with their Goods and Presents? Certainly we ought to use these People more
kindly, that so after they have performed such Undertakings, they may tarry at
home and rest themselves for two or three years.

This favorable Answer of the Emperor gave great encouragement to the
Ambassadors to hope well of their Business; but the Chancellors chief Secretary
did all that possibly he could, to dissuade them from making over much haste
with what they had to desire further of his Imperial Majesty, saying, Is it not
enough that such, who never till then addressed themselves in Embassy to Salute
his Majesty, and were so much prejudiced by former Aspersions, as made them
almost unacceptable to many great Persons in China, be received and admitted as
Friends and Allies at the first Overture, and have leave to progress through
the Country? wherefore he endeavored to persuade the Ambassadors not to insist
too much upon a free Trade, that being the way to unhinge their well-begun
Business; for they were not to imagine, that the Emperor and his Council were
obliged to grant at first sight all what'ere they should desire; and therefore
advised them to forbear mentioning a free Trade till their next Return, when
they would have a better opportunity. But the Ambassadors did not think fit to
follow his Advice, because the time drew near that the Emperor was to make his
Entrance into his new Palace, when he had appointed and promised the
Ambassadors to give them Audience: But before they could have a Hearing, they
were first to perform Obedience in the old Palace, where the Emperor's Treasure
and Seal are kept, in regard, according to a Proverb amongst the Chinese, this
Place is older than the Emperor, and therefore chosen and blessed by Heaven,
and the first Honor does also belong unto it; so that all Foreign Ambassadors
who refuse to pay such Respects, must not appear before the Emperor, but depart
without a Hearing, as it happened to the Ambassador of Muscovy, who, to preserve
the Dignity and Esteem of his Lord and Master, would not perform here the usual
Complement and Ceremony. Likewise all the Grandees of the Kingdom must do
their Duty here ere they appear before his Majesty; nay more, the Emperor
himself, before he is Installed, is obliged to come and bow here. This Custom
is usually performed by Ambassadors three Days before their Audience.

Upon the 22. of August came the Agents of the Canton Viceroys, with the
Mandorin Pinxenton and others of Canton, early in the Morning, to our Lodgings;
and not long after also appeared three Chinese Doctors, and some of the Court,
in very rich Habits: These Persons conducted the Ambassadors and their
Followers in great State into a Room of the old Palace, much like a Library;
for we saw none but Scholars and Gown-men, with Books in their Hands: from
whence after some short stay, we were conducted into an open Court, within a
high Wall, where we were commanded at the voice of the Herald to kneel three
times, and to bow our Heads to the Ground: after a short pause the Herald
proclaimed aloud in the Chinese Language, Caschan, which in English is, God
has sent the Emperor: afterward he cried aloud, Quee, that is, Fall upon your
Knees: then he pronounced the word Canto, signifying, Bow your Head: after
that, Coe, bidding them Stand up; and this did he three times in order one
after another, wherein we also conformed: at last he signified to us that we
should stand aside, which we did. All these Ceremonies were performed in
presence of at least a hundred Chinese Doctors or Rabbis: after which we
returned to our Lodgings.

And now the Ambassadors, according to the Custom, were to appear upon the 25.
of August before the Emperor, but were prevented by the sudden Death of the
Emperor's youngest Brother, who being about six years of Age, happened to die
upon the 23. of the same Month, not without suspicion of Poison by some of the
Council, who it seems (as we were told) did not think him worthy to live,
because he had provoked the Emperor in some ill Language before our arrival at
Peking. But others ascribed his Death to a violent Cold he took by drinking a
Glass of Ice-Water, being very hot, which put him into such a violent
Distemper, that he died in few hours after: The Emperor seemed very much to
lament his Death; for he would not be seen by any Person in three Days. This
young Prince was kept a whole Month before his Interment, so that the
Ambassadors were held from having Audience of the Emperor until the second of
September.

Upon the 14. of August they understood, that the Ambassador of Muscovy went
from thence without Audience, becaus'd he refused to bow to the Seal of the
Emperor, so to preserve the Honor and Dignity of his Lord and Master. One of
his Gentlemen came about Noon, whilst the Ambassadors were at Dinner, and took
leave in the Name of the all the rest; and he desired likewise the favor of a
Letter, to show in Russia that he had found us here; which was presently
granted. Afterward we were informed, That this Ambassador was not suffered to
depart, till such time as the Emperor had given him a Pass.

The next Day after the Funeral the Emperor sent word to the Chancellor, that
he should conduct the Dutch Ambassadors upon that Day before his Majesty's
Throne, as also those of the Great Mogol. He accordingly gave notice by
Proclamation to all the Grandees in Peking, that they were then to appear in
the Court before the Royal Throne.

Upon the Day appointed for this long expected Audience, came the Mandorin
Pinxenton, with the Agents and Mandorins of the Canton Viceroys, and some
others of the Court, in very rich Habits, to our Lodgings, about two a Clock in
the Afternoon, with Lanterns to conduct the Ambassadors, who were only attended
by six of their Followers, the rest being ordered to stay at home. When they
came to the Court, they were first conducted through the outward Gate, and
afterward over a Quadrangle with a well built Gate, and placed upon the second
Plain of the Court, where we sat all Night in the open Air, upon the bare
Stones, till Morning, when his Majesty was to appear upon his Throne. We were
no sooner seated, but the Ambassador of the Great Mogol, accompanied with five
Persons of Honor, and about twenty Servants, came and placed himself next to
our Ambassadors, as did also the Ambassadors of Lammas and Suytadsen, next to
whom also sat several great Lords of the Empire. And because we were to
continue in this Posture all Night, in expectation of his Majesty's appearance
in the Morning early upon his Throne, I shall defer a while acquainting the
Reader with what passed upon that most glorious Day; and in the mean time give
you a Description of the Foreign Ambassadors, who were also with us in this
Emperor's Court.

The Ambassador of Suytadsen (who may be properly called South-Tartars)
deserves here the first and chiefest Place, being he was most in esteem in this
Court, and preferred before the rest. I could not certainly learn his Business,
but only as they told me by guess, That the King of Suytadsen Sent him with
Presents to the Great Cham, according to the Custom of their Country; the
Frontier People and Borderers using to pay such Homage to this their Grand Lord.

He had a Coat on which came down to his Knees, made of Sheepskins died
Crimson; his Arms were naked up to the very Shoulders, his upper Garment being
Sleeveless; his Cap sat close to his Head, turned up or edged with Sables, the
Crown whereof was plumed with a Tuft of a Horses Tail, colored Red also, which
is with them in as much esteem as Ostrich Feathers; his Breeches made of a
slight Stuff, hung down to his mid-legs, in a most slovenly manner; the Boots
he wore were so heavy and large, that he could hardly walk in them; upon his
right Thigh, mounted according to the Tartar and Chinese fashion, was a broad
heavy Sword, so that he looked more like a Soldier than an Ambassador. All his
Attendants were Clothed after the same manner, each having a Bow and Arrows at
his Back.

The Mogol Ambassador (of whose Business and Request we have already made
mention) had a very rich blue Silk Coat on, so richly embroidered, that it
looked like massy beaten Gold; which hanging down almost to his Knees, was
girt about his Waste with a Silk Girdle, with great rich Tassels at both ends;
he wore neat Buskins of Turkey Leather, and a large Turbant of several Colors.

The Empire of the Great Mogol (who had sent this Ambassador to the Great Cham)
comprehends properly the Northern part of East India, or the Country situate
between Mount Caucasus (now called Delauguer) and the Sea beetwee^ the River
Ganges and Indus.

This Empire, called Mogol, had its Name from the Tartar Kings, who formerly
made themselves Masters of it, and is divided into several Kingdoms, though
some of them belong to other Princes. The chiefest Kingdoms over which the
Great Mogol properly Commands, are Cambaya, Dely, Sanque, Mandro, and Bengala.
This great Prince commonly keeps his Court in the City of Dely.

All the Countries over which the Great Mogol Commands, are very fruitful in
the product of all manner of Cattle and Fruits, as Rice, Corn, Wax, Silk,
Sugar, and Cotton; and all sorts of Spices, which are brought from thence in
great abundance. Upon the Mountains are found the Onyx Stone, Diamonds, and
other Precious Gems.

It is held for certain, that this Great Mogol can bring into the Field, in a
very short time, three hundred thousand Fighting Men, and five thousand
Elephants.

Most of the Inhabitants are Mahumetans and other Idolaters. In those Parts
there are also abundance of Jews, who drive a subtle Trade amongst them, and
some Abyssine Christians, allured thither by a profitable Commerce.



The Ambassadors of the- Lammas was Clothed in Yellow; his Hat much like a
Cardinals, with broad Brims; at his side hung a Crucifix, which these
Churchmen commonly carry about with them, by which they say their Devotions
after the manner of the Roman Catholics. Those of Lammas are a sort of
religious People, who had lived a long time in China; but the last Emperor of
China, before the Tartars conquered it, had banished them his Country, from
whence they went and settled themselves in Tartary, where they had the free
Exercise of their Religion. Now these banished People had sent this Ambassador
to the Great Cham, with Request that they might have leave to return and
Exercise their Devotions as formerly. What success he had in his Business I
could not learn, but his Reception at the Emperor's Court was very Friendly and
Civil.

Now I shall proceed to relate what passed during our stay in the Emperor's
Palace.

At the Court-Gate, in which we sat expecting the Dawn, we saw first three
black Elephants, gallantly adorned after the Chinese manner, standing there for
the greater State as Sentinels: They had well girded upon their Backs gilded
Towers, artificially built, and beautified with Carved Works and Figures. The
concourse of People was here so great, as if the whole City had been thronged
together in this one place; the Gates were also kept with an incredible number
of the Emperor's Lifeguard, all of them in very rich Habits after the Tartar
fashion.

By daybreak all the Grandees, who likewise repaired thither over Night, came
gazing and looking upon us with great admiration, as if we had been some
strange Africa Monsters; but they demeaned themselves very civilly, without
giving us the least Affront. About an hour after, a sign was given, at which
all started up on the sudden, as if there had been an Alarm, when the two
Tartar Lords who usually were sent to the Ambassadors, came and conducted them
with their Followers through another Gate into a second Courtyard, guarded
round with Tartar Soldiers and Courtiers; and from thence to a third Court,
which was the innermost, where the House of the Emperor's Throne stood, and the
Lodgings for the Great Cham, his Wife and Children.

This Court, which contains four hundred Paces in the square, was lined on all
sides with a strong Guard, all of them in rich Coats of crimson-colour'd Satin.

On either side of the Throne stood a hundred and twelve Soldiers, each whereof
bore a several Flag, and likewise wore colored Habits suitable to his Ensign,
only they had all black Hats with yellow Feathers. Next to the Emperors Throne
stood twenty two Gentlemen, each with a rich yellow Skreen or Umbrello in his
Hand, resembling the Sun; next to these stood ten other Persons, each holding a
gilt radiant Circle in his Hand, resembling the Sun: next to these stood six
others with Circles, imitating the Moon at the Full: after these were standing
sixteen other Persons, with Half-Pikes or Poles in their Hands, hung full of
Silk Tassels of several colors: near to these stood thirty six more, each
holding a Standard, curiously adorned with Dragons (the Emperor's Coat of Arms)
and other such Monsters, after the Chinese fashion. In this manner were both
sides of the Emperor's Throne guarded and adorned; besides an infinite number
of Courtiers, all of them in very rich Habits, of one Color and Silk, as if a
Livery; which added very much to to the Splendour of the Place.

Before the Steps leading to the Emperor's Throne, stood on each side six
Snow-white Horses, most curiously adorned with rich embroidered Trappings, and
Bridles beset with Pearls, Rubies, and other Precious Stones.

Whilst we were beholding with admiration all the Pomp and Splendour of this
Court, we heard the noise and jingling of a little Bell, sounding sweet and
delightful to the Ear.

Hardly had this Clock or Bell finished the Alarm, but we saw the old Tutang,
with thirty of the most eminent Persons and chief Counselors of the Empire, in
very rich Habits, go and make their Obedience in great State and Humility to
the Emperor's Trone, which was after this manner: There stood a Herald who
first made Proclamation, and then the Tutang, with those that accompanied him,
fell upon their Knees, and bowed down their Heads nine times to the Ground,
whilst delightful Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, filled up the vacancies
of the Ceremony.

No sooner had these Lords performed their Obedience to the Emperor's Throne,
but immediately another Set of very eminent Persons came, doing the like in
the same manner: Then followed the Ambassador of the Suytadsen, and the
Ambassador of the Lammas, who were conducted to the Throne in extraordinary
State by the first and second Chancellors: and after these had done all their
Reverence to the Chair, the Chancellor came to our Ambassadors, and asked them
what Quality or Dignity they had; they answered him, That they had the same
with the Viceroys: After the same Chancellor went to the Mogol Ambassador, and
asked him the same Question likewise; who answered, That he was of that Quality
with the Dutch Ambassadors; whereupon he was placed by the Chancellor in the
like degree of Honor and Dignity with them.

In the Center of the Quadrangle, over against the middle Gate of his Majesty's
Throne, stood twenty extraordinary Mark-stones, which were Inscribed with
Chinese Characters, cut upon Brass Plates, signifying the Quality of the Person
which must stand or kneel upon them.

The Under Tutang went on the left-side, and made signs to the Ambassadors that
they were to make up the tenth Stone, and there was to be their Station.

PROSPECT OF Ye INNER COURT OF THE EMPERORS PALACE at PEKIN
1. Palace where the Emperors Throone is. 2. The two Ambassadors, 3.
Ambassador from the Great Mogol, 4. twelve Snow-white Horses. 5. A Herald, 6
Emperors Liffe-guards.


Being thus placed, the Herald called to them aloud, saying, Go stand before
the Throne; hereupon we made up to the Throne: then the Herald called again,
and said, Step into your Place; which accordingly was done: then he spoke
again, saying, Bow your Heads three times to the Ground; which we did: at last
he called to us, and said, Rise up, and we rose; and this happened three times
one after another: Last of all the Herald cried aloud, Return to your Place;
whereupon we retired to our Stand.

The Holland Ambassadors, together with the Mogol's, were afterward conducted
to a Stage or Theater, which propt the Seats of the Throne, about twenty Foot
in height, and curiously built, and adorned with several Galleries of
Alabaster, or such like white Stone: And after they had kneeled and bowed their
Heads once more, they were ordered to sit down, and then Treated civilly with
Tartar Thea, mingled with Milk, in wooden Dishes and Cups; but the Ambassadors
Attendants stayed below, not wanting the same Liquor. Soon after the Bells
tinkled again, which cast all the People upon their Knees. We endeavored what
we could to get a sight of the Emperor in his Throne as he sat in State, but
the crowd of his Courtiers about him was such, that it eclipsed him from us in
all his Glory.

He ^ate about thirty Paces from the Ambassadors; his Throne so glister'd with
Gold and Precious Stones, that it dazzled the Eyes of all the Beholders. The
Ambassadors themselves, being confined to keep their Station, could discern
very little of him. Next, and on both sides him, sat the Viceroys, Princes of
the Blood, and other Great Officers of the Court, all likewise drinking Thea in
Wooden Dishes, and that in great abundance. These Grandees wore all one sort of
Habit, which was extraordinary rich; they had Blue Satin Coats on, curiously
interwoven with Golden Dragons and Serpents (the Emperor's Blazonry); their
Caps embroidered with Gold, and decked with Diamonds and other Precious Stones,
which signified their Degrees and Qualities. On each side of the Throne stood
forty of his Majesty's Lifeguard, armed with Bows and Arrows, who hindered the
Ambassadors from seeing the Emperor.

This Mighty Prince having sat thus in Magnificent State about a quarter of an
Hour, rose up with all his Attendants; and as the Ambassadors were withdrawing,
Jacob de Keyser observed the Emperor to look back after them, and for as much
as he could discern of him, he was young, of fair Complexion, middle Stature,
and well proportioned, being clothed and shining all in clinquant Gold. We much
admired that the Emperor suffered the Ambassadors to depart without once
speaking to them; but this is a Custom not only among the Chinese, but also
amongst other Eastern People, That their Kings and Emperors seldom appear to
their own Subjects, much less to Foreiners: besides, it has been observed
through all Times amongst the Emperors of China, That they never show
themselves to any Stranger whatsoever, but only to their own Domestics, and
then seated in State upon the Imperial Throne.

The Ambassadors departed; and the Courtiers, Soldiers, and Lifeguard marched
off in much disorder. By reason of the infinite concourse of People, we had
trouble enough before we got to our Lodgings, though we had a sufficient Guard,
to clear the Way before us.

We were no sooner come into our Lodgings, but two of the chiefest of the
Council repaired thither in the Name of his Majesty, to request the sight of a
Pack of Dutch Cloths which the Emperor was desirous to see. The Ambassadors
presented them with a black Velvet Suit and Cloak, a Pair of Boots and Spurs, a
Pair of Silk Stockings, Boot-hose-tops, Drawers, a Band, Shirt, Sword, Belt,
and Bever; all which seemed so very rich to the Emperor, that he said, If the
Ambassadors wear such Habits, how must their Kings be clothes then? In the
Evening the Emperor sent back all the Cloths by one of his Council, who very
much admired the Stuff of the Hat, and asked of what and where the same was
made.

And to the end all Men may be sensible how far this Court exceeds all the
Royal Palaces in Europe, for Splendour, Art, Wealth, and Pleasure, I shall give
you a large Account thereof, and of the Platform of it, which I took my self.

This Imperial Court, which is exactly square, contains three Miles in
circumference; within the second Wall of the City on the North-side, being
fortified also with strong Stone Battlements fifteen Foo^ high. In this Wall
are four Gates, (in the middle of each side one) which have their Prospects to
the four Angles of the World, and so named after the four Cardinal Winds; but
that which stands toward the South, is the chiefest, and most used. We passed
through this Gate when we went to appear before the Emperor's Throne, and from
thence into a base Court, which had a well-pav'd cross Way of four hundred
Paces, with a Water-Trench cut through the middle, and over it a Stone Bridge
of fourteen Paces, very curiously built; but the Water was in some places
covered over with Weeds. Before this Graff or Channel stands also drawn up upon
the Plain, a great number of Tartars, Horse and Foot, who as Sentinels suffer
none to pass through: when you are over this Bridge, you come to the first
Gate, guarded with the black Elephants; through this Porch, being fifty Paces
long, and built upon five stately Arches, you come into the first Quadrangle,
which is also four hundred Paces large, and whether we were brought by
Pinxenton (as has been already said) to expect with the other Ambassadors the
coming of the Emperor. This Plain is well built, with uniform and stately
Houses, standing in the midst of three more lofty and fortified Edifices, which
are so strengthened with high thick Walls and Bulwarks, that they are able to
defend the Place. From this Court there are Passages underneath the three great
Structures, which leads into a second Quadrangle of four hundred Paces wide,
built and adorned with brave Buildings as the former. From hence you pass into
the third and last Plain, also square, and of the same bigness with the former.
This Quadrangle which lies directly in the Cross, and paved with gray Stone,
the Great Cham chose himself for his own Residence. Here also are most
sumptuous and costly Buildings; but the chiefest among these are four, which
exceed all the rest in Magnificence, Art, and Beauty, and take up at least a
third part of three sides of the Court.

Directly forward appears the Building where his Imperial Majesty sat upon his
Throne, and which is far more stately and sumptuous than the former, into which
you enter through three ample and curious Arches. In this third Court reside
only the Emperor and Empress, and none are permitted to enter here but their
Attendants.

The Emperor, according to the Custom of the Heathen Princes, maintains several
Women in this his Seraglio; but amongst all those, only one assumes the Title
of Empress, all the rest are his Concubines, performing Duties in several
Degrees; some wait on the King himself, others look to the keeping of the Rooms
and Chambers decent and clean; some take care of the Children, others only of
the Emperor's Bedchamber, Kitchen, and Table. Of these Concubines, in their
several Attendancies, there are at least five thousand; most of them no more
than Maidservants.

Such shows this Palace within, if you go through the South-Gate straight to
the third Plain, or the Emperor's Abode. The like Courts, and as many, appear
going through the other Gates, with all such Buildings and Adornments; for the
whole circumference of the Court is cut through in the middle in the form of a
Cross, and in several places equally and orderly divided. Without the third
Plain, which lies in the middle of the Court, and upon which stand the
Emperor's Buildings, are several pleasant Gardens, Palaces, Woods, Pools,
Rivers, and delicate Summer-Houses, which the Emperor caused to be made for his
Pleasure; and each is so large, that it is fit enough for any Prince to live
in; so that this Palace contains several Courts for Kings within the Walls.

Each of the Emperor's Children, so soon as they are ten years old, are settled
in one of these Quadrangles. The four Concubines whom the Emperor has chosen
from amongst the rest for his peculiar Pleasure, have also each of them without
the third Plain, a particular Dwelling or Court, where they keep State; and
which are built opposite to the four Corners of the World, facing the four
principal Winds.

There are besides in this Court a great many other Houses and Dwellings for
their Priests, Artificers, Servants, and others; it was affirmed to me, That
the whole number of Persons residing here amounts at least to fifteen or
sixteen thousand.

All the Edifices, which are very many, are most richly adorned with gilt
Galleries, Balcones, and Carved Imagery, to the admiration of all that ever ^aw
them. Each Dwelling has a large Pent-house, so that you may walk dry in Rainy
Weather. Most of the Timber which appears on the outside of the Houses, is
either gilt, or colored over with a certain Gum which they call Cie, much in
use amongst them, and wherewith they color or paint their Household Stuff,
Ships, and Houses, that they make them shine and glitter like Looking-glasses.

All the Roofs of the Buildings are covered with yellow glazed Pantiles, which
shine, when the Sun reflects on them, brighter than Gold: And this has given
some occasion to think, that the Roof of this Royal Palace was covered with
pure Gold; whereas, in truth, the Tiles are only made of Clay, and glazed and
neil'd over with artificial Yellow: But yet, as I was told, each of these Tiles
are fastened with an Iron Nail, whereof the Head is gilt, which makes so much
the more Splendour.

Beside the abovementioned Channel or Graff, which is very shallow, and
overgrown with Weeds, there is yet another in this Palace, Which does run
through the whole Court, with several Windings and Turnings, and serves to
water the Gardens and Woods. This receives its Water from the River Yo, which
springs from a Pool called Si, near to the Mountain Iaciven, and is within the
Emperor's Court so broad and deep, that it will bear great Vessels, which come
laden in, to the great convenience of the Inhabitants. This River sends also
its Streams to those Rocks or Cliffs made by Art, whereof we formerly made
mention.

There is not any thing wherein the Chinese show their Ingenuity more, than in
these Rocks or artificial Hills, which are so curiously wrought, that Art seems
to exceed Nature. These Cliffs are made of a sort of Stone, and sometimes of
Marble, and so rarely adorned with Trees and Flowers, that all that see them
are surprised with admiration. Rich and wealthy People, especially the great
Lords and Mandorins, have for the most part such Rocks in their Courts and
Palaces, upon which they squander a good part of their Estates. It was told me
of a certainty, that somewhere about Peking there are some Rocks which contain
Chambers, Closets, Parlors, Vyvers, Stairs, and all manner of Trees so
curiously wrought and adorned by Art, that the like is not to be seen in the
whole World. These artificial Mountains or Cliffs are commonly contrived with
Chambers and Anti-chambers, for a defense against the scorching Heat in Summer,
and to refresh and delight the Spirits; for they commonly make their great
Enterainments in these Grots, and the Learned seek to Study in them rather than
any other Place.

If I should relate all the other artificial Ornaments, as of Gardens,
Wildernesses, Pools, and other Particulars, which adorn this Court, I should
far exceed the bounds of what I intend, and perhaps to some, of belief; but
what has been already said shall suffice, to set forth the Wonders of this
most magnificent Palace.

Great Endeavors were used by me to observe what was most remarkable and worth
taking notice of, as far as the shortness of our stay would permit, especially
concerning its Situation.

It is an ancient Custom at Peking, That the Ambassadors (after their Addresses
to the Emperor) in token that their Affairs are dispatched, are Entertained
with three Treatments in the name and behalf of the Emperor, upon the tenth,
twentieth, and thirtieth days after their Audience, so that these
Entertainments take up a whole Month before they are ended: but in regard our
Ambassadors were desirous to make what haste they could home again, the
Providore had obtained leave of the Emperor, not without great difficulty, that
these three Feasts should be given them upon three following days.

At two of the clock in the Afternoon (upon the same day that we had been at
Court before the Emperor) the Ambassadors were invited, together with the
Mandorin Pinxenton, and others, as also the Captains and Soldiers who conducted
them from Canton to Peking, in the Name of the Emperor, to the first Feast, at
Providore Lipu's House, which was most Noble and Splendid. To the same Banquet
or Entertainment were also invited the Ambassadors of the Great Mogol,
Suytadsen, and Lammas. Our Ambassadors sat on the same side of the Table with
him of the Mogol, and the other two over against them, with their Followers
next unto them. The Dinner consisted of two Courses: The first Table was full
of Fruits and dried Sweetmeats; and the second of boiled and Roasted Mutton,
Beef, and other Meat. For each of the Ambassadors, and for two of their
Followers, a particular Table was covered with thirty Silver Dishes, full of
rare Fruits and Sweetmeats. The Emperor's Controller (who likewise appeared at
this Feast, representing the Person of his Majesty) sat alone upon a broad
Side-board, with his Legs across, like a Tailor on his Shop-board; next him
sat two other great Lords, who took order to see the Ambassadors well
entertained. The Servants who brought the Meat to the Table, and waited all
Dinnertime, were no ordinary Persons, but of good Quality, and clothed all in
Cloth of Gold.

Before the Ambassadors sat down, they were obliged to turn themselves toward
the North, and bow three times, as if the Emperor had been present, and as they
had done when they were before the Imperial Throne.

The Banquet being taken away, the boiled and roasted Meats were brought to the
Table, but only in three Dishes, and so ill dressed, that we hardly durst
venture to taste of the Cookery of the Tartars.

Dinner being almost ended, the Emperor's Steward called his Servants, and gave
them all the Dishes which stood before him, only he reserved one Dish, being a
roasted Rib of a Camel, of which he eat so heartily, as if he had been fasting
all that Day.

This splendid Treatment finished, the Ambassadors, according to the Custom of
the Country, were to put up what they left into their Pockets to carry home. It
was a pleasant Sight, to see how these greasy Tartars stuffed their Pockets
and Leather Drawers of their Breeches with fat Meat, that the Liquor dropped from
them as they went along the Streets; so greedy were they in eating and carrying
away, that they were more like Peasants than Courtiers.

After Dinner the Waiters brought up several Gold and Silver Pots full of
Zamsou, and pouring it out into wooden Dishes or Cups, gave round to the
Company, drinking of it lustily themselves. They told us that this Drink was
distilled from new Milk, and came out of the Emperor's Cellar; and that this
great Favor and Kindness was done to us, because we came from so remote a
Country, and so we must drink away Sorrow. And though this Liquor was almost as
strong as Brandy, yet the Ambassadors were forced to pledge the Steward several
times, and to take what was left home with them; but they gave it away to the
Soldiers and others who stood at the Gate, who were better pleased with it.

This Dinner being thus ended, the Ambassadors, as formerly, must once more, in
thankfulness for this their splendid Reception, return to the Emperor's Palace
to perform their Obedience; which being likewise dispatched, they retired to
their Lodgings, sufficiently weary with the Ceremony of that Day.

The next Day being appointed for the second Treat, came the Under- Tatang or
Rix-Providore, to visit the Ambassadors in their Lodgings, and asked them among
other Questions, whether it were true, That the Dutch could live under Water
for three Days and three Nights together? for thus had our Enemies, especially
the Portuguese Jesuits, reported of us; as also (as has been said before) that
we had no Country, but lived as Pirates on the Sea: The Ambassadors satisfied
him in every thing, and told him, That they came thither to settle a continued
Trade and Commerce in China, as they did in several other Kingdoms, wishing
that their Business might be effected. To all which the Tutang replied, That he
desired nothing more, and would endeavor to further and promote the same with
all his power. Thereupon the Ambassadors acquainted his Highness, That as yet
they had done very little in their Business. To which he answered, That at
present it could be no otherwise, but if so be they would once more come and
Salute the Emperor, before they were admitted as Friends and Subjects, he would
then assure them, that the Hollanders should be allowed to Trade freely in all
the Emperor's Dominions; that they needed not to put themselves to any great
Charge; and that a few Presents would effect their Desires.

The Ambassadors having been thus kindly and nobly received and treated upon
the first day, as has been said, went the next day at Noon to the second
Imperial Banquet, where likewise repaired the Ambassador of the Great Mogol
(who sat over against our Ambassadors) with some other Mandorins and Prime
Persons of the Empire. They observed in short, That the second Providore was
more kind and open-hearted to the Mogol Ambassador, and to the Moors and other
Guests, than to them; whereat they very much wondered, and asked the Interpreter
what the cause might be; who intimated, That this great Lord had not yet been
Presented by them as he ought: Concerning which Omission the Ambassanor took
speedy order, little suspecting such neglect; for they knew not but that
Pinxenton and the Canton Mandorins had Presented all the Grandees as they ought
according to their Qualities, having received enough from them for that purpose
at Nanking: but mistrusting that they were trepanned as well by the Servants as
by the Masters, they inquired civilly how all their Presents had been disposed
of; which they in plain terms refused to give an Account of, alleging, That
they durst not name those Persons of Honor to whom they were Presented, lest it
should come to the Emperor's knowledge: for this reason, and because our
Business with the Emperor was not yet dispatched as it ought, the last Banquet
was deferred till the 14. of October.

Upon that Day the Ambassadors appeared with all their Followers, to partake of
the last Treatment: And now the second Providore having been likewise Presented
by them, they were received by him with all manner of seeming Respect and
Affection; so great an alteration had the same wrought upon him, that his
Carriage and Language were both of another piece and color, all soft and
melting. Having sat about an hour at the Table, and drank once or twice about,
they were afterward Presented in the Name of the Emperor with these following
Presents, after this manner:

On the side of the Hall, where the Ambassadors were received and Treated,
stood two long Tables, upon which the Gifts were spread in great order. First
of all they delivered the Present for the General John Maatzuiker, which the
Ambassadors received kneeling, with both their Hands; after which they and all
their Followers were called by Name, and had each their Presents delivered to
them likewise upon their Knees. Lastly, as the Ambassadors were ready to
depart, we all of us performed our Obedience to the Imperial Throne, by thrice
kneeling and bowing our Heads.

The Presents, and Persons to whom the same were given, are these following.

To the General John Matzuiker,
Three hundred Toel of Silver, Four Packs of Damask, Four Packs of Black, and
four of Blue Sattins, Four Packs of Blue Damask, Four Packs of Cloth of Gold,
amongst which, two with Dragons, Four Packs of Thuys, Twelve Packs of Pelings,
Ten Packs of Hokiens, Four Packs of Blue Flowered Damask, Four Packs of Gasen,
Four Packs of For As. Four Packs of Black Velvet.
To each of the Ambassadors,
One hundred Toel of Silver, Four Packs of Pelings, Four Packs of Gasen, Four
Packs of Hokiens, Three Packs of Blue Sattins, Three Packs of Black, and three
of Blue Damask, One Pack of Black Velvet.
To the Secretary Baron,
Fifty Toel of Silver, Two Packs of Pelings, Two Packs of Gasen, One Pack of
Damask, One Pack of Cloth of Gold, One Pack of Velvet.
To each of their Followers,
Fifteen Toel of Silver, Two Packs of Hokiens.
To the Interpreter Carpentier,
Thirty Toel of Silver.
To the Interpreter Paul Durette,
A Damask Gown.
The Mandorin Pinxenton had given him
A Mandorins Gown, embroidered with Golden Dragons, which he was to wear
immediately.
Each of the other two Mandorins, who were Gentlemen or Knights, received
One Horse, without a Saddle.
Each of the two Captains who had the Command over the Soldiers, and conducted
us from Canton to Peking,
A Gown of Blue Silk Damask.
Each Soldier, to the number of Twenty, received
A Coat of Black and Blue Silk Damask.
Two Days after, upon the 16. (the Day of our departure out of Peking) the
abovementioned Tartar Lords, who had been often sent to the Ambassadors on the
behalf of the Emperor, caused fifteen Wagons to be brought to carry the Goods.

Upon the same Day the Ambassadors were sent for to appear before the Council
by the Mandorin Pinxenton, in the Court of the Lipu, to receive the Emperor's
Letter, written to the Governor-General at Batavia: They rode thither about one
of the clock, and were conducted into an Antichamber, where one of the Council
took the Letter off the Table, which was covered with a yellow Carpet, and
opening the same, declared to them the Contents thereof: It was written double,
in the Chinese and Tartar Tongues, gilded on the edges, and painted on both
sides with golden Dragons: After he had opened it, he made the Letter up again,
and wrapped it up in a Silk Scarf, putting it into a Box, to be preserved from
sullying; then he delivered it to the Ambassadors, which they received
kneeling, with all Humility and Respect: Afterward the said Councellor took
the Letter again from them, and binding it to the Back of one of the
Interpreters, he went along with it before the Ambassadors through the biggest
and middle Gate of the Court, which was set wide open on purpose to make the
more way for this Imperial Missive: which Ceremony was performed in great
silence; neither was there any mention made at any of their Feasts and
Entertainments of our Netherland Affairs.

The Emperor's Letter runs thus word for word: THE King sends this Letter to
the Holland Governor, General John Maatzuyker, at Batavia. Our Territories are
so far asunder as the East from the West, so that we can hardly come near one
another; and from many foregoing Ages to this present time, the Hollanders
were never seen before by us. But those that sent Peter de Goyer and Jacob de
Keyser to me, are a wise and brave People, who in your Names have appeared
before me, and brought me several Presents. Your Country is ten thousand Miles
distant from me, but you show your Noble Mind in remembering of me; for this
reason my Heart does very much incline to you, therefore I sent to you two
Rolls of Satin with Dragons, beside two other Rolls of Satin, four Rolls of
Flowered Satin, four Rolls of Blue Satin without Flowers, four Rolls of Kin,
four Rolls of Chamelot, ten Pieces of Pelinx, ten Pieces of Phansy, ten Pieces
of fine Stuffs, and three hundred Toel of Silver. You have asked leave to come
and Trade in my Country, to Import Commodities into it, and to Export others
out of it, which will make very much to the Profit and Advantage of my
Subjects: But in regard your Country is so far off, and the Winds very high
here, which will very much endanger your Ships, it would very much trouble me
if any of them should miscarry by the way; therefore if you please to send
hither, I desire it may be but once every eight Years, and no more than one
hundred Men in a Company, whereof twenty may come up to the Place where I keep
my Court; and then you may bring your Merchandises ashore into your Lodging,
without Bartering them at Sea before Canton. This I have thought good to
propose for your Interest and Safety, and I hope it will be well liked of by
you: And thus much I thought fit to make known unto you.

In the thirteenth Year, eighth Month, and twenty ninth Day of the Reign of
SUNGTE.
Underneath stood HOUGTEE THOEPE.



The Rix-Prouidore was busy at Court about some State Affairs when the
Ambassadors were there, so that they could not speak with him, which they would
willingly have done; for he was their Friend, and could procure any thing from
the Emperor.

The Ambassadors being returned home with this Letter to the General at
Batavia, they were urged by the Commissioners to depart, who alleged, That it
was a Custom among the Chinese, after their Dispatch from the Emperor, not to
continue two hours in the City, if they would avoid falling into some
Inconvenience; so that we were necessitated to depart at Noon out of this
Imperial City of Peking, and had no time to take a view of the Circumference of
the Place, or of any thing else that was rare and worth the notice: for during
our stay, we were continually kept close in our Lodgings, as Recluses in their
Cells, without once stirring abroad to take our Pleasure, though we were well
received by the Emperor, and provided with a rich Allowance; for the
Ambassadors received daily Six Catti of Fresh Meat, One Goose, Two Pullets,
Four Cups of Samsou, Two Toel of Salt, Two Toel of Thea, One Toel and one
Measure of Oil, Six Toel of Mison, One Measure of Pepper, Six Catti of Herbs,
Four Catti of Meal, Two Fresh Fishes, Two Toel of Suttati.
The Secretary Henry Baron received daily
One Catti of Fresh Meat, Five Measures of Thea, One Catti of Meal, One Measure
of Taufoe, Five Coudrine of Pepper, Four Toel of Suttati, Four Measures of Oil,
Four Toel of Mison, One Catti of Herbs, One Cup of Arack.
Each of the Followers received daily
One Catti of Fresh Meat, One Cup of Arack, Two Toel of Herbs, One Catti of
Rice.


We had Wood and Fruit of all sorts sent in daily in great abundance; as also
China Dishes for the Table, according to their manner. But the Ambassadors, to
hint to them how they fared in Holland, bespoke several other Dishes at their
own Charge; but we received, after we had been before the Emperor, a double
Allowance, which was seldom done to any other Foreign Addressors.

In the first place you must know, That the Province wherein this Chief
Imperial City of Peking is situate, as also the City it self, have been called
in several Times by several Names, in regard it is an ancient Custom among the
Chinese (as has been already said) that when the Race which Commands and Rules
over them happens to be altered, commonly also then the chiefest Cities, nay,
the whole Kingdom, change and alter their Names. In the Times of the Race of
Chiva, this Province and Chief City was called Ieu; under the Race of Cina, it
was called Xangho; when the Race of Hana Reigned, 'twas called Quangyang; and
under the Race of Ciin, Eanyang. But the Race of Taiminga, which drove the
Tartars out of China, named it Peking and Xuntien, by both which they now call
it.

The City is called Peking, which signifies The Northern Chief City, to
distinguish it from Nanking, which we Interpret The Southern City. But the
other Name Xuntien, whereby it is so commonly called by the Chinese
Geographers, signifies Obedient to Heaven. It is called by the Tartars,
Cambalu, that is, The City of the Lord. It lies in 40 Degrees Northern
Latitude, almost upon the outward Northern Limits of this Province, and the
whole Kingdom, not far from those high Mountains, and that great and famous
Wall which separates the Tartars and Chinese in the North from each other. It
exceeds the Southern Chief City of Nanking in number of Inhabitan^, Soldiers,
and Magistrates; but, on the other hand, is not to be compared with Nanking for
largeness, regular Streets, and Fortifications. Its South Side lies vested with
two high and thick Walls, which are so broad, that twelve Horses may go abrest
upon them, without any hindrance to one another. The inner Wall, which extends
about ten Miles in circuit, is so thick set with Bulwarks, that one may easily
fling a Stone from Tower to Tower. This Wall is all of Stone, and so very high,
that I believe the like is not to be found again in all Europe; the outward
Walls, within which the Suhurbs lie environed, have very slight Fortifications,
only on both sides of the Gates are three strong Outworks. In these Redoubts
and Towers the Soldiers by Night keep strict Courts of Guard, as if the Enemy
were at the Gates.

The Chinese Emperor Taicungus, who Reigned over China in the Year 1404. did
very much embellish this City, and bestowed several Privileges upon it.
Amongst the Emperors which belonged to the Race of Taiminga, this Taicungus was
the first that left the City of Nanking, and settled his Imperial Court and
Residence in this Chief City of Peking, the better to hinder and resist the
Inroads and Excursions of the Tartars, driven out of the neighboring Countries
by his Grandfather.

The City has twelve Gates. All Rarities in China are brought hither, so that
this City abounds in every thing, fit either for Pleasure or humane Sustenance.
Several thousand Royal Vessels (beside those of private Persons) are
continually employed to fetch all manner of Wares and Curiosities for the
Emperor and his Council at Peking. Hither comes all the Revenues which each
Province of the Kingdom pays yearly to the Emperor's Exchequer: and the better
to effect this, for the Importing of all Wares to Peking, the Chinese use
great Endeavors to make all Rivers Navigable, that so they may come with ease
by Water to the Emperor's Court, with the Products of several Provinces. Justly
may a Man admire at the Workmanship of the Chinese, which partly by Art, and
partly by Nature, is so brought to pass, that you may come to this City
hundreds of Miles by Shipping from most Parts of the Kingdom.



By this Importation this Place, though in an unfruitful and barren Soil,
possesses every thing in great abundance, and may be called the Granary of the
whole Empire; for they have a Proverb amongst them, That there grows nothing in
Peking, yet there is no want of any thing.

All Commanders and Officers, as well Civil as Military, who have a mind to be
preferred, must betake themselves to this City, which prescribes Laws to all
others; and upon this Place alone depends the whole Government of China, so
that a very great number of Learned Men and Officers are always resident here.

The Streets are not paved, insomuch that in wet weather (which is seldom) they
are hardly passable; but when the Northern Winds blow, and the Weather is dry,
the Soil, which is of a light substance, makes a Dust far more noisome to
Passengers than the deep and miry Streets; for such it is, that it blinds a Man
as he goes along. The Inhabitants therefore, to prevent this inconvenience, are
fain to wear Silk Hoods over their Faces; and the extraordinary foulness of the
Way makes very many to keep Horses to carry them after a rainy Day: for the
infinite number of common People that are continually up and down, turns this
dusty Soil into Mire and Dirt after a little Rain.

There are also Horses or Sedans to be hired at any time for the accommodation
of Passengers; but none make use of Sedans or Chairs but Persons of Quality, in
which they are carried in great State.

These Sedans are made very artificially of Bamboes or Rushes, in the middle
whereof stands a Chair, which is covered with a Tigers Skin, upon which he that
is carried seats himself, having behind him a Boy with an Umbril in his Hand to
keep off the Sun: His Servants likewise attend him, some of them going before,
and others following after, with Ensigns upon their Shoulders, whereby the
Quality of the Person is known, and he respected accordingly as he passes along.

The City abounds in extraordinary brave Building, famous Idol-Temples, high
and artificial Towers, and Triumphal Arches, which exceedingly adorn the same:
But we had not so full a view thereof as we could have wished, in regard we
were little better (as has been already said) than confined to our Lodgings by
order of the Emperor.

Marcus Paulus a Venetian, who was in this City in the Year 1275. when the
Tartars conquered the Southern Provinces of China, calls the same in his
Writings by the Name of Cambalu, which he describes in this manner: The City
Cambalu, which lies in the Province of Cathai, upon a great River, and
signifies The City of the Lord, has been very famous in all Ages.

The Great Cham did transfer this City to another part of the River; for the
Astrologers had foretold him, that it should rise up against him. It lies
apiece, and is twenty four Miles in circumference, so that each side is
six Miles long; the Walls are of white Stone, high and broad; each side of the
Wall has three chief Gates, which make twelve in the whole; and next to each of
these stands a most stately Edifice, wherein the Arms of the City are
preserved. The Streets run so straight, that you may see quite through the City
from one Gate to another, and built on both sides with brave large Houses. In
the midst of the City stands a most noble Idol-Temple, wherein hangs a very
large Bell, which they ring three times in an Evening, after which no body is
to go out of his House till the next Morning, unless it be for the Sick, or to
visit their Friends: and whosoever goes out after the Bell has rung, must take
a Light with him. Each Gate is watched by a thousand Soldiers, not out of fear
of an Enemy, but against Thieves and Rogues, who are very numerous about this
City.

The Ambassadors having taken their leaves of all the Grandees, and the
chiefest of the Rix-Council, departed out of this famous Imperial City of
Peking; and being come without the Gates thereof, they made a halt, to stay for
some of the Wagons that were behind, by which means I had an opportunity to
take a further view thereof, how the same is situate, and how that famous and
far renowned Wall does separate Tartary and China, and takes its course quite
through the Mountains; a true Description whereof I here give you.

So far does this Wall reach from East to West, that it takes in four
Provinces, as Leaotung, Peking, Xansi, and Xensi: It contains three hundred
Dutch Miles in length, and begins at an Arm of the Sea, which is situate
between the Province of Leaotung and the hanging Island of Corea, where the
River Yalo flows out of the Eastern Tartary; from thence it reaches toward the
West to the Mountains of the City Kin, in the Province of Xensi, near to the
side of the Yellow River: It runs quite through in a direct Line, but has
Turnings and Windings in some places, yet is no where broken off or parted;
only near to the Frontiers of the Province of Xansi lies a very high Mountain,
which makes a separation in the Wall to give way to this Mountain; also where
it gives passage to the Yellow River, it has a breach for so much space; but
for other small Rivers, they run through the Wall, without any separation, by
Arches and Sluices; otherwise it is every where alike: It is about thirty
Cubits, or forty five Foot high, and some fifteen Cubits broad. Several strong
Watch-Towers are built upon this Wall, which stand at a distance from each
other, and were formerly guarded by Soldiers.

Heretofore the Chinese Emperor, as also at present the Great Cham, maintained
for the defense of this Wall, and against the Inroads of the Tartars, ten
hundred thousand Men, who kept Watch Day and Night by turns in the said
Watch-Towers.

The building of this Wall was begun under the Government of the Emperor Chius,
who was a brave Prince, and did many great and noble Deeds, as well in time of
Peace as War; there was never any Chinese Emperor, before nor since, to be
compared with him. When this Emperor had conquered the Race of Cheva, and had
brought all China under his subjection, he was preferred to the Imperial
Throne, being before but a petty King. Being seated in the Throne, he caused
this Wall to be built, having conquered the Tartars, the irreconcilable
Enemies of the Kingdom of China, to hinder and prevent by that means their
Inroads into the Kingdom. This great Work was begun by him in the twentieth
Year of his Reign, two hundred years before Christ's Birth; about which he
employed so great number of Workmen, that it was finished in five years.
Through all China the Emperor commanded three Men out of ^en to work upon this
Wall, which is so well built, and so strong, that there is not the least crack
in it. This Wall is admirable, not only for the length and breadth, but in
regard of its durableness, having lasted for so many Ages without alteration,
being as entire as when it was first built.

After some short stay without the Gates of the City, we got all our Carriages
together, and then began our Journey back with all our Followers, by the same
Way we came.

We Lodged that Night in a Village called Pekinsin, and the next day passed by
the City of Tongsiou, and in the Afternoon came to the City of Sancianwey,
where the Emperor's Vessels were still lying which brought us from Nanking;
expecting our coming: The Skippers came to meet the Ambassadors, to bid them
welcome, and help carry our Goods Aboard; but the Mandorins, whom the Emperor
had ordered to wait upon us, to conduct us to Canton, would not suffer the
Ambassadors to Embarque in those Vessels, but in others which were provided by
order of the Emperor. These Vessels they called Ionken, and were very large,
having several Conveniences, but lay so low and sluggish upon the Water, that
they durst not venture themselves in them, lest they should not arrive at
Canton soon enough, but be forced to Winter there; therefore the Ambassadors,
to make no difference or hatred between the Mandorins and our old Skippers,
took neither the new Ionkens nor their old Ships, but hired small Vessels, to
make the more speed. And having taken order about our Business, and shipped our
Goods, we set Sail again from this Sansianwey, with the Tartarian Lords whom
the Emperor had ordered to attend the Ambassador's, together with the Mandorins
of Canton, and came late in the Night to a small Village upon the River Guei,
where we continued till Morning. Pinxenton in the mean time parted from us at
Sancianwey, and took his Way over Land to Lincing, where we had left his Wife
and Children as we went to Peking.

In our Return from Peking to Canton, we took the same Way we came, but passed
by several Cities and Villages without entering into them.

Upon the 23. of October we came to Singlo, and the next day to Sincocien; upon
the 25. we got to Tonquam, and the 27. to Tacheu.

Upon the 31. of of the same Month we got to Lincing, where the Ambassadors
were nobly received and Treated by the Mandorin Pinxenton. We stayed here two
or three days at the Request of the said Mandorin, who made very much of us all
that while; and then we set Sail with a good Wind at North, which blew so very
hard and cold, that we were hardly able to endure it.

Upon the fifth of November, having undergone much hardship, we got to
Tunchant, and the next day to Xansiu, where we could procure no fresh Men to
Tow forward our Vessels. The Ambassadors, to lose no longer time, hired such as
they could meet withal in the Streets.



Upon the eighth of November we came in sight of Cinning, and on the 13.
following to Tamincien.

From thence we got into the Yellow River, and on the 17. to the City of
Iamcefu, where the Ambassadors were heartily welcomed by the Base Brother of
the young Canton Viceroy, and nobly Treated at his House. After this friendly
Reception we took leave, and came upon the 20. into the River of Kiang, and the
next day got before Nanking.

We came with our Vessels before the Gate where we had Anchored in going; and
in regard the Governor stood upon his departure, we could not procure other
Vessels with that speed as we desired, whereby we had an opportunity to take a
more exact view of the City, and to refresh our selves a while after so tedious
and troublesome a Journey in the heart of China; but the Weather proved so very
bad and cold, that there was no going abroad all the while we continued here.

The Ambassadors themselves were often invited by several Grandees to Dinner;
but the Weather proving so extreme ill, they could go no where: only they gave
a Visit to the two Chief Toll-masters, who lived in the Suburb, whereof the one
was a Chinese, the other a Tartar, and both very brave Persons. These two
Gentlemen showed a very great Respect to the Ambassadors, during their stay
before this City.

Having provided our selves with Necessaries, we departed from Nanking upon the
10. of December; and the 15. we passed by a high Rock, which we, in memory of
William Vander Beek, in our Journey forward, called by the Name of Beekenburg.
The River Kiang is about this Place almost a Mile broad, and in foul Weather
proves very rough and dangerous; on the Bank of which lie a great many Rocks
under Water.

Upon the 19. at Sunset we came to Nankang: It blew very hard all that Night,
and continued so till the 21. when it began to abate: we then set Sail again,
and passed over the Pool of Poyan, and from thence came to the famous Village
of Ucinjeen, where we were forced to stay a while to get fresh Men to Tow our
Vessels. We found that in our absence a violent Fire had destroyed at least a
hundred brave Houses in this Place.

Upon the 23. we came again to the famous City of Kiangsi, which I have already
described at large, and given you an account of what I then saw in our Journey
forward; but in regard we continued three days in this City, I had an
opportunity to satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader with a further Description
of the Situation thereof.

After we had furnished our selves here with other Vessels, we set Sail again
upon the twenty sixth; but having gone about a League, it began to blow so very
hard, that we were forced to return back for shelter under the Walls of the
City, where we Lodged all Night in safety. The next day we departed early in
the morning, and saw the Hills on both sides of the River covered with Snow.

Upon the fist of January 1657. we arrived at the City of Kinnungam, where the
next day, though with much difficulty, we procured fresh Men to Tow our
Vessels, and about two of the clock in the Afternoon set Sail again to
prosecute our Voyage.

Upon the fifteenth day of the same Month we got before the ruined City of
Vannungam, where the Ambassadors were no sooner gone Ashore, but the Governor
of the Place came to bid them welcome; and likewise when we departed from
thence, he Presented the Ambassadors with some Refreshments for the Kitchen,
and amongst the rest, with some Candles, which were made of a thick oily
Juice, taken off of some Trees: These Candles burnt very clear and sweet.

After we were provided with fresh Men to Tow our Boats, and expert Pilots (for
without such there is no venturing upon this River) we set Sail again, and
passed by very many Rocky and dangerous Places, which were not as we came
observable, the Water then being three Foot higher, but now they appeared above
the Stream: and notwithstanding all our care, the Vessel in which the
Ambassadors were, happened to strike against one of them, but with the turning
and Eddies of the Stream she got off again without any considerable damage.
About eleven of the clock we got safe beyond all these threatening Dangers,
which appeared first at the City of Vannungam, and ended over against an
Idol-Temple, extending about three Leagues. The Chinese and Tartars who
frequent this River, do commonly Offer at the forementioned Temple, that they
may have a speedy and safe Voyage through these Difficulties.

Upon the 10. we came before Cancheu, where the Governor in great State came to
welcome and receive the Ambassadors in the Name of the Tutang; and after the
Ambassadors, at the Request of the Governor, had informed him with all their
Transactions at Peking, he went back again into the City to acquaint the Tutang
therewith: with him went likewise Jacob de Keyser (the other Ambassador being
at that time indisposed) to thank the Tutang for the high Honor he had done
them, and to take leave of a Person who had been so civil to them.

Upon the day following, being the 11. we set Sail again, the Weather proving
exceeding cold; and upon the 15. we came with all our Vessels to the most
famous City of Nangan, where the Ambassadors were Lodged in a very large House
on the South Side of the Suburbs; for the Place where they lay before, the
Tartars had burnt to the Ground; who since our departure had marched through
with a flying Army, and committed several Outrages upon the Inhabitants.



On the nineteenth of January we departed from thence, and having passed those
Waters which were the most dangerous and troublesome, we were now to Travel some
part by Land, to get from Nangang to Namhung: The Ambassadors were carried in
Chairs or Sedans, which they had ordered to be made at Nanking, wherein they
were so speedily conveyed over the Mountains by thirty Soldiers, whom they had
hired for that purpose, that they came to Namhung, though late that Night,
without Lodging on the Mountains, as they did in coming.

We lay here at a famous House of Entertainment, which belonged to the Viceroy
of Canton.

I have already given an Account at large of the Situation of this Place, in
the Draught I took thereof in our Voyage to Peking. Now in our Return I thought
it worth the while to make this further Addition, setting before you the
Prospect of this City on the other side, as exactly as I could take it.

Having procured new Vessels, and put our Goods aboard, we left this City upon
the 21. of the same Month, and passing by several dangerous Waters, we came to
those wonderful and strange Mountains of Suytieen, and from thence to the Hills
which we mentioned formerly by the Name of The Five Horse Heads.

Upon the 25. Instant we got with good success before the City of Saoche^. And
here we began to put on our Sails again (which before we durst not bear) being
now past the narrow of the River, and the danger of the Rocks; and the next
day, being the 26. we came to the Mountain Swanghoab before spoken of: And in
regard the Water was now at least twenty Foot lower than when we came, we
discovered here the tops of several dangerous Rocks, which appeared very
dreadful to us, and made us sensible of the great danger we had escaped in our
going, they being then unseen.

Upon the same Day, late in the Evening, we came to Sanyvum, where we lodged
all Night, and early in the Morning set Sail again, and came that day before
the small Town called Xantsui. We saw here the adjacent Fields full of Tents,
Horses sadled, and a vast number of Soldiers, all standing ready for the March.



After a few Hours Sailing, we came in sight of the Village Faesan, which
appeared very pleasant and delightful at a distance.

And in regard as we went to Peking we passed by this Village late in the
Evening, so that there was no taking notice of the same, I thought good (having
now in our Return a full view thereof) to give you an Account of its Situation:
It lies near the River side, being encompassed with very pleasant Fields.

Upon the 28. of the same Month we arrived again before the famous Chief City
of Canton, which we have already described at large. Francis Lantsman, who when
we were going to Peking took care for all our Concerns left there, with the two
Ships and the rest of the Men, came immediately to welcome and receive the
Ambassadors, and had ordered the Gunners of the Ships to discharge all their
Ordnance upon their Landing, which was accordingly performed, to the great
admiration of the Tartar Lords, whom the Emperor had appointed to attend the
Ambassadors upon their Voyage for their better accommodation; who were no less
surpised to see such Vessels, having never seen the like. No sooner were the
Ambassadors Landed, but they betook themselves to their old Lodgings, and found
all things safe, and in very good order, to their great satisfaction.

The Letter of the Emperor writ to the General John Maatzuyker, was taken and
carried by the Secretary Henry Baron upon both his Hands, having a Skreen
before him; next to him followed the Ambassadors, according to the State of the
Business, in solemn Order: And for a more public demonstration of Joy, the
Cannons aboard the Ships were discharged thrice; the Walls and Streets of the
City were full of People to see the Ceremony, and to understand the success of
their Negotiation; for the Inhabitants desired nothing more than a free Trade
with the Hollanders.

The next day, being the 29. the Ambassadors went in great State to Salute the
Viceroys, the young King's Mother, and the Tutang, and to acquaint them with
the sum of their Business. The old Viceroy received them very friendly and
heartily, with a Dish of Thea, and some Discourse concerning their Voyage: The
like did also the young Viceroy; but the Mother of the young Viceroy did not
appear, only sent a Complement to the Ambassadors, to thank them for their
Visit. The Tutang suffered them to wait two hours at his Secretary's House, and
afterward sent them word, That he would hear them when Pinxenton was arrived.

The following day, being the 30. of January, the Ambassadors were Treated by
the young Viceroy's principal Commander at a noble Banquet, who laid the fault
upon the Portuguese Priests at Peking, that our Business succeeded no better
there; and he carried it so, as if he had been very much offended with them,
telling us, That they had every where reported, That there were but three Kings
in Europe, whereof Don John was one; and that the Hollanders possessed but a
small corner of the World, and were his Tributaries; with much more of this
nature.

The Ambassadors went the same day to Salute the Mandorin Toju, who received
them very courteously, and told them, That Poetsiensie, and other Lords, durst
not hold any Conference with them, because the Tutang, whom they stood in awe
of, had not yet granted them Audience.

Upon the first of February, the Ambassadors, with the Merchant Lantsman, and
some other of their Attendants, to the number of twenty Persons, were most
nobly Treated at a Dinner by the old Viceroy, who Entertained them first with
Thea out of wooden Dishes, wishing the Ambassadors to be merry, and to drink
Sorrow from the Heart, since they had now passed the greatest Danger. After
drinking of the Thea, the Trumpets sounded, and Dinner was served in: Each
Ambassador had a particular Table full of Dishes; but before they began to eat,
the King called for a Gold Goblet full of Wine, and commanded two of his
Gentlemen to carry one to each of the Ambassadors, and to let them know they
were heartily welcome: As soon as they had pledged his Majesty, they fell to
their Meat; and whilst they were at Table, the King asked them several
Questions concerning the State and Affairs of Holland. Dinner being almost
ended, several Comedians, according to the Custom of the Country, began to show
themselves before the King; but the Ambassadors being in haste, desired his
Majesty to excuse them from further Attendance; so after a Health or two had
passed about, they took leave, and came back to their Lodgings.

The next day they were Treated by the young Viceroy after the same manner,
only there passed no Discourse at Table, but what was tending to Mirth and
Iollity.

Upon the third of February came Pinxenton to Canton, with all his Train; and
as soon as the Ambassadors had heard of his Arrival, they went to welcome and
Salute him in his Lodgings. On the seventh the Ambassadors (now Pinxenton was
come to Canton) had Audience of the Tutang, who had deferred them till his
Arrival.

The Ambassadors having disposed of 160099 Guilders in Presents for the
Grandees at Peking, were somewhat straightned to find wherewithal to purchase a
New-years-gift for the Viceroys that might be acceptable unto them; which at
last was obtained by the Interest of Lantsman, which he had made during his
abode at Canton: But when the Presents were brought to the Viceroys, they
seemed dissatisfied with them, and demanded not only Interest of 1500 Toel of
Silver, which they had disbursed for the use of their Servants upon their
departure to Peking, but they likewise insisted, That the Ambassadors should
immediately pay the 3500 Toel of Silver which they had promised to the
Viceroys for a free Trade at Canton, before their departure for Peking. This
Business occasioned much trouble; and at last the Ambassadors were necessitated
to comply with their Demands, to prevent further mischief; for they found that
the Common People had been dealt withal, to affront them as they went along the
Streets: and not long after, one of our best Interpreters, by Name Paul
Duretti, was barbarously murdered in his own House. Whereupon the Ambassadors
resolved to depart with all speed for Batavia, and went immediately to take
leave of the Viceroys, who refused to give them Audience, and only sent out
word, That they were not to Export any Tartar Arms.

The Ambassadors finding they could not effect any thing with their Visits,
returned to their Lodgings, and went aboard that Night, and set Sail early in
the Morning; but after a few hours Sailing, the Wind turned, and we were forced
to come to an Anchor not far from Canton, where we lay all Night.

Upon the 23. came the Stewards of the Viceroys, and the Captains of the
Guards, with the Mandorins who had accompanied the Ambassadors forward and
backward from Peking, and Treated them in the name of their Masters with their
strong Liquor Samsou, in the Kings own Dishes: They wished the Ambassadors a
speedy and successful Voyage, and that they might suddenly return again; and
after some Healths had gone about, they took leave, and went back to Canton,
and we immediately hoised Sail, and came upon the 28. about Sunset to an
Anchor in the Harbor of Heytamon. The Ambassadors had sent the Governor a
Princes Flag, which he caused to be hung out with the Tartar Standard upon the
Fort, as a sign that the Ambassadors were welcome to him.

Upon the second of March, about midnight, we weighed Anchor, and set Sail
with an Easterly Wind from the Harbor of Heytamon, steering our Course
South-East. At break of day we came in sight of the famous Village of Lantam,
which lies in a very commodious place, adorned with goodly Buildings, and may
be seen at a great distance off at Sea. We made so much speed that day, that
before Sunset we got beyond the Eastern Islands of Maccao.

Upon the fourth Instant we came in sight of the Northern Mountains of Aynam,
which lay about six Miles North-West from us.

On the eighth of the same Month we came again to the Island Pulo Tymon, where
we anchored, and sent ashore to know whether any Ships had been lately there.
The Islanders told us, That about a fortnight since there Sailed by a Ionck for
Batavia, but they could not tell whence she came. With this advice we set Sail
again, and were no sooner got out to Sea, but we saw whole shoals of flying
Fishes, leaping out of the Water, and sporting themselves in the Air. These
Fishes are commonly of the bigness of a Smelt, and have Wings like those of
Bats; they never swim alone, but keep together in shoals; as soon as they
discover any other sort of Fish that use to make a prey of them, they take Wing
and save themselves: they are not able to continue long above Water, but must
immediately return under Water again. No Creature either upon the Land or in
the Sea suffers greater persecution than these Fishes; for under Water they are
pursued by Soals, and other Fish, and have no way to save themselves but by
flight; and they are no sooner out of the Water, but they are presently set
upon by Sea-Fowls; so that they are continually in jeopardy, either in or out
of the Water.

Upon the 21. of March we came in sight of the Island Linga, situated upon the
Coast of Sumatra. Early in the Morning we spied a Sail, whereupon we Manned out
our Boat to discover what she was, and whence she came; by whom we understood,
That it was our Bloemandael, which had lost us by the way: so we joined
together, and steered our Course South-west.

Upon the 24. we came into the Straight Banca, between the great Island Borneo
and Sumatra; and upon the 26. we past by the Island Lucipara, and so through
the abovementioned Narrow.

On the last of March we arrived in our long-desir'd Harbor of Batavia, after
we had spent twenty Months and six Days in this tedious and expensive Voyage.

The Ambassadors immediately went ashore, to give an Account to the
Governor-General, and the Council of India, of their Transactions in this their
Voyage to and from Peking; and to inform them what ill success they had in
their Business with the Emperor there, notwithstanding all their Endeavors, and
the rich Presents they had given, as well to the Emperor himself, as to the
Mandorins, and the rest of the Grandees of his Court. The Value of these
Presents amounted in the whole to 5555 l. 1 s. 7 d. Sterling; and the Expenses
of our Expedition forward and backward came to 4327 l. 10 d. Sterling: which
together amounted to the Sum of 9882 l. 2 s. 5 d. Sterling.

And for all these Presents, and great trouble of so dangerous and long Travel,
we effected nothing else, but that the Hollanders were received as Friends by
the Emperor of China, and might return eight years hence to Salute his Imperial
Majesty, according to the Contents of the forementioned Letter, which the Great
Cham writ to the Governor-General at Batavia.

And though through the means and Designs of the Portuguese Jesuits, as has
been often mentioned, our Business did not succeed with the Emperor according
to our wish, yet we hope that in a short time, and before the date of eight
years shall be expired, something will be done to the advantage of our
Traffic, by sending a few more Presents to the Emperor; which several of the
Grandees of Peking did more than hint to our Ambassadors. Beside, the Great
Cham having Wars with that Arch-Pyrate Coxinga, if we should but propose to
assist his Imperial Majesty with our Ships, for the subduing of the said
Pyrate, I make no doubt but he would quickly consent to give us a free Trade in
his Dominions.

Amongst so many Alterations happened since our departure, we understood at our
Arrival, with great joy, that the strong City of Columbo, in the Island of
Ceylon, was fallen into our hands, by the Conduct and Courage of the General
Dirck Hulft, who Commanded over those Forces that were sent to subdue it. This
valiant Commander was unfortunately slain in an Assault made by him upon the
said City; which being perceived by his courageous Soldiers, they fell on with
so much fury, that they would not be satisfied for the loss of their Commander,
with any thing less than the taking of the Town; which was soon after delivered
up to them upon terms. How great an advantage this will prove to the Affairs of
the East India Company, any one may easily guess, if they do but know, that
from this Place comes the best Cinnamon.

We likewise understood, that the troublesome and contentious Business in
Amboyna, which threatened this Place with great danger, was accommodated and
reconciled, through the wise management of Arnold de Vlaming; so that one might
live freely and peaceably there, and drive their Trade with the Inhabitants as
formerly.

Lastly, We were informed, that the Bantam Iavaners were grown weary of the
War, and sought to live in Peace with the Hollanders; which will highly make
for the Interest of our East India Company.

I have treated thus far in short concerning what happened upon our Travels
forward and backward to the Emperor's Court at Peking; wherein, to my
knowledge, I have not in the least said any thing contrary to the Truth: and as
I began in giving a Description in short of the whole Empire, for as much as
concerns the Country it self; so I conceive it not improper, for a more full
and perfect knowledge of all China, to continue my Relation of the Government,
Letters, Learning, Manners, Customs, Fashions, and Modes of the Inhabitants;
Creatures, Beasts, Herbs, Fruits; Wars, and Peace, in this vast Dominion of
China.

FINIS.
A General Description OF THE EMPIRE OF CHINA.
CHAP. I.
Of the Government and several Chief Officers in China.
OUR Statists in Europe, and most else that follow Science and Literature, are
not ignorant in the least of the three Forms of Government, viz. That of
Monarcy, or the absolute Power of a Single Person; Aristocracy, being the
Authority of the Nobles; and Democracy, the Sway of the Multitude.

Now the Kingdom or Empire of China has been Governed from Age to Age, in a
series or long prescription of Time out of mind, by a Single Person, the
Supreme Authority being always Monarchical; for both the Power of the Nobles
and that of the Populacy are so altogether unknown to the Chinese, that we had
a difficult Task when we were at Peking, to make them understand what our
Government of the United Provinces was, and what were our High and Mighty
Lords, the States General.

The Emperor of China Commands over the Lives and Estates of all his Subjects,
he alone being the Supreme Head and Governor; so that the Chinese Government is
absolutely Monarchical, the Crown descending from Father to Son; and for want
of Issue-Male it comes to the next of Blood, the eldest Son first resuming the
Paternal Throne; only we read, That two or three Kings in old Times
disinherited their Children, being held unfit to Govern, and put the Scepter
into the Hands of Strangers, no way related to them. It has also often happened,
that the Subjects have by force wrested the Government out of the hands of
their lawful Prince, for being too severe, harsh, and cruel in his Reign, and
conferred it on one more agreeable to their Humor, whom they have acknowledged
for their lawful Prince. Yet herein are the Chinese to be commended, that many
amongst them had rather die honorably, than sweat Fidelity to any Prince that
gets the Crown by force of Arms, having no just Title to the same; for they
have a Proverb amongst them, That an honest Woman cannot Marry two Husbands,
nor a faithful Subject serve two Lords.

When the Heir (which generally is the eldest Son) comes to the Crown, the rest
of the Children are Treated with Royal Dignity and Honor; but they must not use
any Regal Authority. The King allots to each of them a City, with a Royal
Palace, where he lives in Princely State, being served and waited on with
extraordinary Pomp and Splendour, but has no Command in the least over any of
the Inhabitants; neither may they depart from that City without the King's
special License.

In this Government are found no old Laws, as among those of Europe; no
Imperial Edicts, which had their original from the ancient Romans: but those
that are the first Founders of their own House, and have by Conquest, or
otherwise, resumed the Government, make new Statutes according to their
pleasure. This is the reason why the Laws which were in use before this last
Invasion of the Tartars, and are in part observed to this day by the People,
are of no longer standing then the Emperor Humvuo, whose Race, for his most
heroic Actions in the Expulsion of the Tartars, was called Tamin, which
signifies Great Courage. This Emperor made several Laws, and confirmed others
made by his Predecessors.

Their Emperor is commonly called Thiensu, which signifies The Son of Heaven;
and this Name is given him, not that they believe he had his Original from
thence, but because they believe he is better beloved, by being preferred to so
great a Dignity above all other Mortals, for his eminent and natural Virtues,
and because they adore and worship Heaven for the highest Deity; so that when
they name The Son of Heaven, it is as much as if they said, The Son of God.
However, the Commonalty call not the Emperor Thiensu, but Hoangti, The Yellow
Emperor, or The Emperor of the Earth; whom they name Yellow of color, to
distinguish him from Xangti, which signifies The highest Emperor. Two thousand
six hundred ninety seven years before Christ's Birth, their first Prince
Reigned, who bore the Name of Hoangti; and because of his extraordinary
Virtues, and valiant Deeds, the Chinese have ever since called their Emperors
Hoangti.

None are chosen or employed in the Government and Management of Public
Affairs, but such as are held capable, and have the Title of Doctors of the
Law, Men of great Learning and eminent Parts; for whosoever is preferred in
China to Places and Offices of Trust, has given a clear testimony of his
Knowledge, Prudence, Virtue, and Valor; neither the Favor of the Prince, or
Grandeur of his Friends standing him in any stead, if he be not so
extraordinarily qualified.

All Magistrates, both Civil and Military, are called in the Country Idiome,
Quonfu, which signifies Men fit for Council: They are also called sometimes by
the Name of Lavie, which signifies Lord, or Master. The Portuguese call these
Magistrates in China, Mandorins, it may be from the Latin word Mandando; by
which Name the Officers of that State in that Country are also received and
understood by us of Europe.

And although I said at the beginning, that the Government of this Kingdom or
Empire consisted of one single Person; yet it will appear by what has been
said, and what shall follow, that the Government has also some Commixture with
that of Aristocracy: for although that which the Magistrate concludes, and
fully determines, must afterward be ratified by the King upon Request made to
him; yet he also finisheth nothing himself in any Business, before he is
thereunto first desired by his Council.

It is also very certain, That it is no way lawful for the King to confer any
Office, Dignity, or Place in the Magistracy, upon any, unless he be first
requested by one in special Authority: But yet he has Power to present his
Courtiers with some special Gifts; and this he often does, according to an old
Custom, whereby it is free for any one to raise his Friends at his own Charge.

The Public Taxes, Assessments, Impositions, and Revenues, are not brought
into the King's Treasury; neither may he dispose thereof at his Pleasure: but
they are delivered either in Money or Goods into the Treasury and Granary of
the Empire; which Income discharges the Expense of the King's Family,
consisting of Wives, Concubines, Sons, Favorites, and the like.

There are two distinct Councils in China; one whereof not only officiates in
Affairs of State at Court, but has likewise the Care of the Kingdom: The other
is made up of Provincial Governors, who Rule particular Provinces and Cities. A
Catalogue of which Officers fills up five or six large Volumes, Printed every
Month, and to be sold at Peking, where the Court resides. In these Books are
mentioned only the Names of Provinces and Cities, and the Qualities of those
who for that end are employed in the Magistracy through the whole Empire.

These Books are always re-printing, in regard so vast a number of Alterations
happen daily; for some die, others are laid aside, and new ones chosen in their
Places, or else preferred to higher Offices; so that there is hardly an hour
but some Change happens amongst them.

The Grand Council divides it self into six other great ones: The first is
called Pu, or The Council of State; for they nominate and choose all the
Magistrates of the whole Nation: these, as they are most powerful, have also
the greatest Parts, Persons able to judge of whom they confer such Dignities;
for they must be all qualified with Philosophical and other Learning, that come
to any Place in the Magistracy; the general Maxim there being, To prefer none
but merely upon Merit; and whosoever happens to be degraded for any
Misdemeanor, they never admit him to his Place again.

The second, called Hopu, has the Management and Inspection over the King's
Exchequer, pays the Armies, and other Charges of the Kingdom.

The third they name Limpu; this takes care of the common Offerings, Temples,
Priests, the King's Women, Schools, and public Places of Learning, to see that
all things be done in order; likewise orders their Holy Days, and the
Obediences which are to be performed to the Emperor, upon certain Times and
Occasions; also disposes and confers Titles of Honor upon such as deserve them,
takes care for the encouragement of Arts and Sciences, sending and receiving of
Ambassadors, and the writing of Letters into all Parts.

The fourth Council is called Pimpu, or The Council of War, to whom is left the
management of Peace and Military Affairs; wherein however they are not to
conclude any thing without the consent of the Emperor. They dispose of all
Places and Offices in the Army, and confer Titles of Honor and Dignities
accordingly upon such as behave themselves bravely in Conduct, and valiantly in
Battle.

The fifth Council, called Cumym, has the care about Buildings committed to it;
and also appoints Surveyors to look to the Repairs of the Edifices and Palaces
belonging to the Emperor, his Favorites and Magistrates: they also look after
the building of Vessels, and the equipping of Fleets.

The sixth Council, called Humpu, Examines and Judges all criminal Causes, and
appoints their Punishments.

All Affairs of the whole Kingdom are dispatched by these six Councils;
wherefore they have in each Province and City, Officers and Notaries, by whom
they are informed of all Transactions which happen in each Quarter; so that
they are all continually busy about weighty Affairs: but the number and good
order of the Officers very much facilitates their Work; for in each Council is
a President, whom they call Ciu, who has two Assistants, one on his right side,
called Coxilam, and another on his left, termed Yeuxilam: These three, both at
Court, and through the whole Empire, have the highest Dignity, except those who
sit in the supremest Council, called Colao. Beside these three Principal
Counselors, there are belonging to each Council ten others, who differ but
little in Dignity from the rest, being always employed, together with a great
number of inferior Officers, as Notaries, Scribes, Secretaries, and Clerks.

The Jesuit Semedo, in his Relation of China, mentions several other Councils,
whereof some have a like Authority with the beforementioned six; all which are
called in the Chinese Tongue, Cien, Cim, and consist of several Offices,
belonging particularly to the King's Household.

The first of these is called Thai Lisu, that is, The Council of the great
Audite: This Office seems like the great Chancery of the Kingdom, and therein
all weighty Affairs receive a determination; it consists of thirteen Mandorins,
one Councellor, two Assistants, and ten Underofficers.

The second is called Quon Losu, and provides for their Imperial Majesty's
Tables; and for all the Expenses of the Emperor's Court. This Council has one
Councellor, two Assistants, and six Officers.

The third, called Thaipocusu, has the Power of the Emperor's Stables, and
makes provision of all Posthorses for public Use and Service. It consists of
one Councellor, and six Officers.

Beside all these, there is yet another Council higher than all the rest, and
of the greatest Dignity, having Place next the Emperor in all public
Solemnities. Those that sit in this Council are called Colaos, being seldom
above four or six in number, and the most select Persons of all the other
Councils, and of the whole Empire, and are honored and reverenced accordingly.
No private Affairs are brought to them, for they only mind the Public Good and
Government, sitting with the Emperor in private Council; for the
abovementioned six Councils intermeddle not with the Affoirs of the State, as
to make any Conclusion upon them, they being only to Debate and Consult, and
afterward by way of Petition to offer their Advice to the Emperor, who either
alters or confirms what they have done, according as he sees cause. But in
regard he will not seem wholly to rely upon his own Judgment, some of the
chiefest Philosophers always attend upon this Colaos or Council, and come daily
to the Palace to answer Petitions, which are brought continually to the Emperor
in great numbers. This last Conclusion the Emperor Signeth with his own Hand,
that so afterward his Command may be Executed.

There are yet two Councils more, whereof the one is called Choli, and the
other Tauli, each consisting of above sixty Persons, all choice Philosophers
and wise Men, whose Fidelity and Prudence both the Emperor and People
sufficiently have approved, and therefore they hold them in great honor and
esteem. With these his Majesty advises upon all extraordinary and weighty
Affairs, but more especially when any thing has been committed against the Laws.

Beside these, there are several other Councils, whereof the chiefest is called
Han Lin Yven, where are employed none but Learned Men, who busy themselves
with no Affairs of the Government, yet exceed all in Dignity, except such as
sit at the Helm. Their Charge is to take care of the Emperor's Writings, to
compile Year-Books, and write Laws and Orders. From among these are chosen
Governors and Tutors for the Princes; they only are concerned in Matters of
Learning, wherein as they grow more and more excellent, they mount by several
Steps to the highest degree of Honor, coming afterward to be employed in
Places of the greatest Dignity in the Court; neither is any chosen into the
great Colao, who has not first been of this Council. They delight in Poetry,
and get a great deal of Money by their Writings, as in making of Epitaphs,
Poems, and the like, to pleasure their Friends; and very happy he esteems
himself that can obtain such a favor of them.

The Government of the City Nanking, where the Chinese Emperors formerly kept
their Courts, is the same with that of Peking, save that at Nanking the great
Council of the Colao is not in being; but the Esteem and Authority of the rest
of the Councils here is as much eclipsed for want of, as at Peking it is
advanced by the Emperor's Presence.

Thus far we have spoken of the Government in general: In the next place we
will treat of particular and Provincial Jurisdictions. The whole Empire is
divided into fifteen Provinces; in the principal Cities whereof the chiefest
and supreme Courts of Judicature reside, differing little in Method and Rule
from those of Peking and Nanking, and so not consequently one from another. The
Regiment of each Province is committed to the care and fidelity of two Persons,
whom they call Pucinsu and Manganzasu; the first whereof intermeddles only with
Civil Affairs, and the other is altogether concerned in Criminal Matters. They
have both their Seats of Judicature in the Chief Cities of their Province, and
live in great Magnificence, having beside several Officers assistant unto them,
as also the chiefest Magistrates called Tauli; who in regard they Command over
some other inferior Cities, it often happens that they are absent from the
Metropolis of the Province, to take care of their Employments.

All the fifteen Provinces, as has been already said, are subdivided into
several other less Portions, which the Chinese call Fu; over each of which is
appointed a Governor called Gifu. These Divisions are again proportioned into
great and small Cities, the first whereof they call Ceu, and the last Hien:
each has a particular Magistrate, which in the great Cities are called Ciceu,
and in the less are named Cihien; for Ci signifies To Govern. Every Principal
Governor of these Cities is aided by three Counselors, who assist them with
Advice in all their Affairs and Undertakings: The first is called Hun Chim, the
second Chu Phu, and the third Tun Su, and have their particular Courts and
Judicature; but the Governor over the whole Division has no more Authority in
the Place of his Residence, than in the other Cities under his Command: True it
is, he may condemn a Malefactor to die; but he cannot put the Sentence in
Execution, without the consent of the rest that are joined in Commission with
him.

But in regard an Account must be given of the whole management of Affairs, and
the Transactions of all the Provinces, at the Court at Peking; therefore in
each Province there are appointed two other great Officers by the Court, who in
eminency of Honor, and Grandeur of Commission, exceed the rest. The one of
these always resides in some of the Provinces, and is called Tutang; the other
is sent yearly from the Court at Peking, and called Chayven: the first has a
superintendent Power over the other Magistrates and Subjects, Commands the
Soldiery, and is concerned in all the chiefest Offices of the Empire, by reason
whereof he is not inferior to the greatest Viceroys in Europe, either for
Power or Pomp. He continues three years in the Employment, and all that time
has constantly Couriers going to, and coming from Court; and this because he
must daily give an Account of what passes in his Province. At his first going
from Court, several Persons of great Quality (who also are of his Council) are
sent to wait upon him to his Palace: The Inhabitants of Cities and Towns,
through which he passes, go out to meet him with great Respect, and accompany
him good part of his Way, both on Horseback and on Foot, with great Honor and
Reverence: At length, when he is arrived within three Miles of the Capital City
wherein he is to make his Residence, the Garrison of the Place, excellently
accommodated, meet him, to guard and conduct him; after whom follow the
Magistrates, with the chiefest Citizens.

The Office of the second, called Chayven, which signifies An Examiner, is
likewise a Place of great Trust and Command; but (as is said) expires with the
Year. This Officer receives so large a Commission from the Emperor, that he may
supervise and inspect all manner of Affairs, as well Civil as Military; and
this he does, giving an Account thereof to the Emperor, who thereupon
immediately sends him further Orders what to do therein. He alone, amongst all
the Magistrates, causes the Sentences of Life and Death, and other corporal
Punishments, to be put in Execution through the whole Province; so that all
Persons equally fear and reverence him.

Besides these great Officers of the Emperor, there is another Examiner, called
likewise Tutang; but he is sent by the Empress from time to time, and his
Business is only to visit the Prisons of the Province, with a full Power to
release all such from them, as have been put in for trivial Matters. He has a
very great regard to the Poor, his chief Office being to perform Deeds of
Charity, and extend Compassion.

In every Province is also a Treasurer, who takes care of the Royal Revenues
arising within the whole Province: He receives his Commission from the
Rix-Council appointed for the Emperor's Revenue. With him are joined two
Assistants, who both reside in his Palace: And he has under him twenty six
Mandorins, who are employed in several Offices: He receives and takes an
Account of all the Tolls, Impositions, and Royal Taxes; takes a special care of
all Weights and Measures, and determines all Causes and Differences that arise
about the Emperor's Revenue: He is the Person that pays all Salaries, Wages,
and Annuities, whether it be to the Magistrates, the Emperor's Kindred, or
Soldiers; and likewise disburses all Moneys to be laid out for repairing of
Bridges, Streets, and common Edifices, such as the Palaces of the Mandorins.

The fourth Council is Began Cha Sci, whose Business is to inflict, or pass
Sentence for corporal Punishments.

The fifth-Council takes care to improve and reward Learning and Knowledge.

And thus I have given you an Account of the several sorts of Rix-Councils in
China; but before I conclude with their method of Government, it will be worth
our labor to make some mention of the strange and unusual Customs used amongst
them, which other Nations have hardly heard of. And first of all, it is very
observable, That the whole Kingdom is swayed by Philosophers, to whom not only
the People, but the Grandees of the Court yield an awful Reverence, insomuch
that they submit with all humility to receive Correction from them, as Children
from a Master. By these Philosophers are all Military Affairs ordered, over
which they are appointed as Overseers; and their Counsel and Opinions make
greater Impressions upon the Emperor, than all the most admirable Observations
of the Commanders themselves, who are very seldom, and then but some few, taken
into the Council. But that which will appear yet more strange, is, that these
Philosophers far exceed the Military Commanders in Courage and Fidelity, and
will hazard their Persons beyond any of them in the most imminent Dangers, for
the good of their Prince and Country.

Secondly, But that which indeed to our European World will seem most
admirable, is the Good Understanding and perfect Unanimity which is constantly
held between the High and the Inferior Magistrates; as also between the
Governors of Provinces, and the Rix-Councils, and between those and the Emperor
himself; declared by that mutual Respect and Affection which they bear to one
another, in making Visits, and sending Presents upon all occasions for the
continuation of this so well knit Correspondence: and yet notwithstanding this
constant and strict Amity, the inferior Magistrates never speak to the chief
Ministers of State but upon their Knees, and that with singular Civility, and
profound Respect. With like Respect and submissive Carriage the Subjects behave
themselves to the Governors and Rulers of Cities.

Thirdly, No Person continues in Office through the whole Empire, longer than
three years, unless he be confirmed anew by the Emperor; which happens very
seldom, because, as every Man merits by his upright Carriage and Deportment, he
is still advanced to higher and more noble Promotions. And certainly this is
done upon great and Political Reasons of State, as to prevent any such Governor
from contracting near Friendship with the Inhabitants, whereby to draw their
Affections to a by-Interest on his part, to undertake Factions or Novelties
against the Interest of the Prince. For the better bringing to pass whereof,
all the chief Governors of Provinces, Divisions, and Cities, are bound to
appear every third year at the Emperor's Court, to do Homage and Obedience to
him; at which time a strict Account is taken of their Carriages and Behaviors
in their several Places: and after a through Examination of all Matters, the
Emperor and his Council determine who are fit to be continued, who to be
cashiered, who to be preferred, and lastly, who to be punished; and this
without any respect of Persons. Likewise, it is not in the power of the Emperor
to make any alteration in what is concluded by the Council and Judges upon this
Examination, which is so severe and impartial, that for the most part only the
greatest Persons offending are punished. And to this purpose we read, that in
the Year 1607. so strict an Examination was made, that four thousand principal
Magistrates, who had misbehav'd themselves, received Rewards justly due to
their demerits.

The Persons so condemned are divided according to the quality of their Crimes,
into five Ranks: Under the first are comprehended such as take Bribes, and
enrich themselves out of the Emperor's Treasury; these being turned out, are
for ever made incapable of bearing any public Office. Under the second Rank
are set down those who are too cruel in their Punishments; these are likewise
turned out of their Places, and sent home to live as private Persons. Under the
third are reckoned such as are decrepit, and too far stricken in years for
Government, or else such as are too remiss in their Offices; these, though they
are put by the Exercise of their Offices, yet enjoy all their Privileges as
they were wont when they were in their Places, so long as they live. In the
fourth Rank are put down such as have been too hasty and rash in passing
Sentence, acting without any forecast in the Affairs of the Empire; these are
degraded, and put in some inferior Offices, or else employed elsewhere upon
less weighty Affairs. In the last place, all such as live imprudently, and
unbecoming the greatness of their Station and Employment, are not only deprived
of their Places, but also of their Liberties and Privileges for ever. The like
general Inquisition and Examination is made every twelfth Year amongst the
Rix-Councils, as also amongst the Military Officers.

Besides, the Mandorins and Assistants are obliged once a day to give an
Account to the Governor of their City, of their own and other Persons
Transactions under their Jurisdictions, as also what has past either in City or
Country; and if they forbear to give notice of any thing that tends to the
prejudice of the State, which afterward comes to be known, they are most
severely punished, without any delay, or respect of their Persons; an instance
whereof happened at Canton when we were there, the old Viceroy causing one of
the chief Mandorins to be killed in his Presence for such a Crime, and would
not delay the expiation of the Criminal's Offense by his Blood so long, till
the Executioner could be fetched to behead the Offender, according to the
Custom of the Country.

Fourthly, None may in the Province where he was born take upon him the Office
of a Magistrate, but is admitted to be a Field-Commander; the reason whereof
may be, lest he who sits in the Place of Justice should favor his Relations;
but the Soldier being at home in his own Country, will Fight pro Aris and
Focis, and the more valiantly defend it. The Sons of such as are Magistrates,
are not permitted to go much abroad, that so they may not be corrupted with
Bribes.

Fifthly, The Chinese will not suffer any Stranger to continue in their
Country, who has an intention to return home into his own native Soil, or is
found to hold any Correspondence with foreign Kingdoms; neither is a Foreiner
permitted to come into the heart of the Empire: And this is the cause that no
Stranger dares venture into China, otherwise than under the pretense of an
Embassy; which is not only to be understood of such as are far distant from
China, but also of their Friends, Allies, and Tributaries, who pay Taxes to
them; of which sort are the neighboring Islanders of Corea, who for the most
part observe the Chinese Laws; and if they discover a Foreiner to have lived
privately in China, they restrain him from returning into his own Country, upon
pain of death.

Sixthly, No body is suffered to wear any Arms within a City, nor the Soldiers
nor Commanders, nor the Learned Philosophers, unless they are upon the March,
and going to the Wars. Neither are any suffered to have Arms in their Houses,
or to ride Armed, otherwise than with a Dagger to defend themselves against
High-way-men.

In this Empire all Magisterial Officers whatever, whether Philosophical, or of
the Council of War, are ranked into nine Orders; according to which each has a
monthly Allowance paid him, either in Money or Rice out of the Public Revenue;
which in regard of the State and Garb they live in, is not sufficient to defray
the Charge and Expense they are at; for those of the highest Order, have but a
thousand Crowns yearly, yet some of them grow to be very rich Men, but
certainly not by what is given them underhand for Courtesies done,
notwithstanding all the Examinations aforesaid.

All the Magistrates, as well superior as inferior, wear for a Badge and Mark
of Respect and Dignity, one sort and fashion of Hat, which none else is
suffered to wear: These Hats or Bonnets are made of black Silk, and have on
both sides two oval Flaps which cover the Ears, and are made fast to the Bonnet
that they cannot fall off: In which manner and Garb when they appear in the
Streets, they walk with great gravity, not differing from each other in the
rest of their Habit, save only that they have distinguishing Marks upon their
Clothes, whereby their Qualities are known to the Inhabitants, and to what
Order they belong.

Lastly, you must know that the Chinese, though the Tartars have made
themselves Masters of this Empire, yet sit every where in the Councils; they
enjoy their old Laws, Customs, and Privileges as formerly; and it seems the
Tartars suffer this, in regard they find the Chinese have more understanding,
and are better versed in Governing the Country and People than themselves; who
on the other hand are fitter for War, and more able by force to Conquer, than
by Policy to Rule Kingdoms.

CHAP. II.
Of the Characters, Language, Writing, and Literature of the Chinese: And in
what manner the Learned in China arrive to the several Degrees of Knowledge.
THE Chinese manner of Writing differs very much from the Language they speak;
for there is not one Book in all China which is writ in their Mother Tongue.
All the Words in the Chinese Language, without exception, are Monasyllables:
neither have they fewer Letters than Words; for each Letter is with them a
Word: and though there be some Chinese Words which comprehend several Letters,
yet every one of those Letters signifies a particular Word.

And although the Chinese have as many Characters as Business, yet they are so
skilful in joining them, that they make about seventy or eighty thousand; but
about the certain number Writers seem to differ. The Jesuit Athanasius Kircher
reckons them eighty thousand, in all which they must be knowing and expert, who
will aim at the highest Degree of Learning; although any one that knows but ten
thousand of them, may perfectly understand the Language, and be able to write
their Characters. M. Martinus, in his Prologue to the History of China, says,
That the Chinese have above sixty thousand Characters, which have several
distinctions and significations. This is confirmed my Mandelslo in his Persian
Voyage, though others raise the number to One hundred and twenty thousand; and
which is worth observation, notwithstanding this almost infinite variety and
difficulty, yet such is their diligence and industry, that all these words are
found in a large Dictionary called Holpien, which signifies The Sea. Of this so
great difference in the number of the Chinese Letters no other reason can be
given, but that the original number has been increased from time to time.

For the better understanding the method of the Chinese Writing, I conceive it
not amiss to declare more plainly the form and difference of these their so
varying Characters.

And to that end and purpose, in the first place you are to take notice, That
the old Chinese Characters or Letters differ very much from those in present
use: for at first the Chinese uncharacterized their meaning in a kind of
hierogly phick shape, as of four-footed Beasts, creeping Creatures, Fishes,
Herbs, Boughs of Trees, Ropes, etc. which were variously made and contrived, as
the Fancy of the User thought meet: But after-Ages, by a long series of time,
and a constant practical use thereof, finding a great confusion in such a vast
number of differing Creatures and Herbs, imitating the form of some of the
Ancients in their Characters, made or added some little Points and Lines about
them, to distinguish them one from another, and by that means reduced them into
better order, and a less number, and those are the Letters they use at present.

Of the old Chinese Characters, there are to be seen seventeen sorts: The first
and most ancient was invented by the Emperor Tohias, and composed of Dragons
and Snakes, most strangely interwoven one within another, and cast into several
forms. For this reason the Book which the same Emperor Tohias writ of
Astrology, is called The Book of Dragons; but at this time those Characters are
quite worn out of use in the Country. The second sort is framed out of several
things belonging to Husbandry, and used by the Chinese Emperor Xinnung in all
Treatises concerning Tillage. The third sort consists of the several parts of
the Bird Fumhoan, and was invented by the Emperor Xanhoan, who has likewise
writ a particular Book of Birds in these Characters* The fourth sort of old
Characters is compiled out of Oysters, and small Worms. The fifth, of several
sorts of Roots of Herbs; and in this kind of form the ancient Chinese have
writ several Books. The sixth sort is drawn from the Claws of Cocks and Hens,
and other Fowl, and invented by King Choam. The seventh is composed of
Tortoise-shells, and had for their first Founder the Emperor Yoo. The eighth is
shown in small Birds and Parrots. The ninth* in Herbs and Birds. The tenth is
of Co, invented only for a token of remembrance. The eleventh is of Stars. The
twelfth, of several other Letters, serving for Privileges and Immunities. To
the thirteenth belong the Letters Yeu, Can, Chi, Cien, Tao. The Characters of
the fourteenth sort are called the Letters of Rest, Mirth, Knowledge, Darkness,
and Clearness. The fifteenth sort is of Fishes. The sixteenth sort is not yet
known to us in Europe, nor indeed to any besides themselves, and not to all
them neither. The seventeenth sort is used in sealing up of Letters, and
writing of Superscriptions.



That the Reader may more clearly understand the matter, I will set down some
of the old Characters, with those now in use.

As for Example, the Character numbered with the Figure 1. signified with the
ancient Chinese, a Mountain or Hill; at present as the number 2. does express.
The Sun was demonstrated formerly by a round Circle or Ring, with a Speck in
the middle, as the number 3. declares; but now it is expressed as in number 4.
A Dragon was formerly depicted with the Figure, as is expressed in number 5.
but now as it is by the Figure, number 6. A Scepter with one Eye, as is
expressed in number 7. signified formerly the King's Name, but now it is shown
with the Figure, as in number 8. A Bird, Hen, or Cock, were formerly expressed
in full shape and posture, as is mentioned in the numbers 9. and 11. but at
present those Creatures are described as in number 10. and 12.

But the Chinese at present use no more such Characters to express the form of
any such things, but only some certain Lines and Marks, which however different
in form, in some sort obscurely resemble the Characters of the Ancients, which
represented the shape of things. For a clearer demonstration of the Character
in use at present among the Chinese, I have thought good to insert one of the
Figures, marked with the Letter M.

Out of nine several Lines or Marks the Chinese Characters of these Times are
composed, so that by adding or omitting of one Line or Mark, another
signification properly arises; for example, a straight Line, as by the Figure a
upon the left side of this Print, signifies One, or The First; with a Line
drawn through it, as at b, denotes Ten; and with a Line underneath it, as at c,
it signifies Earth; with another put over the downright Line, as the Figure d,
it speaks King; with a Point on the right side, as by the Figure e, it
signifies A Pearl; but such a Point on the left side, as at Figure f, signifies
To Live; Lastly, with a Point upon the head of it, as at Figure g, it signifies
Lord.

Now though all the Subjects of the Empire use several Characters in their
Language, yet in speaking there seems to be little or no difference in them,
all their words sounding alike, notwithstanding the difference of form and
signification in Writing; and this is the reason that there is no Language
which has so many double-meaning words as the Chinese, being only distinguished
by some sound or expression in use amongst themselves. Out of the double
signification of these words there arises a great Inconvenience; for no Person
can transcribe any thing out of that Language which is read unto him, nor can
any Book be understood by hearing another read it, because the double meaning
and various sound of the words cannot be distinguished by the Ear, and are only
to be known by the sight, or not otherwise to be understood; so that it often
happens in common Discourse, that they are necessitated to put their Minds in
Writing, else one cannot understand the other what he means, though he speaks
very clear and plain. This double meaning is in some sort taken away by five
several sounds now in use, which yet are very hard to be distinguished; so that
many times very great mistakes happen between those that have not been used to
these sounds from the very Cradle. An Italian telling a Chinese, That in Europe
there were Ships to be seen as big as Mountains, he gave the word wherewith he
would have denoted A Ship, the same sound that expresses A Tyle upon the House.
The Chinese taking it according to the sound, seemed to admire very much his
Saying, and at length began to laugh at him, as though he had told them
incredible things; asking him withal, To what use they put a Tyle of such
bigness? and saying, That it must have been a very large Oven that could bake
such a Tyle. By which appears how necessary it is, and withal how infinitely
troublesome it is both to Strangers and Natives to learn these differences of
Sounds and Pronunciations, or to be ignorant of them. The Jesuits therefore who
are sent to propagate the Gospel in China, have found out five Points of five
Marks, which they put over every word, and thereby know how to express the
highness or lowness of the Sounds; which are as follow: (...) By the help of
these Marks must the same word which is written in our Letters, and marked with
these Marks, be severally pronounced, and then they intend several things. As
for Example, Y'a with this Mark over it signifies God; and with this Mark over
it, Ya, A Wall; and Ya with this Mark signifies Dumbness. Yet notwithstanding
all these Helps, the Chinese Language is very difficult to be learned and
understood, as well in regard of the double signification of the words, as also
because that in this Language there is no certain number of Letters, but every
Business and Intention of the Mind must be expressed by a particular Character;
which gives not only an infinite trouble to those that will learn it, but
causes a vast expense of time, taking up ten or twenty years before a man can
attain to the Art of speaking and writing this mysterious Language, wherein the
Natives themselves know far better how to express their Minds in writing, than
by speaking.

But in regard I have now spoken of the Character and Writing of the Chinese,
I will add in a few Words in what manner they place them: And herein they quite
differ from the Custom of Europe, and almost all other Nations. Hereof Peter
Iarcius thus, in his Treasury of Indian Things: The Chinese (says he) do not
write from the left hand to the right, as the Europeans; nor from the right to
the left, as the Hebreans: but they begin from the right side above, and write
down to the bottom; so that they put the one Character under the other, and not
one after another, as we in Europe: And when the Line is full from top to
bottom, then they begin again at the top of another Line, and by degrees go
down again to the bottom. And indeed (which is worth observation in this
Particular) the Chinese differ from all others, who absolutely write after
another manner; for at this day there are in all the known World but four
several ways of Writing, upon the Account of placing the Letters: The first is
from the right to the left side, and in this manner are written the Books of
the Hebreans, Chaldeans, Syrians, Arabians, and Egyptians. The second is from
the left to the right side; and after this manner the Greek and Latin Books are
writ, and so write at present all the People of Europe. The third sort of
Writing is in the Greek called Bustrophedon, which signifies to Plough with
Oxen; and this manner of Writing is done just as the Oxen make Furrows with the
Plow, namely, to begin the second Line where the first ended: This way of
Writing (as Pausanius relates) was used by the ancient Grecians; and so (as is
reported) were writ the Laws of Solon. The fourth and last way of Writing is
from the top to the bottom; and this manner of Writing, as has been said, the
Chinese use, and some of the Salvage Indians.

But although this manner of Writing (whereby each thing is expressed by a
particular Character) is very burdensome to the Memory, yet it is of very great
use and advantage to the People, who differ very much in Language from each
other; for hereby they are able to read the Books and Letters of each other (if
they use common Characters in Writing) though the one does in no wise
understand the other in speaking. And in this manner it is that those of Iapan,
Corea, Couchen-China, use one and the same Books, though they differ so very
much in the Pronunciation, that one cannot understand a Word the other says;
yet they bear the same sense to the understanding of the most indifferent
Reader, no otherwise skilled than in the vulgar Idiom of his Mother Tongue: And
which is yet more of wonder, that although the several Natives in the Empire of
China differ infinitely each from other in their several Dialects, so that
their varying of Languages makes them seem as Strangers among themselves, their
Tongues being useless Members to their Intelect; yet in their Books one General
Character is used, so that the same are equally intelligible throughout the
whole Empire.

Notwithstanding the great Confusion of Languages in the several Provinces, as
is before declared, there is yet through the whole Empire another Common
Tongue, by the Chinese called Quinhoa, which signifies The Court or Mandorin
Chinese; and this at first took its rise from the Magistrates, or Mandorins
residing in the respective Provinces, whereto they were sent with a
Superintendent Authority; for coming thither as Strangers, and esteeming it
below their Greatness to be necessitated to learn any other Tongue, this
C^urtly Mandorin Language was introduced through the whole Empire, wherein not
only all Affairs relating to the Laws are dispatched, but likewise all Persons
of Rank or Quality use the same; so that it is as common, and as much in use
with them, as Latin in Europe, or Lingua Franca among the Turks; and this is
the Language that Strangers, Merchants, and others learn, when they come into
those Parts.

This Court-speech, though it exceeds all the others for number of Letters, yet
it consists of no more than 362 Words; so that the shortness or conciseness of
this Courtly or more Modish manner of speaking, makes it flow so pleasantly
from the Tongue, that it passes for sweet Elocution, almost all other Languages
yet known: As for Example, When we will express the manner of taking a thing,
either with the whole Hand, or with one or two Fingers; we are enforced to add
the word Take; but the Chinese do express the same quite otherwise: for each
Substantive, as a Cup or Pot, signifies the thing to be done, as likewise the
manner of doing it. Thus Nien signifies to take with two Fingers, Tzo with one,
and Chua with the whole Hand. The same is likewise observed in the word Stand;
we say, To stand in the House, to stand Eating, to stand Sleeping; but they
have a Word which denotes the Infinitive Verb To Stand, and the manner of
standing. So likewise when we will express the Leg of a Man, or of a Bird, we
always add the same word Leg; but the Chinese express it all in one: for Kio
is a Man's Leg, Chua a Birds, and Thy the Foot of any Creature.

Amongst all the several noble Arts and Sciences wherewith the Europeans are
enobled, the Chinese have only some insight into that of Philosophy; for the
knowledge of natural things is much more obscured among them by several
interposed Errors, than any ways enlightened.

The greatest Philosopher of all that Nation, was one Confutius, born four
hundred and fifty one years before Christ's Incarnation, and lived in such a
manner for above seventy years, that not only by Example, but also by his
Writings and Conversation, he stirred up all others to imitate him in a
virtuous and orderly Course of Life; whereby he gained so great an Esteem
amongst the People, that they believed him to have far exceeded in Virtue,
Learning, and Integrity, all other Mortals that ever lived upon the face of the
Earth: And certainly, if his Works, which are extant in Chinese Books, were
minded with a due regard, Men must acknowledge him to have been a Person of
great Learning and Virtue: In respect whereof the Chinese have to this day so
great an opinion of his Name, that whatsoever he has writ is never called in
question, but by all maintained for good, having gained to it self the
authority of Ipse Dixit in the Schools. And not only the Learned, but the Kings
also have ever since his Death perpetuated his Memory, and recorded his Name in
their Annals, as a Reward of the Virtue and Learning they received from him:
And such of his Posterity as yet remain, are to this day highly respected by
all, and not without reason: for the Emperors of China have Enobled the Heirs
of the Family with great Titles of Honor, and exempted them from paying any
Public Taxes or Impositions.

Nor does the Knowledge of the Chinese end here; for they are great
Proficients, in the Art of Astrology, and in several other Arts and Sciences;
as also heretofore in that of Arithmetic, in the understanding whereof they
have of late years much decayed, insomuch that now the Shopkeepers use Boards
to tell upon, which are full of Holes; yet they are so ready at it, that with a
Peg they know how to cast up an Account with as much Method and Expedition, as
the most skilful European with Counters. In the division of the Hemisphere,
Stars, and Constellations therein, they differ very much from us of Europe,
having added to their number more than are known to the most critical of our
modern Astronomers. The Star-gazers are chiefly employed in prognosticating the
time of the Suns Eclipses, and to observe the various Course of the Planetary
Motions. But herein they are like themselves and Brethren in the same Art, full
of Errors and Mistakes; as also in their Astrological Observations, Calculating
of Nativities, Horary Questions, or the like; concerning good or bad Fortunes
in their Lives, as well as present Successes in their Emergent Occasions;
together with the Fruitfulness and Barrenness of the ensuing Year: for they
take it as a main Article of their Belief, That all things which happen here
upon Earth, depend upon the Influences of the Stars, and are directed and
ordered by the various Signatures of their several Configurations.

Of this Fortune-telling Part of the Art of Astrology, Trigautius the Jesuit
gives this following Account in his History of China.

The present Emperor of China has strictly forbidden this kind of Learning to
all but such who have a Right by Inheritance, or are otherwise appointed and
chosen thereunto: And this Prohibition at first sprung from fear lest any
having obtained to the exact knowledge of that Art, should by pretense thereof
have an opportunity to erect any Novelty in the Empire. Yet that the Art, and
the Masters of the same, may not seem to be utterly lost or neglected, the said
Emperor maintains several Star-gazers, at a very great Charge, for his own use;
and they are of two sorts, namely, the Celubden, who live within the King's
Palace, and the Imperial Magistrates, who live without. Both these have at
present at Peking two Benches, the one entitled The Bench of the Chinese,
which is employed about making of Almanacks and Prognostications, the Suns and
Moons Eclipses: The other is of the Saraceners, whose Studies tend to the same
things, and are Methodiz'd according to the Grounds and Rules of the Western
Astrology. After a time the Judgments of both these Benches are compared
together, and any difference or mistake of either, or both, is then rectified.
Both these Societies have a convenient Mansion provided for them, upon a very
high Hill, that they may the better view the Stars, and raise Observations from
the same. Several old Astrological Instruments, made of Copper or Brass, are
kept in this Place: Every Night one of the Profession remains here, to observe
whether any new Star appear in the Firmament, which might foretell some
Novelty; and if any such thing happen, he immediately gives notice thereof to
the Society, and they communicate the same to the Emperor, and consult with him
what it may p^rtend, and how relate to good or evil. And this is the Office or
Duty of the Astrologers at Peking.

As to Physic and Surgery, they are very expert therein, and their Rules of
Art differ not much from those of our European Physicians: for first, they feel
the Pulse like them, and are very skilful in discovering by the same the inward
Distempers of the Body: in each Hand they take notice of six distinct beatings
of the same, namely, three high, and three low, which, as they conceive, have
some secret Coherences with certain Parts of the Body; as that of the first, to
the Heart; of the second, to the Liver; of the the third, to the Stomach; of
the fourth, to the Spleen; of the fifth, to the Reins, etc. And therefore that
they may with the greater certainty of Judgment deliver their Opinions, they
are at least half an hour in feeling the Pulse of the sick Person.

When by the Pulse they have found out the Distemper, then in order to the
curing of the Patient, they apply and make use of several Simples and Roots; to
say the truth, they are generally very well experienced in the knowledge of the
several Virtues of all kinds of Herbs growing among them. And this is
observable, that there are no Schools in all China for the learning of Physic,
but every Master of Family teaches his Servant. And true it is, that although
in both the Imperial Cities of Peking and Nanking, the Degree of Doctor of
Physic is not granted but after Examination; yet this Degree, when obtained,
does advance neither the Honor or Respect of the Person. And for this reason it
is probable, that few or none Study Physic but the meaner sort of People,
because the very Profession thereof (which is so honorable in other Places) is
there is no esteem, nor adds the least Reputation to him that gains it.

But it is quite otherwise with such as Study Philosophy; for whosoever has
attained to the Perfection thereof, is by them accounted to have arrived at the
highest pitch of humane Happiness attainable in this World.

The abovementioned Confutius, the Prince of the Chinese Philosophers, has
collected into order all the Writings of the Ancients in that kind, and
contracted them into four great Books, to which he added a fifth of his own: In
which Volumes are taught Rules Oeconomical and Political, as well the way to
Live as to Govern well; as also the ancient Examples, Manners, Offerings, and
several Poems of ancient Authors. But beside these five, there is another great
Volume writ by some of the Disciples of Confutius, and is divided into four
Parts, and called The Four Books. The last Volume, thus subdivided, treats of
the same Subject with those other five: And these nine Books are all that are
to be found in China amongst the Booksellers, out of which all others are
composed: And certainly therein are contained most excellent Rules and
Directions for the well ordering of all Civil Affairs, and such as have proved
to the very great advantage of the Empire of China. For which cause a Law was
made by the ancient Kings, That whosoever would be a Learned Man, or so
reputed, must extract the principal Groundwork of his Learning from these
Books: Nor is it enough to understand the true meaning and sense of the same;
but he must likewise get them by heart, and be able to repeat a considerable
part thereof, if he will be thought to have arrived at an eminent pitch of
Learning.

There are no Public Schools in all China (though some Writers have
erroneously told us the contrary) but every Person chooses his own Master, by
whom he is taught in his House, at his own Charge. And in regard of the great
difficulty in Teaching the Chinese Characters, in respect of their vast number
and variety, it is impossible for one to teach many several Persons; and
therefore every Master of a Family takes an Instructor into his House, for his
Children, of whom, if there be two or three to learn, they are as many as one
Tutor can well teach.

All such as are found upon Examination to have made good Progress in
Philosophy, arise to Promotions by three Degrees of Learning: The first is
called Sieucai, the second Kiugin, the third Cinfu.

The first Degree of Learning, called Sieucai, is given in every City by a
certain Eminent Learned Person, appointed by the Emperor for that purpose, and
according to his Office bears the Name of Tihio. This Tihio goes a Circuit
through all the Towns of his Province, on purpose to Promote Learned Men to
this Degree: As soon as he is come into any City, he makes known his arrival,
whereupon all such as stand for this Preferment address themselves unto him to
be examined; and if he find them qualified, he immediately prefers them to this
first Step of Learning: and that their Worth may be taken notice of, for a
particular Badge of their Dignity they wear a Gown, Bonnet, and Boots, in which
Habit none are permitted to go, but such as are in this manner become
Graduates. They enjoy likewise several Honorable Privileges and Immunities, and
are preferred to considerable Employments in the Government.

The second Degree of Honor to which the Learned Chinese are preferred, is
called Kiugin, which is given with much more State than the former, and is
conferred only upon such as they judge to be most deserving; and this Promotion
is made but once in three years, and performed after this manner:

In each Capital City is a great and well built Palace, encompassed with high
Walls, and set apart only for the Examination of the Scholars. In this Place
are several Apartments and Mansions for the use of Examiners, when they come to
Supervise the Scholars Works. Beside these Apartments, there are at least a
thousand Cells in the middle of the Palace, but so small, that they will only
contain only one Person, a little Table, and a Bench: In these no one can speak
to his Neighbor, nor be seen by him.

When the King's Examiners are arrived in the City, they are locked up apart in
this Palace, and not suffered to Discourse with any whatsoever while they are
there. When the time of Examination is come, to which are appointed three whole
days, namely, the ninth, twelfth, and fifteenth Days of the eighth Month; then
are the Writings of the Scholars with great Judgment narrowly Examined, and
several Questions propounded to be resolved by them.

The third Degree is called Cinsu, and is equal with that of Doctor of
Divinity, Law, or Physic in Europe; and this is conferred likewise every third
year, and to them only in the Imperial City of Peking. To this Honor can only
three hundred out of the whole Empire arrive, and the Examination of them
before they are chosen, is performed by the King's Examiners in the same Method
and State as the former. And such as attain to this height of Honor by their
Learning, are preferred to the highest Places of Dignity in the Empire, and are
had in great Esteem and Reputation by the People.

CHAP. III.
Of several Chinese Handicraft-Trades, Comedians, Iuglers, and Beggars.
THe Chinese are not altogether without some Experience and Skill in
Architecture, although for neatness and polite Curiosity, their Building is not
to be compared with that in Europe; neither are their Edifices so costly or
durable, in regard they proportion their Houses to the shortness of Life,
building as they say, for themselves, not for others: And this surely is one
reason why the Chinese cannot comprehend nor imagine the costly and Princely
Palaces which are in Europe; and when they have been told, that some of the
said Edifices have stood for many Ages, they seem as it were amazed thereat:
But if they considered the true Reasons of such continuance, they would rather
applaud and imitate, than wonder; for that which makes our Building last so
long, is, because we make deep Foundations; whereas in China they dig no
Foundations at all, but lay the Stones even with the surface of the Ground,
upon which they build high and heavy Towers; and by this means they soon decay,
and require daily Reparations: Neither is this all; for the Houses in China are
for the most part built of Wood, or rest upon wooden Pillars; yet they are
covered with Tyles, as in Europe, and are contrived commodiously within, though
not beautiful to the Eye without; however, by the curiosity of the People, they
are kept very clean and neat.

Their Temples are most curiously built, some whereof in solitary places near
the Highways, to the great accommodation of Travelers. They are hung full of
Images, and heavy Lamps, which burn continually, in memory of one or other that
lived well, and died happily.

These People have made no small progress in several Sciences, by their early
being acquainted with the Art of Printing: for though those of Europe do
therein exceed the Chinese, having reduced the same to more exactness and
certain Method; yet says Trigautius, in the fourth Chapter of his first Book,
The use of the Printing-Press was much sooner in China than in Europe; for it
is most certain, that the same has been in use amongst the Chinese for five
Ages past; nay, some stick not to affirm, that they used Printing before the
Birth of Christ. Mercator, in his great Atlas writes, That the Printing-Press,
and the use of Cannon, are of so great Antiquity in China, that it is not known
who was the Inventor of them. All which, if it were taken for granted, yet
nevertheless they are too large in saying, That That Printing has been used by
them ever since their Country has been called the Empire or Kingdom of China.
But how ancient soever it is, they use quite another manner and method therein
than the Europeans: for in regard of the great number of Characters, they are
enforced to cut them upon a smooth Board, made of Pear Tree or Apple Tree. Upon
this Board they paste the Writing that is to be Printed, scraping the Paper so
long when it is dry, till the Characters, by reason of the thinness, begin to
appear through; and last of all, they bore the Board with an Iron, that only
the strokes of the Characters are left standing: This done, they Print with
this Board the Writing, which stands already Engraven upon it, upon other clean
Sheets, but with so much ease and quickness, that one Man is able to Print five
thousand Sheets in a day; and in the boring of the Boards they are so dextrous,
that they will cut out one almost as soon as an European Compositor can make
ready a Form to the Press. This manner of Printing is much more commodious for
the Chinese Characters than for ours, theirs being great in substance and form,
our Letters small, and consequently unfit to cut upon a Board.

Neither does this Peoples Ingenuity end here, but dives into the quaint
Fancies of the Painter's Art, arriving sometimes to great skill in Painting of
Pictures; only herein they fall very much short of those who use that Art in
these Parts, in regard they neither understand the making of Shadows, no^ have
learned to temper their Colors with Oil. This is the reason why all their
Pictures look so dull and dead, resembling rather inanimate Bodies, than lively
Images; and yet they have as good Colors in that Country, as in any other part
of the World, wherewith they depict all sorts of Birds and Herbs to the life.

They have also some little insight and skill in the Art of Carving or Graving
of Images, and in Casting of Copper into the Portraicture of Birds, and all
manner of other Creatures, with which they adorn the Cielings of their Houses;
their Temples are likewise beautified with Images of Copper, or other Pieces of
Carved or Engraved Works. Their Bells, which for the most part are made of
Brass, have wooden Clappers; for they cannot bear the striking of an Iron one,
by reason of their brittleness; so that for sound, they fall infinitely short
of the European Tuneableness. Why these People, who are ingenious and witty
enough in other things, are so dull and unexperienced in these, proceeds in all
probability from their general averseness to deal with Foreigners; it being a
Rule among them, to prohibit them entrance into their Country, at leastwise not
to admit them farther then Frontires.

Several sorts of Musical Instruments are to be seen in China, the most whereof
are loud Music or Wind Instruments, to all which they use Snares made of Raw
Silk; but they have neither Organs nor Harpsechords, nor any other the like
Instruments, though there be some that have a great resemblance of our
Virginals in Europe.



Their Vocal music consists of one Note and Tone as it were; for they know not
how to alter or raise their Voices higher or lower, nor is it in use amongst
them; notwithstanding which, they brag very much of their sweet Voices; which
happly to their Ears, accustomed thereto, may seem pleasant; but sure I am, to
ours they are both harsh and untunable.

They have very few Dyals, or Iustruments to show the Hour of the Day; and such
as they have, are made to operate by the means of Water or Fire: Those which
show the Hour with Water, bear a kind of resemblance to some great Hour-glasses
for their shape; but such as show the Hour by means of Fire, are made of
perfumed Ashes. They have some other kinds of Instruments amongst them, to know
the Hour of the Day by, somewhat like our Clocks with Wheels; and they are made
to turn with Sand, as Wheels of Mills with Water; but they are not to be
compared to our Clocks in Europe, for they seldom go true. Some inkling they
seem to have of Sun-Dials; but they are ignorant, and desire not to be informed
in the use of them.

They are very much addicted to Shows and Stage Plays; and herein only do they
exceed those of Europe. Their Comedians are for the most part young and active,
and very numerous throughout the whole Empire; some of them travel from Place
to Place, and others resort to the Chiefest Cities and Towns, to be employed at
Weddings, and other great and solemn Entertainments.

The Comedies which they Act are either Satirical or Comical; but true
Relations of the present Times, or new Inventions of their own Fancies, to make
the People merry: and the greatest part of them boast Antiquity; for although
it be facile inventis addere, yet they seldom add to, or refine what is old,
much less invent any thing new. And by this means they are always in a
readiness to act their Plays, whenever, or how often soever they are desired by
any Company; for the better satisfaction of whom, they always carry about them
a Book, wherein the Names of their Plays are written, of which, when they are
called out by any Persons, which frequently happens at times of Public
Feasting, they Play all the while Dinner lasts, which is sometimes seven or
eight Hours, in which time their manner of Acting is such, that nothing therein
proves tedious to the Company; the cause whereof may seem to be, for that one
Play is no sooner done, but they begin another; all their Actions being
various, attended with their Singing Parts, and using strange expressions to
amuse the People.

There are likewise a great number of Iuglers and Hocus-Pocusses, who are very
dexterous in their way: Some of them have Rats and Mice in a Cage, fastened to a
Chain, which they have taught to Dance in several Postures: Others thrust
Threads into their Eyes, and pull them out at their Noses. One I saw creep into
a narrow Basket, while his Camerade ran thereat with his Sword so fiercely,
that he pierced it through; whereupon the Blood ran down, as if the Fellow
therein had been wounded in several Places; but immediately coming forth, it
was evident he had received no hurt at all.

The People of China are great Lovers of Seals and Coats of Arms, wherewith
they not only Seal their Letters, but make Impressions upon all manner of
Writings, Verses, Pictures, and other things. But upon these Seals is no
Device, as among the Gentry and Nobility of Europe, neither any thing besides
the Name, Surname, Degree, and Quality of the Proprietor; and to make the
Impression, they neither use Wax, nor any thing like it, but only color it
with a certain red Paint; to which end the chief Persons in China have a Box of
these Seals always standing upon a Table, upon which are Engraven several
Names, every Chinese appropriating to himself diverse Denominations. These
Sigils or Signets are either Engraven in the best and richest sort of Wood, or
else in Marble, Ebony, Copper, Crystal, or the like; for the performing
thereof, there are several Engravers very skilful in this Art, who are much
respected by the People among whom they carry the repute of Learned Men.

There are not in this Country any swarming of Writers; but such as do write
are esteemed Artists of the best qualification. Their Ink is made of certain
hard Cakes, which when they will make use of, they rub upon a smooth Marble
Stone, with a few drops of Water, till the Color comes off, into which they
dip their writing Pencils, being made of Hair, and fairly appropriated to the
writing of the Chinese Characters; and the making of these Pencils, but
especially of the Ink, is amongst all there reputed a particular and ingenious
Calling.



Other Handicraft-Trades there are in China, among which the Fan-maker is not
of least use and credit. These Fans are of such general use to cool the Face in
the heat of Summer, that no Person, of what Degree soever, goes abroad without
them: And of these there are several sorts, some being made of Reed or Wood,
others of Ivory, Ebony, Silk, Paper, or perfumed Straw; nor is their variety
greater in substance, than their difference in fashion; for some are round,
others apiece, etc: Such as are worn by the Grandees, are made of white
Paper gilt, to open and shut at pleasure; with one of which it is customary
among them to Present each other, as a token of Love and Friendship. These
Fan-makers also as aforesaid, are employed much in the making of Quittesoles,
which are a kind of folding Canopies; carried over the Heads of the Grandees by
their Servants, being made of the same Stuff with Fans, and Lined with Silk or
Linen.

The Ruffians Travel through all parts of the Country with Women in their
Companies, and where by chance they find any handsome young Maids amongst the
common sort of People, they use all art and means to entice them away, neither
sparing Money or good Words; whom if they prevail upon to follow them, they
afterward teach to Dance and Sing, so making them fitter for the Entertainment
of their Hectoring Blades, and wild Gallants. When they are thus instructed,
the Male-Bawds endeavor to sell them, either to the Grandees outright, or else
to prostitute them for Money for a certain number of days, which turns to a
considerable advantage; for every of these Brokers for impudence, have several
Women that belong unto them, according as their ability is able to afford them
a Maintenance: They seldom stay long in a Place, but go from Town to Town, and
there residing longest where they can meet with the best Markets. Whosoever
hires one of these Women for a Nights Lodging, must receive her in the public
manner hereafter described, viz. She is set upon an Ass, and so conducted with
a Hood over her Face to the House of him that sent for her; and when she is
come to his House, she casts aside her Hood, and then he receives and conducts
her into the House.

The Beggars here are generally not only bold, but troublesome; for they ask
with great importunity, yea, and often times threaten such as refuse to give
them: They are for the most part very ill featured and misshapen Creatures,
for not one of hundred but is mangled or deformed in some part of his Body;
whereof the Natives give this reason: That these Lazars take their Children in
their Infancy, and break their Arms and Legs, or otherwise deform them, that so
they may grow up in a misshapen form, on purpose to become fit to be bred up
in their way of Begging. Besides these enforced Deformities* they are many
times full of running Sores, that the very sight of them is enough to breed a
loathing in the most settled Stomach: And all this misery is done and suffered
by them on purpose, to stir up some pity and commiseration in such as pass by.
Some there are that appear outwardly sound of Body; but such use another Art in
Begging, which is, to knock their Heads together like distracted Persons, so
that Spectators would believe that their Brains were ready to fly out, or
themselves to fall down dead on the Ground; for such is their customary Humor,
that they will never cease beating till they have prevailed with you to bestow
something upon them. There is likewise another sort, who in stead of knocking
their Heads together, as aforesaid, strike their Foreheads so hard upon a round
Stone four Fingers thick, which lies upon the Ground, that it makes the Earth
seem to rebound with the blows; by means whereof many of them have contracted
such terrible Swellings upon their Foreheads, that they can never be cured of
them.

In the Yellow River a certain Armorer showed himself to us, coming Abroad our
Barque from a small Chinese Boat called Tsiapam, which is an open Boat, flat
before, and with a little Mast in the middle. This Armorer sat quite naked,
only a Cloth covered his Privities, and drivell'd like a Man possessed with
some evil Spirit; and to make himself appear the more dreadful, he had run a
sharp Dart through one of his Cheeks, which made him look with a Countenance
full of terror. He carried likewise two sharp Darts in his Hands, wherewith he
threatened either to wound or kill himself if nothing was given him. Next to him
sat one of the Country Priests, who had a Book in his Hand, wherein he said
every Person that gave him something was to write his Name; but the
Ambassador's refused so to do. There were some Tartars with us, who all
appeared to be afraid; but some of them were so very much frighted, that their
Hair stood an end at the sight of such an extraordinary mad Creature; and
(whether out of fear or folly it matters not) they gave him several Presents,
that they might have good Weather, and a speedy and safe Passage: at which
simplicity of the Barbarians some of our Company could not forbear laughing,
and departed away without giving him any thing, saying, That they feared God,
but not the Devil; and would have nothing to do with his Adherents.

There is also another sort of Beggars here, who set fire to a combustible kind
of Stuff upon their Heads, which they suffer to burn there with such excessive
pain and torment, till they have extorted some Charity from the transient
Company with their howling and crying, enduring very great misery all that
while.

And lastly, Upon every public Market Day there are to be seen whole Troops of
blind Beggars in the several Cities and Towns, who beat themselves upon their
naked Breasts most furiously with great round Stones, till the very Blood drops
from them.

Besides what is mentioned before, there are several other Trades in China, as
the Baking of Porcelane, or China-Ware; the Gumming and Painting of Chests,
Trunks, and Boxes; as also the Weaving of Carpents, Damasks, Cottons, and
several other Stuffs, which I have thought fit to omit in this Chapter: First,
in regard the same are already mentioned in the first part of our Relation; and
also because the Chinese do so infinitely abound in all manner of Arts and
Handicraft-Trades, that it would take up too much time to give a particular
Account of the whole.

But notwithstanding this abundance of Trades in China, a great Defect and
Abuse is observed in most of the Commodities which are made there, and it is
this, that they only appear and seem fair to the Eye, but are really for the
most part very slight; and for this cause they may well be afforded much
cheaper to the Merchant.

CHAP. IV.
Of some strange Customs, Fashions, and Manners, in use amongst the Chinese.
THE ancient Chinese, called their Kingdom or Empire in old Times by the Name
of Courtesy or Civility, and other known Manners; yea, and which is more,
Civility or Courtesy is held with them for one of the five principal Virtues;
amongst which, as chief, all others are comprehended. The nature of this Virtue
consists, as they say, in the showing of mutual respect: Now to be complete
herein, and to be Masters of Ceremony, they spend no small time to accomplish
themselves; yet some of them of a higher Speculation, viewing humane
Vicissitudes, lament themselves that they cannot reject and shun these
Complemental Formalities, although they do therein far exceed those of Europe.
Wherefore in this Chapter I shall show in what manner they Salute one another
when they meet, and afterward Treat of some other Manners and Customs in use
amongst them, wherein they differ from others, or amongst themselves.

It is held for no point of Civility amongst the Chinese to take off the Hat,
or to make Legs, as it is usually termed, much le^s to embrace any Person, or
kiss his Hand, or make any outward show of Complement. The most general and
common way with them of showing Civility, is done after this manner: They carry
their Hands when they walk (unless they are to Fan themselves, or otherwise to
use them) always folded together in the Sleeve of their upper Garment, which is
made for that purpose; so that when they meet, they raise their Hands on high
in the Sleeve with great Devotion, and then let them fall again after the same
manner, Greeting each other with the word Cin, which signifies Nothing.

When one comes to visit another, or if two Friends meet in the Street, they
bow (with their Hands in their Sleeves all the while) the whole Body, and their
Heads three times to the Ground; and this manner of Salutation is called Zoye.
In the performing of which Ceremony the Inferior always gives place to his
Better, and the Party visited gives the upper Hand to him that makes the Visit:
But in the Northern Parts of China the Visitant is placed on the left hand:
Oftentimes also, after they have done bowing, they exchange Places, and go off
from the left to the right hand, and from the right to the left; which is done
for this reason, that so the Party that is received in the highest Place should
show some Respect to the other again. When this Ceremony happens to be in the
Street, both Parties turn themselves side to side toward the North, and within
Doors to the upper end of the Hall; for it is an old Custom amongst them, to
lay the Threshold of the Palaces, Temples and other Edifices, to the South; so
that in regard this Ceremony is performed in the Hall next to the Threshold,
they turn their Faces to the upper end, and and then they look toward the
North. If so be both Parties meeting or visiting have not seen one another in a
long time, or perhaps never before, and have a desire to bestow extraordinary
Civilities upon each other, then after performance of the first Ceremony, they
fall upon their Knees, touching the Ground with their Foreheads; and this they
do three times together. But when this Civility is to be shown by an Inferior
to a Superior, a Child to his Parent, or a Subject to his Prince, he receives
the Honor done unto him either sitting or standing, and only bowling a little
when the other falls upon his Knees. With the same, and no greater Reverence
and Honor they pay their Religious Duties to their Gods and Images, as well at
home in their Houses, as in their Churches before the Altars. Moreover, if a
Master speak to his Servant, he stands next to him; but when he gives an
Answer, he falls upon his Knees.

They use likewise several particular Forms and Methods both in Writing and
Speaking: for in Speech they never use the second Person Thou; neither when
they speak of themselves must they ever use their Proper Names, unless the
Master speaks to his Servant, or a Superior to his Inferior. In their Discourse
with their Betters they have several forms of Speech, by which, together with
their submiss Behavior, the Reverence they give them is known: Amongst which
the courtly and polite modish way of Speaking, is never to mention himself but
in the third Person, as not I, but He, or Such a one; whereas we in Europe use
the word I, or Pronoun in the first Person: and whatever a Man's Reputation may
otherwise be, yet he is never thought, or thinks himself to have attained the
Pinacles of Honor, wanting the most accurate ways both of Speaking and Writing.

When any makes a Visit, the Party visited is obliged in convenient times to
make a return of the like Civility, modo and forma. Also when they send
Presents, (which is very frequent) they write them down in a Book, with the
Name of him to whom they are Presented, which are either received, or civilly
sent back with a Complement: And if they are accepted, he Enters their Receipt
likewise, and makes a Return accordingly, which he also Registers. It is also
very common there for Presents to be made in Money, though not so usual with us
in Europe.

Such as are preferred to any Place in the Magistracy, or have attained to be
Learned in the several Arts and Sciences, put on distinct Habits when they go a
Visiting, each according to his Place and Degree; and hereby he is known,
although it differs not much from his daily Habit. And according to this Order,
such as are not Learned, nor of the Magistracy, but yet are Persons of Quality,
put on a distinct Habit when they make Visits, which however differing little
from the ordinary Garb, is satisfactory to him that is visited, whereas the
contrary is ill resented. And for this reason the Jesuits in those Parts, in
point of prudence, Habit themselves in other than their common Vestments, when
they are to Confer with the Grandees about any Affairs.

If several Persons are visited in one House, the chief among them places the
Chairs in the best part of the Room, wiping the Dust off with his Hand, though
made never so clean before; then he invites his Friends that came to see him to
sit down, and taking a Chair (seeming to wipe off the Dust) seats himself: The
Visitors being thus placed, presently after comes one of the Household Servants
in a long Gown, bearing in his Hand a very next Board, filled with Cups of Cia,
or Liquor made of Beans (of which I have already made mention) in each a piece
of Biscuit, and a little Silver Spoon, lying by as a Nicety. The Servant
Presents to each his Cup, but to him first that sits uppermost, and so going
till he comes at last to his Master, who sits at the lower end of the Room, and
then exits: If they continue any time together, the Servant returns and fills
the Cups the second, third, and fourth time, and a fresh piece of Biscuit is put
every time into each Cup.

The Entertainment being in this manner ended, they take leave of each other
after the usual manner, with bowing and lifting up of Hands, and being attended
by the Master of the House to the Door, there again they bid farewell, for the
last time, after the same manner: And now upon their departure the Master is
very importunate with them to see them in their Chairs, or on Horseback, as
they came; but they civilly excuse it, and desire him to return into his House:
Hereupon he goes back to the Threshold, and there again bows and lifts up his
Hands, to which the Guests make a suitable Return; and thus they part, without
any other kind of Complement or Ceremony: It may be as they are riding away he
will suddenly come again to the Door, and perform the last Complement, in using
the word Cin, putting up his Hands on high, and then down again; in all which
Actions the same Return is made by the Guests, who, notwithstanding these
Formalities of Courtesy, make no stop nor halt by the Way: Last of all, he
sends his Servant to see how they got home, and to Salute them in his Name; and
this is likewise done by the Guests, who send their Servants to return him
Thanks.

Thus far we have treated after what manner the Chinese Salute, Visit, and
sends Presents to each other. Now we will speak of their more solemn
Entertainments, wherein they are much concerned; for they dispatch most of
their Business and Transactions at Feastings and Topings, (not only such as
live a well ordered and more private Life, but the very Priests themselves) and
count the greatness of the Friendship, by the value of the Entertainment of
their Friends; and these indeed may rather and more truly be styled Drinking.
Meals, according to the ancient Custom of the Greeks, than Eating-Meals; for
though they sip but a little at a time, yet they sip often, and that for
several Hours together.

They neither use Spoons, Forks, nor Knives at their Meat, but round Sticks
about half a Foot long, like our Drum-sticks, wherewith they are very dexterous
to take up Meat, and put it into their Mouths, without once touching it with
their Fingers. These Sticks are made of Ebony, or other hard Wood, and tipp'd
at the end with Gold or Silver. But here you are to take notice, that all forts
of Flesh are brought to the Table hasht, cut in small pieces. They drink their
Liquors, which are generally made of Beans, Zia, or Water, boiling hot in the
heat of Summer, Wine only excepted, which is drunk as it is naturally: and they
find by experience, that such hot Liquors are very good and comfortable for the
Stomach, being very great Cordials, and much strengthening the inward Parts;
and to these Means they attribute their long Lives and Healths, being very
brisk and lively at seventy or eighty years of Age. And indeed by this means I
conceive the Chinese are preserved from the Stone in the Bladder, wherewith a
very great part of the People of Europe are very much afflicted, and which
diverse Learned Men have believed to proceed from no other Cause than their
continual drinking of cool Drink.

When any Person is invited to a great Entertainment, the Inviter sends to his
Guest, two or three days before, a Book, wherein is contained, beside the
Inviter's own Name, the usual Form of Salutation in few words; then is
declared, That he is preparing a Feast of green Herbs, and has rinsed his Bowls
to Entertain them at such a Time and Hour, which commonly is in the Night; and
therefore does entreat him to do him the favor to give him a Meeting. On the
outside of the same Schedule is fixed a piece of red Paper, upon which is
written the chiefest Names or Attributes of the Guests, (for, as we said before
every Chinese has several Denominations) with their Titles and Dignities; and
in the same manner is ever individual Person invited. In the Morning of the
Feast Day the Guests are again all sent to, with a further Entreaty, not to
fail to meet him at the time appointed. Lastly, an hour before the
Entertainment he sends the third time, which (as they say) is only done out of
civility, to conduct the Guests to his House: whereinto being received, and
having performed the usual Complements of Salutation, they are requested to sit
down in the first Hall, where they are Entertained with the Bean-Liquor, or
Cia; that performed, they are conducted into the principal Room of
Entertainment, which is richly adorned and furnished, not with Carpets, as
among those of the East, (for they are not in use here) but with Pictures,
Flowers, Dishes, and the like Household Stuff: Each Guest is seated apart at a
apiece Table, well furnished with Dishes upon Chairs, laid over with Gold
in a most rich manner, in several Shapes and Figures. Before they sit down, the
Master of the House takes a Bowl in his Hand of Gold or Silver, filled with
Wine, and Salutes therewith those that are to sit uppermost, in the usual
manner of bowing and holding up his Hands; which done, he goes out into the
Courtyard, where first bowing, he offers up the Bowl, with his Face turned to
the South, and pours out the Wine as a Libation upon the Ground: then bowing
the second time, he returns into the Dining Room, takes another Bowl, and
Salutes him that is to sit at the upper end, bowing to him but once only, and
then leading him by the Hand, places him at the Table which stands in the
middle of the Room; then invites the rest to sit down after the same manner:
When all the Company is seated, the chief Guest receives a Bowl full of Wine
from the Servant of the House, and drinks to the rest of the Guests, and to the
Master of the Feast; whereupon they all bow in manner as aforesaid. And here
observe, That the Table of the Inviter stands in the lowest part of the Hall;
but with his Face he looks upon the chiefest Table, where he sits that is
accounted the prime Guest of the Feast.

And in regard the Chinese do not touch the Meat with their Fingers, they
neither wash their Hands either before or after Dinner. During the Repast, the
Master of the House often calls for a Bowl of Wine, and drinking thereof,
invites his Guests to pledge him, who likewise call for Wine to do him reason
at the same time. They make several small Draughts before they empty their
Cups, after the manner of Drinking in Holland; and this is duly observed, as
well when they drink Water as Wine; for whatever the Liquor be, they do but sip
it off by degrees, never Potations, as we say Pottle-deep.

Whilst the first Glass is passing about, Meat is brought to the Table; then
the Master of the Feast performing the usual Ceremonies of bowing and putting
his Sticks into the Dish, they all begin to fall to, and take two or three bits
of a Dish, being the most they eat of one: all the Company hold their Sticks in
their Hands till the chief Guest has first laid down his, and when that is
done, the Servants fill into every ones Bowl fresh Wine; then they all drink,
having first bowed to one another. The greatest part of the time they squander
away rather in drinking than eating; and so long as the Meal lasts, which is
generally protracted to a great length, they use no other than merry
Discourses, or else have Plays or Music to exhilarate and revive their Spirits.

At these Feasts the Tables are generally furnished with such Meats as are
eaten in Europe; and though they cannot Cook them with European Curiosity, yet
they know how to dress them to please the Palate: neither are the Dishes
crammed full, but of each sort a Modicum is only brought to the Table; so that
the Magnificence of a Feast in China consists in the multiplicity and manner of
Dishes of several sorts, with which they always fill the Table.

The Epicurean fashion of dressing Fish and Flesh at a Meal, is in use with
them, as in Europe; but herein they greatly differ, for after once a Dish of
Meat is brought to the Table, it is not taken away till the Dinner is ended, so
that they pile up the Dishes one upon another, that the Table in a manner
resembles a Castle. No Bread is set before the Guests at these great Feasts,
nor Rice, which they use in stead of Bread, only at some ordinary Dinners
perhaps they do, but then it is only at the end of the Meal; and if at any time
Rice is brought to the Table, they eat of that before they drink any Wine.
Neither are their Feasts lengthned out only by Eating and Drinking, for the
Guests play at several Games, whereat whosoever loses, is obliged to drink. And
this Custom is observed with so great delight by the whole Company, that they
laugh and clap their Hands for joy.

After the Treatment is ended, they generally ply the Bowls with Wine; yet no
Person is forced to drink more than he pleases: and though all their Cups are
equal in bigness, they never pressingly urge one another to Pledge. The Wine
they drink is Brewed or Boiled as our Beer, but is not at all heady; yet
nevertheless, such as drink too great a quantity of it, will find its strength
so operate upon them, that here and there one may be heard of that has been
drunk with this Wine, which has one good quality, sufficient to encourage
Ebriety, that it does not make the Head ache the next Morning, like the Wine of
Europe. Notwithstanding all that has hitherto been said, these People are very
moderate in eating; for they always rise from the Table with an Appetite, so
that is no marvel why they eat so often, as five or six times a day: but they
never eat of the same Dish a second time, whatever is left being given to the
Servants.

Most of these great Invitations or Feastings are made in the Night, and
continue very frequently till late next Morning.

The ordinary or daily Meals are made by the Chinese very early; for they have
an Opinion, That if they should fast till Noon, some Misfortune would befall
them that day. They are not curious in their Diet; for they eat all manner of
Flesh without difference, as well that of a Horse, as of an Ox. They are great
Lovers of Swines Flesh, which they praise as the most delicious of any, and
prefer before all other Meat: But the more ordinary sort of People will feed
upon any Carrion, either of a Horse, Mule, Ass, Dog, or any other Creature.
They are likewise greatly delighted with dried Sweetmeats, which they know
very well how to order. The Mandorins have always Comedians to Act, and Music
to Play, whilst they are at Dinner, to excite them to cheerfulness.

Their ordinary Drink is Hot Water, wherein Thea has been steeped, which (as
they do all other Liquors) they sip off warm. But the best of their Liquors is
that which they call Cia, and is made after this manner: They take half a
handful of the Herb Cha, and boil it in Spring Water; when it is well boiled,
they put to it four times as much New Milk, with a little Salt. This Liquor
drunk warm, as they generally believe, has more virtue than the Philosophers
Stone.

As to the rest of their Civilities, Manners, and Fashions, they consist
chiefly in the Honor, Duty, and Obedience which is shown to the Emperor: and
that is extraordinary; for he is Obeyed, Honored, and Served more than any
Spiritual or Temporal Prince in the whole World beside. No Person, of what
Condition or Quality soever, may speak to him, but only the Gelubden, who wait
upon him in his Chamber in the Palace, and his nearest Kindred, as his Sons and
Daughters that live with him in the same Palace. All the Magistrates without
the Palace (for the Gelubden have their Degrees of Orders and Preferment) are
only to speak to the King in Writing, in the manner of a Petition, wherein
their Desires are set forth with the most humble Expressions imaginable.

When it is the new Year, (which always begins with the new Moon before or
after the ninth Month of October, at which time also they begin their Lent) an
Ambassador is sent from every general Province to Salute the King. This Duty is
performed every third year with greater State, and such humble Submission, that
it seems in a manner a servile Obedience.

So upon the first day of the new Moon the Magistrates, every one in his own
City, meet, and bow to the Royal Throne, which is adorned with Pictures and
Images; then with exalted Voices pray, That the King may live ten thousand
years; and this is loudly seconded by the redoubled Echoes of the People
purposely met together. The same Honor is done to the Emperor upon his
Birthday through the whole Empire; and upon the same day the Magistrates of
Peking, and the Ambassadors which are sent from other Provinces, as also the
Emperors nearest and chiefest Friends, come into the Emperor's Presence, to let
him know what Day it is, and to confirm their good Wishes for his long Life, by
the greatness of the Presents which they then bring unto him.

All such as are preferred by the King to any Place of Magistracy, or other
Office, are summoned to appear early in the Morning before the King's Throne,
to return Thanks for the favor shown: At which time they are Clothed in red
Satin, with Silver-gilt Turbants upon their Heads; in both Hands they hold an
Ebony Board four Fingers broad, and a Foot long, which they put before their
Mouths as often as they speak before the Emperor or his Throne.

When formerly the Emperor intended to appear upon his Throne, he showed
himself first out of a large Window, in the highest Room of the House, holding
an Ebony Board in his Hand before his Face, and another over his Head; both
which Boards were beset with so many Precious Stones, and of that bigness, that
they covered his Face, and hindered any one from having a perfect sight of him:
But how the Tartar Cham appears in this Age, we have already related.

It is only lawful for the Emperor to be arrayed in Yellow, that Color being
forbidden to all others: his Raiment is chiefly Embroidered with Dragons; and
not only are these Dragons upon his Garments, but likewise Engraven upon the
Vessels of Gold and other Plate belonging to the Palace, as also upon all the
other Furniture thereof; insomuch that the very Tyling of the Palace is of a
yellow Color, figured with the shapes of Dragons, which has given occasion for
some to believe, that the Roof of the Palace was either of Gold or Copper;
whereas in truth it is only covered with Tyles colored yellow in the Baking,
and fastened with Nails, whose Heads are gilded, that so every thing outwardly
seen may resemble the Emperor's Apparel: And if any Person should be so
audaciously presumptuous as to venture to wear this Color or the Dragons,
unless he be of the Royal Blood, it would endanger the loss of his Head, such
an Offense being esteemed criminal as Treason, and the Offender would suffer as
a Traitor.

The Royal Palace has four Gates, toward the four Quarters of the World: All
that pass by these Gates are obliged to alight, whether on Horseback or in a
Chair, and to go on foot till they are beyond them. This is done by all the
Chinese in general, but much more orderly, and with greater Reverence, by the
Grandees; for they perform this Ceremony while they are yet at a good distance
from the Court: and this is duly observed, not only at Peking, the present
Imperial Residence, but also at Nanking, (the ancient Seat of the Emperors)
though of late years deserted by the Court.

The Emperor oftentimes, for some certain Reasons and Causes best known to
himself, does confer Titles of Honor upon the Ancestors of the chiefest
Magistrates, by a certain Writing formally drawn up by his Majesty's
Philosophers: They put a high value upon such a Writing, and think nothing too
much to give or do to purchase the same; which once obtained, they lay up
carefully for their Posterity, as a Holy or Sacred thing. They likewise set a
very high value and esteem upon other Titles, which are expressed with two or
three Characters, and are granted by the Emperor to Widows, that in their old
Age subject themselves again to Matrimony, or to any other extraordinary
ancient People.

These Marks of Honor they hang over their Doors, to be as a Testimonial for
them; and when any Magistrates have done their Country good Services, Statues
of Marble are erected in their Honor, at the Charge of the Public,

Whatsoever through the whole Empire is rare of costly, is sent to the Emperor
at Peking; the Magistrates whereof appear with far less State and Magnificence
abroad in the Streets than those of other Places; for unless it be some of the
chiefest and more noble, the rest must only ride on Horseback, and not be
carried in Chairs; and whosoever is permitted to keep a Chair, must use no more
than four Chait-men to carry him. Without the Imperial City, the Magistrates
thereof may appear abroad in a more glorious Grandeur; but their lowly Demeanor
at Peking is done in submission to their Sovereign there resident. Every fourth
year, at four distinct times, all the Emperor's Council assemble at the Tombs
of the ancient Kings and Queens, and there offer up rich and costly Presents,
with great Humility and Reverence; but the chiefest Honor is given to King
Hunvuus, who delivered the Kingdom of China out of the hands of the Tartars,
and restored the same to Peace and Honor.

Next to the Emperor they observe and reverence their Superiors and
Magistrates, which they do in particular forms and manners of Speech, as also
in stately and noble Visits; neither is access free to them all, but only to
such as have born some Office of Honor or Trust in the Kingdom, or served
abroad in some honorable Employments; for such when they return into their own
Countries, are had in great esteem, as well by the Magistrates as People.

If any one has done his Country considerable Service, behaved himself well in
his Office, has been preferred to some higher degree of Honor and Trus^ than
ordinary, or for some Reason of State or Policy happens to remove from the
City, he is Presented by the Country in his Passage with great Gifts; but at
his departure he must leave behind him his Boots, Marks of Honor, etc in
perpetual remembrance of this Favor: His Boots are locked up in a Chest, kept
on purpose for such uses, with great care and respect. Others of a higher
Quality have a Pillar of Marble erected to their Honor, to preserve their
Memory and Fame to Posterity, by inscribing thereon in the most legible
Characters, the great Services they have done for their Country. Some indeed
are more magnificently Signalized, having Temples erected in Honor of their
Names, at the Charge of the Public, with Images of the Party deceased, drawn
to the Life by the best Artists in the Country, and placed upon the Altars: nor
is that all, but there is Incense, Vessels, Torches, and Persons appointed to
look after the same, that they may always be kept Trimmed, Perfumed, and
Burning; which to accomplish the more readily, they have great Vessels of
Copper provided to burn in, as is used in their Idol-Temples; only there is
this difference between the Worship of the one, and the Veneration of the
other: for in that of their Gods they are always Desiring or Praying for one
thing or other; but in this, appointed to the Memory of a deceased Party, they
are always showing their grateful Respects for the Benefits received by him.
But it may be very soberly conjectured, that the ordinary Man, not able by the
narrow scantling of his Judgment to discern this duplicity, makes no difference
between the two Worships; and this seems the more probable, for that great
numbers of People resort thither, and there bow and kneel, and Offer up what
they have, with the same zeal to the one as to the other.

All the Chiness Books which treat of Manners and Fashions, contain no other
Instructions but in what manner Children are to obey their Parents: and
certainly herein these blind People are highly to be commended; for there is no
Place in the World to be compared with them in this Particular, for the Honor
and Reverence that is by Children yielded to their Parents, they being neither
suffered to sit near them, or opposite unto them, but in some low place of the
Room, and that with great Submission and Reverence. The like respect is shown
by Scholars to their Masters; neither do Children speak to their Parents, but
in the most submissive Terms imaginable; and if perhaps either the Father or
Mother, or both fall into want in their old Age, the Children freely work night
and day to provide for them, and stint themselves, pinching their own Bellies,
to fill those of their Parents: An Example truly well worth both imitation and
praise, although, to their shame, not much practiced by Christians. Such is
their Behavior to their Parents living, however qualified; and it ends not with
their Lives, but follows them to the Grave, attending their Funerals, not only
in their Mourning, wherein they differ very much from other People, but
likewise in the Coffin wherein the Corpse is enclosed, which is made of the
richest and most durable Wood that is to be purchased in their own or the
Neighboring Countries.

Every Person in China observes his Birthday as Sacred, bestowing Presents
upon his Friends, and withal making great Entertainments for them. Now although
every Anniversary Birthday is thus observed, yet there is one especially
celebrated with a more Festivous Solemnity, which is when they live to the Age
of seventy; for not till then are they reckoned amongst the Old People: and
then are the Walls of the Houses hung with Pictures and Verses, filled with
Eulogies to the Party whose Birthday is to be commemorated. There are also two
others more remarkable than the rest, one whereof is that of the tenth Year;
but this wants much of the Ceremonies of the former: The other, which is much
honored by them, is that upon which they put on the Virile Hat, as formerly at
Rome the Young Men did the Tog^ Virilis, or Manly Gown; and this is when they
have attained twenty Years of Age.

But with far greater Splendour, and more extraordinary State, is New-years-day
solemnized through the whole Country, to wit, upon the first day of the New and
Full Moon; for that is the Emperor's Festival, on which day every Man lights in
his House great store of Artificial Candles, made of Paper, Glass, and Cloth,
which are sold in the Markets in great quantities. These being lighted, and the
Rooms hung therewith very thick, make a show as if the House within were all of
a light Fire: And as an addition to their Mirth, they run up and down the
Streets, with the like Candles in their Hands, whooping and hollowing like mad
People.

The Chinese, like the old Romans, have several Names by which they are
distinguished: for first, they have a Surname, which is ancient, and never
altered; then a Christian Name; and lastly a Proper Name; and this is still
newly invented, and signifies one thing or other, as their Sir-names most
commonly also do. This second Name, which the Father bestows only upon his
Sons, is always writ with one Character, and pronounced with one Syllable; but
the Women have no such Name, being called by their Fathers Surname, and by the
number of Place in which they stand in regard of their Birth among the Sisters.

When a Child is put out to School, he receives from the Master a new Name, and
that is called the School-Name, whereby he is called by the Master and the
Scholars only. Again, when a young Man puts on the Virile Hat, or is Married,
he is presented by some Person of Quality with a more Honorable Name, called
The Letter, by which any Person may afterward call him, except his Servants.
Now when he is grown to Years of perfect Manhood he is presented by some other
Person with a very honorable Name, called among them The Great Name: By this
Name he is called by all without any distinction, except his Parents, who think
him unworthy of that Honor, and continue to call him only by the Name of the
Letter.

If any Person embraces a new Sect or Opinion, the Doctor who introduces him
bestows upon him a new Name; and therefore the Jesuits have a higher Name given
them than what they received in Baptism.

All manner of Antiquities are of great value and account among them, such as
old Vessels made of Chalk, Wood, Marble, or Copper; but especially Pictures
that are well Drawn, as also the Characters and Writings of famous Penmen,
writ upon Cloth and Linen; and these two last they reckon as most precious.
All the Magistrates wear a distinct Badge or Mark to be known by, as to their
Offices and Employments, which they preserve with great care; for if they
should unhappily lose it, they would not only be turned out of their
Employments, but also be severely punished; therefore whenever they go from
home, they nail it up in a Chest, and seal it with their Seal.

Men of great Places and Dignity never go on foot, but are carried on Men's
Shoulders in Chairs, made close round about, so that they cannot be seen by
such as walk the Streets, unless they draw open one of the Curtains^ and this
difference there is between them and the Magistrates, who are carrie^ in open
Chairs. The Women are also carried in close Chairs, but something different
from those of the Men.

Coaches, Wagons, and Sledges, are not to be used in that Country, but only at
Peking where the Court resides, as I have already said.

The Schoolmasters there are in higher esteem than in Europe; and though a
Scholar has been under the Tuition of a Master but one day, yet he calls him
Master as long as he lives, and respects him as such, according to the Custom
of the Country, in giving him the upper hand.

Neither is there among the better sort any kind of Gaming; but among the
Vulgar, Cards and Dice are sometimes used. The Nobles and other Great Persons
divert themselves with this Recreation: They play upon a Board which has a Hole
in the middle, and three hundred little Houses circularly placed about it, with
two hundred Pegs, the one half whereof is white, and the other black; which
being divided betwixt the Play-mates, each strive to force the others Pegs into
the Hole, and to get to himself all the Houses; for herein consists the winning
or losing of the Game; but although he cannot attain all, yet if he can get the
most Houses, he still wins the Game. With this sportive Diversion the
Magistrates themselves are much taken, and spend much time at it; and if they
play with Judgment, sometimes they spend a whole hour or more before they make
an end of one Set. And such is the Humor of this People, that whosoever are
very skilful herein, are highly honored and respected, though they are
excellent in nothing else.

Marriages are solemnized here with great State; and although the Parties are
oftentimes Betrothed to each other in their Nonage, or rather Infancy, by the
Parties of both sides, who never ask their Childrens Consent till all is
concluded and agreed; yet such is their Obedience and Submission, that they
comply with their Desires in this Particular. There is great variety of Customs
in this Business; for Persons of Quality for the most part Marry with their
Equals, only for Wealth and Honor, reserving besides what Concubines they
please, which also is allowed for others to do; and of these the handsomest of
Face and Body carry the precedence, and are ordinarily bought for a hundred
Crowns, and sometimes for less. The Commonalty and inferior Degrees of People
buy themselves Wives, and sell them again when they please; but the Emperor and
his Children neither look after the Birth nor Extraction of the Person, but
only to the comely Shape, and extraordinary Beauty of the Face.

The Emperor has one more select and peculiar Consort, who only is called the
lawful Wife, and is his Empress; yet he is also Married to nine others, who are
of a more inferior Condition than the first; and likewise to thirty more of a
third Degree, who are all called his Wives. There are several other Women that
belong to him, but they are only styled Queens, which is a Title below that of
Empress. Amongst all this variety of Women, such of them as are fruitful, and
bring him Children, are most highly respected and beloved by him; but she more
especially that bears the firstborn Son, in regard he is to succeed his Father
in the Imperial Throne. And this is not only observed by the Emperor and the
Royal Family, but all the Grandees through the whole Empire by that Pattern,
set an Estimate on their Wives, according to their fertility.

The Empress, which is his first and lawful Wife, sits only with him at the
Table, while all the rest attend her, and are not permitted to sit down in her
Presence, but must stand at her Elbow, as ready upon all occasions to serve her.

It is generally observed through all China, That none may intermarry with a
Wife of his own Name, though there be no kind of Relation between them; but
they may freely and legally couple, if they be of differing Names,
notwithstanding any vicinity of Blood whatsoever; by which means it comes to
pass, that a Father will marry his Child to the nearest Kindred of his Wife.

Whatever Household Goods any Maid or Woman is possessed of in her own Right
before Marriage, must not devolve to the Bridegroom; but he purchases them of
her the day before the Wedding: yet she is obliged to bring with her a Nag
bridled and sadled, four Maidservants, and two Boys. But the Bridegroom is to
furnish the House with Provisions of all sorts; and during the Treaty of
Marriage, he presents the Bride with several sorts of Silks and Linen; in
return whereof, as an acknowledgment of a grateful disposition, and in token of
an inviolable Love, she sends him a rich Suit of Cloth of Gold, or Silk. The
Bridegroom, in the next place, gives to the Father of the Bride 100 Toel of
Silver, and 50 Toel to the Mother; which Ceremony performed, and Presents on
all sides given and accepted, they proceed to the Consummation of the Marriage:
After which, the Bridegroom first solemnly Treats and Feasts the Bride and her
Friends eight days together at his House; and then the Bride re-invites the
Bridegroom and his Friends, and Feasts them for three days together in great
State and Splendour. Yet notwithstanding all this Feasting, the next day after
the Marriage the new married Woman is not neglected to be attended home to her
Spouse, by the chiefest of her Kindred and Friends, who all the way are waited
upon by the best Musicians they can get.

They are not so full of Circumstance and Ceremony in the forementioned things,
as they were heretofore remiss in the punishing of Theft, or other notorious
Crimes; for they used not to put any to death for simple Stealing, unless to
accomplish their Villainy they used Force and Violence: If any taken the second
time were found guilty of Robbery, he was branded upon the Arm with a hot Iron,
with two Characters: If the third time, he is branded in the Forehead; but if
he committed the like Fault the fourth time, he was then Whipped and Banished.
This neglect of punishing Rogues for Stealing, was the cause why China did
swarm so very much with Thieves and Vagrants: But since the Tartars have been
Conquerors of this Empire, they have with great prudence and strictness redrest
those Abuses, and put the Laws in force against all Offenders; insomuch that
when I was in China, Petty Offenses were made Criminal; for he that was found
guilty of the least Fault, was punished with death: In the execution of which
Sentence, as soon as any one is condemned to die, his Hands are bound behind
him, with a Board upon his Back, whereon is writ his Offense; and so bound he
is led by the Sheriff into an open place, according to custom, either within or
without the City; and there he is beheaded without any further Ceremony. If it
happen that any are Pardoned, and have their Lives spared them, they are
punished with that extreme severity, that oftentimes they choose rather to die,
than to undergo the Torture which they must suffer to preserve their Lives,
which is after this manner: Two lusty Fellows are commanded to beat the
Criminal upon the Calf of his Leg, till all the Sinews and Nerves are miserably
torn and bruised, if not broken. And this is their ordinary method of
Punishment, which is inflicted without any distinction of Persons.

Now as the Punishment is severe, to prevent all Disorders and Robberies which
stir up this severity, there are strict Watches kept every Night in the
Streets, which go the Rounds through the City at certain Hours, as the Guards
(...) used to do in the best Governed Cities of Europe.

CHAP. V.
Of their Ceremonies, and manner of Burials; and of their Tombs or Monuments.
BY what has been said in the former Chapters it may appear, That the Chinese
may be compared, in many things which concern their manner of Living, with the
Philosophers, and Virtuosi of Europe; but they differ very much in things
relating to Funerals; among which this may be reckoned the first, That those of
Europe seldom think of their Mortality, and so consequently take little or no
care of their Burials while they are living; but the Chinese are in nothing
more serious and sollicitous, than to provide for their Interments whilst they
live, and are in perfect health; and that ignorance may be no excuse, they put
down in Writing how they will have the same performed, strictly charging their
Children upon their Deathbeds, and and even at their last gasp, to observe
their Orders. Now there is one Custom through the whole Country inviolably
observed, which is, never to bury any one without a Coffin, though it be a
Child but of two days old; for every Person, according to his Quality, is laid
into a Coffin, made of the best sort of Wood their ability will reach to: But
Persons of more Eminency are at far greater Charge for a rich Repository for
their poor Carcasses.

The first Ceremony they observe, when they perceive the Patient to lie a
dying, is this; they take him and lay him upon a Mat, carry him into the
outward Hall of the House, there to breathe his last. And this Custom, though
it carries somewhat of Barbarism in it, is observed through the whole Empire by
the Commonalty; but for what reason I could never learn, notwithstanding all
the diligence of my curious and prying Enquiries. But among the better sort, a
Person of equal Quality with themselves is suffered to die in Bed. Another
fantastic Humor here is, whilst the sick Party is breathing forth his last,
the eldest of his Sons puts on his Bonnet or Cap, and coming to the Bed in a
distracted manner, tears the Curtain, and covers therewith the dead Body,
which after it has lain a convenient time, is washed according to the Custom
of the Country, and wrapped either in very fine Linen or Silk: Some are yet more
extravagant, and will dress out the Corpse with new Clothes, and after they are
Embalmed, set them at a Table well furnished with Provisions of all sorts; and
this a great, but not much commendable Fashion amongst the Grandees. The
nearest Relations of the Deceased are invited to this solemn, though mournful
Entertainment; who entreat him to eat and be merry with them, as if he were
living. In the mean time the Priests are busied in Singing* and performing the
other usual Ceremonies.

As to the Mourning Habit, it differs from all Countries that I have seen, not
only for its Color, which generally is white, but for the form and shape of
it: for Sons, when they Mourn for their Fathers, they Clothe themselves for the
first Month in a course stiff Habit, hanging down to their Heels, and tied
about the Middle with a Cord, after the manner of the Monks of the Franciscan
Order. But although they lay aside that Habit then, yet it is a constant Custom
for Children to Mourn three years for their Parents; the reason whereof they
allege in their Books to be this, because that Parents carry their Children
for the three first years of their Infancy in their Arms, with great care and
trouble; and therefore the Children ought to requite their Affection and
Kindness, by showing their Duty in Mourning after this manner. But the time of
Mourning for other Friends is much abbreviated; sometimes it lasts a Year,
otherwhiles but three Months, according as they stand related or affected to
one another.

The legal time of Mourning for the Death of the Emperor or Empress, was
formerly three years; and this outward show of Sorrow extended even to the
furthermost Confines of the Empire: But now, with the Emperor's consent, which
is openly proclaimed, the Months are turned into Days, so that at the present
they Mourn but only one Month for his Death; but still the extent reaches over
all his Dominions. All the Funeral Ceremonies are written in a large Book,
which those concerned peruse when a Person of Quality dies, whereby they know
how to order his Burial.

As soon as any Nobleman is dead, the Son, or who is next related to him in
Blood, signifies the same by a Book to all his Kindred and Friends, upon the
third or fourth day, wherein the Mourning is set forth in the usual terms. At
the same time the Corpse is incoffin'd, and placed in the Hall or Chamber, which
is hung with white Linen; in the middle whereof is erected an Altar, whereon
is placed the Corpse and Portraicture of the Deceased. Into this Room come all
the Kindred and Friends upon the third or fourth day, clad in Mourning, and
bringing Incense and Wax-Lights to the Altar, which being once lighted and
burning, they tender their Respects to the Dead, in bowing and falling upon
their Knees four times, a while before burning a little Incense over against
the Coffin and Picture. While these Ceremonies are performing, one or two of
the Sons of the Deceased stand on one side of the Coffin in their white
Mourning, with great modesty, and shedding tears plentifully. Behind it sits
the Mother, with the Daughters and others of the Relations, in Mourning also;
but they are so reserved in their manner of Lamentation, that they have a
Curtain drawn before them, that so they may not be seen. In the Hall stand two
Trumpeters, and at the great Gate of the Court within, two Drummers; over the
Gate hangs upon a Board, a long Scrowl of Paper even to the Ground, wherein is
to be read who it is that is deceased, and what he had done in his Lifetime
for the Service and Benefit of his Country.

It often happens that the Children keep their Bodies three or four Years
unburied in their Houses, in all which time they are never offended with any
Scents proceeding from the same; the reason whereof may be their extraordinary
skill in Embalming, and closing the Crevices of the Coffin: and so long as they
keep them thus above-ground, they set before them Meat and Drink daily, as if
they were living: During all which time, the Sons take not their Places, but
sit upon a long Bench covered with White; and as a further Testimony of their
obedient Sorrow, they sleep not upon Beds, but upon Matrasses of Straw spread
upon the Floor near the Cossin, abstaining likewise all that while from Flesh*
or any compound Meats, or drinking Wine, or using any Baths: and, that which is
yet more to be taken notice of, they forbear to accompany with their Wives in
any way of Natural Affection. And this for the generality is voluntary; but
what follows is forbidden, to wit, They may not go to any public Invitations
abroad, nor so much as be seen in the Streets for so many Months; but if their
Occasions be such as call them out of doors, they are carried in a close Chair,
covered over with Mourning. Although formerly, to the commendation of the
Country, these things were performed; yet in this present Age few or none are
found amongst them that are so strict in the observation of these Ceremonies.

Upon the day appointed for the Funeral, all the Friends meet, who are invited
by another Book to accompany the Corpse of their Friend to his Grave. The
Solemnity is ordered and performed after the same manner as the
Roman Catholics make their Processions at certain times of the Year. Several
Images of Men, Women, Elephants, Tigers, Lions, and such like Beasts, made all
of Paper, and Painted with several Colors, are carried before the Coffin, and
at last burnt at the Grave; among whom also go some that carry Incense in large
Copper Vessels, and Wax Torches burning: The Priests and others that belong to
the Idol-Temples, follow after these with Drums and Pipes; After whom, next in
place, is the Coffin, most curiously beautified and adorned, born up by at
least forty or fifty Persons, all very richly Habited. Behind the Coffin come
the Sons on foot, but seeming to support themselves with Sticks in their Hands,
as if Grief and Sorrow had brought them into a weak Condition: Then follow the
Women in close Chairs, covered with White, so that they cannot be seen.

If sometimes it happen that the Fathers die when their Sons are from home, the
Funeral is deferred till their Return, and notice thereof sent them; which as
soon as they receive, they immediately put on Mourning upon the very Place
where they are, and then hastens home with the first opportunity, to perform
the Ceremonies in order as we have related. But this is not all; for a Son is
obliged by virtue of the Laws, though he is in the highest Office of the
Kingdom, and one of the Colaos, to return home, and there to Mourn for the
space of three entire years; in which time he is totally forbidden to return to
his Charge: Yet this is only to be understood of Mourning for Parents, and not
for other Friends. Nevertheless the Soldiers and Military Officers are not
subject to this Law.

If it chance that any dies either in Travel, or Employment, out of his native
Country, he to whom the Charge and Care of his Funeral is committed, uses his
utmost diligence to procure the dead Body to be brought back, that it may be
buried in the Grave of his Ancestors; in the preserving whereof they are very
curious, insomuch that none else are admitted to be Interred there: And
therefore every Chinese who is able, erects a Vault with a Tomb over it,
without the Walls of the City, in the Suburbs, to remain for a Burial-place to
him and his Posterity, it being dissonant to the Grandeur of Noble Persons to
have their Sepulchers within the City. They are generally of Marble, sometimes
of other Stone, contained in a portion of Ground, according to the Greatness of
the Person, and commonly Walled about; within whose circumference some make
several little Rooms, which, together with the said Wall, are surrounded with
artificial Groves of Cypress-Trees. Upon the top of the Grave lies a large
Stone, rarely adorned with curious Images Engraven round about it; and upon its
Surface are Engraven the famous Actions of the Deceased.



They whose Wealth raises them to the highest pitch of humane Felicity and
enlarges their Pleasures beyond the limit of a Satisfaction in this Life, such
as the Gelubden, bestow vast Sums of Money upon their Tombs, building them
little inferior to Palaces, with several Apartments within, and Triumphal
Arches standing before them.

In the Province of Xansi, upon the Mountains, are several of these famous
Sepulchral Monuments. Near to the City Taming is a very noble Piece of
Antiquity in this kind, built by the Emperor Cavus, about 4000. years since, as
they report. So likewise near to the City Cinon, upon the Mountains are built
very sumptuous Tombs, as well of Kings, as of other Great Lords.

I my self saw some of these Sepulchers, very artificially built upon some
solitary Hills, which were not the Products of Nature, but, to make the Work
the more stupendous and considerable, were cast up with the Spade, and raised
to almost an incredible height. In the middle of Wall was a Gate, through which
we entered into the Sepulcher (to which belong commonly three such Doors) and
ascended by easy Steps up to the Mouth of the same, which was Plastered on
the insides and had Benches about it.

At certain times of the Year, the surviving Friends come and visit these
Graves, bringing store of Provisions with them, and then express their Sorrow
afresh, shedding Tears, and using other Lamentations for the loss of their dear
Friends; nay, some of them do with such reality of Grief and Affection
oftentimes take it to heart, that they will by no means be drawn thence, but
desire to be reckoned among the Dead.

Without the City of Nanking (heretofore the Court and Imperial Chamber of the
ancient Princes) but not far distant from the Walls, grows a very pleasant
Wood, full of Pine-trees, Walled in, and containing twelve Italian Miles in
circumference; in the middle whereof rises a Hill, whereupon are to be viewed
several well built Tombs, and diverse other very famous Works; among which a
certain Idol-Temple may be accounted the chiefest Masterpiece, for thereby
does sufficiently appear the great esteem these People had of their
Burying-places, not only in regard of the pleasant solitariness, but of the
almost infinite Cost bestowed upon it. It is situate upon an high Hill, and
built all of Wood, except the Walls, which are of Stone. The Entrance into this
Temple is by four large Marble Staircases, each having several Steps, with
Gates opening toward the four Quarters of the World; between which are four
Princely Galleries, supported on all sides by curious Carved Pillars of Wood,
each being at least four yards thick, and thirty six Foot high; all the
Cielings being most exquisitely, and with great Art Painted and Gilded. The
Doors are most admirably wrought with Imagery, and Painted; the outward
Galleries and Windows have as it were a covering of Wyre-work, to keep the
Birds from roosting upon, or fouling them, which is made so thin, that it does
not in the least darken the Temple.

In the middle or more inward part of the Temple stand two Thrones, wrought
with extraordinary rarity, and adorned with all manner of Precious Stones. Upon
these stand two Chairs, in one of which the Emperor sits when he Offers,
which in this Place is forbiden to all Persons, of what Condition soever, but
only himself; the other continually remains empty, to be as it were a Seat for
the Deity, supposed to be present and ready to receive the Offering; yet they
permit no Image to be set before it. In the open Air, or as we say, sub Dio,
stand several Altars of red Marble, by which the Chinese signify or denote
the Sun, Moon, Mountains, and Floods; and these things, as by them is reported,
are erected without the Temple, because none should worship them; and that
every one should render Worship and Honor unto nothing, but what is venerated
and adored by the Emperor in the Temple. Round about are several Cells, wherein
formerly were Baths for the Emperor to wash himself before he went to Offer;
leading to which are several broad Ways, planted on both sides with Pines, by
them esteemed so Sacred, that no Person is suffered to break a Bough from them,
upon pain of death; all which, as well in the Walks as on these Hills, are said
to be Planted.

Much more might be voluminously writ of the Tombs and Burial-places in
general, but especially of those which the Emperors have caused to be Built
near the Royal City Peking, the present Place of their Residence: But these,
and most of the rest, have undergone one and the same direful Fate, not
escaping the fury and rage of the Tartars, who in their late Invasions
destroyed and utterly laid waste all that was rare or worthy of Remark in this
Empire.

And after this manner Persons of Quality, and such as are Rich, for the most
part provide themselves Burial-places in their lifetime; but the ordinary and
vulgar sort of People have a Place deputed within the City, where they Bury
promiscuously, and without any Ceremony or Charge.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Form, Shape, and Make of the Body, and the Fashion of their Clothes.
THE Chinese, for the greater part of them, are almost as White of Complexion
as the People of Europe; though indeed some of them, who live in the Southern
Countries, somewhat near the Line, are so scorched with the heat of the Sun,
that they are of a Swarthy Color. The Hair of their Beards, though thin and
short, is yet very stiff and harsh, and long before it appears; so that a Man
of thirty years of Age there, looks as young as one of twenty in Europe: The
Color of their Hair is generally Black, which they wear of a reasonable
length; but if any happen to have Red Hair, which is seldom seen, it is a
discredit to wear the same long. Their Eyes are little, somewhat long, yet
inclining to round, and black of color: Their Noses small, and not rising very
high; yet their Ears are of the largest size: but in the other Parts of the
Face they differ very little from those of Europe. This Description reaches not
all Parts of China; for in some Places the People have flat and almost
apiece Faces. In the Provinces of Quantung and Quangsi the greatest number
have upon the little Toe two Nails, which is common likewise to those of
Couchinchina; the Reason whereof happily might be, that they had formerly on each
Foot six Toes.

All the Women are short, and low of Stature, and their chiefest Beauty (as
they imagine) consists in the smallness of their Feet; and therefore when they
are young, they bind and swath their Feet, they keep them from growing to their
natural bigness, and by that means they become generally very small: But this
is not all the care; for they are taught very young, That it is a principal
part of modesty to keep within doors, and not to be seen frequently abroad in
the Streets: and therefore they account it, especially in Persons of Honor, a
great shame to appear openly in the Streets; yet they are brought up to Dance,
Sing, and Play upon such Musical Instruments as are in use amongst them.

They are for the most part Handsome, Complaisant, and Ingenious, and exceed in
Beauty and exact Symetry of Body all other Heathenish Women; their Complexion
tends to whiteness; and their Eyes are brown: All their natural Beauties and
peculiar Excellencies they heighten with Gold and Painting. But amongst all the
rest, they have this one single Humor proper to themselves, that they never
pare the Nails of their left Hand; and I my self saw a Gentlewoman at Peking,
who wore a Case made of Reeds about her Fingers, to preserve her Nails from
breaking. Such as are rich are tenderly Educated, observe Set-times of Eating
and Drinking, but with great moderation, being stinted to a Measure which they
must not exceed; and by this strict manner of Living, most of them grow very
slender and handsome.

Heretofore both Men and Women in China wore long Hair upon their Heads, never
permitting it to be cut, only the Youth of both Sexes cut off all theirs, but
one Lock upon the Crown, till they were fifteen years of Age; then they began
to let it grow till they came to be twenty, at which time they put on the
Virile Hat; and all the time beforementioned they wore it as the ancient
Greeks, or modern English, hanging down about their Ears; but then they tied it
up, and wore it under their Hats, or else Caps made of Horse-hair, Mens-hair,
or Silk. This Hat had a Hole in the Crown, through which the longest Hairs,
neatly pleited, were seen.

The Women wore no such Hats, but went in every respect as they do at this
time, with Hair neatly pleited, and curiously adorned with Precious Stones,
Gold, Silver, and Flowers: But since this famous Empire fell under the
tyrannous Yoke of the Tartars, and became subject to them, they have also
submitted to the Tartarian Mode of cutting and wearing the Hair: for now the
Chinese do cut off all their Hair after the manner of their Conqueror,
reserving only one Lock, which hangs down behind. But certainly, had they not
been reduced into the meanest Condition of Servility, they (who took so much
pride in wearing long Hair, that thousands of them suffered themselves to be
put to Death, rather than have their Hair cut off) would not now unconstrained
have altered their Minds; and this I the rather believe, for that they have a
superstitious Fancy, that they are to be pulled up into Heaven by the Hair of
the Head.

The Fashions of their Apparel alter as well as here in Europe: At present they
generally wear long Gowns of a blue Color, which reach down to their Heels,
wherein the Men wrap themselves when they go abroad; but the Women tie them
close about their Wastes with a Girdle. Both sorts are made with large Sleeves;
but those for the Women are much larger at the Hand, whereas the Men's are made
fit for their Wrists and Arms. These Forms of Apparel are worn by all without
difference, but only in substance they materially differ; for those of the
nobler sort are made of the richest Silks, Embroidered with Dragons, whereas
the Commonalty wear them made of ordinary Stuffs.

The next observable part of their Apparel is their Shoes, wherein they differ
much from the other Parts of the World, both for the Fashion and Stuff. The
Women commonly make their own Shoes of blue or red Silk, with sharp Toes,
decked with Pearls and Rubies, and stitched with all manner of Flowers. The
Commonalty only wear Shoes made of Leather, colored yellow; but Grandees are
so far from wearing Leather, that the very Soles of their Shoes are made of
Cloth.

The Learned, such as they term Philosophers, wear apiece Caps or Hats;
but the illiterate are forbidden to wear other than round ones, made of
Horse-hair; only in Winter they have of them made of Silk or Wool, with an
Edging about it of Sables. They use no Linen Shirts, as the Europeans do, next
to their Skins, but only a Frock made of white Cotton, which is so made, that
they tie it above the Ancle with a Ribband.

They often wash and bathe themselves, and spend the greatest part of a Morning
in Combing and Dressing their Heads: When they go abroad, they skreen
themselves from the parching heat of the Sun, with large Quittesol^^, (in Italy
called Umbrella's) which are carried over their Heads; but the ordinary sort of
People make use only of Fans.

Thus far of the Customs of the better sort of People, and Citizens; from whom
the Country People do not altogether differ: for they likewise wear short Hair,
with a long Lock hanging down behind. They are very laborious, and excellently
skilled in Husbandry and Tillage: When they Plow their Land, a Man and a Woman
help to draw the Plough with an Ass, and another Man goe^ behind to guide it:
And this kind of toilsom Life, in regard of the great Profit it brings to the
Public, and that it conduces so much to the Benefit of Mankind, is much
encouraged by the Chinese Emperors, who have granted several Immunities to such
as make it their Employment; which Privileges have so far prevailed, that by
continual Practice, and experimental Observation, they have brought that
Calling to great perfection, and have left very little Ground untilled in all
China. Barren Ground they know how to improve, by Dunging, or other ways of
Manuring. Such Lands as are scorched up in Summer for want of Water, they
plentifully supply, though with much labor and industry, conveying Water to the
same from remote Places, by Trenches and Aqueducts cut for that purpose; by
which means one may pass by Water through most Parts of this Empire, to the
great accommodation of the Inhabitants, and the wonderful advance of Traffic
and Commerce through the whole Country.

The Country Women in China wear Breeches, which they tie about their Knees:
And some, that they may lose no time, go commonly Spinning about the Streets,
Fields, or other Places, which arises to such Profit, that thereby only a
great number of Families make shift to get a competent Subsistence.

CHAP. VII.
Of some Superstitious Customs, Fashions, and other Errors in use amongst the
Chinese.
IN this following Chapter we shall treat of some Superstitious Fashions and
Erroneous Customs which are in use among the several Sects of the Chinese: And
first we shall take notice, That they are generally very much inclined and
addicted to observe Times and Seasons, and have so great an esteem for
Soothsayers, Fortune Tellers, Astrologers, Star-gazers, and the like, that
they believe whatsoever they foretell; insomuch that they govern all their
Transactions according to the Sayings of those People, whose Advice is taken
and followed in their Affairs from time to time; their Books, much like our
Almanacks, being in general request: besides which, there are other Books of
their Writing, which treat of far deeper and concealed things. So prevalent is
this Science among all sorts of People, that there is a vast multitude of
Masters that teach it, who have no other livelihood but what they get by
directing those that come to them the Day and Hour in which they may with great
hopes of Success go about any Business: And indeed they are so infinitely
possessed with an opinion of the Knowledge and Wisdom of these Men, that they
never undertake a Journey, go about to erect a Building, or do any thing else
of consequence, but they first consult with them about it, and observe to a
Tittle whatsoever they direct; so that neither Rainy, Stormy, or Tempestuous
Weather, such as would even fright a Satyr, can hinder them from beginning
their Journey upon the Day prefixed for the same, though they go but out of
sight of their own Dwellings: or if they are to Build, they will dig a little
way into the Ground, or make some entrance or beginning into the Work, let the
Weather be never so bad, that it may be said they began upon that Day which was
foretold them should be successful to their Undertaking.

Over and above these humorous Niceties, they are great Observers of the Day of
any ones Birth, by which they confidently undertake to predict to them the good
or bad Fortune likely to befall them through the whole Course of their Lives:
and in truth, this inclination of their Nature is the cause that no People in
the whole World are more easy to be deluded with the fallacious Fancies of
such as assume to themselves the Title of Wizards and Sooth sayers, whose
Cunning has devised various Ways to cheat the Ignorant, and to make them pass
for Oracles.

In the former Chapter we treated of their Sepulchers, and the ordering
thereof, wherein they are not more careful, than curious in making choice of
the Place for that purpose, which they make to resemble the Head, Tail, and
Feet of a Dragon; which sort of Creature they fancy to live under Ground. Upon
this does not only depend, as they firmly believe the good and bad Fortune of
particular Families, but the very well-being of Cities, Countries, and of the
whole Empire: And therefore when any public Building is to be Erected, the
Learned in this mysterious Art are first consulted with, concerning the good or
bad success that will follow upon it, that they may thereby choose the better
Lot.

There are abundance of People here, who not able to restrain their
licentiousness, though in the meanest degree of Poverty, sell themselves for
Slaves to the Rich, upon condition that they may take to Wife any of the
Maidservants: But note, That whatsoever Children come of these Marriages
become Slaves for ever. Othere there are, who being well to pass, and of
ability, purchase them Wives for their Money; but when their Families increase
in number, and Means begin to fail, they sell their Sons and Daughters for two
or three Crowns apiece, not caring what becomes of them afterward, nor ever
taking notice of them, though they are made Slaves for ever, and may be put to
what Employment the Purchaser thinks good. Many of this kind are bought up by
the Portuguese and the Spaniard, and carried out of their native Country into
Foreign Parts, where they live in perpetual Slavery during their Lives, without
any hope of Redemption. This cannot in Civilized Nations be accounted other
than a piece of Heathenish Barbarism.

But yet they commit a far greater and more horrid Inhumanity, which is this:
In some Provinces they drown the young Infants, especially Females, for no
other reason, but that they mistrust they shall not be able to maintain them,
but be forced to sell them to unknown People. This liberty they take to
themselves, from a belief, That the Souls of the Deceased transmigrate into
other Bodies; and therefore they would seem to infer, That this their Cruelty
is necessary, at leastwise convenient, and so no ways dreadful unto them;
averring, That they do the Children great advantage in taking away their Lives;
for by that means they deliver them the sooner out of a miserable Condition, to
settle them in a better: And therefore the poor Children are not made away
clandestinely, or in private, but aperto sole, openly, before all People.

But this unnatural Cruelty is not all; there is yet more inhumanity practiced
amongst them: for some, out of despair of Good Fortune, or because they have
sustained great Losses, will voluntarily lay violent Hands upon themselves;
others, if they cannot find a means to revenge themselves upon their Enemies,
will kill themselves, thinking thereby to do them a mischief; for (as it is
said) great numbers both of Men and Women destroy themselves every year, either
in the Fields, or else before the Doors of their Adversaries, by strangling,
drowning, or poisoning themselves.

Another sort of Barbarism they are guilty of in the Northern Provinces,
toward young Children, which is by Gelding them; whereby, and no otherwise,
they are made capable of Service and Preferment in the Emperor's Palace: And
these they call in their Language Gelubden, besides whom, none are admitted to
wait on the Prince; and which is more, the whole Government of the Empire is in
their Hands and Management. There are at least ten thousand of these Gelubden
in the Palace, who originally are all mean Persons, without Learning, etc.
brought up in perpetual Slavery; by reason whereof, and their ignorance, they
are of a dull and heavy Disposition, and unfit for any Business of Concern.

The Magistrates have in effect an Arbitrary Power over the Subject, whom they
oftentimes condemn unheard. The manner of punishing Offenders, is to lay them
flat upon their Faces on the Ground, with their Legs bare, upon which they give
them several Blows with a Whip made of twisted Reed, which fetches Blood at
every Blow. And the great Motive that induces to this more than common Severity
in punishing Offenses, is for that the Chinese are infinitely addicted to
Robbing and Stealing.

There are two extravagant Humors that the Grandees in China are much guilty
of: The one is the Transmutation of other Metals into Silver, about which they
often break their Brains, and consume their Estates: The other is an Opinion
they have of obtaining an Immortal Being in this World, while they are clad
with Flesh and Blood; that is to say, they fancy such means may be used, as
will preserve them from falling into that common Bosom of Nature, the Grave. Of
both these Mysteries there are an innumerable company of Books both Printed and
Written; and few or none of the Grandees but, as it were by Obligation, betake
themselves to the Study of these distracting and destructive Sciences. To this
purpose there is a Story in the Chinese Books, of one of their ancient
Emperors, that was so intoxicated with this Prensie, that with the danger and
hazard of his Life he endeavored after an unattainable Immortality; the manner
thus: This Emperor had caused a certain Drink to be prepared by some deceitful
Masters of this Art, of whose Rarity and Perfection he had so great confidence,
that he believed when he had drunk it, he should be immortal; and from this
conceited Imagination he could not be dissuaded, nor could the strongest
Arguments of his nearest Relations divert him from his Humor: At last one of
his Friends, seeing that no argumentative Ratiocinations would prevail with
him, came one day to Congratulate the Emperor's Health, whose Back being
turned, the Visitant took the Bowl and drank a good Draught; which the
over-credulous Emperor perceiving, fell immediately into a great Passion,
attended with no less than reiterated threats of Death, for depriving him of
his immortal Liquor. But the bold Attempter answered him with an undaunted
courage in these terms: Do you suppose that you can deprive me of my Life, now
I have drank of the Immortal Cup? sure 'twere great madness in you so to think:
But if in truth you can despoil me thereof, then I aver that I have not done
any thing amiss; for either by participating of your Drink I am become equally
Immortal with you, or else you are equally Mortal with me: If you can take away
my Life now, I have not robbed you of your Immortality, but shall make you
sensible of the Deceit and Guile wherewith you are abused. The Emperor hearing
this, was presently pacified and highly commended the Wisdom of his Friend, in
extricating him so ingeniously out of the greatest Folly and Madness
imaginable. But though there have not wanted wise Men in China, that have
always endeavored to confute this fantastic Principle, and to cure this
Distemper of the Mind, which in it self is no better than a Fit of raving
Madness; yet they could never so hinder this Disease from increasing or taking
head, but at present it overspreads the whole Country, and generally gains
belief among the Great Ones.

CHAP. VIII.
Of several Sects in China: Concerning Philosophy, and Idol-Worship.
OF all the Heathen Sects which are come to the knowledge of those in Europe,
we have not read of any who are fallen into fewer Errors than the Chinese,
ever since the first Ages; for in their Books we read, That these People have
from the Beginning worshipped the Highest and One Godhead, whom they call The
King, or with another and more common Name, The Heaven and the Earth: Hence it
appears they were of opinion, That Heaven and Earth were inspired, and so they
worshipped the Soul thereof for the highest Deity. But beside this Supreme
Deity, they deviated into the worship of several Spirits, to wit, of Hills,
Rivers, and such as Command over the four Quarters of the World. In all
Transactions the ancient Chinese were wont to say, That Men ought to hearken
to the inbred Light of the Understanding, which Light they have received from
Heaven. But as to the Supreme Deity, and the Spirits which wait upon him, we do
not find in any of their Books that they did ever broach such licentious
Doctrines, to the support of Vice, as were invented by the Romans, Grecians, or
the Egyptians, who in the committing of all manner of Filthiness, did implore
the assistance of their debauched Gods.

It likewise appears by the yearly Book, which comprehend the Transactions of
four thousand years, that the Chinese have performed several brave Works for
the Service of their Country, and the Public Good. The same is also to be seen
by the Books of the ancient and wisest Philosophers, which were all in being
before the last Invasion of the Tartars; but then in the general Conflagration
of the Country were most of them burnt, wherein were writ good and wholesome
Doctrines, for the Instruction of Youth in the Ways of Virtue and Goodness.

These Books mention only three Sects to have been in those Times in the World:
The first of which is the Sect of the Learned: The second is called Sciequia:
And the third Lancu. The first of these three Sects is followed by all the
Chinese, and the adjacent People which use the Chinese Characters, as the
Islanders of Iapan, Corea, and Couchinchina, and by none else, and is the
ancientest of all the Sects that were ever heard of in China. Out of it, about
which a very great number of Books are writ, generally are chosen such Persons
as are fit for the Government of the Empire; and therefore it is honored and
esteemed above all others. The Doctrine of this Sect is not learned all at
once, but they suck it in by degrees when they learn to Read or Write. The
first Founder of this Sect was Confutius, the Prince of the Chinese
Philosophers, who is to this day honored by all the Learned with the Title of
The most Wise. This Confutius, as the Jesuit Semedo relates in his History, was
a Man of a very good Nature, and much inclined to Virtue; Prudent, Subtle, and
a great Lover of his Country: His Writings are to this day had in great honor
and esteem, as being the Groundwork of all the Learning at this time in use
amongst them. What concerns his Writings, which are contained in four large
Books, we have already made mention.

Several other Books have been written by the Followers of this Sect; some
whereof have been brought out of China into Europe, the Titles and Contents of
which I thought good here to mention; and are these that follow: 1. The first
treats of the Original of the whole World, of the first Creator and Preserver
of all things. Out of this Book are most things selected which relate to
Natural Knowledge. 2. Of the Eternal Middle. 3. Of the Doctrine of the Full
Growth. These two Books are reputed to contain all Natural Knowledge, and
selected out of the first Book. And they firmly believe, that no Person beside
themselves are able or fit to comprehend the Marrow and Pith of these
mysterious Books, though in truth and substance they are no more difficult to
be understood, than the Writings of Titus Livius, and Cicero. 4. Of the Course,
Condition, Influx, and Operation of the Erratick Stars; as also of the other
Heavenly Lights. 5. Of the Casting of Figures, and making Conjectures; which
are used about things that have an uncertain and doubtful issue. 6. Of
Palmestry and Physiognomy. 7. Of Natural Witchcraft. 8. Of the Rise, Names, and
Worship of Idols. 9. Of the Deeds, Miracles, Deaths, and Burials of the Chinese
Saints. 10. Of the Immortality of the Soul, and its future State; as also of
Mourning Habits, and in what manner they are to be worn. 11. Of several Books
of Physic and Surgery. 12. Of the State and Condition of Children in the
Womb, and of such things help forward, or hinder the Birth. 13. Of Arithmetic.
14. Of Husbandry. 15. Of what belongs to a Farrier in the Cure of Horses. 16.
Of War and Military Discipline, with the Weapons belonging thereunto. 17. Of
the Signs whereby to know a fruitful Year. 18. Of the Art of Writing, and how
to make Characters. 19. An Exact Description of all the Provinces in China. 20.
Of the Age of the Chinese Empire and Government. 21. Of the Command, Majesty,
Revenues, Palaces, etc. of the Emperor. 22. Of the Offices of the Emperor's
Servants. 23. Of the Laws of the Empire. 24. Of the Acts and Deeds of the
Chinese Emperors. 25. Of those Nations that are known to the Chinese. 26. Of
Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, in use among them. 27. Of Poetry. 28. Of
several sorts of Plays.


Moreover, this first Sect of the Learned, whereof we have thus far made a
Description, is absolutely against the Worship of Images, neither will they
suffer them to be in their Temples. The Adherents and Fautors of this Sect
acknowledge and worship One God only; induced thereunto, because they firmly
believe that all these Earthly Things are Preserved, Governed, and Directed by
him: they also render a certain Veneration to Spirits, but with less Adoration
and Respect. Some among them teach, That the World had neither Creator nor
Beginning, but sprung immediately from it self. There are others among them,
but not so Learned and Famous, who are possessed with Dreams and Phansies of a
multitude of incredible things, and many impossible Impertinences relating
thereunto.

In the Doctrine of this Sect there are many Lessons, teaching the Reward of
Good, and the Punishment of Evil: and this seems to insinuate to us, That the
Ancient Chinese did not doubt of the Immortality of the Soul: But the Learned
among them at this time are of opinion, That the Souls of the Departed perish
and come to nothing with the Body, thereby endeavoring to invalidate the Belief
of Future Rewards and Punishments: Yet some think this too hard, and therefore
maintain, That only the Souls of the Just remain alive; because, as they say,
the Soul of a Man is so united and renewed through the Exercise of Virtue, that
it will live for a long time after its separation from the Body: but withal
they conclude, That the Souls of the Wicked die as soon as they are divided
from the Body, and vanish like Smoke.

And although the Learned, and Dependents of this Sect, acknowledge the Highest
and One Deity, yet they erect no Temple for him, nor have any particular Place
for his Worship; neither are there any Priests, nor settled or due Form of
Worship, nor Commands to observe, other than such as they may at pleasure
break. There is no High Priest amongst them, to punish such as offend against
the Law, or to propagate the Doctrine taught concerning him; therefore they
Offer unto him neither Prayer nor Sacrifice, in Public or in Private,
believing that it is only free for the King to Offer up unto, or Adore this
King of Heaven. And if any body else should be so adventurous to undertake to
make such an Offering, he would be held for a Traitor, and punished
accordingly. For this purpose has the Emperor two famous and well built Temples
in both the Imperial Chief Cities of Nanking and Peking; the one Dedicated to
Heaven, and the other to the Earth; in both which themselves formerly in Person
made their Offerings: but now the chiefest Magistrates Officiate in their
behalfs, and Sacrifice several Oxen and Sheep to Heaven and Earth.

The chiefest Matter wherewith the Professors of this Sect trouble themselves,
and wherein as well the King as the People is concerned, consists in the
performing of certain Ceremonies toward the Dead, whereof we have already
spoken at large; for they conceive it a principal part of their Duty, to honor
their deceased Parents and Friends, as if they were still living: Yet these
People (although they set Viands and the like before them) are not so blind and
ignorant to believe that the Dead eat, or have any need thereof: But they give
this reason for such their Doings, which in it self indeed is of no weight,
viz. because they can show their love unto them no other way. The wisest among
them affirm, That those Customs were introduced more for the Instruction of the
Living, than Honor of the Dead, to wit, to teach Children how to honor and
respect their Parents and Superiors when they are alive, whom they see honored
and respected by so many Persons of Quality and Worth after their Deaths.

We now come to speak of the Doctrine Confutius left behind him, and which is
in such esteem amongst the People.

This great Doctrine, or rather the Doctrine of this Great Man, is made up of
these Heads or Positions, viz. That every one bring himself first to
Perfection, and afterward others, that so all may arrive at the possession of
the Supremum Bonum, or Highest Good: But herein Perfection it self consists,
That every Person blow up the Natural Light in himself, and make it clear, so
as he may never err from the Law of Nature, or from the Commands and Rudiments
which are naturalized unto a Man by that Law: And in regard the same cannot be
done without an insight and inspection into things; therefore it is requisite
Men should betake themselves to the Study of Philosophy, whereby they may learn
what is to be done and avoided. By this Knowledge (say they) we are taught how
to order our Affairs aright, and to rectify our Desires by the Rule and Square
of Reason; and herein consists the Perfection of Body and Mind.

This most short and perfect Comprehension of the Chinese Wisdom and Doctrine,
comprehends in it the Beginning, Means, Rule, and Benefit (which at last arises
from thence) of Perfection, as well relating to our selves as others. The first
Beginnings of this Perfection are said to arise from an Intrinsic Light,
kindled by a diligent Observation and Scrutiny into the outward Grounds and
Rules of Natural things, and so gradatim brought to Maturity. For the better
accomplishing whereof, are presently added the Means leading to this
Perfection, consisting in Acts, as well of the Operation as of the Will: The
Rule of both is called here Reason; which is, That we shall not desire or will
any thing, but what is consonant to Reason. Lastly, The Advantages are set
forth that accrue thereby; and that a double Perfection, of the Body in the
first place, and then of the Mind.

The second Sect, called Sciequia or Omtofe, is called by those of Iapan,
Sciacca and Amidaba. This Doctrine was brought out of the West among the
Chinese, in the sixty fifth Year before the Birth of Christ, from the Kingdom
of Tienci and Scinto, both which are known at this time by the general Name of
Indostan, and are situated between the Rivers of Indus and Ganges. The Chinese
History mentions, That one of their Emperors was admonished in his Sleep, to
send Ambassadors thither for that Discovery, which (according to the over
credulous humor of that Nation) believing, he accordingly did: They arriving in
the Country, and delivering their Message, were received with Applause, and in
convenient time returned to their Prince with the Books, and some of the best
skilled in those Languages, to Interpret them into the Chinese Tongue; wherein
are maintained several Opinions of the old Heathen Philosophers, as, That there
are several Worlds; The Transmigration of Souls; That three Gods unite and grow
in one Deity; That the Good shall be rewarded in Heaven, and the Wicked
punished in Hell. Such as are great Admirers of this Sect, reject a Married,
and commend a Single Life.

If any among them be found to transgress their Rule, he is not only blamed and
despised by all, but likewise severely punished: As a proof whereof, I saw at
Cunningan, a Priest whom they had found and taken amongst Light Women, for
which Offense they bored him through the Neck with a hot Iron, and so hung upon
him a Chain of ten yards long, with heavy Bars: And thus accoutred, he was led
through the City, to the derision of all the People, till he had begged ten
Toel of Silver for the Benefit of his Cloister: He was not suffered, as he
passed along, to bear up the Chain with his Hands to ease himself; but it hung
down loose behind him, so that the whole weight fell upon his Neck. And that
every Person might take notice of the Punishment, one of his Brethren of the
same Order followed him with a Whip in his Hand, and lashed him all the way he
went upon his naked Body, till the Blood ran down his Skin. This Spectacle
going by the Ambassador's Lodgings, moved in them so much compassion of his
Misery, that they bestowed on him a Largess to help to pay his Ransom.

After a strange manner also are the Priests here Dressed, being Clothed each
in a particular Habit: Some wear a long Gown upon the left side only, black,
with a apiece Cap or Bonnet upon their Heads, and a Chaplet of Beads.
Others wear another sort of Gowns and Caps, but as uncouth as the former. But
the most strange Garb is that of the Begging Priest, who has commonly a Gown on
of several Colors, and full of Patches: Upon his Head he has a Cap, which on
both sides has long Feathers to defend him against the Sun and Rain: In his
left Hand he carries a Bell, upon which he continually strikes till something
is given him, or that you are gone out of sight. They seldom go about Begging,
but sit upon the Ground with their Legs across, like our Tailors.

The Cloisters of these Priests are divided into several Apartments, according
to their bigness; in each of them is also a Supervizor and head, in whose Place
his Scholars succeed after his Death. Each Head is diligent to contrive as many
Cells as he can for his Scholars, because they let them out to Travelers for a
piece of Money at any time; so that indeed they serve as well for Inns, or
Hostries for Travelers, as Cloisters for the Brotherhood.

And though these Friars live thus in a mean Condition, and contemptible; as to
the outward appearance, yet they are invited to Burials frequently, and other
Public Ceremonies, as the making free of wild Deer, Birds, Fish, and
four-footed Creatures. Some of the greatest Sticklers of this Sect buy these
Creatures alive, with design only to set them at liberty; and in so doing their
Service is meritorious, and such for which they believe they shall be rewarded.
This Sect is very much increased of late years; and the greatest part of their
Followers are the Gelubden Women, with a company of other simple Creatures.

The third Sect, called Lanzu, has its rise from a certain Philosopher,
contemporary with Confutius, of whom the Natives fancy, that he was carried
eighty years in his Mothers Belly before he was born; and therefore they called
him Lanzu, which signifies The old Philosopher. The Jesuit Martinus writes in
his fourth Book of the Chinese History, That he was called Lanxu Laotanus, and
taught, That there remained not any thing of us after we were dead, the highest
Happiness of a Man consisting in Pleasure; in imitation of Epicurus. The Fable
concerning his Birth, had its rise from the number Nine; for as this number is
held for the most perfect, and again multiplied, makes eighty one; so has
Nature in the product of this famous Man, been so many years in Travel and
Labor. This Philosopher left not any one Book behind him of his Doctrine, being
unwilling, as it seems, to introduce any new Enthusiasms; but after his Death
his Sectators made a Collection of several Doctrines, out of the Books of
diverse Sects, and compiled them into one.

Those that are in their Cloisters live unmarried, and buy their Scholars, but
obtain among the People no respect, nor have any sense or fear of God among
themselves. Yet others of the same Gang betake themselves to a Married Estate,
and live in a more orderly manner.

They Worship the Lord of Heaven, whom they represent in the Form of a Man, and
say that he has much wrong done him: yet beside him, they have made to
themselves two other Gods, whereof Lanzu, the Head of this Sect, is one; so
that these two Sects, though in a different manner, adore each three Gods. By
the Followers of this Sect is the Place described where Men after this Life are
either rewarded or punished: but concerning these Matters, there is between
this and the foregoing Sects no small difference; for the Heads of this Sect
promise to their Tribe, that they shall possess Heaven with Soul and Body: And
the better to demonstrate the same, they expose to sight in their Temples the
Images of several People, who (as they say) went to Heaven in that manner: And
the more certainly to obtain to this Happiness, they teach their Followers
several Postures and Prayers, and exhort them to Deeds of Charity.

The Office of the Priest consists chiefly in dispossessing such Houses as are
infested or haunted with the Devil, by their ungodly Prayers and Curses, which
they effect commonly after this manner: They paint frightful Faces, and
Postures of Devils, upon Yellow Paper, and fix them to the Walls of the House;
then they bawl and skream so terrible loud, that they seem to be like so many
Devils themselves: And this is the utmost height of their Conjuration.

There is another Office and Art which they ascribe to themselves; for they
boast, That in dry Weather they can cause Rain, and at their pleasure make the
same either to abate or cease again. And they profess to be skilled in several
other strange Arts (but in truth mere Delusions) wherewith they deceive the
whole Empire; yet notwithstanding, these Priests have their Residence in the
Royal Temples dedicated to Heaven and Earth, and are always assistant at the
Offerings (whether the Emperor himself be there present in Person, or only the
Magistrates in his behalf) whereby they grow famous, and are had in great
esteem, not by the Common People alone, but the Grandees also; to all whose
Burials they are invited, and help to perform the Ceremonial part of the
Funeral, attired in very costly and rich Habits; and go before the Corpse,
playing upon Flutes, and other Musical Iustruments.

All this Sect are under the Command and Jurisdiction of one Prelate, called
Ciam, whose Dignity always descends upon one of his Posterity, which has been
observed for above a thousand years.

It seems that this great Dignity or Office had its first rise from a certain
Sooth-sayer, who lived in a Cave in the Province of Quangsi, where his
Posterity continue at present, and practice the Delusions of their Ancestors.
This their High Priest Ciam is for the most part Resident in the Imperial City
of Peking, and very highly honored by the Emperor, having an allowed Access
into the middlemost part of the Palace, to Bless and Consecrate the Rooms, if
at any time they are suspected to be haunted, or molested with Evil Spirits: He
is carried through the Street in an open Chair, in as great State as any of the
most principal Magistrates, and receives yearly a good Revenue from the Emperor.

And thus I have given you a Description of the three Chief Sects in China, out
of which the ignorant and blind People have broached and set on foot so many
hundred sorts, differing from one another in point of Worship.

The Emperor Humvuus, the first of that Race, that at the beginning of this Age
had the Sovereignty over China, gave express Command that those three Sects,
for the Defense and Honor of the Government, should be strictly observed, by
which he did infinitely win the Hearts of the Followers; but yet though he
mentioned all, he so ordered the matter, that the Sect of the Learned only
should have a share in the managing the great Affairs of the Empire, and also
should have Authority over the other two: And this probably may be the Reason
why the one Sect does not wholly endeavor to abolish and extirpate the other;
because the Emperor carries an equal hand to them all, respecting the one as
much as the other, and makes use of them alike, as he has occasion; sometimes
causing an old Temple to be repaired, and sometimes a new one to be built, for
one or other of them, as he thinks it expedient. But the Empress affects that
Sect best that maintains the Worship of Images, and is very bountiful to the
Priests thereof, bestowing large Annuities, and great Incomes upon them.

The great number of Idols which are found in China is incredible; for not only
the Temples, and such like Places of Worship, are hung very full, but also all
Houses, Streets, Ships, etc. are adorned with them. And this is one of the
great Abominations that at first appears to all that come into China.

Amongst the rest, the Idol that represents Immortality, is in great
Veneration, whose Description is this: It is in the shape of a thick fat and
Person, with his Legs across, and a Belly that sticks at least two Foot out; on
its right side stands commonly a Stag, a Creature of a long life, looking upon
his Lord with a pleasant Countenance. The Image it self sits with his Hand in
his Sleeve, and his Doublet unbrac'd, so that his fat Body may be the better
seen: His Looks are very grim and stately, and his Habit rich and Majestical.
This Image is the Patron for Travelers, and called upon by them when they make
any long Voyages, for Protection, Preservation, and Success in their
Undertaking.

The next is the Idol of Pleasure, which they call Minifo, and is composed and
made after the same manner as that of Immortality, but much bigger, being
commonly cast of Brass, hollow within and twenty Foot high; it carries a very
pleasant Countenance, and, like the former, is very thick and corpulent, with a
Belly sticking out; and that his gross, and fat Members may be the better seen
he sits with his whole Body almost naked.

Betwixt these, sitting in a Chair, is an Image thirty Foot high, made of
Plaster, having a Crown upon his Head, gilded all over, richly Apparelled,
with several other strange Ornaments. They call this The great Kingang, and
give it a Respect in the highest manner.

Beside these there are two others; the one is the Goddess which at Linain (as
it is already related in our former Description) stand upon the Temple
Dedicated to her; it is thirty Foot high, very richly gilded, and has stood in
that Place ninety six years and upwards.

The other sits in a Chair richly adorned, resembling one of the Chinese
Governors, who had done his Country very good Service, for which they honor him
since his Death after this manner: At his Feet, as a sign of Victory, is
Pourtrayed a certain Country; and in his Hand, to show his Authority, he holds
a Scepter.

In the Province of Quantung, near to the noble City of Chaoking, in a
well built Temple, stands another Statue of a certain Governor of a Province,
who had done his Country extraordinary Service six years together; and as a
return of thankfulness for the same, the Inhabitants, according to the Custom,
erected this Image and Temple, and Dedicated it unto him.

In Cuchiung, near to Hangan, there is a great Stone above a hundred Foot high,
called Xinxe, and signifies The Holy Stone, which they cover yearly quite over
with Gold, and then worship it. This piece of Idolatry was commanded by the
Emperor Mung.

Near to the City Cioking, upon the Mountain Xepao, is a great Stone Column,
with the Image of the Idol Fe, and an Elephant, Lion, and Drum, cut out of
Stone, each of which is of several Colors; but whose workmanship they were, or
who brought the same thither, is altogether unknown.

In the Province of Suchuen, near to the Chief City of Chunking, is a very
strange great Hill upon the side of the River Feu, between this City and
another called Tunchuen; and on this Hill is a mountainous Idol, called Fe; it
is made sitting with his Legs cross-ways, and his Hands clapped over one another
before him. How incredibly large the same is, may be guessed at by this, that
Travelers can plainly see his Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Mouth, at two Miles
distance.

CHAP. IX.
Of Idol-Temples.
ALL this Country does infinitely abound with Idol-Temples, which are built at
very great Charge, and most commonly situate without the Walls of their Cities,
in solitary places; and in these the Traveller may find Accommodations
answerable to his desire. Adjoining to these Temples stands commonly a Tower,
with a smaller Edifice of the same kind, but no less costly than artificially
built. These Idolatrous Places are filled with Images, and hung round with
black Lamps, burning night and day, in memory of such who lived well, and died
happily. When any Governors of Provinces are to be admitted into their Offices,
they are Sworn in these Temples* That they shall faithfully perform their
Duties. I took an exact view of one of these Structures, of which I thought it
not amiss to give this following Account: The sides of it were built with
Timber, and the Roo^ Tyl'd; the Floor was in some places Earth, and in other of
gray Stone; and on each of the sides stood several great Images in a row; but
at the entrance was one most dreadful to behold, being a Horned Devil, in a
most terrible and frightful shape, with a wide Mouth, and Hands like the Claws
of a Griffin, in such a posture as if it would have seized those that entered.
Within, in the middle stood an Altar, upon which was erected another great
Image thirty Foot high; behind which stood a great number of small ones: Before
the great one there stood upon the Altar a thick hollow Bambo's, upon which was
written some Chinese Characters, that foretold things that should come to pass.
On the sides stood several Vessels with Incense burning, and in the middle was
a wooden Dish, with several Offerings in it, which the Priests, when they
would know or foretell any thing, bring to the Altar and Offer up to this Image.
Now the chief Offerings at such times, are either Rice, Wine, or the Entrails
of Beasts, which being ceremoniously disposed, the Priest draws some Reeds out
of the Bambo's Basket; and if they are in his opinion portentous of Ill, he
draws out others, till he has drawn such as he believes prognosticate Good. In
this interim the Incense burns, and at last the Priest falls upon his Knees,
and mumbles one thing or other to himself, whereby he intends to pacify the
Idol, and get him to favor his Suit.

In the Province of Peking, near to Chingting, is a very large and most
magnificent Temple, a hundred and sixty five Foot high; within which stands a
thick and prodigious Image, a hundred six Foot and a half high called Quonin,
curiously wrought in the form of a Virgin. Behind this Temple is erected a
spacious Palace.

In the Province of Xansi, in the City of Ta^ven, is a Temple Dedicated to
Siangus, the wisest of their Emperors, and of the Family of Chaus. It is
reported in their Histories, that this Image, which is made of very precious
Stones, being finished, rose up of it self, and went to the place which was
appointed for its Station.

At Leugan, upon the Mountain Peco, which signifies The Mountain of Fruits, is
founded a Temple in honor of the Emperor Xi^^ungus; near which stands a famous
Well. Now (according to the Saying of the Chinese) Xinnungus received diverse
sorts of Seeds from an unknown Person, and received Directions in what manner
he should Sow the same to gain a plentiful Harvest; which he having
experimented, taught to his Subjects: for which Benefit they erected this
Temple to his Memory at very great Charge.

In the Province of Xensi, in the City of Hanchang, are five Temples, whereof
one is Dedicated to the Emperor Cangleangus, because he had caused a Way to be
cut through the Mountain; and in perpetual memory of this his great Undertaking
this Temple was erected.

In the Chief City of Kingang are three Temples full of Images; and in the
Province of Xantung, in the Chief City of Cinan, are several.

Near to Yencheu, in the City of Ceu, are fifteen stately Temples, Dedicated to
Helvutius, and other renowned Heroes.

In the Province of Suchuen, in the Chief City of Chingtu, is one built to the
Memory of King Cancungus, because he taught the Inhabitants of that Kingdom the
Art of raising and preparing of Silkworms.

In the Province of Huquang, near to Kiun, is a large Hill called Vutang, upon
which are erected several Structures, with Cloisters for Priests; and the
reason thereof may be, for that here all Priests receive their Introduction,
who follow and teach the inward approved Doctrine of the separation of Soul and
Body.

In the Province of Nanking, near to the Chief City Ningque, stands a very high
and beautiful Edifice called Hiangsin, that is to say, The well-scented Heart,
and Dedicated to five Virgins, who being assaulted by such as would have
ravished them, rather chose to die than have their Virginity violated: in honor
of whose Chastity the Inhabitants erected these Temples.

In the Province of Chekiang, and in the Chief City of Hangcheu, are found very
many of these Buildings, to which belong several thousands of Priests.

At Nanking, on the Mountain Ni, stands one of these Fabrics, that has at
least a thousand Images to it, and to every Image ten Priests.

And indeed (to shorten this Relation) there is hardly a Mountain or Hill in
China of any Note, but has a Temple upon it, with Priests belonging to it.

In the Province of Fokien, near to the City Cinggan, lies a great Hill called
Vay, which has several Temples and Cloisters upon it, abounding with Priests
and Friars, most whereof worship Idols, shave their Crowns, and despise all
Earthly Riches, Possessions, and Honors. But that which is fullest of
admiration is this: It was said, that amongst these Priests, one of the chief,
called Chang, who had two Chapels under his Command, being convinced of the
Error of his Way, coming one day into his Temples, broke all the Idols in
pieces, exclaiming bitterly against the Priests, for having thus long deceived
him, and keeping him in blind Ignorance; from thenceforth embraceing the
Christian Religion to the utmost period of his Life.

In the Province of Fokien, near to the City Civencheu, is a Temple called
Caiyven, which is worthy of admiration, both for its height and largeness: The
outsides of this sumptuous Edifice are all of Marble, and the inside most
richly adorned with Idols of all sorts. Among others there are some that
exceed, which are either cast in Copper, or cut out of Marble, made for Madam
Fee, having such curiosity of Workmanship, that the Chinese say they were not
made with mortal Hands.

Without the Imperial City of Nanking I was my self in one of the three
Idol-Temples, where Hell (so as Virgil describes the same in the sixth Book of
his Aeneids) was so curiously Painted to the Life, and adorned with rare Images
of Plaster, that it is enough to fill all Persons with admiration that look
upon the same.

CHAP. X.
Of Towers and Sea-Marks.
CHINA is very full of brave and well built Towers, whereof some are nine,
others seven Stories high, many of which are only for Ornament; but upon a
great part of them called Ceuleu, stand their Clock-workss and in others,
especially at Nanking, are kept the Astrological Instruments: Upon the
Clock-house Turrets stands an Instrument, which shows the hour of the day by
means of Water, which running from one Vessel into another, raises a Board,
upon which is Portrayed a Mark for the time of the day; and you are to
observe, That there is always one remaining there, to take notice of the
passing of the time, who at every hour signifies the same to the People by
beating upon a Drum, and hanging out a Board with the Hour writ upon it in
large Letters. This Time-Drummer likewise gives notice if he discovers any
Fire; whereupon the People all rise to quench it: In whose House soever the
Fire happens through carelessness, the Master thereof is punished with Death,
because of the fright and hazard he put his Neighbor in, whose House joining to
his, and built all of Timber (as all Habitations there are) was in very great
danger of being likewise consumed; for all the Houses stand very close. And
this in truth is the cause of so great severity showed against such, whose
Houses are burnt through carelessness.

Upon the top of the Mountain Hiaiken stands a very ancient Tower, which is
very much decayed, but yet keeps the height of a hundred and eighty Paces; but
that which is most to be admired therein, is, that it is built of Stone, which
with infinite Labor, Industry, and Expense, they must bring thither, and then,
together with the Mortar, carry up so great a height to build such a Tower.

In the Country of Huquang, near to the City of Hanyang, is a Tower called
Xelonhoa, which far excels all other such like Structures in Art and
Costliness. It is said to have been erected upon this account: There was a
certain Daughter, who was worthy remark for her Obedience to her Mother-in-law;
she having one day a Pullet for Dinner, invited her Step-Dame to the eating
part of it; who accepting the Invitation, and coming to participate thereof,
had no sooner tasted of it, but she fell down dead: The Daughter was
immediately apprehended, brought before a Judge, and accused of poisoning her
Mother-in-law, and the matter of Fact being so clear, was condemned to die: As
she was going to the Place of Execution, she happened to pass by a
Pomegranate-Tree then in Blossom, which holding fast in her Hand, she Prayed
(as is said) after this manner: If I have poisoned my Stepmother, may the
Flowers of this Branch now in my Hand wither; but if I be innocent, let the
Branch live, and bring forth Fruit immediately: Which words were hardly passed
her Lips, before that Branch which she held in her Hand hung full of
Pomegranates. In remembrance of which so famous Miracle the Inhabitants built
this Tower, and called it Xelenhoa, which signifies A Pomegranate-Tree.

In the Province of Chekiang, in the Chief City Hangcheu, are four of these
Towers, each of them nine Stories high; and in the great City Niencheu is
another of the like height.

Near to the City Vencheu lies a Hill called Paocai, upon whose top stands a
Tower nine Stories high, which serves for a Landmark to the Ships and Mariners
Sailing at Sea.

Lastly, in the Province of Chekiang, near to the City of Hangcheu, lies a
Mountain called Funghoang, upon the top whereof stands a like Tower of nine
Stories high.

Triumphal Arches.
MOst of the Cities in China, both small and great, are adorned and beautified
with Triumphal Arches, stately Towers and Pyramids, made of Stone or Marble,
with great Art, Cost, and Ingenuity, and adorned with Images, being generally
erected in honor of some famous Act, Thing, or Person. Those who have done
their Country any signal Service, have some of these set up to eternize their
Memory, almost after the same manner as was formerly practiced by the ancient
Romans. So also if any have been more excellent in Learning, or if any
Magistrate has signalized himself by his good behavior in his Employment, in
honor of such, Arches, Towers, Pillars, or Pyramids are built, and commonly
placed as Ornaments in the chiefest Streets, and most populous places. Their
fashion is this; they have three Roofs, the biggest in the middle, and on each
side a small one, underneath which Men pass as it were through a very broad
Gate; the sides are adorned with Lions and other Images, curiously cut out of
Marble, and fixed thereto, or otherwise very artificially bored through, and
sometimes adorned with small Images cut out of Stone; so that it is indeed a
thing deservedly to be admired, which way they can bore through such great
Stones, and cut Images out of them, as they lie fixed in the Building. The
whole Arch for the most part consists of three Stories, and is on the Front and
Back alike for fashion; so that when you look upon the one side, you have in
effect seen both sides. Upon the top of all lies a blue Stone, upon which the
Emperor's Name, in whose Government the same was erected, is curiously Engraven
in Letters of Gold: In the middle also lies a very large flat Stone, upon which
is writ in gilt or blue Letters, the Name, Country, and Dignity of him in whose
behalf this Edifice was erected.

CHAP. XI.
Of Rivers, Channels, Highways, Bridges, Ships, etc.
THrough the Province of Suchue runs the River To, as far as Sinfan, being a
Branch brought from the River Kiang, by the Command of the Emperor Ivos, to
hinder the overflowing of that River.

In the Province of Chekiang are most of the Rivers which come from the North,
made by Art so useful, as if they had been naturally so. It is highly to be
admired, and meriting the highest Commendation, to consider with what labor and
pains they have effected such vast Undertakings; for in some places there are
very large Channels, running far up into the Country, which have been dug,
and are paved on both sides with Stone: Over which Channels lie many great and
heavy Sluices, with several Bridges, convenient for Travelers, either by Land
or Water.

In Ningpo, the ninth City of the Province of Chekiang, both sides of the
artificial Rivers, for several Miles together, are made up with Stone: At the
end of every River lies a Sluice, through which all Vessels must pass before
they come into it,

In the Country of the City Xaohing is an artificial River toward the East,
three days Journey in length, both sides whereof are made up with Brick, to
prevent the Earth from falling in, to choke or clog up the same.

Common Ways.
THE common Passages, or Highways in China, are contrived as much for the
convenience and ease of Travelers, as in any Place or the World. We begin in
the Southern Provinces, where most of their Ways (...) even and smooth, the
very Hills being made passable, and a Way hewn (...) through the Rocks by the
labor of Men's Hands. Upon these so commodious Ways, stand several Marks of
Stone, which declare the Distances of Places from one another; and every ten
Miles there is a Post appointed to c^^ry the Emperors and Magistrates Letters
and Commands, which being (...) received, are delivered with extraordinary
speed; so that there happens nothing in any part of the Country, but it is
presently known through all the Empire.

At every eighth Stone, which is a days Journey, you have one of his Majesty's
ordinary Houses, built on purpose to receive and treat at the Emperors Charge,
all Governor's and Magistrates that travel that way upon the Emperor's Service;
but before their Arrival they send a Messenger to certify what day they intend
to be there; so that the Governor or Magistrate arriving, finds all things in a
readiness for him, to wit, Provisions, Horses, Chairs, Trackmen, and, Vessels
of all sorts, if he need any; for whatsoever he desires, is given notice of by
him in a Letter.

The Banks of the Rivers are no less well contrived for the ease of Passengers,
than the common Ways; for they suffer no Trees to grow within eight Foot of the
Rivers side, lest they should be a hindrance to the Boats that are Towed along
by Ropes.

In the Province of Fokien, near to the City Hinghoa, the Ways are well and
strongly paved with Stone, for above four Dutch Mile in length.

Near to the City Hoanting lies a deep, small, and darkish Valley, through
which runs a paved Way two Miles in length.

Upon the Mountain Mechi (which is in truth a Wilderness) lies a firm, but very
narrow Way, made by Art for Travelers to pass over; and upon Co is a very
steep Way, at least ten Dutch Miles.

Near to the City of Kiangxan there is a great Mountain called Civen, at least
three hundred Furlong in length, over which is the direct Road to Fokien, and
has several good Inns upon it for the Entertainment of Passengers.

Bridges or Sluices..
IN the Province of Xensi, over the River Guei lies three Sluices, namely, one
Easterly, the second in the middle, the third toward the West; all of them
built very strong, with many great and very high Arches of square Stone,
curiously adorned, and carved with diverse sorts of Images, as Lions, Dragons,
and the like.

In the Province of Queicheu, in the fourth Chief City Ganxin, are three Sluices
of great bigness; but the third called Tiensing, that is to say, the natural
Sluice, is well nigh a thousand Rod long.

In the same Province, near to the City Hanchung, is a most admirable piece of
Work, so great a Masterpiece in its kind, that the like thereof is hardly to
be found in the World, whose Description I will give you as follows: Between
this and the Chief City the Way was formerly altogether unpassable; and the
Inhabitants were constrained to fetch a great compass round, by reason of the
high and rough Hills, and steep Passages; sometimes necessitated to travel
toward the East, to the Frontiers of the Province of Honan, and then again to
turn toward the North; so that they went at least two thousand Furlongs,
whereas the direct Way over the Mountains was not much more than five hundred:
wherefore at the end of the Race of Cina, when Licupangus made War with
Hiangyus for the Empire, all these steep Hills and Vales were levelled by order
of Changleangus, the General of Licupangus, to make his Army with the more ease
to pursue the flying Enemy. And certainly, with great and incredible labor and
industry was this stupendous Work effected, in which he employed no less than
his whole Army, with at least a hundred thousand Men more, by whose Labor a Way
was at last perfected through the same.

On both sides of the Way are Walls made out of these Mountains, so high, that
part thereof touches the very Clouds, and thereby obscures the Passages in
some places. In others he caused Planks to be laid, to serve as Bridges to pass
over from one Mountain to another, on purpose to shorten the Way, which is
generally so broad, that four may ride abreast, and has Conveniences enough to
accommodate Passengers: And lest the People should by chance receive any
mischief as they pass over the Bridges, both the sides thereof are Railed in
from one end to another.

In the same Province, near to the City Chegan, is a Bridge called Fi, reaching
from one Mountain to another, and having but one single Arch, which is six
hundred Foot long, and near seven hundred Foot high, through which the Yellow
River runs* It was three years in building, and is called by the People, The
Flying Bridge.

In the Province of Honan, in the City Queite, lies a Sluice made of apiece
Stone, over the Mere or Lake called Nan.

In the Province of Huquang, near to the City Chyangang, is another Sluice of
Stone, having several Arches, erected by King Guei.

In the Province of Kiangsi, in the little City of Gangin, there is a Bridge
worthy to be spoken of, and called The Bridge of Obedience and Subjection; the
Story of it goes thus: A Daughter of rich Parents Married a Husband who soon
after died; and in regard it is held in China a great dishonor to honest Women
to Marry the second time, she went and lived with her Father and Mother, that
by the enjoyment of their Company she might the better and more easily forget
the loss of her Husband: but not long after, her Father and Mother happened to
die, by whose loss being left comfortless, she upon serious debate within her
self, laid out her Estate upon building of this Bridge, which stands upon
several Arches; and when she had finished it, being yet troubled in her
thoughts, she came early one Morning to take a view of the Structure; which
having done, and imagining her Memory would be Eternized thereby, she flung her
self headlong into the River, where she was drowned.

In the same Province, in the City of Cancheu, where the River Chang and Can
meet in one, is a very long Bridge, built upon a hundred and thirty Boats,
fastened to one another with Chains, upon which lie the Planks and Timber that
compile the Bridge; one or two of which Boats are so contrived and ordered,
that they easily remove to open or shut, and so make passage for Vessels at
pleasure, after they have paid their Toll, for the receipt whereof there stands
a Toll-house at the foot of the Bridge.

In the Province of Chekiang, near the fifth Chief City Xinhoa, from the top of
the Mountain Fanguien, is a very large Bridge made over a Vale, which is so
stupendous a Work, that it fills all People with great admiration that ever
saw it.

In the same Province, in the City Luki, is a Bridge consisting of Stone
Pillars and Wooden Planks, which is a hundred Rod in length.

In the Province of Fokien, in the Chief City Focheu, is a very stately Sluice
of a hundred and fifty Rod long, and half a Rod broad, built over an Inlet of
the Sea, of yellow and white Stone, with a hundred very lofty Arches, adorned
and beautified with Sculpture of Lions and other Creatures. The like lies near
to the City Focing, and, according to the relation of the Chinese, is a
hundred and eighty Rod long.

In the second Chief City Civencheu may be seen a stately Bridge, called
Loyang, the like whereof is hardly to be seen in the whole World, whose
Description a certain Chinese Historian gives after this manner: Near to the
City Burrolilicum (says he) lies over the River Loyang, the Bridge by some
called also Loyang, but by others Vangang. The Governor of the City, named
Cayang, caused this Bridge to be made, which is three hundred sixty Rod long,
and half a Rod broad: Before the erecting thereof People were Ferried over in
Boats; but in regard every year several Boats were cast away by foul Weather,
the Governor, for the preservation and safety of the Inhabitants, resolved to
build this Bridge, which he did of black^ Stone; it rests not upon Arches, but
has at least three hundred large Pedestals or Columns of Stone made after the
fashion of Boats, which are sharp before, the better to withstand the force of
the Current; and to prevent any danger to such as pass over, the sides are
Walled in with Stone to a good height, and beautified in several places with
Images of all sorts, according to the fashion of the Country.

In the third Chief City Cangcheu there is to be observed another very stately
Bridge made of Stone, with thirty six very high and great Arches; it is so
commodiously broad, that Shops are made on both sides, and yet room enough for
Passengers either on Horse or Foot.

There are several other famous Bridges in many Ports and Cities of this
Empire, which to particularize, would take up too much time, and make this Book
swell into a larger Volume than was at first intended; therefore to pass them
by, we will proceed to give an Account of the fashion of their Ships.

Of Ships.
THe Royal Ships, and those of the Governors of Provinces, exceed the rest, and
are built after such a manner, that few or none will scarce give credit to the
Account I shall give of them, unless they had seen them; our Vessels in Europe
being in no wise comparable to those, for they lie upon the Water like high
Houses or Castles, and are divided on both sides with Partitions: In the middle
is a place like a Hall, furnished with all manner of Household Stuff, as Tables,
Chairs, etc. The Windows and Doors are made in the fashion of our Grates,
wherein, in stead of Glass they use the thinnest Oyster-shells they can get, or
else fine Linen or Silk, which they spread with clear Wax, and adorn with
several sorts of Flowers; and this keeps out the Wind and Air better than any
Glass. Round about the Ships are made Galleries, very commodious for the Seamen
to do whatever business they have, without prejudice to the Rigging: The
outside of the Ship is Painted with a certain sort of Gum, called Cie, which
makes it glitter, and appear very glorious at a distance, but within it is most
curiously Painted with several Colors, very pleasant and delightful to the
Eye. The Planks and Timber-work are so curiously rifted together, and jointed,
that there is little or no sign of any Ironwork. In length they differ not much
from those in Europe, only they are lower and narrower, and the Passage up into
them is by a Ladder twelve Foot long; the Stern of the Ship, where the
Trumpeters and Drummers stand, is like a Castle. When any of these Ships of the
Governors meet one another at Sea, they Salute, and give place according to
their Qualities, which are writ in great Letters behind their Ships, so that
there never happens any Dispute about Precedence. When it is a Calm at Sea, and
little or no Wind stirring to fill their Sails (which are made of Mats) there
are certain Men appointed to Tow the same: At such time also, and as a farther
help, they are very dexterous in the use of their Oars, wherewith they can Row
without pulling them out of the Water.

The Ships which carry the Fish called Saull, and the Silks, to the Imperial
Court, are so extraordinarily curious and rich, that no others can compare with
them; for they are gilt within and without, and Painted red; and such is their
esteem, that all other Ships strike Sail, and give place to these, whenever
or wheresoever they meet them.

In the Province of Nanking, near to the Chief City of Sucheu, may be seen
several Pleasure-Boats or little Ships, which the Inhabitants keep only for
their Pleasure; they are very richly Gilt and Painted, and may more properly be
compared to Houses than Ships: Some of the Chinese are so profusely in love
with them, that they will spend their Estates aboard these Vessels in Eating
and Drinking.

There are a vast and incredible number of Ships and Boats that pass daily from
one Place to another, by which means there is so great Accommodation by Water,
that Men may pass from the City of Maccao to the City of Peking, except one
days Journey by Water. Also Men may travel by Boat from the Province of
Chekiang, through the whole Province of Suchue, from East to West. And to say
the truth, there is hardly any considerable City but what has access to it by
Water; for the Natives have with Art and Industry dug Channels through most
of the Provinces, and let in the Rivers, on purpose to carry their Goods and
themselves by Water, by reason of the extraordinary Hills and Deserts which
they meet with in a Passage or Journey by Land; of all which we have already
made mention in our General Description of China.

In the Province of Fokien are such an innumerable company of Vessels, that the
Inhabitants proffered the Emperor, when he intended to make War upon those of
Iapan, to make him a Bridge of Boats, which should reach from thence to the
said Island of Iapan.

The Courts of the Governors of Provinces.
IN each Chief City are at least fifteen or twenty great Houses belonging to
the Governors; which is regard of the Magnificence of their Building, may
compare with Kings Palaces. In other less are eight or nine great Houses, and
in every small City four, which are all alike in fashion, only they differ in
largeness, according to the Quality of the Governor. At the Front of each
Palace are three Gates, whereof the biggest stands in the middle, adorned on
both sides with great Marble Lions: Next to this Plano, or Courtyard Pail'd
in, Painted with Gum, which they call Cie. In this Plano stand two small Towers
or Pyramids, curiously adorned, and furnished with several Musical Instruments,
upon which certain Persons play as often as the Governor goes out or comes in.
Within the Gate is a large Hall (and generally every great Palace has four or
five) where the Governor gives Audience to any that comes about Business to
him; on the sides of this Hall are several small Apartments inhabited by
inferior Officers. Here are also two particular Rooms for the Reception of
Persons of Quality that come to visit the Governor; when you are past these two
Rooms, you come to three Gates more, which are seldom opened, but when the
Governor sits upon the Bench of Judicature. The middlemost of these Gates is
very large, through which Persons of Quality are only suffered to go; other
People pass through the Gates on each side. Then you come to another large
Plano, at the end whereof is a great Court built upon Pillars called Tang, and
here the Governor administers Justice; on Both sides thereof the Courtiers and
inferior Officers have their Dwellings, who never remove with the Governor, but
live there continually, in regard they are maintained at the Charge of the
Country. Next to this is an inward Court, but far exceeding the former, and is
called Sutang, which signifies Private; and in this Court only may the nearest
Relations converse with the Governor. To these Places appertain also several
Gardens, Orchards, Ponds, Rivers, Warrens, and the like, as well for Pleasure
and Ornament, as Profit. And here observe, That the Emperor furnishes the
Governor not only with these Palaces, but likewise with all manner of
Household Stuff, Provisions, and Servants, at his own Charge: And when a
Governor (which is yet more remarkable) happens to depart to the Rule of
another Province, or else to lay down his Employment, which falls out commonly
every half year, it is allowable for him to take all the Household Goods with
him, and then the Court is to be furnished anew for the succeeding Governor.

In Cingtu, the first Chief City of the Province Suchue, famous for Trade,
there lived formerly a certain Great Prince or Governor of the Family of
Taminga, who in Power and Imperial Title could only be said to give place to
the Emperor; for in all things else he lived like a King. This Kingly or Royal
Person had a large and stately Palace, which was at least four Italian Miles in
compass, adorned with four Gates, and stood in the middle of the City; before
it, toward the South, lay a large broad Street, full of costly and artificial
Triumphal Arches.

Near to Hinghoa, the seventh Chief City of the Province of Fokien, at the foot
of the Mountain Chinyven, runs a large Water called Chung; on the side whereof
stands a large Palace containing ten Courts. In this Palace is a great Wonder
taken notice of; for infallibly there is heard a noise against Wind or Rain,
like unto the sound of a Clock, of which (although diligently inquired after)
no natural reason can be given.

Concerning the incomparable, stately, and costly Structure of the Imperial
Palace of Peking, I have already given a particular Description in my former
Relation.

CHAP. XII.
Of Rivers, Waterfalls, Lakes, etc.
HAving spoken at large of the chiefest things which the Hand or Industry of
mortal Man has produced, we shall now proceed to particularize such things
wherewith Nature has abundantly furnished the Chinese out of her rich Store.
Under which Name I comprehend Rivers, Pools, Aquaducts, Hills, Wells, Earth,
Plants, Trees, Animals of all sorts, and the like, which are mentioned in the
following Chapters.

First of all, There are in China two famous large Rivers, namely Kiang, and
the Yellow River.

The River Kiang, which is also called Yangeukiang, signifying The Son of the
Sea, divides all China into a Northern and Southern Tract: It flows from West
to East, and receives several Names, according to the Provinces through which
it runs: It was first called Minkiang, from the Mountain Min, whence it has
its source. These Mountains stretch themselves Westward of the Province of
Suchue, very far toward Prester John's Country, and come toward the North not
far from the Chief City of Guei. After it is got from this Mountain, rushing
forward with great violence, it divides it self into several Branches, which
turn and Wind through most of the Provinces. From the City of Sincin it is
called Sinkiang; afterward receiving a great many Rivulets into its Bosom, it
runs before the City of Sui, into the River called Mahu. From the City of
Liucheu it receives the Name of Liukiang, and running from thence to the City
of Chunking, joins with the great River Pa, and embraces its Name: Being gotten
beyond the City of Queicheu, it falls into the Province of Huquang, and regains
not far from the City Kingcheu, the old Name of Sinkiang: Thus far it runs with
many crooked Meanders, and a great force of Water, through Vales, terrible
Rocks, and dreadful Precipices, which the Natives knowing, do avoid and shun
with great dexterity. Being past the City of Kincheu, it begins by degrees to
run more gently, and falls toward the North into the Mere or Lake called
Tungting, from whence it takes its course before the Chief City in the Province
of Kiangsi, and from thence to the Sea Foum, which is above a hundred Dutch
Miles; and all this way it runs so gently, that Vessels may with ease Sail
against the Stream; and the ebbing and flowing of this River is observed so far
up in the Country, that it is in a manner wonderful to relate, especially at
the New or Full-Moon: In this place it is at least two Miles over, watering and
making fruitful the whole Province of of Nanking. And lastly, being passed the
Cities of Nanking and Chinkiang, it falls into the Ocean it self, through a
great Mouth, in which lies an Island and City well Guarded, and provided with
Soldiers and Ships.

The Yellow River, by Strangers so called from the color of the Water,
occasioned by the yellowness of the Ground, is named Hoang in the Chinese
Language, and seems at first to be very Morish; but the swiftness and great
force of its running makes it appear quite contrary; for with so incredible a
swiftness does this River run, that no Ships are able to Sail up against its
Stream, but are Towed along by the main strength of a great number of
Track-men: which may proceed from its being contracted within so narrow Bounds;
for in some places it is but half a Mile broad, and in others little more; but
in length it extends above eight hundred Miles. By this it appears, that this
River, next to that of Kiang, is the biggest and most famous of all China; and
though it is naturally no other than a Foreiner that has invaded the Country,
yet does it not stand in fear of their Laws (which will not permit a Foreiner
to live among them) but as their Revenger insults over them, by often laying
their Country under Water in a most lamentable manner. The Hills Quenlun, from
whence it has its source, are in my opinion the Amazion Hills, being situate
not far from the Kingdom of Laor or Tihet; and that which is more, the very
Situation of those Places and Countries do demonstrate, that from the same
Hills the Rivers Ganges in Cengala, Mesor in Laor, and several other famous
Streams, which water the Parts of Sion and Pegu, have their rise: for the
Chinese believe, and so report, That there are very many great Rivers
Southward, which take their rise from these Hills.

But to return whence we have digress'd; After this Yellow River is passed
beyond the vast Territories of Sifan and Taniju, which does not in the least
belong to the Empire of China, it runs before the City Lingao, not far from
another called King, in the Province of Xensi, in the Empire of China, to the
place where the Great Wall (made to prevent the Invasions of the Tartars)
reaches toward the East, which it likewise washes; Then it runs with great
fury, as well toward the North as the East, by one side of the vast Wilderness
called Samo, at least two thousand Furlongs, and then turns toward the South,
where it passes through the Gate Se, which is in the Wall, and so divides the
two Provinces of Xensi and Xansi: Thence it runs into several other Provinces,
whereof I have formerly made mention in the Description of our Journey to
Peking. The Water of this Yellow River is very thick and muddy, the Pople
report it will not grow clear in a thousand years; and therefore when they
speak of any difficult Undertaking, they use as a proverbial Speech among them
to say, When the Yellow River is clear. But notwithstanding this Report of
theirs, it is well known, that the Seamen which frequent this River have an
Art to make the Water clear, by flinging Allom into it, which being dissolved
therein, makes the Mud sink to the bottom.

Of Water-Shoots and great Falls of Water.
IN the Province of Xansi, near to Pingiao, is a great Fall of Water, which
makes such a noise, that it is heard some Miles distant.

In the Province of Kiangsi, hard by the Chief City Nanchange, is the Mountain
Pechang, which signifies The Mountain of a hundred Rods, because the Waters
there run so far with great impetuousness.

In the River Chuem, which runs near to Xunking, through steep and cragged
Rocks, are thirty six great Water-falls, which continually rore with a most
hideous noise.

Near to the tenth Principal City of this Province, is a River called Xemuen,
or Heng, which runs with great boisterousness from a Water-shoot that falls
into it.

The River Yao in its Passage by the City Liniao, makes so great a noise, as if
it Thundered.

From the Mountain of Taye are Cataracts that fall with great force, at least
four hundred Rods.

Near to the City Tau, is so plentiful a Water-fall, that it has caused a Mere
or Lake.

Near to the Chief City of Choxang is a River called Xangyung, wherein is so
great a fall of the Waters, that when at any time a Stone is but flung into it,
it causes Rain and Thunder; which may well be esteemed a Prodigy.

Near to the City Hoeicheu lies the River Singan, which has at least three
hundred and sixty Water-shoots falling into it, between Vales and Rocks.

In the Province of Fokien, near the City Tingcheu, is a River which runs to
Ienping, which has many of these Water-falls, and dangerous Sands and Rocks,
insomuch that when any Vessels Sail down with the Stream, the Skippers, to
avoid Shipwreck, fling out great Bundles of Straw beforehand, which stopping
against the Rocks, preserve the Vessels that strike against them from beating
themselves in pieces.

Near to the City Kiegan lies the River Can, where the dangerous Rocks called
Xetapan take their rise; it is very hazardous to Sail down the River from this
City, by reason of blind Cliffs and Sands, which have destroyed many Vessels;
for the Sands are not easily discoverable, the River running with great
swiftness over them; and therefore whatever Skippers Sail that way, take with
them always an expert Pilot from this City.

Near to the City Ce lies the River Tan, which signifies Red, because the Water
thereof looks like Blood. They report, that this Water was formerly very clear
and white, but that it received this color by means of one Pei, a very
faithful Governor of his Country, who for some reasons unknown killed himself
upon the side of this River, and ever since the Waters have retained a bloody
tincture.

There runs a River before the small City Cu, in the Province of Suchue, called
The River of Pearls, for that in the Night it glitters and sparkles as if it
were full of Precious Stones. Also before the City of Iungcheu runs the River
Siang, whose Water is of a Crystal clearness, so that though it be several
Fathoms deep, yet one may see plainly any thing that lies at the bottom.

Near to Foming runs a small River from the Mountain Talao, the Water whereof
turns blue in Harvest; at which time the Inhabitants wash their Clothes in the
same, to give them that color, which it does with as good effect as any
artificial Dyer could do.

The River Kiemo, near to Paogan, is said to have such an occult Quality, that
it will bear no Vessel of Wood, but as soon as it comes upon it, it sinks as
suddenly as if it vanished in the Air.

The like is the River Io, near to Kancheu, which is therefore called The Weak
River, because it will bear nothing that is heavy.

Near to Chingtien, upon the Mountain Cucai, is a small River, whose Waters are
very sweet and well scented.

Near to Choxan is the River Cungyang, whose Water takes Spots and Stains out
of all sorts of Cloths, and is so naturally cooling to the Air, that it
tempereth the Heat of Summer; and therefore the Emperors of China have built a
Palace over this River, to which they frequently resort, to avoid the
extraordinary Heats.

The River Kinxa, or The River of Gold, is so named, because the Inhabitants
find great quantities thereof in the same.

Near to the City Pezan runs the River Che, but more peculiarly called
Hoanglung, that is, The Yellow Dragon; for the Inhabitants fancy, that they saw
a yellow Dragon therein in the time of the Race of Hana.

The River Siangyn, which runs before Mielo, is famous, because it was the
occasion of the observation of the Feast Tuonu, which is observed and kept
through all China upon the fifth Day of the fifth Month, in memory of a certain
faithful Governor, who drowned himself in this River, to prevent some Traitors
that were plotting to take away his Life; he being a Man well beloved by the
People over whom he Ruled, they to this day, as an honor to his Posterity, and
to continue his Fame, make great Entertainment.

In the Province of Kiangsi, near to the City of Vucheu, runs the River
Lieufan, from whence the Chinese fetch the Water which they use in
Hour-glasses, in stead of Sand, because this Water is of all others the least
subject to alteration either of Time or Weather.

Near to Kiegan is a River called Senting, which signifies A Pipe or Flute,
because the Water running very swift through Cliffs and stony places, makes a
very musical and delightful noise.

Near to Xincheu is the River Xo, which does infallibly cure several sorts of
Diseases.

In the Province of Chekiang, near the Chief City of Hangcheu, runs a River,
which in regard of its Course, is called sometimes Che, sometimes Cientang, and
in some Places Cingan. This River causes upon the eighteenth Day of the eighth
Month, such a very high Tide before this City, that it extremely puzzles the
Philosophers themselves to find out the meaning, or give the reason thereof;
for upon that Day the Water rises Higher than at any other time of the Year:
by reason of which so very famous is this Day, that the whole City about four a
Clock makes toward the River to behold the wonderful Operation.

Of Springs, Wells, and Fountains.
IN Chinting, the fourth Chief City of the Province of Peking, lies a Mere,
which has its rise from two Springs; the Waters of the one are very hot, the
other cold, and yet they lie but at a small distance asunder.

Upon the Hill Ganlo, near to the City Iungchang, is a Stone in the form of a
Man's Nose, and from his Nostrils arise two Springs, whereof the one is warm,
the other cold.

In Tengcheu, the Chief City of the Province of Xantung, is a Spring called
Hanuen, which is a Miracle in Nature, for it bubbles forth Water both hot and
cold at the same time, which separate and divide themselves.

In the Province of Xensi, in the City of Lincheng, is a Fountain as clear as
Crystal, being scarcely five Foot deep, yet the top thereof is very cold, but
the bottom so hot, that there is no enduring to touch it with ones Foot.

In the Province of Quangsi is a Spring, the one half whereof is clear, and the
other muddy; although any Person take of the Waters and mingle them, yet
nevertheless they immediately part and divide, each receiving presently their
former Colors.

Near to Iungping is a Spring whose Water is so hot, that it will boil an Egg.

Near to the City Hiqoy is a Hill called Caotung, upon which are several warm
Baths and hot Springs.

Near to Iungcheng is a Hill called Gailo, upon which is a very deep Well,
which serves the Inhabitants, by observation of its rise or fall, for a sign of
a fruitful or barren Year.

There are several other Springs and Waters in many other Places of China,
which are very remarkable for their Qualities, and have great esteem among
them, because they have had sufficient experience of their Virtues; wherewith
we shall no longer detain the Reader, but proceed to what follows.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Hills and Mountains.
VEry curious, and indeed nice, even to Superstition, are the Chinese in the
choice of Hills; for they say and believe all their Fortune depends upon it,
being places inhabited, as they imagine, by Dragons, unto whom they attribute
the cause of all their good Fortune: And for this cause, when any of them
intend to erect a Tomb (which is generally done among the Mountains by rich
People) they diligently examine the shape and nature of the Hill for its
situation, and are very sollicitous to discover a happy piece of Earth; and
such they esteem so which has the resemblance of the Head, Tail, or Heart of a
Dragon; which once found, they imagine that according to wish, all things shall
go well with their Posterity. And this Fancy is so generally prevalent with
them, that there are many who profess the Art of telling Fortunes by the form
of Hills.

In the Description of Hills and Mountains, I shall not only mention their
largeness, height, etc. but likewise their Nature, Shape, Form, and the Beasts
that live upon them.

The Mountain Lungciven, near to Kungyang, is about two Miles and half big.

Suming, near to Xaohing, fills a place of seven Miles and a half.

Lofeu, near to Polo, is in its circumference eighteen Miles and a half.

Tiengo, near to Pinkiang, is thirty one Miles in extent; so also is the
Mountain Quanghia near to Nanking.

The Heng, near to Hoenyuen, is fifty Miles large.

The Yen begins at Iotyen, and teaches sixty three Miles in length.

At Kinhoa, near to You, lies the Mountain Kiming, which is the largest in
extent of all the Mountains of China.

The Ximus, near to Taigan, is three Miles and a half high: It is said, that
upon the top thereof, at the first Crowing of the Cock, the Sun may be seen to
rise.

The Tientai is five Miles high.

The Vempi, in the Province of Queicheu, reaches with its top above the Clouds.

At Sintien lies the Mountain Pie, which is the highest of all Hills, and
reaches far above the Clouds.

Near to the City Xefan lies the Mountain Tafung, which seems to touch the very
Skies.

Near to Cangki is a very high Mountain called Iuntai, which they entitle The
Throne of Heaven.

The Hocang is so high, that it ascends ten thousand Foot above the Earth, and
never any Rain or Snow was seen to fall upon it.

The Kiming, near to the City In, requires nine days Travel to the top of it.

In Quangsi, near the City Ieyang, lies the Mountain Paofung, whose top reaches
to the very Clouds, and yet has a Stone House built upon it.

There are very many other wonderful Hills and Mountains in the Provinces of
China, which we shall omit to mention for brevity sake, and shall proceed to
speak of their Shapes and Nature.

The Hills of Umuen show as if they hung in the Air.

In the Province of Quangsi is a Hill which bears the shape of an Elephant.

The Mountain Utung resembles the shape of a Man standing upright, with his
Head bowing downward.

Near to Paoki is a Hill called Chincang, whose concave parts are such, that
before stormy Weather or Thunder it will rore in so fearful a manner, that the
noise may be heard two Miles.

Near to Sinyang is a very high and pleasant Hill, whose top against Rain is
always covered with a Cloud.

Near to Pingchai lies the Mountain Pequi, of which it has been observed, that
the melting of the Winter Snow upon its top is a sign of a plentiful Year; but
if it continues all Summer unmelted, it is a bad sign.

Upon the Mountain Kesin, near to the Garrison-Cities, it is extraordinary cold.

Near to Nanking is a great Hill named Quanglin, which in the fairest Weather
is always so very much covered with Clouds, that it is hardly to be seen at any
little distance.

Near to Xaicheu lies the Mountain Lingfung, upon which if any Rain do fall in
the daytime, a great flame of Fire appears in the Night, but in dry Weather
there is seen no such appearance.

The Mountain Hoo is called The Fiery Mountain, because in the nightime
certain Lights appear upon the same, as so many burning Candles: Country People
speak them to be a sort of Glowworms, which creep out of the River by Night,
and shine after this manner.

Near to Munghoa lies the Mount Tienul, called The Ear of Heaven, famous for a
notable Echo.

The Mountain Quan is stored with brave Hawks and Kites, which the Great Ones
use for their Recreations.

The Chinese Historians relate, That near to Sinfung lies a very great Hill,
upon which such wild Beasts and Men live, whose likes are not to be found in
any other Place.

Upon the top of the Hill Fungcao (as is said) the incomparable and seldom seen
Phoenix has her Nest, under which is found an extraordinary Precious Stone.

In the Province of Xensi, upon the Mountain Holan, is a great Race of wild
Horses; and upon that of Liniao breed several wild Oxen, Tigers, and other
Creatures.

In the Province of Chekiang, upon the Mountain Cutien, an incredible thing to
be told, are Tigers who have left off their fierceness, the nature of the Soil
being of that Quality, that if any are brought thither wild from other Places,
they become tame in a short time: the same thing happens to Snakes.

Near to Cinyven, in the Province of Iunnan, is the Mountain Nilo, where is
great abundance of Tigers and Leopards.

In the Province of Suchue, near to Cungkiang, upon a Mountain called Toyung,
are Monkies which very much resemble a Man.

Near to the City Changcheu lies the Hill Cio, upon which is said to lie a
Stone of five Rod high, end eighteen Inches thick, which of its self rolls and
moves up and down against foul Weather.

Near to Lioyang, upon the Mountain Yoinea, which signifies The Mountain of the
Rich Woman, is to be seen a Statue of a very beautiful Woman, not made by Art,
but grown there naturally.

Near to the City Iengan, in a certain hollow place of the Mountain Chingleang,
is to be seen a whole Herd of strange Idols, to the number of above a thousand,
being Images cut out of one hard Stone, and made by the Command of a King, who
lived all his Life here in solitariness.

Near to Vucheu, upon the Hill Vangkiu, stands a strange Image, in shape and
proportion resembling a Man, but attended with this peculiarity, that according
to the several tempers of the Air, it receives several colors; by the change
whereof the Inhabitants know whether they shall have fair or foul Weather.

The Emperor Xius employed five thousand Men to dig a Passage quite through the
Mountain Fang; for he had heard of the beforementioned deceitful
Mountain-gazers, who promise to foretell every Persons Destiny by the shape of
the Hills; some of whom had given out, That they foresaw by this Hills shape,
that another Emperor should reign; wherefore Xius, to frustrate his approaching
Fate, caused this Hill to be cut through to alter its shape.

Near to the City Cing, upon the Mountain Loyo, stands the Statue of a great
Lion, out of whose Mouth gushes Water continually.

Near to the City Xeu, in the Province of Nanking, upon the Hill Cuking, was
found a great lump of Gold, which they say had the Virtue of curing several
Diseases.

The Hill Kieuquan is called The Hill of seven Palaces, because the Sons of
King Cyugan caused seven Palaces to be built upon it, in which they resided,
and studied several Sciences.

The Hill Lin, near to the City Tauleu, is very famous for the expert Archery
of one Hevyus, who in this place shot seven Birds flying, one after another.

Near to the City Ceu is the Mountain Changping, very much noted for the Birth
of the great and admired Philosopher Confutius. Here also may be seen the Ruins
of some City or Town that formerly stood upon it.

Near to the City Kioheu lies the Hill Fang, not a little frequented, by reason
of the Tomb of the Ancestors of Confutius.

The Hill Kieuchin, near to Hanyang, has its Name from nine Virgins that were
Sisters, and lived thereon, studying Chemistry.

Near to the City Cu lies the Mountain Cu, where Report says King Ci buried
much Gold; and afterward, because he would not have it discovered, put to
death all those that were employed in hiding it; but by chance a young Son of
one of the Workmen taking notice of what his Father was doing, and bearing the
same in mind, when he came to years of discretion went and took it away, with
the cause of his Father's Death felicitating his own Life.

Upon certain high Hills of the Province of Suchue, where it borders upon the
Province Honan, lies a Kingdom called Kiug, absolute of it self, and no ways
subject to the Emperor's of China; only upon the account of Honor, and the
maintaining of a good Correspondence, the King thereof receives from the
Chinese Monarch his Crown and Scepter. These High-land People will in no wise
suffer the Chinese to come amongst them, and very hardly to speak to them. The
People of this Kingdom are the Issue of them who fled out of the Province of
Huquang, to avoid the Outrages of the Enemy of the Race of Cheva, and betook
themselves to these high Mountains for safety, where ever since their Posterity
has continued, possessing innumerable brave Vales, and incomparable good
Lands, which are secured against the Invasion or Inroads of any Enemy.

Upon some of the Mountains in China are great store of wild People, who by
reason of the narrow and difficult Passages to them, are not to be brought
under Subjection to the Emperor, notwithstanding great Endeavors have been used
to effect the same.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Mines of all sorts, as Metals, Stones, etc.
Within the spacious Continent of this Empire, and chiefly upon the Mountains,
are found many rich Mines, as well of Silver and Gold, as other Metals, in
great abundance; yet to dig for Gold or Silver out of any of them, is forbid,
although it remains free for any Person to seek for Gold upon the sides and
Banks of Rivers, where the same is also found in great quantities, with which
all the Country drive their Trade, by Bartering and Exchanging it away for
other Commodities.

Upon the Mountain Yocheu is dug up a green Stone, which being beaten to
Powder, affords the Painter a most delicate Vert. There are also several
excellent Stone Quarries, among which, some of Marble, whereof they make
Tables, and other curious Ornaments for their Houses, it having such strange,
yet natural Veins, that by their concentring, the shapes of Hills, Waters,
Trees, Flowers, are so admirably figured upon the same, as if the most
exquisite Artist of the World had depicted them with his Pencil.

In the Province of Peking is found very clear white and red Marble, as also
Touchstones, and several other sorts of Stones, which for color and hardness
are much valued. And upon the Mountain Xaitung, in the Province of Xansi, the
Jasper of several colors is found; as also in Xensi, upon the Hill Io, are
very clear Stones, which for their luster and sparkling resemble Diamonds.

Out of Mount Kiun is dug red Marble.

In Suchue, on Mount Tiexe, grows a Stone, which being burnt in the Fire,
yields Iron very fit to make Swords.

The Hill Cucay, near Chingtien, brings forth Trees and Stones red of color;
and in the Province of Huquang, all the Products of the Hill Hoan (which
signifies The Yellow Hill) even to the Earth and Stones, are of a Gold color.

There are several other Hills which produce strange and Precious Stones, as
the Hill Xeyen, so named, because after Rain there are found Stones upon the
same resembling Swallows. Many other produce variety of Stones, held in great
Esteem by reason of Experiments which have been made of them in the cure of
several Diseases, as all sorts of Agues, Fevers, Calentures, etc. And as in
some places are such variety of rare and Physical Stones, so in others are
Earth and Medicinal Drugs; namely,

In the Province of Quangsi, near to the City Cincheu, is dug up a certain
yellow Earth, which is a powerful Antidote against all manner of Poison.

In the Jurisdiction of Huquang there are several Places where they gather
great store of Manna, which the Natives take for frozen Dew.

In the Province of Xansi, upon the Mountain Tape, they dig up a certain Earth
so red, that they use it for Vermilion to Print their red Seals; whereas upon
the Mountain Nieuxu the Earth is so white, that it is used by the Women in
stead of Paint; for being dissolved in Water, it strangely embellisheth the
Face which is washed therewith. Here also they have Mines of Coals, which are
like those in Europe.

There is also in diverse Places throughout the whole Empire, a certain sort of
Lime, which they press from the Bark of a Tree, being tough, and sticking like
Pitch; of this, which I suppose I may call a Gum, they make a certain sort of
Paint, wherewith they color all their Ships, Houses, and Household Stuff, which
makes them to shine like Glass; and this is the reason that the Houses in China
and Iapan glitter and shine so bright, that they dazzle the Eyes of such as
behold them. This Paint also lays a shining color upon Wood, which is so
beautiful and lasting, that they use few or no Table-cloths at their Meals; for
if they spill any Grease, or other Liquor upon the Table, it is easily rubbed
off with a little fair Water, without loss or damage of Color.

CHAP. XV.
Of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, Reeds, Trees, and Fruits.
THE vast and large Territories of this Empire, which reach not only very far
from East to West, but also from South to North, occasioneth that in no part of
the Universe so great a variety of Fruits is produced; the true and natural
cause whereof is the several tempers of the Air (which must of necessity be
granted in so immense Territories) it being by experience known, that some grow
best under a hot Climate, others under a cold, and some under a well tempered
Air; all which are to be found in this Country.

The Learned among themselves have described at large in their Books what each
Province does produce; by the view whereof, and other particular Relations,
this may be affirmed for truth in general, That all things necessary for the
sustenance of Man, as well as for delight, are to be had there in great
abundance, without being beholden to their Neighbors. And thus much I dare from
my own knowledge affirm, That whatever is to be had in Europe, is likewise
found in China; and if in truth there want any thing, Nature has supplied that
single defect with diverse other things beyond those we have in Europe. Now that
it may be obvious to every Understanding, with what a copious Harvest of Fruits
and Vegetables mild Nature has blessed this Empire, and the Inhabitants
thereof, I shall briefly discourse thereof as follows.

In Iungping (the Chief City of the Province of Peking) grows a very excellent
Root, and of great esteem, called by them Ginseng, but by the Islanders of
Iapan, Nisi: The reason of the Chinese Name seems to be derived from its shape,
in regard it artificially resembles a Man; It is not much unlike to the
Mandrake of Europe, only it is much less; neither do I much doubt but it is a
sort of Mandrake, in regard it has the same shape and virtue. This Root being
dried is yellow of color, and sweetish of taste; but being chewed, it seems to
be mingled with a little bitterness: it is a great enlivener of the Spirits of
a Man, and therefore such as are of an hot and strong Constitution, endanger
their Lives by using it, in regard of its strengthening Nature and Quality;
whereas Persons weak and feeble through Sickness or otherwise, find great
advantage in the use thereof; for such is the sovereign Virtue of this Root,
that it has recovered some that were brought to Deaths door; for which its most
rare Qualities it is become of so great Price, that it is commonly sold for
thrice its weight in Silver.

This Root also has made notable the City of Leao, in the Province of Xansi;
which Province produces abundance of incomparable medicinal Roots and Herbs,
especially Rhubarb, which does not grow wild, as some report, but is raised and
increased with great care and diligence: The Root is not hollow, but very firm
and knotty, the leaves thereof in some sort resembling our Cabbage-leaves, but
much bigger. The Chinese make a Hole through the Roots, and hang them to dry
in the shade; for the Sunbeams extract their Virtue from them. From hence, and
from Suchue, comes for the most part all the Rhubarb which is brought into
Europe by Sea, or through the Kingdoms of Cascar, Tebet, Mugor, and Persia.
Ignorant therefore altogether are they in Affairs, that will have Rhubarb to
grow in those Parts, whereas in truth we only receive it from thence; b^t they
buy it of the Chinese, and drive a Trade therewith into Europe.

In Queicheu, near to Liping, grows the best Root of China; there is of two
sorts, the true and counterfeit, yet both natural; the true grows near to this
City, and in other Places the counterfeit, or, to speak more properly, the wild
Root, and is that which is brought generally into Europe: It is of a reddish
color within, but neither so big, nor of so great Virtue as the true, which
grows and increases under Ground, almost after the manner of Potatoes in India,
and especially in old Pine Tree Woods, from whence they say this Root proceeds,
first of all from the Gum or Juice of the Pine Tree, which falling upon the
Ground, takes Root, and brings forth an Herb, which by degrees spreads it self
upon the Earth, and grows under Ground with knotty Roots, in shape, bigness,
and color, not unlike to the Indian Coco-Nuts, but thinner and softer, which
they use in several Medicines. This Root was first known in Europe in the Year
1535. when the Chinese brought the same to be sold in the City of Goa in
India; and although the like Root may grow in other parts of India, as also in
the West Indies, yet is it much inferior in goodness to that of the East; the
best whereof is tastless, heavy, sound, and firm.

This Root has a particular Virtue, according to the Relation of Garcias, for
the Cure of the Spanish Pox, and is sovereign against the Itch, Tremblings,
Aches, Gout, etc. It is also very good for a weak Stomach, Headache, the Stone
in the Bladder proceeding from Cold.

Acosta gives this Description of the China Root, That whosoever uses the same
for the cure of the Pox, may eat all manner of Food, either Flesh or Fish,
without any hurt to themselves, or to the Operation of the Medicine; which by
the Chinese and Indians is thus used: They take two Ounces of the Root, and
half an Ounce of Parsley, and boil it in two Quarts of Water, to a third part,
which they reserve in a Pot for use; and when any are sick, they drink a good
Draught, and then go and lie down upon their Bed, covering themselves warm; two
hours before Supper they drink another Draught: but for their daily Drink they
take it cold. Some take every Morning and Evening the fourth part of an Ounce
of it beaten small, and p^t into Wine; which is so innocent in operation, that
they may go abroad about their Affairs without any inconvenience.

Here grows also great store of Ginger in this Country, so purely, and with
such celerity, as exceeds all in other Countries; though it is true, in several
other Parts there is great store of Ginger to be had, as at Bengala, and upon
the Islands Molucco, etc. which is for the most part brought into Europe. Of
this Root there are two sorts, Male and Female; which last is smaller of Leaf
and Root than the first; the Leaves are very like those of Reed, so that
whosoever never saw any Ginger grow, would take them to be Reeds. The Leaves of
the Male sort, through which run some greater Sinews or Veins, rise not much
higher than three Foot above Ground: The Roots are of several weights and
bigness, whereof some have the length of four Spans, full of Knots, and
shooting not deep into the Ground, but like Reeds grow upon the surface of the
Earth, and are dug out of the Ground when the Leaves are withered, which is
about the middle of Summer: when they take them up, they break off a piece, and
fling it into the Ground again for an increase. The Roots fresh taken up, by
reason of their abounding moisture, are not so hot of taste as the dried, which
are laid a little into the Sun to harden; thus prepared, they fling Mold or
Clay upon them, to prevent them from being Worm-eaten, which this Root is very
subject to; it increases very fast, as do all other Spices which grow in such
Places as lie near the Sea. And though the Chinese and others Plant Ginger
amongst the rest of their Herbs, yet however it grows also wild, but falls
short of the goodness of that which is cultivated. When they intend to prepare
this Commodity for Sale, they first pare it, and then put it immediately into
Pickle or Vinegar for an hour or two; afterward they take it out, and lay it
in the Sun to dry for the like space; then they take it again into the House,
put it up into a dry place, and there let it lie till all the moisture is drawn
out; which done, they put it into Pickle, with good store of Sugar: And this
kind of ordering makes it pleasant to the Pallat, and abates much of its heat.
And this is generally known by the name of Green-Ginger, which as a Sallet is
used by the Chinese among other Herbs. It is very sovereign for several
Distempers, as pain in the Belly, Cholick, Flux, etc. but Persons of a hot
Constitution ought to use it moderately, it being apt to inflame the Blood.

Most of the Provinces of China abound as well in all manner of Eatable, as
Medicinal Herbs. We will descend a little to Particulars.

In the Province of Xensi, near to the chief City Kingyang, grows a Herb called
Kinsu, which for its resemblance to a Tuft of yellow Hair, the Chinese call
The Golden, or The Gold Thread of Silkworms; it is of a bitter taste, and
rather of a cooling then warming Quality; it cures all manner of Scurf of the
Body.

Here also grows another Herb called Quei, good against Melancholy, and
occasioning joy and gladness of Heart, if taken inwardly.

Near to Cingcheu, in the Province of Quantung, lie some Islands, wherein grows
an Herb called Lungsiu, which makes Horses strong and swift if they eat of the
same.

Also near the same City grows The Herb of a thousand years, so commonly
called; but they farther affirm of it, That it is immortal, and never dies. The
Water wherein the same has been infused, being drank, makes white Hair black,
and is very good to prolong Life. There are besides these several other
incomparable Herbs, which are used amongst them for the cure of Distempers of
all sorts.

In the Kingdom of Tanyeu grows a certain Herb very high amongst the Rocks,
which will not burn when flung into the Fire, and there kept for some time;
only it will turn a little red, but as soon as out of the Fire, presently
recovers its pristine and natural color; yet although it resist Fire, it
immediately turns to Dirt being put into Water.

In the Province of Quantung, near to Kiunchen, grows the Herb Chifung, so
called, because it shows which way the Wind blows; the Seamen say they can
discover by the same what stormy Weather they shall have, before they go to Sea.

In the Province of Quangsi, near to Chincheu, the Inhabitants make a kind of
Cloth of a certain Herb called You, which is esteemed far before Silk, and much
dearer.

But in the Province of Queicheu, near to Liping, they make Cloth of an Herb
very like Hemp, and called Co; which is very commodious in Summer.

The Chinese Physicians say, That upon the Mountain Tiengo grow above a hundred
sorts of Simples, all of very sovereign Virtues.

But amongst all others, China is famous for an Herb called Thea or Cha, and
whereof the Natives and other neighboring People make their Liquor called Thea
or Cha, taking its Name from the Herb.

Of all the Places in China, this Herb grows fastest, and in greatest
abundance, in the Province of Nanking, near to the City of Lucheu: and indeed
the same is only found in China, Siam, and Iapan: The Leaves thereof are very
like those of Sumack; and that this is a sort of Sumack none need to doubt:
however it springs not wild, but by manuring; it is neither Tree nor Herb, but a
Bush or Shrub: they Plant it upon little Hills three Foot asunder, and it grows
as high as a Rose-tree: the Branches thereof are full of Flowers, and thin
Leaves of a dark green color, which though they differ not in shape, yet they
are of several sizes; for upon one Shrub are at least five several degrees in
bigness; the first and biggest grow upon the lowermost Sprigs; next to them
follow those of the next size, and are lesser than the first, and so by degrees
grow all the other sorts. But so much as these Leaves decrease upward in
bigness, so much the more they increase in Price; for a Pound of dried Leaves
of the first bigness is worth five Shillings; those of the second, ten
Shillings; of the third, ten Guilders; of the fourth, fifteen Gilders; and of
the fifth and last bigness, fifty, yea, sometimes a hundred and fifty Guilders
a Pound, if well prepared. Upon the Branches grow small green Buds, which
produce little Flowers with white Leaves, yellow within, and in bigness,
fashion, and color, very like the Flower of Sweet-Briar, but different from it
in smell. After the Flowers are shed, there remains a Husk which contains a
blackish Seed, which being sowed in the Ground, brings forth the third year new
Bushes, from whose Leaves is gathered every year a rich Harvest, and that in
such Places where it Rains and Snows, as it does in Europe; so that it is
probable enough that there might be Bushes raised from that Seed, if it were
sown in some shady fruitful European Soil. It is full of spreading Roots, which
run but shallow in the Ground, and are good for nothing; but the Leaves they
gather every day, and drying them in the shade, preserve them for their Drink,
which they use in stead of Beer, not only at Tables, but upon all Visits and
Entertainments; and which is more, whosoever has any thing to dispatch in the
Palaces of the Grandees, is Presented as soon as he is seated with a Cup of
this Liquor, which is always drunk, or rather supped off hot, according to the
fashion of the ancient Romans, who esteemed more of warm than cold Water. If at
any time this Liquor proves bitter to the taste, they mingle a little Sugar
with it, and drink it to drive away drowsiness: But such especially find the
benefit thereof who have overcharged their Stomachs with eating, or discomposed
their Brains with too much strong Drink: for it is a very great drier of gross
Humors, and dispels Vapors, occasioning sleep; it strengthens the Memory, but
increases Gall, if drank in too great a quantity: In brief, they extol the
Virtues of this Drink infinitely, and attribute their not having the Stone or
Gout to this (as they term it) Most noble Drink; which we may believe the
rather, because in all our Journey forward and backward, we met with none that
were afflicted with these Distempers.

There is a very great difference in the manner of preparing and using this
Liquor, between the Chinese and those of Iapan; for that the Iapanners beat
the Leaves to a Powder, and mingle it with boiling Water in a Cup, which they
afterward drink off: But the Chinese put the Leaves whole into a Pot of
boiling Water, which having lain in steep for some time, they sip off hot,
without swallowing down any of the Leaves, but only the Quintessence thereof
extracted. Others prepare it with Milk and a little Salt mingled with Water,
which is not so well approved; but however prepared, it is not only drunk in
China, and other Parts of India, but is much used likewise in diverse other
Countries; and the general consent of all People, that they find much good by
it, enhances the Price, and makes the same be sold here at a very dear Rate.

In Xensi, near the City Hacheu, is great store of Hemp; but no Flax grows in
all the Empire.

In Kiangsi, near the City Kienchang, grows a sort of Rice, so far exceeding
the rest for goodness, that the Emperor himself sends for his own Stores from
thence; and for its excellency the Chinese call it Silver-Cron.

In Xensi, near the City Kingyang, grows another sort of Rice, used by the
People to purge the Body, and cause Urine.

In the Province of Chekiang, upon the Mountain Tienno, near the City Hangcheu,
grow Mushroms in great abundance, which are dispersed into all Parts of the
Country, and will keep good a whole year, either dried or Pickled.

This Country produces abundance of Cottons, the Seed whereof was brought
thither about five hundred years since: And though this Fruit does likewise
grow in other Parts at present, as in Arabia, upon the Islands of Cyprus,
Maltha, in Sicily, and in Egypt, I think it not amiss (since it is one of the
most profitable Commodities for Trade in China) to give this brief Description
thereof: It grows upon a Stalk almost three Foot high, covered with a reddish
Bark, and full of Prickles, dividing it self into several Branches. The Leaves
are not much unlike those of the Vine, and divided into three Parts, which for
bigness may be compared with those of the Mast-Tree: It bears a Flower which is
yellow on the outside, and red in the middle, from which proceeds a round
Fruit, about the bigness of an Apple, wherein, when it is ripe, the Wool lies
concealed, which is afterward gathered, sold, and disposed of to several Uses.

The Leaves of the Cotton-Tree are generally alike, only here and there some
are smoother, softer, and more even than others.

In some places of China Beans may be seen growing upon Trees, a sort of which
near the City Changchang are reputed good against Poison.

The Province of Quantung produces abundance of Osiers, which seem to be no
other than Ropes twisted together by Nature; of which there are whole Mountains
full in this Province, which are put by the Inhabitants to diverse Uses: and in
regard they are very tough, and will not easily break, they make sometimes
Cordage thereof for Vessels; but their best use is to make soft Mattresses,
upon which most of the People, the Grandees, and the Emperor himself lay
themselves naked when they go to sleep. Very neat and clean is this Furniture,
and withal very cool in the Summer; and though the Mattresses be only spread
one the bare Floor, yet they look upon it as a fit place to lie on, having been
no otherwise accustomed.

The whole Island of Hainan is full of these Osiers, especially of the best,
which the Portuguese call The white Rota.

Of Flowers.
THere are several rare and well scented Flowers which grow in these Parts,
that are unknown to those of Europe.

In the Province of Suchuen, near to Chungking, grows a certain Flower called
Meutang, in high esteem amongst them, and therefore called The King of Flowers.
It differs very little in fashion from the European Rose, but is much larger,
and spreads it Leaves farther abroad. It far surpasses the Rose in beauty, but
falls short in richness of scent. It has no Thorns or Prickles, and is
generally of a white color, mingled with a little Purple; yet there are some
that are yellow and red. This Flower grows upon a Bush, and is carefully
cherished and Planted in all Gardens belonging to the Grandees, for one of the
most choice Flowers.

In the Province of Huquang, near the City Tan, is a great Cataract, which
occasions a Mere, wherein grow Flowers of a Saffron color, whose like are no
where else to be seen in all those Countries. Several of these Flowers grow
upon one Root, being something bigger than the European Lilly, and much
handsomer; for fashion, resembling Tulips: The Leaves of the Stalks are large
and round, and drive upon the Water, as the Leaves of the Weeds do in Europe,
which at their Season they gather and dry, and make them fit to be used by
Shopkeepers in stead of Paper, to put up their Wares in. There are in some
places whole Pools abounding with these Flowers, which, to say truth, grow not
there naturally, but have been sowed by one or other, for that they are in
great request amongst them.

But amongst all others, the Chinese Rose must deservedly take place, which
changes color every day twice; for one time its all Purple, and another time
as white as Snow; and were the scent thereof pleasant or delightful, it might
with merit challenge the World for a Peer.

The Chief City of Queicheu, situate in the Province of Quangsi, takes its Name
from the Flower called Quei; which although it grows in other Parts, yet no
where so plentifully as in this Province, and chiefly under the Command of this
City: It grows upon a very high Tree, which has Leaves proportioned like them
of a Laurel or Cinamon-tree; but the Flowers are very small, yellow of color,
and have a fine smell: After they are once in Flower, they continue a long time
blowing, without withering or shedding, or falling from the Tree; and after
they have done blowing, the Tree shoots out again within a Month, and has fresh
Flowers, whose color is so fragrant, that they perfume all those Parts where
they grow. The Tartars infuse these Flowers in the Juice of Lemmons, wherewith
they color the Hair of their Horses: But the Chinese make delicate Confects
of them, which are delicious to the taste, and pleasant to the smell.

Near to Kinhoa, in the Province of Chekiang, is a certain Flower, by the
Portuguese in India called Mogorin: It grows upon a very small Tree, is
Milk-white, and not unlike to the Iessamy Flower, only it has more Leaves, and
exceeds it far for smell; for one Flower is enough to perfume a whole House.
This Flower is in very great esteem with them, so that in cold Weather they
diligently house the Pots in which they grow.

And lastly, near the City Pingyve in Queicheu, grows in great abundance the
well scented Iessamy.

Of Reeds.
IN the foregoing part of this Chapter you have had some Examples of the
variety of Herbs, Plants, Flowers, etc. produced in several parts of China; I
shall now say something of the different sorts of Reeds growing there And first,

In Xanhung, near Tengcheu, grows a Reed that is naturally apiece.

In Huquang, near the Mountain, grows a sort of Reed which will last only three
years; but like a careful Sire, before it dies it shoots out afresh at the
Root: thus every three years renewing by death, and rising again.

In the Province of Nanking, near Hoaigan, is a great Mere, wherein grows very
large and high Reeds, greatly esteemed by the Inhabitants.

In Quanhung, near the City Lochang, upon the Mountain Chang, grows a black
Reed, whereof the Chinese make Pipes, and several other things, of as pure a
black and shining color, as if they were made of Ebony.

In the same Province, upon the Mountain Lofen, grows a Reed that exceeds all
the rest for length and thickness, the Stalks being at least four Foot thick.

In the Province of Chekiang, near the City of Chucheu, runs a Rivulet, in
which grow several sorts of Reed or Cane, as hard as Iron, and oftentimes three
Handfuls thick: and although they are hollow, yet are they of strength
sufficient to bear a great Burden without breaking: The biggest grow three or
four Rods high; some have green Stalks, others Coal-black: They make a very
pleasant show, not only because of the flourishing Verdure of the Leaves for
the most part of the Year, but also because of the several Colors produced by
the various sorts that grow altogether. Of these, notwithstanding their
hardness beforementioned, such as are skilful Artists, and know how to split
the same into very thin pieces, make Mattresses, Baskets, Canes, etc. Of the
thinner and smaller sort they make Pikes and Lances, which have sharp Irons at
the ends. They put them likewise to several other uses, especially for the
making of Perspective-Glasses, in regard they are light, straight, thick and
firm. The Water that runs from this Reed, when it is laid green upon the Fire,
is found, being taken inwardly, to be very sovereign to drive out of the Body
all putrifi'd Blood, occasioned by Blows, Falls, or otherwise. The young Shoots
of it, before they have any Leaves, are boiled with Flesh like Turnips, and
pickled in Vinegar, are kept all the year for Sauce.

The Province of Suchuen produces great store of Sugarcanes, from whence they
draw great quantities of Sugar, and that none of the worst. And though there
has grown for a long time great quantities of such Canes in this Province; yet
the Inhabitants never knew how to extract Sugar from them, until they were
taught by a certain Indian Priest, who accidentally riding with his Ass through
a Field of Sugarcanes, was detained by the Owner thereof for spoiling the
same, and would not let him pass till he had made satisfaction for what damage
he had done; whereupon the Priest, to redeem his Ass, discovered to that
Countryman the way of making Sugar out of those Canes. This Reed or Cane grows
very fast upon Morish Grounds, and has Leaves like the Reeds in Europe,
shooting six or seven Foot high, and being about two or three Fingers thick,
and full of Knots; the Pipes of it are full of white pithy substance, out of
which they squeeze the Sugar. The manner of increasing this Cane used by the
Chinese, is as follows: The Ground is first plough'd up, and laid into
Furrows, wherein they Plant the young Shoots, and afterward fill up the
Furrows with Mud. The moister it stands, the better it will thrive, and in a
years time to come to perfection; and then they cut down the old, and Plant new
ones; but sometimes they let it stand until the second year, which is not much
amiss; but if it be not then cut down it will be good for nothing: It will
continue for many years, if this course be taken to preserve it, and if it be
Planted in moist and fertile Earth, and that the Worm get not to the Root; but
what of it stands in dry Grounds will hardly continue five years without
transplanting.

Amongst these various sorts of Reeds may be comprehended another kind, that
grows upon some Mountains in China in great abundance, and is called by the
Indians, Rotang; but in Europe, Rotting, or Iapan Canes. And though these Canes
are used in Europe to walk with, yet the young Branches thereof being full of
Juice, are eaten raw by the Chinese. When these Canes are dried, and struck
one against another, there will fly Sparks of Fire from them, as from a Flint,
and as such they are made use of in some Places of the Indies. This sort of
Reed is very tough, and being green, is made use of in stead of Cords to tie or
bind any thing withal. The Inhabitants of Iava, Iapan, and other Islanders,
make therewith Cable for Anchors, which will last longer in salt Water than
Ropes made of Hemp; and when any Merchants Ship Trading thither from Europe,
need any, they make use of these, they being strong enough to hold the
weightiest Anchors. The Fruit of this Rotting or Cane is eatable, and pleasant
to the Palate; in form somewhat round, about the bigness of a Ball, having a
Shell like a Chestnut, hard, but brittle. Upon every Joint, from the bottom to
the top, sprouts out a small Branch in stead of Leaves, upon which hangs the
Fruit in Clusters. Within the Body of this Fruit is a white Kernel, from which
they extract an Oil not only good to eat, but very sovereign in the cure of
Wounds, if dressed therewith; so that the Indian Slaves, if they receive hurt
at any time from these Rottings or Canes, wherewith they are wont to be
Corrected, they forthwith make use of this Oil.

Besides these beforementioned, there are found as well in China as diverse
other Parts of the Indies, two other different sorts, which are by the Indians
called Bamboes. The smaller of these is very full of Pith; but the other does
so far exceed all the rest for bigness, that I do not wonder in the least if
some Writers, both ancient and modern, have sometimes called it a Tree. This
kind, called Bamboes, grows in Morish or Fenny Grounds, and is very straight;
but in its growth they bend it on purpose to prepare it for their use, which ss
to make Chairs of, such as they are carried in. Of the Body of this Tree the
Chinese sometimes make their Wherries, in which they Row with great swiftness
upon the Rivers. The Leaves hereof are somewhat like those of the Olive Tree.

Of Trees.
THis Empire does also very much abound with Trees; not only such as grow in
Europe, but several others of a more strange nature, not known in these Parts
of the World.

In the Province of Suchue, in the small City of Kien, stands a certain
Idol-Temple, wherein is a Tree called Cieennien, that is to say, The Tree of of
a thousand years; which is so prodigiously large, that two hundred. Sheep may
stand in covert under one Branch of it, without being seen, though you come
very near to it.

In the same Province likewise grows a sort of Beans upon a Tree, which are so
exceeding hard, that the People, by reason thereof, have given them the Name of
Stone-Beans.

In the Province of Huquang grows a Tree, named The Tree of Sleep; for that (as
some report) a Branch of this Tree applied to any part of the Body, causes a
sweet and pleasant Sleep.

In the Province of Chekiang, near to the small City Singhiang, grow such
extraordinary large Trees, that fourscore Men are not able to fathom them
about: Nay further, there are some of those Trees (ni fallit fama) of that vast
bigness, that one Branch will cover at least forty Men.

In the Province of Macao is a Tree by the Portugueses called The Iron-Tree, in
regard the Wood thereof, both for color, heaviness, and hardness, resembles
Iron, and sinks immediately when put into the Water.

In the Province of Quantung, near Chaoking, grows great store of sweet and
well-scented Wood, whereof the Inhabitants make Tables, Chairs, Chests, and the
like.

In the Province of Quangsi the Inhabitants make Linen Cloth of the Leaves of
Trees.

In the Province of Chekiang are several Woods consisting of Mulberry-Trees,
which the Inhabitants cut every year, that so they may not grow up to any
largeness; for they find by experience, that the Leaves of the lower Trees make
the best Silk: so that by this only means, all that keep Silkworms know very
well how to distinguish the first Spinning of the Silk from the second, because
the first is the product of the soft and tender Leaves, which shoot forth in
the Spring, and are then eaten by the Worm; but the hard and sour
Summer-Leaves make the second Spinning; which alteration of Food does occasion
so great a difference in the Work of these small Creatures. And such is the
infinite abundance of Silks in this Province, that ten Suits of Silk may there
be bought cheaper than you can buy one of Cloth here in Europe.



In the Province of Quangsi, near the City Cincheu, is great store of
Cinamon-Trees, which differs only in this from that of Ceylon, in that it is
stronger of scent, and hotter upon the Tongue. The Tree upon which it grows, is
about the bigness of an Orange-Tree, and has many long, thick, and straight
Branches, whose Leaves have some similitude with those of the Laurel: It bears
a Snow-white and well-scented Flower, from whence is produced a smart sort of
Fruit, which being neglected by the People, is eaten up by the Birds and
Monkies. From this Fruit drops a Juice which has the taste of Cinnamon, but not
so strong: The Wood of the Tree has neither smell nor taste, insomuch that
Nature seems to have deprived all the parts of this Tree of its Virtue, and
only bestowed it upon its Bark, to raise it to the higher esteem, and draw from
thence the greater advantage. This Tree, as all others, has a double Bark; the
first is a very pleasant kind, and so thin, that it cannot be distinguished
from the other, but by its greenness: for afterward when it is dry, it sticks
so fast to the innermost Bark, that it can neither be seen nor tasted, nor
peeled off. The green inward Bark, when this outward Rind is taken off, is
slippery and smooth: Being thus peeled off and cleansed, it is cut into
apiece pieces, and laid a drying in the Sun, it is afterward rolled up,
and put into Barrels, and so Transported into Europe in the same form as we
have it, and see it sold in all Parts. After the Bark is peeled off, the Tree
will stand two or three years naked, without getting a new Bark; but after that
time the Bark will re-increase, and become fit to be new peeled. The
Inhabitants say, that the Root of this Tree produces a Sap not unlike to
Camphire. The Chinese, and likewise those of the Island of Ceylon, distill
from the green Bark and the fresh Flowers (almost after the same manner as
those of Europe make Cinamon-water) a certain Liquor, which they apply to
several Uses.

In the Island of Ceylon these Cinamon-Trees grow in such abundance, that they
supply all parts of the World with their Bark, and would produce more than
could be spent, if the Islanders did not sometimes burn whole Woods. But this
may be observed, That as this Island is very fruitful in the product of
Cinnamon, so on the other Hand, neither Cloves nor Nutmeg-trees will grow upon
it.

In some few Places of China there grow Cloves, Pepper, and Nutmegs, but in
small quantities, so that most of those Spices are commonly brought from other
Places.

Now in regard it will not be unpleasant to the Readers, to peruse the Nature
of these Trees and Fruits, I shall declare in a few words what I have observed
concerning them, whereof no mention has been made by any other former Writer.

The Tree upon which the Cloves grow, is as big as an ordinary Pear Tree, and
grows after the same form: The Leaves hang upon long Stalks, and grow sometimes
single, and sometimes in clusters: It has several greater and lesser Branches,
each whereof end in very thin Shoots, upon whose top grow small Stalks, where
sit the Cloves in clusters: within the head of the Cloves grows also a Flower
which yields a very pleasant scent, as well as the Fruit, but is much more
fragrant in dry Weather than in wet; upon which also depends the fruitfulness
or unfruitfulness of it: for in a dry Year there is more Fruit than Leaves upon
the Tree. But although extraordinary Heat be the most seasonable Weather for
these Trees; yet they do not always yield a like plentiful Harvest; for about
the second or third, and sometimes about the seventh Year, the Crop is much
worse. The Cloves are first red of color, but afterward turn black, and are
gathered in the Months of September, October, and November, either with the
Hand, or else beaten off with a long Reed: Such as are left upon the Tree grow
much bigger than those that are gathered, and fall off of themselves the next
year; which though they are not altogether so sharp of taste, yet are held much
dearer, and are used for Seed: And this is the reason why the Indians name the
same The Mother of Fruits. These Seeds grow up to a complete Tree in eight or
ten years time, and then bear store of Fruit. The Cloves, when they are first
gathered, are blackish, and to make them blacker, they lay them to dry in the
Sun; but to preserve them from being Worm-eaten, they lay them to steep a while
in salt Water, and then again dry them in the Sun: Being thus prepared for
keeping, they are Transported into most Parts of the World. And here observe,
That though the Clove-trees are only cherished for the sake of the Fruit, yet
there is an Aromatic sovereign Virtue in the very Leaves, Flowers, and
Branches.

I shall not need to say any thing of the Excellency of this Spice, it being so
well known to all Persons; only this I shall add, as worthy of observation,
because thereby may be understood the subtilty of the Indians, That when they
are to sell their Cloves, they will be sure to soke them well beforehand with
Water, to make them weigh heavier.

Out of the Flowers and green Cloves the Indians extract a certain Water or
Spirit, which is exceeding pleasant of smell, and also very good for several
Distempers.

The best Place for these Clove-trees to grow in, are the Molucca Islands,
where they are more fruitful than in any other Place, and naturally delight to
grow upon high places, and so thick together, that the Sun is not able to
pierce through them.

Now observe, That as the Cinamon-tree prospers no where so well as upon the
Island of Ceylon, nor the Clove, as upon the Moluccaes; so the Nutmegtree takes
the greatest liking to the particular Island of Banda, which is one of the
chiefest of the Moluccaes.



The Tree upon which the ordinary Nutmegs grow, and called by the Inhabitants
Bongopolu, resembles an Apple or Pear Tree, and springs oftentimes of it self,
without Planting. It is always green, full of Blossoms, and laden with Fruit,
whereof some are full ripe, and others but half ripe. The Bark is swarthy, the
Wood hollow and pithy, and the Leaves (which grow in Clusters upon the Stalks)
are green of color, thin and smooth, which being rubbed between the Fingers as
they are pulled from the Tree, do not only smell very strongly fragrant, but
retain also, when they are dried, their sharp and strong Aromatic scent and
virtue. The Flowers or Blossoms are for bigness and color much like the Pear
or Cherry-tree, dropping easily off without any great scent: The Fruit which
succeeds the Blossoms, grows scattering up and down about the Joints of the
Boughs. When the Blossom is fallen off, the first Shell of the Nut at the
beginning is green, tough, and somewhat thick; but as it grows ripe, it becomes
full of yellow and purple Specks. This rough Shell being soon split, the Nut
appears, about which sits the Mace in the form of a Net; afterward, when the
Fruit is ripe, this rough Shell falls quite off, in the same manner as the
Shell of a ripe Walnut drops off; and then the Mace appears of a delicate red
color, but afterward turns yellow, and includes that Kernel which we properly
call the Nutmeg; so that the Nutmeg is covered with three Shells; the outermost
green and thick, the middlemost is thinner, of a Gold color, and very hard;
and lastly, the innermost, which is a hard Rind. This Fruit is very much
spoiled and eaten up by Birds, especially a certain kind of white and small
Pigeons, whose Flesh being eaten, taste very much of the Mace: They are by
those of Europe called The Nutmeg-Eaters.

These Trees bring forth Fruit two or three times in a year, which nevertheless
are not to be gathered till they are through ripe, lest they should grow light
and worm-eaten. When they are first taken out of the Shell or Husk, they are
laid a drying in the Sun; then taking off the Mace, they wash the Nutmeg in
Limewater, which preserves it from perishing; insomuch that they may be
transported into all Parts of the World without taking any harm. Those Nuts are
counted the best which are of an Ash Color, mixed with white Streaks. It often
happens that some Nuts differ from others in bigness and color, as is to be
seen by the Nuts in Europe. Such Nuts as are by the Indians called Palajava,
are used in Medicines, not amongst their Victuals.

But the Mace that covers the Nutmeg is taken by the Indians before it be
through ripe, whilst it is of a very deep red color, and put into Vinegar and
Salt, and so brought to the Table, and eaten before the Meat, to sharpen the
Appetite. When the Mace is ripe, it is taken off the Nut and dried in the Sun,
and laid up carefully. The Indians say, That as well the Nut as the Mace cures
shrunk Sinews, and other Aches of the Body, caused by Cold; and for that end
every one has Oil in his House made of the fresh Fruit: And as there comes from
the Mace mnch less Oil than from the Nut, so on the other hand, the Oil of Mace
is much stronger than that of the Nutmeg. The Inhabitants esteem and value the
Mace so much higher than the Nut, in regard they can sell the Mace almost fifty
times dearer than the Nut. The green and unripe Nuts are put by the Grandees of
India into Vinegar or Sugar, and so brought to the Table in stead of a Banquet.
And of late years some European Merchants have brought over of these Nuts
ordered after this manner, which are used not only in Physic, but as a
Delicacy. Some put the outward Shell or Husk into Sugar, and prefer it before
the Nut, because of its most delicate smell and taste. There is another sort of
long Nutmegs, which are by the Indians called Pala Metfiri: These are accounted
the best by the ordinary People, but without any reason; for though they they
are bigger than the round, yet they have not that Aromatic virtue: neither is
the Mace of this long Nut in that esteem amongst the Indians (though perhaps of
a better color) as that of the round Nutmeg, there being very little virtue in
it; and the very Trees upon which these long Nuts grow, are reckoned amongst
the wild and worst sort, so that the Indians think it not worth their time or
trouble to gather them, there being little or no virtue in them. And to say all
in one word, the Tree upon which these long Nutmegs grow, differs more in
virtue and strength then form or shape from that of the other.

The chiefest sorts of Pepper are two, the one round, and the other long: The
round Pepper grows chiefly in some Molucca Islands, as Iava and Sumatra,
shooting up very high, and is supported with Poles, as Hops in Europe. If the
Seed of this Fruit be sown in a fertile and rich Soil, it will bring forth a
very plentiful Harvest in one year; but if sown in a more barren Ground, it
will require longer time before it comes to bear. If shoots downwards into the
Ground with its Root, which is full of small tough Strings: The outside of the
Leaves are of a deep, but the inside of a more pale Green. The Fruit hangs like
Currants, only the Branches are much bigger and longer.

The Berries or Pepper-corns are at first green, but grow black of color as
they grow ripe, which is in the Summer-Months. The ripe Berries are gathered
and dried in the Sun, which makes the outward Shell so full of shrivles: But
when this black Shell is taken off, before it is dried in the Sun, it makes
another sort of Pepper, which is commonly called White Pepper, and is sharper,
harder, and pleasanter of taste than the black, and often used in India by
Persons of Quality in stead of Salt with their Meat. The peeling of this
outward black Skin is done when the Pepper is over ripe, and after it has been
steeped in salt Water; for by this infusion the outward Skin aforesaid swells,
so that the white Pepper-corns within may be taken out with little or no
trouble, which are afterward dried again in the Sun. And if the lazy Indians
were not so averse to Labor, there might be much more white than black Pepper.
And here note, that not only the Berries, which are properly called Pepper,
have a fiery hot taste, but also the Leaves, and the whole growth, have the
same Virtue; for when they are chewed, they burn upon the Tongue, like the Root
of Costus and Berethram.

Besides this, there grows in India a sort of long Pepper, called by the
Indians, Pimpilim, which is never used about Meats, but only in Medicines,
especially in Treacle and other Antidotes against Poison: And this seems to be
done not without great reason, in regard it has a very great strength, which
single Quality makes it to be sold at a dearer Rate than the other. This long
Pepper grows in great abundance at Bengala, and is Transported from thence into
Europe. In shape (except the Fruit) this Plant is like unto that of the round
Pepper, only it either creeps along upon the Ground, or runs up against lower
Poles than those of the other Pepper. The Leaves thereof are more tender, and
of a darker Green, and have long Stalks: There is little difference between
these two sorts; that is, the Fruit is gathered when it is green, and dried
before it is ripe; and though it is not so hot upon the Tongue when it is first
dried, yet afterward by lying, it gathers as great strength, and is as hot of
taste as the round Pepper.

The Indians use this in Salves against the Griping of the Guts; and also for
an Antidote against Poison, Giddiness of the Head, etc.

Though the Chinese have an extraordinary opinion of themselves and their
Country, and have a very great aversion to all foreign Manners and Customs; yet
the Inhabitants of some Quarters have learned of their Neighbors to chew the
Root Betel, the Leaves whereof are generally so used by the Indians: It grows
after the manner of Pepper, or Hops in Europe, and at a distance can hardly be
distinguished from Pepper. The Leaves, which hang upon a long Stalk, are very
like the Leaves of an Orange-Tree, but not quite so sharp at the ends, smooth,
of a dark Green, thin, and full of Veins, and increasing very fast in a well
tempered Soil, but apt suddenly to wither if too much handled. They are in the
eating harsh and gravelly, insomuch that when the Leaves are chewing, it is
just as if one had so much Sand between his Teeth. These Leaves are chewed in
some of the Southern Countries, Mornings, Noons, and Nights. But in regard of
their extraordinary bitterness; they mingle one thing or other to sweeten their
taste, as Licium, Caphur de Burneo, Aloes, Musk, or some other Spice: and being
thus prepared, it proves pleasant, and makes a very sweet Breath. In some
Places these Leaves are sold very dear, by reason of their frequent use; for
whenever they make any Visits, they Treat one another with Betel, mingled with
some pleasant Ingredient to make it agreeable to the Palate. When they use it,
they chew first a little Areca, and presently after a Leaf of the Betel, which
after it is chewed a while, yields a Juice or Sap as red as Blood, which they
spit out; after the red Juice follows another, which they swallow down. The
Indians believe that it is good to preserve their Teeth, and strengthen the
Stomach. The Leaves are hot and dry in the second degree. Some esteem the ripe
Leaves the best, others the dry ones, because they make the greatest noise when
they are chewed. Notwithstanding this general Custom, at some certain times, to
wit, when their near Relations are dead, or upon some Holy Days, they forbear
chewing these Leaves.

In some Places of China grows a very wonderful and strange Tree, which by
some, because it bears a Fruit like Figs, is called The Indian Fig Tree; but
others give it the Name of The Tree of Goa, because it was first found out
there by those of Europe, and grows no where so well as upon that Island. This
Tree grows up very high with its main Body, and spreads its Branches round
about, from which proceed little thin Strings, which hanging down to the
Ground, take root, and grow to be young Trees; and thus they sometimes increase
to a large Wood, wherein it is difficult to distinguish which is the Mother of
all these Off-sets, but only by the largeness of its Body, which frequently is
so thick, that three Men cannot fathom it. When the Inhabitants will make a
Passage through this Tree, they cut away all the undergrowing and smallest
Shoots, and so make convenient Places to shelter themselves in from the Heat of
the Sun, whose Beams are not able to pierce it, by reason of its thick growth:
Nor is that all; for it is sometimes of so great an extent, that it will afford
Covert for 3000 People. The Leaves of the young Branches are very like those of
the Quince-tree, and much eaten by the Elephants: they are green on the
outside, and whitish on the inside, with a little Wool thereon. The Fruit in
shape resembles a small Fig, is of a redd^^^ color, and full of Seed, like the
ordinary Fig, and as wholesome to eat, but not so pleasant to the taste.

Here grows also in many Places abundance of Coco-Nuts, which the N^tives call
Coquoeiro. The Tree which bears them seldom grows straight, i^ commonly four or
five Foot thick, and above fifty Foot high, with the Roo^ lying very shallow in
the Ground, which causes great admiration how it can be supported so high in
the Air, with such a heavy Top, hanging full of large Fruit, against high and
stormy gusts of Wind, and not be over-turn'd* And indeed this is the more
admirable, if it be considered, That the lowe^ part of the Body of this Tree is
no thicker than the upper. The Bark of it is of a swarthy color, and of little
use, though sweet and juycie. About the Body of the Tree grows never a Branch;
but on the very top of it stand up fifteen or sixteen large Leaves, like a
Plume of Feathers, each being about sixteen Foot long, and a Foot thick at the
bottom, consisting of several other Leaves, which stand one against another in
a row. Between each Leaf on the top of the Tree is a Rent or parting Cleft of
two Foot long, which is at first green, afterward red, and opens of it self.
Before this Cleft opens, there appears within a very fine Stem of a Foot long,
and three or four Fingers thick, with several Branches upon it, upon which grow
certain three^corner'd Blossoms, as big as Almonds, white of color, and are
the beginnings of the Flowers and Nuts; for when the Rent breaks open, then the
Branches spread, and the yellow Flowers appear. After the Flower is off, the
Fruit succeeds, which grows each upon a short Stem, about the bigness of a
Goose-quill. The Fruit of this Tree is heavy, hard, and as big as a Man's Head,
hanging in Clusters at the top. On the outside of these Nuts is a thick,
stringy, and tough Shell, which, if gathered green, yields a very pleasant
Juice, good, being drank fresh, against the Dropsy. When the Nuts are through
ripe, and dry, the Kernel proves very sweet of taste, and are often eaten by
Travelers for refreshment, no Nuts in Europe being to be compared with them:
and the Seamen that go long Voyages provide themselves with these Nuts, which
they eat as Medicinal against the Scurvy, and as a Restorative when they are
grown weak and faint. It is warm and moist in the first degree; and of the
Kernels is made an Oil, not inferior to that of Almonds for strength and
virtue, and is generally used in the East and West Indies, both in Meats and
Medicines. Taken inwardly, this Oil cures the Rupture, and most inward Wounds
and Bruises. Of the stringy Stuff which grows on the outside of the Shell of
these Nuts they make Ropes in several Parts, that will last a long while in
salt Water, which is so well known to the Portuguese, that all the
Anchor-Cables and other Ropes (which is very observable) used about their Kings
Ships, are made of this Stuff. A certain Historian, Lucuna by Name, makes
mention in one of his Books, that in some Places in India, they weave Carpets
of this hairy Stuff that grows about the Shell of the Coco-Nut. Of the hard
Shell are made Drinking-Cups, which are often tipped with Gold or Silver. The
Leaves serve, and are used in stead of Paper; nay, some Indians make themselves
Clothes of the same, which will last many years before they go to decay and
wear out. The Wood it self is good for, and put to diverse uses, whereof, in
regard others have written at large, I shall omit to make any mention.

Near to Kingyven, in the Province of Quangsi, grows a Tree called Areca,
brought thither out of India, in shape like that of the Coco-Nut, but not so
thick, and has small Leaves: Its Fruit is also called Areca, being so hard,
that it cannot be parted or divided, but with a Knife or some sharp Instrument.

Of Fruits.
BEsides the Fruits which grow in several Parts of Europe, the Chinese
Territories likewise produce yearly a rich Harvest of several other sorts.

In the Province of Quantung grows a sort of Fruit, which by the Chinese is
called Venku; by the Portuguese, Iamboa; and by the Hollanders, Pompel-Moes.
This Fruit grows upon a Tree beset with Thorns, like the Lemmon-tree, but
exceeds it for bigness, having a white Blossom, well scented, and whereof they
make a sweet Water: The Fruit is much bigger, being generally as large as a
Man's Head. The Shell resembles that of the Gold-Apple for Color. The Pap
within is reddish, and sowre-sweet, and tastes as a Grape not ripe, so that
they make a sort of Liquor of there, as it is usual in Europe to do of Cherries
and Pears.

In the Province of Peking grow very excellent Apples, Pears, Plums, Wheat, and
Rye; as also Figs, Grapes, and several other sorts of things; but the
Inhabitants however make no Wine, being better pleased with their Liquor made
of Rice, which indeed is very pleasant of taste, and preferred by all that
Trade there, yea even by those of Europe, before Wine. In Xansi grows a sort of
sweet Grape, which doubtless would make very delicate Wine; but the Inhabitants
dry them to make Raisins of them, which are brought to be sold through all the
Country.

In the same Province also grow very large Chestnuts; but in that of Suchue is
another sort that will melt in the Mouth like Sugar.

In the Province of Honan grow all sorts of Gold-Apples and Pomegranates. But
in that of Huquang only one sort, which the Chinese call The
Winter-Gold-Apple, because they are ripe in the Winter, and are sweet of taste:
There is in Fokien the best sort of them, which differ not much in bigness from
the Apples in Europe, but are like unto the Muscate Grape for taste and smell.
This Fruit dried and confected in Sugar, will keep a whole year, and is a very
delicate Sweet-meat.

In the Province of Chekiang drops from the Trees a certain fatness, whereof
they make very white Candles, much better than those of Tallow; for they
neither foul the Fingers when put out, nor are of an ill smell. The Tree is
very large, and in its Leaves and shape is not unlike the Pear Tree in Europe:
It has white Blossoms as the Cherry-tree; after the Blossom follows a round
Berry as big as a Cherry, but with a brown and thin Skin, under which lies a
white Substance, which when the Fruit is ripe, and the Skin bursts, is seen;
and then they gather the Berries, and boil them in Water, which when hot, smell
like Flesh, but when cold, it feels like Tallow. The Leaves of this Tree are
very fat, on which the Sheep and Cows feed, and therewith become fat in a short
time.

In the Province of Xantung grows the Apple called Sucu, which dried as we do
Figs in Europe, will keep good a whole year together, and is as a Delicate sold
in all Parts of China. It is bigger than the ordinary Apple in this Country,
and of a deep red color: the Kernels do not lie in the middle, but stand
upright on one side, being uncertain in the number; for in some there are found
ten, fifteen, or more, according as they are in largeness, while in others
there are none at all. It is red within, and pleasant of taste when ripe. Here
also are some Apples, green of Skin, and hard, and are eaten after the manner
as the Apples in England. This last sort of Fruit grows no where but in China.

In the Province of Suchue grows the Fruit Lichi, which being ripe, as a Rarity
is brought to the Emperor's Court. The greatest quantity thereof is found in
the Southern Parts of Fokien. The Portuguese at Macao call it Lichas. It grows
upon very high Trees, whose Leaves are like those of the Laurel. Upon the tops
of the Branches grows the Fruit in Clusters as Grapes, but is very like for
fashion unto a small Heart, and about the bigness of an Acorn, with a rough
Shell as the lesser Pineapple, but not so thick, being easily pulled off with
the Finger. Its Kernel is full of Juice, white of color, pleasant of taste,
and smells like a Rose, and being ripe, receives a purple Color. It is a very
pleasant sight to view the Trees, then showing as if they hung full of small
Hearts; so that with great reason may this be called The King of Fruits, being
both so pleasant to behold and taste. Through the whole Empire of China there
grow no Pine-Apples, but only in this Province. There is also another sort of
round Fruit called Kungyen, that is, Dragons-Eye, not much unlike the former,
only it is somewhat smaller and rounder, being for the bigness much like our
Cherries in Europe, but harder of Skin. This Fruit is dried and sold every
where in Markets; but it is much better eaten fresh from the Tree. Here also
grows the Fruit Muiginli, that is, The Plum of the fair Woman, being round, and
exceeding the Damas Pruine for bigness and goodness.

In the Province of Quantung grow every where the Indian great and small Nuts,
as also a kind of Fruit much esteemed for the bigness, and by the Indians
called Iaca; by the Arabians, Panaix; and by the Persians, Funax: It grows not
upon the Branches of Trees, but upon the very Stock or Body, as if they were
afraid the Boughs would not be able to bear up their weight without breaking.
The Skin or Shell of it is so hard, that it cannot be opened but with an Ax.
Within it is full of little Holes, containing a yellow Pap, wherein lies a Nut,
which when it is ripe, eats very sweet, like a roasted Chestnut. The Tree that
bears it is very high and broad, having very large Leaves, of a pale Green,
through which in the length runs a thick and hard Sinew. The best sort of this
Fruit grows upon the Malabase Coast, and is larger than the biggest Cabbage
when it is ripe, and of a pleasant smell. There are two sorts of this Fruit,
the least whereof is called Baria, the other Papa, and is the worst. The Nuts
which grow in them, if eaten raw, fill the Body with Crudities; but if roasted,
and eaten after the manner of Chestnuts in Europe, they have a pleasant taste,
and increase Seed.

In this Country grows likewise in several Places a certain Fruit called
Duriones, which, though of an ill taste, are yet very wholesome. It is dry in
Operation, causes Sweating, and is good against the Wind and Dropsy, provided
it be eaten moderately, for otherwise it will over-heat the Liver. Most Men at
first fancy this Fruit to smell like rotten Eggs; but after they have once eaten
of it, they change opinion, esteeming it to be the sweetest that ever they did
eat of. The Grandees make account of this Fruit as a great Delicacy, and think
they can never have enough of it. The Leaf or the Herb Betel (which we spoke of
before to be so chewed by them) has so great an aversion to this Fruit, that it
spoils and rots the same, if it lie near unto it; insomuch, that if at any time
any Person eat too much of that, the Betel is a present Remedy against the same.

Here grows likewise a well-tasted Fruit called Ananas, which was at first
brought from the West into the East Indies, where it is now to be had in great
^bundance: It is about the bigness of a Citron, of a yellow Color, and well
scented, full of Juice, and pleasant in taste, if eaten when ripe; for it is
much like Strawberries with Wine and Sugar: Upon the top it is crowned with a
Cluster of Flowers and Leaves, and at a distance is not unlike an Artichoke,
but has no Pricks at the corners: The middlemost Stalk being the biggest, upon
which the Fruit grows, is about two Foot high, and has fifteen or sixteen
Leaves, Round about this Stalk grow other lesser ones, with young Fruit upon
each. Whosoever will eat of this Fruit, must first of all take off the outward
Skin, and then cut it into pieces, and so infuse them in Wine or Water, to draw
out the biting Quality that is in it, otherwise it will make Blisters upon the
Tongue: nor is that all, for it is very dangerous to eat of it, because it is
apt to put one into a Bloody Flux. And though this Fruit be hot, yet the Leaves
thereof are cooling, having a sour and corrosive Quality, which is only found
in cooling Herbs; and the main hazard is produced by its pleasantness, which is
such, that it will melt in the Mouth like Sugar.

In Quantung is a certain Fruit called Musa: The Tree whereon it grows is very
delightful, as well for height as its large spreading Arms, and called by some
The Indian Fig Tree: The Leaves are nine handfuls long, and two and a half
broad; the one side of a brown Color, and the other Green. It shoots forth
several Branches, upon which hang the Figs, which are of several kinds; for
some are yellow, long, pleasant of taste, and well scented; others green, long,
and well tasted; but both hard of digestion: nevertheless it breeds good Blood,
and cures the Cough. And the Bark of the Tree is good against Agues and other
Distempers.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Animals.
AS kind Nature has abundantly provided and blessed China with all manner of
Trees, Bushes, Herbs, and Fruits; so it has made the same no less fruitful in
the product of all sorts of irrational Creatures, as Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, etc.

Of Four-footed Creatures.
THe Sheep in China are like those of Persia and Tartary, having long and thick
Tails, which they drag after them, weighing forty or fifty Pound: their Flesh
is very sweet.

Near the Garrison of Tieki is great store of Cows, having very long, thick and
curled Tails, which the Chinese Soldiers wear for Ornament in their Caps in
stead of Feathers.

Near to the Cities of Cingcheu and Tengcheu, there is found in the Maw of a
Cow a Stone called Nienhoang, which signifies The Yellow of the Cow, by reason
of its Color: It is of several sizes, and sometimes as big as a Goose Egg: And
although it be not altogether so firm and close as the Bezoar Stone, and
consequently lighter, yet is it by the Chinese valued and esteemed much before
it: It seems outwardly to be Chalk, and is much commended for several uses.

In the Province of Quantung is a Creature which the Chinese call The Swift
Cow; for it is so nimble of foot, that it can run more than three hundred Miles
in a day.

In Cincheu is a certain Beast very like a Cow, having Horns much whiter than
Ivory, which is an exceeding great lover of Salt; and therefore when at any
time the Huntsmen go abroad to take any of them, they carry Bags of Salt with
them, which they lay as a Bait; and on this they will feed with such
greediness, that they rather suffer themselves to be killed, than leave off
their so dearly beloved Prey.

In the Province of Kiangsi, and especially in the City of Nanchang, the
Inhabitants feed their Hogs as well within the City as without, by means
whereof there are such great and swarming Herds continually kept in the
Streets, that they are hardly passable; yet they are always kept very clean,
great numbers of People being continually employed in taking away the Filth.

In the Province of Peking there are some Cats with very long Hair, as white as
Milk, and having long Ears like a Spaniel: The Gentlewomen keep them for their
Pleasure; for they will not hunt after, or catch Mice, the reason perhaps being
for that they are too high fed: Yet they have store of other Cats which are
good Mousers.

In the Provinces of Iunnan and Suchue are the best Horses. And in the Province
of Xensi, upon the Mountain Holan (three hundred Miles large) are many wild
Horses. Their Horses are generally but of a mean stature, yet well set, broad
Buttock'd, and strong for Service.

Near Siven are yellow Mice, very large, whose Skins are in much request
amongst the People.

In all Parts of China, especially in the Province of Quantung, are abundance
of Stags, Bucks, Hares, etc.

In Xantung are many ravenous Wolves: And in Xensi abundance of Bears, the
Fore-feet whereof are held in great esteem by the Natives.

Near to the Chief City Linyao lie some Mountains, upon which are bred wild
Oxen, and Creatures like Tigers, with whose Skins the Inhabitants make their
Clothes.

In the Province of Suchue, near the City Po, is a Creature called The
Rhinoceros: It is of a swarthy hue like the Elephant: the Skin is full of
Wrincles, and so hard withal, that it can scarcely be pierced with a Sword: It
has a Snout like a Hog, but sharper; and above the Nostrils stands the Horn,
which is generally black; now and then there is one white, but very seldom, and
that is sold much dearer than the other; and indeed one is larger than the
other, according to the age of the Beast.

In bigness and thickness of Body the Rhinoceros differs but little from the
Elephant, only it has much shorter Feet; and that is the reason why it is not so
comely to the Eye. This Creature is of that temper, that it will hurt no bod,
unless it be first assaulted, and then it falls on with great fury, not only
upon him that gave the Offense, but upon every thing that comes in its way,
which he will never leave till he has destroyed it. When he has got a Man
down, he kills him with a lick of his Tongue, which is both sharp and rough;
afterward tears off his Flesh to the very Bones; but his ordinary Food is
thorny Bushes. He is always at enmity with the Elephant, to whom before he goes
to gives Battle, he whets his Horn against a Stone, and in Fight endeavors to
wound him in the Belly, which he knows to be the weakest part. He makes a noise
like the Grunting of Hogs. The Moors eat his Flesh; but it requires good
Stomachs as well as Teeth to feed upon him. Some use the Horn as an Antidote or
Preservative against Poison.

There are great store of Tigers in the Province of Chekiang, mischievous and
fierce, according to their Nature: But upon the Mountain Kutien are some that
will not hurt a Man.

In several Parts of China also are Elephants bred, but the best are in the
Provinces of Nanking and Iunnan: I shall only add a few words concerning them,
so much having been already said by several Authors. Their bigness is various:
At Constantinople was one seen, which from the Eyes to the furthermost part of
the Back, was eleven Foot, and from the Eyes to the end of his Snout, eight
Foot long. In height some are twelve, others thirteen and fourteen Foot. They
are generally black; but some Chinese Writers affirm, that the King of
Nazaringa had a white one. Their Skin is like Network, but so extraordinary
hard, that it will turn the Edge of a Sword; yet it is harder upon the Back
than the Belly. For the chewing of their Meat, they have four Teeth within,
besides those that stick out before, which stand crooked in the Male, and
downright in the Female. The nether Iaw-bone is only moved in chewing, the
upper always rests. In that part where the Nose is placed in other Creatures,
the Elephant has a long Trunk or Snout, which reaches to the Ground, and has a
Slit at the end: This is both pliable and slippery, which they make use of in
stead of a Hand; for they can take up any thing with it either moist or dry,
and put it into their Mouths.

Of the extraordinary Docility of this Beast there are several Examples to be
found, both in the ancient and modern, as well Chinese as other Writers. Pliny
writes, That they fling up Arms into the Air, and that they Fence with one
another. Of the time and manner of Copulation there is great variety among
Historians; Pliny says, That the Male and the Female at ten years old begin to
couple: But Aristotle gives them a longer time, ascribing twenty to them both,
the Female at twelve, and the Male at eight years. This Act of Generation they
do most commonly in the Water, as being most easy for them both; and that in
the most private Recesses they can find out, and but once in three years;
neither does the Male make use of one Female any more than once: After they
have done Coupling they grow wild and furious, doing much hurt where they come.
How long they go before they cast their Young is uncertain; some speak of a
Year and six Months, others say three years, and some ten. They bring forth
with great pain, leaning backward upon their hinder Legs. Some write, that they
bring forth but one at a time, others four: As soon as it is brought forth it
sees, goes, and sucks with the Mouth, and not with the Snout, till it is eight
years old. They wage War with the Rhinoceros, Lion, Snake, Tiger, Ram, Hog, and
Dragon, as also with some Colors, and with Fire.

In the Province of Iunnan, the Hill Nalo is full of wild Tigers and Leopards;
and so also is the Mountain Xepao. In the Province of Quangsi, they are much
fiercer than Lions, and very hot and eager in the pursuit of Men, Women, and
Children. But Nature has in some sort provided a means whereby to avoid the
cruelty of this Beast; for it is always accompanied with a small Creature,
which with continual Barking gives notice of its coming; upon which noise every
living thing endeavors to get out of the way by flight, or otherwise. The
People of Bengala stand in very great dread of this Beast. The Tiger and
Rhinoceros (as Bontius writes) are great Friends to one another, conversing
much together; the reason whereof the Islanders of Iapan told me, was, as they
supposed, and which is not improbable, because the Tiger is altogether a
devourer of Flesh, which must of necessity occasion a weak Stomach; whereas the
Rhinoceros feeds only upon Green: therefore the Tiger follows him for his Dungs
sake, which he eats for a Cure when he is out of order, as the Dogs Grass, and
the Cats Nip or Cats-mint.

In the Province of Quangsi are very large Hogs, with great and strong Bristles
of a Foot and a half long, which by a particular and strange motion of the Body
they know how to dart toward any one, and that not without great prejudice of
those they hit.

In the Province of Xensi is found the Creature called Xee, from whom proceeds
the Musk; and which is very strange, if at any time it be carried out of the
Kingdom of Lu, into the adjacent Kingdom of Laos, it dies immediately, as a
Fish out of the Water.

In the Kingdom of Gannan is a certain Creature called Tese, which in shape
comes very near to a Man, having long Arms: he is black and hairy upon the
Body, swift of Foot, and laughs aloud like a Man, but is of so voracious a
nature, that whomsoever he meets with he instantly devours.

In the Province of Suchue lies a Mountain called Toyung, upon which are
Monkies or Baboons, which for bigness and shape are very like a Man. These
Creatures are more than ordinarily addicted to Venery, so that they often
attempt to surprise Women on purpose to satisfy their beastial lust, and have
their wills on them. The Indians call them Wild Men, and the Indian Women are
in such fear of them, that they dare not come near those Woods where they
frequent.

Of Fowl.
IN the Province of Xantung are Hens and fat Capons to be had very cheap* as
also great abundance of all sorts of Fowl, as Pheasants, Partridges, etc.

In the Province of Xensi, about Mincheu, are Cocks and Hens having Wool upon
them in stead of Feathers.

In the Province of Quantung are an innumerable company of Ducks, which the
Inhabitants take great delight to breed and increase. They never suffer the
Duck to sit upon her Eggs to hatch them, but put them into an Oven moderately
heated, or else bury them in a Dunghill, and so hatch the young ones.

In the Province of Huquang, near to the City Hanyang, may be caught great
store of Geese.

There are several other sorts of Fowls and Birds in other Provinces, whereof
we have already made mention in the former part of the Description of China.

Of Fish.
IN the Province of Xantung the Pools and Rivers do so abound with Fish, that
for the value of a Penny you may buy ten Pound weight thereof.

In the Province of Kiangsi is a great abundance of all manner of Fish,
especially of Salmon, and the like.

In the Province of Huquang are caught many dainty Lampreys in the River Lofeu.

Near to the City Kiagan is the Pool Mie, in which is bred a sort of Fish as
sweet as Honey.

In the Province of Chekiang, near the City Canghoa, lies the Mountain
Cienking, upon which is a Pool, famous for the yellow or Gold-Fish that is in
it: It is but a small Fish, about a Fingers length, with a forked Tail; but is
in very great esteem at the choicest Tables, so that the Grandees have them
commonly in their Fish Ponds for their Pleasure and Use.



In the Province of Honan, near to the Chief City Namyang, runs the River Tan,
wherein at the beginning of Summer, but never else, are taken red Fish; before
and after which time they are not to be had, in regard they hide themselves.

Near to the Island Hainan are caught Whales, after the same manner as the
Hollanders and English take them in the North about Greenland, whereof they
make Oil which serves for several uses. Of these commonly some are a hundred
and twenty Foot long; the Head whereof is reckoned for a third part of the
whole Body: Upon the top of the Snout are two round Holes, by which means they
will take in a great quantity of Water, and spout it out again with a mighty
force. In stead of Eyes they have two thin Skins which stick out, and are three
Yards long, and a Foot and a half broad, and covered over with Stuff like unto
Flocks. On each side of the Head it has an Ear, which is much smaller without
than within, whereby they are very quick of Hearing. It has a very large
Mouth, with Lips of so great a thickness, that they have sometimes five or six
thousand weight of Fat upon them. The Tongue, which is about eighteen Foot
long, and ten broad, rests upon eight hundred small and great Pegs or Teeth,
which are all covered with Stuff like Horse-hair, to preserve the Tongue from
being hurt as it lies upon them. They feed upon Fish, and the Froth and Scum of
the Sea. There was once one taken that had forty Cod-Fishes in her Belly. The
Tail is at the end almost twenty eight Foot broad, and two thick. The Male has
a Pizzle about fourteen Foot long. They bring forth but one at a time, and that
in the Harvest, which stays by the Female under the protection of her Fins,
till it is grown of a large size. It stands in great fear of the Sword-Fish,
which is a mortal Enemy unto it, and who with its sharp Saw endeavors to rip
open the tender Belly of this Prodigy of Nature. The manner of killing them has
been sufficiently described by others, and therefore I shall forbear to trouble
the Reader with a Relation thereof.

Of Creeping Creatures.
NEar Fungciang is found a sort of black Snakes, whose Flesh is made use of in
the Composition of Medicines that are prescribed as Antidotes against Poison.

In the Province of Honan, near the City Hangang, are Snakes with white
speckled Skins, whose Flesh having for a convenient Season been infused in
Wine, makes the same a very sovereign Remedy against Lameness.

In the Province of Huquang is a sort of Snake, which Physically used is very
good against the Scurf and Itch.

Of Vermin.
THE Province of Xensi is subject, among many other Inconveniences, to this,
that it has more want of Rain than the other Northern Parts; and this
occasions every where such infinite swarms of Grasshoppers, that they
continually devour the growth of the Fields, notwithstanding all the Care and
and industrious Diligence of the Inhabitants to prevent the same: And this is
the true cause why there is very seldom any green Grass to be seen in that
whole Province. But these very Vermin supply the Defect they cause, by becoming
good Food, insomuch that of these Grasshoppers the People make a delicate Dish
for their Tables.

The whole Country of China has great numbers of Silkworms, but in no part
are they in so great abundance as in the Province of Chekiang, the Inhabitants
whereof spend the greatest part of their time in tending, looking after, and
taking care to increase them,

In the Province of Xantung the Trees and Fields hang sometimes full of Silk,
which is not spun by the forementioned Silkworm, but another sort, and
consists of long Threads of white Silk, which being carried by the Wind upon
the Trees and Houses, is gathered together. Of this sort they weave Stuffs, but
it is far courser then that which is wove of the former; but this is
recompensed by its durableness; for it is much stronger.

In China are also found several strange Creatures, which live as well upon the
Land as in the Water; namely, in the Province of Huquang, in the River of
Siang, lives a certain Creature like a Horse, only in stead of Hair it has
Scales upon the Body, and Claws like a Tiger. It is of a very fierce and cruel
Nature, and will fasten upon any thing when it comes out of the Water, whether
Man or Beast.

In Quantung, near the City Hoeicheu, is a Creature which is neither Fish nor
Fowl, but between both; for all the Summer it is a Bird of a yellow Color, and
therefore called Hoangcioya, and keeps upon the Mountains; but in the Winter it
turns Fish again, and betakes it self to the Water. The People eat of it with
great delight and satisfaction.

Near the City Caocheu, in the River Co, are abundance of very mischievous
Crocodiles: they are by the Indians called Caiman, having an Hide as hard as
Iron, and only soft upon the Belly. This Caiman has a broad Forehead, and a
Hog-like Snout, with a very wide Mouth: Its Teeth are large, white* and strong,
fixed in both the Iaws, whereof only the uppermost moves; for the lowermost is
fixed and immovable: It has no Tongue, but only a Ski^ that cleaves to the
lower Iaw, being much like a Tongue: It has large round black Eyes: The Legs
are strong, and the Feet Armed with sharp Nails: The Tail is as long as the
rest of the Body: It is said, that he can live four Months without eating; but
at last being hungry, he howls or cries out like a Man. These Serpents are very
swift of foot, but cannot so well wind and turn, by reason of their stiff
Back-bones. They are not only found here, but in other parts of India, Africa,
Asia, and America, especially in the River Nyle in Egypt. They live upon Fish
or Flesh, and when they come Ashore they prey upon Cattle: When they Couple,
the Male lays the Female upon her Back, otherwise by reason of the shortness of
his Feet he could not Copulate. The Female lays sixty Eggs, of the bigness of a
Goose Egg, and is hatching of them sixty days. There is no Creature to be
found, that from so small a beginning grows to such a largeness; for some are
thirty Foot long. They are at enmity with the Tiger, Serpents, Scorpions, etc.
but at amity with Hogs, which they suffer to pass by them unregarded. In the
Day this Creature lives upon the Land, and in the Night in the Water. When it
is gorged with eating, and is fallen asleep with his Mouth full of Meat, a
small Bird called Trochicus, and in Italian, The King of Birds, comes to him as
he lies with his Mouth open, and cleanses his Teeth with picking and scraping;
wherewith the Crocodile is so highly pleased, that he opens his Throat as wide
as is possible, that so the Bird may scour the same: for which kindness it
bears it much friendship. The Chinese eat the Flesh thereof with great
delight. It is reported, that Termus King of Egypt swam amongst them stark
naked, having his Body only anointed with the Grease of them.

In the River Chaoking is a Fish called The Swimming Cow, which comes often out
of the Water, and fights at Land with the tame Cows, to their great hazard,
till its Horns grow weak by staying out of the Water, which may be discerned by
their turning yellow; then with all speed it returns into the Water, where the
Horns grow hard again.

Near to Caocheu there is to be seen a strange kind of Creature in the Sea,
having a Head like a Bird, and a Tail like a Fish: In its Belly are found some
Precious Stones.

Between this City and the Island Hainan are taken a sort of Crabs, which as
soon as they are out of the Water become petrifi'd, and immediately turn into
Stones. The Portuguese and Chinese make great use of them for the Cure of
Agues.

In the Province of Suchue near the City of Chunking, are great store of
Land-Tortoises of several sizes; some very large, and others very small, which
the Inhabitants keep in their Houses for their Pleasure.

But in Quantung, near to Hoeicheu, there are caught in the Sea such very large
Tortoises, that they look like little Rocks at a distance. The Land as well as
the Sea-Tortoises engender after the manner of the Adder-Snake, the Male
getting upon the Female. They lay Eggs like Hens Eggs, but lesser, and more
oval. It is said of them, that they live under Ground in the Winter without
eating: They are afraid of the Eagle, which makes a prey of them taking them
up, and letting them fall till they break. They make but little noise, yet
louder than the Snake. Whether they are to be reckoned amongst Flesh or Fish,
is still to be determined. Some account them amongst Fish, and eat them in
Lent; others think the contrary, because they have Feet, and draw Breath.

The Land-Tortoise Shells are very hard, and like Ebony, nor will they bend
like those of the Sea; but they are full of Knobs upon the top, and most of
them of fine Colors, yellow and brown, as if they were Painted with Crosses,
Stars, and other Figures. They thrust out their Heads and Feet, which when they
draw in, as they can at pleasure, they seem to be immovable: They differ very
much in bigness, some being no bigger than a Man's Fist.

In Virginia are Tortoises of three and four Foot long, with two Heads; which
are very malicious, and given to biting.

In the Island Mauritius are some Tortoises so large, that they will carry four
or five Men standing upon them. Their Shells are of so capacious an extent,
that ten Persons may sit in one of them. But the Sea-Tortoises are much larger
than those of the Land. John de Lery writes, That there was one taken by their
Fleet, which gave eighty Persons their Bellies full. Their Shells are much
smoother and flatter than the other, and very curiously wrinkled. In hot Water
they will bend into any shape, which the other cannot do by reason of its
hardness; so that Artificers make Combs and Boxes of them. In stead of Feet
they have Fins, wherewith they swim as other Fish; but they lie much upon their
Backs, and swim sleeping upon the Water. The Flesh of this Creature is
luscious, and tastes like Veal, being interlarded with yellowish Fat. The
Female lays her Eggs by Night, and buries them in the Sand, which are hatched
in six Weeks by the heat of the Sun.

CHAP. XVII.
Of some things more than Natural, and strange Pools.
IN the last seven Chapters I spoke of great and admirable things, yet such as
are not beyond the ordinary Course of Nature; but in this I shall treat of some
more wonderful, which are hard to be credited, though the Chinese do firmly
believe the same.

In the Province of Xensi, near the City Vucung, is a Hill called Taipe,
whereupon if a Drum be beaten, presently follows Thunder, Lightning, and
stormy Weather, insomuch that the Magistrates have forbidden all Persons upon
pain of Death, to beat any Drum there.

The River Tan has red Fish, with whose Blood (as the Chinese write and fancy)
whosoever anoint their Feet, they may wade over this River without sinking;
adding further, That if the Water of this River be but stirred, all the Fish
presently rise and swim upon the top of the Water, and make it look as red as
Fire: from whence in probability it had its Name; for Tan signifies Red.

In the Province of Xantung, near the City Niuyang, is a Spring in high esteem
amongst the Inhabitants; for they verily believe, that whosoever drinks of
(...) it makes them long-lived.

In Suchue, near the City Chingtu, is the most large and extensive Mountain
Chingching, upon which, according to the vain belief of the Chinese, the
immortal Men meet to Converse.

In the Province of Huquang, upon Mountains of an incredible height and
bigness, inhabit none but wild and unciviliz'd People.

Near to Liencheng, a City of Quantung, lies a great Hill called Uhoang, where
grows a sort of Fruit whose like is not to be found any where else; for you may
eat as much as you please, but you must carry none away, and while you endeavor
so to do, you can never find the way down.

In the Province of Iunnan, near the City Chinkiang, is to this day a great
Stone to be seen, where Simulo, who possessed the Kingdom of Mung, gave
Audience to the Ambassadors of another King, who upon the delivery of their
Message not satisfying him, he arising in anger, and taking his Sword naked
into his Hand, struck with it so violently upon the Stone, that the Blow
pierced above three Foot into it, and with threatening words said to the
Ambassadors, Go and acquaint your King what Swords I have. This happened in the
Reign of Iliaouvus, the Founder of the Race of Hana, which incorporated the
powerful Kingdom of Mung to the Kingdom of China.

Near the City Munghoa, in the Province of Honan, lies the Mountain Funghoang,
which tooks its Name from the Phoenix, because it died upon the same, after it
had sung there a while most deliciously. The Chinese relate, That there is a
general Assembly of Birds once every year upon this Mountain, to lament the
Death of the said Phoenix; of which time the Inhabitants taking notice, climb up
by Night with Lights, and catch abundance of them.

Near the City Fuencheu is the Mountain Vanhu, which is reputed the highest of
all Hills; and this Name was given to it, because ten thousand People, in the
time of the Inundation of the World, got upon the top of this Mountain to avoid
the danger of drowning.

Near to Tingcheu is a Mountain called Kin, upon which are three Pools, which
turn Iron that is flung into them, into Copper immediately.

There are several other strange Pools, Springs, and Wells to be found in
China, some whereof are very sovereign for the cure of several Distempers of
the Body.

On the West side of the City Caifung, in the Province of Honan, lies a Pool
called Kinning, which the Imperial Race of Sunga caused to be dug for the
disciplining and training up Seamen, to make them expert in Sea Fights, which
was very much used by the Emperor Taicungus. This Pool is so very pleasant,
that round about the same are built several brave Palaces of the Grandees,
besides diverse Idol-Temples.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Chinese Kings and Emperors, which have Governed in China before and
since Christ's Birth.
BEfore I make mention of the Wars between the People of China and the Tartars,
I shall speak in short concerning the Genealogy of the Kings and Emperors who
have Reigned there before and since the Birth of Christ.

First then observe, That before Christ's Birth, between the Years of the World
2207. and the Year 2952. eight hundred succeeded one another in the Government
of that Empire, which took not the same by Inheritance, but after the death of
one, another was elected by plurality of Voices. But after that time the
Government became Hereditary, and the next Heir to the preceding King succeeded
after his death.

The first eight Elective Kings were Fohius, Xinnungus, Hoangtius, Xaohavus,
Chuenhious, Cous, Yaus, and Xunus. All the Transactions during the Reign of
these eight Elective Kings, and the following Imperial Races, before and after
the Birth of Christ, are not in the least doubted, but firmly believed by all
the People, in regard the Histories of those Times are faithfully transferred
to Posterity by the then Chronologers: for it has been a constant (and without
doubt) a most laudible Custom amongst them, that the new Emperor does appoint
and order some of the most Learned Philosophers to write the Deeds and Actions
of his Predecessor at large, without fraud or flattery. Out of this voluminous
Work, which comprehends in general all the great Transactions of the whole
Empire, the Chinese, for ease of Memory, have made an Extract or Epitome of
the most remarkable Passages. But as to what passed before the eight elected
Emperors, the Chinese themselves are very doubtful, because the Books of those
Times are full of ridiculous Stories, as well relating to the Age of the
People, as the Years of the Governors: for according to the fantastic belief
of those Writers, the World must have been created some thousands of years
before the Flood.

But before I proceed to the Lives and Actions of these eight Emperors, I shall
in a few words declare what Kings and Princes are feigned to have had the Rule
over China, before the Government of Fohius the first of them.

The Chinese feign, That the first Man, whom they also own for their first
Governor, was called Puoncuus, and had his Original out of a confused Lump, as
out of an Egg; though some of the more Learned in Europe are of opinion, That
Cainan or Kenan, the Son of Enos, was the first Man that with his Followers
Peopled China, and that from him they all had their rise. They also add, That
this Cainan was preferred to the Government when he was five hundred years old,
and that after him the eight Elect Emperors Governed those Countries and
Inhabitants, as has been and shall be more fully related: Yet they tell us,
That after the decease of this Puoncuus, one Tienhoangus succeeded in the
Government; of whose Time a certain Chinese Historian speaks thus: (...) that
time the Spirit of Heaven covered the Face of the Earth, and by degrees
introduced good Manners, and taught the People, being then very decible,
Civility and Morality; but especially when the great Dragon was killed, which
had molested the whole World by mingling Heaven and Earth together: after his
Death, every thing receiving a more illustrious form and Dignity.

After him, they say, succeeded one Th^angus, who was very skilful in the
Course of the Stars, distinguished the Day and Nights by Name, and ordering
every Month to consist of thirty Days. When he was deceased, they write, That
nine other Princes succeeded; but they are altogether ignorant both of their
Names and Actions.

After these nine followed, according to their Legend, Ginhoangus, with nine
more of his Family. He divided the Country into nine Parts, whereof one was
given to the People to inhabit, and the other eight he appointed for Husbandry:
and by this means he brought the People, who at first, as wild and unciviliz'd,
lived dispersed, to bring their Habitations near together, though yet they had
no Houses. His Reign, they say, was a Golden Age for the Earth brought forth
Fruit of it self without much Labor. This Prince cared for his Subjects with
more then a Fatherly Love, who on the other hand honored and served him, as
dutiful Children obey their Father.

After him followed one Yeus, who instructed the People that had long lived in
Holes and Caves of the Mountains, to make Huts and little Edifices of Wood, to
defend themselves against the fury of wild Beasts: for till this time they were
ignorant of most things useful for the support and sustenance of Life; for they
had not so much as heard of Husbandry, nor knew how to strike Fire, wherewith
either to dress their Victuals, ^r to refresh the Body; but they lived only
upon wild Herbs and Fruits, and devoured the raw Flesh of wild Creatures, and
drank their Blood, going for the most naked, or at the best wearing only the
undressed Skin of some wild Creature they had killed, about some part of their
Body.

After the death of this Yeus, Sujus Reigned, who was very skilful in
Astrology. He taught, that there were five Elements, as Metal, Wood, Earth, and
Fire; which last he observed in the Air. He was also the first that made the
discovery of Fire, by rubbing one piece of Wood against another. There was no
kind of Money or Coin, either Silver or Gold in his Days; but they exchanged
Commodity for Commodity, by way of Barter. Thus far their hardly-believ'd
Histories proceed; which whether true or false, shall be no Task for me to
discover; but leaving them as they are, I shall return to speak of the eight
Elect Emperors beforementioned, the first whereof was Fohius, whom the
Chinese called Thiensu, that is, The Son of Heaven; and by this Title they
still call all their Emperors. They say, and happily believe it, that he was
brought into the World by his Mother without a Father; for as she was walking
by the side of the Pool which runs through the City Lanthien, in the Province
of Xensi, she trod accidentally (as Fame suggests it) in the Footsteps of a
Man which was in the Sand; upon which, being immediately with Iris or the
Rainbow, she proved to be with Child, and at her full time brought forth this
Fohius in that Province, who took upon him the Government two thousand nine
hundred and fifty two years before Christ's Birth, and Reigned a hundred and
fifteen years.

This Emperor was a Man of a most upright and virtuous Disposition, very well
skilled in Astrology, seeking thereby as well to know and understand the
Motions of the Heavens and Stars, as to be famed for the well managing of
Earthly Affairs; and indeed he made discovery of several things relating to
Astrology, and introduced very good Laws, whereby he kept his Subjects in awe,
reducing the same into Writing, having for that purpose invented the first and
most ancient Chinese Characters.

Till this Princes Time there was in China among the Men and Women no
difference, either of Habit or Manner; neither did they know the civilized
Limits of lawful Wedlock, but lived as Beasts, in common one among another.
Both these things he reformed, ordaining the sacred Rites of Marriage, and
ordering the Men to wear their Clothes distinct in fashion from those of the
Women.

Xinnungus was elected Emperor after the death of Fohius, by reason of his
eminent Virtues, and Reigned a hundred and forty years. He first invented the
use of the Plough for tillage of the Ground, and taught the Inhabitants the use
thereof, who finding the Benefit thereof, began to manure the Land of their own
accord, which required their Industry with a plentiful Crop of Fruit for the
better sustenance of Life; and for this reason they called him Xinnungi, which
signifies The Ingenious Husbandman. He was also a diligent Searcher into the
Virtues of all Herbs and Plants, making Experiments thereof upon his own Body.
After he had Reigned a hundred years, one Hoangtius, a petty King, his
Neighbor, made War upon him, and after having defeated and killed him, won also
the Kingdom. The Defeat was received upon the Mountain Fano, in the Place where
now the City Peking is situate, in the Province of Peking; the Inhabitants of
which Place still retain some memory of that War, it being, as they say, the
first that ever was waged in the World. And thus by force of Arms Hoangtius
came to the Empire, who nevertheless for Virtue, goodness of Mind, and comely
shape of Face and Body, was hardly ever to be paralelled. He made several good
Laws, and particularly ordered just Weights and Measures: But all these Virtues
were in some measure sullied by his seeming Tyranny; for he always kept an Army
on foot, wherewith he kept the Rebellious in awe: And indeed there was nothing
blameworthy in him but this, and his treacherous falling upon the foregoing
Emperor, and taking his Kingdom from him: However, he Governed very prudently,
and had a particular care of the Welfare of his Subjects; one testimony whereof
appeared in his advancing Commerce, which hitherto had been hindered by
unpassable Ways: for effecting whereof to the best advantage and accommodation
of Trade and Travelers, he caused Ways to be dug through Hills and
Mountains, by the same means likewise enlarging the Territories of his Empire.

He was the first in this Country that introduced the Imperial Crown, and other
Ceremonies and Marks of Majesty, using blue and yellow Clothes, in imitation of
the two Colors of Heaven and Earth. He invented the Art of Dying several
Colors, and then commanded the more Wealthy People to distinguish themselves
from the Poor, by wearing Apparel different in color. Where Rivers were great
and broad, for the better and more easy transfretation, he caused the Trunks
of Trees to be hollowed out in the form of Boats; but over the smaller, and
such as were narrow, he ordered Bridges to be made: And finding that difference
in Commodities hindered Dealing, for promotion of Trade he ordered Brass-Money
to be Coined; and to defend both it and themselves against an Enemy, he not
only found out the Invention of Arms, but taught his Subjects how to handle
them. There is a Report (which is certainly strange, but how true I will not
decide) That in the Hall of his Palace there grew an Herb of that Nature and
Virtue, that if an unjust Person came into the same, it would turn and bow
toward him, as the Sun-Flower does to the Sun.

He had by his Wives twenty five Children, amongst which were fourteen lawfully
begotten, and lived to see them at Man's Estate: nay, which is more, they
report he never died, but was received amongst the Xinsien, that is, The
Immortal: and doubtless this may with great Reason be said of him, for his Name
was immortalized for his Virtue; all the Chinese Emperors since his Time taking
to themselves the by-Name of Hoangtius, as the Roman Emperors after the first
Caesar assumed the Name of Caesar's. After his death his Son Xaohavus succeeded
him in his Throne (being nothing inferior to his Father for Virtue and
Goodness) in the Year 2597. before the Incarnation: He Reigned eighty four
years, and was the first of all the Emperors that caused a distinction in the
Degrees and Dignities of the Mandorins or Magistrates, by their several
bearings of Birds and Colors; for it is a Custom to this day, for every
Magistrate to wear a particular colored Habit, whereby his Place and
Employment may be known: to which end they bear a Bird, or some other Mark,
embroider^d with Gold and Silver, both behind upon the Back, and before upon
the Breast, that so every one that meets them may know what Place and Dignity
he enjoys: which Notes or Badges of distinctions are easily known; for such as
have any Employment in the Civil Magistracy, have always tame Birds for their
Cognizance; but the Commanders over the Armies have Dragons, Lions, Tigers, and
the like wild Creatures, which declare the destructive nature of War. The
Emperor Xaohavus made choice of Birds for this use before any other Creatures,
because at the beginning of his Reign, the Bird of the Sun appeared, which was
a sign of much prosperity of the Empire: for if these Birds are long before
they come, the Chinese firmly believe, that the Imperial Race will not be of
long continuance, but that there will be Wars made upon them. What sort of Bird
this is I could never understand, but according to its shape, as they describe
it, it is not unlike an Eagle, only the Feathers are very curious, as well for
singularity of Colors as other beauty. But in regard it so very rarely
appears, it may be supposed to be the Phoenix, by them called Fughoang.

This Emperor having Reigned many years, to the great satisfaction of the
Inhabitants, and by reason of his Age not being able any longer to take care of
the Affairs of his Dominions, one Chuenhious, Nephew to Hoangtius, upon the
account of his extraordinary good Qualities, was Substituted to the
Administration of the Government in the Year 2513 before Christ's Birth, and
Reigned seventy eight years. He continued the virtuous Courses of his
Ancestors, both in Religious and Worldly Concerns. Amongst others, he caused a
Law to be made, That no Person, of what Quality soever, should be admitted to
Offer to the Gods, but the Emperor only; so great an esteem they had in those
days of Ecclesiastical Employments, that they were not to be Exercised by any
but the greatest Princes.

No sooner wat Chuenhious dead, but his Nephew Cous succeeded him, being as his
Predecessors, very eminent in all manner of Virtue and Goodness: He was chosen
Emperor two thousand four hundred thirty five years before Christ's Birth: He
Married four Wives, which was very rare in those Days, and had four Sons by
them; one of them, named Cious, he procured by performing some Promise to the
supreme Emperor of Heaven. Another of his Wives bore a Son called Kius, who was
said also to be given to her by the Gods, through importunity of Prayer, having
been always barren before. The third Woman had a Child in the fourth Month of
her Marriage, which was called Yaus, having first seen in her Sleep a red
Dragon, which is held by the Chinese for a sign of great Prosperity. The
fourth had a Son called Cheus. This last was preferred to the Throne by his
Father Cous before all the rest, being observed by him to be the most inclined
to Virtue and Goodness: But the good old Man was much mistaken; for he was no
sooner in the Throne, but he fell into all manner of Debauchery, giving himself
up so much to Women and Drinking, that he neglected the Affairs of the State:
And being often admonished by the Magistrates to take better care of his
Government, but continuing still in his lewdness, the Subjects (who had been
for the most part Governed by just and virtuous Princes) judged that he was
unworthy to Reign any longer, so that they deposed him in the ninth Year of his
Reign, and set up his Brother Yaus in his Place.

This Yaus, who began to Reign in the Year 2357 before Christ's Birth, and
Governed ninety years, is renowned in all the Chinese Histories for a most
virtuous Prince: and certainly if regard be had to the greatness of his
Actions, and the whole course of his most exemplary Life, he may, for
honorable, Achievements, be compared with the best of Princes that ever swayed
that Scepter. A certain Book called Xu, published in his Reign, mentions in
short his Fame, in these words: The Noble and Heroic Actions of Yaus have
filled the whole World with Admiration; such was, his extraordinary Diligence,
that he was esteemed by all Men for his Worth, Understanding, Civility, and
quickness of Apprehension, according to the grandeur of his Merit; and such his
good Fortune, that whatsoever he undertook was brought to pass by him. The
Chinese Histories tell us, That during his Government, the Sun did not Set for
the space of ten days, and great fear possessed the People, that the World
would have been destroyed by a general Conflagration, in regard there had
happened several great Fires at that time. They likewise report, that at the same
time several strange Monsters, as Snakes and Dragons, crept out from under the
Ground, and that this Yaus in these dismal Times, and notwithstanding all those
dreadful Accidents, carried himself with so much Piety and Care for the Welfare
of his Subjects, that he was looked upon by every body as the Redeemer and
Deliverer of his Country.

To descent to Particulars concerning this Emperor; he was very much addicted
to Astrology, being instructed therein by the two famous Men, H^us and House,
Persons more than ordinarily expert in that Science: But he was not alone
eminent for Knowledge and Industry; for his Wife the Empress taught other Women
how to breed and raise Silkworms, and the Art of preparing and weaving of
Silk. When he had th^s civilized the People, by his own and Wifes Instructions,
to the knowledge of Manufactures, he forthwith new modeled the Government, and
introduced the six Iudicatures or Benches of Justice, to wit, Sipu, Hopu,
Limpu, Pimpu, Cumpu, and Humpu.

When he had thus settled the Affairs of his State in order, he deposed himself,
and transferred the Government in his Lifetime upon another; in which more
than ordinary Action he had more regard to the Good of the Public, than to the
Welfare and Affection of his own Children and Relations, all whom he
voluntarily passed by, although no ways inferior to him in Knowledge and
uprightness of Life, and surrendered the Empire to a Stranger in Blood, not for
respect of his Princely Alliance, but only the Eminency of his Virtue and
Integrity.

And as a singular Testimony of this his Zeal for the Good of his Country, I
shall only give you this one Example; namely, Discoursing once with one
Fangius, an Eminent and Learned Person of his Council, he told him, That he was
in a very great suspense whom he should choose to be his Successor. The
Counselor made him this Answer; There is one of your own Princely Family, your
Eldest Son Chus, and rightful Heir, upon whom you may settle your Empire; the
goodness of whose Nature, extraordinary Prudence, quickness of Wit, treading in
your Royal Steps, and imitating your laudable Exemplar, merits no less: And if
your Servants Counsel be acceptable to your Ears, I shall advise you to settle
in the Government this your Eldest Son, and no other. But Yaus interrupting his
Discourse, said, You know, Fangius, that I take as much distaste at the
commending of Bad, as I do at the discommending of Good People: My son is
unready of Speech, and slow of Tongue, his Words and his Deeds not agreeing;
true it is, he knows in outward Gestures how to behave himself as a Wise Man,
but inwardly he is nothing.

Not long after, being about the seventieth Year of his Reign, he sent for one
Sungous, one of his greatest Favorites and Counselors, to whom he spoke in
this manner: I find the Weight of a Crown too heavy for my aged Head, and
therefore intend to surrender up my Empire to you, having in all my time
observed none so fit for it, either for Virtue or Wisdom. But Sungous,
unacquainted with Ambitious Thoughts, absolutely refused to accept of it,
modestly protesting his Insufficiency for so great a Charge, for that he was
not not furnished with those Qualities wherewith an Emperor ought to be
provided; and so neither worthy of that Honor, nor able to undergo the Burden.
When Yaus saw him persisting immovably in his Resolution not to accept of the
Government, he demanded of him, whom he judged worthy of the same; to whom
Sungous, in the presence of the Emperor's Council, made this Answer: Since you
are pleased to inquire of me, O King, whom I judge worthy to be a Successor in
your Empire, though there are many others better able to advise in a Point of
so high a Nature, yet I shall acquaint you with that which I suppose and hope
may tend to your own and the Empires Good. There is (said he proceeding) a
Husbandman, your Subject, and a Bachelor, looked upon by all People for a very
honest Man, who for his Piety, Virtue, and good Disposition, is so beloved and
respected among his Neighbors, that they will give or lend him their Moneys,
Lands, and Houses, without asking: And so great is their Opinion of his
Prudence, that upon all Occasions they ask his Advice, and follow it. His Name
is Xunus, who by his Virtuous and Exemplary Life has reclaimed many vicious
and debauched Persons, and brought them to be Imitators of his Goodness and
Sobriety; although his Misfortune is great in this, that his Father (called
Cassus) is a Fool; his Mother a pertinacious Woman, and full of Tongue; and his
Brothers proud, haughty, and wilful. The Emperor Yaus having heard this
Relation, told him, that he would send to inquire concerning the Abilities of
this so unfortunately^extracted Wise Man, which not long after he accordingly
did, causing him to be brought to the Court: At his first arrival he was
entrusted with the Government of the West Country only, that thereby the
Emperor might be satisfied of his Ability and Honesty: And, according to the
Character given of him, herein Xunus so well behaved himself, that every Body,
but especially Yaus, did with admiration reverence him; and finding him every
way extraordinarily qualified, the Emperor soon after took him to his
Assistance, and cast the Care of the whole Government upon his Shoulders: In
which high Estimation and Grandeur he continued for the space of twenty eight
Years, that the Noble Prince Yaus lived.

But at last Yaus, being over-laden with Years, and ready to die (in the Year
before Christ's Birth 2257.) admonished Xunus upon his Deathbed, to accept of
the Government, in these or the like words: Draw near to me, and hear these my
last words; I have tokens enough of your Virtue and Honesty, and that your
Words and Deeds are correspondent each to other: Therefore you must accept of
the Scepter, which is due to your Virtues and Services. Take care of the
Welfare and Good of your Subjects as a Father, and remember that you must
serve, not enslave the People, and so they will love, and not fear you; for
this reason a King exceeds all his Subjects, because he alone is to take care,
and to watch over all the rest. Having thus said, he yielded up the Ghost, for
whom Xunus Mourned, not as one Friend for another, but as a Son for his Father:
for according to the Custom of the Country, where Sons lament their Parents
Death, he left the Government wholly to his Council, and continued three whole
years at the Grave of his Prince, without removing from it.

This Solemnity of Grief being past, and Xunus returned to the Exercise of his
Government, he quickly gave Proofs of his Prudence and Clemency, which caused
him to be very much beloved by his Subjects. It is reported, that in each Eye
he had two Balls or Apples, which was, and still is held by the Chinese for a
sign of extraordinary Fortune.

Being now settled, he divided the Inhabitants into several Companies, and
gratified each according to his Worth and Parts with his Offices; he either
made new Laws and Customs, or reformed the old. The six Benches of Judicature
erected by his Predecessor Yaus, were reduced by him into a better Form:
Afterward he divided the whole Empire into twelve Provinces, which he visited
yearly in Person, and whatever Learned or wise Men he found, them he cherished
and preferred above all others. He gave in charge to the Governors and
Mandorins of Provinces, to promote Agriculture and Tillage above all other
things; that they should accommodate and show themselves kind to all Strangers
and Travelers; to put into Offices only such as were able, and of known and
approved Integrity, and give credit to honest and good People. He devised
likewise five sorts of Punishments, according to which Malefactors were to
suffer, as the greatness of the Crime did deserve: which were, 1. Loss of Life.
2. Cutting off the Nose. 3. A Foot. 4. A Hand. and 5. Pulling out the Teeth. He
introduced likewise the Custom of banishing Malefactors, the chiefest whereof
were to be exiled out of the Limits of that Empire, and to be forced to live
and reside amongst Foreign People. Another thing yet very observable of him, is
this, That during his Reign he forbad that any should obey him merely for fear
of his Authority, because he was Emperor, but rather for love of his Goodness,
because he ordered that which was Just and Right.

During his Government, the Tartars (of whom never any mention was made before
in the Chinese Histories) broke into China, plundering, and making Inroads into
most of the Provinces: But the good Prince, who only cared for the Welfare of
his Subjects, having raised a great Army, marched against them with it, and by
main force subduing the Enemy, settled his Empire again in Peace and Quietness.
But since that time, which is many Ages since, the Tartars never left molesting
and disturbing the said Countries, till now at last in our Days they have made
themselves Masters of the whole, as I shall mention hereafter.

At the time of this Invasion, as Fluctus fluctum sequitur, one Evil seldom
goes alone, the Emperor was full of trouble, by what means to repel the high
Waters which threatened to overflow the lower parts of the Country. After many
Experiments, he gave order at last to one Quenius, to cast up a Bank against
the same; but he not being able to perform it, and leaving the same imperfect,
the Charge of the Work was committed to his Son Yvus, who in the space of
thirteen years effected it, to the great accommodation of the Inhabitants,
following his Design all that while with such earnestness, that he would hardly
eat or sleep. Some part of this great and stupendous Work may be seen to this
day, as the Royal Channels, in which great Vessels pass and Sail from one Place
to another: For the making whereof the Workmen were compelled to dig through
Rocks in some places, and to divide or cut great Rivers into two or three, and
make Inlets for them into the Sea: by which Industry great store of Ground was
drained, and recovered from the Water under which it had lain immerged ultra
memoriam. This great Labor, Diligence, and Dexterity of Yvus, used in the
accomplishing this stupendous Work, so far prevailed upon the Affection of the
Emperor, that he made him his Fellow and Companion in the Government, passing
by his own Son; so that they two, without any ambitious Emulation or Envy to
each other (which is a very strange thing) Governed seventeen years with equal
Power and Authority. At the end of which time Xunus happening to die, and his
eldest Son, taking it ill thas Yvus should be preferred before him, in regard
he took it for granted, that the Scepter did by hereditary Right belong unto
him, he endeavored to seat himself in the Imperial Throne by force of Arms: But
what Stratagems, Policy, or Force soever he used, all proved vain; ^or he could
not prevail, the generality of the People adhering cordially to Yvus, in regard
they judged him most deserving of the Crown; which accordingly was settled upon
him, though not without some trouble.

This Yvus was the Founder of the first Chinese Imperial Race, which he caused
to be styled Hiaa, and the last of the elected Emperors: for when the Royal
Chair after his Death became void, his Son was unanimously admitted to succeed
him, and from that time the manner and custom of Election was changed into an
hereditary Succession from Father to Son.

This Royal Race or Family, which had its beginning in the beforementioned
Yvus (in the Year 2207 before Christ's Birth) swayed the Imperial Scepter four
hundred forty one years in a continued Line of seventeen Emperors, who
succeeded each other in the Government of China.

This Race being extinct for want of Issue, arose the Family of Xanga, whereof
the Emperor Tangus, in the Year 1766 before Christ's Birth, was the first who
called it Xanga, from a Lordship of the same Name he possessed. This Family
produced twenty eight Emperors, who sat upon the Throne successively for six
hundred years and upwards, to the Year 1122 before the Birth of Christ.

This Line being extinct in the beforementioned Year, there arose a third
called Cheva, whose Founder was one Faus, who at the beginning of his Reign,
changing his Name, called himself Uvus, that is, A Warrior. Thirty seven
Emperors proceeded out of this Family, and all successively swayed the Scepter:
which ending the Year 246 before Christ's Birth, the fourth Race called Ciua
stood up, whose Founder was named Chingus; but altering his Name, was called
Xius. This Race, which gave its Name to the whole Empire (as I have already
related) was yet but of short continuance, there having sprung but three
Emperors from thence, who Reigned forty years, and extinguishing about the Year
206 before the Birth of Christ, the fifth Race, called Hana, got into the
Throne: the Founder whereof was one Leupangus, whose Successor in a direct Line
held the Sovereignty of the Empire of China till the Year 264 after Christ's
Birth. This Family being brought under, the sixth Race, called Cyna, stepped into
the Throne, and Governed till the Year of our Lord 419. within which compass of
Time there were no less than five Kings at once, who were all called Utai, and
waged very cruel Wars one against another for above four hundred years. At last
having miserably worried and weakened each other, they were all subdued by the
seventh Race called Tanga, which seized upon the whole Empire, and Reigned with
his Posterity till the Year of Christ 618.

No sooner was this Race of Tanga at an end, but the eighth, called Sunga,
succeeded, in which the Government continued till the Year of our Lord 1278.
when the Tartars, after a long and tedious destructive War with this Family
^unga for seventy three years, conquered the whole Empire, extirpating the
whole Family, and set up a new one called Ivena, which Reigned over the
Chinese till the Year 1368. But in the same Year appeared a Priest called Chu,
who with the assistance of his Countrymen expelled the Tartars, and settled
himself in the Throne, assuming the Name and Style of Hunguvus, which signifies
The Warlike Soldier; from whom sprung the Race of Taicinga, which held the
Crown two hundred and eighty years, but at last was brought under, and wholly
rooted out in the Year 1644 by the Tartars, who once more conquered and
overran the whole Empire, and erected a new Generation of Royal Blood called
Taicinga, under its first Founder Xunchius, who was born Great Cham of Tartary.
And thus having led you as it were by the Hand to the Tartar Government, it
will not be amiss to show you, as briefly as the Subject will bear, as well the
cause as the manner of that terrible Devastation, which not only extirpated the
same Family, but brought the whole Country to the slavish Subjection of their
unciviliz'd Barbarism.

The Tartars, who for Antiquity go beyond all other People in Asia, and from
whom many and several Nations are sprung, did in the Year 2158 before Christ's
Birth, make very bloody Wars against the Chinese, wherein they were sometimes
Conquerors possessing the Land, and at other times conquered and driven out
again. Now it is to be observed, That under the Name of Tartars I understand
here, those People that have their Habitations on the North side of that most
renowned and famous Wall, in former times built against the Invasions of those
Barbarians, and reaching from East to West three hundred Dutch Miles in length.

For what cause or reason these People have born for so many Ages so much
Malice and Hatred to one another (as appears by the bloody Wars they have made)
the Chinese Histories make no mention: But others who would seem to be curious,
and understanding Inspectors therein, ascribe it to the difference of Customs
and Manners of these two Nations; for as parity of Manners is a concealed
beginning and introduction of Friendship; so on the other Hand, a difference
therein is the original and true occasion of Enmity. Now how much the Tartars
and Chinese differ in their Customs and Manners, will easily be made appear by
the daily Employments and Actions each of them affects from the Cradle. The
Chinese is of an affable and peaceable Disposition, addicted to Husbandry, and
loving all good Arts and Sciences: But the Tartar, on the other Hand, delights
in nothing so much as Hunting, being very cunning and deceitful, lusting after
War, and of a very loose and uncivil Comportment. It is true, both endeavor to
shun Idleness, but with Intentions very incoherent; the one to live temperately
and honestly; but the other only to range abroad in a wild and beastial
Barbarism.

It cannot be denied, but that the Tartars and Chinese have waged War one
against another for many Ages; yet I dare be bold to say, we read of none so
terrible as those in this our Age: for thereby the Tartars have not only made
themselves Masters of all the said Empire, but extirpated the last Royal Line,
that there is not any Vestigium or Trace left of them in being. In short, that
the occasion of this last War may be the more fully and clearly understood, I
shall relate unto you the two first Conquests of China, by way of Proemium.

You must first then take notice, That the People of West-Tartary, after they
had brought under their Power almost all Asia, which is the fruitfullest part
of the inhabited World, fell upon the Empire of China, about the Year 1206
before Christ's Birth; which was continued (as is before hinted) for above
seventy three years with so great animosity, that at last in the Year 1278. the
whole Empire was subdued by them. The Tartars after this so total a Conquest,
settled a new Lineage of their own Country in the Throne, called Ivena, whose
Offspring for nine Generations brought forth successive Emperors, who Governed
the Empire peaceably one after another.

The Tartars having thus long peaceably enjoyed the whole, grew at last to
degenerate through the Pleasures and Plenty which they found there; so that by
degrees they forgot themselves, and pedetentim Inch by Inch as it were, inured
themselves to the Chinese Customs and Manners, neglecting their Places of
Strength and Forces, till at last, in stead of warlike Soldiers, they were
grown effeminate Chinese.

And though these Tartar Princes did Govern with great Care and Prudence, yet
the Chinese could not forget the great and horrible Slaughters of their
Ancestors, whose bleeding Carcases lying as it were before their Eyes, excited
them to Revenge; and being likewise inwardly stimulated with a desire of
Liberty, they had now already gotten the same in their thoughts, which was yet
far off, and with great hazards to be sought: for although the People were
every where ready to revolt, and shake off the Tartar Yoke, yet there was not
one of the Grandees or Men of Eminency durst lead the Dance or break the Ice.
But what Providence ordains to be done, shall never want Means to be effected,
as will plainly appear by the sequel; for while the Great Ones durst not, and
the Commons with a Leader could not do ought, at last a poor despicable Fellow
appeared, whose Name was Chu, and the Servant of a Priest: This Chu, who took
compassion of the miserable State of his oppressed Countrymen, and a
displeasure in his own despicable Fortune, being of a high, lofty, and
ambitious Spirit, left his Cloister and Cell, in which he had lived for some
years, upon a high Mountain, and betook himself to a secular Life amongst
Robbers and Highway-men, among whom in a short time he became the vilest and
most wicked, not fearing to act what some Spirits would tremble at the thoughts
of; so that for his great courage and boldness, they began to look upon him as
the Person that should deliver their oppressed Country. This Imagination of his
Associates elevating his Valou, and being withal of a fluent and voluble
Tongue, very quick of Apprehension, and of great Understanding, he never failed
of Courage, Conduct, nor Success; so that in a short time he grew so
considerable in Power and Credit amongst the Rabble, that choosing him their
Leader, he was able to bring some thousands into the Field. Being gotten thus
into a Posture, not only to defend himself, but to offend his Enemy, he
resolved to show himself in the Field for the deliverance of his Country from
the Tartar Vassalage under which they groaned, and thereupon began to forsake
his Holes and Fastnesses upon the Mountains, and to appear with his Army upon
the Plain; the Fame whereof once noised, made his Forces increase daily in
number, among whom, with his good Conduct and Courage, he so prevailed, that he
won their Hearts, so that they thought nothing too much to do for him: And to
show as well his Providence as Valor, he caused the Hills and Mountains to be
plough'd and manured, to keep himself and his Army from starving, in case he
should be overpowered by his Enemy, and forced to retreat thither again.

Chu at last, encouraged by these fortunate beginnings, draws his Army
together, makes toward the Enemy, and fights them, who not expecting such an
Onset, were soon beaten, and afterward overcome in several Fights, in which he
was still victorious; yet notwithstanding the Soldiers fury, and rage of War,
he still spared the native Chinese, promising to restore them to their ancient
Privileges and Liberties, if they would forsake the Tartars, and adhere to Hun:
by these Means, and his continual Spies which he had every where to give him
Intelligence, he discovered the Designs of the Destroyers of his Country, whom
he so closely pursued, that they were at last forced to quit the Country, and
leave it to the ancient Inhabitants: which Redemption was effected in the Year
1368.

When now Chu, from a mean Servant, had thus raised himself, by driving those
insulting Tartars out of the Empire, he erected in that Year a new Race, which
he called Taicinga, and changing his own Name according to Custom, he called
himself Hunguvus, that is, A great Warrior.

He was no sooner settled in the Throne, but the People out of all the Provinces
came to acknowledge and Salute this their Deliverer; the whole Country being
overjoyed, that they had once again got one of their own Natives, though of
mean Extraction, to be their Head and Governor, (for it is the natural temper
of that People, to hate and vilify all Foreigners, but highly to esteem of
their own Countrymen) humbly requesting of him, that he would take care as a
Native of China, with such Prudence to Govern and Protect the Chinese Throne,
that they might not be necessitated hereafter to call in a Foreiner.

Hunguvus thanked them for their Affections, and taking into his own Hands the
whole Sovereignty, seated himself in the Imperial City of Nanking, where he
behaved himself with so much Honor, that in a short time he so settled the
Affairs of his Empire, that the People lived under him in great security and
freedom. But this Settlement he knew would not long continue, unless he
provided to secure all from abroad; therefore to prevent future trouble from
his now vanquished Foe, and that the Tartars whom he had thus driven out, might
not rally and make Head again, he followed his Advantages and Conquests, and
with a considerable Army entering Tartary, overcame them in several Battles, and
so ruined their Country with Fire and Sword, that they were forced to lay down
their Arms, with a Promise to pay him Tribute. These were those Tartars, who
after the Overthrows given them, as before related, fled into the Country of
Ninche: And indeed after those of Ninche had made their Peace with the Emperor,
they brought yearly their Presents unto him, as his Subjects and Friends, and
were permitted to Trade in his Dominions as his Vassals; and since that time
have never had any thoughts of War, but rather were fearful to give any
Offense, left they should draw thereby any ill will upon themselves, and so
fall into new Troubles: for in the last Wars, they were reduced into most
miserable Extremities. And thus we see the Vicissitudes of Fortune, and
uncertain Events of War, in those Tartars who were not long since Masters of
China, but now are become Vassals and Subjects to that Empire, to whose Prince
they seek for Friendship and Protection.

In this Posture stood the Affairs of these Countries for a long space of time,
till these People of Ninche increased so very fast in Power and Multitude, that
they concluded to form themselves into a distinct Commonwealth, and to send
some of their People as Colonies to inhabit other Parts. Thus at last they
divided the whole District of Ninche into seven Principalities or Governments,
who for a while agreed among themselves, without any grand Disturbance, or
pretense of Warring with each other; but at length upon some occasion Quarrels
arose, which broke forth into a long War, wherein the Victors assuming to
themselves absolute Principality, turned their Commonwealth in the Year 1600
after Christ's Birth, into a Monarchy, and called it The Kingdom of Ninche.

This Ninche (which is properly East-Tartary, and as yet very little known to
those of Europe) is bounded on the North and North-East with another Tartar
Kingdom called Niulhan; toward the East lies the Kingdom of Yupi, likewise
under the Tartar Yoke, and surrounded with the Sea, between Iapan and
East-Tartary: on the South it borders upon the Island Corea, and by the Great
Wall it is divided from the Province of Laotung; but more toward the West
separated by the great River Linhoang, flowing between this Kingdom of Ninche
and Kilangho. The antiquiety of this People appears in the mention made of them
in the Race of Hana, which began in the Year 206 before Christ's Birth: They
are known to the Chinese and Neighbors by the Name of Kin, which signifies
Gold, and commonly are called The Lords and Masters of the Golden Mountains, it
being a common opinion, That China is full of Gold-Mines, which we will not
dispute, but dare knowingly affirm, That it has Rivers, upon the sides whereof
great store of Gold is taken up daily.

It is to be observed, that the Tartars of several Parts have at diverse times
Warred on China; but the People of Ninche above all have always been their
greatest Enemies, having during the Reign of the Race of Sunga given so great
Overthrows to their Forces, and made such Depredations upon their Land, that
they were forced to fly out of the Northern Provinces into the Southern, the
Ninchians having subdued and brought under their Subjection the Provinces of
Laotung, Peking, Xensi, Xensi, and Xantung; and without all doubt, at that time
would have conquered the whole Empire, if the neighboring Tartars of the
Kingdom of Samarcand, who envied their great Success, after the Conquest of a
great part of Asia, had not through the Western and Southern Provinces fallen
into the Empire of China, and put a stop to their Victories by their
irresistible Armies; which was the occasion of a cruel and bloody War between
them. These Tartars of Samarcand drove those of Ninche not only out of China,
but pursued them into East-Tartary, their own Country, whereof they took a
considerable part from them: And since that time the Samarcandians, who
possessed the Northern Provinces, out of which they had beaten the Nincheans,
have made many and sharp Wars against the Emperors of the Southern China, and
at last subdued the whole, and erected a new Race called Ivena, as is before
said, which continued till it was brought under by the same Hunguvus.

The Chinese, out of a natural Emnity to the Tartars, say in derision of them,
That they live in Holes and Caves under Ground: which is not so; for they keep
in very strong and well-wrought Tents, which they use in stead of Houses, being
for the most part made of Silk or Stuff, and so curiously Painted, that they
shine in the Sun like Looking-glasses, and keep out the Rain, so that none
drops through. Of these Persons of Quality have several, which yet are so
contrived, that they seem but one: In some parts of which the Wife and Children
remain, in others the Servants; and some are for necessary uses, as Kitchins,
and the like.

They relate, That during the Reign of the Race of Ivena, there were a hundred
and twenty four Cities in this East-Tartary; but whether there are so many now
I cannot affirm, in regard the Tartars themselves in China were not able to
inform me. All their Towns and Places are in a manner movable (which the
Latins call Horda) with which, and the Cattle and Families, they remove from
place to place, changing according to the Season of the Year, and pitching
where the best Accommodation is to be had.



The Clothes of the poorer sort are made of Skins, but the richer go clad in
Silk and Cotton, though there grows neither in the Province of Ninche; but such
among them as Trade, come and buy it of the Chinese, or exchange other
Commodities for it, as Skins of Wolves, Foxes, Beavers, Otters, Sables, and the
like. The Men wear long Coats down to their Heels, with narrow Sleeves; and
about their Middle is a broad Girdle, with a Cloth fastened to it, wherewith
they wipe their Faces. At their sides hangs a Knife, and two little Pu^ses,
wherein they put Tobacco, which is taken by them with great delight, insomuch
that the noblest Visitants are Treated with the same, it being brought them
lighted by a Servant of the House. On the left side they wear a Hanger or
Zable, with the Edge turned forward, and the Hilt behind, insomuch that when
they are on Horseback, they can draw their Zables with great dexterity, by
laying the right Hand behind over their Backs upon the Hilt, without holding
fast, or so much as touching the Scabbard. In the Summertime, for coolness,
they wear Hats of Straw; but in Winter, Caps which come down over their Ears,
with an Edging of Fur about it.

The Soldiers wear commonly Iron Helmets upon their Heads, differing very
little in fashion from such as are used in Europe, only they have no Fence for
the Face. In stead of Feathers they wear either a Horses Mayn or Tail died red.
Their other defensive Arms are Iron Breast-pieces, not made of one Piece, but
of several Plates fastened together with Nails, so that they make a hideous
noise when they are upon their March, but especially the Horse. Their offensive
Arms are a Bows Arrows, and Hanger; for Guns or Muskets are not in use amongst
them. The Horsemen are generally clad in Black, to make them look terrible,
having Boots on made of Horse-leather, with thick Soles, but no Spurs.

There are among them very few Foot-Soldiers; for being generally good
Horsemen, they turn all their Forces into Cavalry, who when they march,
observe this Order: First two Horsemen, with Colors upon their Backs. Next to
these follow two other Horsemen with Colors. Then comes the Commander in
Chief over the Cavalry. After him five others, the middlemost whereof carries
the Emperor's Standard. Then march all the rest of the Troop in order, five a
breast.



The Chinese have a high estimation of the Tartars for strength, because
therein they exceed them, although they fall far short in the same to those of
Europe. They are whitish of Complexion, not talkative, but silent, and well
composed, bred up to Arms from their Cradles, which makes them such excellent
Soldiers: But at shooting with the Bow at a Mark, they are so extraordinarily
dexterous, that no People in the World are to be compared with them.

The Tartar Women are generally Clothed in black Garments, which hang loose
about them; but Persons of Quality wear generally Silk, whereas the ordinary
sort are content with Cotton. Their Hair is neatly plaited and turned up, only
a few Locks hang down: And those of the better sort wear upon their Heads, Hats
curiously wrought.

These Tartars eat whatsoever they can get, but chiefly Flesh, and that half
roasted or boiled, being not curious of what sort it is, whether of Camels,
Horses, or other Creatures. They take great delight in Hunting, and have very
swift Hounds for the Game. But when all is said that almost can be, we must
add, That they are in effect a Nation of Plunderers and Robbers, being
naturally inclined to those Vices. And no wonder, for they live generally
without the Profession of any Religion: But especially they have a great
abhorrency to the Religion of Mahomet, and possibly therefore hate the Turks as
the Factors of that Religion; but a more probable reason may be, because the
said Hunguvus, Founder of the Race of Taicinga, expelled the Tartars out of
China by the assistance of the Turks.

They burn the dead Bodies, after the manner of the Indians, upon very high
Heaps of Wood: on which Funeral Pile are also laid the Women, Servants, Horses,
and Arms of the Deceased. Notwithstanding all which Heathenish blindness, they
are however very careful and sollicitous about the state of their Souls, as
whether they are to expect after this Life another, or whether they do not
presently die with the Body; by reason of which many of them are very ready to
embrace Christianity, and diverse of them after the Conquest of China, were
converted to the Catholic Religion.

As to their Language which they speak in the Kingdom of Ninche, it is not so
difficult to learn as that of China, but more resembles the Persian Tongue:
Some of their Letters, both for fashion and pronunciation, are like the
Arabic, which in all are above sixty in number, and do not much differ in the
pronunciation and spelling from those in Europe, but very much in the form and
make. In Reading and Writing they proceed from the top to the bottom, after the
manner of the Chinese, and not from the left to the right side, as we do in
Europe; nor from the right to the left, as do the Arabians and Hebrews.

In this Kingdom of Ninche are found excellent Rubies and costly Pearls,
besides other Precious Stones: Also very large Cattle, especially Cows, which
exceed those in Europe for bigness, but have no Horns.

The Western part of this Country is very full of Rocks and Hills, between
which lies most fertile and pleasant Valleys, and fruitful Fields. The biggest
Mountain of all is called Kin, which signifies Gold.

There is also the Mountain Changpe, which reaches a thousand Miles, and in the
middle of which is a Sea-like Mere at least eighty Miles long, from whence two
Rivers take their rise, the one called Yalo, running to the South, and the
other Guenthung, taking its course to the North.

And thus much shall suffice for the Description of East-Tartary, or the
Kingdom of Ninche, whose Inhabitants, in manner afore-mentioned, the Chinese
Emperor kept in awe: But on the contrary, to the West-Tartars, which possess
the Kingdom of Tanyn, the same Emperors sent Presents and Tribute yearly, that
they should not make War upon them; for they hold it no Scandal to prevent a
War by that means; nay, they hold it altogether unlawful to enter into a War,
so long as the Country can be kept from Invasions by any other means.

But yet although the Chinese on the one Hand kept under their Enemies by
force of Arms, and on the other bought a Peace with Presents and Tribute, yet
they lived in continual Fears and Mistrust, insomuch that they always kept the
Great Wall which divides China and Tartary strongly guarded with at least a
Million of Men.

But to return from whence we have digressed: The Throne of China being settled
in the Race of Taiminga, was by the same enjoyed in peace and quietness two
hundred and fifty years, when Vanticus the thirteenth Emperor, a just, prudent,
and upright Prince, came to Reign, which was in the Year 1573 after Christ's
Birth: But herein he was unfortunate, that he (as most Princes secured by long
Peace) trusted too much to his Governors and Mandorins, and suffered the whole
weight of his Affairs to lie upon their Shoulders.

During this time the Tartars of Ninche, as is beforementioned, being formed
from a Popular Government into a Monarchy in the Year 1600. their first King
was a Man of so great Courage and Magnanimity, that all their Neighbors, and
especially the Chinese, began to be afraid of him; for he managed the Affairs
of his State after such a politic and prudent manner, that in a short time his
Subjects became not only very numerous, but formidable for Strength to all
their Borderers; and being sensible of their own Greatness, and that their Fame
began to grow terrible, they began to call to mind the ancient Glory of their
Conquests, and to consider how shamefully they had been heretofore driven out
of the possession of the honorable Acquisitions of their Ancestors; and
observing likewise the great Miscarriages and Neglects of the Chinese in the
management of the Government, they resolved upon some sudden and great
Undertaking against them: therefore weighing with themselves the Yoke of
Servitude they lay under, as a fit occasion of Quarrel, they began first of all
to shake off the same, and to refuse to pay Tribute, and shortly after to
appear in their true Colors, by publicly opposing the Authority that was over
them.

The Chinese Governors (whereof the most in Leaotung, the Province bordering
nearest to the Kingdom of Ninche, are Military Commanders) hearing of this,
concluded very unadvisedly to misuse the Tartars in the most cruel manner,
thereby the more to incite them to War, so hazarding their Countries Weal for
their private hoped for Lucre; for by the War they thought to have a fairer
opportunity to enrich themselves, as well upon the Tartars as Chinese. These
indeed might be, and questionless were great Motives to the War: But the
chiefest Reason of all, was the base Murder committed by them upon the King of
Ninche; for they looking upon him with an envious Eye, seeing him increase his
Kingdom so very much in Power and Strength (which they fancied would be at one
time or other employed against them) consulted and conspired to make him away,
which they contrived, and in a most barbarous manner they thus effected: They
came one day, upon pretense of a Visit, to the King with a feigned Affection,
who not having the least suspicion of their wicked Design, they easily
surprised him, took him Prisoner, and put him to death: but the better to gloze
over the Villainy, gave out that he died suddenly of an Apoplexy.

This done so closely, as they supposed, they presently imagined they had
Weathered the Point, and overcome all Difficulties: but they were not a little
disappointed in their expectations; for his Son, who, like his Father, was of a
Princely and Warlike Spirit, being substituted in his Place, as soon as settled
in the Throne, and at Peace with his Neighbors, raised a great Army, with an
intention to Invade China in revenge of his Father's Death. The chiefest
Grandees and Counselors of his Kingdom encouraged him in this Design:
whereupon in the Year 1616 he came with a very great Army to the Great Wall of
Partition between Tartary and China, with hopes to pass there, which succeeded
according to his desire: for after a sharp Skirmish, the Chinese betook
themselves to flight, leaving to the young King a free Passage into China with
his victorious Army, with which he first fell into the Province of Leaotunga,
and made himself Master of the City Tuxung or Cayven, which lies near Tartary,
and the River Yalous (the place where the Great Wall begins;) and here he
Planted himself to carry on the War: And this he undoubtedly did to this end,
that he might be able to save himself by flight by Sea, in case the Chinese
should have fallen upon him and blockt him up, and so have endeavored to have
cut off his Passage from getting back again; but if he were able to make good,
and stand his Ground, then he foresaw it lay coveniently for him to receive
Succors out of his own Country, and from others his Allies, whereby with
continual Reinforcings he should be the better enabled to overrun that Empire,
which he had already conquered in his Eye.

Thus we see the King of Ninche safely got with his Army into his Enemie's
Country, where having pitched and fortified himself, as afore-mentioned, he
began to consult with himself of his Undertaking; when considering what a small
Force he had to conquer so powerful an Empire, and that on the other hand he
might be easily set upon by the Forces which lay in the Cities of the Provinces
of Leaotung and Peking, and destroyed before he could be well secured; he
thought it best to add the Foxes Tail to the Lions Skin, and so resov'd to send
a civil Letter to the Emperor of China, to complain of the wretched and
inhumane Murder committed upon his Father, to lay open the deceitful Carriages
of his Governors in many Particulars, but chiefly in the misusage of his
Subjects in their Trade and Commerce, and the like. He likewise desired, that
the Emperor would not harbor a hard Opinion, but pass a just Censure upon his
Actions and Undertaking, and cause condign punishment to be inflicted upon his
Governors. Last of all he desired, That the Emperor would quit him the yearly
Taxes which he paid, to defray the Charges of this War: And upon performance of
these things, he promised to quit the City he had taken, and to retreat with
his Army beyond the Wall, and that the Inhabitants of China should be received
and treated in Ninche as Friends and Allies.

For the Bearer of this Letter the King of Ninche (to make it the more
acceptable and effectual) chose a certain Priest, whom the Tartars call Lama,
with Command to deliver the same in a most submissive manner, and seriously to
lay before the Emperor and his Council the great quantity of Blood that was
like to be spilt, if not timely prevented by a friendly Accommodation between
them.

The Emperor Vanlieus, to whom the King of Ninche sent this civil Letter,
though in other things he was a wise and prudent Prince, yet in this Business
(whether through his great Age he began to dote, or that the greatness of hi^
Power and State had stupifi'd his Brain) showed not his wonted Prudence and
Conduct: for as he could not but very well understand by the Contents of the
Letter, that the Complaints of the King of Ninche were grounded upon weighty
Reasons, and not without great Cause, yet he took the Business so little to
heart, and judged it of so small consequence, as not worthy to be Debated in
his Presence, and so referred it to the Consideration of some of the Council,
or rather truly to some of his Governors and Commanders, who had labored all
they could at Court, that it might be transmitted to them, that so they might
show their Pride in not answering the Letter of a Tartar King; for to that
height was their insufferable arrogance grown, that they thought it an
undervaluing to their Honor and Grandeur, to return any Answer unto it; but in
stead thereof signified their high Displeasure, that People subject unto them,
and who paid Taxes yearly to the Emperor, should take upon them to come and
complain of Injuries unto him. Nor ceased they here, but mocked and reviled the
King of Ninche with bitter words, never considering that great Army wherewith
he had invaded their Empire, or so much as gathering any Forces together to
oppose him.

The Tartar King finding himself thus slighted and scorned, changing his anger
into madness, burst out into cursing and swearing, that he would revenge the
Murder of his Father with the death of two hundred thousand Chinese: for (as
we said before) it is a Custom amongst the Tartars, that when any Persons of
Quality die, in honor of the Dead they fling into the Funeral Fire where the
Deceased was burnt, some Menservants, Women, Horses, Bows and Arrows, as if
the Dead stood in need of these things hereafter; and here the Vow of the King
signified, that so many thousands should attend his Father's Funeral. But they
have very much left this barbarous cruelty since their Conquest of China,
insomuch that they now there bury their Dead after the Chinese fashion, without
burning, though in their own Country perhaps they observe still the same
Ceremony.

The King of Ninche being thus incensed, marches forward with his Forces
immediately, and suddenly laid Siege to the Chief City Laoyang, in the Province
of Leaotung: The Place was strongly fortified, and there was a Garrison of
Soldiers within it, all well Armed with Muskets, whereas the Tartars use
nothing but Zables, Bows, and Arrows: for prevention therefore of the slaughter
by Bullets, which the Tartars were very fearful of (for this sort of Arms was
then altogether unknown to them) they invented a Stratagem, which might render
the shooting of Bullets ineffectual unto the Chinese, which was this: Their
King caused a great number of thick Planks to be made ready, and caused each
Foot-Soldier that marched in the Van to carry one, wherewith he secured both
himself and the Horse that followed behind. Being thus provided, having lain a
while before the City, whose Inhabitants were unwilling to yield, it was
concluded to Storm the Place: To this end the King divided his Forces into four
Divisions, to Storm the City in four places at once: He commanded the Foot to
march with their beforementioned Planks in the Front, next to them the worst
Horse, after whom followed those that carried the Scaling-Ladders: At last
marched up the Prime of his Army, which consisted of the Stoutest and ablest
Soldiers of his Kingdom.

Having thus put his Army in Battel-array, he fell upon the City immediately
with an undaunted Courage. Those within made very stout opposition at first;
but the Tartars pressing upon them furiously, got the better, and at last drove
them from the Walls, to which fixing their Scaling-ladders, they quickly became
Masters of the same, such was their ex^raordinary nimbleness and Courage. And
now the Chinese, finding themselves unable any longer to oppose the Enemy,
fled out of the City; but the Tartars killed a great number in the Pursuit.

After the taking of this City, the Tartar marched on with his Army without any
stop or hinderance, taking by Storm whatever other Cities opposed him; but such
as submitted, he commanded that none of the Inhabitants should suffer either in
Body or Goods.

When now the King of Ninche had filled the Inhabitants of the Province of
Leaotung with fear and dread of his Army, and had totally Conquered the same,
he marched forward with the Flower of his Army into the Province of Peking,
making no haste till he was come within seven Miles of the Imperial City, and
there finding several Chinese Armies to lie round about him, he pitched his
Camp in a very rich Quarter, not daring to advance any further up into the
Country; whereas if he had marched on, he had in all probability carried all
before him, and might undoubtedly have taken the Imperial City, the People
being general consternated, and their Hearts dead with Fear, insomuch that the
Emperor himself had already concluded to abandon the City of Peking, and with
his whole Family to retire toward the Southern Provinces; but he was dissuaded
from it by his Council: yet notwithstanding, the Inhabitants of both these
Provinces were so filled with Fear at the approach of the Tartars, that they
left their Habitations both in City and Country, and fled into the Woods and
Mountains with what they could well carry with them; the Enemy in the mean time
laying waste several famous Cities, and putting all to Fire and Sword where he
came.

The Ninchean King, who, as we said, durst not adventure to march against the
Imperial City of Peking, having got good store of Riches out of the other
Conquered Cities, retreated back with his Army to the Chief City of the
Province of Leaotung, which was a very goodly City before he took it, both for
strength, situation, and fairness of Building: but being told by his
Soothsayers, that to let the old Walls stand after he had won the Place, could
bode naught but Misfortune, he caused them thereupon to be razed to the Ground,
and new ones built.

There are but two Great Cities in all this Province, which are Leaoyang and
Ningyven; the rest are of a smaller Circuit, yet are they both Populous and
Rich: But with Places of Strength, which exceed some Cities for bigness, it
exceedingly abounds.

The Inhabitants of this Place are very dull of Understanding, and so
altogether incapable of learning any Arts and Sciences; but very healthful of
Constitution, and strong of Body, therein much exceeding the other Chinese:
And the cause may be, for that they are bred from the Cradle to Wars and
Hardship, by reason of their vicinity to the Tartars, who are perpetually
making Wars upon them. As to their Manners and Customs, they resemble very much
the Tartars; which comes to pass by the great Intercourse that ^s daily between
them.

The Country is in some places very Hilly and Mountainous, and in others plain
and even for many Miles together; yet every where very fruitful in the product
of all manner of Cattle, both Wild and Tame; as also in Tree^ and Fruits of the
Fields, wholesome and medicinal both in their Bodies, Leaves, Fruits, and Roots;
amongst others, here grows that incomparable Root G^^seng, whereof mention is
made before. There are also to be had store of Rich Furs, as Sables, Bever,
etc. which they wear in Winter to keep themselves warm, and Traffic with
likewise into other Provinces. It also produces curious Pine-apples, excellent
Wheat and Barley, but no Rice; yet a great abundance of Figs, Apples, Pears,
Grapes, and several other sorts of Fruits: Which extraordinary Plenty of all
Necessary Things of its own Growth, renders it both pleasant and cheap to live
in; but much more, in regard of its Situation upon the Sea, from whence it is
furnished with all manner of Commodities from other Countries.

Their Religion is very little different from that of the other Chinese, being
great Promoters of the Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls out of one Body
into another.

Thus the Tartars having made this Place the Seat of War, whereby they could at
pleasure Invade the Neighboring Provinces, the Emperor and his Council began to
consider which way was the most likely for them to drive the Tartars out of
their Territories, and at last they concluded to raise an Army of 600000 Men;
over and above whom, the King of Corea sent to their Assistance 12000 valiant
Bow-men, who were not inferior for Skill to the Tartars. In the mean time the
Ninchean King was not idle, but drew out of his Kingdom as many Forces as could
possibly be spared, to join with him. Being thus prepared for Wars on both
sides, the Chinese in the Year 1619 marched with that formidable Army against
the Enemy; who hearing of their approach, set forward from their Camp to meet
them, which soon happened; but then such was the inveterate malice of both
Parties, that as soon as they saw each other the Battle began, which was
valiantly fought for a long time by both Armies, so that the Victory hung in
suspense, nor could any judge who would have the better, till at length the
Chinese running away in great disorder and confusion, the slaughter was very
great among them, both of Commanders and Soldiers, upon the Spot, those that
escaped carrying the news of the Overthrow to the Emperor. This great Victory
the Ninchean King pursued with that expedition, that he took several Cities and
Towns, some whereof they laid in Ashes, and put the Inhabitants to the Sword,
harrassing and plundering up to the very Walls of the City of Peking, though
they durst not lay Siege to it, there being a Garrison of eighty thousand Men,
and and the Place well fortified with great store of Cannon upon the Walls:
Notwithstanding which Provision, such was the fear of the Pekinger, that if the
Tartars had but attempted, they might have been Masters of that great City
without any very hazardous opposition; for the Emperor was again fully
resolved, as before, to quit it, and to retire to the Southern Provinces: But
some of his Council, now too late grown wise, altered his Purpose, by telling
him, that it would encourage the Enemy, and not only put the whole Empire into
confusion, but hazard the ruin, if not the loss of it. The Tartars by this
means being put to a stand, having enriched themselves with Booty, destroyed
some thousands of poor Creatures with the Sword, and burnt down their Dwellings
to the Ground, retreated back to their old Quarters in the Province of Leaotung.

During these Troubles the Emperor Vanlieus died in the Year 1620. After whose
Death his Son Taichangus, a valiant and prudent Prince, succeeded; who by the
Conduct of his Affairs, in a short time gave sufficiently to understand what
good Services his Country was to expect from him, had he not been unfortunately
cut off by an untimely Death in the fourth Month of his Reign: To whom was
Successor his Son Thienkius, a gallant Person, and no ways inferior to his
Father for Virtue and Courage.

This Monarch finding the unsetledness and danger of his Affairs, made it his
chiefest Concern to contract Friendship, and support his Government with the
Favor and Affection of his Neighbors: for he had taken notice by experience,
how much the Empire of China had suffered by living always at great variance
with the Tartar Kings of Ninche, which bordered upon him: In the first place
therefore he endeavored to win the Favor of the King of Corea, who had formerly
sent to his Grandfather a Supply of twelve thousand Men to aid and assist him
in this War; but they being most of them killed and wounded, he doubted lest
this might make him take part against him, and join with the Tartar; for
prevention whereof, and to satisfy the King in every scruple, he immediately
sent an Ambassador to him, to return him thanks for those great Succors he had
sent; and withal signifying his extraordinary Grief and Sorrow for the great
loss which had fallen upon the afore-men^ion'd Aids in that War; but that he
hoped in a short time to retaliate upon the Enemy the Wrongs they had done to
him and his Kingdom. And that his Embassy might be the more grateful, he
likewise sent several rich Presents and promised him his Assistance, where and
whenever he should have occasion to make use of it. But this friendly Message
looked not only for verbal Returns; for it was designed as a Motive to procure
more Succors from him: which without doubt he had reason to endeavor, in regard
the People of this Island of Corea, which lies very near to Iapan, have out of
the Neighborhood far greater Strength than the Chinese.

And now craving leave for a little digression, which may not be impertinent,
in regard there has been often mention made of this Island of Corea and the
Inhabitants thereof, I shall describe the same in short, and all that is worth
observation in the same.

It is unto this day doubted by those of Europe, whether Corea be an Island or
firm Land; but according to the opinion of the best Writers, it is a hanging
Island, surrounded with Water on all parts, except the uttermost part, which is
joined to the firm Land; for though Trials have been made to Sail round about,
yet it could never be done, as some People seem to affirm to us from their own
experience, though some there are that affirm the contrary. But this Error
proceeds from a mistake of a certain great Island called Fungina, situa^e to
the Southward of it, to be Corea. However it be, this truth is most certain,
that all the Chinese Writers affirm Corea to be firm Land, and joining to the
Kingdom of Ninche in Tartary. Another mistake may arise from the varie^y of the
Name given to it; for the Chinese call it Chaosien, therein following the
Iapanners, though by us of Europe it is called Corea.

Toward the North it borders upon the Kingdom of Ninche, on the North-West it
has for Confine, the River Yalo; the rest is surrounded and washed with the Sea.

The whole Island is divided into eight Provinces or Counties: The middlemost,
and accounted the first, bears the Name of Kinki, wherein is situa^^ the Chief
City of Pingiang, the Court of the Kings. The second, toward the East, is
called Kiangyven, but heretofore Gueipe. The third, situate toward the West, is
now known by the Name of Hoangchui, but was formerly called Ch^^sien, the Name
at this day proper to the whole Island. The fourth, situate ^^^ward the South,
now called Civenlo, was formerly named Pienhari. The fi^th, also Southerly, but
inclining to the East, is called Kingxan. The sixth, toward the South-West, is
Changing. The seventh, toward the North-East, has the Name of Pingan.

In these Counties are several populous and rich Cities, which for fashion and
strength differ very little from those in China, and built for the most part
apiece.

The Country is very well Peopled, throughout the whole having but one Form of
Government; not at all differing in Habit, and using one and the same Form both
of Speech and Writing. Their Religion is the same with those of China, holding
the transmigration of the Soul out of one Body into another. They all adore one
Idol called Fe, whereof I have already made mention.

The Bodies of their dead Friends they bury not till three years be fully
elapsed, and then they put them into very fine Coffins, after the manner of the
Chinese, glu'd up so very close that no scent can strike through.

They give a greater liberty to their Women than the Chinese; for they admit
of them into any Company, whereas the other will hardly suffer them to stir
abroad. Here also the Son or Daughter may Marry whom they think fit, without
asking the consent of Father or Mother: which is quite contrary to the use of
the Chinese, and indeed all other civilized People.

This Island is very fruitful in the product of all manner of Fruits necessary
for the sustenance of Life, especially of Wheat and Rice, whereof there are
twice a year plentiful Harvests. Here also are made several sorts of Paper, and
curious Pencils of Wolves Hair, which the Chinese and other neighboring People
as well as themselves use in Writing. Here grows likewise the Root Guiseng, and
(as is reported) are several Gold-Mines. But notwithstanding all these
Advantages of natural Commodities wherewith this Place abounds, yet the
Inhabitants thereof drive no Trade with any other foreign People, but only those
of China and Iapan. And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of Corea; we will
now return to give an Account of the sequel of the Wars.

The Chinese Emperor, after his Embassy to the King of Corea, to prevent the
further Invasion of the Tartars, and the better to oppose them, mustered
several Troops raised for his assistance out of the fifteen Provinces or
Kingdoms of the Empire, and sent very great Armies toward Leaotung: And the
better to furnish such vast Armies with Provisions, he caused an extraordinary
great Fleet of Ships to be Equipped in the famous Port of Thiencin, which were
wholly employed to carry Provisions by Sea from all parts of China for their
supply; by the exact performance and observing whereof they had no want of any
thing.

Amongst other Martial Commanders and Governors of Provinces that had the
Conduct of these Armies, there was a certain Woman who may very justly be
called The Chinese Amazon; for she came with three thousand Men out of Suchue,
which is the furthermost Province of China toward the West, and showed by her
Courage a manly Heart; and she fought several Battles successfully against the
Tartars, having always the better of them: In remembrance of whose good
Services, the Emperor conferred several Titles of Honor upon her.

And now at last the Emperor Thienkius, being come in Person into his Army in
Leaotung, and having in manner afore-mentioned taken care to have it fully
supplied with all convenient Necessaries, drew up the same in Battel-aray, and
on a sudden fell furiously upon the Tartars, beat them out of the Field, and
recovered the whole Province with less difficulty than was supposed or
expected, in regard the Inhabitants, who had been miserably handled by the
Tartars, joined with their Countrymen the Emperor's Forces; by which addition
being come far more numerous than the Enemy, and having advantage of revenge,
they fell upon them with great rage and fury, stirred up thereto by having
before their Eyes the lamentable Condition into which they had brought their
Country by Fire and Sword: And to say all in a word, it was their good fortune,
that at this time the King of Ninche was so unfortunate, that the Mutinies of
his own Subjects at home hindered him from recruiting his Army, which in diverse
great Battles had been much wasted, and he could get no Forces from thence to
reinforce himself; so that at last being every where worsted by the Emperor's
Supplies, the incroaching Ninchean was fain to save himself by flight, and to
leave the Province of Leaotung to the conquering Sword of its just and lawful
Emperor.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the last Chinese and Tartar War, wherein the Tartars overran and conquered
the whole Empire of China.
ALthough by the means mentioned in the last Chapter, the Chinese Empire was a
while freed from the fury and destroying Sword of the wasting Tartars; yet it
was not long before it fell into far greater Troubles than ever, by those their
old Enemies, who once more renewed the War, and never left it off till they had
brought under the whole Empire. The manner as follows:

The Chinese suspecting the return of the Tartars after that they had quieted
their domestic Troubles, and settled their Affairs, in the mean time took care
to supply the Frontier Places with strong Garrisons, and raise more Forces for
the security of their State: which was scarcely performed before it happened as
they imagined; for the Troubles and Mutinies being appeased in Ninche, that
King returns with a mighty Army into the West of Leaotung, having given order
to seventy thousand Horse (whom he sent before) to block up the Chief City of
Leaoyang, assuring them he himself would follow with the main of his Army.
These Horsemen, to show their Courage and Valor, no sooner approached, but
they Stormed the City, and in two days time became Masters of it, before their
King came up to them with his Forces. There wa^ no Courage wanting on either
side; for it was manfully fought out by both, till at least thirty thousand Men
were killed on the part of the Chinese, and no less on that of the Tartars (woe
had never lost so many Men before in any one Fight in this Quarrel;) yet at
last they took the City, not so much by their own Strength, as Treachery
hatched within it: for they had Bribed one of the Commanders with Money and
promise of Preferment, to set open the Gate committed to his Charge: which he
performing according to the Agreement, the Tartar came rushing into the City,
and won the same in the space of a few hours, laying it level with the Ground
in a most miserable manner. The Tutang or Governor having understood the
Treason, took it so much to heart, that he hanged himself presently, that he
might not live to see the ruin and desolation that was coming upon the City
and its Inhabitants. The Emperor's chief Councellor had undoubtedly followed
his Example, and undergone the same Fate, had he not been prevented by the
Tartars, who took him and saved his Life, only out of design that he should be
serviceable unto them in discovering the Condition of the Country: But he not
valuing his Life, scorned to give the Title of KING to the Tartar, and would in
no wise be persuaded to falsify the Oath, and betray the Trust reposed in him
by the Emperor. The Tartars wondering at the Courage, Stability, and Constancy
of this Man, gave him afterward both his Life and Liberty, thereby to let the
World know, that they understood how to reward Virtue and Integrity. But he,
more cruel to himself than the Enemy, knowing very well what Reward (according
to the Chinese Law) would fall to his share, deprived himself at last of his
own Life, which his Enemy had spared, by following the Example of the
forementioned Tutang: for it is a known Law and Custom in China, though very
unreasonable, That all Generals and Commanders of Forts and Garrisons, though
they behave themselves never so well, if they come off unfortunately, forfeit
their Lives when they return home.

The Tartars after the taking and destroying of this City, immediately issued
out a Proclamation, That the Inhabitants of no City should s^ffer any Damage
either in Life or Estate, if they would cut off their Hair, leaving only a
single Lock behind; and pull out all the Hair of their Beards, except their
Mustachio's, and likewise go Clothed after the Tartar Fashion.

Although this Command was strict, yet it carried with it some show of Favor,
and consequently gained a kind of Love, until the Tartars, by some barbarous
Acts they committed afterward, were very much hated and abominated. The Story
goes thus: There being at that time several Merchants come to the City with
Commodities from other Parts of Chi^a, to Trade withal, the Tartar at their
Request gave them free leave to go and come; whereupon these innocent People,
not apprehending the dangerous mischief that was designed against them,
departed with their Riches and Goods: But they were hardly got three Miles out
of the City, when the Tartars lying in wait for them, fell upon and killed them
every one, taking as free Plunder all they had, which they brought with them
into the City triumphantly, as if it had been the Spoil of an open Enemy. Which
barbarous usage being heard of, occasioned a great amazement amongst the
Inhabitants, who knew no other but that they might be served every moment after
the same manner. But notwithstanding all their salvage cruelty, they were at
present necessitated to make a halt, in regard of the great loss they had
sustained before this City of Leaoyang; nor durst they venture to march further
up into the Country, or lay Siege to any Place of importance, till they had
first recruited themselves; for they found all the Frontier Towns and Places of
Strength well fortified and guarded.

Amongst all other Chinese Commanders who signalized themselves in showing
their Courage in their Countries behalf against the Enemy, was one Maovenlung,
who did very great execution upon them in several Encounters: He was a Native
of the Province of Quantung, where he had learned and understood in his
Conversation amongst the Portuguese at Macao, several things concerning their
Military Discipline: From thence he had likewise brought with him several great
Guns, which he purchased out of a Netherland Ship that was cast away there, and
those he Planted upon the Walls of the Chief City of Ningyven.

The Eastern part of Leaotung, and the Chief City of Leaoyang being thus lost,
in this new made Chief City there happened to be at the same time the Tutang or
Viceroy of Leaotung with the whole Chinese Army. The Tartars having many times
had trial, to their sorrow and cost, of the Courage of this Maovenlung, having
often been routed by him, durst not adventure any further to Cope with him in
an honorable way, but bethought themselves of some Stratagem or politic
Device, whereby to wound the Integrity and Virtue of this brave Person; and
they supposed the best means to assail him with, would be fair words and high
Promises: Wherefore to put in execution this their Design, they offered him by
a private Letter (which they caused cunningly to be delivered to him) half the
Empire of China, if he would desert his natural Prince with the Flower of his
Army, and help them to conquer the Empire. But Maovenlung, who would neither
forfeit his Honor nor Oath, courageously refused these high Offers, and
returned for Answer, That he had rather lose his Life, than betray his Prince
and Country.

The Tartars finding that this Plot of theirs would take no effect, and that
the Chinese had well provided against their coming, resolved to desist, and to
make no further progress in the present War, which wholly ceased till the Year
1625. when suddenly it breaking forth again, they came and besieged the Chief
City of Ningyven. This greatly startled the Chinese, who thought they had
overcome the greatest difficulty and danger. But Maovenlung came time enough to
the rescue and relief of this Place, and fell so furiously upon the Besiegers,
that they were forced to raise their Siege, with the loss of at least ten
thousand Men that were slain upon the Spot, amongst whom fell the King's own
Son; whose Death was so highly resented by the surviving Tartars, that they in
a great rage and madness made over the Ice (for it was in Winter,) and getting
into the Island of Theyoven (whereof they quickly made themselves Masters) they
put every living Creature they found to the Sword (which were a very great
number) in revenge of the young Prince; which having done, they immediately
left the Province of Leaotung, and retreated into their own Country, not with
an intention to be quiet, but only to recruit themselves with more Forces, and
then to return again at a convenient time.

And hereupon followed a Cessation of Arms, till the Year 1627. when the
Chinese Emperor Thienkius happened to die, being but a young Man, whose Death
proved to be the loss of all China; although the Tartar King of Ninche called
Thienning, who had destroyed so many thousands of People by Fire and Sword, did
not long survive, but as an Attendant on his Corpse, died the same Year.

Thienkius was succeeded by his Brother, who was very unfortunate in all his
Undertakings, and at length, through the treachery of his Subjects, had both an
unfortunate Reign and Death, as by the remaining part of the History will
appear.

The Tartar King Thienning had for his Successor in the Throne his Son
Thientung, who quickly changed the salvage and barbarous Manners and Customs
used by his tyrannizing Father; insomuch that he did not pursue the Chinese so
fiercely, but began to treat them with more Civility, which produced a very
great Change, and caused all his Affairs to become more acceptable. And
certainly this prudent and politic Prince had effected great things, had he
not been cut off by an untimely Death, his mildness having gotten so great
renown withal, that the Council who had made choice of him, thought themselves
happy in the Change, and withal learned from him by Example, that the Chinese
would sooner be reduced and brought under their Government by Clemency and
Civility, than by force of Arms.

In this Year 1627. the Commanders and Officers of General Maovenlung, who by
reason of the quietness of the Tartars, had no Enemy to Encounter, began much
to molest, and be injurious to their Friends and Allies of Core^, by making
Inroads and Incursions upon them; nay, by degrees they grew so very insolent
and troublesome to all Parts adjoining to their Quarters, especially the
Inhabitants of the Province of Hienkien, who were so intolerably oppressed by
their Rapines, that out of revenge and hatred they put themselves under the
Protection of the Tartar, advising him to re-invade and fall into China with a
mighty Army; which he (not willing to let slip so fair an opportunity)
immediately did; so that a very great Army was in the Field ready to assail the
Chinese Forces, before they had any thoughts of an Enemy, and when they least
dreamed of their coming; who by this means lying carelessly dispersed up and
down in the Provinces, were soon destroyed. Maovenlung however rallied, and by
the addition of some new Leavies and Recruits being grown into a strong Body,
he fought several doubtful Battles with the Tartars; but they at last growing
superior to him in Strength and number, Maovenlung the Chinese General was
constrained to quit the Field with the gross of his Army.

Yet neither the loss of the Army, nor greatness of the Victory obtained by the
Tartars, did make any great impression upon the Chinese; nor indeed were they
troubled at it, when they understood that their General had saved himself out
of the Island of Corea. But the Ninchean Commanders imagining that those of
that Place had been instrumental in helping to convey the General Maovenlung
away, with their Army fell into it, plundering the Inhabitants, and ruining the
Country by Fire and Sword. This Act was highly disapproved of by the Tartar
King himself, because it stirred up the King of Corea to Arm against him, and
join his Forces with those of the Chinese, which Maovenlung had been gathering
together, and with them was marching toward Corea to revenge himself upon the
Tartars.

The Tartars having thus inhumanely, and without reason turned their Arms upon
the Countries of Corea, were setting forward with their Army against the Royal
City thereof, and were arrived at the beginning of the Mountains (through which
the Way runs to the City) being about seven Miles from the same. Here the King
of Corea, in the narrow Way, had pitched to receive them; and the Tartars being
eager to Fight, furiously assailed the Coreans in their Station, so that there
began a bloody Battle; but both Armies were hardly Engaged, before the valiant
Maovenlung came up with his, and fell like Lightning into the Rere of the
Tartars; who now finding themselves beset before and behind with two such
potent Armies, and no other way for safety or escape, than what their Zables
could cut out for them, resolved not to part with their Lives at a cheap rate,
and spurred on by despair, they fought without any fear, every one endeavoring
to exceed the other in Valor and Courage; so that in the very Writings of the
Chinese they are extolled, saying, There was never the like Battle fought
between them. But that which is chiefly to be admired is, that of three so
great Armies none obtained the Victory, but were all of them almost totally
ruined and destroyed: There were killed fifty thousand Men on the side of the
Tartars; those of Corea had seventy thousand slain; but the loss of the
Chinese was so great, that few or none escaped: Those of the Tartars that
survived, made their way home into their own Country as fast as they could, by
which means the King of Corea had the opportunity of recovering his Country
again.

The Tartars having sustained so great an Overthrow, were very careful
afterward how they provoked the Inhabitants of Corea; yet still they continued
to make several Inroads into the Province of Leaotung, till at last they wholly
subdued the Eastern part, and plundered the remainder thereof; but this was
done by fits, and at several times: for they never durst venture to seat
themselves there, nay, they paid oftentimes very dear for their Robberies.

While Affairs stood in this posture, the Emperor of China, whose Name was
Zungchinius, sent his General Yvenus with a strong Army, and a large
Commission, toward Leaotung; having also private Instructions to conclude a
Peace with the Tartars, if they would agree to it, but if they refused, then
forthwith to make a sharp War upon them: And to say truth, he was necessitated
to make this Proposition, for that his whole Empire was as it were overspread
with Highway-men and Robbers, so that he stood in greatest fear of them; for
their numbers daily so increased, that if they should once join into one Body,
it would be no difficult matter for them to make themselves Masters of the
Kingdom.

This Yvenus, upon whom the Emperor had conferred such high and ample
Authority, was a perfect Courtier, of an affable and free Speech, and one that
knew very well how to use his Pen with so much advantage and ingenuity, that
there was hardly any one in the Court to be compared with him. By these
singular Perfections he had won not only the Heart of the Emperor, but of all
the Grandees, so that the management of all Affairs was wholly left to him. But
here it must be observed, That he was insatiably covetous of Wealth, and
consequently for obtaining thereof stuck not to perpetrate any clandestine
Mischief; otherwise, by his more than common Parts, he might undoubtedly have
done extraordinary Services both to his Prince and Country: But neither the
greatness of the Trust reposed in him, nor the Love of his Country, were in any
measure answerable to his Thirst after Riches: Unde habeat quaerat nemo, sed
oportet habere. Of which avaricious temper of his the Tartars having
information, and looking upon him as a fit Instrument to be employed in their
Design, they never left sending to him extraordinary Presents, accompanied with
large Promises of the most eminent Preferments: With which Baits being taken,
he contracted Friendship with them, promising to give them his Assistance when
it should lie in his power. And as the first Proof of his Friendship to them
(through the cunning instigation of the Tartars) he undertook privately to
murder the valiant and faithful Commander Mao^enlung, of whom the Tartars
stood in great fear and awe; which he accordingly effected with great secrecy,
by inviting him to Dinner, and poisoning him with a Cup of Drink which he
caused to be given him at the Table.

Having thus clandestinely accomplished this his monstrous Undertaking, he
concludes a Peace with the Tartars, upon most dishonorable and disadvantageous
Terms for his Prince; who no sooner read the same, but he refused to Observe
and Ratify them. Yvenus, conscious of what he had done, and well seeing that
upon the making good of this Treaty of Peace, his Honor and Authority depended,
advised the Tartars to force the Emperor, his natural lord, to the Observation
thereof by force of Arms: Whereupon in the year 1630. upon his Promises not to
oppose them in the least, if they would make an Invasion in some other Part of
the Empire where he had no Command, this treacherous Advice was no sooner
given, than accepted and put in execution; for the Tartars doubted so little of
the Promises of Yvenus, by reason of his extraordinary Covetousness, that
without taking any further Counsel, they poured their Forces into the Province
of Peking, Plundering all Places where they came, and laying the same
afterward in Ashes; and at last so was their Courage, or rather Fury,
heightened, that they laid Siege to the Imperial City of Peking: at whose
approach, it is no marvel if the confusion and amazement were great, not only
amongst the Citizens, but also amongst the Rix-Counsellors, who in this
dangerous vicissitude of Affairs earnestly advised the Emperor to leave the
City, and to retire to the Southern Provinces: but he would by no means hearken
to their Counsel, saying, That he would rather be cut in a thousand Pieces,
than that it should be said he fled for fear of the Tartars. Wherefore both as
a Valiant Soldier and Careful Prince, he immediately gave order to his
Commanders not to suffer any to depart out of the City upon pain of death; but
that they should incite and stir up all the People to a Courageous Defense.

While this was doing within, the Tartars without began to Storm the City, but
were beaten off with great loss upon several Attempts, so that they concluded
to continue the Siege with more moderation, and rather endeavor to take it by
Famine, than hazard the weakening of their Army by such fruitless and
unsuccessful Assaults. At length, by advice of his Council, the Emperor sent
for Yvenus to come to his Assistance and Relief with the Army under his Command
(for as yet his Treachery was not discovered:) who upon the first Intelligence,
to prevent the Emperor from having any suspicion of him, came with his Army
under the Walls of Peking, but kept at a great distance from that of the
Besiegers; neither showed he any hostility against them, but in stead thereof
advised the Emperor to the Observation of the Terms upon which the Treaty of
Peace (the cause of this War) had begun: And this he strongly labored to
persuade him to, not only to prevent the discovery of the Treason, but that so
he might return home with great Wealth and Riches, which the Tartars had
promised him in case the Peace took effect. Zungchinius considering what the
meaning of such Advice might tend to, began to mistrust the Fidelity of his
General; and afterward by other means being more fully satisfied of his
treacherous dealing, for the destruction and ruin of the State, he sent
privately unto him, to desire his Presence in the City at the Council of War,
to advise with the rest of the Military Officers, what was best to be done in
that dangerous Exigent, for the Safety and welfare of the whole Empire. Now it
is to be noted, That the Emperor would not suffer any Gate to be set open,
under pretense that the Enemy lay close to the Walls; but in truth, for fear
lest Yvenus should crowd in upon him with his whole Army: therefore he sent him
word, that he should come to the Walls, and they would draw him up privately
into the City over the Wall. Of this Design of the Emperor Yvenus had not the
least inkling given him by any of the Council; for indeed the Emperor at this
time making himself alone his own Privy-Councellor, had not discovered to any
what he knew of the Treason hatched against him by Yvenus, nor of what he
intended against him for his Reward; but only that he would confer with him
about some Affairs in order to the Preservation of the City: for had the
Emperor never so little discovered either his Knowledge or Intentions, Yvenus
would soon have been advertised thereof, having his Creatures in all Corners of
the City, to give him intelligence of all Affairs; but this being by his
silence and secrecy prevented, Yvenus came without any fear into the City, and
addressed himself to the Emperor, in whose Presence, upon his very first
appearance, he was Apprehended and Beheaded. This being a Public Act, could
not be long concealed, nor indeed was it; for the Tartars heard of it
presently, and thereupon raised their Siege, and left the Imperial City, out of
fear of being attaqu'd by the Royal Army, which lay not far from them, as soon
as the Emperor should have appointed a faithful Commander over the same in
stead of the Traitor Yvenus: However, in their Return and March back they
ruined and destroyed whatever stood in their way, and with great store of
Wealth and Booty got at last into the Province of Leaotung.

The War continued till the Year 1636. with various Events, sometimes the
Chinese having the better, otherwhiles the Tartars; but however the Chinese
defended themselves so well against them till that time, that the Tartars did
never set footing in China, but they were driven out again with great loss.

In the same Year 1636. the Tartar King Thienzungus died, and his Son Zungteus
(the Father of the present Emperor who now wears the Royal Diadem in China)
succeeded him: A Prince so endowed with all the most excellent Qualities both
of Art and Nature, as if designed for some great Undertaking: He exceeded all
his Ancestors in Parts and Prudence; and in his Minority, before he attained
the Crown, gave no small signs of an excellent Understanding. To descend a
little to Particulars: He was both Learned, Courteous, and of a good
Disposition: Being yet in his juvenile Years, he was sent by his Father into
China, under the Tuition of some of his Council, who put him into the Chinese
Habit: Here he lived privately a long time, learned the Chinese Language, and
exchanged the rough and salvage Behavior of his own Country, for the more
civil and gentile Behavior of the Chinese; so that when he had got into the
Throne, he Reigned with much mildness, moderation, and affability, carrying
himself toward his Subjects quite contrary to the morose Nature of his
Ancestors, whose Cruelty and Severity he observed to have been the overthrow,
or at least the retarding of all their Designs against the Chinese, whom by
his Conversation among them while he lived there, he found were better to be
won with a soft and mild Hand, than with rough and harsh usage: Wherefore he
resolved to alter the way and manner of the Government of his Ancestors, and to
confirm himself in his Throne rather by the love of his Subjects, than by force
of Arms. This his prudent Carriage immediately won to him the Hearts not only
of his own natural Subjects, but of the Chinese his Enemies, who when they
submitted to him, were treated as his own Subjects: Such as were conquered by
him in the War, were civilly accommodated, and received into Favor and Service;
and the rest that were willing to return home, had free leave at their own
pleasures to be gone. By this winning sweetness the Fame of this Prince spread
at last among several of his Neighbors, so that they sought unto him for his
Friendship and Protection; which stood him in great stead afterward in the
Conquest of China. He always preferred only Men of Abilities into Offices and
Places of Trust; and such Commanders or Governors as fled to him out of China
for any supposed Crime or Offense, had not only their Liberties, but were also
much made of, and put into Employments: for by the Chinese Government, to
prevent Treachery and Covetousness, it is ordained and settled as a fixed Law,
That all the Princes, Governors, or Commanders in Chief, under whose Authority
any Misfortune happens, shall lose his Head without mercy: As for Example, If a
General happen to be unfortunately defeated; if a Governor lose his Province
over which he is appointed; or that a Mutiny happen among the People or Army,
though neither of them were by any probable or rational ways able to prevent
it, yet they shall lose their Lives for it; so that the Chinese Generals and
Governors finding upon all occasions, that the King of Tartary was kind and
civil to such as fled to him, made thither as soon as any thing went amiss with
them, for which they knew they had incurred the Penalty of losing their Heads.

At this time there seemed to be a Cessation of all Warlike and Hostile
Actions; for although the Tartars held the Western part of the Province of
Le^otung, yet the East part was so well guarded with Forts and Soldiers, that
they thought themselves secure from any future or further Invasion on that
side: Nor were the adjacent Places in any great fear, for that there was a very
strong Army thereabouts to hinder them from making any further Inroads into the
said Province.

But this noble and flourishing Empire had that Viper hatching within its
Bowels, that would work its Confusion, and was the only occasion of its
Overthrow; for (as was said before) at that time it was full of Vagabonds,
Thieves and Robbers, who not only wasted, but at last delivered it up a Prey to
the Tartars, as you may more clearly understand by the sequel of the Story.

The first Insurrection and Treachery of these Robbers and Highway-men was
discovered in the Province of Suchue, where joining with a sort of wild People
that live among the Rocks and Mountains, they began the mischief, and opened
the Flood-gate of Rebellion, by subtly opposing the Authority that was over
them. Their first Work was to fall a Plundering, or in plain English, Stealing,
without any exception of Persons, whatsoever they could meet with: In which
their rebellious and unlawful Undertaking being successful, they at last
resolved to make an open war, and to that end laid Siege to Chingtu, the Chief
City of the Province; which they had without doubt taken; had not the
abovementioned Amazon opportunely come to its Rescue; for these insolent and
now commanding Thieves having heard of the Fame of her extraordinary Courage,
were struck with such a terror, that upon the first inkling of her approach
they immediately raised the Siege, and left the City with great loss. But this,
though for a while it diverted them, yet it did not so deter them as to make
them cease from any farther Attempt; for returning toward the Mountains, they
presently rallied again, and recruited their Forces with some fresh Supplies,
wherewith they continued to forage and spoil the Country.

To heighten and encourage the Insolence of these Villains, it happened that in
the Province of Queicheu there had passed an unjust Sentence in a certain Cause
between two great Men, by reason whereof he against whom the Cause went,
endeavored the same reversed; but notwithstanding all his Endeavors, as well by
himself as Friends and Alliance, there was no good to be done therein. The
Robbers, after the raising of the Siege, kept themselves in great numbers upon
the Mountains, without making any further Disturbance; but they sent to this
injured Person, to let him know, that if he pleased to accept of their Power,
they would stand by him with their Lives, to help him to redress his Wrong,
provided he would become their General, and be assistant to them in the
carrying on of their Designs. This Great Person possessed yet with fury and a
desire of Revenge for the Injury done him, was not long in consulting, but
presently accepted of their Offer, looking upon the same as the best and most
likely means, not only to repair his Damages, but to revenge himself also. Upon
knowledge of this Acceptance, these Robbers submitt with extraordinary alacrity
to his Command and Authority; wherein he was no sooner Invested, but first of
all they fall upon the Judge that gave the Sentence, whom they immediately
killed: Then they fell upon the Army of the Tutang or Viceroy, which they
quickly routed and put to slight; but he rallying his Forces, turned back again
upon them with such fury, that he forced them to fly into the Mountains with a
very great slaughter; notwithstanding all which, they recruited again, but kept
in their Holds till they had an opportunity to show themselves again, as they
did in a short time after.

Those Depredations, together with the infinite number of Grasshoppers, which
had destroyed all the Grass and Fruits of the Field in the seven Northern
Provinces of China, causing a scarcity of Provision, and consequently a great
dearness, gave a very great occasion to the rising and increasing of the number
of these Thieves, which happened chiefly in the Provinces of Xensi and Xantung.

Another Provocation or Instigation was, That the Emperor Zungchinius, being of
a covetous and miserable Nature, would have (notwithstanding the Dear^h) the
usual yearly Taxes paid him, as in a fruitful Year; which Exaction set the
Inhabitants of those Provinces upon Plotting against him, and at length to join
with the Robbers, by whose assistance in a short time they brought eight strong
Armies into the Field, appointing for their Generals such as they counted the
most valiant Men among them.

These Robbers and Mutineers having now thus strengthened themselves with
Forces, and got great store of Wealth by Preying and Stealing, resolved not to
rest here, but driving higher Designs in their Heads, and aiming at greater
Matters, they began to consult about reducing the whole Empire under their
Subjection, and Dethroning the Emperor: For the accomplishing whereof, and
advancing himself, every one of the eight Generals thought himself of
sufficient Strength to get that Morsel, and fancied himself capable and fit to
bear so weighty a Burden. With which ambitious thoughts puffed up, each of
them began to make War upon the other, every one being in hopes to be
Conqueror, and to encircle his Head with the Royal Diadem, and enoble his
Posterities Blood by the possession of the Empire. This War continued till six
of the eight Generals were slain, and only the two stoutest, Licungzus and
Changhienchungus, left alive to dispute the Quarrel. For the more easy
bringing this to pass, each endeavored to win to his Party the Forces of the
other slain Generals, to strengthen themselves; for to such a height was their
Ambition grown, that there was no thoughts of dividing the Stakes between them,
each resolving to be aut Caesar aut nihil; so strangely were they lifted up
with the thoughts of Sovereignty.

Filled with these aspiring thoughts, these two Generals took several ways to
advance their Interests and Designs; Licungzus with his Forces falling into the
Provinces of Xensi and Honan: but the other imagining to get the best Booty in
those of Suchue and Huquang, marched thither; so that now they no longer fought
one against another as formerly, but seeking Wealth and Booty, were removed to
a great distance.

In these Transactions the Emperors Concerns began to look with a had
Countenance, as if the Government it self were suddenly to undergo some fatal
Alteration; for the Tartars (who were not ignorant of these Proceedings) had in
their former Wars made such havoc of brave Commanders, that there were hardly
any left, whose knowledge in Military Discipline capacitated them for Conduct
of the Forces which were marching to subdue these rebellious Plunderers under
the two Generals.

Licungzus in the Year 1641. marched with his Army out of the Province of
Xensi, after he had wholly plundered and destroyed its chiefest Cities, into
the plentiful Province of Honan, directly to the famous City Caifung; which he
presently begirt and blocked up so close, that there was no going in nor coming
out: but the Place being well fortified and provided with a good Garrison and
Provisions, the Siege was soon raised, and the Besiegers constrained to retire
into the Mountains, not without very great loss of Men: But they had no sooner
recruited themselves, but they returned to the Siege again, with an intention
to have surpised the same on a sudden; but the Citizens having privately
received Intelligence thereof, and standing upon their Guards, hindered them
from effecting their Design.

The Enemy being thus twice frustrated in his hopes, and seeing no likelihood
of taking the City by force, resolved to compel them to a Surrender by a long
and close Siege: And though it were a Place at least three Miles in
circumference, yet they surrounded the same in such a manner, that no Relief
could possibly be given them. But the Governor after the first Attempt,
although provided with all manner of Necessaries to withstand a Siege; yet in
regard the Harvest of Corn proved very bad that Year, found upon survey, that
it was impossible to lengthen out the same by the best Husbandry, to serve for
the Maintenance of such a number of People for six Months; yet still though
their Magazines fell short, they held out, and suffered very great hunger, in
hopes that the Emperor would come or send to their Relief: And at last such was
their want, that a pound of Rice was sold for a Pound of Silver; a Pound of old
rotten Leather for twenty Shillings; nay, they fed upon dead Men's Flesh as
freely as upon any thing else.

Thus did these Loyal Subjects hold out beyond admiration, before they would
harbor any thoughts of yielding; but when they saw themselves destitute of all
hopes of Succor, they unwillingly submitted to the cruelty of their Fate.

This Caifung lies in a great Valley on the South side of the Yellow River,
which runs at least a Mile to the Land-ward from it: And in regard the Water
lies much higher than the Valley wherein the City is built, there is made
before it a Bank or Dike of Stone to hinder the overflowing of the same River.

The Emperor at last understanding into what a Strait the Besieged were
brought, resolved to march to their Relief, and to that purpose came with his
Army before the afore-mentioned Stone Bank, with an intention to bore the same
through, and so drown the whole Army of the Besiegers. But the Workmen that
were entrusted, not being so prudent as they ought to have been in the
execution of a Design so hazardous, made too great an Opening in the Bank, so
that in a few hours the Water gushed in with such violence, that it not only
drowned most of the Enemy's Army, but the whole City also was overwhelmed, and
almost all therein destroyed with the Inundation. In this miserable Calamity,
thus unfortunately happening, above three hundred thousand Persons were drowned,
and this famous City, formerly the ancient Seat of the Emperors of China, upon
the ninth of September 1642. converted into Pool* with the adjacent Country
round about it; for through the violent force of the Water, not only all the
Buildings and Houses were soon overturned, but Trees which had stood for many
Ages were washed up by the Roots; so that at this time there is nothing thereof
left to be seen.

Licungzus, who in Person escaped this Deluge, with some few of his Forces, yet
once more made a shift to recruit his Army; upon the sight and muster whereof,
being still persuaded that he should get into the Throne, took upon himself the
Title of King, calling himself King Xunnanst, that is, A Fortunate King.

The Province of Honan being thus subdued and brought to slavery, and the
Inhabitants thereof miserably handled with Plundering and Stealing, this
upstart King departed with his whole Army, and fell into the Province of Xensi;
where he immediately laid close Siege to the Chief City of Xigan, which he took
after three days, giving the Plunder thereof to his Soldiers; but out of a
seeming Compassion he gave the Inhabitants their Lives. He made this City, upon
its Reduction, the Seat of his War, and caused all manner of Provisions and
Ammunition to be brought out of the Province and laid up there; partly thereby
to keep the Country in awe, and partly to hinder the Chinese Army from any
Provisions in those Parts to support themselves against him. And now becoming
over-confident by Success, and doubting no longer of the possession of the
Empire, which he had already appropriated to himself in his thoughts, he took
upon him the Title of Emperor, by the Name of Thienxun, which signifies
Obedient to Heaven; for by pretext of this glorious Name, which he used for a
Cloak to his Villainy, he gave out in Speeches, and so made his Soldiers
believe, That it was concluded in Heaven that he should ascend the Throne, and
deliver the oppressed Subjects out of the covetous Hands of the present
Emperor, to inflict Punishment on the corrupt Governors of Provinces, who had
over-burthen'd the People with intolerable Taxes; and lastly, to Govern the
Empire in Peace and Quietness. To all this the Renegado Chinese who had sided
with Licungzus giving easy credit, were very forward not only to give him the
Title of Emperor, as his Ambition had assumed it, but did verily believe he was
sent from Heaven to Govern.

And to add the greater Honor and Luster to his Name, and win their Favor, he
Governed them with great moderation and mildness, so to make his Actions and
his Name seem agreeable: for such as had done any wrong, underwent no Corporal
Punishment, but were only chastis'd with kind Words and good Admonitions, All
such Chinese Governors as refused to submit to him, he caused to be put to
death when taken by him. He abolished and took off several heavy Taxes, that
had been laid, and then continued upon the People, charging such as he made
Governors to Rule gently and lovingly over his Subjects. And after this manner,
through his cunning and crafty Insinuations, did this grand Thief bring under
his Obedience several Provinces without spilling any Blood; for the Commonalty
(which is Bellua multorum capitum and instabile vulgus) was hugely pleased with
this new Model of Governing, applauding their new Emperor with highest
Eulogiums.

But beside the Troubles occasioned by the two grand Robbers, there arose in
the Court another Dispute and Discontent as mischievous as the other, and which
was indeed the greatest occasion of the overthrow of the Empire, and the
greatest Divisions amongst the Governors themselves, occasioned by the
jealousy and hatred they bore to one Guei of the King's Bedchamber, for the
great Authority committed to him, and Affection shown him by the Emperor, who
had not only entrusted the whole Government into his Hands, and preferred him
to the best Offices and Charges within his Dominions, but likewise treated with
Respect, as if he had been his Father. But this Favorite not knowing how to
keep himself within the limits of Moderation, began so to swell with Pride,
that he caused several Great Persons to be punished with Death or Banishment
for small Offenses. Which exorbitant Cruelties brought him into great hatred,
not only with the Nobles and Grandees, but also with the Prince Zungchinius
himself, who, by the information of the Prime Persons about him, being
acquainted with his Carriage, began to abate much of his Love toward him.

This occasioned a very great Fraction amongst the Governors and
Rix-Councellors, who were divided upon it into two Factions; so that in a short
time there was hardly any Considerable Person to be found who did not side with
the one or the other, each endeavoring to ruin his Adversary, yet still both
pretending the Welfare of the State. But the Emperor Zungchinius foreseeing the
ruin that was imminent over his Head through these Divisions, endeavored by
all the means he could devise to reconcile these intestine Iars, thus unhappily
risen among his Subjects; and in order thereunto, after several other probable
Experiments without any effect, he caused the Friends of the beforementioned
Guei to be punished in due form of Law, and severely punished, as Disturbers of
the Public Peace: nay, at last he was forced to cause Guei himself to be put
to death, with several others his Adherents, which was put in execution after
this manner:

According to an ancient Custom of the Chinese Emperors, to visit the Tombs of
their Ancestors, this Guei, under color thereof, was made choice of for the
Emperor's Proxy (it being an Employment always committed to the Greatest
Persons in the Empire) who not dreaming of any hurt intended against him, began
his Journey with a great Train; but he was hardly gone a Mile out of the City
of Peking, but a Messenger from the Emperor overtook him, who delivered him a
Golden Box, wherein was a Silken Cord, with order to hang himself therewith;
which he readily embraced, and presently went and performed. And thus to come
to the period of Life, is held by the Chinese for an honorable Death; insomuch
that none who have any respect for their Family will reject or refuse this
severe, though inhumane Order and Command, when sent him.

But very little advantage did the Emperor reap by the Fall of this his so
eminent Favorite, but rather created more trouble unto himself; for his
Adherents hereupon began to conspire with the rebellious Robbers, and to swear
Revenge. And these Feuds being spread into the Armies that were sent to subdue
those Robbers, made such heart-burnings among the Soldiers, that they returned
home still with great loss; by means whereof the Emperors Affairs began to fall
daily into a Condition of worse and worse; for the Friends of the
beforementioned Guei did whatever they could to ruin the Emperor, and the
Party adhering to him.

When Licungzus received information of these Divisions between the Emperor and
his Commanders and Governors, he concluded that it was now a covenient time to
fall upon the Chief City of Peking; whereupon (after he had well secured the
Province of Xensi) he marched with his whole Army to the East, and passed with
little or no trouble over the Yellow River, being not defended by any; for he
might have been easily obstructed, if not totally prevented in that his Passage
with a handful of Men, in regard this River in those Parts, between the
Provinces of Xensi and Xansi, runs with a very violent Stream and Current; but
there being no Strength to hinder him, he easily got over, and at the first
Assault took the famous and great City of Kiangcheu, which lies near the said
River, and on the South side of the Province. The news hereof caused other
Places where he came not to withstand him, only those of the City of Thaiyven
held out several days, as it were in a Bravado: but at last being forced to
submit, they dearly paid for their opposition; for the Commanders were all put
to the Sword, and a very heavy Fine set upon the Citizens that survived.

When the Emperor Zungchinius received Intelligence, that these bold Pillagers
were already got over the Yellow River, and in the Province of Xansi, which is
not very far from the Imperial Court of Peking, he immediately caused a very
great Army to be raised under the Command of his General Lius, with order at
least to stop the Robbers in their March, if he could not totally destroy them:
But this great Army effected nothing; for no sooner were they come in sight of
the Enemy, but they deserted their Commanders, and ran over to them; which so
infinitely afflicted the General, that he went away forthwith and hanged
himself.

The report of these disastrous Actions being spread, immediately filled the
whole City of Peking with great consternation and amazement, and withal made so
deep an impression into the Heart of the Emperor, that he concluded to leave
the same, and to depart with his Family to Nanking: but from this his
Determination he was earnestly dissuaded, as well by such as were faithful, as
those that intended Treachery toward him. These last, under color of
Friendship, though they were in Heart Traitors and Enemies to their Prince and
Country, advised him to stay, that so with the greater ease and convenience,
before their Conspiracy came to be detected, they might deliver him up into the
Hands of the Rebels: but such as were indeed faithful, advised his stay for the
welfare of the Empire, alleging, That his flight, and the deserting his
Imperial City, would hazard the whole State, by heartning the Enemy, and
discouraging his Subjects: besides, they concluded, That they were able to
defend the City against all Attempts whatsoever of the Enemies Army, being well
provided and fortified with Victuals and Ammunition: Nay further, That without
all peradventure the Inhabitants of all the other Provinces would not forbear
to come to their Relief, when they should hear that the Emperor was resolved
not to leave the Imperial City, but to run the risque of his utmost Fortune,
even to the loss of his Life, in the same. Whereupon the Emperor rests
satisfied, and resolves in Person to stand by the City, and defend the same to
the last drop of his Blood.

The Usurper Licungzus, on the other hand, no less quick in Intention than
nimble at Action, and well knowing that Proverb, Virtus an dolus quis in host
requirit? joining Policy and Force together, sent a great number of his
Soldiers, Habited in the same Mode with those of China, into the Chief City of
Peking; and the better to prevent discovery, he sent them not all at one time,
but now and then one, furnishing some with Money to drive a Trade there,
ordering others to set up Drinking-houses, or to take what other course of Life
they judged most free from suspicion, till such time as he came with his whole
Army before the Walls of the City; and then by setting Fire on the Houses, or
some other like Misfortune, they should make some Disturbance in the City.

The Plot was not better laid than effected, being carried with that privacy,
that nothing of it was ever discovered by the Chinese, till it was put in
Execution. But the ambitious Fox not daring to trust only to this, thought upon
some other means fit to make sure of this his Undertaking; and that which
appeared most feasible to him, was by corrupting some of the Chief of the
Council of War, which he easily compassed; for they perceiving the Emperor's
Affairs to be in a decaying Condition, were soon persuaded to enter into a
Confederacy with him, whereby they obliged themselves to deliver up the City to
him at such a time and hour: And so faithful were they in Infidelity, that it
was accordingly performed by them in the Month of May 1644. when one of the
Gates being by these Traitors set open, the Besiegers suddenly entered; and
although discovered by such as were faithful to the Emperor, yet they also
perceiving that the City was full of Confusion, and that the Matter was quite
past hope, every one shifted for himself, and left all to the mercy of the
Robber.

Licungzus being thus Master of the City, marched up directly to the Emperor's
Palace, and with the Prime of his Army was gotten through the second Gate
(which is much to be admired; but what will not Treason effect?) before ever
the Emperor knew any thing of what had passed; but when he was first told of
the Enemy's being within the Court, he was astonished with admiration at the
unexpected hearing of such direful news; but after a small pause, seeing there
was no hope to escape, he took a Pen, and writing a Letter with his own Blood,
accuses therein his Officers of most horrid Treason, earnestly desiring and
entreating Licungzus, that since Heaven had so favored his Designs as to give
him the Empire, he would do him (a Prince yielding to his Fate) that Right, to
punish his traitorous and perfidious Officers and Servants with most severe
Punishment.

Having finished this Letter, as a Man distracted, he kills his Daughter in his
Chamber, being a young Virgin of seventeen or eighteen years of Age, that she
should not be misused and ill treated by the Rogues; and then with a settled
Resolution not to survive this dismal Misfortune, going into the Garden, with
one of his Garters he hanged himself upon a Plum-Tree. And this was the
miserable Catastrophe of the Emperor Zungchinius, who was very unfortunate
during his Reign in all his Undertakings, and is reckoned for the last Emperor
of the Race of Taiminga; for although afterward some other of that Line were
chosen, yet they are not reckoned by the Chinese themselves among the Emperors
of that Race, in regard that after the Death of Zungchinius they never
possessed the whole, but only some part of the ancient Empire. Thus was that
Race, whose first Founder was the Robber Chu, destroyed and brought to nothing
by another Robber Licungzus, who had the Fortune, even beyond his Hope, though
not his Ambition, to subdue the biggest Empire in that part of the World.

The Emperor's Death begat so great a Grief and Commiseration in the Chief
Governor of the City, that not thinking himself worthy to survive his unhappy
Lord, he went and hanged himself likewise in the same Place. The Empress
followed the same Example, and also all such as were faithful to them, rather
than they would fall into the Hands of the Enemy; for it is counted a piece of
Honor and Faithfulness with the Subjects of that Country, to die with their
Sovereign.

Licungzus being now Master of Peking, presently seats himself in the Imperial
Throne, and the next day caused the dead Body of the Emperor to be hacked in
pieces, and the Plunder of the City to his Soldiers.

The Emperor Zungchinius had three Sons, whereof the eldest (seeing his
Father's Death, and the City in possession of the Robbers) never appeared more,
though great search was made for him; to have had him either alive or dead. Of
his loss there are diverse opinions, some thinking he was killed in the Crowd
unknown; others, that he saved himself by flight, amongst those that escaped to
the Mountains, where they lived a long while after.

Beside this, were two other younger Sons, who were brought alive to the
Tyrant; but he caused them to be Beheaded presently.

And to show his tyrannical Cruelty, and that the Barbarism of his Nature was
not at all altered by his being gotten into the Throne, he Summoned the
chiefest Persons of the Empire to a Meeting, under color of Treating with them
about Business of great consequence; whether being no sooner come, but a
company of the basest Fellows were turned in upon them, whose salvage Fury so
unboundedly raged, that it spared none but such as had Money enough to buy off
their Lives. But here ended not his Tyranny, as by the following Tragedy will
appear.

Amongst several other Governors and Commanders whom he had taken Prisoners,
there was a very ancient Man named Us, who had a Son, called Usanguejus, that
had the Command of the Chinese Army which lay upon the Frontiers of Leaotung
against the Tartars: of whom the Usurper standing in fear, as perceiving that
he was able to do him very great prejudice with his Forces, threatened this old
Man to put him to death in a most cruel manner, if he did not forthwith command
and enjoin his Son to come and submit to him; promising him to reward such his
Civility with great Presents and Preferments. The decrepit old Man Us, in hopes
to get his Liberty, and overcome with these great Promises, writ a Letter to
his Son, the substance whereof was to this purpose: That the various Changes
and Vicissitudes which happen in this World are either preordain'd by the
Heavens, occasioned by the Earth, or impuls'd by Destiny. This I write to you,
my Son, to give you notice, that the Emperor Zungchinius, and the Government of
the Race of Taiminga is totally destroyed; and that since the Heavens, which
order and manage all things by a just Rule, have given the Dominion to
Licungzus, it is requisite that we comply with the Times, and make a Virtue of
Necessity, especially if we will escape all Disasters, prevent a cruel Death,
and enjoy his Favor. He promises to enoble you with a Royal Dignity, and to
confer on you all manner of Honor and Friendship, if you will take part with
him, and own him for your Lord and Emperor. Consider well thereof, and know,
that upon your Promise and Consent to this, depends my Preservation; and you
may now either preserve my Life, or destroy it: Weigh with your self the
Obligations of Nature, which will tell you how deeply you are engaged to
preserve him that first gave you Being.




Usanguejus upon the receipt and reading this Letter, though very much troubled
at the Contents thereof, being tied by Oath to his natural Prince, answered his
Father with these few, but sharp words:

I shall never own him for my Father, who will not be true and faithful to his
Prince. Have you forgot that Faith which you owe to the Emperor? who then can
blame me, if I forget that Obedience which I owe to you? Much rather had I die,
than betray my Trust, and falsify my Oath.

No sooner had Usanguejus sent this Letter to his Father, but he dispatched an
Ambassador to the Grand Tartar Cham, to desire Assistance against the Usurper
and Tyrant Licungzus, who had so unjustly intruded upon the Throne by (...) and
Murder: And to incite the Tartars the more speedily to the March, he promised
them great store of fine Linen, Silks, Gold, Silver, and a great number of
very handsome young Women, wherein the Tartars take great delight, because they
are very scarce amongst them, their Country abounding more with Men than Women.
The Cham, who had long been waiting for such an Opportunity, readily accepted
of his Offer, promising to assist him with a considerable Army, which then lay
ready in the Province of Leaotung: And in truth he was as good as his Promise;
for it was not long before he began his March with an Army of eighty thousand
Men, to join with Usanguejus; to whom at meeting he thus spoke:

That we may not be baffled in our Undertaking, I judge it necessary, and
advise you earnestly, to put all your Soldiers into Tartar Habits, to wear Caps
and short Hair, that so the Tyrant by this Stratagem may be deceived; for that
he will take them all for Tartars.

Usanguejus, whose Heart boiled with Revenge, agreed to all that the Tartar
desired of him, not considering that he brought in Tigers (according to the
Saying of the Chinese) to hunt out Dogs.

This Confederacy against Licungzus was not so privately carried, but he had
intelligence thereof: But when the news was brought him, that they were not
only joined, but upon their March against him, it struck such a terror into the
Robber, that he presently quitted the Imperial City of Peking, not daring to
stay or abide their coming, and fled into the Province of Xensi for safety,
taking with him all that was of value, and Seated himself in the Chief City of
Sigan, formerly the Court of the ancient Emperors. As a testimony of the
greatness of the Treasure that was carried out of Peking by this flying Tyrant
and his Followers, it is most certain, that seven or eight days were spent
wholly about loading of Wagons and Horses with the same; and yet they left
great store of Riches behind them, being surprised with fear at the sudden
coming of the Tartars. And thus were the infinite Riches of Gold, Silver,
Jewels, and costly Furniture, which sixteen Emperors of the Race of Taiminga
had been scraping together for the space of two hundred and eighty years,
destroyed and carried away: But he had not yet gotten into Harbor with his
Booty; for in his flight he was set upon by the Tartar, who recovered from him
all that mass of Wealth which he had so traitorously stolen, and then marches
directly to the Imperial City of Peking, where the Inhabitants without making
any resistance set open the Gates, and gave them free entrance. And thus at
length, and after this manner, the Tartars became Masters of the whole Empire
of China, for which they had waged War, and fought so many bloody Battles, for
many Ages.

And although at this time, which was at the very first entrance, the Tartar
King Zungteus happened to die, yet (which is very observable) they were not
thereby deterred from pursuing their designed Conquest, but endeavored both by
Cunning and Policy to win the Hearts of the Chinese to affect them: for though
the Death of Zungteus gave a little check to their Affairs, yet through his
good Conduct while he lived, he had opened such a Way for them, that they
easily saw in what Method to proceed for the gaining of the whole Empire. He
left behind him a Son who was but six years old, whom he declared his Successor
upon his Deathbed, enjoining and conjuring his own Brothers prudently to
Supervise and Govern the great Transactions of his Dominions, during his
Minority. The eldest of these Brothers had the greatest hand in the management
of Affairs, which he most faithfully performed, effecting very great things.

The Robber Licungzus being thus expelled from his Usurpation, Usanguejus
endeavored to settle again in the Throne the next Heir of the Family and Race
of Taiminga; and with the more applause to effect it, he returned his hearty
thanks to the Tartars for their faithful Assistance and Service, highly
commending their Courage shown in driving out the Robber. After this Complement
performed, he proffered them the promised Presents, with request, that upon
receiving the same they would depart out of China, and for the future forget
the old Injuries, which they had now sufficiently revenged. But Usanguejus
received from them an Answer quite contrary to his expectation (which they had
long since in their thoughts framed) in these words:

It seems to us, although perhaps you shall judge it otherwise, as yet too soon
for you to part with us: China is not yet free from Armed Thieves, but still
too much overrun with them: You may easily imagine how great a Danger is still
imminent over your Head, in regard the grand Robber Licungzus has settled
himself in Sigan, the Chief City of the Province of Xensi. We have newly struck
a fear and terror into him, but if he be once informed of our Departure, he
will soon re-invade the Throne with fresh Forces, and re-conquer the whole; and
then in regard of the great distance that will be between us, it will be
impossible for us to come timely enough to your assistance. Wherefore we judge
it better for us, now we are here, and before our Departure wholly to destroy
these Plunderers; and then all being in Peace and Quietness, your new chosen
Prince for the future will be freed from any new Troubles. As to your Promises,
never think of them; for they are as well performed by you as by us: But if
your Intentions aim at the Public Good, march with a potent Army against
Licungzus, and force him to leave that City, while we in the mean time will
endeavor to drive the other Robbers out of the Province of Xantung: And in the
doing of this, the whole Empire will be settled in Peace.

Usanguejus, who either did not perceive the craftiness of the Tartar, of else
dissembled his knowledge on purpose at present not to provoke him, agreed at
last to his Proposal, and permitted him with his Forces to continue in China.
But the Tartars, in pursuance of their long intended Design, before they began
their March, at the request of Usanguejus, with their Army into China, to drive
out Licungzus, had sent into their own Country to raise a mighty Army with all
speed for the Conquest thereof; yet the better to palliate their Practice, they
used no Force against the Chinese, but kept them in hand with kind and crafty
Language, till they had got their Forces out of Tartary, who brought with them
their young King of six years old, called Xunteus; whereby they first gave to
understand that they aimed at the Sovereignty: for no sooner was their
new-raised potent Army arrived, but they Proclaimed this young Child Emperor of
China, gave him the Name of Xunchi, and Entitled his Race Taicung. This Child
(who yet lives and Reigns in China, and is now about twenty nine years of Age)
was placed with great Majesty in the ancient Imperial Throne, through the good
Conduct of his Uncles and near Relations, who proved very faithful to him,
being entrusted with the sole management of all Affairs, and of so great
Courage and Valor, civil, loving, and just Deportment, that they won the
Hearts of the Chinese.

Upon the very Day of this new Emperor's Instalment, there was sent in his
Name, by the advice of his Uncle, a Regiment or two of Tartars to Usanguejus,
who was upon his March toward the Province of Xensi, to Fight with Licungzus,
with sealed Letters, whereby he was Constituted King Pingsi, which signifies A
Pacifier of the West; the Chief City Sigan ordered to be his Court, and that he
should pay some yearly Tribute in token of his Obedience. This Policy did the
Guardians of the young Emperor use, to satisfy and gain Usanguejus to their
Party; for they knew very well, that the Interest which he had in China was
sufficient to embroil the Affairs of the Tartars, and involve them in new
Troubles.

Usanguejus, who could never expect the like Preferment from the Chinese
Emperor, considering that all the last Emperor's Children were dead; and seeing
the Tartars upon their March against him with so great an Army, and that
himself was in no Condition to oppose them, relinquisheth the Trust which he
had thus long kept, receives the new Honor, and acknowledges the Tartar for
lawful Emperor of China.

In this manner was he, who not long before for the Protection of the Chinese
was sent with an Army to subdue the Rebels, now brought over to Fight against
his own Countrymen, and with the Tartars help conquer the Empire; and at last,
with the assistance of the Tartars, having quite vanquished the Robbers in
Xensi in a pitched Battle, went and settled his Court in the City of Sigan. And
thus did the Tartars prefer this Lord to great Honors and Dignities, who had so
often fought against them with great Success; but trusted him not with any
Military Employment, as well knowing what such an expert and valiant Commander
(well guarded with Soldiers, whose Love in time of Peace he would purchase) is
able to do, in case Fortune should afterward become froward, and begin to
frown upon them.

What became of Licungzus is not certainly known, for his Forces were most of
them killed upon the Place by Usanguejus; and therefore some are of opinion
that he fell into the Slaughter amongst the rest, for he never was heard of
after that Battle.

The other Tartars who were sent toward Xantung and Peking, soon made
themselves Masters of them, meeting with little or no resistance: But yet the
greatest stop that was after put to the Arms of the Tartars, was the Law they
published, whereby the Chinese were commanded to wear their Hair after the
Tartar fashion. This did very much alienate their Affections from the Tartars;
for they of China take great pride in their Hair, and therefore did fight more
valiantly to defend that, than for the Safety and Preservation of the Empire or
Emperor; insomuch that thousands (who perhaps otherwise would have submitted
peaceably) chose rather to lose their Heads than their Tresses.

Nevertheless the Tartars were so successful in their War, that in the space of
twelve Months they Conquered four Northern Provinces, viz. Peking, Xansi,
Xensi, and Xantung; but for the rest they used another means, which got them
more than the Sword, and indeed was a good piece of Policy; for they made no
manner of alteration in the Government wheresoever they came, but suffered the
Conduct and Direction of all Civil Affairs, both in City and Country, to
continue in the Hands of the Chinese Philosophers, wherein it was settled
before: And this one thing brought the Tartar into such favor and esteem with
the Chinese, that they readily submitted themselves to their Command; only
herein consisted all the Marks of their Vassalage, that the Conquerors reserved
to themselves the sole management of all Martial Affairs; nevertheless, such
Chinese Commanders as they had found faithful, were still employed by them; and
even in the Imperial City it self, the same Order, as to the Civil Government,
was observed, only one half of the Judges were Tartars, and the other Chinese.

In the mean time the Governors and Commanders of the Southern Provinces (where
the first Disturbance of the Robbers began) having information of the Straits
the Emperor was reduced to, raised a great Army, and were already upon their
March to his Rescue; but when they were certifi'd of his Death, and the taking
of the City, they immediately returned with all their Forces; and not long
after understood that the Tartars, who by the means of Usanguejus were called
in as Aids, had possessed themselves of the whole Empire, and were become
absolute Masters thereof; the very thoughts of which much perplexed their
Spirits.

And this spread likewise a great consternation among all the People, even as
far as Nanking, the Chief City of the Province of the same Name, so that they
did not know what to advise or do; but at last the General took courage, and
set up, after a long serious Consultation, one of the Family of Taiminga, being
the next Heir to the Chinese Crown, as Grandchild of the Emperor Vanlieus, and
Cousin of the last Emperor Zungchinius, who heretofore kept his Court in the
Province of Honan, but for fear of the Robbers removed to Nanking; where, upon
his Arrival, the Inhabitants in great Pomp and State set the Crown upon his
Head, and Proclaimed him Emperor by the Name of Hunquang, in hopes to effect
great matters by him, in regard he was a valiant Prince. He was no sooner
seated in his Throne, but he sent an Ambassador to the Tartars, to demand a
Peace upon Terms of leaving all the Northern Provinces to them which they had
taken. But the Tartars well understanding, that the scope of this Embassy was
only intended to gain time till the Chinese could recruit themselves with Men
and Money, rejected his Offers, and returned him answer, That they would either
have the whole Country, or no part of it, being resolved not to lay down their
Arms till they had accomplished what they had undertaken.

In the mean time, whilst the Ambassador was upon his return home, and that
both Parties prepared for the War, there appeared in Nanking a Youth, who gave
himself out for the eldest Son of the Emperor Zungchinius, and endeavored to
confirm it with some peculiar remarks of Truth: And that which seemed to make a
great addition to the credit of this Report, was, that several Gelubdens, and
others who had been conversant in the Emperor's Court, pretended to know him.
But Hunquang, who had tasted the sweetness of Government, and in some measure
settled himself in the Throne, refused to own him for the lawful Son of
Zungchinius, but caused him to be Apprehended as an Impostor, with an Intention
to put him to death: And in this cruel Resolution he persisted, notwithstanding
that all the Commanders and Governors opposed him, and extremely hated and
maligned him for it; for they gave credit to the Saying of the Youth.

This Business occasioned so much and so long trouble among the Chinese, that
the Tartars in the interim took the opportunity to subject the Province of
Nanking, wherein they found little or no opposition, in regard the Chinese
Commanders were divided among themselves to that height of malice, that some
refused to hinder the Progress of the Tartars, on purpose to work a Prejudice
to the new Emperor: Whereupon they came immediately to Hoaigan, the first Chief
City of the same Province, and without making any stop or delay, they took in
the East side of the Yellow River, and Ferried over the same in Boa^s, though
the other side thereof was well lined with Chinese Soldiers; who no sooner
perceived the Tartars in earnest to put themselves aboard for Passage, but they
left their Station and fled like so many Sheep pursued by Wolves. The Tartars
thus got over (which might have been easily prevented, if the Guards appointed
for defense of the Banks had shown but the least Courage) fell with their whole
Army into the said Province, and took and carried away whatsoever they found
upon the North side of the River Kiang, no Place being able to withstand them,
only the rich and famous City of Iangcheu made some considerable Resistance,
and killed many of the Tartars in their Sallies, amongst whom was a Son of one
of their Petty Kings. This City was Commanded by one Zuus Colaus, placed there
by the new Emperor, to whom he proved very faithful; for he defended the Place,
wherein was a strong Garrison, to the very last; yet having endured a long and
cruel Siege, and seeing no likelihood of Relief (the Provisions also being all
spent) he was forced to deliver it up to the Tartars, who put all, as well the
Soldiers as Inhabitants, to the Sword, plundered the City, and afterward set
it on fire.

The Tartars hereupon increased very much in Power and Authority, so that many
of the Chinese Commanders went over to them, and were either continued in their
present Employment, or else preferred to better. Which friendly and favorable
treating such Officers and Cities as came voluntarily and without force over to
them, and on the other hand inflicting such great severity and cruelty on such
as made opposition, was the cause that most of the Places situate on the North
side of the River Kiang submitted themselves, to avoid the punishment and
misusage which they should otherwise undergo by making opposition.

Having subdued these Places, the next thing they undertook was against the
City of Nanking, formerly the Court of the ancient Emperors, a stately City
lying upon the South side of the River Kiang, which separates the whole Empire
of China into the Southern and Northern Divisions, and runs quite through the
middle of this Province: And the better to accomplish their Design, and to get
the new Emperor into their Hands, whom they knew was in this Place, the Tartars
provided beforehand great numbers of Boats, to transport them over the River:
But the Chinese having likewise a considerable Fleet under the Command of the
valiant Prince Hoangchoang, endeavored to hinder their Passage. The Tartars in
their Boats fell upon the Chinese Fleet with great fury, which was as manfully
received and maintained the Fight; so that both sides fought valiantly: but at
last the Tartars were vanquished and totally routed, with a very great
slaughter of their Men. But Fortune, never constant but in her inconstancy, did
not long favor this brave General; for a while after he was most treacherously
killed by one of his Commanders, a Traitor who had long before been hired by
the Enemy to perpetrate this Villainy, one Thienus, a Native of the Province of
Leaotung, who from his very Childhood had served amongst the Chinese. And as
this Act in it self was direful, so the Events that followed had a like
miserable issue; for through the unfortunate Death of this excellent Commander,
the Chinese Affairs began infinitely to decline, and the whole Empire became a
Prey to the Tartars in a short time after.

The Traitor Thienus not satisfied in having committed this foul Action, but
resolving to add Villainy to Villainy, flies with his Men into Nanking, under
color of performing his Duty as a faithful Officer, but in truth with hopes to
effect some other Treason, as he afterward did; for the Emperor hearing of the
Death of the late General, was persuaded by this Thienus to leave the City. As
soon as the Tartars, who were got over the River with their Army, understood
that the Emperor was fled, they sent great Parties in pursuit of him, whom the
Traitor (being present) seeing approach, commanded his Men to seize him, and
then delivered him up to the Tartars in July 1645. who now having obtained what
they aimed at, did not presently put him to death, but carried him about in
Triumph, and at length brought him under the Walls of the Chief City of Peking,
there Strangled him with a Bow-string: which manner of Death is held in great
esteem amongst the Tartars. And thus the Emperor Hungquang came to his End,
before he had Reigned a complete Year. Then they caused the Youth who pretended
himself to be the Son of Zungchinius, and whom they found in Prison, to be also
Strangled; and not only these, but all others they could meet with of the Royal
Race: for it is a Custom through all Asia, that when a Kingdom is taken from
another, all the Kindred of that King are put to death by the Conqueror.

These things thus brought to pass, the Tartar Army fell upon the Chief City of
Nanking, and took the same without any resistance, or so much as ^ Blow given,
and out of an innate hatred turned the Imperial Palace (the ancient Seat of the
Emperor's Courts) and also their Tombs and Sepulchers into a heap of Stones,
yet never offered any hurt to the Inhabitants Houses. Marching thence, they
reduced all the other Cities of this Province without any opposition, they
freely submitting to avoid their Cruelty.

This Province thus settled, part of their Army was sent for Hangcheu, the first
Chief City of the Dominion of Chekiang; and the other part marched over the
River Kiang, to subdue the Southern Countries, as Kiangsi, Huquang, and
Quantung. About this City was got together the remainder of the Chinese Army
that had saved themselves by flight, where they were about to choose a new
Emperor called Louangus, of the Race of Taiminga: But he earnestly refused to
take upon him that Dignity, being contented with the Kingly Title, saying, That
when the Tartars were beaten and driven out of China, then he would accept of
it. His Reign had not continued three days, but he saw the Tartars coming to
Fight with him, and to drive him out of the Kingdom: but he not frighted
therewith, being a valiant Prince, encouraged his Men to make a manly
Resistance; which they not only promised, but faithfully performed, behaving
themselves with great Valor and Fidelity, till they were not able to hold out
any longer, being overpowered by Hunger. Whereupon Louangus, who had not his
Fellow amongst the Chinese for Civility, and a passionate Affection to his
Subjects, went to the Walls, and entreated the Tartar General upon his Knees,
that if he would forgive the City and Inhabitants, he should do with him what
he would; for he would willingly offer up himself a Sacrifice for his Subjects
safety. Which said, he forthwith delivered himself freely over to the Tartars,
who by that means became Masters of the City; yet being enraged by their
resistance, they neither had compassion on the Soldiers nor Inhabitants, but
put all to the Sword who could not save themselves by flight.

After this the Enemy took the City of Hangcheu without doing any prejudice to
the Inhabitants thereof: And from thence, by the help of Boats passing the
River Cienthang, they came before Xaoking, the most complete and uniform City
of all China, which presently submitted to their Arms without making the least
resistance. And without doubt they had taken all the other Southern Cities
without any opposition, had they not set forth an Edict, thereby commanding
every Person to cut his Hair after the Tartar fashion; upon the first hearing
of which the Chinese Commanders and Inhabitants, who have as much love for
their Hair as their Country, began to fly to their Arms, with a resolution to
fight for their Hair; which they did with such Valor and Courage, that they
beat the Tartars out of the City of Xaoking, forcing them to fly over the
River with the loss of many of their Men: And doubtless if at this time they
had pursued, they might have regained those Places they had lost; but being
satisfied in their Minds that they had thus preserved their Hair, they ceased
to pursue their Victory, only making resistance on the South side of the River,
where they so fortified themselves with the raising Bulwarks and Forts, that
the Tartar desisted for a whole Year, without making any considerable Attempt.

The People having unfortunately lost their faithful, and too zealously loving
Prince Louangus, endeavored to make another Head over them, and to create one
Lu (of the Family of Taiminga) Emperor; but he likewise refused the Imperial
Title, only taking upon him that of Restorer of the Kingdom.

The Tartars finding their Armies much weakened by the great numbers of Men they
had lost in several Battles, so that they were not in a Condition to effect any
considerable Design, sent for fresh Men from Peking to reinforce their Troops,
wherewith they endeavored to pass the River Cienthang; but notwithstanding all
the Force and Policy they could use, were not able to accomplish it. And thus
the Chinese began by degrees to recover their lost Country, which had
undoubtedly had very prosperously succeeded, if an unfortunate Accident had not
happened in the mean time, which prevented it; the Story thus:

The Soldiery and Governors of the Province of Fokien that were fled out of
Chekiang, had with them one of the Race of Taiminga, whom they Proclaimed
Emperor in the same Province, which borders upon that of Chekiang. This Prince
being of a lofty and ambitious Nature, and not being able to keep himself
within Bounds, sent some to persuade King Lu to renounce his Sovereignty, to
lay down his Government, and quit the Title of Restorer of the Kingdom;
alleging, That he had but few Cities, and was not so near allied to the former
Emperor as himself. Lu argued on the other hand, That he had the Priority of
Title by the Election and Submission of the Subjects, and his Conquests
sufficiently showed the Love he bore, and the Service he had done his Country.

The Tartars were not a little overjoyed at these Divisions, which gave them an
opportunity to work their Ends, by reducing the whole Empire under their Power;
for it was impossible to reconcile the Differences of the two new Kings, so as
they might join their Forces against the Tartar, each of them still endeavoring
what he could the ruin of the other. And in regard Lu had but eight Cities
under his Command, which were not able to maintain an Army sufficient to
grapple with the Tartar, he only stood upon the defensive part, and never durst
venture over the River; the Tartars in the mean time laboring with their utmost
endeavor to get over the River, but with Ships they durst not attempt,
understanding very well that Lu had sufficient to oppose; notwithstanding
which, Fortune too much favoring the Tartars in their Undertaking, it happened
this Year to be a very hot and dry Summer, so that the River on the South Side
was thereby grown shallow, of which they, by the information of some
treacherous Chinese, having intelligence, found out a fordable place for their
Horse, whereof a few only being got over, gave presently sudden Alarm to the
Country, that so the Inhabitants thereof fled and left all to save their Lives:
Lu himself was so surprised at the news, that he abandoned the City Xaoking,
and fled into the Island Cheuxan, situated over against Ningpo, the ninth Chief
City of the Province of Chekiang, where he lived several years after.

This Island, never inhabited before but by a company of poor Fishermen and
Peasants, is now, through the concourse of the Chinese, fled thither to aid
this Lu, as the Protector of their Hair, grown to be so great and powerful a
Kingdom, that there was reckoned in the same seventy two Cities. The Chinese
and their Protector being thus fled, the Tartars conquered all the rest of the
Cities of the Province, without meeting with any opposition; only the City of
Kinhoa, whereof the Tutang was Governor, did withstand for some Months their
victorious Arms; for the Governor was resolved to quit himself with Courage for
the Honor of his Country: but notwithstanding all his Valor and Resolution, at
last the Tartars having planted some great Guns before the City, they made a
large Breach in the Walls, at which they entered, and put all to Fire and
Sword, insomuch that they left not one House standing. The Governor himself, to
prevent falling into the Hands of the Enemy, caused himself and his Family to
be blown up with Power in his Palace.

One of the same three Armies was already upon its March, in order to the
subduing the Province of Fokien, but was in no small trouble where to begin the
same to their own least prejudice, in regard of the hinderance given to them by
the steep Hills and Mountains which lie at the entrance into this Province; for
between Fokien and the Provinces of Quantung, Kiangsi, and Chekiang, lies a row
of inaccessible Rocks and Mountains, which divide it from the other three, and
to get over the same is not only a troublesome, but tedious Journey of three
days; so that it would have been a very easy matter to the Chinese to have
hindered at least, if not stopped the Tartars in their March through these
Mountains, if they had guarded the same but with a few Peasants; but they were
so frighted and amazed at the coming of the Tartars, that they fled out of the
Mountains upon their first approach, so that at last, though with infinite
trouble, they got over them into Fokien, which they subdued in a short time;
and for that the Inhabitants made little or no opposition, the Tartars were
favorable unto them. This done, and having re-inforc'd their Army, they marched
to the Province of Quantung, through those of Huquang and Kiangsi; whither
being come, and attaquing the Chief City thereof, they soon laid it wholly
waste, because it had made some opposition against them. Moved by the terror of
whose Example, the rest of the Cities not daring to stand out, submitted at
first Summons. These Provinces thus brought under, an Army was sent for Peking,
with Orders to settle in each City a strong Garrison, and Magistrates over both
Civil and Military Affairs, in the Name of the Tartar Emperor.

But there are some that give another reason how it came to pass that the
Tartars happened to Master the Province of Fokien with so little trouble.

About this time there appeared a famous Pyrate, a Native of Fokien, by Name
Chinchilung, but Foreiners call him Iquon: This Person in his Youth well known
to the Hollanders and Spaniards, being but of mean Extraction, served the
Portugueses first of all in Maccao, in the Quality of a Servant, and afterward
the Hollanders in the Island of Formosa; but being of an aspiring and ambitious
Mind, could not brook to live under so much Subjection; wherefore retiring from
them, by specious Pretenses, he drew in a great many innocent Creatures to take
part with him, by whose help, and with a few Ships he had made shift to get
together, he turned Pyrate; in which way after a while having made some
considerable Gain, he increased very much in Shipping, at last growing so
strong therein, that he far exceeded the Chinese Emperor both in Naval Forces
and Wealth; for he drew the whole Trade of India to himself, Trafficking with
the Spaniard upon the Philippine Islands, with the Hollanders upon Formosa and
in New Batavia, and with the Portuguese in Maccao. He drove likewise a very
great Trade with those of Iapan, and other Kingdoms and Islands situate in the
great Indian Sea; so that in truth he alone was able to Export by his Power,
Men, and Ships, the Chinese Commodities out of that Empire, and to Import back
into the same the Commodities of Europe: Of which the Emperor taking notice,
after a long War that had been between them, at length a Peace was concluded,
by which in a small time he grew so very potent in Shipping, that he was able
to set forth a Fleet of three thousand Ships.

And now Success imping the Wings of this Pyrat's ambitious Thoughts, he was
not contented with this petty Greatness, but aspired at the Crown; but in
regard he knew it would be impossible for him to effect any thing so long as
any of the Race of Taiminga was remaining (for neither the Commonalty nor
Soldiery showed any Respect toward him) he conceived some hopes, that with the
help of the Tartars it would not be hard for him to extirpate that Family, and
so make the way easy to his own Advancement: Wherefore he resolved under the
Cloak of Virtue (and by that Delusion to draw the greater number to follow him)
to march against the Tartar as the common Enemy. And undoubtedly, had not this
Treason been foreseen, under that Pretense all the Chinese would have joined
with him, and looked upon him as the Restorer of their Country. But
notwithstanding this fair Pretext, in the mean time he Contracts underhand a
Confederacy with the Tartars, promising to give them the best Assistance he was
able, as indeed it does appear he did by the sequel of the Story; for this
Traitor Iquon, when the Tartars fell into Fokien, was made by Lunguvus General
of his whole Army; by which means having gotten the Power into his Hands, he
suffered the Tartars unresisted to come into the same; so that it is no wonder
why the Tartars afterward conferred upon him the Royal Dignity, and gave him
the Title of King Pingnan, which signifies One that Settles the West in Peace.
Yet notwithstanding this Service by him done to them, they did but temporize to
lull him into security, being jealous of his great Force by Sea, and suspecting
that he aspired after the Royal Diadem. Now true and most certain it is,
although the Tartars knew this very well, yet never durst they act any thing
against him with Force, but always Courted him, and made him believe that they
would give him the Government of the Provinces of Fokien and Quantung. Iquon
finding himself in such high esteem among the Tartars, doubted not at all but
that he should at least keep the Government of the Southern Provinces: But see
the inconstancy of humane Affairs, for he was very much deceived in his
expectation, and clearly outwitted; for when the Tartar Viceroy of the
Province of Fokien had resolved to go for Peking, it is a Custom for all the
Commanders to come and take leave of him, and to wish him a good Journey;
according to which Iquon, who suspected no mischief toward him, concluded in
himself to do the like Honor to this Petty King: and thereupon departing from
his Fleet, which he left in the Harbor of the Chief City of Focheu, he went
thither and joined with the Company to conduct the King some part of his Way;
but when he came to take leave, the King earnestly desired him to bear him
company quite through to Peking, promising to do him great Honor upon his
arrival there for such his Favor. Iquon now too late began to grow jealous,
endeavoring by all the most plausible Allegations imaginable to excuse himself,
but the King would admit of no Denial. And thus this famous Pyrate was easily
taken in a Net by subtilty, who was not to be meddled with, or overcome by Force
of Arms; for he was no sooner arrived at Peking, but he was cast into Prison,
where he lay sometime in Captivity, and was afterward not publicly Executed,
but made away by Poison. His Sons and Brothers, when they heard of his
Imprisonment, quickly went aboard their Fleet, wherewith since that time they
have done very great Damage, and still continue their Pyracies to this day.

In the interim the other Army, which was got through the Island Quarters into
Quantung, was from thence upon their March for the Province of Quangsi, to
reduce the same likewise under their Power. But in this Undertaking their
Forces were often worsted by the Chinese, who made the greatest opposition
where it was least expected.

At that time one Khiu Thomas (who was Baptized by the Jesuits, and had
embraced the Christian Religion) was Viceroy of the same Province, and one
Ching Lucus was General over the Militia: These two Warriors and valiant
Commanders having gotten together a very great Army, fell so furiously upon the
Tartars, that they not only drove them out of the Field, but also re-took such
Places as they had won toward the West.

Prosperity seeming thus to begin to smile, these valiant Chinese, willing to
show they were not ambitious, made one Iunglieus Emperor, one of the Family of
Taiminga, being a Grandchild of the Emperor Vanlieus: He kept his Court at
first in Queilin, the principal Chief City of the Province of Quangsi, hoping
thereby to draw other Chinese to take up Arms against the Tartar: But soon
after he went and removed his Court to the famous City of Chatting in the
Province of Quantung, where continuing, he got the better of the Tartars in
several Battles. But the ill Fate of the Empire diverted his good Fortune, so
that he did not continue successful any long time, but was quickly overcome and
driven out of Quangsi and Quantung, and from thence constrained to fly to the
Frontiers of Tungking.

No sooner was the Viceroy of Fokien upon his Journey to Peking with Iquon,
but it seemed as if the People of that Province and Quangsi had taken fresh
Courage, there happening a very great and sudden alteration in the Tartar
Affairs; for one Vangus a Priest, who had formerly been a Commander in the
Army, set the whole Country in an uprore, and having raised a great number of
Men, and modeled them into an Army, he went and took the City of Kienning with
several other Places, and put all the Tartars therein to the Sword; which good
Success immediately caused such Chinese as had formerly fled into the
Mountains for safety, to come down and join with him, to help to recover their
Country. At the same time one Changus by Name, and a Tartar born, being
Viceroy of two Provinces, had the Command likewise of the Province of
Chekiang; who hearing of the Insurrection in Fokien, marched immediately
thither with his Army, and finding no opposition at the mouth of the Mountains,
where he supposed the Chinese would have blocked up his Passage, which a few
Forces would easily have done, he cries out with a loud voice, The Day is my
(...), and the Rebels are fled. So marching over the Mountains without any
opposition, he lays Siege immediately to the City of Kienning, into which the
Priest Vangus was retreated with most of his Army. The City endured a long
Siege for several Months, and was of such Strength, that it could not be taken
by Storm, which had been often attempted by the Besiegers, to their great
damage and loss of Men; wherefore at last they resolved to get it by Famine,
rather than lose any more Men by Storming, whereby he had already very much
weakened his Army; but that being recruited with fresh Men from Peking, and
having made a considerable Breach in the Wall by their Ordnance, they resolved
to Storm it once more, and the Success answered their Desire; for the
Commanders within the Place being divided among themselves, there was not such
care taken as ought to have been for the resisting of the Assault, by which
means the Besiegers getting in at the Breach, immediately cut out their Way and
put all to the Sword, neither Man, Woman, nor Child excepted, so that (dirum
dictu) there were killed in and before this City above three hundred thousand
People, and the City it self afterward totally destroyed, and not one Stone
left standing upon another. After the dreadful destruction of this City, the
whole Province of Fokien submitted to their Power, and for the future none but
Tartars were made Commanders over the Militia, and Governors of Cities: But
notwithstanding all this great and prudent foresight which was used, the
Tartars were not able to keep all quiet; for it happened that the Governor of the
Province of Kiangsi, named Kinus, revolted and made new work for their Arms;
the occasion whereof is said to be upon some difference which happened between
Kinus and the other who supervis'd the Civil Affairs of the same Province; the
manner thus: They being invited to an Entertainment where a Play was Acted
during the Meal, as the Custom is in China, and the Players Dressed in Chinese
Habits, and not after the fashion of the Tartars; Kinus (who was born in the
Province of Leaotung, where they very much resemble the Tartars in their
Customs and Manners, and therefore put a very great confidence in the
Inhabitants) minding the same, said to the other Governor, Does not this Habit
show much better than the Tartar Fashion? The other answered nothing at
present, yet thought himself obliged in Duty to acquaint the Emperor by Letter
with this Saying; for he fancied that by these words Kinus was designing some
Novelty in his Head, to the disturbance of the Public Peace, and imagining he
bore the greatest affection to those whose Habit he chiefly commended: Kinus,
who wanted neither Courage nor Ingenuity, had Bribed the Secretary of this
Governor, by whom he was informed from time to time of all was writ to the
Emperor against him; and being acquainted with the Contents of the aforesaid
Letter, he went immediately with a Company of Soldiers into the Governor's
Court, and there killed him on a sudden before he was aware. Having done this,
he falls off from the Tartars, with the whole Province of Kiangsi, and declares
for the Chinese Emperor Iunglieus, at which the Inhabitants were not a little
overjoyed; only the City of Cancheu, which was Commanded and Governed by a very
faithful Tartar, was not to be brought over to countenance the Revolt, which
happened very well for the Tartar; for the standing out of this single Place
alone was of such consequence, that the Tartars (as I shall relate hereafter)
did victoriously recover the whole Province of Kiangsi and Quantung, and
brought them once more under Subjection.

The General of the Militia in the Province of Quantung, called Licungzus, was
likewise at the same time revolted from the Tartars, and had delivered up that
part of the Country to the Emperor Iunglieus, whom also the Southern Part owned
for the Emperor of China. And for the better prosecution of the Design against
the Tartars, the General Licungzus endeavored to join his Forces with those of
Kinus, to fall both together at one and the same time upon them, and drive them
out of the Kingdom; which undoubtedly had taken effect accordingly, had not the
resistance of the Governor of the City Cancheu hindered them: for the same
Governor was no sooner informed that Licungzus was likewise revolted from the
Tartar, and upon his March with his Army, but he sends to him this deceitful
and politic Letter.

Till now I would never submit to Kinus, because I could never believe that he
would be able to withstand the Forces of the Tartars; but seeing that you, most
valiant Prince, also turn your Arms against him, I cannot conceive what Safety
and Protection I can henceforward expect from him; therefore I hold my self
obliged to follow your Standard, and you shall no sooner appear with your
Forces before this City, but I will deliver it up into your Hands.


After the Governor had dispatched away an Express with this Letter, he sent
another to the General of the Tartars, who lay with his Forces in the next
Province to Fokien, to assist him with what Strength he could well spare; which
were sent, and by him conveyed into the City by Night, so that no notice could
be taken of his Design. Licungzus in the mean while not suspecting any
Treachery intended against him, boldly, but carelessly, went up to the City, and
found the Gates thereof standing open, so that without delay he entered, and
immediately found himself assaulted on all sides by the Tartars, who lay in
Ambuscade waiting for his coming, and was forced to retreat with great loss:
Licungzus himself, as is supposed, was killed in the Fight, because he was
never heard of afterward.

This Defeat brought the Affairs of the Emperor Iunglieus into great disorder
and confusion, yet nevertheless Kinus won afterward several Battles for him
against the Tartars; and when he heard of the Defeat of Licungzus, went himself
and Beleaguered the City of Cancheu; but he had ^ot continued the Siege many
days, before there was advice brought him of a new Army of Tartars sent from
Peking to reduce the Province of Kiangsi; insomuch that Kinus fearing to fall
into a Noose, broke up his Siege, and marched toward the Northern parts of
Kiangsi, to defend and preserve the same from being overcome by the Tartars. At
first indeed he fought with good success; but at last finding himself
overpowered, he retreated for safety to the Chief City of Nanchang; which
having suffered all the miseries of a tedious Siege, was at last taken; but
Kinus escaped alive out of it, and got to the Mountains, as has been already
related at large. This City thus subdued, they were Masters of the whole
Province, and put new Garrisons into most of the Cities and Places of Concern,
and so marched back with their Army in triumph to Peking.

While these Transactions were on foot, very great Preparations for War had
been making in Peking, so that three new Armies were raised to reduce the
Province of Quantung, and others which still held forth, and took part with
Iunglieus. Whereupon the Guardian and Uncle of the Grand Tartar Cham, called
Xunchi, who now Reigns in China, the better to reduce the Southern Provinces
into Subjection, and rectify their Disorder, resolved to appoint some
Viceroys over those Provinces, who being Tartars by Nation should have
absolute Power, only with Obligation to pay Tribute yearly to the Emperor. This
Counsel was immediately put in Execution, and in the Year 1649. (when the
Province of Kiangsi was full of uprore) three Viceroys were sent with three
Armies, which consisted for the most part of Tartars, from Peking; the one was
made Viceroy of Fokien, the other of Quantung, and the third of Quangsi, with
express Order to endeavor jointly the subduing, reducing, and total conquering
of Quantung, and to drive the Emperor Iunglieus out of the whole Empire.

Hitherto we have only spoken of what happened in the Southern Provinces
concerning the Chinese Revolts; we shall now proceed to give an Account how
Affairs went in the Northern Provinces; by which it will appear with how much
Zeal the Chinese were concerned for their Liberties and the Welfare of their
Country; for the Commanders in Chief over the Northern Provinces as well those
that had the Power over the Civil as Military Affairs, plotted together which
way they should drive out the Tartars: Whereupon they raised as many Forces as
they could privately, and chose one House to be their General; who coming to the
Army, which he found to consist of about twenty five thousand Men, marched
therewith from among the Mountains into the Plain Country; whereupon many of
the Natives perceiving his Strength, came in to him, and several Cities set
open their Gates and received him and his Army, only Xigan, the first Chief
City of Xensi, withstood him, being in truth compelled thereto, having a strong
Garrison of Tartars in it; besides, the Governor thereof having observed that
the Chinese made no resistance, but rather freely submitted to him, and
fearing lest the Citizens might carry on some private Design against him,
resolved to put to Death all the Chinese within the City; which he had
undoubtedly put in execution, had he not been dissuaded from it by one of the
Viceroys; yet still jealous of them, and willing to prevent any Conspiracy by
them, he forbad upon pain of Death, that any more than two Chinese should
converse together at a time, and that none should walk the Streets in the
Night, nor keep any Arms in their Houses.

Not yet satisfied with all this Care, but to be thoroughly informed of the
Forces of House, he sends out Spies to bring him intelligence of the Strength
and Posture of the Enemies; at last House comes with his Army, (which now
increased with the conflux of Country People that sheltered themselves there,
amounted at least to the number of three hundred thousand) and Besieged Xigan,
which is at least three Miles in compass. When the Tartar Governor saw from the
Walls such a vast number of Men, he stood amazed, as supposing they had been
all Soldiers, which caused him again to pass a second cruel Resolution, to make
away all the Chinese Inhabitants within the City, to prevent any Correspondence
between them and House; but finding that those that served him, and were sent
out to fight, behaved themselves valiantly, he forbore to execute such a
barbarous Resolve. In the mean time House perceiving that no Attempt he could
make would prevail against the City, broke up the Siege; which he was the
rather induced to do, because he had received intelligence that a strong Army
was upon their March for relief of the same: House endeavored to save himself by
a timely flight, but the Tartar Horse overtook the Rere of his Army, and killed
a great number of them; but what became of him was never known, in regard he
never after appeared publicly; and indeed it is more than probable that he was
either killed in the Fight, or ended his days in the Mountains.

And thus the Chinese effected as little by their Insurrections and Plottings
against the Tartar in the Northern Provinces, as they had done in the Southern;
for there followed nothing upon it but a total destruction of their Cities, and
the ruin both of the People and Country, drawn upon themselves, and with the
greatest severity executed in revenge of their Revolt.

The Tartars having thus successfully pacified all these Troubles and
Commotions, could not yet be at Peace, but fell again into other as great
Dangers and Difficulties as the former, which they brought upon themselves by
their own Pride and Wantonness; for in the Year 1649. the young Imperial Cham
Xunchius having attained the Age of twelve years, was desired by his Uncle to
take to Wife the Daughter of the King of West-Tartary, otherwise called The
Kingdom of Taniju; which Alliance would not only strengthen him, but also would
be a means to establish him in his Throne. To that end one of his Uncles was
sent in Embassy to the same King; in which Journey he happened to pass through
Taitung, the third Chief City, and called The Key of the Province of Xansi; for
it is a very strong Place, and serves as a Bulwark and Defense against the
Invasions of those Western Tartars into China: moreover, it is reported the
most famous of all others for the beautiful Women which live there. The Tartars
who attended on this Ambassador, in their Passage through this Place ravished
and took away some of these Women, and amongst the rest a Bride of great
Quality, as she was carried by chance through the Street to the House of her
Bridegroom; a thing that is held very abominable among the Inhabitants of
Taitung. At this time was one Kiangus, a Commander in the Army, Governor of
that Province for the Tartars; to whom the Friends and Relations of the Virgin
that was carried away by force, came and complained with Tears in their Eyes:
Kiangus, who took compassion of them, in regard of the Injustice and Villainy of
the Fact, sent immediately one of his Attendants to the Viceroy* Panang, with
request, that he would be pleased to give Order that the ravished Bride might
be restored to her Bridegroom, for that he was grown distracted upon the loss
of her; desiring also that care might be taken to prevent the like Abuses for
the future. But the Viceroy gave no heed to this Request of the Governor, but
suffered the Tartars to go away with the Rape unquestioned; which Kiangus took
so to heart, that he went to the Viceroy himself in Person, who not only
refused to give him Audience upon it, but commanded him to be put out of his
Court.

Kiangus boiling with Revenge at this uncivil Carriage of the Viceroy toward
him, swore that he would never serve those that countenance such abominable
Actions; and not long after having drawn his Forces together, he came with them
and fell upon Panang in his Court, killing the greatest part of his Followers;
but Panang saved himself by being let down with a Rope over the Walls; and so
escaped with his Life. Kiangus hereupon, knowing that what he had done, was a
sufficient cause to make him lose his Head, if he fell into the Hands of the
Tartars, sets up his Standard, and promises to submit himself to the Chinese
Emperor, but names none in particular, for he knew not that Iunglieus was
elected to that Dignity, being at so great a distance from him. He likewise
used all Endeavors to draw the Chinese to take part with him, and to stand up
for the regaining the Liberties of their Country, which by the unheard of
Oppressions of the Tartars they had lost. Several Commanders and Officers
hearing of this, came and joined with him, so that by this Revolt of Kiangus
new Troubles were arisen in the Emperor's Court at Peking, and the more in
regard the Western Tartars favored him, who were able to bring more Men into
the Field than the Eastern, especially Horse, of which they have great plenty,
whereas there are but few in the other.

Now to nip these Risings in the Bud, which were made by the means of Kiangus,
a very great Army was forthwith raised in Peking, and sent against him.
Kiangus, who was no less wise than valiant, and very well understood the Humors
of the Tartars, having Conversed many years with them, at first seemed as if he
were afraid to stay the coming of the Enemy, for he fled with his Forces; but
this was done only out of Policy to draw them to pursue after him, having by
the Way laid an Ambuscade for them; which took good effect, the Tartars being
thereby set upon and defeated; and after they had rallied, were beaten in the
open Field a second time. The news of this double Defeat being brought to
Peking, occasioned again new Troubles in the Court, especially when they heard
that Kiangus his Army consisted of above a hundred thousand Horsemen, and four
hundred thousand Foot; of which great multitude there is no wonder, for every
Person was glad of his Success, and ready to follow him as the Redeemer of
their Country from the Tartar Slavery.

When now the Emperor's Uncle understood with how great Success this Kiangus
proceeded, he resolved to march himself with all the Forces the Empire was able
to make against him; for he durst not trust any with a Concern, upon which
depended the Welfare of the whole State. He therefore causes the eight
Standards, under whom march all the whole Tartar Militia to be made ready for
the War; and accordingly, that he might lose no time, draws forth the choicest
Soldiers of this great Body, wherewith he marches against Kiangus, to chastise
him for his Revolt, strengthening himself also by the Way with the addition of
many more Forces, which he had from the Southern Provinces: But although he
Commanded a very great Army, yet he avoided by all means Fighting with Kiangus,
who gave him occasion, and provoked him on purpose to draw him to Battle. But
the Tartar took a better course, fearing the uncertain event of War in a
Battle, and knowing how to overcome his Enemy at a far cheaper rate, as being
but ill furnished with Provisions; and therefore he resolved to delay him so
long, till he should be compelled to leave the Field for want of Victuals and
other Necessaries: besides, another reason that made him unwilling to give
Battle was, because he first desired to receive an Answer from the Western
Tartar King, to whom he had sent an Ambassador with very rich Presents, and
several handsome Women, with order also to demand his Daughter in Marriage for
the Emperor his Nephew, and request him not to give any Assistance to Kiangus
the Rebel. And so much operation had this Embassy upon the King of Taniju or
West-Tartary, that he returned the Ambassador immediately with a satisfactory
Answer, and Promise, that he would continue from thence-forward in Peace and
Amity with the Great Cham. Kiangus also having sent thither for Aid, but
finding himself frustrated in his Expectation, and deserted, thought it most
advisable for him to make toward the City of Taitung; into which he was no
sooner entered, but the Tartar Forces were at his Heels, and got to the very
Gates; and in the space of three days, with the help of the Peasants, who were
compelled to come in, a deep Trench of ten Miles in circumference was drawn
round about it: Whereupon Kiangus, finding himself thus penned up, and that no
Relief was to be expected, but he must either be killed or starved, like a
valiant Commander thus bespake his Men: You see, Fellow Soldiers, into what a
Strait we are reduced, there being no hopes to escape but by Fighting like Men,
the Sword on one side, and Hunger on the other encompassing us; let us not
suffer our selves to perish with Hunger, but rather with our Swords in our
Hands dearly sell them our Lives, or with their hazard, cut the Way to our
Safety through our Enemies Carcases; I for my part will die with my Zable in my
Hand. He had no sooner ended his Speech, but he and all his Forces made a Sally
out into the Trench, where both sides fought for a while with equal Courage,
till Kiangus unhappily struck with a Dart, fell down dead, at the very sight
whereof the Chinese despairing of making their Way through the Enemy, some
flung down their Arms and called for Quarter, others betaking themselves to
Fight; such as submitted freely to the Tartars, had their Lives spared, for
they now thought they had done enough in overcoming so great and dreaded an
Enemy, whose Power would have endangered the loss of the whole Empire. After
they had cleared the Field, and totally routed and destroyed the Chinese Army,
they marched into the City Taitung, whose Plunder was given to the victorious
Soldiers: And not long after the General, having first taken care for the
settling of good Garrisons in all Places, marched back in triumph to Peking,
where he was received with great joy. And now having thus subdued the Rebels,
and made all things to become peaceable and quiet, he bends all his Thoughts to
accomplish the Match between the Emperor his Nephew, and the Daughter of the
King of West-Tartary; and to that end he takes a Journey thither in Person, and
through his crafty Behavior at last obtained his Suit, and also License for
the Exportation of a great number of Horses. The Wedding was kept in very great
State; for the Tartar Kings maintain in Marriage the same Customs with those of
Europe, Matching only with the Daughters of the highest Quality; whereas the
Chinese Emperors were wont to choose only for Beauty, making no difference
between a Person of Quality, and one of a mean Extraction; for if the Face do
but please them, they mind not the Quality; as a testimony whereof, most true
it is, that the Father of the last Chinese Empress maintained himself by making
Shoes of Straw.

But to return to the three Viceroys, who were made by the Tartars Governors
over the three Provinces of Fokien, Quantung, and Quangsi, and sent with three
Armies to reduce Quantung, drive out the Emperor Iunglieus, and pacify the
Disorders in the Southern Provinces: They took their Journey through a Country
which the Tartar Emperor had given to some Tartars (for the native Chinese, by
reason of their Conspiracy, were all put to the Sword) to inhabit and cultivate
the same, they requested of the Viceroys, that they might accompany them upon
the Way; for in truth these People ever had an aversion to Husbandry, loving
their Arms better than the Plough or Spade: But two of the Viceroys denied
their Request without leave from the Emperor; the third only, called Kengus,
being of a high and lofty Spirit, permitted them to follow him; so they
abandoned the Country, and exchanged their Spades and Ploughs for Boughs and
Arrows, following their Countrymen with great joy. As soon as the Emperor
heard of it, he writes a Letter to Kengus, with express Command to send them
back to their Husbandry; but Kengus taking no notice thereof, suffered them to
continue their March with him: whereof the Emperor having a second time notice,
in a great Rage sends to the chief Tutang or Governor of the Southern
Provinces, who held his Court at Nanking, either to imprison or kill Kengus.
The Tutang forthwith obeys the Emperor's Order; for after the three Viceroys
were arrived at Nanking, and had been nobly Treated by the Tutang, he pulls out
his Letter and Order, showing them to Kengus; who knowing that no Excuse would
be admitted, goes immediately and hangs himself; however, his Son, who
accompanied him in the Wars, succeeded him in his Place, by Order of the
Emperor. After this the other two Viceroys through the Provinces of Xantung,
Kiangsi, and Nanking, at last arriving at Quantung, with an intention,
according to their Commission, to reduce that Province, and to force Iunglieus
to fly thence: and indeed, no sooner was the Report of the coming of these
three Armies spread through the Countries, but most Places submitted freely,
only the Chief City of Canton or Quancheu endured a long and hard Siege, and
made great and valiant opposition, yet was at last taken by Treachery in the
Year 1650. all the Inhabitants being put to the Sword, and the City levelled
with the Ground.

After the taking of Canton, all the adjacent Cities and Places sent
Ambassadors to the Viceroys, with Promises of Submission if they might have
their Lives spared; which was freely granted them. Then the Viceroy marched
with his Army to the City Chaiking, where the Emperor Iunglieus kept his Court
at that time; who hearing of his coming, durst not stay for him, but left the
City and Province, and fled to that of the Dominion of Quangsi; but being
narrowly and closely pursued, he was necessitated to betake himself to the
Confines of the Kingdom of Tungking, where what became of him is not since that
time certainly known.

In the Year 1651. died the faithful Uncle of the Tartar Emperor, to the great
grief and lamentation of all People; for he was a Prince of great Valor,
Prudence, and Experience, and to whose happy Conduct the Conquest of China is
chiefly to be attributed: Not only the Tartars, but the Chinese themselves
loved and feared him, for his Understanding in Martial Affairs, and his
otherwise civil Comportment and Integrity. And as good Men always die too soon,
so was he hardly cold but great Divisions happened in the Court, by means of one
of the Emperor's Brothers called Quintus, who would take upon him the
Guardianship and Direction of the young Emperor, against the wills and minds of
all the rest; for they were of opinion, that the Emperor Xunchius being now
arrived at the Age of sixteen years, was sufficiently qualified to take upon
himself the Management of all the Affairs of the State: But ambitious Quintus
alleged, that the Emperor was not yet of an Age capable to take upon him the
great and weighty Affairs of the Empire; and therefore insisted that the
Direction and Management of Affairs might be committed to him till the young
Prince should attain his full Age: But finding that he was generally opposed by
all the Grandees of the Court, and that it was impossible for him to attain his
Ends, he at last concurred with the Opinions of all the rest; and the young
Cham of Tartary is Crowned, and the whole weight of the Government unanimously
thrown upon his Shoulders; which he managed with such Judgment, that in a short
time he gave sufficient proof of his Abilities, and not only his desire, but
intention to do Justice; insomuch that when some dangerous Counsels which his
deceased Uncle had in his Lifetime given came to break out, he caused his dead
Body to be taken out of the Tomb, and be most shamefully misused, and the Tomb
to be broken in pieces: nor ended he there; for those of his Uncle's Relations
who were privy and consenting to the said Counsel, were likewise handled with
extreme severity.

Thus far have I spent in setting forth particularly, how and in what manner
the Robber Licungzus first overran China, and after his Expulsion how the
Tartars at last conquered the same: Now you are to remember, that contemporary
with Licungzus was another Thief called Changlianchus, the remaining
Transactions of whose Villainy, whereof we have already in part made mention, I
shall now relate: And indeed when I call to mind the Cruelties committed by
this Monster in Man's shape, I am as one deprived of his Senses; for his Actions
were so dismal and horrid, that whoever hears of them, will be filled with
stupefaction and amazement.

This Robber Changlianchus plundered and ruined several Provinces, putting the
Inhabitants to unspeakable Tortures, to make them confess where they had hid
their Wealth and Goods; he was greatly delighted to put out Peoples Eyes, and
to see Men die in misery. His Design was really to have depopulated the whole
Country of China, that so being alone, there might be none left to oppose him,
or be his Competitor: And although the barbarousness of his Nature appeared
every where, and upon all occasions, yet did he give a proof of his Cruelty in
no Place more than in the Province of Suchuen, where he took upon him the Royal
Title, and put most of the Inhabitants to death. He would frequently cause a
whole Family to be utterly destroyed, if any one of them had not obeyed his
Orders according to his will and mind. He abounded so very much in Feral
Barbarism, that oftentimes if by chance any one had offended him, he would
cause all the Inhabitants residing within the same Street to undergo the Fury
of his inhumane and bestial rage.

He was civil and kind to none but his Soldiers, with whom he would Converse
and Drink as if he had been but their Companion; and many times would bestow
great Presents upon them, if they had performed any thing well, and according
to his mind; yet on the other hand, for the least Offense or Neglect, he made
nothing to put multitudes of them to death. And which is yet more, this bloody
Caitiff's Butchery extended to very Magistrates, but in special manner to those
of the Chief City of Chingtu of the Province of Suchuen, so that of six
hundred, in the space of three years were hardly twenty left that escaped with
their Lives; and it was a Recreation to see and cause People to be flayed alive.

When this Blood-thirsty Tyrant endeavored to take the Chief City of the
Province of Xensi (which in regard of its Strength is called The Key of Suchuen
and Xensi) he came in the Year 1645. before it with a very great Army of at
least a hundred and eighty thousand Natives of the Province only, beside a vast
number of others out of several other Provinces. When the Siege had continued a
long time, (for the Inhabitants defended themselves with wonderful Courage)
there ran over to the Besieged at least forty thousand Men out of his Camp,
which troubled and provoked the Tyrant so much, that he caused the remainder of
a hundred and eighty thousand Men of Suchuen to be cruelly massacred and
murdered by their other Fellow Soldiers, before his Face.

When he heard that the Tartars in the Year 1646. were fallen with their Forces
into the Province of Xensi, he found himself necessitated, to prevent such an
unquiet and troublesome Neighborhood, to march against them; but lest the
Inhabitants of Suchuen, to many of whom he had been so cruel, should conspire
against him in his absence, he caused them all to be put to death, except such
as live toward the North-East: Then he marched first to Chingtu, the principal
Chief City of the Province of Suchen, and caused all its Inhabitants both Rich
and Poor, being above six hundred thousand in number, to be bound by his
Soldiers, and afterward miserably slain; by the effusion of whose Blood the
Chinese write, that the Water of the great River Kiang, which runs before the
City, was extraordinarily swelled and raised. The dead Bodies that they might
not taint or infect the Air, were flung into the River, which being carried
down with the Stream, soon brought this mournful news to the neighboring Cities
and Places, viewing what they were like to expect, if they resisted not the
fierceness of that merciless Beast; which though they did with all their Might,
yet it was not long before the same cruel usage reached many of them. And after
this manner was this Province, which formerly abounded with People, laid waste
and made desolate both of People and Habitations.

These Villainies perpetrated, and being now to march against the Tartars, he
encourages his Soldiers to behave themselves valiantly, for that he had Silver
enough to reward such as did well; but in regard the Women (as he supposed)
would be a trouble to them, not only upon their March, but in the Battle, he
caused them to be put to death, therein showing them the way; for of three
hundred beautiful Women which he used for his own lustful Pleasure, he reserved
only twenty to wait upon his three Queens, all the other being massacred in
view of the whole Army: whereupon the Soldiers following his barbarous and
bloody Example, did the like, either by Shot or Sword killing their Wives in a
most wretched manner.

Having destroyed all the Inhabitants of the Province, and no more left to
exercise his Cruelty upon, he fell upon the Cities and Houses, laying them
waste, and not leaving any one Place standing wheresoever his ruining Feet
trod; nay, more to show his hatred to Posterity, he caused all the Trees to be
felled and cut down, that so no body for the future should have any benefit by
them after him; such as were sick and not able to follow the Camp, he caused
likewise to be hanged up, to prevent them (as he scoffingly said) from living
or dying in pain and misery.

After all this barbarous Havoc and Desolation made, this Enemy of Mankind
passed with his Army into the Province of Xensi, whither the General of the
Tartars followed him at the Heels with an Army of fifty thousand Men, un^^l the
residue of the whole Army could get up to him. When the news was brought him,
that the Tartars were in sight of him with a great Army, he laughed at those
that reported such a Fable (as he thought it) not believing it possible that
such a thing could be, till going out of his Tent himself, to make the
discovery, the first Object that he met with, was the sight of five Tartars,
who according to the Custom of those People, were sent out before to discover
and demand whether he would have Peace or War; but in stead thereof they
presently fell upon him, and the first Arrow that was shot pierced him quite
through the Heart; wherewith falling down dead upon the Place, it struck so
great a fear into all his Followers, that they were soon overthrown. The news
of this Victory was quickly spread abroad, upon the report of which such
Tartars as were left alive, and had escaped the bloody Hands of the Traitor in
the Province of Suchuen, came out of their Holes, and cried up the Victors as
their Deliverers: And thus at length the Province of Suchuen fell under the
Subjection of the Tartars, who putting Garrisons into the chiefest Places,
marched back with their Army to the Imperial City of Peking; where upon their
Arrival the General of the Army, though he returned victorious, yet so slippery
are the Stations of Great Men, was very unworthily received by his Brother, who
accused him of Neglect, in that he had not well performed his Charge. The
faithful General with this disgraceful Affront was put into so violent a
Passion, as being conscious of his own Merit, and knowing that he had deserved
the greatest Thanks imaginable for what he had done, he flung his Tartar Hat
upon the Ground, which is taken by them for a sign or token of great
Disrespect; and therefore (O base Reward for Fidelity!) he was condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment; but this valiant and generous Spirit prevented it, by
hanging himself beforehand in his Palace.

The Tartars having cleared the Kingdom of the two great Robbers, Licungzus and
Changlianchus, they immediately endeavored by all fair means to settle the
Kingdom in Peace and Quietness; which they shortly to their great satisfaction
and content brought to pass, and enjoy the same at this time without any
further disturbance.

FINIS.
A NARRATIVE OF THE SUCCESS OF AN EMBASSAGE SENT BY John Maatzuyker de Badem,
GENERAL OF BATAVIA UNTO THE EMPEROR OF China and Tartary, The 20th of July
1655. Soliciting a License of Trade in the Ports of his Empire.
Dedicated to Antonio de Camera, Captain General of the City of The Name of
God, with the Magistrates thereof.
Written by a Jesuit in those Parts.
THREE things have I earnestly coverted ever since my first arrival in China,
and frequently have implored them from Heaven: The first is, Union and Concord
among Christian Princes. The second, that I might live to see our native
Country of Portugal Governed by a natural King. The third, that I might also
see before my departure hence, those Countries which the Hollanders have
Conquered from us, recovered out of their Hands. From the Object of these my
Desires it will be easy to understand the Motive from whence they proceed,
which is no other than to remove the Obstacles, and make the Way plain to the
present Maintenance and farther Propagation of the Roman Catholic Faith.

Thus in the Year 1648. being newly delivered from that Imprisonment, Famine,
and other Calamities, which I endured within the Province of Sienchuen, under
the Tyrant which there Rebelled, I came to the Port at Peking, and was there
encountered with the news of our new, or rather our old King (for he cannot
cease to be a King, who continues such in his Subjects Breasts, and was always
one by Birthright) like a new Sun rising in the West in Lisbon: which although
it came to pass contrary to the Laws of neighbor Kings, yet no ways contrariant
to the Laws of Nature. I say, when I heard this News, it caused such a Iubilee
to my Soul, and Joy to my Heart, and raised in me such great hopes of spreading
the Christian Religion, as I could then only feel within my self, and am not
able to express; being moreover satisfied, that our new King, and his glorious
Achievements in Brasile did promise no less in these Eastern Countries. May
the Lord accomplish these Desires, and grant the happy End that my Heart longs
for.

But that GOD might either show us our Sins, which have so justly deserved
Punishment; or that he might manifest the Bowels of his Mercy and singular
Providence which he has over his People, especially the Holy Catholic City of
Maccow; he has permitted the Hollanders to become her Rivals in this Empire,
and to Court it for their Establishment, Alliance, and Commerce with it. This
indeed did rebate the edge of our Minds, and reduce your Favor to more remiss
degrees, though not wholly extinguish it: for four of us, Brethren of the
Society of JESUS, then living at Court, resuming our Courage with blooming
Hopes, resolved to leave no Medium unessay'd to overthrow those Hollanders
Designs, and with all Diligence and Vigilance to vacuate their Undertakings.

What Success the Hollanders had in their first Expedition to Canton many years
past, I have already written to your Lordships; therefore I shall only meddle
with the second Encounter, and by how much fiercer that was with an Enemy
furnished with all the Habiliments of War, to wit, Plenty of Gold and Silver,
the most prevailing Weapons for the conquering of Countries and Great Ones; and
of all other Rarities adapted to satisfy both Covetousness and Curiosity, as
the most powerful Engines against such Soldiers; by so much was our Conflict
more grievous, and consequently the Victory more glorious: so has it many
things worthy to be published. The Lord grant (for it has ever been my
faithful Petition to him, and may your Lordships make it yours, with your whole
trust in him) that as your Lordships and my self also at a great distance have
beheld with our Eyes the Hope of my second Desire fulfilled (for we have seen
the Desire of all Nations, our King, our Father) so you may see the first and
third part of my Wishes, to the Glory of God, the Honor of the Crown of
Portugal, and the increase of Christianity.

Access to Canton being precluded to the Hollanders at their first Attempt, and
Trade denied them, those Reguli which Rule that Province, allured with the
hopes of that extraordinary Gain they expected to make by Commerce with the
Dutch, Counseled them to return on a second Embassage, which they accordingly
entered upon the 20th of July 1655. and arrived in Canton the fifth of September
the same Year, where from those Reguli they had a very friendly Reception; but
because they could obtain no Audience above to their first Message, they were
fearful to proffer a second, lest the King and Council should suspect it to
arise only from the hopes of their own Advantage and Self-interest; they
therefore so wrought with the Viceroy of Canton, that he should send this
second Memorial of their Desires, which, accompanied with many Commendatory
Letters to Courtiers, and strengthened a world of large Promises, came at length
to Peking, about the Year 1655. and presently, no man opposing, it was decreed,
That twenty Hollanders (to wit, two Captains, and eighteen others) should
repair to the Court, where they were promised a convenient House, with many
other Kindnesses; and that after their appearance, their Business should be
transacted according to the Customs and Laws of the Realm.

Fifteen days after this Memorial came to the Court, we had notice of it, when
Padrie Lodouicus Ballionies, and my self, immediately entered the Lists, and
searched after all means possible to hinder the Hollanders access to the Court.
We consulted with our Friends, both Christians and Heathens, who were all of
opinion, that it was impossible for this time, (at least without vast Bribes)
because those Reguli of Canton had corrupted the Great Mandorins, and opened
all the Dooas of the Court unto them.

Notwithstanding all this Zeal for the Public Good, the Progress of
Christianity, the Love of our Country, and especially of this noble City (to
which we allow so much) did invite, yea, compel us to an Undertaking, the
accomplishment of which seemed impossible to all Men. By the Mediation of a
certain Christian, of no contemptible Condition and Authority, we first
compassed to speak with one of these Mandorins, which the Chinese call Colli,
and we may style The Master of Requests, whose Office is to acquaint the
Emperor with the Misdemeanors of the whole Empire, and particularly with the
Exorbitances of the Mandorins: He at our first Address readily undertook the
Business, and seemed to promise himself an happy issue of it. Hereupon we
delivered him certain Heads to frame a Petition, of which he accepted; but a
few days being passed, when we thought he had made some progress in the
Business, he comes to the Christian beforementioned, and thus excuses himself:
Sir, if those Padrees who are Strangers be ignorant, yet you who are Natives
must be acquainted with the manner of doing Business in this Court, to wit,
That whose Petitions either I, or any other in the same Office with me, do
exhibit, proceeds always from these two Reasons; either that we may avenge our
selves of our Enemies, or that we are hired to it by some great Reward from him
in whose Name the Petition runs: Now I have received no Injury from the
Hollanders to be avenged of, nor any Gratuity from those Padrees, that I should
thrust my my self into so much difficulty and danger for them. This Man
therefore we left, and applied our selves to anther, who plainly told us, That
if we would give him two hundred Tays, he would plight his Faith to deliver our
Petition, with whatever Articles we should insert, only he would not oblige
himself that the Emperor should approve of them; but if we would give him six
hundred Tays more, he would be bound they should be granted; and in case they
were not, he would repay the whole Eight hundred Tays.

Considering the weightiness of the Mattir, and the Liberty which your
Lordships gave us in your Letters, to undertake for any Sum of Money that we
found necessary to effect this Business, with your Engagement that the City of
Maccow should make good the Payment, we promised him the whole Sum: and upon
the rehearsed Conditions, before the Petition should be delivered ^according to
this Country Custom) this Master of Requests would see the whole Sum of Money
ready, and also receve some certain Tayes beforehand, as a Pledge and Earnest
of the whole; which being impossible for us to do, he even excused himself as
the former had done, and so forsook us: but we insisted, and in stead of ready
Money, which we wanted, produced two rich Vests that the Emperor had bestowed
upon us, and we had careful preserved by us, but never worn, because it was
the Emperor's Gift to us, and that they were unsuitable to our Poverty and
Religious Habit: These he accepted for a hundred and fifty Tays of the Sum
agreed on, with all the symptoms of a great Satisfaction; and really great was
our Content, because we now seemed to have laid a sure Foundation for that Work
we so earnestly desired to finish. When lo this same Mandorin, we know not by
what means, came to discover, or at least to suspect, the Vest to have been the
Emperor's Gift unto us, which was an Argument sufficient for him to decline our
Business, alleging not only, That he was not so barbarous to receive or wear
them, but also, That it was unworthy in us to slight the Vests which had been
Presented us by the Emperor, and therefore we might go look some other Person
for our Business, which on such Terms he would not touch with his little
Finger. Nor is this Answer any matter of wonder to any that are acquainted with
the Dispositions of those Chinese; for so timorous are they in any thing
relating to their Emperor, or rather so superstitious, that beyond all
comparison they do more dread him than they do God or his Temple: But this fear
and lowness is but external, in reference to their Hands, and where their want
of Power forbids to do more; but if you respect their Hearts, there is no
Chinese, especially of the Learned sort of ingenious and liberal Education, who
is not a very Prince and carries not in his Plebeian Breast the Pride of the
greatest Monarch. And this is the Source and Fountain whence such frequent
Dissentions spring up among them, and the Cause of their often Changes. But
this is a Digression, let us return.

Our Affliction and Trouble was not small, to see our Hopes thus plunged;
whereon, besides the many Sacrifices of the Mass which we offered to God, we
appointed also some particular Devotions daily for this purpose. Our next
Application was to all Princes and Noblemen, whom either we could take any
occasion to visit, or who took any occasion to visit us (for no day passed
wherein several Persons came not to adore the Holy Image, and to view our new
Church and Habitation, which the Emperor had bestowed upon us) these we spared
not to acquaint with the villainous and perfidious Disposition of the
Hollanders, with their Apostasy from their ancient professed Religion, and
Rebellion against their lawful Sovereign; as also their Attempt upon the City
of Maccow some years past, where they were repelled, and indeed cut off by the
brave Inhabitants, few in number, but mighty in Courage and Unanimity;
whereunto we thought fit to add, That after their Repulse from Maccow, they
made an Invasion upon some part of the Province of Fokien, and also seconded
that with a forcible Seizure of an Island lying in that Sea, belonging to the
Chinese, and by them called Taiwan, (but by us named Formosa) where they had
erected Warlike Forts, and where they had in no longer space than two or three
years, murdered more than three thousand Persons of the Chinese, some the
ancient Inhabitants of the Island, and some Merchants of the Province of Fockin
and Checkin, passed thither with their Merchandise: And it appeared in the
Records of their Judicial Proceedings, that during the last King's Reign,
thirteen of those Hollanders which chanced to be taken Prisoners upon the Coast
of Fockin, being brought to the Court, were all there Condemned, and
accordingly Executed. In like manner we continued to allege, That under the
pretense of Trade they had been admitted Footing upon the Island of Iava; that
notwithstanding that King, weary of their Neighborhood, had a long time cut off
all Relief of Provisions going to them from all parts of his Territories, and
sometimes Besieged them with puissant and numerous Armies, yet could he never
prevail to turn them out of their Possessions, from whence he might at first
easily have kept them: Nor was the Bond of any League strong enough to tie
these Universal Robbers from offering, or to secure any of their Allies from
suffering Injuries by them, who thought the Sea only their single due,
excluding all others from any Right to it; and therefore never made distinction
between Friend or Foe, when any Ship fell into their Hands they were able to
master, as if Neptune had granted to them the only Patent of the Ocean. And
upon all this we inferred, That to admit these Men the Exercise of a Free-Trade
in China, besides the domestic Perils and Mischiefs it would contract, were
likewise to condemn and scandalize all other Christian Princes and Rulers, when
they should see the great Potentate of the World, embracing in the Bosom of his
Country the Arch-Pyrates of all Seas, whom all other Principalities did shun,
as the most pernicious Danger in their Dominions; But here I omit, that all the
Chief Persons about the Emperor admired at the Impudence of these Hollanders
Undertakings, and astonishment at the Carelessness and Security of those Persons
who were in Places of Trust in this Empire, or (more truly) at their
Corruption, in letting such a kind of People have access into their Country.
One amongst the Great Tartars, a Man of a precipitate Zeal, was so transported
upon our Relation, that he cried out, 'Twere fit the Emperor did immediately
command them to be Hanged, as public Thieves and Rebels to Mankind, to be sure
to deter them from the like Attempts for the future: To whom we answered, That
such a Course would be too rigorous and unjust, because they ought to enjoy the
Privileges and Immunity of Ambassadors; and since they had committed themselves
to the Emperor's Faith, were by all means to be preserved from Violence:
'twould better become the Emperor to show them Grace and Favor, as to
Strangers, especially since they had brought rich Presents, and to dismiss them
peaceably to their Ships, only to be certain to grant them nothing they came
for, so to discourage their Return. More moderate and wise was the Behavior of
an Eunuch of the Emperor's, a great Councellor, who when he had heard our
Character of the Dutch, said, Although they are a despicable sort of People, it
were ignoble to Treat them ill; rather the Emperor should return them Presents,
and dispatch them for their own Country, with a strict Order never to return to
this. Our Report had soon spread it self so far within and without the Palace,
that at length it came to their Ear who had the management of the Hollanders
Business, and from thence to the Dutch themselves, who sent a Messenger to
desire us to forbear exasperating these People against them, as Thieves and
Vagrants, it being an Injury they could not bear: but before I give an Account
of them here, something of their coming hither.

The Memorial from the Viceroy of Canton (as we have said) coming before, it
was so contrived, that the Hollanders accompanied with Mandorins, and some
Interpreters, beside a great company of the Viceroys People, who gave them
Attendance and great Honor upon the Way, followed to the Court of Peking, where
they arrived the 17. of July 1656. and (to confess the truth) had they given as
ample testimony in their Travels of their being Catholics, at least
Christians, as they did of their Munificence, and being Europeans, they had
highly deserved every Man's Affection, and the Titles of Governors and Noble
Persons; for to all the Reguli, Nobles, and Mandorins which they met in their
Way, and the Cities they passed through, their Presents were very rich and
noble, their Gifts very liberal, even to the meanest of the People, who brought
them but a Coal of Fire to light their Tobacco, or did any such small Office;
whereby they purchased the Hearts of the Chinese, who unacquainted with such
Silver Showers, thought they could never sufficiently admire and extol them.

That these Dutch proved not Catholics is no great wonder, but that they
should not appear Christians, was a great Infidelity and a grand Scandal. In a
City through which they passed in their Journey toward the Court, and where I
Lodged in my going thence to Maccoa, a Father residing in a Church there,
together with many other scandalized Christians, told me, That the Dutch had
there given to the Bonzians forty Tays toward the building of a Temple for
their Profane and Diabolical Sacrifices; which I endeavored to excuse, by
alleging, That doubtless they gave it to some other end, but that the Chinese
Interpreter had taken the advantage thus to turn it, that thereby they might
endear the Affections of the People (as is customary in that Country) at the
Cost of Strangers: but if they did really what the same Father and those
Christiuns related to me, it is manifest how much their Policy savors of
Atheism; but however, if in this I have pleaded their Favor, yet for their
Eating Flesh on Fridays and Saturdays I cannot do it, because it was a grievous
Scandal to all the Christians here; but these are the Fruits of that Evil and
Infernal Tree, Heresy, to wit, Scandal of the Brethren, Remissness in all
Catholic and Christian Duties, Doubtings in Matters of Faith, Evil report of
the Holy Law, and Schism in the Union of the Church; for these young Buds and
tender Blossoms are not able to endure such blasting Winds, and nipping of
Frosts: it is so far from entering into their Hearts, that an European Christian
should err in matter of Faith, that they hardly believe he can fail in the
Observation of any of the Laws of God: nor have an Affront to proffer at it,
since it is impossible to excuse that next to be related. Amongst other curious
and precious Gifts (a List whereof you have at the end of this Relation) they
gave several Corral and Amber Beads, as well to the Queen Mother, as to the
King himself and his Royal Consort, and amongst these (as an Eunuch who
receives and lays up all Presents in the Royal Treasure told me) there was the
Image of the Child Jesus, our Lord and Savior, most admirably wrought in Amber;
whereof since there is no particular mention among the Catalogue of the
Presents, doubtless they included it among those several Pieces of Amber
appointed for the King. My purpose here is not to Dispute, but to give a
Narrative, therefore I shall only say, That it is an Infernal Policy of that
Nation to accuse us for using Beads, and worshipping of Images, as Superstition
and Idolatry; yet by the same in way of Present to make their Addresses to so
Great and Eminent Persons; intimating what they would (as to Religion) trample
under their Feet, to be a part of their own Divine Worship.

About a years space before the Hollanders arrived at Court, came two of their
Men, one a Chinese of Canton, the other an Interpreter, whether of Maccoa or no
we cannot tell, because we would never visit either them or the Hollanders,
though they much desired it; therefore these two espying Father Lodowick
Balion, through inadvertency passing by their Door, called after him very
earnestly, twice repeating Father, Father; but he kept on, as though he had
neither heard nor seen them; and thenceforward we were more careful to avoid
all passage near their House; for if no other Inconvenience arise from visiting
them, yet it had been a kind of Contradiction to those Report which we made
here to all People of them.

Now although we knew that these two had corrupted many Great Men about the
Court, and particularly a Tartar, the chief of these Coly (as they call them)
President of the Tribunal of Hospitality (somewhat like our Master of the
Ceremonies) whose Office is to receive Strangers, and to Negotiate their
Business for them; yet we resolved not to be discouraged, but rather taking the
greater magnanimity, and trusting in Almighty God, who sometimes permits
Difficulties to appear insupportable by Humane Strength, that we may ascribe
our happy Success to him alone, and return him all Praise and Thanks who brings
all our Works to pass; with erected Spirits therefore, and our Hearts advanced,
we accosted a famous Chinese, who is likewise President of the Tribunal of
Hospitality (for now all their Courts have double Chiefs and Presidents in
them, the one a Tartar, and the other a Chinese) earnestly requesting his
favorable assistance in this Business; for knowing his Authority, in his Favor
lay our greatest Hopes, and he was ever a most friendly Person to us (as he had
been to the Fathers our Predecessors) and one that had a good opinion of our
Books and Sciences; to whom we Presented a Book written in Chinese Characters,
a Mirror or Theater of their part of the World, wherein I showed him a
Description of the Island adjacent to the Province of Fokien; and among them a
Geographical Map of the Island of Formosa, which they vulgarly call Tywan; and
so took occasion to report those Mischiefs that had befallen that Isle since
the Hollanders invaded, and to declare the imminent Danger impending not only
over that Province of Fokien, but the whole Empire of China, by the vicinity of
such an Enemy; particularly, that so long as the Hollanders remained upon the
Island of Formosa, neither Civencheu nor Cincheu (the Names of the Cities of
the Province of Fokien) could ever be secure or flourish, but would be in
perpetual hazard of decay. This Mandorin was wonderfully pleased with the Book,
and promised me to show it to the Council that was to be held about the
Hollanders; and withal he added this word of Consolation, That these Hollanders
shall never accomplish and bring to pass their Designs here, although I well
know they have Bribed the King of Canton, and many other great Officers about
the Court: for I will never suffer them to enter into China, or to be allowed
any Commerce with it: And as he promised, so he likewise performed, with other
Chinese of his Party withstanding the Tartars, and anon producing the Book to
them, whereunto they all gave great estimation and credit, because it was
written in the Chinese Language.

At length, from the Cognizance that all Great Men took of the Hollanders, and
the Fame that was spread of them, it came to pass that the Tartars shut them
up, and not only denied them liberty to sell any thing, or to buy any
Necessaries for themselves, but also prohibiting them to receive those
Entertainments whereunto some of the Viceroy of Canton's intimate Friends had
invited them; nor would they suffer any Man so much as to sit down at their
Door: whence the Dutch despairing of any good issue of their Negotiations,
plainly disowned their Pretense of seeking any Commerce here, and pretended
their Business to be only a Congratulation of the Emperor in his new Conquest;
which having now performed, with their most hearty Wishes for the continuance
and increase of his Posterity, they desired his Majesty's leave to return to
their Ships and Country.

Hitherto whatever Father Lodowick Balion and my self have done to defeat the
Hollanders, if it were not according to our Wishes, it was according to our
Power, and by Divine Assistance it proved sufficient in our laying open the
Qualities of this Nation, to alienate the Affections of the Chinese from them,
and of many Tartars too, who before stood at the most but in a Neutrality, and
to the striking some terror in those who had been corrupted by their Bribes: I
say, That by Divine Assistance it proved sufficient; for without that it had
been impossible for us to have advanced one step in a Business of this nature,
as well for the vast Gifts and Presents, whereby they had gained upon Men whom
they had found capable of furthering their Design; as for the contrary, Penury
on our side, which lost us many Advantages that we could otherwise have taken:
for at Peking, as at old Rome, all things are bought and sold.

We went often to the old Church, to confer with Father John Adam about this
Matter, and to animate him to acquaint the Emperor with it (for he had frequent
access to the Emperor's Ear) I say, to animate him, not that he wanted either
courage or good will, but because (as I have formerly written unto your
Lordships) all Matters of great moment are entirely acted in the Tribunals,
from whence alone the Emperor is to be informed of the Administrations of his
Empire, whereto he commonly conforms himself; yea, sometimes (if he would) he
cannot alter the Determinations and Decrees of the sixth Tribunal, who are
become the Supreme Legislators of that Empire. When homebred and domestic
Business of the Country is in question, and whereof the Emperor has any
knowledge, though it be but small, they commonly make their Addresses to his
Majesty about it; but of Foreign Business he has no knowledge at all till they
have finished it. Nor was it a thing of little danger to move the Emperor in,
lest they who favored the Hollanders might be provoked to plead, that what
Father John and we did, proceeded merely from Envy and Covetousness to defame
the Hollanders, because we would ingross the Trade of Canton in the Hands of
the Portuguese, excluding all other Nations, who probably might be more
advantageous to this Empire: Yet notwithstanding all which, Father Adam did
adventure to speak to the Emperor, who was always highly pleased to favor him,
and now to entertain his Motion, and for his sake to incline to our Party; and
it pleased God so to stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers, that none durst open
after. Your Lordships owe much to Father John Valleat, who although he could
not negotiate with any abroad out of the Palace, (as he wished) was yet very
behoveful in his constant solicitation of Father John Adam, exhorting him to
improve his Interest in the Emperor about our Business, and suggesting many
Reasons to him of its feasibleness; and what he did herein, we have extracted
out of an Epistle from him to Father Visidore, as follows:

THe twelfth of this present February I was with the Emperor, who being pleased
(according to his wont) to honor me with familiar Discourse, among other
Subjects, he fell upon the Hollanders; which gave me occasion to represent them
in their proper Colors, and particularly to admonish the Emperor of that great
Lie, wherewith they had armed themselves upon their coming hither, in the poud
boasting of their large Dominions, as if they had been legal and ancient Owners
of great Territories, when they, the truth is, were but violent Possessors of a
small part of a Country, which they at first had traitorously usurped, and
since rebelliously defended from their lawful Sovereign; and thereupon became
Vagabonds upon the Sea, there seeking Rapine from all People to furnish
themselves for maintenance of their Rebellion at home. Whereto his Majesty
expressed his credit, by telling me, That two years since, upon their Proffer
at it, he had denied them Entrance into his Country, and that he knew not how
they had now obtained it; signifying, that 'twas either through negligence, or
surreptitious dealing in his Officers; which I interpreted to him to be the
Bribing those of Canton: however, since there was a License sent for their
coming to Court, the best was to admit them, because it would seem light now to
revoke it; only he should be cautious how he granted them any Commerce in his
Country; for wheresoever they once got footing, they immediately so fortified
themselves, that there was then no expulsion of them, nor preserving the
adjacent Parts from being infested with them. The Emperor was very well pleased
at my Information, and said it should be remembered in its proper Season. A few
days after their arrival here, I was Summoned by the Mandorins to be present in
the Tribunal, in the Hearing and Debating the Hollanders Proposals, and to give
my Judgment upon them: At their appearing there were twenty of them, the two
chief being Peter de Goyer, and Jacob de Keyser, whom the Tartars called
Compim, that is Captain, and showed them a fair Respect: they Saluted me very
civilly after the European fashion, calling me by my Name, which they had
learned in Canton or Couchinchina. Here they presently produced many Boxes and
Fardels, which they opened before the Mandorins and Tartars, and took out their
Contents; but being asked concerning every Species, whether it were of Holland
or any other Country, either because I was present, or to justify themselves
by the truth, they openly acknowledged of what Place every Particular was; so
that all things being seen and Examined, scarce one of ten was found to be of
Holland, it being easy to perceive they were most of them Indian Commodities;
yea, the Cloth, which they pretended to be made in Holland, and whereof they
had a hundred Pieces, was really no other than Indian Bafta's: Then Demand
being made of the length of the Voyage from thence hither, they said it did
require sixteen Months, affixing the time spent in Sailing from Place to Place
where they gathered up Goods. All the Friends and Servants of the Kings of
Canton were diligent Attendants unto the Dutch, perpetually praising and
extolling them, and proclaiming the great Benefit which the Mandorins would
receive by Commerce with these Men; by which it was apparent, that those of
Canton had undertaken the management of this Embassy, which they performed with
all their Power, as if it had been their own proper Business: At length they
flocked about me, to hear what I would say; and I thus delivered my self in the
Chinese Language: Most certain it is, that these Hollanders are Europeans, who
have now no King to Govern them, because they have cast him off; they have one
only Prince that Commands their Armies, and he who Commands now is a Child
about six years old, nor is it he who sends them hither; but, as they confess,
by the Advice and Counsel of their Mandorins, they came first into India, and
afterward into China: The Traffic they bring with them is for the most part
(that I say not all) of the Growth of other Countries, and not their own. But
as I intended to have proceeded, a Messenger coming for me from the Emperor, I
was forced to break off, only adding, That my Native Country was near theirs,
so that I very well knew their Manners, and understood their Language, whereby
I had discovered from them, that in the Schedule which they delivered to the
Mandorins, and in the Memorial to the Emperor, they had made a far different
Relation from what they now have, had I been either absent, or ignorant of
them: And though they found one President acting much in favor of them, yet
seeing me sit near him, they supposed me to have some Authority in the Court,
which made them to forbear so much; and when I arose to go out, they all stood
up, and the two Captains proffered me their utmost Service.

When I came to the Emperor, the first Observation I made to him, was the
Calculation of the time of the Hollanders Travels; for being demanded, Whence
they came to this Employment? they answered, From Holland, for a second
Experiment of that Success whereof they had failed two years since. They had
confessed sixteen Months for their Voyage from Holland to China, and allowing
other sixteen Months for their Passage from China to Holland, therein were
thirty two Months for their Passage forward and backward; whereto adding eight
Months, which have been spent between their arrival at Canton and this Court,
the whole amounts to forty Months, whereby it is manifest, that they could not
go hence home, and there wait for a Commission and Presents, to return hither
with them, and all in the space of two years, as had been pretended; so that by
this Lie the Emperor might judge what credit was to be given them in other
Matters. The Emperor was somewhat amazed at this Argument; but approaching
near, as if I had some Secret to whisper to him, I alleged a second, which
much more astonished him, thus: If these People get footing in any Place, upon
pretense of Commerce, immediately they raise Fortresses, and plant Guns.
(wherein they are most expert) and so appropriate a Title to their Possessions.
I admire how they come to be led through the Emperor's Highways between Canton
and this Court, and to be suffered to view all Places which may be most
advantageous to them: for supposing they have a Design to Invade the Kingdom of
Cayo, if they come to that Island which is called The Golden Mountain, standing
in the middle of the great River, where it empties it self into the Sea, and
should there build a Castle, they would Command that Passage, and be capable of
all Supplies from Sea, in despite of this whole Country: and thereabouts are
four great Cities, which who could preserve from their Incursions, if they
should Settle themselves upon the aforesaid Place, which they would be able to
defend with a hundred Men, though it would put your Majesty to the Charge of
keeping two or three thousand Men in Pay to attend their Motions? and the like
danger there would be in what Place soever should be allotted them for Abode.
Let not the Emperor take it ill that I do thus freely declare the sense of the
Danger I apprehend him to be in; for I stand before my bounteous Lord and
Master, to whom I am obliged to declare any thing that may prevent his ill, the
fear whereof breeds no little anxiety in my Heart. The Emperor stood musing for
a small space, and then signified his clear apprehension of what I delivered,
and presently asked me if the Muscovites were of the same Temper? whereto I
answered quite contrary, That they were a very faithful and just People, one
only Exception Law allowed, which therefore they do not so perfectly observe as
they ought; but they are Governed by a potent Prince, who could have no other
Design in his Embassy hither, but a mere Congratulation of the Emperor's
fortunate Conquest of this Empire, and happy Inauguration in the Throne: but
because they understand not this Language, nor have any Interpreter careful of
their Business, they are left as Men forlorn; it would be therefore like the
Emperor's wonted Goodness, though here are but two of that Nation, seeing you
have received their Message and Present, to do them some Honor, and with other
Gifts to return them in Peace and Amity to their ow^ Country. The Emperor was
pleased to approve whatever I said, so that I thought it needless to press any
thing farther; God grant he may be mindful (as I have already found him) of
what I have now urged to him, as well as what I moved about the Hollanders some
Months since. At length the Emperor commanded a Table to be furnished for me,
and the chief Eunuch of the Palace to accompany me, and so withdrew.

Certain it is, that three thousand Tays were sufficient to make a Present to
the Emperor, more acceptable than all the Dutch have brought, thereby to
confirm the Emperor's Favor to us, and interclude all Ways to these Heretics;
but we are at too great a distance from Maccoa, to acquaint them with these
Passages, and probably we might not be heard; nevertheless I assure your
Reverend Fatherhood, that as far as my Power will extend, I will spare neither
Art nor Labor to paint out these Hollanders in their true and native Colors.
To do this Work now by the Hands of Subjects, seems very difficult unto me:
insomuch that a thousand, now the Enemy by his Bribes has possessed so many
Hearts, would scarce do what a hundred would formerly have done; however, I
trust in God, the Ruler of all Hearts, and hope in the Goodness and Favor of
the Emperor, that as he has been pleased to hearken unto me in other things,
so he would vouchsafe me equal Grace in this present Business.

The first of August some Mandorins belonging to the Emperor, invited the
Mandorin of Canton, with a great Mandorin of another Province (who both had
accompanied the Dutch to Court) unto our College, whither there came that day
at least a hundred Men, most of them grave and eminent Persons, my ancient
Acquaintance and Friends: Among other things they told me, that the Fraternity
called Cin a vam, had resolved to invite the Dutch to a Feast, but they were
not permitted to stir out of their Doors, which made them despair of effecting
their Design, insomuch that they had declared against all seeking of Trade
here; and having Saluted and Congratulated the Emperor, were desirous to depart
homewards, only they had a very choice Present designed for me, but for the
same reason were not able to bring it; yet they hope I will do them no Injury
to the Emperor.

The sixth of August the Emperor sent for me to come to Court with speed, to
cooperate with the Coli in the Hollanders Business; and as soon as I came,
they showed me a Copy of a Decree drawn up, but not confirmed by the Emperor,
who (they said) would have me consulted in it. Upon Examination I found it run
much in favor of the Dutch, praising their Nobleness and Greatness, and
extolling their Worthy Labors in coming from so remote a Country, to Visit and
Congratulate his Imperial Majesty; upon which Considerations this Tribunal
being to deliver their Opinions to the Emperor concerning the Commerce which
they desire with his Countries, they declared an unanimous propensity to it:
The President asked me if it were with my satisfaction? I answered Negatively,
and gave him my Reasons for it, that for thousands of years past, until this
time, the Empire of China having never admitted the like, it was a pregnant
Argument that it was not conceived safe, but very dangerous; and greater
Mischiefs were to feared from the Hollanders upon such a Contract, than from
any other Nation under the Sun. But probably the Hollanders (said I) may be
your Parents and Kindred, and so come hither for your Benefit wholly; yet if
their Pretenses be well scanned, they will appear to be grounded upon their own
Profit: They boast what great Merchants they are, and I suppose it is their
Nature, as well as Trade, to enrich themselves from the Goods of others. The
Tartar President was both amazed and incensed at my Answer; he was Son-in-law
to one of the Viceroys of Canton, and durst not contradict his Father-in-law;
therefore to make trial whether I would change my Sentence, he appointed three
Chinese of the Coli to debate the Business more privately with me; who were so
far from altering my Opinion, that with great alacrity they became all of my
Mind, and expressed a great deal of Joy that I had spoke so frankly, which they
not daring to do, were resolved to absent themselves from Court. Hereupon I
urged boldly that the Decree might be altered, and the Suffrage of the Court
being taken, a definitive Sentence drawn up, That seeing the Emperor had
received Presents from the Hollanders, he should be desired to remunerate them
away; but Contracts with, and Access to this Court, was not according to the
ancient style of this Empire. To this they were all silent, and ignorant of the
reason, albeit two days after a Decree was issued out with some small
Alterations only; which moved me to go to the most ancient Chinese of the Coli,
to know the reason thereof: who seeing my Constancy and Resolution, desired me
to rest satisfied, and said it should be Concluded, that Commerce should be
denied the Dutch, only it should be confirmed by general Suffrage, that there
might be no occasion of offense to any.

The same day came the President to visit me, to be informed (as he said) about
the Hollanders Business: I advised him to be very careful what he did in it,
for I had spoken privately with the Emperor, who had commanded the Coli to
consult with me about it; whereby he intended nothing else, than that they
should follow my Sentence in it, and not recede from it. His Reply was, That he
would persuade them to be content; that the Emperor should reward them only,
but not grant them any liberty of Trade. Thus far was only Consultation about
it, but it is now become a Conclusion; for they despaired of the Emperor's
Approbation in their Favor without my Consent, and of that they despaired much
more: In few days the Decree will be Published, and possibly before Father
Gabriel Magelanus's Departure, who brings these.


The Letter from the General of Batavia, to the Emperor of China, and Viceroy
of Canton; Translated out of Dutch into Portuguese by Father John Adam.
THE Omnipotent God, who created the Heavens, the Earth, and whatsoever is
contained in them, has divided the Earth into several Kingdoms, Empires,
Provinces, Islands, and Dominions, and has ordained by his Eternal Wisdom that
no one Place should be stored with all manner of things, but that whatsoever is
either necessary for the Life, or convenient for the Ornament of Mankind,
whether Production of Nature, or Invention of Art, should be found partly in
one Country, and partly in another, Divine Providence so disposing it, that the
Wants of this Land should be supplied by that, and the Defects of that
retributed by another, that so by the means of Commerce Men might enjoy
Society, and the common Wants of all Nations might, by receiving mutual Relief,
knit themselves together in the Bonds of Friendship: And this is the reason
which moved our Nation, above all others, wholly to apply and devote it felf to
Trade and Commerce through the utmost Parts of the Sea; and by this means are
we come to Alliance and Friendship with Kings and Rulers of most Countries
neighboring on China, whereby we came to receive Intelligence of those
triumphant Victories, and glorious Conquests which Almighty God has given your
Majesty over the renowned Emperor of China, by settling and establishing your
Majesty in the Throne thereof: And by this we have been stirred up to appear in
the Presence of your Majesty, to Congratulate those glorious Achievements, and
to wish a future Happiness and Prosperity thereunto; and withal, to desire your
Majesty's admittance of our Ships to enter with safety into the Ports of your
Dominions, and to exercise a Trade with your Subjects, as we do with those of
other Countries. We hope that your Majesty will grant us this Favor, seeing it
is the Decree of Divine Providence, and an universal practice amongst all Men;
whereby great Profit shall accrue to your Majesty's Subjects and Countries. And
to the end your Majesty may receive from us the greater Security and
Satisfaction about our Proposals, we have sent two ancient and honest Men,
Peter de Goyer and Jacob de Keyser, to attend your Majesty's Person and
Pleasure, to whom we trust your Majesty will give Audience, and a convenient
Dispatch. And thus we pray Almighty God to grant perfect Health, and to add
many happy days to your Majesty's Life.

From Batavia, July 20. 1655. Governor General, John Maatzuyker.


This Letter, which by the Emperor's Order was Translated verbatim out of Dutch
into the Chinese Language, came at first unsealed, and without any manner of
Glorious or Majestic Title, as if he had writ to one of his familiar Friends
and Equals; but the Chinese in Canton did so dress it up and adorn it, that it
appeared with great Reverence and Humility: for otherwise and different were
the Letters formerly written to the Emperor's of China when we came hither, by
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and Ranutius Fernelius Duke of Parma, as well for
the Paper, Style, and Superscription, as for the magnificent Titles and
Encomiums which they gave him: but what Comparison between these Princes and a
few Merchants in Iava? at length the World will be undeceived. Thus far Father
Adam.

The Presents they brought they divided into four Parts, the first was for the
Emperor, the second for his Mother, the third for the Empress; these three had
their Superscriptions: the fourth was a particular Present for the two
Ambassadors. This Division was subtly enough contrived, to purchase the
Favor, and to insinuate into the Affections of all Parties: but though the
Hollanders are sufficiently Masters of that Art, this was not their own
Contrivance, but the Viceroy of Canton, who, as they did not act the
Translator's part, to mend and patch the General of Batavia's Letter, but
Composed new ones in stead thereof, so they wholly ordered and disposed the
Presents, supposing so to manage the whole Business, that it should not be
capable of denial: Nor had they missed their aim, had they been Catholics; for
then they had met with no Opposition. That the method and alteration in the
disposure of the Presents was the Chinese Invention, appears plain enough from
this one Argument: When the Master of the Ceremonies had received the Presents
from the Hollanders, he asked them how it came to pass that such and such were
for the Queens, seeing there was no mention made thereof in their General's
Letter or Memorial? To which they returned this ridiculous Answer, That after
they set Sail from their Port, and were far off at Sea, they found these things
in the Ship, which they knew not of before, and therefore they had disposed
them for their Majesty's. Happy Argonautes are these, to find Silk and Purple
woven in their Ships, without their own Labor; Corral and Amber, with all
manner of precious things, without their knowledge! Let no Man think their
Answer false or equivocal, because happily they found them in the Ships of some
Portuguese Merchants or others they met with in their Voyage; for this they
ordinarily do without any scruple of Conscience, or terror of Divine Vengeance.

No Man can doubt, but a Nation so remote, which was in no case dependant upon,
and never heard of before in the Empire of China, coming now with the specious
Pretense of being Tributaries, their Hands full of Presents, (which though they
had been of ordinary Quality, and things common in China, yet might have been
sufficient for the multitude of them) whereby they endeavored to conquer the
Emperor by the Viceroys of Canton, corrupt the Mandorins, and above all make
sure of that Chief of the Coli, Son-in-law (as I have said) to the eldest
Viceroy of Canton, and Bribe the Tartar President of the Tribunal of
Hospitality (which was not hard to fasten on so sordid and covetous a Wretch) I
say no Man can doubt, but that all this did promise to the Hollanders a very
prevailing Success to their Negotiations. But the Hearts of Kings are in the
Hand of the Lord: but though it must be confessed, that Gifts will do much, yet
much more the devout Prayers of the Servants of God, who has been pleased to
fortify the Minds of the Chinese Mandorins, to weaken and unbend those of the
Tartars, and so to fix the Heart of a young Emperor, that he should deny the
Hollanders the Commerce they sought, and with a remarkable Ingenuity,
Affability, and Prudence, make them promise their Return hither once every
eight Years to pay their Tribute.

Three things there are, whereof the Hollanders have no scarcity, which had
they brought, would have been powerful Advocates for them: The first is, a
Harpsichord, with a skilful Player on it; the second, a Trumpeter; the third,
some Engineers and Officers to Train up and Exercise Soldiers. These things the
Emperor does much long for; but our God would not suffer them to bring them,
that for the future the like may be brought by our Friends, which may redound
very much to the benefit of the Catholic Religion.

Lastly, May your Lordships consider, that it was a peculiar Grace of God to
blind the Eyes of these Hollanders (with their great Favorers and Interpreters
in Canton) that they should not put a pleasing Title to their Memorials, that
thereby the Chinese taking disgust at these innovating Heretics, might be the
more closely linked to the Catholic Portuguese.

A Catalogue of the Presents which the Hollanders brought to the Court of China.
The Presents for the Emperor.
A Suit of Armor Embossed with Gold. Twenty three Guns of several sorts and
sizes, all richly and curiously wrought. Six broad Swords. Six other Swords,
Hatched with Gold. Five Chests filled with Cloves. One Chest filled with
Nutmegs. Two Pieces of fine Scarlet. Two Pieces of Broad-Cloth. One Piece of
Cloth, Carnation Color. One Piece of green Cloth. Two Pieces of Skie-colour
Cloth. Two Pieces of Popingee Cloth. A hundred Else of Holland. Three Fardels
of Flowers of diverse Colors. Three Fardels of Cinnamon. Twelve Quilts. Fifty
Pounds of Amber. Two Pound of choice Corral. Two Pound of Amber Beads. One
Branch of polished Corral, weighing one Pound and a half. Ten Parcels of
Sandal. Three Flasks for Powder. A Silver Optic Tube. Twelve Plumes. Four
Looking-Glasses. One great Looking-Glass eight-square. One Suit of of Tapestry
Hangings. Six Carpets.
The Presents for the Empress.
A large Looking-Glass. A little Image of Tortoise-shell. A Piece of of green
Cloth. A Piece of Scarlet. Eight Else of Holland. A Piece of Skie-colour Cloth.
A Piece of green European Satin. Two Quilts. Tapestry Hangings. Four-Pieces of
Amber. Two Italian Tables of white Marble, Inlay'd with Pictures of diverse
Colors. Three Rosaries of Amber Beads. A Crystal Cabinet. A Cabinet of Wood of
diverse Figures. Ten Bottles of European sweet Waters. Six little Chests of
diverse Pictures.
The Presents for the Empresses Mother.
A large Looking-Glass. A Tortoise-shell Cabinet Inlay'd with Silver. An Ebony
Cabinet Inlay'd with Silver. Another little Ebony Cabinet. A great Scretore
wrought with Crystal. Four Rosaries of Amber Beads. Three Rosaries of Corral
Beads. Six Pieces of gross Amber. One Branch of Corral. Six Italian Tables of
white Marble, Inlay'd with Pictures of diverse Colors. Three Painted Carpets.
One Piece of Scarlet. One Piece of Broad-Cloth, somewhat course. One Piece of
black European Satin. One Piece of green European Satin. One Piece of blue
Satin. Two Pieces of black European Damask. One Piece of European Velvet.
Tapestry Hangings. Twenty six Else of Holland. A Cabinet made after the fashion
of an Eagle. Six Crystal Goblets. Twenty one curious Pinctadoes of
Metchlajatam. Twelve Bottles of European Sweet-Water. One Piece of Broad-Cloth,
very fine.
The Presents which Peter de Goyer and Jacob de Keyser, the two Holland
Ambassadors, made to the Emperor.
A Piece of Scarlet. A Piece of green Cloth. A Piece of green European Satin. A
Piece of red European Satin. A Piece of white Satin. Twenty four Else of
Holland. Ten Pieces of Amber. Two Rosaries of Amber Beads. Two Rosaries of
Corral Beads. A Looking-Glass. Four Looking-Glasses with Painting. Four Marble
Tables of diverse Colors. A Marble Cabinet. Two Guns. Two Lances. One Sword,
with a Silver Hilt and rich Scabbard. Three Goblets of Venice Glass. Two
Statues, Engraven with diverse Flowers. A Sword Hatched with Gold and Silver. A
pair of Knives. A Plume of Feathers. A Painted Parrot. Twenty Bottles of
European Sweet-Water. Twelve Pots of Wine of diverse Countries.
These are the Treasures wherewith the Hollanders intended to purchase the
Chinese Trade; certainly the best Course for Merchants to take: But though
these had good Skill, yet they had bad Success; and our God who suffered them
to enter Iapan, so much to the destruction of Christianity, which before
flourished on that Island, would not permit their Ingress into China, to the
like damage of Religion here.

The Hollanders Reception in Canton was very Honorable, and their Entertainment
at this Court very Hospitable; and at last their Dismission thence was withal
possible Grace and Favor, as appears by their Passport, whereof the Translation
follows, viz.

A Remonstrance of the Court of Request to the Emperor.
IN the thirteenth Year of the Reign of the Emperor Canchy, on the eighteenth
Day of the sixth Month, came to this Court a Copy of a Petition of the
Hollanders, who came here to tender their Homage and Vassalage to your Majesty;
wherefore, according to our Duty, we have consulted thereon: and although the
truth be, that the Fame of your Majesty's Greatness and Power be extended unto
the utmost Parts of the habitable Earth; yet upon our strictest examination and
search into the Laws and ancient Records of this Empire for this purpose, we
cannot find in any Age past, that the Hollanders have ever sent to pay Tribute:
Therefore seeing we have no President, nor established Rule to follow in this
Business, the result of our present Judgment is, that your Majesty may do very
well to continue this following Decree, to wit,

That considering the Voyage from the Hollanders Country hither is both tedious
and perilous, your Majesty does grant them leave, once every five years to come
and pay their Tribute unto this Court, and not oftener: And this your Majesty
does, to show the whole World your willingness to receive into your Bosom the
remotest Strangers. For the Way of their approach hither, it is fit to be by
the Province of Canton, and no otherwise: And for what relates to grant
License for their Commerce within your Majesty's Dominions, there is already a
clear Declaration published for your Majesty's Dislike thereof, so that more
needs not be said of that Matter; yet notwithstanding, after their appearance
before your Majesty, they may buy and sell some certain things, provided they
have regard always to such Constitutions as are made concerning all Strangers
within this Realm, and exactly conform themselves in the manner of Buying and
Selling to the Laws and Ordinances established in that behalf; and hereupon let
all vigilance he had, and all appointed Penalties severely executed upon
Default. As often as they shall come to pay-their Tribute, their whole number
both of Masters and Servants not to exceed an hundred Persons; of those, only
twenty shall repair unto the Court (the rest remaining behind at Canton) and of
those twenty, let them observe to bring two Chiefs, whereof one may be a Man of
Learning, the other a Soldier. Let the Mandorins provide strong Guards to
accompany them to the Court, and to take care at their Return that they keep
together, without straggling out of their Way; and upon their arrival at Canton,
that they immediately repair for their own Country, their delays about the
Coast and Seas of Canton appearing inconvenient.

This is the Opinion of your Majesty's Court of Request, but not daring to take
upon it any Determination of what is fit or not fit; therefore I the President
thereof, do in all humble reverence offer this Remonstrance unto your Majesty,
beseeching your Majesty's Royal Decree for a final Determination hereon. Given
in the thirteenth Year of his Imperial Majesty Canchy, on the seventh Day of
the seventh Moon.

Two days after the Date of this Remonstrance, this following Decree of the
Emperor was Published.

The ultimate Decree of the Emperor.
To the Kingdom of Holland Health and Peace, which out of its Cordial Love to
Justice has subjected it self to Us, and sent Ambassadors through the wide Sea
to pay Us Tribute: We nevertheless weighing in Our Mind the length of the
Voyage, with the Dangers incident thereunto, do heartily grant them leave to
come once every eight years, to pay their Tribute unto this Court; and this We
do to make known to the Universe Our Affections to the People of the remotest
Parts: In all other things We give Our Royal Consent and Approbation to the
Remonstrance of Our Court of Request.

Thus (you see) neither the Court nor Emperor have granted them Commerce in
this Country; which being denied, there is little reason to think that they
will return to pay their Tribute only, whence they shall reap neither Honor nor
Profit, but contrarily Damage and Disgrace: for although the Emperor should
have returned them Gifts of equal value to their Presents, according to the
Custom of other Countries, yet the Expense of a Ship or two for the space
almost of two years, would be burthensom and ridiculous; which however,
allowing the denial of Commerce to them, if the Emperor had granted them their
Return every year, they might well have made up by a private Trade, especially
being so much in favor with the Viceroys of Canton, and the Tartars
thereabouts, who would ingross the Profits thereof. Therefore did God stir up
the Hearts of the Chinese Mandorins unanimously to oppose and contradict it;
and at length, when both Tartars and Chinese had granted their Return every
fifth Year, the Emperor by special Divine Providence has augmented it to the
eighth Year; and before that Revolution come, either the Emperor, the Viceroys
of Canton, or the rest of their Favorers will be dead, or the Hollanders will
be destroyed, or the Times will be changed, and other Government will succeed:
but if all these fail, and the Hollanders will be so abject to return at the
eight years end, yet the Lord will minister some means to us for the ruining
their Designs; albeit there is little probability of their Return, since they
departed so highly discontented as they did, as well by the strict Watches that
were set over them, as for that they were never admitted to the Emperor's
Presence, as Father Balion has acquainted me in an Epistle which he wrote to
me by a Post after my departure to Nanking, wherein he thus writes:

The Hollanders may not come into the Kings Presence (nor the Muscovites)
because they will not submit themselves to those Ceremonies of Reverence
accustomed in this Palace. They are Novices, and ignorant in Affairs, and
obstinate in refusing to accommodate themselves to the Customs of the Country.
God will at length discover his Mercies to the Catholic Portugueses here. The
Court of Requests exhibited a Remonstrance to the Emperor, to grant them leave
to return every fifth Year, but not any liberty of Trade; but the Emperor has
altered the fifth to the eighth Year, which is equivalent with a forbidding
them ever to return again. The day before Publishing the Emperor's Decree
(whereof I here send your Father-hood a Copy) Father Adam told me he had spoken
with the Emperor. Thus far Father Balion.

Your Lordships may observe how much our God does favor and assist true
Catholic Christians; for the Tartars and Chinese are highly offended with the
Hollanders, and account them Barbarians, for refusing the Ceremonies and
Reverence of the Court: and the Hollanders (with the Muscovites) are equally
distasted, because they could not be admitted to the Emperors Presence without
them; and very just is it, that Heretics and Schismatics should depart with
hatred and disgust, that by their ill Example they might not give Scandal to
the new Christianity here Planted, nor cause the Religion of Europe to be ill
spoken of.

Wherefore the most Noble Captain, and the rest of the Governors of the Holy
City, be your Lordships of good Courage, and hope strongly in the Bowels of the
Mercy of God, that as he has suffered his City (most faithful to his Divine
Majesty) of late Years to undergo so many Tribulations, he has done it for
Direction only, not for Destruction. Does Gold melted in the Furnace come out
wasted and consumed? no, but more pure, bright, and precious. Can God forget
the Piety of such a City, which maintains so many Religious of all sorts, and
where so many Masses and Oblations are daily Offered? Where is the Refuge and
Sanctuary of Religion but in this City, which is gloriously called The Name of
God? Can God forget his Promise? he has promised Tribulations, and an
hundredfold for the Sufferings of his Saints, and an hundred he will pay.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: OR Special Remarks TAKEN AT LARGE OUT OF ATHANASIUS KIRCHER'S
Antiquities of China.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Cause and Occasion of this Work.
IT is now about thirty years since I produced the Exposition of a certain
Syro-Chinesian Monument, found in China in the Year 1625. which although it
gained no small Applause among the Readers of a more than ordinary
Apprehension, who were taken with the Novelty, yet there were not wanting some
incompetent Censurers or Critics, who ceased not to wound its Reputation by
snarling and trifling Objections, stabbing it with critical Steletto's, albeit
they proved in the sequel leaden and blunted, viz. That there was never any
Monument of such a kind in Nature, and that therefore it was a mere Forgery.
This they endeavored by all means possible, not only to persuade themselves to
believe, but also to raise a like Credulity in others. These and the like
Persons are deservedly, and ought to be esteemed for such, who rejecting all
Divine and Humane Faith, approve of nothing but what they have seen themselves,
account nothing to be believed but what their own Brain has dictated to them.
These are they that like troublesome Flesh-Flies, flying at any obvious fatness,
soil that which is sincere and untainted, and desist not to bespot that which
is pure with a defiled and Thrasonick Blast: Amongst which was a certain modern
Writer, who blushed not with all his Might, and indeed with an insolent Scoff
to question the truth of this Monument, sometimes asserting it to be introduced
by a Iesuitical Cheat, and other whiles averring that it was a flat and plain
Forgery of the Jesuits, feigned both to deceive the Chinese, and also to
defraud them of their Treasures. I shall conceal the Name of the Person, partly
out of a tenderness to Christian Charity, and partly because in the Judgment of
prudent and knowing Men he seems unworthy of any Answer; seeing that the
truth of this Monument is established and confirmed by the Eyewitness of so
many illustrious Authors, by so many Books concerning this Method divulged
throughout the whole Empire by the Chinesian Colais themselves, Leo and Paul,
Persons of great Quality, and instructed in the Christian Religion (the se
^ooks are commonly exposed to the sight of Strangers in the Library of the
Roman College, with the authentic Draught of the Monument it self sent from
China) and lastly, approved by the whole Christian World; so that it is of
little concernment what an obscure Bragadocio barketh forth in the utmost
Quarter of the World; who, if he had abstained from Calumnies and Scoffs, and
had prudently proposed the Matter with some scrupulosity, peradventure might
better have saved his own Reputation and the Credit of his Work; but so it
happens by the just Judgment of God, that those who endeavor to traduce the
Glory of the Divine Majesty by Cavils and Scoffs, both contrary to Conscience
and Charity, for the most part at length suffer Shipwreck of their own Fame and
Labors.

Moved therefore by these Reasons, lest a Monument of so great Concern,
deprived of its Credit, should run the hazard of being cast away, I shall labor
so by the Divine Assistance to establish the Truth of the Monument in this
undertaken Work, (being my Contexture from the very bottom of the Matter)
confirmed not only by the great attestation of the Fathers of our Society,
which have seen it with their own Eyes, but also from the testimony of the
Chinese themselves, that from henceforth there may no place of doubting be
left, and the Heterodox themselves may be forced to confess (the Interpretation
of this Syro-Chinesian Inscription being considered) that no other Doctrine was
taught above a thousand years past by the Preachers of the Gospel, which is not
altogether consonant and conformable, yea the very same with the Orthodox
Doctrine now professed: and therefore the Gospel Preached formerly in China, is
the same with that which the Universal Catholic Roman Church enjoineth to be
believed at this Day, as I shall afterward prove by manifold strength of
Argument.

Now that the Matter may be treated of in a requisite Order and Method, A
twofold Interpretation of this Monument.
I thought good first of all to annex a twofold, perfect, and sincere
Interpretation of this Stone, expounded by the Chinesian Learned Men
themselves, from a Book Printed in Chinesian Characters, and expressed verbatim
in the genuine Pronunciation of the Chinesian words, by Father Michael Boim, a
Person excellently skilled in the Chinese Language, as it will appear anon from
his Epistle to the Reader. I have also adjoin'd another Exposition with the
Scholiasts, avoiding the Chinese Phrase, not so accustomed to our Ears, and
that for the more suitable apprehending of the genuine Sense of the Table. And
this I did the rather, that I might not seem to omit any thing by which the
Monument might receive the greater Illustration. And by reason some may justly
question how those Syrian-Chaldeans, the great Propagators of the Christian
Religion, could penetrate into those utmost Quarters of the Earth; it appeared
not only congruous, but also absolutely necessary for the confirmation of this
Matter, to administer Aid to the perplexed Reader in this obscure Labyrinth of
various Travels, by the flaming Pharos of this Work; that is, to direct him by
Geographical Demonstrations; from which, if I do not deceive my self, Whence
the Gospel, as also the Heathenish Super^^itions came into China
the Reader shall clearly understand, That not only the Christian Doctrine, but
also the Superstitions of the Chinese and their Fables before the coming of
our Savior, derived their Original from one and the same Region; that is, from
Egypt, Graecia, Syria, and Chaldea. Now where the vast Empire of the Chinese
is, into which the Monument shows the Gospel to have had an Entrance, I shall
rather hint at in a few words, than endeavor to describe; concerning which,
notwithstanding, if the inquisitive Reader desires farther satisfaction, I
shall remit him to have recourse unto the History of Father Nicholas
Trigautius, and John Samedius, as also to the Atlas Sinicus of Martine
Martinius, and many others, where he shall find fully described whatsoever
relates unto the Situation of China and its Wonders, the Nature, Property, and
Fertility of the Regions, the multitude of its great and vast Cities, and their
Inhabitants; and lastly, the Politic and Civil Government, in which regard
this Empire seems not to give place to any Monarchy in the World. My Business
is only to explain those things, which as they are controverted, so likedo
wonderfully render the Readers doubtful and perplexed about the equivocation of
the Terms; and also to allege, in respect to the curious Reader, the more rare
Curiosities and Secrets of Things observed to be treasured up in this Nation
and others adjacent, not observed hitherto by any former Authors; with the
Prodigies both of Nature and Art, each being recorded in their proper place.

CHINA, The Description and Boundaries of China.
the largest and vastest of Kingdoms, as it was confined unto the utmost Bounds
of Asia by the Creator of the Earthly Globe, so also did it remain altogether
unknown unto the Ancients, even unto the Year 1220. when Marcus Paulus Venetus
first discovered it unto us under the Name of Catay, as afterward shall be
made manifest. On the East it is encompassed with the Eastern Ocean; On the
North it has Tartary adjoining, separated by a Wall, whose yet undiscovered
Bounds are extended even unto the Frozen Sea, and questionless they are in some
part or other continued to the North part of America with Anian; whether it be
a Sraight or Isthmos; although unto this very time (as with great pains it was
searched after by the Fathers of our Society employed in China) the Limits of
these vast Kingdoms and Lands have as yet been detected by no Person: On the
West it is encompassed partly with Ridges of most high Mountains, partly a
Sandy Desert and other Kingdoms, which we shall discourse of anon: Lastly, on
the South it is limited with the Sea, the Kingdoms of Touchinum, Cochinchina,
Laum, and others. The Latitude begins from 18 Degrees, and extends it self
unto 43. that is, it is distended by the interval of a thousand four hundred
and forty Italian Miles from South to North, and from the West unto the East it
almost consists of the same Distance; whence the Chinese do express it in
their Maps in the form of a Quadrate, although by our Geographers that are
better skilled in the Mathematics, Its several Names.
it is described in the Figure of a Crescent. Now in reference unto the
confusion of the Names of it, it is as great as the diversity of the adjoining
Nations are: the Spaniards and the Portuguese call it China; the Ancients, as
it ^s to be seen in Ptolemy, Sin and Serica; the Arabians, Sin; and the
Sarazens, Catay: All which Appellations are so far I may say, from being in use
among the Chinese themselves, that the Names are not so much as known, as it
is hence apparent; for it is an immemorial Custom among the Chinese, that as
often as the Right of Dominion devolved from one Family to another, according
to the mutability of Humane Affairs, so also was the Kingdom dignified with a
new Name by him that assumed the Regalities; which he that does, imposes some
glorious Title on the Empire, according to his own will and pleasure: So in
Times past we read that it was called Tan, which is to say, An Empire without
Bounds; other times You, that denotes Rest or Repose; then Hiu, from the Name
of a great Duke; I find it also called Sciam, as if you should say, A most
Adorned Kingdom: Cheu signifies A Kingdom that exceeds all other Kingdoms in
Perfection; also Han, by which word they denominate the Milky-Path; whence it
comes to pass, that almost each several Nation does describe it by the
imposition of proper and different Terms: Now at this Day it is called Ciumquo*
and by some Ciunhoa, whereof the former signifies A Garden, by reason of its
pleasantness, and abundance of delightful things, and the latter implies The
Middle, because the Chinese suppose their Kingdom is situate in the midst of
the Earth, which also they will have to be apiece.

This whole Empire is divided into fifteen Kingdoms or Provinces, The Division
of the Empire of China.
bounded or terminated in some places by vast Rivers, and in others by
inaccessible Rocks and Mountains: Of which Provinces nine are reckoned in the
South part, and six in the North. Nature in a manner has contrived all this
complex of Kingdoms unaccessible unto all others; on the East and South the
Ocean is scarcely Navigable, by reason of the violence of the Tides; and on the
West the craggy Ridges of the Mountains admit of no passage; and on the North
it is at this Day fortified partly by a Desert of an immense vastness, and
partly by a Wall of nine hundred Italian Miles, erected by King Xio, about two
hundred Years before the Incarnation of our Savior, by the work of 1000000 Men
in the space of five Years, to restrain the Incursion of the Tartars; so that
being defended by so many Fortifications, it relieth on its own weight: If you
do but only observe the Wall, it is a Work that will cause an amazement, which
without doubt, if the Ancients had arrived unto the knowledge of, they would
have reckoned it amongst the seven Wonders of the World. But let us now subjoin
the Names of the Kingdoms or Provinces.

The Northern Kingdoms of the Empire of China are Honan, Xensi, Xansi, Xantum,
Peking, and Leautum. The Southern Kingdoms are Canton or Quantung, Quangsi,
Yunnan, Fukien, Kiangsi, Suchuem, Utquang, Chekiam, and Nankim.

That I may comprehend all in brief, first I shall annex a Geographical Scheme
or Map of the whole Empire, divided into fifteen Provinces, that you may more
clearly discover the Situation of each, and that we may not appear to have let
slip any thing memorable in reference to the Cities, Mountains, Rivers, Lakes,
and other Occurrences worthy of observation, I have here prefixed this
Geographical Table, which contains a Description of all the Kingdoms; from
which, as from an alone Compendium, you may find whatsoever presents it self
worthy of Consideration.

CHAP. II.
IN the Year 1625. when in Siganfu, The first disc^very of the Syro-Chinesian
Monument.
the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Xensi, in a certain Village a Trench was
dug for the fit Foundation of an Edifice or Building, it so happened, That in
the casting up of the Earth the Laborers found a Stone Table, worthy of note
for its Chinesian Writing; which when they had dug out of the Ground, they
measured it is quantity, and found it in length nine handfuls and a half, in
breadth five, and in thickness about one; whereupon was curiously Engraven a
Cross. Those who studiously viewed it, report, That the Cross was bent inwards
like to the Lilies, in the manner of that which is to be seen at Meliapore in
India, on the Sepulcher of St. Thomas the Apostle, and not much unlike that
which the Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem bore, partly hanging on
their Necks, and partly sewed to their Garments and Cloaks. Under this Cross
follows the Title of the Inscription, expressed throughout the whole
superficies of the Stone in the Chinesian Language and Character, as is
manifest from the Figure adjoin'd.

And as the Chinese are carried as it were by a certain natural propensity
unto things curious; so also the first Report of the finding of this Stone
attracted a great multitude of their Learned Men, who resorted thither from all
Parts. The Governor of the Place being moved with the strangeness of this
Monument, having seriously contemplated the venerable Antiquity of it, that he
might allure and draw the People from all Parts by the Fame thereof, for the
Benefit and Reputation of the City, placed it on a Table or Pedestal curiously
wrought within the Court of the Temple of the Bonzii, and erected a Roof over
it, partly that it might receive no damage by the injury of Time, and also that
as many as were Spectators of this unusual Monument might read, examine, and
describe it at their own leisure.

And because that on the Margents there were discovered Characters unknown to
the Chinese, intermixed with those of their own, they were much concerned to
know what they related unto, and at last were satisfied by the diligence of our
Society, as it will appear more at large in the following Discouse. Leo the
Mandorin being now instructed in the Christian Faith, By whom first made public
first of all others divulged it, exactly described, unto the whole Kingdom,
for the great advantage of the Christian Religion, which he hoped might accrue
from thence; which coming to the Hands of the Fathers of our Society, when they
had read it, they could not sufficiently admire the Providence of the Divine
Majesty, that should condescend so far to disclose a Monument of so great
Concern for the Conversion of the Heathen in this novel Vintage of Christ;
wherefore not to conceal their Joy, they betook themselves to Siganfu, the
great Metropolitan City of Xensi, that they might be ocular Spectators of it;
of which the first was Father Alvares Samedus a Portuguese, whose words I shall
the rather allege, by how much he was the more engaged unto me by the strict
tie of Friendship, whilst he remained at Rome Procurator or Provincial, where
he related to me in a familiar Conference all the Observations he had made
concerning this Monument. Now he thus relates the whole Circumstance in his
History of the Affairs of China, Published in Italian, page 158.

Three Years after, in the Year 1628. there went some Fathers to that Province,
upon occasion of a Mandorin, being a Christian, whose Name was Philip, who was
going thither; those Fathers, by the help of the Mandorin, erected both a
Church and a House in the Metropolis of Siganfu, that since our Blessed God,
who would that so fair a Memorial of a hold taken of his Divine Law in that
Country should be discovered, he might also be served, and the Restoration of
the same Faith Instituted in the same Place. 'Twas granted to me to be of the
first, and I fancied that Mansion happy because of seeing the Monument, and
when I got thither I cared not for any thing else: I saw it, and read it,
viewed it, and read it over and over leisurely, and wholly; and considering its
Antiquity, I wondered how it could be so entire, and have its Characters so
clear and cleanly Engraven. In the middle it has many Chinese Characters,
which contain the Names of Priests and Bishops of those Times; it has also
many others, which then were not known, because they are neither Hebrew nor
Greek, yet they are thought by most to contain the same Names, to the end that
if perchance any Stranger should not be able to read those of the Country, they
might happily understand the Foreign ones. Afterward passing by Coccino, I
arrived at Grauganor, the Seat of the Archbishop of Costa, to consult upon
these Characters with Father Antonio Fernandez of our Society (most excellently
skilled in the Characters of this St. Thomas his Christianity) who told me that
they were Syriack Characters, and such as were in use there. Thus Father
Alvares Samedus.

But there being very few that had any knowledge in the Syriack Letters, at
length being sent to Rome, they came to my Hands, when I (if I be not deceived)
gave the first Interpretation of them in my Prodromus Coptus, as I shall show
more at large anon; yet notwithstanding I could not obtain them all, because
some of them being described in disjoined Papers, peradventure were Transcribed
from the authentic Copy, only for a Specimen; but when not long after the
perfect Exemplar of the Original (which also at this day is to be seen in the
Library of the Roman College) was sent unto me, then in truth I esteemed it
requisite to finish all and every part of them in this, as a very convenient
Place, with a more exact Interpretation both of the Chinesian and Chaldean
Characters.

Father Martinius Martinii coming to Rome after Samedus, did not only give me
an account of the Monument by word of Mouth, but also relates the Matter at
large in his Atlas, where treating of the Province of Xensi, he says, That
which makes this Province the more famous, Martin. Atlas page 44.
is that most ancient Stone, Sculp'd partly with Chinese Characters, concerning
the Introduction of the Gospel by the Successors of the Apostles into China;
thereon are Registered the Names of the Bishops and Priests of that Time, and
the Favors and Indulgences of the Chinesian Emperors; there is also contained
in it a short, but a most exact and admirable Explication of the Christian Law,
composed in a most eloquent Style; concerning which, by Gods assistance, I
shall treat more fully in my second Decade of the Epitome of the Chinesian
History. This Stone was found Anno 1625. when in the City Sanyun a Trench was
prepared, by casting up the Earth, for laying of the Foundation of a Wall: The
Governor of the Place being informed thereof, when he had exactly considered
the Footsteps of venerable Antiquity, of which the Chinese are wonderful
Admirers, immediately he took order to have the whole Inscription of the
Monument Engraven on another Stone of the same Magnitude, observing and keeping
the same Strokes of the Characters as exactly as might be: The first Draught of
which the Fathers of our Society dispatched to Rome, together with the
Interpretation, where it is preserved in the Library of the Roman College. The
Figure of the Stone is extended after the mode of a Parallelogram, five Hands
broad, one thick, and almost ten long; on the top is a Cross, somewhat like
that of the Knights of Malta: If any one desires a more accurate Account of
it, he shall find the Matter more fully explained in the Prodromus Coptus of
the Reverend Father Athanasius Kircher, and in the Relation of the Reverend
Father Alvares Samedus, concerning the Transactions of China. The Fathers of
our Society then again restored the knowledge of the Law of God, obliterated
and almost blotted out of the memory of Men by the interval of a long Series of
Time, they having erected many Temples to the living and true God, and
Administered in them with conspicuous and signal Piety: Two of our Fathers do
there strenuously cultivate that new Vineyard of the Lord, one of them having
fixed his Station in the Metropolis, the other Traveling hither and thither
throughout the Province, where the greater necessity requires, for the
promotion of the Worship of God, and the Good of Souls, that he may every where
break and communicate the Bread of Salvation to all that require the same. Thus
Father Martinius Martinii.

Father Michael Boim at length arrived here, who brought me a more exact
Relation of this Monument than any other; he mended all the Defects in
describing of it from a Chinesian Manuscript, which I have in my Study, and in
my presence perfected a new and short Interpretation of the whole Table word
for word, by the assistance of his Associate Andreas Don Sin, a Native of
China, a Person excellently versed in his native Language: all which he
presents to the Reader; in which he has exactly described the Series of the
whole Matter, and whatsoever may afford it self worthy of consideration in this
Monument; which Epistle I have judged meet, with his assent, to be here
prefixed, as a luculent Testimony of the truth of this Interpretation, and also
for a lasting and durable Preservatory of the Matter; and I have taken care to
have the Draught of this Monument brought from China, the Original of which
even now may be seen in my Study to be Insculp'd, keeping its genuine Notes and
Characters, both those of the Chinese and Chaldeans, and also with the
addition of Scholias. The aforesaid Epistle of Father Michael Boim follows.

Father Michael Boim, a Polonian, of the Society of Jesus, wishes all
Happiness to the well affected Reader.
AMongst the Monuments found in China concerning the Catholic Faith there
Preached, a Marble Stone of Chinese Writing, Engraved about a thousand years
since, with ancient Syriack Characters, which they term Estrangelo, and the
Subscription of the Chaldean Priests, claims the precedence of Place.

Although long since there has been Imprinted an Interpretation of this
Monument, performed by Father Athanasius Kircher in the Latin Tongue, and after
him by Father Alvares Samedus in the Italian, who himself saw the Monument; yet
notwithstanding, because both of them have only attained the Sense of the
written Stone, and the former also had not as yet obtained out of China the
Syriack Subscriptions of all the Priests, that he might Interpret them; I have
therefore resolved with my self entirely, and with all Fidelity, to publish the
Inscription it self both in Chinesian and Latin Characters, with a Latin
Interpretation word for word, retaining the Chinese Phrase, and also to propose
and show unto all Persons all the Syriack Subscriptions of the Syrians
Commented on by Athanasius Kircher, a Person excellently accomplished in the
Languages, with other Chinesian Occurences, as so many obvious Testimonies of
the Catholic Verity: and that I may comprehend all in a word, to expose the
Stone it self to the Eye of the whole World in the Chinesian Idiome, as it was
Sculp'd in the Year of Christ 782. that from this most ancient Testimony every
one may conjecture, how true the Doctrine of the Catholics is, seeing the same
was Preached in an opposite Quarter of the World, amongst the Chinese, Anno
636. of our Savior, that is about a thousand years since. The Chinesian
Original of the Stone is now conserved in the Library of the Roman College
that belongs to the Fathers of the Society of Jesus; and another Copy is to
be seen in the Repository of the House of the Profession. I my self also
obtained from the most Grave Chinese Doctors and Masters (at the very time that
the Monument was found) a Book Printed in the Chinese Language, in which the
Writing of the Stone was most truly and exactly expressed according to the true
Original. They advise the Chinese in the larger Preface adjoin'd to the Book,
that at length they would have recourse to the Masters of the great Occident
(for so they term the Fathers of the Society of Jesus) and discover whether
they Preach the same Law amongst the Chinese, which their Ancestors with so
many Emperors embraced a thousand Centuries ago, and which the Fathers of the
Society of Jesus exhibited in the Books Printed in the Chinese Language before
the Stone was found. Now it only remains that I should declare how this
Marble Table was detected.

When, after the Death of St. Francis Xavier, the venerable Father Matthew
Riccius, and other Fathers of the Society of Jesus, had introduced the Gospel
of Christ into the more Inland Parts of China, and had erected Residences and
Churches in some Provinces, and therefore the Propagation of the Holy Faith had
made no small progress in that of Xensi.

Anno 1625. one of the Fathers of the same Society, invited by Doctor Philip,
having Baptized twenty Persons in his native Country of Sanyven, he went with
the same Doctor to see a Stone, which they had found some Months before in the
Village Chenche, near the Metropolis Siganfu, whilst they were casting up the
Rubbish for the building of a Wall.

This Father writes (which other Fathers, who had fixed their Abode, and
erected a Church in Siganfu, with the Christians and Heathens, also affirmed)
That a Stone was found five Hands broad, one thick, and nine long; the top
whereof made like an oblong Pyramid of two Hands, and one broad; on the Vertex
the Cross was Engraven above the Clouds, that with its Branches seemed to
imitate the Flower-Deluce; besides the Chinesian Inscription, on the left side,
and beneath, there appeared the Names of the Syrian Priests, and also other
Chinesian Names of the same Priests underwritten. (It is the Custom of the
Chinese to have many Names; whence also the Christians at this Day retain both
the Name of the Saints they received in Baptism, and another Chinese Name.) The
Governor of the Place being certifi'd of the finding of this Monument,
commanded an elegant Composition to be made in praise of it, and to be Engraven
on such another like Marble Stone, causing both of them to be placed in the
Fane or Temple of the Bonzi, that are called Tan Su, a Mile distant from the
Walls of the Metropolis Siganfu, as a perpetual remembrance of the same.

Many other Footsteps of the Catholic Faith Preached to the Chinese were
discovered in the following Years, which God seems not willing to have
manifested, but only at that very time in which the Preaching of the same Faith
arrived amongst the Chinese by the Labor of the Fathers of our Society, that
so both the old and new Testimonies might affect the identity of the Catholic
Faith, and the truth of the Gospel might be rendered perspicuous and manifest
unto all, The like Images of the Holy Cross were seen in the Province of Fokien
in the Year 1630. In the Province of Kiangsi also a miraculous Light shone
forth, Anno 1635. which was beheld by the Gentiles; and also in the Mountains
of Fokien, and in the City Cyvencheu, 1643. Crosses were found; yea, the
venerable Father Martin Riccius, when first he came into China, found Xe tsu
Kiao, to be a Name signifying The Doctrine of the Crosses, by which the
Christians anciently, that were Disciples of that Doctrine of the Cross, were
named; and I doubt not but all that were Christians in the Kingdoms of China,
when the Tartars about three hundred years past first invaded China, and that
they lived there mixed with Sarazens, Jews, Nestorians, and Gentiles; that is
to say, in the Time of Marcus Paulus Venetus, who traveled unto Catay, which
is the very same with that we now call China.

And now, whether St. Thomas, or any other Apostle, first Preached the Gospel
to the Chinese, is not yet certainly known. Father Nicholas Trigautius
collecteth from some ancient Testimonies of the Christians of the Church of
Malabar in the Archbishopric of Cranganor, or De Serra, which are termed The
Christians of St. Thomas, That in that Place, as also in Meliapor (which
formerly was called Calamina, and now by the Portuguese, San Thome) the holy
Apostle Preached, by reason that out of their Gaza, or Treasury, in the Office
of St. Thomas is recited or rehearsed; That by St. Thomas the Chinese and
Ethiopians were Converted to the Truth; by St. Thomas the Kingdom of Heaven
took its flight, and ascended to the Chinese: And in the Antiphono, the
Ethiopians, Indians, Chinese, and Persians, in commemoration of St. Thomas,
Offer up Adoration unto his holy Name. Also in an ancient Synodical Canon, the
Bishops of the great Province, viz. those other Metropolitans of China, India,
and Pases, do send their Letters of Consent. Add withal, That he that Governed
the Church De Serra at the coming of the Portuguese, subscribed himself
Metropolitan of all India and China. But in truth, things being more narrowly
considered, from those Circumstances and Footsteps which began to be manifest
after the time of Father Trigautius, we cannot certainly conclude, that St.
Thomas the Apostle Preached the Gospel himself amongst the Chinese: for
although these Footsteps of the Faith of Christ here found, do evidently show,
That the Christian Belief has been in China; yet notwithstanding, those very
Paths or Tracts do demonstrate, At what time the Christian Faith entered into
China.
that the Faith had its entrance into China when the Family of Heuhan Ruled
over three Kingdoms (which are now united in Nanking, the third Province of the
Empire) viz. in the Province of Kiangsi, at the Shore of the River; for
Antron-Cross seems by its Inscription to have been fixed, according to the
Chinesian Computation, about the Year of Christ 239. (which Cross weighed about
three thousand weight) whence the Faith, and the Preachers of the same, are
certainly evinced to have come amongst the Southern Chinese about a thousand
four hundred and fifteen years ago. But in some years following (the Knowledge
of the Gospel being extinguished) it was again renewed by Priests out of Tacyu,
that is, India or Syria, in Xensi, a Northern Kingdom of the Chinese, the
Royal Family of Tam then Reigning Anno 639. as the Monument that was found
avoucheth, where relating the Preachers of the Faith of Christ at that time
amongst the Chinese, it mentions not St. Thomas, or any other Apostle; which
yet, if Insculp'd, would have been of considerable moment unto their purpose
who erected the Stone, viz. That the Preachers of the Faith then again Preached
the same Law that St. Thomas or some other Apostle had before Preached amongst
the Chinese. Moreover it is evident, That those Preachers of Tacyu had no
knowledge of St. Thomas, or any other Apostles Preaching the Law of Christ unto
the Chinese; and a Conjecture may be made, that peradventure neither St.
Thomas, nor any other Apostle, introduced the Gospel amongst them: And that I
may speak most moderately, nothing can be certainly deduced or drawn concerning
this Matter from the Footsteps here found; and the Passages before alleged are
only able to prove, That those Priests were sent from the Church of St. Thomas,
or Babylon, which then Governed the Malabran Chuch De Serra, belonging unto the
Christians of St. Thomas (as the Portuguese afterward found) to erect an
Episcopal Seat, and to introduce the Faith amongst the People of China, seeing
this is testified by the ancient Syrian Language called Estrangelo, which is
now retained in that Church, and was in former Times in use in Babylon and
Syria. And as for the Orations composed in praise of St. Thomas the Apostle,
from them we may only conjecture, that by the Merits of St. Thomas and his
Church, the Priests perchance introduced first of all the Faith which they had
received from St. Thomas, amongst the Chinese; and therefore deservedly their
Conversion ought to be attributed unto St. Thomas. Wherefore seeing there is no
mention of St. Thomas to be found in the Paths of the Faith Preached, hitherto
discovered, we cannot positively assert, That St. Thomas, or any other Apostle,
Preached the Gospel unto the Chinese; but I rather think that many Ages after,
the Christians of Prester-Iohn's Country (whose Emperor Paulus Venetus calls
Usan Can) who are termed The Worshippers of the Cross, were those that entered
into China either with the Tartars, or a little before: for those from India,
or rather from the Syrian Chaldea, or those of Malabar, as they are far more
ancient than the Tartar-Christians, so would they have called their Disciples
that were Followers of a more clear Doctrine Kin Kiao; but I believe those
Preachers came not out of India, for the Syrian Language and Names testify
them to be Syrians; and they termed themselves Jews, or of India, by reason
they Preached that Law or Doctrine which had its Original from India: But from
what Place those Syrian Priests came, as also their Syrian Subscriptions,
these, I say, we leave to the industrious Disquisitions of the Reverend Father
Athanasius Kircher, a Person highly meriting of all Antiquity; which that he
may accomplish with the greater fidelity and solidity, we have presented him
the same Writing, transcribed in the Chinese out of the Book by the sole pains
and industry of Don Chin Andreas, a Noble Chinesian Youth, the inseparable
Companion of my Voyage to Rome, to the Apostolic See (which Book was Imprinted
and divulged throughout the whole Empire by the Chinese Doctors, Men of great
Fidelity and Authority) with my Latin Translation rendered word for word; and I
have laid up the Book that is altogether consonant to the original Monument, in
the Study of the same Father, together with an Attestation of the Fact, by the
Subscription of my own Hand, and the Hands of those that were Natives of China,
Eyewitnesses of the Monument, as also the Transcribers of this Table from the
Original.

Rome, November. 4. Anno 1653. Father Michael Boim. Andreas Don Chin, a Chinese.
Matthew, a Chinese.


A Paraphrastical Declaration of a Chinese Inscription, Translated word for
word out of the Chinese Language into the Portuguese, out of that into Italian,
and from the Italian into the Latin Tongue.
The Declaration of Xiu Piu; or, as the Commentator has it, made by a Priest
of the Kingdom of Judea, who was called Kim Lim.
1. THis therefore I say, The Creatic^^ of all things.
That he who was always True and Undisturbed, being without any Beginning, of a
most profound Intellect and eternal Essence, by his most excellent Power out of
Nothing created All things, and by his Divine Wisdom made the Saints. This is
that Divine Essence, Three in Person, but One in Substance, our Lord, who being
certainly Infallible, without Beginning, Olo o you (which in the Chaldee
signifies the same with Eloba) made the four Parts of the World in form of a
Cross, gathering together the Chaos: He formed two Kis, that is, two Virtues or
Qualities called Inyam, the Commentator names them Two Principles; changed the
Abyss, that is, he took away the Darkness, and the Heaven and the Earth
appeared: He formed the Sun and Moon, that by their continual Motions they
should distinguish the Night and Day: He set together and built all things. But
when he created the first Man, besides his Being, he endowed him with Original
Righteousness, appointing him Lord of the whole Universe; which at first of his
own Nature was empty and vile, filled with himself, of a plain and equal
Understanding, and having no mixture of any inordinate Appetite.

2. But afterward, by cunning Deceits, The Fall of Adam.
the Devil brought it to pass, that Adam infected whatever was before naturally
and in its self Pure and Perfect; that is, he was the cause of sowing the Seeds
of Malice (that general Disturber of the Peace) in his Heart, whereby the equal
Temper of his Uprightness was altered, and Discord fraudulently introduced:
From whence in process of time three hundred and sixty five Sects sprung up one
after another, each of which drew to themselves as many as they could delude;
some worshipping the Creature in stead of the Creator; others made an empty
Principle of all things, and a real Ens, (to this alludes the Sect of the
Pagodi and Learned Chinese) because they assert, That the Principle which
produced all things was void; That the same is to them subtle and
undiscernable to the Senses, although in it self it be a real and positive
Principle. But others say, That the Principle of things is not only real and
positive, but that it was of such a Figure and Corpulency, as might easily be
comprehended by Sense. Some did seek Happiness by Sacrifices; others took a
pride to deceive Men under the specious show of Goodness, using all their Skill
and Industry therein, making all their Diligence and Intentions subservient to
their Affections: But in vain, and without any profit, did they labor, still
making their progress from bad to worse, as it happens to those that would
strike Fire out of an Earthen Vessel, they add Darkness to Darkness; and so
indeed once leaving the true Path, they can never return to the Way of Life.

3. Then one of the Divine Persons of the most Holy Trinity, The Incarnation of
the Son of God.
called the Messiah, by contracting and hiding his Majesty, and accommodating
himself to Humane Nature, was made Man: Wherefore, for the declaring these
joyful Tidings, he selected an Angel, and was born of a Virgin in Judea. A
great Star also proclaimed this Felicity, so that Kings seeing its brightness,
came and offered Presents, that the Law and Prophesies of the twenty four
Prophets might be fulfilled. He Governed the World by one great Law, founded
the Divine and Spiritual Law without any thundering Words, and confirmed it with
the Seal of a true Faith. He pronounced the eight Beatitudes, turned Mundane
things into Eternal, opened the Gate of the three Theological Virtues, and gave
Life by destroying Death: He descended into Hell in Person, and brought
Confusion to the Devil and his Angels: He wafted Good Men to Heaven in the Ship
of his Piety, and gave Salvation to the Souls of the Just. These things
finished about Noon, by his wonderful Power he ascended into Heaven, leaving
twenty seven Tomes or Volumes of his Doctrine, to open a Way for the Conversion
of the World. He Instituted Baptism by Water and the Spirit, for the washing
away of Sins, and cleansing the World: He made use of the Cross, that he might
take in all without exception, stirring up all by the voice of Charity,
commanding to worship toward the East, that they might proceed in the Way of a
Glorious Life.

4. His Ministers or Priests for outward Ornament sake nourish their Beards,
but shave the Crowns of their Heads, that they may show they are inwardly
inclined to no Evil: They use no Servants: In Prosperity and Adversity they
show wonderful Humility, making themselves equal to the meanest: They heap not
up Riches, but make them all common: They observe Fasts, as well for
mortification of their Passions, as observation of the Divine Precepts: They
bear all awful Reverence to their Superiors, who are equally as themselves
retired from the World: Seven times a day they Pray as well for the Living as
the Dead; and one Day in seven they keep Holy, to purge their Souls from Sin,
The Excellency of the Christian Law.
and restore them to Purity. And because this infallible and well-grounded Law
is so excellent, it is a very difficult thing to appropriate to it a congruous
Name; for the Effects of it are to illuminate and find out all things with the
clearest perspicacity; whereupon, as necessary, it was entitled Kim kiao, that
is, The Great and Perspicuous Law.

5. The Law, where there are no Royal Persons, is neither extended nor dilated;
yet Persons Royal without the Law are not worthy of Esteem. The Law therefore
and Princes concording, and as it were meeting in one, forthwith the World is
illuminated.

In this famous Time a King named Tai cum veu huamti, with singular Prudence
and Sanctity Governing China, there came out of Judea a Man of very great
Virtue, styled Olo puen, who brought as it were from the Clouds this true
Doctrine: And driven by the Winds, by the help of Hydrographical Maps (having
sustained many Dangers and much Labor) at length, in the Year Chin quon jeu
sie, that is, 636. he arrived at the King's Palace: When the King heard
thereof, he commanded the famous Colao, called Fam Kien Lym, that he should
ride to meet this new Guest toward the West, that is, toward the Suburbs of
the City, and should bring him to the Palace with all Kindness and Respect;
then he directed him to declare his Doctrine there, when at once he searched
out the Truth of the Law; whereof being satisfied, he seriously commanded the
same to be Preached and Published with Efficacy and Reverence through his whole
Kingdom. And in the Year 12 Cin quon 7 (which is 636.) he wrote back in this
manner. The tenor of the Promulgation is as follows:

The true Law has no determinate Name, nor have the Saints any limited Place
where they remain; they run to all Parts that they may instruct the World,
being intent with might and main to do good, and succor the afflicted People.
Out of the far distant and remote Kingdom of Tancin, (or Judea) Olo puen, a Man
of most eminent Virtue, brought and presented his Doctrine and certain Images
to our Princely Palace: Whose Intentions to instruct us we having examined to
the bottom, do find his Doctrine most excellent, without any exterior clamor,
and taking its original from the Creation of the World. This Doctrine consists
not in multitude of Words, nor does it lie only in a superficial Foundation for
Truth, but brings Profit and Salvation to Mankind: Wherefore it is meet that it
be divulged through our whole Empire.

He commanded also the Mandorin called Nim Fam to build a large Church, and to
officiate therein. The Author Kim Lim praises this King, for enervating the
Strength of the Monarchy of Cheu Olad iu, that is, the Head of the Sect Stai
iu, or Tansu. He departed in a black Chariot toward the West, that is, out of
China: But where the Great Tam is made famous with Tao, the Holy Gospel is
brought into China. A little after the King caused the Effigies of the same Olo
puen, who as we said first Preached here the Gospel, carefully and exactly to
be Painted, and so to be fastened to the Wall. This most excellent Figure shines
at the Gates of the Church, and his Memory will always be refulgent in the
World.

6. According to Geographers who mention those Western Parts, The Des^ription
of the Situation of Judea according to the Chinese Geographers.
and by the Historians of the Kingdoms of Han and Guei, the Kingdom of Tancin
(that is Judea) on the South is bounded by the Red Sea; on the North it has
the Mountains of Pearls; on the West Boco das fullas (which what it is, is hard
to conjecture, but I guess it to be Carmel) bounds it; lastly, on the East it
borders on this Place Ciam fam and The Dead Water. This Land casts forth Ashes
yet hot with Fire, (perhaps he means the Asphaltick Lake) produces Balsamum,
little Gems and Carbuncles (by which he seems to mean Egypt, with the Coast of
the Red Sea, where the things aforesaid are found.) There are neither Thieves
nor Murderers, but the People live in Peace and Quietness. They admit of no
Religion into the Kingdom but the Gospel, nor do they confer any Dignities but
on Persons meriting the same by Virtue. Their Buildings are very large. In a
word, the Kingdom is famous for Poetry, Order, and good Manners.

7. Docao, or Caozum, Cum the Son of Tai cum, came to the Government in the
Year of our Lord 651. Our Author Kim Lim speaks thus of him:

Cao vim, otherwise Caozum, a very great Prince, not at all degenerating from
the Virtues of his Grandfather, was pleased with Honor to continue his good
Intent, and also to improve whatever his Father had begun: He commanded
Churches to be built in all Provinces, at the same time also enobling Olo puen
with the Title of Bishop of the Great Law which Governs the Kingdom of China.

Hereupon the Law of God was promulgated through all the ten Provinces of
China, the Kingdom enjoyed a flourishing Peace, all the Cities were filled with
Churches, and the People prosper'd under the Evangelical Felicity.

8. In this Year called Ximlie, which is all one with The Year of our Lord 699.
the Bonzii, Followers of the Pagods, making use of their Strength, with a huge
clamor aloud blasphemed our holy Law in the Place which is called Tum Cieu, in
the Province of Honan; and in the end of another Year called Sien tien, which
answers to the Year of our Lord 713. certain private Men in Sieno, the ancient
Place of Venvam, (the Commentator will have it to be Siganfu in the Province of
Xensi) were so audacious as to rail against our holy Law with Mocks, Flouts,
and opprobrious Language.

9. At this time there was one of the Chief Priests (a Bishop as it should
seem) by Name John, and another Man of great Virtue and Eminency, by Name Kie
Lie, with other Nobles and Persons belonging to them, no less honored for their
Fame, than respected for their contempt of worldly Affairs, who began again to
revive and Preach their most excellent Gospel, and to tie together those Threads
which by the malice of the Devil had been broken: And the King Hiuen cum chi
tao, who began his Reign in the Year 719. commanded five of his Principal
Officers, that they should go in Person into that Happy House (meaning the
Church) and erect Altars. Then the Pillar of the Law, which for a short time
had been laid grovelling, began anew to rise and flourish. In the beginning of
the Year Tien pao, being the Year of our Lord 743. King Ota Ciam Kuen gave
strict Command to Cuolie fie (an Eunuch in extraordinary Favor and Power with
him) that he should carry the true Effigies of the five Kings his Predecessors
and Grandfathers, and place them in the Church, whither also he should send an
hundred Measures of Precious things for celebrating the Solemnity, the Author
Kim Lim says, in honor of the said Kings.

10. In the third Year Tien pao, being the Year of our Lord 745. there was in
Judea, others say India, one Kieho a Priest, who was conducted into China by
the help of the Stars, and looking upon the Sun (this was a Ceremony of those
who are admitted to speak with our Emperor) he was forthwith brought into his
Presence: But the Emperor Commanded that the Priests John and Paul, with others
of that Profession, and the so eminently virtuous Person Kieho, should betake
themselves to the Palace Him Kim, to worship and perform other holy Acts of
Devotion. At this time his Royal Grants were kept in Tables in the Church,
according to order richly adorned, and glittering with red and blue; and the
empty space was filled with the Royal Plume, ascending and reaching even to the
Sun. His Favors and Donations are compared to the height of the Mountains of
the South, and the abundance of his Benefits equal to the depth of the East
Sea: Reason cannot but well like a thing so approved and worthy to be
remembered. Therefore the King Sa Cum nen men, or Ven min, who began to Reign in
the Year 757. commanded Churches to be built in Lim suu seu and five other
Cities, by a new Proclamation. This King was of a most acute Ingenuity, under
whom a Gate of Happiness was opened to the whole Kingdom; and hereby all the
Royal Affairs of State were Administered, and prosper'd with applause,
rejoicing, and felicity.

11. The King Tai cum nen vu coming to the Throne in 764. and enjoying the
benefit of good Times, managed all the Affairs of the Kingdom without any
difficulty. At the Feast of Christ's Birth every Year he sent certain
excelcellent Perfumes in a thankful remembrance, and assigned Princely
Provision of all kinds in honor of the Ministers of that holy Law. Surely the
Heaven gives beauty and perfection to the World, which therefore produces all
things with so liberal a Hand. This King imitated Heaven, and therefore knew it
was fit to nourish and preserve his own.

12. The King Kien cium xim ven vu, in the Year 781. used eight ways of
rewarding the Good, and chastising the Bad. He set forth new Orders for
restoring and promoting the Gospel. The Effect of the Gospel and Law of Christ
His Government was full of Excellency. We Pray to God for him, not blushing
thereat. He was eminent for Virtue, Peaceable, and Learned: He loved his
Neighbor, abounded with Charity to help all, and was a great Benefactor to all
then living. This is the true Way and the Scale of our holy Law, to cause that
the Winds and the Rain return at their wonted Seasons, that the World be quiet,
Men well Governed, Affairs orderly disposed, such as yet are on Earth live
well, and those that are deceased enjoy Rest and Peace: To have these things in
readiness, and be able to give an Account thereof, proceeds really from our
holy Faith, and are Effects of the Strength and Power of our most sacred Gospel.

13. The King gave to the Priest called Usa, and one of the Chief Preachers of
the Law, these Titles, Kin ju, quam lo tai fu, being an Office in the Court,
and Sou fum cie, tu fu lei, being an Office without the Court, and Xi tien thum
Kien, another Office also (but the Explication thereof we have not found in the
Exemplar.) He gave also to the said Priest and Preacher of the Great Law, a
Vestment of blue Color (which the Italians call di color pavonazo.) This
Priest was inclined to Peace, rejoiced to do good to others, with all his
Endeavors striving to do Acts of Charity: He came into China from a remote
Country and Place called Vam xi ciu chim, being Heathenish, which is the same
as the far distant India: He perfectly taught several Sciences, and his Acts
were famous through China for above three Generations: At the beginning he
waited upon the King in his Court, and afterward his Name was Entered in the
King's Record or Chronicle.

14. The Governor Fuen Yam, called also Co cu y, and enobled with the Title of
Chum Xulim, at first only minded his Military Affairs in the Parts of Sofam;
but the King So cum, commanded Ay su, or Y su, that he should promote Co cuy
with more favor than the rest (it seems the King commanded Ay su to make him a
Councellor) for although his Captain loved him extraordinarily, yet he did not
like his ordinary method of proceeding; for (as the Chinese speak) An Army is
the Teeth and Nails, the Eyes and Ears of the Commonwealth. He knew how to
distribute his Revenues, and not hoard them up at home: He offered to the
Church a Precious thing called Poli (made of Glass as it seems) the People of
this Place name it Cim reguen, others Lintiguen. Besides, he bestowed
Tapestries of these Parts interwoven with Gold, called Cie Ki, repaired the
Churches in such manner, that he seemed to have founded them anew: He appointed
a Court and House for the reading of the Law, beautifying and adorning
Hospitals and Places of Receipt. Over and above these Exercises of our holy
Law, he was very much given to Works of Charity, every year calling together
the four Priests of the Churches, to whom he cordially performed all Offices of
Love and Service, he provided them with all necessary things for the space of
fifty days; he Fed such as were hungry, Clothed such as were naked, took care
of such as were Sick and Weak, and buried the Dead.

15. In the time of Ta so there was no such Goodness heard of with all his
Parsimony (this Ta so was a Bonzius, a Pagan kind of Priest) who in a great
Assembly of the Bonzii, wherein was to be consulted concerning the Affairs of
their Sect, he undertook the Office of receiving Strangers, and procuring every
one all things necessary. (Therefore the Author in handling the Works of
Charity of Oy ^ie, places him before Ta so.) But although this was a Time in
which the Gospel was Preached, yet we see there were Men void of Good Works:
Wherefore, that such heroic and noble Deeds may be declared and set in open
view, I have caused the same to be Engraven upon this great Stone.

16. I say therefore, That the true God is without any Beginning, Pure,
Peaceable, and Unchangeable: He was the first Creator of All things; he
discovered the Earth, and lifted up the Heaven. One of the Persons, for the
Eternal Salvation of Mankind, was made Man; he ascended into Heaven like the
Sun, destroying Darkness, and in all things establishing a profound Verity.

17. This most Glorious King, who most truly is the Chief King of Kings, takes
away all difficulty, using his own time: The Heaven was stretched out, and the
Earth extended. Most noble is our Gospel brought into the Kingdom of Tam,
asserting Knowledge, erecting Churches, and being both to the Living and the
Dead as a Refuge or Guide; and which exalting all Felicity, restored Peace to
the whole Universe.

18. Cao Cum continuing in the Footsteps of his Grandfather, The building of
Churches.
gave his Mind to the new building of Churches, so that with their loftiness
and magnificence they filled the Land; but the truth of this Law is its
greatest Beauty: He bestowed on the Bishop a Title of Honor, and the People
enjoyed a mirthful Peace without any irksom Toil.

19. The wise King Ni ven cum understood how to persevere in the true and right
Way; the Tables of the Kings were magnificent and illustrious; the Royal Grants
therein flourished and were resplendent, their Figures glittered: All the
People highly reverenced them, all things were improved, and from hence all
enjoyed the Perfection of Happiness.

20. This King So cum then Reigning, came to the Church in proper Person: The
Sun of Sanctity shined, and the enlightened Clouds dispelled Darkness and
Obscurity: Thus Felicity being accumulated in the King's House, all Vice was
banished, and our Empire restored by the taking away of Dissension.

21. The King Tai cum fu was Obedient; for Virtue he might compare with the
Heaven and Earth; he added as it were a Life to the People, and made all things
thrive: He sent sweet Perfumes for the giving of Thanks, and exercised Works of
Charity: The Sun and the Moon were united in one Person, that is, all flew to
perform their Duty and Obedience to him.

22. The King Kien cum being settled in the Government, showed himself most
virtuous; he pacified the four Seas by force of Arms; he illustrated ten
thousand in his Confines by Literature; illuminated the Secrets of Men like a
Candle, and as it were in a Looking-glass seeing all things, revived the whole
World; so that even barbarous People took from his Example a Rule to live by.

23. O how great! how perfect! and extending it self to all things, is this
Law! Willing to give a Name thereto, I could call it no other than The Divine
Law. Former Kings were not to seek how to dispose of their Affairs: I a Vassal
am only able to declare them, and therefore I erect this most precious and
wealthy Stone, to be the Proclaimer of this excceeding Felicity.

24. In the Empire of the Great Tam, in the second Year of this Kien cum, in
the Year of our Lord 782. on the seventh Day of the Autumnal Month, being
Sunday (or to say better, The Lord's Day) this Stone was erected, Him ciu being
then Bishop of the Chinese Church. The Mandorin, by Name Lieu sieci yen, but by
Title Ciao y cum, or as others, Chio y lam (in which Office before him was Tai
cieu sie su Can Kiun) made this Inscription with his own Hand.

And this is the Explication of the Inscription Engraved on the Stone; in which
this truly is worthy of great admiration, That the relation of so great a
variety and multiplicity of Affairs and things as this Stone contains, could be
comprised in so narrow a space, and written with so few as eighteen thousand
Characters.

Of this Writing there was a double Interpretation made; this present is most
conformable to that which was made at Peking, and afterward again by P.
Michael Boim exposed from the Chinese Exemplar, being indeed more elegant and
proper, and likewise more conformable to the Chinese Language; and although for
that cause it seems less polite in our Tongue, yet nevertheless is it most
eloquent, and having respect to the Phrase and Style of the Chinese Speech, is
by such as profess themselves Masters in the understanding of that Tongue,
judged the most deserving Praise of all others. Now it is collected from this
Monument, That the Law of Christ was above a thousand years ago brought into
China; also with what Reverence and Honor it was received by the Emperors; how
and through what vast Provinces it was Preached; how in the space of a hundred
and fifty years, wherein it chiefly flourished, it was spread abroad; what
Persecutions it twice suffered, and how by little and little it was so
suppressed, that unless the remembrance had been preserved in this Monument, no
Footsteps thereof could have been traced; for in all the Chinese Chronicles,
besides the Names of the Kings and Mandorins, that then lived, there is hardly
any mention of it, or any other Matters of those Times. And this Stone was
found a few years before the Fathers of the Society of Jesus arrived in China:
From whence it appears, That the Interpretation of such sublime and notable
things was only reserved to them, who being eminently instructed in the Science
as well of Humane as Divine Matters, were to become the Preachers and
Propagators of the same Law and Doctrine, almost obliterated by the
all-devouring Teeth of Time. And this may suffice concerning the Inscription in
the Chinese Language.

CHAP. III.
An Interpretation of the Syriack Names inscribed upon the Monument.
NOW we proceed to the Inscription that is Insculp'd on the Margins; which
seeing it has remained unexplain'd hitherto, by reason of the want of Men in
China that are versed in those Characters, and for that very cause was sent
into Europe by the Portuguese Fathers of our Society, to be explicated by
Persons skilled in the Syrian Language; I first of all undertook the
Interpretation thereof, and that with good success, discharging the same with
equal fidelity and diligence. Now it is Engraved on the Margins of the Stone in
the ancient Syriack Characters that are termed Estrangelo, and it contains
the Year, the Names, and Offices of those Apostolical Men, and Promoters of the
Divine Law, that were then in China when the Stone was erected. Father Emanuel
Dias, in a certain Letter written in the Portuguese Tongue, Dated from Maccao,
August 23. 1625. takes notice of this Stone, and of the Inscriptions
mentioned; His words translated are these:

In the Province of Xensi in China, where now Trigautius resideth, a certain
Stone of about twenty four Hands breath was dug up; in which is manifestly
apparent, that above a thousand two hundred and forty three years since there
were Christians with shaven Crowns, that Preached the Mystery of the Trinity
and Incarnation, and that the Kings of China conferred many Favors on them.
Doctor Leo desired to have the whole Matter Printed, first transcribed by the
Mandorins that were Christians, to show all the Mysteries contained on the
Stone, that the same might more plainly appear. At present we only endeavor
that the Matter may come to the knowledge of the Emperor. God prosper all to
his own Glory.

Father Francis Hurtado, from the Province of Nancheu, also confirms this,
and adds, That in the same Year a Passage was opened into the new Provinces
of the Empire of China, viz. Xensi, Xansi, Fohum; which last is conterminate
with Couchinchina, and easily admits of Strangers. And thus proceeding says,
Unto these were annexed ten or twelve Lines in Syriack, which I could not
Interpret; also the Privileges granted by the Kings of China to the Priests of
that Law were adjoin'd. The Version was made word for word out of the Chinese
Language. There were also other Translations, but they all agree in the
Essential Matters. It is Recorded in the Books of the Kings of China, that the
Christian Faith arrived amongst the Chinese above 994 years since, and that
this Inscription was made 140 years after its entrance. Thus Father Emanuel
Dias.

But in other Letters of a more later Date, from Maccao 21 November. 1627. we
find it thus written concerning this City: Some years since there was found a
very long and ancient Writing Engraven on a Stone in the Chines^^ and Chaldean,
or Syrian Language; from whence it is evident, That the Law of our Lord and
Savior arrived amongst the Chinese about a thousand years since, Anno Dom.
636. Now the Stone was erected and inscribed Anno 782. that is a hundred and
forty six years after the Preaching of the Gospel there, by which a great
Conversion unto the Faith was wrought, Churches were built, and Bishops
constituted. The Kings that Governed at that time are reckoned about eight,
whose Names are expressed in that Stone, and who ^ll of them favored the
Christians: Now the Preachers of this Law came out of Palestine, and other
adjoining Places. It contains the chief Mysteries of our Faith, which are
manifest from the Inscription. All which are largely evident from the
forementioned Testimonies of Father Boim, Martinius, and Daniel Bartolus, which
were collected from the Study of the College of our Society. But I think it
will be worth our time to produce this Syrian Inscription in the same
Strangelick Characters in which it was expressed in China, together with the
Interpretation; especially seeing the Fathers of our Society in China therefore
sent it hither into Europe in a particular Folio, Printed in China by the
Masters of that Language, for a better Explanation of it: For this being
Explained, I hope it will so come to pass, that both the Day, the Names, the
Country, and the Offices of the Preachers of the Divine Law, and finally our
Design, will the more evidently be discovered.

The Inscription of the Syriack Names is twofold; one of them Sculp'd on the
Margin, the other on the Foot of the Monument: And because this latter
contains the Year of its Erection, we shall begin the Thread of our Exposition
from it. The Syrian Inscription is as follows:

Adam Kasiso Ucurapiscupo Upapasi di Zinstan. Bejume Abo dabohotho Mor Ha^an
Iesua Kataliko Patriarchis. Besanath alf utisaain utarten dia vanoie. Mor
libuzad Kasiso Ucurapiscupo de Cumdan medinah malcutho bar nihh napso Milis
Kasiso dm^ Balehh Medintho Tahhurstan Akim Lucho hono Papa dicta bou beh
medaharna^ho dpharukan Ucaruzuthon dabhain daluat malche dizinio. Adam
Meschamschono Bar Iidbuzad Curaphiscopo. Mar Sargis Kasiso, Ucurapiscupo.
Sarnischua Kasiso. Gabriel Kasiso Varcodia cun, Urisch ahito de Cumbdan u
Dasrag.
This the Explication of it.
Adam, Priest or Presbyter, and Archbishop and Pope of Zindostan, or the Region
of China, [where note, that Stan in the Indian Language signifies A Region,
whence are derived Indostan, Turkistan, or Turchestan, and the like Names that
signify the same, even as the following German Names Friesland and
Franckeland, signify the Regions of Frisia and Francovia, and other
innumerable words of the like kind, all which are compounded of the German word
Land, which as the Indian word Stan, is the proper Name of a Region or Place.
Which I though fit here to allege, that the Reader might not be ignorant why
China is called Zindostan] in the Days of the Father of Fathers, the Lord Hanan
Iesua or John Iosue, Catholic Patriarch [you must understand either the
Patriarch of Alexandria, or of Antioch, or of Babylon, who are properly called
Universal or Catholic Patriarchs] in the Year 1092. according to the Grecian
Compute; The Lord Iidbuzad, Priest and Vicar-Bishop of Cumdan, City of the
Kingdom [so they phrase the Metropolis] Son of Milis, Peace be to his Soul,
Priest of Belehh, a City of Tahurstan, [you must read Turchestan] Pope, [so
they term the Chief in any Ecclesiastical Order] erected this Table, and the
Administration, or Government of our Savionr is Inscribed in it, and also the
Preaching of our Fathers, who resided with the Kings of China.

Adam the Deacon, Son of Iidbuzad, Episcopal Vicar. Mar Sargis, Presbyter and
Episcopal Vicar. Sarnischua, Presbyter. Gabriel, Presbyter and Archdeacon, Head
of the Churches of Cumdan and Dasrag.
And these are found in the Folio Printed in China, which are also seen
Insc^lp'd on the Stone.

But before I proceed any farther I must clear one Difficulty which occurreth,
about the Year of the Erection of this Stone; for the Year of this Stone in the
Chinesian Inscription is found so different from that of the Syriack, that not
a few Persons being perplexed with the diversity, alleged their Doubts unto me
concerning the true and faithful Interpretation of the Monument: for the
Portuguese Version out of the Chinese Tongue, and the Italian Translated from
the Portuguese, place the Year of the Erection of this Stone in the Year 782.
after the Birth of Christ; but the Syriack Inscription fixes the time,
according to the Compute of the Grecians, at the Year 1092. which how different
it is from the other Account, is easy to be discovered by any one. Now that
all these Particulars may be the better reconciled, and this Knot also
unloos'd, I thought it requisite first to set down word for word the
Translations of the aforesaid Inscription.

Thus the Portuguese has it.
No nosso Potentado do Grande Tam, segundo Anno deste Kien Cium, que eram do
Senhor 782. no mes de Autuno, no settimo dia, dia de Domingo, foy allevantada
esta pedra; sendo Bispo Nim Ciu, que governa a Igreia China.

Thus the Italian.
Nel nostro Potentato del Gran Tam, secondo Adno di questo Kien Cium, che erano
del Signore 782. nel mese di Autunno, nel settimo giorno, giorno di Dominica,
fu inalzata questa pietra; essendo Vescouo Nim Ciu, che governa la Chiesa della
China.

The Italian Version is thus.
In our Dominion of the Grand Tam, the second Year of this Kien Cium, which was
of our Lord 782. in the Month of Autumn, on the seventh day, upon the Sunday,
this Monument was erected, Nim Ciu being Bishop, who is over the Church of
China.

The Interpretation of both of them is this.
In our Potency of the Great Tam, (viz. the King) in the second Year of this
Kien Cium, which was the Year of our Lord 782. in the Month of Autumn, on the
seventh day, being the Lord's Day, this Stone was erected, Nim Ciu the Bishop
Governing the Church of China.

The Syriack Inscription.
BISNAT ALF VE TISSAIN VE TARTEN DIUNOIO. That is, In the Year 1092. according
to the Grecian Account.
Now seeing the Eastern, or the Greek Church, does agree for the most part with
the Latin in the Compute of their Years, it is demanded, after what manner
these Years may be reconciled? I answer therefore, That this Monument was
Marked or Sculp'd with a twofold kind of Computation of the Years used by the
aforesaid Promulgers of the Christian Law, viz. One being the Ecclesiastical
Account of the Years of Christ, which the faithful Christians (...) where use
in China; the other was a Politic or Civil Year, which was common to the
Syrians, Chaldeans, Arabians, Egyptians, and almost to the whole East; which
that you may the better understand, you must observe, that the Years of the
Grecians, of which the Books of the Maccabees make mention, are the same with
those that are otherwise called by the Chaldeans, The Years of the Sele^cians,
Syro-Grecians, or Syro-Macedonians; but by the Hebrews, The Years of Contracts;
and by the Egytians, The Alexandrian Years, or The Account from the (...) of
Alexander; by the Arabians they are termed Dhul Karnain, which is as much as to
say, Of Alexander holding of two Horns, (and they therefore call him so, either
(as Christmannus will have it) because that he subdued both the Oriental and
Occidental Parts of the World; or, as I suppose more probably, from Jupiter
Ammon, who was figured with the Head of a Ram, whose Son Alexander would be
esteemed; or, in relation unto the he-Goat, unto which Daniel compares him) or
lastly, they are called The Years of Philip (which I have showed above to be
called by Albategnius, Tarich Alkupti) and the Epoch of those Years begins
12 Years complete after the Decease of Alexander the Great, as St. Hierome
observes out of Eusebius, on Daniel, cap. 9. who is followed herein by Ribera,
Torniellus and others. Now although before Julius Caesar these Years seem to
have had another form, and another beginning of their Month, yet
notwithstanding, by the common Supputation they take their Entrance from the
Calends of October. The Names of the Months are either Greek, or Syro-Chaldean;
in other respects they agree with the quantity and form of the Julian Year,
only that the Intercalary Day is added in this Epoch or Account, unto the
Month Sab^th, which is answerable unto our Month of February.

These things being noted beforehand, we place the beginning of the Grecian
Empire, by the consent of Eusebius, Scaliger, and others, in the Year current,
before the Year of the Christian Epoch or Account 310. in the 117th Olympiad,
according unto the Chronicle of Alexandria; for it is agreed upon by all, that
Alexander the Great died in that very year in which the 114th Olympiad began,
in the latter end of the Month Hecatombaeon, as Plutarch writes, viz. before
the Christian Account 322. (for Christ was born in the third year of the 194th
Olympiad considered exclusively) therefore the years of the Kingdoms of the
Grecians, beginning or taking place from the year of Christ 310. going on do
differ, so that the year 310 of the Kingdom of the Grecians begins from the
first year of Christ; whence it comes to pass, that if you add 310 unto the
year of Christ proposed, the beginning year of Alexander will arise in the very
year of Christ that is current, or going on; and if you substract 310 from the
year of Alexander, the year of Christ remains, in which that year of
Alexander is discovered; and finally, if the year of Alexander be subtracted
from 310. the number remaining will show the year before the Christian Epoch
or Account, in which the year of the Grecians began, or in which the Era or
Compute of Alexander had its beginning; which Compute the Arabians and
Egyptians call Tarich Dhul Karnain.

This being thus demonstrated, if you substract 310 (which is the difference
between the year of Christ and the year of Alexander) from the Grecian or
Alexandrian year 1092. that is Engraven in Syriack Characters on the Stone,
there will remain 782. which is the year of Christ Insculp'd on the Stone in
Chinesian Characters, exactly answering to the Syro-Grecian, or Alexandrian
year.

A Paradigma of the Compute or Account.
Alexander the Great died, according to Plutarch, Olymp. 114 A. After whose
Death, as St. Hierome witnesses, twelve years being completed, the
Alexandrian Epoch began, viz. Olymp. 117 B. N^w Christ was born the third year
exclusively, viz. Olymp. 194 C. The Stone was erected in the Alexandrian year
1092 D. And in the year of Christ 782. E.
This being thus laid down, substract the number B. from the number C. and you
have the difference of the aforesaid Olympiads, viz. 77 Olympiads, which being
reduced into years, each Olympiad consisting of four years, the Product will be
308. and unto those add the two years completed of the Olympiad in which
Christ was born, and they will make 310. which being subtracted from 1092.
there remains E. the number of the years of Christ in which the Stone was
erected. Wherefore with good advisement they Engraved this twofold Computation
of Time upon this Stone, that so such Strangers as understood not the year of
Christ, might here find that of Alexander, which extended farth^r, and with
which perhaps they might be better acquainted.

From hence it is also manifest, that the Syrian, or Chaldean Tongue in those
Times was common to the Churches of Syria, Palestine, Egypt, and Babylon, yea
peculiar to them in Christ's time; so that it is no wonder that the Gospel of
Christ, immediately after the Travels of the Apostles throughout the whole
World, was carried not only into the most remote Regions of the East, but also
into the adjacent Regions of Babylon, Egypt, and Ethiopia, where, as if in the
native Birth-places of the Church, the Syrian or Chaldean Tongue took such
root, that it was thereby spread throughout all the Coasts of India, as I have
said before, and the utmost Regions of China. But of this more in the following
Discourses.

OF THE VARIOUS Voyages and Travels UNDERTAKEN INTO CHINA.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
By whom, and by what means the Holy Gospel of Christ was at diverse times
introduced into the uttermost Regions of the East, into India, Tartaria, China,
and other Countries of Asia.
SEeing that at this very Day in India, China, and other Regions of Asia, there
are yet remaining frequent footsteps of the Christian Religion, as I have
shown even now, I think it will be worth while, if (having Explained the
Syro-Chaldean Monument found in China) I now give a brief Account by what way
and occasion these Apostolical Persons penetrated into those most remote
Quarters of the World; for having accomplished this, it will clearly appear,
that at all times Syria, Egypt, and Grecia, have been a Seminary, not only of
promoting the Christian Religion in the far distant Regions; but also before
the coming of Christ, they were the Propagators of all Superstition throughout
the World. And that I may proceed with the more clearness in a Matter so
abstruse, I shall first here set down the Opinions of some concerning them; so
that those things being discussed, it may more evidently appear what ought to
be resolved concerning the Matter proposed.

First therefore, there are some Persons who assert, That these Colonies of the
Christians first of all entered China, and the other Regions of Asia, by the
assistance of that great Asiatick Emperor usually termed Presbyter John: But
then again, seeing that this is a great Controversy amongst Authors concerning
this Emperor, and the Situation, Quality, and Condition of his Kingdom or
Empire, I shall in the first place allege something concerning this Prince and
his Dominions, for the more clear Explication of the Matter or Subject, albeit
I have already treated of the same in my Prodromus Coptus.

Who was that famous Presbyter John, and whether there ever were such an
Emmperor
NOw therefore, as the Kings of Egypt were at first called Pharaohs, and
afterward Ptolemyes; those of Mauritania, Seriphii; those of the Persians,
formerly Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and now Sophi; so the Name of Presbyter John has
now for a long time denoted the Dignity of some Christian Prince whose
Dominions are placed, by consent of the most knowing Persons, not amongst the
Ethiopians, or in any part of Africa, as some falsely suppose, but in the
Continent of Asia; yet in what Place he Ruled, is not exactly known. Now some
Writers affirming that they were the Kings of Cathay, Presbyter John, where he
inhabited.
have thereby rendered the Matter more doubtful, seeing it has been discovered
in these latter Years, that all Cathay belongs unto China, and that there is
no City or Territory called by this Name, that is now found without the Bounds
of China. And in this all the Fathers of our Society, who have continued in
China for many years, do agree, who are Persons very well skilled in
Geographical Knowledge; as Matthew Riccius, Nicholas Trigautius, Alvarus
Samedus, Michael Boi^, Martin Martinius, John Gruberus, and John Adams, that
great Mandorin of the Kingdom of China; and lastly Benedict Goes of the same
Society, who by order from his Superiors traveled from the Kingdom of Magor
purposely to find out Cathay by a Land-Voyage. I believe that it is not far
wide of the Truth, that besides that portion of Land, which by the Name of
Cathay was found by the Fathers of our Society within the Limits of China,
there is another Quarter of the World much larger, conterminate on the North
and West unto the Empire of China. But seeing that all that Region without the
Walls of China, is a Desert almost of two Months travel, incultivated, and
destitute of Inhabitants, it is probable that the Region of China, in latter
Times, as being very much manured, and abounding in all things, might properly
be called Cathay: And that the Desert at this day called Kalmuk, and the
Regions confining on it without the Walls, in former Ages had the Name of
Cathay the Desert; in the adjoining Kingdoms of which, that same Presbyter
John, of whom even now we treated, Ruled in the days of our Ancestors: Marcus
Paulus Venetus terms it The Empire of the Great Cham; the Holy Scriptures,
(as Arias Montanus will have it) Gog and Magog; concerning which, thus writes
Sybilla: Heu tibi Gogque, Magogque, aliisque ex ordine cunctis,
Marson atque Angon tibi quot mala fata propinquant!


Now that this is the Scythian Cathay, is showed by the Arabic Geographer,
throughout the four entire last Climates, where he describes it to abound in
Men, Animals, and Minerals, flourishing with Christians, meer'd and enclosed
with the vast extended Skirts of Caucasus, called Iagog and Magog. Thus the
Arabian Geographer in his ninth Part, Climate 5. Line 21. his words are to this
effect, as I have translated them out of the Arabic: From the Mansion Gerrada,
to the City Tahamet, on the South Quarter are four Leucae (whereof one makes
twenty five Miles) from the City Geerada even unto the Mountain which is called
Caucasus, is seven days travel. And this Mountain encompasseth the Regions of
Iagog and Magog. It has such craggy and difficult sides, that none can ascend
it, and if any one does attempt it, he can never arrive at the top, being
obstructed by continual Snows congealed into Ice; which because they are never
dissolved, represent the similude of a Mist, or thick Cloud perpetually fixed
on the top of the mountainous Caucasian Rocks. On the other side the Mountain
are many Cities of Iagog and Magog. And it often happens, that the Inhabitants
of this Region, out of a certain curiosity, ascend some part of it, to discover
what is on the top of the Mountain, and what is beyond, but many never return,
either because they are devoured by wild Beasts, or taken by the
Transmountainers; but some that have returned safe, relate, That in the Region
on the other side of the Mountain in the Night are many Fires, but in the Day
nothing else but a thick Cloud mixed with Darkness is discovered. Also in the
seventh Part of the same Climate, Line 34. he adds, In these Regions many
Christians or Nazaraeans do inhabit. And in the eighth Part, Line 18. he says,
That a great quantity of Gold is gathered out of these Mountains, and diverse
sorts of Precious Stones, and that there is a great Monarch that Rules over
these Countries: All which are agreeable to the Empire of the Great Cham, as
Marcus Paulus Venetus, an Eyewitness, in his first Book, Chap. 64. delivers
in these words: Departing from the Province of Egriaia toward the East, the
Way leads unto Tenduc, (it is better to read it Tanchut,) [Now Tanchut is a
Kingdom of Tartary, which comprehends many other Kingdoms, as the Kingdom of
Lasa, or that which the Tartars call Barantola, the Kingdoms of Nethel, Tibeth,
Maranga, and others, as I shall show anon, together with the Desert Kalmack,
which is bounded by the Wall of the Chinese: and most Geographers confound
this Kingdom with Cathay] in which are many Cities, and Tents, where also that
great Emperor, termed, Presbyter John, so famous throughout the whole World,
was wont to reside. But now that Province is Tributary to the Great Cham,
having a King of the Progeny of Presbyter John: and although there are many
Idolaters and Mahumetans, yet the greatest part of the Province embraces the
Christian Faith, and these Christians are the Chief in this Province;
especially there is a certain Nation in the Province called Argon, which is
more subtle and eloquent than the other People; here are also the Regions of
Gog and Magog, which they term Lug and Mongug; in these Places is found the
Stone Lazuli, that makes the best Azure: In these Mountains also are great
Provinces, Mines of Silver, and various sorts of wild Beasts. All which aptly
consent with the Description of the Arabic Geographer before alleged. Also he
thus writes concerning the Altitude of the Mountains Iagog and Magog, in his
first Book, Chap. 27. Hence if you travel to the Eastern Quarter, you must
ascend for three whole Days up the steep Rocks of Caucasus, Belor a most high
Mountain.
until you come to a most high Mountain, than which there is not an higher in
the World; and there also appears no Bird, by reason of the Cold, and the
over high Elevation of the Earth, which can afford no Food unto Animals. And if
at any time Fire he kindled there, it becomes not light, it being obstructed
by the overmuch coldness of the Region, neither is it of that activity as in
lower Places. And a little after he says, This Region is called Belor, always
having the face of Winter stamped on it. Thus far Marcus Paulus. All which
agree unto that Mountain, which they call Langur, the highest Mountain in the
Kingdom of Lasa; concerning which Father John Gruberus, who traveled through
it on foot, relates, that you cannot travel through it in Summer without
danger, both by reason of the great subtilty of the Air, which hardly admits
a Passenger to breathe, and also because of the Vapor of a certain poisonous
Herb, which by its scent kills both Man and Beast. And about this Kingdom of
Belor, viz. the ancient Seat of the Sacae, the Arabian Geographer places the
principal Kingdom of Presbyter John in Cathay; as the Tractate written by Rabbi
Abraham Pizol does also clearly demonstrate: The Nubian, or Arabic Geographer
calls it Begarger, in which he says there is situate a very great City; his
words are these: In the Eastern part of it is the Kingdom of Begarger, the
great City of which is called Centaba, fortified with twelve Iron Gates. Rabbi
Pizol with Paulus Venetus calls it Belor, in which he says the Kingdom of
Thebeth was lately discovered; his words are as follows: The Kingdom of Belor
is very great and mighty, according unto all Historians that have written of
it; there are many Jews inhabiting in it, principally in the Eastern and
Northern Quarters: And there are moreover other Eastern People not long since
discovered, called by the Natives Thebeth, having a most splendid and
magnificent City exceeding all others in magnitude, there being not the like
under the Canopy of Heaven, in which all good things are found. Which indeed
can be no other than the City Chaparangue, situate in the Kingdom of Thebeth,
concerning the Monuments of which, in relation unto our Religion, there left by
the Christians, Father Anthony Andradas, a Portuguese, of the Society of Jesus,
relates Wonders; who when he had heard that the Inhabitants thereof were
professed Christians, he took a Voyage into the same from the Kingdom of Mogor,
Anno 1624. full of labor and difficulty; in which also having discovered the
Fountains or Heads of Ganges and Indus, he observed many things most worthy of
Consideration and admiration, as I have it confirmed by Joseph, a Christian of
the Mogors Country, who at the time of this my writing, with Father Henry Roth,
Moderator of the new Converted Christians in the Kingdom of the Mogor, is yet
at Rome, strong and lusty, although eighty five years of Age, who related unto
me every Particular.

There is in the most high Mountains of Thebeth, that are perpetually covered
with Snow, a great Lake, the Receptacle of the greatest Rivers of India, from
which Indus, Ganges, Ravi, Athec derive their Currents: Hence the River Ganges
has its original, falling down from the most high Rocks into a low Valley:
Indus, and the other Rivers, make their Outlets through the foot of the
Mountains, as is evident from the Map. Now he affirms this Kingdom to be one
of those of Great Cathay, that are contained both without and within the Walls
of the Chinese, although the Relation be not in every respect conformable unto
that performed by Benedict Goes of our Society, which he undertook by order of
his Superiors, as we shall see anon.

And in these vast Regions of Cathay I find by the Relation of Paulus Venetus,
that most Potent Emperor Presbyter John to have had subject unto his Dominions
seventy two Kings, partly Christians, and partly Heathens; although the
similitude of the Kingdoms in those vast Regions, and the Names arising from
the various Revolutions of those Nations, the Tumults of War, and the other
changes of Affairs, together with the different Denomination, has caused such
and so great a Confusion, that to this very Day no Person has been able to
free himself out of this intricate Labyrinth; for some make him the same with
the Great Cham, others call him Ascid, by Original a Persian; so Almachin, in
the third Book and fourth Chapter of his History of the Saracens: Every King,
says he, of Pharanga (so they call the City of Sogdiana) is called Ascid, as
the Roman Emperor is called Caesar, and the King of the Persians, Cosrai. And
there are some, that rather by a new Name with the Ethiopians, more truly than
by the old, term him Iuchanes Belul, that is to say, Precious John: Others, by
no improbable Conjecture do assert, That in honor of the Prophet Jonah, who is
highly respected amongst them, all that Governed the Empire were so
denominated. But yet in these Western Parts of the Latin Church he is termed
John, with the addition of the word Presbyter, not because he was a Priest, but
by reason that after the Mode and Custom of a Chief Archbishop, he had a Cross
carried before him, by which he declared himself a Defender of the Christian
Religion. Whence Scaliger supposes him to be so called from the Persian word
Prestegiani, which signifies Apostolical; which the Western People
misunderstanding, for the word Prestegiani they write Presbyter John; I will
add his words: In truth (says he) I have very often admired, that a Nation
altogether ignorant in Navigation, should be so potent both at Land and Sea, as
to extend the Bounds of their Empire from Ethiopia even unto China: for from
those very Times we have had a knowledge of that Emperor, but that under the
Name of Prestegiani, in the Persian Tongue, which is almost common over all
Asia, as the Latin is with us in the West, signifies Apostolical; by which
Name it is manifest they understand a Prince that is Christian and Orthodox;
for in the Persian, Prestegiani in the plural Number signifies Apostles, and
Prestegini, Apostolical, as Padischa Prestegini, an Apostolical King; in the
Arabic, Melek Arresuli; in the Ethiopick, Negus Havarjavi. That the Empire of
the Ethiopians was extended far and wide in Asia, is evident by the Ethiopian
Crosses which are seen in Iapan, China, and other Places; yea, and the Temple
of St. Thomas the Apostle, situate in the Region of Malabar, is wholly
Ethiopick, as the Crosses, the Structure, and many other things, yea, and what
you will most wonder at, the very Name. Thus far Scaliger.

From which Discourse we may well collect, That certain Colonies were sent out
from Ethiopia into India, China, and other Parts of Asia, which propagated the
Christian Faith in those Parts, which we now endeavor to show: but in that he
says Presbyter John was originally an African, or that being forced out of
Asia, he should set down in Ethiopia, and there Rule and Govern, is altogether
improbable, and without any foundation, as we shall see anon. Now that this
African and Asiatick Emperor were diverse, is consented unto by the greater
part of the best Authors. And the Empire of the Asiatick flourished for many
Years, until it fell unto one David, who, as Paulus Venetus relates, being
overcome or vanquished by a certain Commander named Cingis Cublai, his Uncle,
in a great Battle (who was elected Emperor by the Scythians, and in stead of
Presbyter, began to be called Uncam, or Naiam) unto the great loss of
Christianity, put an end both to the Glory of the Empire, and the Name of
Presbyter John, as we have showed in the History of Marcus Paulus Venetus. I
shall now declare by what mistake the Name of Presbyter John was given unto the
Emperor of the Abyssines or Ethiopians. Why the Emperor of the Aloyssines is
called Presbyter John.
At that time in which the Portuguese by a Maritime Voyage sought after new
Quarters of the Earth, the Name of Presbyter John was very famous through
Europe; for he was reported to be a most potent Emperor, Lord of many Kingdoms,
a Christian by Religion; but in what Place he Ruled, was altogether unknown:
Therefore when Peter Couillan was sent by John the Second King of Portugal,
first through the Mediterranean Sea, and afterward by a Land-Voyage, to find
out this Prince, he heard in the Asiatick India, unto which he had arrived,
that in that Ethiopia which is beneath Egypt, there was a certain Prince very
powerful, who professed the Christian Religion; he therefore betook himself to
him, and when he had found many things there with him, which were conformable
unto the constant Fame that was reported amongst the Europeans, he believed
that that was the Presbyter John so called. He therefore was the first Person
who began to call the Emperor of the Abyssines by the Name of Priest Iean, that
is, Presbyter John: Others also in succeeding times, who traveled into
Ethiopia, imitated him, and easily introduced the same Error into Europe. All
which is Learnedly showed by Father Balthazar Tellez, in his Ethiopian History,
which he has composed in an elegant and polite Portuguese Style: unto which
also subscribeth Alphonsus Mendes, the most wise Patriarch of Ethiopia, and the
great Light of our Society, in an Epistle prefixed unto the Work of Father
Tellez concerning the Ethiopick Affairs. Therefore when we speak of Presbyter
John, we understand not the Emperor of the Abyssines; for besides that his
Empire is situate very far distant from that of the Presbyter John of Asia, it
is evident from the Chronology of the Emperors of Ethiopia, which is to be seen
in the Vatican Library, that there is no mention of transplanting out of Africa
into Asia, or out of Asia into Africa; yea, Damianus a Goes, in his Book of the
Manners and Customs of the Ethiopians, does expressly deny him to be called
Presbyter John, or that he was ever so termed; which is also asserted by the
Ethiopian Priests above cited: but we understand that Great Prince of Asia, of
whom we have spoken in the precedent Discourse.

And certainly at this very day there remains some Footsteps of this formerly
Great Presbyter John, in the Kingdom of Tanchut, which the Tartars call
Barantola; the Saracens, Boratai; and the Natives, Lassa; as the Fathers of our
Society, Albert Dorville, and John Gruberus (who traveled through it as they
returned from China into Europe, Anno 1661.) sufficiently testify, who relate
incredible things concerning the superstitious Adoration of this Prince.

Now there are in this Region two Kings, The King of Barantola adored as a God.
the first whereof has a regard to the Administration of the Political
Government; and the other, whom they term God, or The Celestial Father, or else
The Great Lama, or High Priest, and Pope of the Priests, remains in the
innermost Recesses of his Palace, and receives Adoration and Worship from all
his People, as a Deity; and they have him in such high Veneration, that they
foolishly persuade themselves, that the very Filth of his Body, and his
Excrements, are extremely conducing to the curing of all Distempers; whence
they do not only compound and mix them with their Medicines, but also blush not
to carry them about in a Box, fastened to, or hung about their Necks. And by
reason that Mortality cannot evade or escape the Bonds of Death, his
Worshippers, that he may not be said to perish as other Persons, (the Devil
their Tutor suggesting it to them) have found out the following Stratagem or
Device: They make Inquisition throughout all the Kingdom to find out a Lama as
like as may be unto the former; whom when they have gotten, they advance him by
a clandestine and secret Machination or Plot unto the Throne of the Eternal
Father, as they call it, pretending the feigned Deity, upon the account of his
likeness to the former, to have been raised from the Dead, who is now said to
have been raised seven times. The Reader may fully understand in the following
Discourse, the Rites and Ceremonies by which the foolish People do Adore him
with a perpetual Veneration: And they report, that these Ceremonies and Worship
had their original from no other Person than that Prince which Authors usually
term Presbyter John; whom they are certainly persuaded to have Ruled in the
Kingdom of Tanchut, which is now included under the Dominion of the Kingdom of
Lassa: for as formerly they went in Pilgrimage from all Parts of Tartary unto
him, as unto an Oracle, so at this very time they cease not from all Parts to
flock unto this ridiculous God and Father, the Head of the Lamae, to obtain his
Benediction; so that Anno 1629. that great Tartarian Monarch of the Chinese,
as soon as he had subdued the Empire of China, according to the Custom
practiced by his Ancestors, was solicited by the Magistrates of Tartary, to do
Homage to the Great Lama, that is, The Priest, as to the Supreme Bishop or Pope
of the Religion of the Tartars; and the Business was brought unto that
accomplishment, that the Emperor, through the Advice of his Council, was
resolved to meet with the Great Lama, now coming toward him even unto the
Walls of the Empire of China, in a Progress almost of two Months space, if
Father John Adams, an intimate Associate of the Emperor, out of an extreme
hatred unto the thing, had not showed himself averse and opposite, and that by
the allegation of many weighty Reasons: which Persuasions of the aforesaid
Father took so good effect, that the Emperor was so far from vouchsafing to go
forwards out of the City to meet him, that he would hardly give him any farther
entrance or admission than the Garden of the Palace of Pequin; and at length,
after the usual Mode, being Presented with diverse Presents, dismissed him unto
his own Kingdom, wholly neglecting all those accustomed Ceremonies that were
usually performed; and he that was supposed to have conferred great Prosperity
and Happiness by his Approach and Benediction, brought the contrary Effects
with him; for that ridiculous Archpriest, after his departure, incurred the
Curses and Malediction of all Persons, as being the seeming Cause of Famine,
Pestilence, and War.

But to return to our purpose; Where Presbyter John resided.
I say therefore, That it is very probable this Presbyter John resided in the
Kingdom of Tanchut: for he and his Successors Ruling far and wide in Asia, and
worthily promoting the Christian Faith, those Preachers of the Word of God,
either being called, or of their own accord, out of zeal to advance the
Christian Faith, or which is more likely, being compelled by Fear, and flying
from the aforesaid Places, in the time of that horrid Persecution which began
under the Empire of Dioclesian and Maximianus, in which on the Confines of
Syria, Egypt, and the adjacent Places of Ethiopia, the Followers of the
Christian Doctrine were every where inquired and sought after, to be put to
most cruel Torments; they sat down and Planted themselves in the middle of
Persia, Bactria, and Turchestan: and then it is altogether probable, that by
degrees, after long Exilement, arrived in the utmost Regions of Asia: and
lastly, Anno 600. in the time of the Empire of Heraclius, persidious and
debauched Mahomet then rebelling, new Colonies were continually transplanted
into the aforesaid Regions of the East. For it is manifest, that the Syrian or
Babylonian Priests giving place to the fury of the Infidels, ceased not in
succession of time to propagate the Christian Religion, as the alleged Syriack
Inscription does clearly show, where Iidbuzad Bishop of China is called the Son
of Noah, a certain Priest of the City of Balech in the Kingdom of Turchestan,
as is manifest from the Syriack words above cited, and here again repeated,
viz-Anno 1902. Iidbuzad Priest and Vicar of the Bishop of the Regal City of
Cumdan, Son of Noah a Priest, Native of the City Belech in the Kingdom of
Turchestan.

Now that Turchestan is the same Region which the Persians call Usbec, the
beginning of Great Cathay, and the City Belech seated in it, is clear from the
Arabian Geographer, Part 8. Climate 4. Line 34. where treating concerning the
Turchestians, a peculiar Province of the Corafini, he places the Situation of
the City Belech not far from Samarcande, the Regal Court of Great Tamberlain,
formerly a most famous City: his words are these, as they are Translated by me
out of the Arabic: Now this is the eighth Part of the fourth Climate, and
contains a portion of the Region of Corasina from Karman even to Kasaralkamat
fifteen Miles; hence to Samarcande, six Miles: and it is the Road of those that
pass from Samarcande unto the City of Belech: Whence it is plainly manifest,
that Iidbuzad Vicar of the Bishop, termed a Syrian by Original or Descent, was
of the Country of Turchestan or Corasine: And it is evident from the
Syro-Chinesian Inscription of the Stone, that many of the Region of the
Pagodes, and other Countries of Asia, penetrated into China for the advancement
of the Gospel: All which we leave farther to be inquired after by the curious
Reader. And thus much shall suffice concerning the Transplanting of the
Colonies in the Kingdoms of Presbyter John, and in China.

Moreover, those who suppose that most of these Evangelical Persons first
arrived in India out of Syria, Egypt, and Ethiopia, and having converted that
Country by their Labors to the Faith of Christ, afterward sent out some
Colonies from amongst them into China, by reason of the frequent Commerce which
at that time was maintained by a Maritime Voyage between the Indians and
Chinese; have much more of certainty than any others for their Opinion. And of
this Expedition I shall give a clear Account in few words.

CHAP. II.
Of Cathay, and its proper and genuine Situation.
ALthough in the preceding Discourse we have produced diverse Passages out of
various Authors, both Latins, Grecians, Jews, Arabians, and Persians,
concerning the Situation of Cathay; yet here notwithstanding, for the better
elucidation and clearing of the Matter, we shall declare by diverse Voyages and
Travels purposely alleged for that end, what at length this Kingdom of Cathay
is, and where situate.

It is not only evident by the diligent search of the Fathers of our Society,
(...)
that China is the greatest part of Cathay; but also it is most apparently
proved out of Marcus Paulus Venetus: for he says, That the most vast City of
Cambalu, or, as the true pronunciation of the Tartars has it, Cambalek, was
the Regal Seat of the Great Cham. The Fathers of our Society say, That it was
no other than the modern Imperial City of China, which they call Pequin, or
Pekin; and that the vastness of the Walls made in a Quadrangular order, and the
incredible bigness of the City, do more than sufficiently demonstrate the same.
Now Marcus Paulus writes, That the City of Cambalu, situate near the great
River, was anciently very Splendid and Regal; for Cambalu, signifies The City
of the Lord: The Great Cham removed this City to the other side of the River;
for he learned from an Astrologer, that in time it would become rebellious unto
his Empire. This City being built apiece, comprehends in circuit twenty
four Miles, the side of every Square or Quadrate containing six Miles: It has
Walls whited over, which are twenty Paces high, ten in breadth, but in
thickness become narrower as they ascend: Every Quadrature of these Walls has
three principal Gates, there being twelve in all, which have each a magnificent
Palace built near unto them: In the corners also of the Wall there are noble
Towers, where the Arms and Ammunition of the City are stored and kept. There
are Streets and Passages straight through the City, so that there is a free
Prospect from one Gate unto another, most beautiful Houses being Erected on
either side. A little farther he says, That without the City of Cambalu there
are twelve great Suburbs, adjoining unto each of the twelve Gates, in which
Merchants and Strangers are continually found. All which are so agreeable unto
the Princely City of Pequin, that there is hardly any difference, as Martinius
relates, in Page 29. of his Atlas; also the Names of the City Tadinfu,
Cacanfu, Quelinfu, Cingianfu, Sianfu, which also is now called Siganfu, situate
not far from the Saffron River, which was taken by the Great Cham, after three
years Siege, by the help of battering Engines (as yet unknown in China) which
he caused Christian Arrizans to make: This happened Anno 1268. as Marcus Paulus
Venetus (who with his Father Nicolas and his Uncle, that then were resident
with the Emperor) relates. See Marcus Paulus Venetus in his second Book, Chap.
58. For Fu in the Chinesian Language signifies nothing else but A great City,
and also Ceu added unto other words or Names, denotes A small or indifferent
City; which words are proper and known unto no other Region but only that of
China. Yet nothing so clearly demonstrateth China to be taken for Cathay, as
the Astronomical Botanical Monuments of the Persians; which the Learned Iacobus
Golius, in his Appendix adjoin'd unto the Atlas Sinicus, has made apparent
unto us from the Astronomical Tables of Nasirodim, a Persian Mathematician,
famous throughout the whole East; where you may plainly see the Cathaian Names
of the twelve Hours into which the natural Day is divided amongst the Chinese,
or Cathaians, so correspondent unto the Chinesian, that they differ in nothing;
which is also testified by as many of the Fathers of our Society as have
returned from China to Rome. But that it may be more evident, I shall here set
down the Names.

The Names of the Hours into which the Natural Day is divided amongst the
Chinese or Cathaians.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Cu, Cheu, Yin, Mao, Xin, Su, V, Vi, Xin, Yien, Sio,
Hai.
If any one compare the Cycle of sixty Years, (which, as Nasirodim says, the
Cathaians use in the Calculation or Account of their Days, Weeks, and Solary
Years,) with the Chinesian Account, he shall find the mode or form of the
Computation, and the Names by which they call it, to be wholly the same: and
the like we affirm concerning the Cathaian Year, which they divide, as also the
Zodiac, into twenty four Parts, beginning their Year from the 15th Degree of
Aquarius. But concerning this, see the abovementioned Golius in the place
cited before, who alleges Uleg Beg, a Persian Astronomer, for a Witness, from
whose Astronomical Tables he shows evidently whatsoever has hitherto been
delivered from the Harmony or Agreement of the Cathaian Calculations, or which
is the same, that of the Chinese. And I also find in the Arabian Physicians,
the Musk that is found in China, often called The Musk of Cathay; and also that
Drink which is made of a certain Herb proper to Cathay, is for the most part
termed Cha of Cathay. And the Mogors, which are originally Tartars, and had
their Descent from the Line or Stock of Cingis-Can, and the other succeding
potent Emperors, them, I say, I find to be so called (from their overrunning of
the Empire of China) by their Historians the Chinesian-Mogulos. But what he
writes concerning Quinsai, a City of a wonderful and almost incredible
magnitude, is all found to be true at this day concerning the Metropolitan City
Hancheu, of which Father Martinius, the Author of the excellent Atlas Sinicus,
thus discourses, Folio. 109. The D^scription of Hancheu or Qu^nsai.
That the European Cosmographers may no longer err in making enquiry after,
and ridiculously delineating of Quinsai, mentioned by Marcus Paulus, I shall
here give the very exact Portaicture of the same, the Shadow of which did not
appear unto the Author of the Archontologia Cosmica; and if the Divine Majesty
be propitious unto my Design, I shall peradventure in time send over the
Theater of the Cities of China, Printed by the Chinese themseves, not known or
seen, as I suppose, hitherto in Europe. But to return to the Matter in hand; I
prove first by most invincible Arguments, that this is the same City of Quinsai
mentioned by Paulus Venetus: for this is that City which is distant the space
of five days travel from Singui, that is, Su Chou; which holds good, if we
speak of the Progress or March of the Army, in which it is manifest that MarcuS
Paulus Venetus was; otherwise it is scarce four days Journey. This is that City
in which in his time was the Court or Imperial City of China, which the
Chinese in the elegant Tongue of their Learned Men term Kingsu, but in the
common Speech of the vulgar sort of Men, who tie not up themselves unto that
exactness of Phrase, Kingsai, whence the term of Quinsai in Venetus had its
original. You must here note moreover, that Kingsu is a Name of Dignity common
unto Regal Cities, and not proper and singular unto one alone; for its genuine
and true signification is Regal, although oftentimes the same City has
otherwise a proper Name; as this City is called Hancheu, which under the Empire
of the Family of Sunga was called Lingan, because the tenth Emperor of this
Family, named Coacungus Kin, flying from the Tartars, there fixed his Court,
and therefore in the time of Venetus it was called Kingsu, whatever others
think to the contrary. This happened Anno 1135. And also in the same City the
Family of Sunga held the Empire, until the Western Tartars, under the
Government of the Great Han, erected the Kin Tartars, or those of the East out
of Cathay, that is, out of the Northern Provinces, and so then they became
vanquished; and a little after they advanced their victorious Armies into the
Kingdom of Mangin, having begun a seizure of those Southern Provinces. But to
come more near to the Business: This is that City which has such a vast number
of high Bridges, both within its Walls, and without in its Suburbs; for there
are almost ten thousand, as Venetus reckons them, if you account the
Triumphal Arches amongst the Bridges, which by reason of their similitude he
might esteem for such, by the same mistake by which he called Tigers Lions,
notwithstanding here are none to be found, nor almost in all Asia; except you
will have him to be understood not only to comprehend the Bridges that are both
within the City and without in the Suburbs, but also those of the whole Empire,
and then indeed their number, which otherwise will hardly gain credit amongst
us, may easily be augmented, there being so vast an abundance of Bridges and
Triumphal Arches every where to be found. For the greater confirmation of this
Matter, there is a Lake of forty Italian Miles, which they call Sihu, which
although it be not within the Walls, yet it does encompass it for a large space
from the West to the South, and many Channels are drawn from it into the City;
moreover, the Banks or Shores of it on every side are so beset with Temples,
Monasteries, Palaces, Libraries, and private Edifices, that you would suppose
your self to be within a most spacious City, and not in the Country: the
Margents or Banks of the Lake are raised in every part with apiece and cut
Stone, and a convenient Passage left for Travelers; also some Passages go
clear through the Lake, furnished with many, and those very high Bridges, under
which Ships may pass, in passing over which, they may to and fro encompass the
Lake, whence these Bridges might easily be reckoned by Venetus to belong to the
City. This is that City which has a Mountain within its Walls on the
South Side, termed Chinghoang, in which is that Tower with a Guard, where they
measure the Hours by an Hourglass, and it is declared or inscribed on a Tablet
how many Hours, in large Golden Letters. This is that City, all whose Streets
are paved with square Stone; and this is situate in a Moorish place, and
divided by many Navigable Channels. Lastly, This is the City, to omit other
things, from which the Emperor took his flight unto the Sea by the great River
Cientang, the breadth of which exceeds a German Mile, and flows to the
South Side of the City. So that here is the very same River which Venetus
ascribes unto Quinsai, whence it is disembogu'd into the Sea toward the East,
from which this City is as far distant as Venetus does affirm it. I add, That
the compass of the City is above an hundred Italian Miles, if you reckon in the
large Suburbs, which extend very far on every side, whence you shall go over
five hundred Chinesian Paces or Stadiums, by walking in a straight Line or Way
from North to South through the most large and populous Streets, in which you
shall find no place destitute either of Houses or People: you may perform the
like Journey almost from the West to the North. Seeing therefore that according
unto the Chinesian History, the Name, the Description, the Magnitude, and all
other Passages, do demonstrate this to be the City Quinsai, we ought no longer
to question or doubt of the same. Thus Father Martinius Martinii in the Place
cited.

SECT. I.
The Voyage of Benedict Goes, of the Society of Jesus, into Cathay or China,
taken out of Father Nicholas Trigautius.
I Shall therefore now briefly show whence proceeded that so great confusion of
Opinions concerning the proper Situation of Cathay. Now it is known both from
the History of Marcus Paulus Venetus, Haytho the Armenian, and also from the
Chronology of the Chinese, that the Great Cham, Emperor of the Tartars, whom
some call Cublai, others Ulcam, or Uncam, Anno 1256. making a Breach or
Irruption through the Walls, gained the whole Empire of the Chinese (which
then was divided into two Empires, whereof the one toward the North was called
Cathay, the other toward the South Mangi;) whence as the North part of China,
with the other Regions without the Walls, was otherwise vulgarly called Cathay,
so also the whole Empire of the Chinese being now possessed, the whole was
called by the Name of Cathay, by the Tartars, and the adjoining Saracens, the
Name of the other circumjacent Regions without the Walls being utterly
extinguished; so that from that very time, that only Empire of the Chinese
that extended so far included within the Walls, was called Cathay, by as many
as Traffick'd or Merchandiz'd thither from Indostan, Usbec, Camul, and other
Mediterranean Regions, as it is manifest from the Voyage of our Brother
Benedict Goes. But because that was not only undertaken and decreed by the
Command and Advice of the Superiors of our Society, The Voyage of Benedict
Goes, for the Discovery of Cathay.
but also by the Command of the Viceroy of Aria in India called Saldagna, yea
also of the Great Acabar, Emperor of the Mogors, both to find out Cathay, and
also to instruct in the Christian Religion the Inhabitants of the interjacent
Kingdoms; certainly it was performed with all the diligence and care possible
by Benedict Goes, a Person of great Prudence and Understanding, and also
skilled in the Persian Language, which he had excellently attained to by a long
stay or continuance in the Court of the Mogor, and where he was very familiar
with the Emperor Acabar. Therefore he being sufficiently furnished with
Supplies convenient for so great a Voyage from the Viceroy of India, and
having also the Diploma, Patent, or Pass, taking the Habit of the Armenians,
and changing also his Name Benedict into Abdulla, which signifies The Servant
of God; and joining with him an Armenian named Isaac, as his inseparable
Companion in his Voyage, Anno 1603. in the solemn Lent Fast departing from
Lahor the Regal City of the Mogor, he traveled toward the Kingdom of Cascar
in the company of five hundred Persons, which they call The Caravan, having
with them a great multitude of Beasts of Carriage, Camels, and Wagons: In a
Month he arrived at the City Athec under the Jurisdiction of the Mogor; and
having passed over the River Indus, at the end of two Months more he came unto
Passaur, where he was informed by an Hermit, that about two Months Journey
farther toward the North, was the Region Caphurstan, that is, The Land of
Infidels (of which I shall treat anon) that had many Christians in it: unto
which notwithstanding, being hindered by the Caravan, he could not travel. Hence
in the Course of twenty five Days he came unto a City named Ghideli, where he
was in great danger of Thieves. Departing thence, in twenty Days he came to the
City Cabul, a City yet subject to the Mogor; from whence he went unto
Chianacar, a City abounding with Iron; and from thence in ten Days he arrived
at a Place called Parvan, the last Town of the Kingdom of the Mogor. After five
Days respite, he came in the space of twenty Days to a Region named A^cheran,
having passed over exceeding high Mountains; and in fifteen Days more he
arrived at the City Calcia, and there having spent ten Days, he came to a
certain Place called Gialalabeth, famous for the Portage or Customs of the
Brachmans: after fifteen Days more he came to Talhan; and hence proceeding
forward to Chaman, he incurred the great hazard of Robbers; whom having
shunned, at length he came to Ciarciunor; and after ten days, passing through
Sarpanil, a desert Place, he came to the Province Sarcil, over a very high
Mountain, and that in twenty Days Travel: after two Days more he came to the
foot of the Mountain Cetialath, in which, by reason of the multitude of Snow,
many perished by the vehemence of the Cold. Having traveled six Days through
the Snow, he came to Tamgheran in the Kingdom of Cascar, and after fifteen Days
to Iaconich, and after five to Hiarcham, the Metropolitan City of Cascar, and
the end of the Region of Cabul: The whole Region are Followers of the Law of
Mahomet; and hence from Hiarcham is the beginning of the Expedition by Caravan
into Cathay; and the Negotiation of those that certainly know they shall be
admitted into the Kingdom, wholly consists as it were in Fragments of
precious Iaspar, which are found in great plenty in Cathay, that is in China,
and are of two kinds; the first sort is brought out of the River Cotan, not far
from the Regal City, by Fishermen, like unto thick Flints; the other being
dug out of the Mountains, is cleft into stony Plates, almost two Else long.
This Mountain Cansangui is distant from the Imperial City twenty Days Journey,
and it is called The Stony Mountain, noted vulgarly in Geographical Maps: hence
therefore Benedict, after long stay, again began his Voyage; first he arrived
at Iolci, the Place of Custom for the Kingdom, and from hence in a Voyage of
twenty five Days he passed over these following Places: Hancialix, Alceghet,
Hagabathet, Egriar, Mesetelec, Thalec, Horma, Thoantac, Mingieda, Capetalcol,
Zilan, Sarognebetal, Cambasco, Aconsersec, Ciacor, Acsu; Acsu is a Town of the
Kingdom of Cascar, from which he passed by a laborious Voyage, through the
Desert Caracatai, that is, Black Cataia, unto Oitograch, Gazo, Casciani,
Dellai, Saregabadal, Ugan, and at last he arrived at Gruciam. Departing hence,
in a Voyage of twenty five Days he came unto the City of Cialis, which is
subject to the Dominion of the King of Cascar, where the Saracens returning in
the Caravan of the Year before from Cathay, that is, from Pekin, the Royal City
of China, declared wonderful things unto our Benedict, concerning Matthew
Riccius and his Companions; and here our Father wondered that he had found
Cathay in the chief Place of the Chinese. From hence in twenty Days he came
unto Pucia, a Town of the same Kingdom, and from hence to Turpham and Aramuth,
and at length arrived at Camul, a fortified City: from Camul in nine Days he
came to the Walls of the North part of China, which he had so long desired,
unto a Place called Chaiaicum, where being admitted within the Walls by one
Days Journey, he came to the first City of China called Socien, and found no
other Cathay but China; so that from thenceforward he laid aside all scruple of
the proper and true Situation of Cathay; which the Saracens often confounded
with China. Note, That this Voyage was taken or begun from Laor toward the
North, when he might have come to his Iourneys end from Laor by a much nearer
Way; but as this Voyage or Passage through the Thebetick Mountains, was not yet
discovered, so that also on the other side by Usbeck and Samarcande at that
time was more used, although that to conform himself unto the Custom of
Merchants, he was forced to attempt to pass by this latter, though it were very
much out of the Way, by reason of its vast Windings and and Turnings, and also
on every hand subject to Robbers. The Territory of Usbec is extended by a large
Interval of Regions from the West to the North, being made up of three very
great Kingdoms, whereof the first is Samarcande, famous for the Birth of
Tamberlan; the second, Tarphan; and the third, Turphan; all of them infamous
for the Religion of Mahomet. The Inhabitants, as Historians relate of the
Scythians, are Cruel, Thieves, Bloody, and implacable Enemies of the
Christians; so that this Kingdom is now altogether unpassable for the
Christians, except such as will become Deniers of Christ, and profess
themselves Followers of the Law of Mahomet. And this is the Passage from Usbec
to Cathay.

But the Voyage undertaken by Father Antonius Andradas, a Portuguese, into the
Kingdom of Thebet, was after this manner: First passing over Ganges from Laor,
he entered into Scrinegar and Ciapharanga, most great and populous Cities; and
from these having passed over a most high Mountain, on the top of it he
discovered a vast Lake, the common Receptacle of the Waters of the River Indus,
Ganges, and the other great Rivers of India; and hence by a Voyage of many
Days, and that also through high Mountains, he arrived in the cold Northern
Region Redor, and in a City of the same Name; from which, passing through the
Kingdom of Maranga and the Kingdom of Tanchut, which belongs unto the
Tartars, in two Months space he easily arrived at Cathay, that is, China.

SECT. II.
Another Voyage from China to the Mogor, performed by the Fathers of our
Society, Father Albert Dorville, and Father John Gruberus.
THese Fathers began their Voyage from Pequin, Anno 1661. in the Month of June,
from whence they arrived at Siganfu; and from hence, after thirty Days stay,
they departed to Sining or Siningfu, in almost twice so many Days, having
passed over the Saffron River. Now Sining or Siningfu is a great and populous
City, built at the Walls of the Kingdom of China, by or through the Gate of
which is the first entrance into Cathay or China, for those that Trade thither
from India, and where also they are forced to stay till they have a farther
admission granted them by the King. The City is placed under the Elevation of
the Pole 36 Degrees and 20 Minutes.

From Sining in three Months space, passing through the Desert of Kalmack in
Tartaria, they came unto the very entrance of the Kingdom of Lassa, which the
Tartars also call Barantola: The Desert is partly moutainous, partly level, and
overspread with Sand and Dust, altogether sterile and barren; unto which
notwithstanding Nature is here and there in some places propitious, by
affording some small Rivulets, whose Banks yield a sufficient quantity of green
Herbs and Grass: But as this Desert deriveth its original from the innermost
Mediterranean Parts of India, so is it also extended in a straight Line from
the South to the North, and no Person has yet unto this Day been found, who
has discovered its Bounds: Many suppose it to be extended even unto the Frozen
Sea, concerning which I have treated at large in my Book of the Subterranean
World. Now it has various Names; Marcus Paulus Venetus calls it Lop,
infamous for Diabolical Delusions, and a multitude of Specter or evil Spirits
that usually appear in it, concerning which notwithstanding our Fathers relate
nothing; for the once or twice appearing of these Spirits, does not prove the
perpetual continuance of their appearance unto all: The Tartars formerly called
it The Desert Belgian, others sometime Samo, the Chinese Kalmack, others
Caracathay, that is, Black Cathay, where you shall find no other Animals but
wild Bulls of a mighty bigness: Yet the Tartars, accustomed to Deserts,
wandering to and fro, pass over it at all times; and there also pitch or fix
their Hords, where they find a Place or River commodious for the Pasturage of
their Cattle; their Hords are Pens or Tents, fit for the receiving both of Men
and Cattle.

From Lassa or Barantola, placed under the Elevation of the Pole 29 Degrees and
6 Minutes, they came in four Days space to the foot of the Mountain Langur; now
this Langur is the highest of Mountains, so that on the top of it Travelers
can hardly breathe by reason of the subtilty and thinness of the Air; neither
can they pass over it in Summer, without manifest hazarding of their Lives, by
reason of the virulent and poisonous Exhalations of some Herbs. No Wagon or
Beast can pass over it, by reason of the horrible great steepnesses and rocky
Paths, but you must travel all the Way on foot, almost for a Months space, even
unto the City Cuthi, which is the first, or Chief City of the Kingdom of
Necbal. Now although this mountainous Tract be difficult to pass over, yet
Nature has plentifully furnished it with variety of Waters, which break forth
of the hollow places of the Mountain in every part thereof. These Waters are
replenished with abundance of Fish for the Sustenance of Man, and their Banks
afford plenty of Pasturage for Beasts: I take this to be the same Tract which
Ptolemy calls Parapanisus, which being linked in the series of the Caucasian
Mountains, is extended far and wide toward the East, and with its Skirts
touches the South and North. Marcus Paulus Venetus calls it Belor, others
give it other Names, according to the diversity of Nations through which it
passes.

From Cuthi in five Days passage they came to the City Nesti in the Kingdom of
Necbal, in which all the Natives, being involved in the Shades of Idolatry,
live without any sign of the Christian Faith; yet it abounds with all things
necessary for the sustaining of Life, so that thirty or forty Hens are sold for
one Scutum.

From Nesti they came in five days Journey to the Metropolitan City of the
Kingdom of Necbal, which is called Cadmendu, and placed under the Elevation of
the Pole 27 Degrees and 5 Minutes, where there is a potent King that Rules,
and although an Heathen, yet not very much averse unto the Christian Religion.

From Cadmendu in half a Days time they came unto a City that the Natives call
Badda, the Regal City of the Kingdom of Necbal.

From Necbal in a Journey of five Days you meet with the City Hedonda, a Colony
of the Kingdom of Maranga, being placed under the Altitude of the Pole 26
Degrees and 36 Minutes.

From Hedonda in eight Days space they came even to Mutgari, which is the first
City of the Kingdom of Mogor.

From Mutgari is a Voyage of ten Days space even unto Battana, which is a City
of Bengala toward Ganges, placed under the Elevation of the Pole 25 Degrees
and 44 Minutes.

From Battana in eight Days space they came to Benares, a populous City on
Ganges, and placed under the Elevation of the Pole 24 Degrees and 50 Minutes:
It is famous for an Academy of the Brachmans, which flourishes there, in which
all the Sciences proper unto their Religion, or rather more truly, unheard of
Superstitions are taught.

From Benares in eleven Days space they came to Catampor, and from thence in
seven Days to Agran.

Therefore from Pekin even unto Agran was a continued Voyage of two hundred and
fourteen Days; but if you have respect to the stay of the Caravans, it is a
Voyage of one whole Year and about two Months. And these Relations ^ received
by word of Mouth from the abovementioned Fathers, who performed the Voyage in
the same manner as I have described it.

CHAP. III.
Of the various Habits, Manners, and Customs of the Men of those Kingdoms,
which were observed and drawn by the aforesaid Fathers, Albert Dorville, and
Gruberus, as they passed through them.
AS the Kingdoms, which the afore-mentioned Fathers passed through by a Voyage
never hitherto attempted by any European, were unknown to Geographers; so also
did they observe many things, very worthy of consideration, in reference to the
Habits, Manners, and Customs of those Nations, which on purpose being delivered
to me, what by Pictures, and what by Writing, they left to be inserted into
their Voyage performed; which I thought fit, having now an opportune and
convenient time, to accomplish.

Therefore setting forwards from Pekin, the Metropolis and Imperial Seat of the
Chinese, they came in the space of two Months to those most famous Walls, at
which that vast City Siningfu is situate, as it were a certain and most safe
Bulwark unto the Walls against the Incursions of the Tartars, A Description of
the Walls of China.
where in the end of our Book, we exhibit the Structure of as much of these
Walls as the convenience of the Place would admit of, as they were most
diligently observed and drawn by them; and they added, that the Walls were of
so great a breadth, that six Horsemen set orderly abreast, might conveniently
run a Race without being an hindrance to one another; whence they report, that
they are so frequently visited by the Citizens of Siningfu, both for the
enjoying of the Air, which is most wholesome and which breaths from the
adjacent sandy Deserts, and also because they are very opportune for the
performing of many other Exercises for easing and recreating of the Mind; for
they are of that height, that they easily invite the Inhabitants unto them by
their Prospect, which is on every side most clear and open, and withal
exceeding pleasant, and also by reason of the great convenience of the Stairs,
which give an Ascent unto them: now the Longitude unto the broadest part of the
Wall, even unto the other Port or Gate, through which they pass from the Desert
unto the City Sucien, is so great, that it can hardly be passed in the space of
eighteen Days; which many do undertake, having first obtained leave of the
Governor of Siningfu, not so much out of any necessity of Trafficking or
Merchandise, as led by a certain Curiosity, and withal being sufficiently
furnished with Provision; for they say, that the innumerable Habitations which
are within the Wall, appear from thence as from an high Mountain; but without
in the adjacent Desert, as the Inhabitants related unto them by word of Mouth,
they may recreate themselves with the wonderful and unwonted sight (as it were
from an high Tower) of all kinds of wild Beasts, such as are Tigers, Lions,
Elephants, Rhinoceroses, wild Bulls, Monoceroses, (that is, a certain kind of
Horned Asses) and all the while being free, and out of all danger, more
especially from that part of the Wall, which leading toward the South, draws
near unto the more inhabited Regions, as Quansi, Iunnam, and Tibet; for from
hence unto the Saffron River, and the Places adjoining, which abound with
Bushes and Thickets, they are wont to betake themselves in Herds and Droves at
certain times of the Year, both in respect of Pasturage, and for Hunting of
their Prey.



I. A Tartar of Kalmack. II. A Woman of Kalmack. III. A Lama Tartar. IV. The
Habitation of the Tartars. V. The Turning Wheel.




Therefore when these Fathers had passed this Wall, presently they met with a
River replenished with Fish, of which they made their Supper, which they
prepared in an open Tent; and having also passed over the Saffron River without
the Walls, and immediately having entered that most vast and barren Desert
Kalmack, a Desert very dreadful and formidable, in two Months they came to the
Kingdom of Barantola. This Desert, although it be parched and ruinous, is yet
inhabited by the Tartars, which are called Kalmack, at certain times of the
Year, when there is great abundance of Pasturage on the Banks of the River,
they there fixing of their Hords, which you may term, and not unfitly, Portable
Cities. The Tartars rove up and down in this Desert to Rob and Pillage; whence
it is very necessary that the Caravan be sufficiently strong, to resist the
violence of their Attempts. These Fathers, as they happened to see them, drew
their Habits as they are here set down.

The first Figure shows a Tartar of Kalmack, The Habit of the Tartars of
Kalmack.
Clothed with a Leathern Garment, and a yellow Cap.

The second Figure exhibiteth a Tartar Woman of Kalmack, Clothed with a
Vestment made of a certain Skin, as they guessed, of a green or red color; and
each of them has a Phylactery or Amulet hung about their Necks, which they
wore to preserve themselves from Dangers and Mischiefs.

The Tartar which the third Figure exhibiteth, wears the Habit of a Lama,
which is the Priest or Bishop of the holy Rites of the Nation of the Tartars of
Kalmack; they use a Cap or Hat Painted of a red Color, a white Coat or Cloak
cast backwards, a red Girdle; they are also Vested with a yellow Coat, from the
Girdle of which hangs down a Purse.

The fourth Figure expresses their Habitations, which are Tartarian Tents,
made up within of small bended and wreathed Sticks, on the outside framed with
a course Matter of a certain Wool, and tied or bound together with Cords.

The fifth Figure shows an Instrument, or turning Wheel, in the form of a
Scepter, which is moved round by the superstitious Auditors or Bystanders, at
the time when the Lama Pray.

VI. The fore part of a Woman of Northern Tartary. VII. The back part of the
same Woman.




In the Court of Deva King of Tanguth, our Fathers saw a Woman born in Northern
Tartary, who as she was Dressed in an unwonted Habit, so she seemed not unworty
of having her Picture taken unto the Life: She wore Hair tied or knotted like
unto small Cords, having her Head and Girdle adorned with the Shells of
Sea-Cockles: See her exhibited in her fore and back part, in the sixth and
seventh Figures.

VIII. The Habit of a Courtier in the Attire of a Woman. IX. The Trophies which
are erected in the tops of the Mountains with Adoration unto the Great Lama*
for the conservation of Men and Horses. X. Another Habit of a Courtier.




There were also in the same Court of the King certain Courtiers, whose Habit,
if you observe it, is altogether womanish, but only that they use a Coat of a
red Color, after the manner of the Lama; which, together with the Trophies
erected in the tops of the mountains in Adoration of the Great Lama. for the
conservation of Men and Cattle, are expressed in the eighth, ninth, and tenth
Figures.

XI. The Habit of the possessed Youth that kills Men, called Phut. XII. The
common Habit in the Kingdom of Tanchut. XIII. The Habit of the same Nation.




There is a most detestable and horrible Custom introduced into these Kingdoms
of Tanchut and Barantola, by the subtlety of Satan, which is as follows: They
choose a lusty Youth, unto whom they grant liberty on Set-days of the Year, to
kill with the Weapons wherewith he has Armed himself, any Person he meets,
of what Age or Sex soever, without any difference or respect of Persons, fondly
supposing, that those who are thus slain, immediately, as if they were
Consecrated by Menipe, a devilish Spirit whom they worship, obtain eternal
Honors, and a most happy Estate. This Youth, in a very gay Habit, furnished
with a Sword, Quiver, and Arrows, and stuck or laden with the Trophies of
Banners and Ensigns, at a prefixed time, being possessed with the Demon or
Devil unto whom he is Consecrated, rushing with great fury out of the House,
wandreth through the Ways and Streets, and kills at his pleasure all that
meet him, no resistance being made: This Youth they call in their Language
Phut, which signifies The Slayer; whence our Fathers depicted him altogether
after the same manner that they had a sight of him, together with the Habit of
both Sexes in the Kingdom of Tanchut, as the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Figures do show.

There are other Kingdoms included within the vast Kingdom of Tanchut, and in
the first place Barantola, also called Lassa, which has a Metropolitan City of
the same Name: It has a King of its own, and is altogether entangled with the
foul Errors of Heathenism: The People worship Idols, with the deference of
Deities; amongst which that which they call Manipe has the preeminence, and
with its nine-fold difference of Heads rises or terminateth in a Cone in a
monstrous height, concerning which we shall speak more fully in the following
Discourse, when we come to treat of the many-headed Deities of the Chinese.
Before this Demon or false God this foolish People perform their Sacred Rites,
with many unwonted Gesticulations and Dances, often repeating of these words, O
Manipe Mi Hum, O Manipe Mi Hum, that is, O Manipe, save us: They many times set
diverse sorts of Viands or Meats before the Idol, for the propitiating or
appeasing of the Deity, and perform abominable kinds of Idolatry.

XIV. Han, the deceased King of Tanguth, whom they worship with Divine Honor.
XV. The Effigies of the Great Lama.




There is also exhibited in Barantola another Spectacle of a false Deity, which
as it almost seems to exceed humane belief, so it also does require to be
evidenced with the more singular care. Our Fathers relate, that whilst they
remained in Barantola, which was about two Months, to wait for the convenience
of the Caravan, they observed many things in reference to the Manners and
Customs of the People, of which they noted some to be ridiculous, and others to
be cursed and detestable.

There are two Kings in this Kingdom, whereof one is truly concerned and
employed in the management of the Affairs of the Kingdom, whom they call Deva;
the other being separated and taken off from the weight or encumbrance of all
extraneous Concernments, living in quiet and repose within the private
Apartments or Withdrawings of his Palace, The ridiculous Worship of the Great
Lama.
is adored like a Deity, and that not only by the Natives, but of all the Kings
that are subject unto the Empire of Tartary, who undertake voluntary Iourneys
or Pilgrimages unto him: They adore him as the True and Living God, and call
him The Eternal and Heavenly Father, offering a multitude of Presents and
Oblations to him. He sits in an obscure Chamber or Room of his Palace,
adorned with Gold and Silver, and rendered resplendent by the multiplicite
luster of flaming Lamps, in a lofty place upon a Couch, which is covered with
costly Tapestry; unto whom Strangers at their approach fall prostrate with
their Heads to the Ground, and kiss him with incredible Veneration; which is no
other than that which is performed unto the Pope of Rome; so that hence the
fraud and deceit of the Devil may easily and plainly appear, who by his innate
malignity and hatred, in way of abuse has transferred (as he has done all the
other Mysteries of the Christian Religion) the Veneration which is due unto the
Pope of Rome, the only Vicar of Christ on Earth, unto the superstitious Worship
of barbarous People.

Whence as the Christians call the Roman High Priest Father of Fathers, so
these Barbarians term their false Deity The Great Lama, that is, The Great
High Priest, and The Lama of Lamas, that is, High Priest of Highpriests,
because from him, as from a certain Fountain, flows the whole Form and Mode
of their Religion, or rather mad and brainsick Idolatry, whence also they call
him The Eternal Father. And lest that by dying he should seem to be divested,
of the duration of Eternity, the Lamae, or Priests, which are perpetually about
him, with great care and solicitude wait on his Necessities, expound the
Oracles that are taken from his Mouth unto simple Travelers, and such as will
believe them, with a wonderful counterfeiting of a feigned Divinity; these, I
say, after his Death, seek throughout the whole Kingdom for another Person as
like unto him in all respects as may be, whom, being found, they advance into
his Throne; and by this means they persuade and impose on the Belief of those
that are ignorant of the fraud and deceit, by divulging the perpetual duration
of the Eternal Father, seven times now in an hundred years raised from the
Dead; the Minds of those barbarous People being so firmly blinded by a
diabolical Delusion, that from hence they have no doubting or scruple of the
truth or belief of it. Thence it comes to pass that he is worshipped with so
great signs of Veneration, that that Person esteems and reputeth himself
blessed, who can obtain by the Bounty or Courtesy of the Lamae or Priests
(whom therefore they are wont to corrupt or bribe for that purpose with large
and costly Presents, which redounds much to their advantage) any of the
Excrements or Urine of the Grand Lama: for from these worn about their Necks,
and the Urine mixed with their Meats, (Oh abominable nastiness!) they foolishly
imagine themselves to be safe, and througly armed against the Assaults of all
Bodily Infirmities. These things the Fathers learned from the Citizens of
Barantola, and were very much afflicted in Mind, in considering of the great
blindness of these Nations; and although they could not see the Great Lama (by
reason those that are of the Christian Profession are prohibited his sight, as
also any other may not be admitted, unless he have first performed the
aforesaid Idolatrous Ceremonies proper or peculiar to the Great Lama) yet
notwithstanding they exactly drew his Effigies as it was exposed to view in the
Entrance or Porch of the Emperor's Palace, to which they pay the same
accustomed Ceremonies, as unto his living Person.

The Castle wherein the Great Lama inhabiteth, is situate at the end of the
City Barantola, and is called by them Bietala, a Draught whereof is expressed
in the sixteenth Figure.

XVII. and XVIII. The Habit of the Kingdom of Necbal. XIX. A Northern Tarstar.




This Great Lama is of so great Authority throughout all Tartary, that there
(...) no Kings Crowned in any Place, who does not first send his Ambassadors
with inestimable Presents, to crave his Benediction, as an happy Omen of his
Entrance upon the Kingdom. See what I have said at large in the preceding
Discourse, concerning the Honor conferred on him by the Imperial Monarch of
Tartary and China; where also I have demonstrated, that this whole
superstitious Worship of the Great Lama took its original from that famous
Presby^^ John, who had his Residence in this Kingdom of Tanchut. But thus much
shall suffice for the Great Lama.

They saw also strange Habited Women at Barantola, which came thither out of
the adjacent Kingdom of Coin. The Noble Women braid or curl all their Hair in
the manner of Hairlaces or small Bands, and wreath it behind them; on their
Foreheads they wear a red Fillet, beset with Pearls; on the top of their Heads
they bear a Silver Crown, interlac'd with Turchoises and Coral.

Having left the Kingdom of Lassa or Barantola, in a Months Voyage they came
over the most high Mountain Langur, The high Mountain Langur.
which we have described a little before, unto the Kingdom of Necbal, where
they found nothing wanting (...) to Humane Sustenance, nor could any Good be
wished them which they did not enjoy, except the Light of the Gospel; for they
are all involved in (...) thick Cloud of Heathenish Blindness. The chief Cities
of this Kingdom (...) Cuthi and Nesti.

It is a Custom in this Country, that if you drink to a Woman, the other Men or
Women that are in the Company, pour in the Liquor Cha, or (...) Wine, three
times for them, and in the time of Drinking affix three pieces (...) Butter to
the Brim of the Pot or Cup; those that pledge, or drink after them, take them
off again, and stick them upon their Foreheads.

There is also a most cruel Custom observed in these Kingdoms; for when they
despair of the recovery of their Sick, esteeming them near to Death, they carry
them forth, and cast them into deep Ditches in the Fields, which are full of
dead Bodies; and there being exposed to the injury of Time, they suffer them to
perish without any pity or commiseration; and after they are dead, they leave
them to be devoured by ravenous Birds, Wolves, Dogs, and such like Creatures;
whilst in the mean time they persuade themselves, that it is no mean Monument of
a glorious Death, to have their Tomb in the Bellies of living Animals. The
Women of these Regions are so deformed and ugly, that they appear more fit for
Devils than Men; for out of a Religious Conceit they never wash themselves with
Water, but with a stinking kind of Oil, which besides that it gives a most
intolerable scent, it does so bedaub and render them filthy, that they seem not
to be Women, but Hags and Witches.

The King of Necbal showed himself extraordinary courteous to our Fathers, by
reason of a Present they bestowed on him, which was a Perspective-Glass, and
other very curious Mathematical Instruments, with which he was so taken, that
he wholly determined with himself not to let them go, which he had not done,
but that they made him a faithful Promise to return thither again; which if
they performed, he promised to erect a House for their use and Exercise,
endowed with most ample Revenues, and also to grant them a plenary Power to
introduce the Christian Law into his Kingdom.

Departing from Necbal, they came to the Confines of the Kingdom of Maranga,
which is enclosed in the Kingdom of Thebet; whose Metropolis is Radoc, the
utmost Bound of the Voyage formerly undertaken by Father Andradas, where they
found many Marks of the Christian Faith in time past there Planted, from the
Names of Dominick, Francis, and Anthony, by which the Men are called.

From hence they arrived at that first City of the Kingdom of the Mogor, so
well known unto the World by the Name of Hedonda; and thence they came to
Battana, a City of Bengala, situate on Ganges; thence to Benares, a City famous
for an Academy of the Brachmans; and at last to Agra, the Imperial City of the
Mogor: where Father Albert Dorville, broken with the Labors of his Travels, and
full or replenished with Merits, leaving this Terrestrial Country, departed, as
we piously believe, unto the Heavenly Mansion, in a middle Way between Europe
and China.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Voyage attempted by Father Amatus Chesaud, a Frenchman, Superior of the
Residency of Isphahan, for the discovery of an easy and ready Passage into
China, extracted out of his Letter written in the Persian Language, and
directed unto Father Athanasius Kircher. The Letter is to this effect.
I Write not this Letter from Hispahan, The Voyage of Father Amatus Chesaud.
but in the Way, being returned from the City Hairat Sfahanum, from which City
it is almost a Year since I departed toward Baich, which is the Regal City of
Usbeck, that I might discover whether there were any possible way of passing
through the foresaid Usbeck and Turkestan into Cathay, and hence into China.
But indeed as I came hither with the Ambassador of Usbeck unto the Bounds of
Kezalbax, I found that Way both difficult and dangerous; therefore I continued
for some Months at Hairat (which City was formerly called Sciandria) and there
I narrowly viewed the Place which the Ancients called Bachtra, where there is a
great University or Academy, built by the Son of the Famous Tamerlang (which
notwithstanding is destroyed by degrees, and runs to Ruin for want of
Repair) as also many other Edifices, which were formerly there built about the
same time in which that City was in the Hands of the Usbequi. From this Place
at length I came to the City Maxahad, which others call Sancta, where there is
a fair Mesquit, adorned with Gold. In this Place I continued two Months, and
here Disputed with the Learned, of whom there are many, about the Law; and I
found, that albeit they openly and abroad praise their own Sect, yet they hold,
That others of a contrary Persuasion ought to observe the King's Law: Their
time is not as yet come. I departed from this Place, and came to Nixapor and
Sabazuar, which belong unto Chorasan; from whence I passed through the Cities
Setam, Damgan, and Iamnam, and at last arrived at Kaxanum in the Province of
Aracand, which is thirty Farsang distant from Sfahanum. This Tract of Land is
for the most part barren. At length I returned to Sfahanum, and here remain
ready to fulfill the Commands of your Reverend Fatherhood. But does your
Reverend Fatherhood in the mean while publish nothing to the World? Such a Tree
ought to bear some Fruit. Besides two Books that you were pleased to send me
some Years since, nothing else has arrived at my Hands. I have here Composed
some Treatises about the Controversies of the Law, in particular, An Answer to
the Polisher of the Looking-glass. I know no Person that can better manage this
Business at Rome than your Reverend self, whom I beseech to render me more
certain whether such Books can be Printed there; but I much question whether
any one can be found that will be at the Charge: yet in this matter I shall
determine nothing but what my Superiors shall ordain. To conclude, The least of
your Reverend Fatherships Servants only more especially requesteth this, That
you would retain this my Epistle by you for a Memorial, and that you would not
be unmindful of me in your Holy Sacrifices. Dated near Xaxan about the time of
the Festival of Saint Francis Xavier.


CHAP. V.
The Voyage performed by Marcus Paulus Venetus, and Haython the Armenian, into
Cathay or China.
SEeing none of the Ancients have described the Kingdoms of the utmost Confines
of the East, more fully than Marcus Paulus Venetus, therefore I esteemed it my
Duty to say somewhat of his Voyage into Cathay at this time, having so fit an
opportunity; although there do many things occur, which are neither apprehended
nor understood at this very Day by any Geographer, by reason of the variety of
Names by which he calls Kingdoms. Provinces, Cities, Mountains, Rivers, and
Lakes, and that differently from all others; and also by reason of the
Description of some Cities, which consent not with the modern Geography.
Moreover, Marcus Paulus being ignorant of the use of the Globe, hence it came
to pass, that he sets not down the Longitude and Latitude of any City, from
which knowledge alone the true Situation of Places is found. But now let us
come to relate his Voyage.

Anno 1269. The Voyage of M. Paulus Venetus.
being Emperor of Constantinople, two famous Persons of the Illustrious Family
of the Paulini, Nicolas and Matthew, Citizens of Venice, set forwards unto
Constantinople in a Ship fraighted with diverse Commodities; where having a
little refreshed themselves, and committing themselves to the Euxine Sea, they
arrived with prosperous Winds at a Port of Armenia, called Soldadia; (Now what
this Port of Soldadia is, we have not hitherto found out: I interpret it to be
Trapezonmet, seeing that there is no Port of the Armenians nearer the Euxine
Sea; neither can we discover what the Kingdom of Bartza is.) From the Kingdom
of Bartza they came by great windings and turnings of the Land unto the City of
Bochara, situate on the River Oxus in the Kingdom of Usbeck; where great Wars
arising between the King of Bartza and the Tartars, they were much perplexed,
and ignorant which way to take to return into their own Country; but at last,
upon serious Consideration and Advice, they remained there full three years:
and that they might not spend their time idly in that space, they applied
themselves with all their endeavor to the attaining of the Tartarian Tongue.
While Affairs were in this Condition, an Ambassador came to Bochara, to Treat
with the Great Emperor of Tartary, where when he had found these forementioned
Persons, he used his utmost Endeavors, (both in reference unto their great and
noted Behavior, and the Tartarian Tongue, in which they were excellently
accomplished,) to have them with him in his Return to the Great Cham, to whom
he knew they would be very acceptable; therefore they relying on the Advice of
the Ambassador, after the Travel of several Months, made their appearance
before the Great Cham. He first of all admiring the Countenance and Behavior of
these Europeans, and also being led with a curiosity of understanding the
Affairs of Europe, was wholly intent upon the discovery of the Mode and Form of
the Government of the Occidental Regions, enquiring of them concerning the
Pope, the Emperor, and the Rites of the whole Empire, as well those that are
observed in Peace as War: Unto which, when they had prudently replied, they so
far wrought upon the Emperor, that entering into Counsel with his Nobles, he
concluded upon sending an Ambassador to the Pope of Rome, which he thought fit
in his Name to impose on these Paulini, whose Faith and Sincerity he had now
sufficiently tried; and together with them he sent a Golden Table and Letters,
in which he requested his Holiness would send him an hundred Persons,
conspicuous both for Learning and Wisdom, to instruct his Subjects in the
Christian Faith, which he said was the best and most pure of all others.
Wherefore these Persons having received their Embassy, immediately set forward
on their Voyage, having this Golden Table, which was Sealed with the Seal of
the Great Cham, and also having his Letters, in which he commanded all his
Subjects to receive them with all Honor and Affection, and discharge them of
all Customs and Tribute. Thus they followed on their Journey by the great
assistance of the Golden Table, and after the space of some Months, came at
length to Balzra, a Port of the Armenians (now what this Port was, whether on
the Caspian or Euxine Sea, I have not as yet found) it is most probable to be
the Port of Trapezonment, placed in a Corner of the Euxine Sea; for from this
Port, within a few Months, Anno 1272. they came to Ancona, which could not be
performed from the Caspian Sea, by reason of the great space of Land and
Regions interjoin'd.

Moreover, having returned unto Ancona, whence they departed, the report of the
death of Clement the Fourth being noised abroad, and no other as yet placed in
the Apostolical Seat, being destitute of Advice, they were not a little
disturbed: and setting forward unto Venice to visit their native Soil, they
heard of the Election of a new Pope. Here Nicolas found his Wife, whom he had
left great with Child at his departure, to be dead, having left behind her
Marcus, a Son of fifteen years of Age, who afterward became the Companion of
his Father into those remote Regions of Asia, which his Father had before
traveled unto, and also was the Author and Writer of this Geographical
History. Wherefore a new Pope being chosen, and named Gregory the Tenth
(Rudulphus being Emperor) by the unanimous Approbation of the Cardinals, they
return to Ancona, having delivered the Letters of the Great Cham, together with
the Presents, to the Pope; with which he being moved, and greatly rejoicing
that he had a fit opportunity offered him for the Propagation of the Gospel, ^e
returned a Literal Missive unto the Great Cham, in which all things were
contained that might seem necessary to instruct them better in the Christian
Religion, and render the mind of the Great Cham more flexible and yielding unto
the receiving of the Christian Law. Unto these he adjoin'd two excellent
Persons for Learning, of the Society of St. Dominick, William of Tripoly, and
Nicolas, whose Surname is not added. These therefore, provided with all
Necessaries for such an Expedition, began their Journey to the East, and at
length after a long Voyage by Sea and Land, entered Armenia, where they found
all things in disorder, by reason of a War commenced between the Armenians and
the Sultan of Babylon: The Fathers being struck with fear, and laying aside all
prosecution of a farther Voyage, took up their Station, and continued in
Ar^^nia; but Nicolas, with his Son Marcus Paulus, rejecting all fear of danger,
ou^ of a great desire which they had to give the Great Cham a plenary
Satisfaction concerning his Embassay, although they were exposed to great
hardship, and the danger of unknown Paths, yet at last arrived at the City
Clemenisu; of whose approach when Cublai the Great Cham was acquainted, he
commanded his Messengers in forty Days space to set forwards to meet them, and
to conduct them to him, and withal to show them all the respect that might be,
and to let them want for nothing that might be any way necessary for them.
Therefore being admitted into the Presence of the Great Cham, and having
performed the accustomed signs or tokens of Veneration, they declared the
Effects of their Embassy, and also Presented him with the Letters of the Pope,
together with a Viol of Oil borrowed from one of the Lamps our Savior's
Sepulcher: He admiring the Presence of Marcus the Son of Nicolas, gave such
Respect unto both of them, that he admitted them for his Domestic Attendants,
which was a token of great Honor, and made use of Nicolas as an Ambassador,
whom by reason of that singular Prudence that appeared in him, his signal
dexterity in dispatching Business, and his great skill in four different
Tongues, he sent him on diverse Employments, all which redounded unto his great
advantage; and when he discovered the Emperor to be delighted with curious
sights of Nature, and strange Customs, whatsoever he observed rare, admirable,
and exotic, in the various Tracts of his Embassies and Voyages, those he
collected with great Industry, and Presented them to the Great Cham; by which
you can hardly imagine how much he ingratiated himself in his Favor; until at
length, oversway'd with a desire of returning to their native Country, after
the discharge of many Embassies for the space of seventeen years, having
obtained, though with much reluctance, a freedom to return, they came back well
and safe, through many unknown Paths of Sea and Land, having passed innumerable
Regions, unto Venice, Anno 1295. Now having related this by the way, there
remains nothing, but that I should describe somewhat more at large his Voyage
into Cathay, seeing many things, as I have said, do occur in it, that do very
much perplex Geographers.

Having Sailed over the Mediterranean Sea, and Traveled through Anatolia,
Armenia, and Persia, he came unto the Region of Balasia, which I suppose to be
Corasina, a Country interposed between Persia and the Kingdom of the Great
Mogol: From this Place, avoiding the Passage toward the South, he took his way
between the North and East, which they call Nordost; thence he went through the
Deserts, and then over the most high Mountain Belor, which we have described
before, into the Kingdom of Cassar, which now they call Cascar, for a time
Tributary to the Great Cham, partly Inhabited by Nestorian Christians, and
partly by Mahumetans: Thence wandering a little toward the North, he entered
into Samarcande, the Regal Seat of the Great Tamberlain, in the Kingdom of
Carcham, now called Tarcham; from whence he proceeded onwards, through the
Desert Lop, into the Cities Peim and Ciarcia, and at length into Camul and
Tarpham, at that time Provinces of the Empire of Tanchut, and now subject to
the Empire of Usbeck. All which agrees with what we have alleged before
concerning the Voyage of Benedict Goes. Yet from hence he went not the shortest
Way unto Cathay, but declining toward the North, he came unto the City
Campition, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Tanchut, where having entered
between the East and South, that is, South-East unto those that proceed
forwards, he came into Cathay through the Desert; yet laying aside this
Passage, he proceeded forwards again toward the North, and having passed
through many Provinces and Kingdoms of the Eastern Tartary, where he found many
Christians, at length he arrived at Cambalu, the Royal Court of the Great Cham,
of the largeness and Etymology of which City we have before treated at large:
Where I wonder very much that Paulus Venetus makes no mention of the Walls of
the Empire of China, through which of necessity he should have passed;
peradventure he straggling far and wide unto the Eastern Sea (unto which he
writes that he came) through the Northern Kingdoms, passed through Cireanum
(belonging unto the Chinese) into Cathay, that is, China; for whatsoever he
afterward relates concerning Cathay, whatsoever he observes concerning the
vastness and magnificency of the Cities, concerning the frequency and multitude
of the People and Merchants, of the affluency of all things necessary for
Humane Life, of the abundance of great and small Rivers, of the admirable
Structures and Fabrics, of the Bridges; these, I say, can agree unto no other
Region, Kingdom, or Empire, but only unto that most vast Empire of the
Chinese, unto which the Chinesian Names of the Cities, with their Customs and
Manners, are altogether consonant and agreeable, as I have shown at large in
the preceding Discourse.

Haython the Armenian, a Monk of the Order of the Praemonstratensis, and of the
Bloud-Royal, a Traveller throughout the whole East, he with the Fidelity of a
religious Person confirms whatsoever is more largely related by Paulus
Venetus concerning the Kingdom of Cathay; for Anno 1307. he beheld all those
Kingdoms of the utmost Parts of the East with his own Eyes, the cause, manner,
and occasion of which Voyages, we shall afterward declare. Now he thus
speaks concerning the Kingdom of Cathay, in the first Chapter of his History:
The Kingdom of Cathay is the greatest that is to be found in the World, and is
replenished with infinite People and Riches: It is situate on the Seacoast.
The Men of of those Parts are most subtle, and full of deceit: and therefore in
all Knowledge makeslight of all other Nations; for they say that they are the
only People that see with both Eyes, and all others only with one: They have
for the most part little Eyes, and are naturally without Beards. And moreover
it is reported concerning this Kingdom, that it is situate in the chief part of
the World, because it has the East on one part, and on the other part there
does no Nation inhabit, as they report; on the West it has its Confines on the
Kingdom of Tarsa, on the North it is bounded with the Desert of Belgian, and on
the East and South there are innumerable Islands of the Sea. In which words he
so describes Cathay or China, that he differs in nothing from the modern
Situation, the Customs of the Nations, and other things proper unto China.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Introduction of the Christian Faith into the forementioned Kingdoms of
Tartary and Cathay, by the now alleged Voyages.
SEeing that in all the forementioned Voyages we at all times meet with the
mention of the Christians, the Reader ought not to doubt, but that the
Evangelical Doctrine of the Christian Law has been introduced into the utmost
Kingdoms of the East, from the very first Times of the Primitive Church, either
by the Apostles themselves, or by their Disciples, or their Successors in the
Apostolical Function; which that it may appear more plainly, I am resolved to
treat of the Apostolical Expeditions of all Ages into these Kingdoms; and
although I have in the former Part of this Book treated of the Expedition of
St. Thomas into India, and the neighboring Kingdoms, yet I shall here
demonstrate how by the Assistance and Labors of St. Thomas, as also of St.
Philip, Bartholomew, Thadeus, and other Apostles, the Holy Gospel was
propagated in the Kingdom of the Mediterranean India, to the utmost Bounds of
Tartary. Which whilst I perform, I must acknowldge that I received no small
Light from the excellent Father Henry Rho, who has traveled almost throughout
all India; for being sent from Goa into the Kingdom of the Mogu^, to Dalcan,
which is now called The Kingdom of Visiapour, having passed over the Mountain
Gati, he came to Golconda, and thence into Montipur, and thence by a direct
Voyage to Bengala and the Kingdom of Decanum; and from hence, in a straight
Path, to the Court of the Mogor in the City of Agra. What Rarities and
Curiosities he observed in so great a Voyage, he will publish to the World in
due time in his itinerary Discoursing concerning the Kingdom of Narsinga, and
those so celebrated Relics of St. Thomas at Meliapor, he says, That amongst
other things which the Christians reserve in their Library unto this Day, there
is the Voyage of St. Thomas (which that holy Apostle undertook from Judea into
India) preserved, and that he has it Translated out of the Syriack into the
Latin Tongue; which when I earnestly requested, he freely assented to my
Desire, and it is as follows: In the general distribution of the Globe of the
Earth, made by the Apostles at Jerusalem, for the propagation of the Divine
Gospel, it is manifest from Ecclesiastical History, that India fell unto the
lot of St. Thomas, unto which that he might arrive, he thus began his Voyage:
From Judea, having passed through Syria, Armenia, and Mesopotamia, he came unto
a certain City of Persia, which is called Soldania, where having sowed the Seed
of the Gospel, he reaped a large Harvest of Christian Converts. Hence he passed
through the Kingdom of Candahar and Cabul, which is 40 Lucae distant from
Candahar; now Cabul is also called Galabor, by which the Holy Apostle passed
over high Mountains unto the Region called at this Day by the Moors Gavorstan,
that is, The Region of Infidels, for so they term the Christians which continue
there unto this very Day. The Christians are called The Christians of St.
Thomas; they are naturally defended or fortified by most high Mountains, so
that there is no easy Passage to them, although sometimes some Saracens pass
unto them, who are presently stain, out of an hatred ^f their perfidious Sect;
but the Gentiles or Heathens are received: And although these Christians
observe various Rites of the Christian Religion, as that they imprint a
^hree-fold Cross on their Foreheads and Temples, which is done or depicted by
an Indian herb ^r Weed called Santalis, of a red Color, and that in Baptism
they dip their Children in Water; yet notwithstanding it has so happened in
process of time, that the Church growing full of Brambles for want of
Apostolical Men, Christianity is much wasted and decayed, some small sparks of
the Christian Faith only remaining; for the whole Nation is defiled with the
various Superstitions and Blemishes of Error. Father Nicholas Trigautius, in
the Voyage undertaken by Benedict Goes into Cathay, farther confirms it in
these words: Afterward they came into another Town named Passaur, where they
met a certain Anchorite, by whom they understood, that thirty Days Journey
thence was a City of the Christians named Caphurstan, into which there was no
Passage admitted unto the Saracens, and those that approach thereunto, suffer
Death: yet the Heathen Merchants are not prohibited the entrance of their
Cities, but are only excluded or debarred admission to their Temples. He
farther related, That all the Inhabitants of that Region go to Church
Apparelled in Black; that the Land is fruitful; and that there are plenty of
Vines found there. Which Narration caused a suspicion in him, that without
question there was yet the Habitation of Christians, although much degenerated,
which he had also confirmed by report elsewhere. This was also so manifest unto
others of our Fathers, the Propagators of the Christian Faith in the Kingdom of
the Mogul, that no Person from henceforwards ought to doubt of the same; whence
unto this very Day they are called The Christians of St. Thomas: and
questionless they had long since been gathered into the Church of Christ, if
there had not wanted Laborers. Moreover, St. Thomas is said to have departed
from Caphurstan unto to the lesser Guzarata, not far from the Kingdom of
Casmir, of which we have treated above, which is situate distant from Labor
three Days Voyage toward the North; and thence he is said to have the
Mountains of Thebet in a long compass of the Land toward Bengala through the
Kingdom of Decan, to have arrived at Meliapor. It is certainly related, that
Letters written in the Syriack Tongue, on a most ancient Parchment, are yet
preserved in the Library or Repository of the Church of Meliapor, in which St.
Thomas is said to have convocated the Bishops Consecrated by him in the
aforesaid Kingdom, that is, from Candahar, Cabul, Caphurstan, the lesser
Guzarata, and the other adjoining Provinces, unto the Council of Meliapor;
which if it be so, it is very much to be lamented, that there have no Persons
been found, who might have translated a Treasury of so great Ecclesiastical
Antiquity into Latin. But however this be, Origin and Eusebius write, That St.
Thomas first went and Preached to the Parthians: and Gregory Nazianzen
delivers, in his Homily against the Arrians, that he Preached to the Indians:
Theodoret consents unto these, that the Preaching and receiving of the Gospel
amongst the Parthians, Persians, Medes, Brachmans, Indians, and the bordering
Nations, ought to be ascribed unto St. Thomas: And Nicephorus also relates,
that he came unto Tapraban, now called Sumatra, which seeing it is not remote
from the Empire of China, it cannot but appear very probable to any one that he
visited China also in his own Person; any one, I say, who rightly understands
what I have above related concerning the Voyages of St. Thomas the Apostle,
which is at large handled by Osorius Bishop of Sylva, who has elegantly
compiled the Indian History: Whence from these Regions even now declared, viz.
from Cabul, Caphurstan, Tibet, and Mogul, he might easily by the Bishops his
Successors, propagate the Sacred Gospel of Christ into the remotest Provinces
and Kingdoms, to the utmost Bounds of Tartary. This Ortelius openly confirms,
who says, That the Kingdom of Archon, situate in the utmost Angle or Corner of
the North, was Converted unto the Christian Faith by St. Thomas; you must
understand it of of his Successors; so that by this Account there is no Part or
Corner of the World which has not been filled with the Light of the Gospel, by
his Care and Diligence.

Nicephorus also relates in his second Book, Chap. 39. That St. Philip
Preached the Gospel in the upper Asia; now the upper Asia is nothing else but
that vast Space of Asia Minor which the Ancients called by the Name of Scythia
on this side, and beyond Imaus; and they are all those Regions which are
comprehended in the extreme Limits of the Eastern Sea, and about the Caspian
Sea, as Georgia, Iberia, Albanior, Micrelia, Armenia, and part of the
Transmarine Asiatick Tartary; from whence in course of Time the Gospel of our
Savior by a farther sprouting, was transplanted into all the circumjacent
Kingdoms, as Thebet, Indostan, Tanchut, and the like. Chrysostom says, That
St. Bartholomew instructed the People of the greater Armenia in the Christian
Faith: Sophrinus says, that he taught the Albanians; and Origin, that he
Preached to the hithermost Indians, Panthenus, a Christian Philosopher, says,
That when he traveled to the Indians, he found Christianity yet flourishing by
the Preaching of St. Bartholomew. He that is curious to know more concerning
this, let him have recourse unto the History of the Armenians, which they call
Giarrentir, that is, A Book of Relations, which Clemens Galanus, a Canon
Regular, who spent many years in Armenia, Georgia, and the other Regions of
Colchis, to propagate the Christian Faith, here published at Rome.

First of all therefore, the Christian Faith was introduced into the
forementioned Kingdoms by the Apostles, Thomas, Philip, and Bartholomew, which
afterward in course of Time being Propagated and Cultivated by their
Successors, very Holy Men, and illuminated with the Holy Spirit, diffused and
spread the Light of the Divine Law throughout the whole East, unto the great
advantage of Souls, until by the want of Laborers, the People following a more
dissolute and ill mode of Life, degenerated from the Rectitude of Faith (...),
and also blemished and bespotted with the Rites of the Gentiles, altogether
fell off from the True Way: for Anno 400. when by the instigation of Satan the
cursed Arrius, Nestorius, Dioscurus, and other Heretics, but especially the
Nestorians, had every where spread their damnable Opinions, and in an horrid
manner weakened the Orthodox Faith of Christ; above all other Parts it infected
with the Venom of its pestiferous Doctrine Colchis, Armenia, Persia,
Turchestan, and the utmost Bounds of the Asiatick Tartary; so that (as Marcus
Paulus and Haython relate) there is no Place of the aforesaid Regions which it
has not defiled. The time of Mahomet's coming into the World.
Add unto this, that in the Year 632. or thereabouts, was the cursed rise of
the Incendiary of the World, Mahomet, who swelling and breaking in like an
Inundation over a great portion of the Earth, subjected the same to his most
unjust Laws; whence it came to pass, that the faithful Christians, and more
especially Persons of the Priestly Order, being exiled their Native Country, by
degrees forsook the Provinces of the more inward Part of of Asia, either for
fear of Persecution, or by a voluntary Exile; those that were armed with a zeal
and desire to the House of God, being inflamed with a fervor to propagate the
ancient Religion of the Orthodox Faith, fled, or retired into China it self,
where how much they labored to the advantage of the Christian Faith, is plainly
showed by the Syro-Chenesian Monument I have expounded above. Now as nothing is
firm and solid in Humane Affairs, so also the Faith introduced into the
forementioned Regions, now fading, either through the want of Apostolical Men,
or the extreme degeneration of Christians, tended or deflected first to
Idolatry, then to Mahumetanism, anon to the Religion of the Nestorian
Heretics, according as the lust of each Persons Genius led or drew them; and
this Vicissitude or Alteration of the Orthodox Faith, sometimes received, and
sometimes being rejected, continued more especially in the Eastern Tartary,
unto the Year 1252. in which (as Haython the Armenian relates, who was of the
Blood Royal) Haython King of Armenia his Brother Reigned, until he could no
longer endure the Turkish Spoilers of his Kingdom; wherefore by a Divine
Instinct taking a new Counsel, and going in his own Person unto the Great Cham
Emperor of Tartary, whom Paulus Venetus calls Cublai Cingischan, who Ruled in
Tartaria and Cathay, both to make a League against the Saracens, and to gain
the Favor of that most Potent Prince for the confirming of the Christian
Commonwealth in a peaceable Estate and Condition, after a tedious Voyage he
arrived at Almalech, that is, Cambalu, the Court of the Great Cham. The Great
Cham, The Great Cham converted to Christianity
or Cublai, being much joy'd at his coming, received him with great Honor and
Respect, as he deserved, bestowed on him great Presents, and advised his Nobles
to follow his Example, and do the same. Therefore when King Haython had rested
himself some Weeks after the toil of his continual Travels, he addressed
himself to the Emperor, and with much strength and weight of Rational Arguments
opened the Cause of his so far undertaken Voyage. The Emperor having duly
pondered the just Reasons of his Petition, and greatly admiring both the
Condescension of the King's Person, in exposing himself to so great Labors and
Danger, and also considering that the Quiet of his Kingdom, and the Advantage
or Interest of the Christian Commonwealth was very much concerned, out of his
Clemency promised to grant him whatsoever he should demand. Haython accepting
of the obsequiousness of so free an Offer, Presented him in Writing several
Points of his Petition, which were as follows: 1. That the Great Cham would
vouchsafe to embrace the Christian Faith. 2. That a perpetual League of
Friendship might be confirmed between the Christians and the Tartars. 3. That
all the Christians, both Ecclesiastics and Laics, with their Churches, might
be free from all Persecution, and enjoy the Immunities and Privileges in all
the Kingdoms which the Tartars had subjected to the Empire. 4. That he should
raise an Army to free the Holy Sepulcher of Christ from the Turkish Tyranny,
and also restore the Holy Land possessed by the Saracens, into the Hands of the
Christians. 5. That he should join his Forces with his, to root out the most
potent Caliph of Baldach. 6. That he should grant him the Privilege, to
implore the Assistance of the Tartars wheresoever they inhabit, more especially
those that border nearer Armenia, and that without any delay they should be
obliged to aid him. 7. That the Privileges and Jurisdictions of his Kingdom of
Armenia, which first was possessed by the Saracens, and they being thence
expuls'd by the Tartars, the Tributary Kings of the Great Cham possessed,
should be restored to him the King of Armenia.


The Great Cham having heard these Demands, presently called a Council of his
Nobility, in whose Presence he returned this Answer:

Because the King of Armenia has addressed himself to Our Empire, not by any
Compulsion, but moved of his own free Will, in truth, it very much becomes Our
Imperial Majesty to assent unto his lawful Requests, and by all ways possible
to further his Desires: Therefore We accept of your Prayers, and shall be
careful to accomplish all by God's Assistance. First of all, I the Emperor and
Lord of the Tartars, will cause my self to be Baptized, and will hold that
Faith which the Christians hold, advising all the Subjects of my Empire to do
the same, but not with that intention, that I desire violence should be offered
to any Person. Unto the second We Answer, and effectually Intend, and strictly
Command, That there be a perpetual League between the Christians and the
Tartars inviolably confirmed. Also We Will, and it is Our Pleasure, That all
the Churches of the Christians, and the Clergy of what Condition soever,
whether Secular or Religious, have and enjoy their Privileges and Liberties in
all the Kingdoms or Provinces subject unto my Dominion, and that none molest
them. As for what concerns the Holy Land, We say, That if We could with Our
Convenience, We would, out of Reverence unto Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
go in Person; but because We have much Business in these Our Kingdoms, We Will
and Enjoin Our Brother Haolon to bring all this Business to effect, as it
requires and becomes the same: for he shall free the City of Jerusalem, and
all the Holy Land, out of the Hands of the Pagans, and shall restore the same
unto the Christians. And now for what concerns the Caliph of Baldach, We shall
issue out Our Commands unto Our Captain Baydod, who is General of the Tartars,
and those that are in the Kingdoms of Turcia, and all others that inhabit about
those Regions, That they reduce them all under their Yoke, and utterly destroy
the Caliph, Our Capital Enemy. And as for the Privilege that the King of
Armenia requires by the Aid of the Tartars, it is Our Pleasure, that he may
have Satisfaction according to his Desire, which We are resolved also freely to
confirm. And lastly, as concerning the King of Armenia's Demand, That we should
restore the Lands of his Kingdoms taken from him by the Saracens, and
afterward possessed by the Tartars, this We willingly and freely grant unto
him; and it is Our Pleasure that our Brother Haolon restore all those Lands
without delay; and also Our Will and Pleasure is, that many Tents may be
granted unto the aforesaid King, and and that by a special Grace, for the
Augmentation and Defense of his Kingdom. Thus Haython the Armenian, who was
Brother of this King of Armenia, and also his inseparable Companion in his
Voyage unto the Great Cham into the remotest Parts of Tartary.

The Points which King Haython requested of the Great Cham, were obtained with
wonderful constancy of Faith and Sincerity; for as the Armenian Writer of this
History testifies in his 24th Chapter, he accomplished the first Point, in
reference unto Baptism, without delay; for after he had been instructed in the
Christian Faith, he with his whole Court, and all his Nobility, were Baptized
by a Bishop that was Chancellor of Armenia, and by his Brother Haython, the
King of Armenia; and having now happily discharged his Embassy, and accomplished
his Desires, accompanied with Haolon, after he was restored unto his Kingdom,
he gained the Possession of all Persia, being then without a King, meeting with
very little resistance: He despoiled also the Caliph in Baldach, and plundered
the City, which abounded with great Riches, and blocked up the Caliph, the Head
of the perfidious Mahumetan Religion, a Person extremely covetous, who reserved
his Money to raise an Army, in a Castle or Tower, and thence cast out his Gold,
Silver, and Jewels, to maintain and preserve his Life, if possible; but he
famished him, by depriving him of all Provision, and thus spoke unto him: If
thou had not so covetously and penuriously reserved this Treasure, thou had
freed thy self and thy City; but now enjoy thy Wealth, and eat and drink that
which thou have so dearly delighted in. And thus he reposing confidence in his
Riches, perished with Hunger. Thence wheeling about his Army, he wan all
Turcia, and reduced into his Possession Alepo, a most strong and populous City,
and abounding in Wealth; after nine Days Siege; which being gained, and
Damascus being also Assaulted and taken by his Valor, he then subdued with the
like success the Holy Land, even to the Desert of Egypt: and in all the
Kingdoms now subjected under his Dominion, this was his only Care, that
whatsoever Christians he found either Exiled or debarred of their Liberty, were
restored unto the same again, and also had the Privilege of their Churches
grant^d them, and those that were demolished, were re-edifi'd at their Cost;
being induced unto this more especially by his Wife, who was named
Dioucoscaron, and reported to be one of the Lineage of the three Kings that were
led by the Star, and offered their Presents unto our Savior at his Birth: for
she, as having been long before instructed in the Christian Religion, so also
being inflamed with a zeal and desire of promoting the Christian Faith, made it
her whole endeavor, by the extirpation of the wicked Sect of Mahomet, to
restore the Holy Land and the Sepulcher of Christ unto the Christians.
Therefore it so happened by the zeal of Haython to the Christian Faith, that
besides the hithermost Tartary, both the Kingdoms of Armenia and Colchis, and
also Turcia, Babylon, Syria, and Palestine, freely, and with great liberty,
enjoyed the Christian Profession, with a great accession of the Infidels unto
the Faith of Christ. And in the greater Tart^ria, all every where following the
Example of the Great Cham, embraced the Christian Profession even unto the
utmost Bounds of Cathay.

St. Antonius confirms all this in his 3. Tom. Tit. 19. Chap. 8. Sect. 21.
and he whom we before called Haolon, he calls Ercaltay, a Prince, and Brother
of Cublai the Great Cham; for he a long time after his Baptism, being sent in
the name of the Emperor to destroy the perfidious Sect of Mahomet, out of a
great and incredible zeal he had to the Orthodox Religion, and also to recover
the Holy Land, as we have before related, achieved many Exploits worthy
eternal Memory. There is an Epistle of his extant, in the same quoted place of
Antonius, unto St. Lewis King of France, who was also at the same time intent
on the War undertaken against the Mahumetans in the Island of Cyprus; in which
Epistle he ardently exhorts him to accomplish the same Enterprise together
with him; and because it is worthy of consideration, I thought it requisite
here to insert it. This is the Exemplar or Transcript of the Letter which
Ercaltay Prince of the Tartars sent unto King Lewis, and by his Command
Translated into Latin word for word.

THe Words of Ercaltay, The Letter of Haolon to the K. of France.
sent by the Power of the High God from the King of the Land of Cham, unto the
Great King, the Strenuous or Victorious Conqueror of many Provinces, the Sword
of the World, the Victory of Christianity, the Defender of the Apostolical
Religion, Son of the Evangelical Law, King of France, let God increase his
Dominion, and preserve it for many years, and fulfill his Desires in the Law,
and in the World now, and in the World to come, by the Verity of his Divine
Power, that leads all Men, and all the Prophets and Apostles, Amen. A hundred
thousand Salutes and Benedictions; and this I request, That he will accept
these Benedictions, and that they may appear great in his sight: God grant that
I may behold this magnificent King, who has approached so near unto us. Now
the most High Creator grant this our Meeting may be in Charity, and cause us to
assemble together in Unity. After this our Salutation, That in this our Epistle
we intend nothing but the advantage of Christianity, and to strengthen the
Hands of the Christians; and I beseech God to render the Christian Armies
successful, and that they may become triumphant over their Adversaries that
contemn the Cross. Now on the part or behalf of the Great King, let God advance
him, let God increase his Magnificence in the Presence of Cyochaym: We come
with Power and Command, that all Christians be free from Servitude and Tribute,
from Force, Compulsion, and the like, that they be Honored and had in
Reverence, and that none take away, or deprive them of their Possessions; and
that their demolished Churches be re-edifi'd, their Tables founded, and that no
Person may restrain them to Pray with a quiet Conscience and free Mind for our
King. We have sent hither by our faithful Servant the venerable Person Sabaldi,
David and Mark, and they declare those good Reports, and relate by word of
Mouth how Matters are carried with us; now the Son may receive their words, and
may concredit them, and in our Letters the King of the Earth may be exalted:
His Magnificence commands, that in the Law of God there be no difference
between the Grecian and the Roman, the Armenian, Nestorian, and Iacobite, and
all those that adore the Cross; for they are all one with us, and so we desire
that the Magnificent King would not be divided, or be contrary amongst us, but
that his Piety may be shown upon all the Christians, and that his Goodness and
Clemency may continue.


Thus far the Example of the Epistle, which was sent to the King of France in
Cyprus from Ercaltay Prince of the Tartars, unto which other Letters are
sufficiently consonant, which a little before were Presented unto the same King
from the King of Cyprus, and the Count of Ioppa; a Transcript of which also,
together with the Transcript of the aforesaid Letter of Ercaltay, were sent by
the venerable Legate unto Pope Innocent the Fourth. This I have transcribed our
of Antonius.

Also St. Lewis sent unto the forementioned Ercaltay, The Presents of St. Lewis
King of France, to the G^^at Cham.
and to the Great Cham, Ambassadors of the Order of St. Dominick with rich
Gifts or Presents, one whereof was that which they call A Baldachin, a most
magnificent Present, in which the whole Life of Christ was beheld interwoven in
Tapestry-work by a wonderful Art, together with a piece of the Cross: But
concerning this see more at large St. Antonius in the forecited place; as also
Vincentius Bishop of Bellay, in his Speculum Historicum, or Historical
Looking-Glass; all which happened about the Year 1256. and are consonant to what
we a little before alleged out of Paulus Venetus and Haython. St. Antonius
asserteth in the place quoted, That some Tartars came unto the Council held
under Innocent the Fourth. At length, Anno 1300. (as Vadingus relates in the
Life of Odiricus) many Religious Persons of the Order of St. Francis were sent
unto the Great Cham, into the greater Cathay and Tartary, and remained in the
Cities of Cambalu and Nanchin, which they call The City of Heaven, as also the
Kingdom of Tebeth, Converting many of the Infidels and Pagans unto the Faith of
Christ. This St. Odiricus abovementioned, was a Person of the same Order, who
being inflamed with a zeal of gaining all the People of those Kingdoms unto
Christ, is reported to have traveled thither, as is shown at large by the
Reverend Fathers Bollandus and Hoenschenius, in the splendid Work of The Lives
of the Saints, unto which I refer the Reader; where in the first Tome, on the
fifteenth day of January, they at large demonstrate the same in their Learned
Commentaries. And therefore by this occasion the Gospel of Christ being spread
throughout all Tartary and the Kingdom of Cathay, which is China, was in every
Place much augmented. But as we have often said before, what through the defect
of the Cultivators of the Vineyard of Christ, or by the various Successors of
the Empire, very little addicted unto the Christian Faith, or from some other
causes, the Tartarian Church reduced unto its Chaos, partly adhered unto the
Superstition of the Gentiles, part^ly unto the Law of Mahomet, or else to the
Heresy of the Nestorians, who in the Year 1300. undertaking an Expedition or
Voyage from Chaldea into Tartary to ^sow their Tares, infected the Minds of the
Christians there yet remainining with the Venom of their impious Opinions, and
also taught them, who were ignorant of Writing before, the use of the Chaldean
Characters, which the Tartars use unto this Day. But how the Tartars became
Mahumetans, read in Matthias Micheu, in his first Book of the Asiatick Tartary.
And this is that which in brief I esteemed requisite to acquaint the Reader
with, concerning the Change of the Christian Religion in China, Tartaria, and
the other Regions of India.

CHAP. VII.
Of the last Introduction of Christianity into China.
THe Church of Christ continuing thus from Anno 636. in which the
Syro-Chinesian Monument was erected in China, The various Changes of the
Christian Law in China.
and making great Progress, behold, the Enemy of Mankind, by the Assistance of
wicked Men, threw down at one shock or storm, whatsoever the Church of God had
perfected in many years, the Preachers of the Christian Faith, out of the
hatred and envy of the Bonzii, being some put to death, and the rest banished;
whence the Faithful at that time persever'd in the constancy of the Faith
received, even unto the Death: but their Posterity in process of time, being
brought up in the Rites of the Law of the Gentiles, even unto the Year 1256. in
which the Great Cham, Emperor of the Tartars, making an Incursion into China or
Cathay with an irresistible Army, in a short space, as I have related before,
subjected the whole Country unto his Dominion, who as he was instructed in the
Christian Religion, so also a great multitude of Christians (as Paulus Venetus
and Haython relate) entering with him, Propagated themselves in a great number,
who at length, when again the Natives recovered the whole Empire, and expelled
the Tartars, the Christians also, whether out of fear of Persecution, or out of
hope of living better among the Tartars, left China and followed them; and
those that remained behind, retained only some external Ceremonies: And these
are those Christians whom the Chinese, by the Name of The Adorers of the
Cross, relate to have lived in China; concerning which see what I have said
before. Therefore China being again accustomed unto its Country Worship of
Idols, so continued unto the Year 1542. in which a new Light of Truth shone
forth unto it; for after that St. Francis Xavier, an Apostle elected by God for
the Salvation of the Indians, had sown the Seed of the Word of God through all
the unknown Parts of the World, with a great and incredible gain of Souls, and
had gained Iapan, an Island hardly noted to the World, unto the Faith of
Christ; at length he applied his Mind, inflamed with a thirst of obtaining
Souls unto Christ, to the Conversion of the Chinese, using his utmost
endeavor, that he might become Master of his Desires: But it seemed otherwise
fit to the Divine disposal of the Heavenly Majesty; for expecting an
opportunity of entering China, in Santian, an Isle adjoining to the Coasts of
China, he was seized with a Fever, where being replenished with Merits, and now
ready to receive the Reward of Eternal Blessedness for those his signal Labors
performed, he rendered his Spirit unto his Creator, and took his flight unto
Heaven, and what he could not perform of himself, that he obtained with God by
his Intercessions, that his Successor in so great a Charge might accomplish
after the following manner: Alexander Valignanus, of our Society, who Anno
1582. conducted the three Viceroys of Iapan, who were Converted to the
Christian Faith, to render Obedience to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth; he, I say,
had come out of Europe, as appointed Visitor by the Vicar General of all the
Indies; and now having passed over that part of India that is on this side of
Ganges, he set Sail to view that which is situate on the other side of Ganges,
and at length arriving in the Port of Amaca, he determined with himself to pass
over into Iaponia; but being hindered by the Laws of Navigation, he continued
full ten Months in our Station of Amaca, where being wholly informed of the
Chinesian Affairs, he resolved with great ardency to prosecute the Voyage or
Expedition begun by his Predecessors that hitherto lay hid in the Embers; for
from the magnitude of the Empire, the nobleness of the Nation, their great
Peace now enjoyed for so many years, the Prudence of the Magistrates, as also
the Political Mode of Government, unto which none were admitted, but only such
Persons as were accomplished in all kinds of Literature: from these
Considerations, I say, he most rationally concluded, That the Chinese being a
Nation subtle, and addicted unto the Studies of good Arts, might so far at
length be wrought upon, as to admit of, or tolerate certain Persons excelling
in Virtue and Learning, to abide or inhabit in their Empire, and especially
such as were not unskilful in their Country Language, and Learning; and he
seemed to be of opinion, that in time it might so come to pass, that the Rules
and Statutes of the most holy Christian Law might have a propitious Influence
on this Nation, seeing they were so far from the disturbance of the Political
or Civil Administration of the Republic or Empire, that they would rather
highly promote the same; whence China abominating their Heathenish Vanities,
might conceive an hope or desire of the Heavenly good things, and have an Eye
unto Eternity: therefore on that very account he commanded without any delay,
some Persons, sent for out of India, to employ their utmost Endeavors for the
attaining of the Chinesian Language and Learning, (they were two Italians, one
Father Michael Rogerius, and the other Father Matthew Riccius:) which when they
had in some measure attained, with very great Industry they entered the City of
Canton, with hope to get some Habitation in it; but being often frustrated in
their Intentions, they returned to Amaca. It can hardly be expressed, how many
and various Adventures or Casualties interposed, which rendered the Business of
the undertaken Voyage, if not desperate, yet at least very much eclipsed and
fading; all which in the end being overcome, the Matter was brought to the
wished Conclusion by Father Matthew Riccius, unto whom, by the prosperous Lot
of our Fathers, the first Way was opened into the Empire of China, and to him
also the blessed Success of the Christian Law ought deservedly to be ascribed.
This Person had been formerly the Scholar of Father Christopher Clavius, one
very well skilled in the Mathematical Sciences; he being associated unto Father
Rogerius, and being stored with abundance of curious things, together with a
formal Embassy from the Portuguese to the Viceroy of Canton, made his Entrance
into China, and so bewitched the Fancy of the Governor with the Novelty of the
Presents that he brought with him, that he avouch'd, that nei^^ he himself, nor
all China ever beheld the like; and he also not only retained these Fathers
with him as Persons dropped from Heaven, but likewise showed them all the Respect
and Civility that possibly he could.

The Fame of such great Matters being noised abroad, possessed the Minds not
only of many Learned Persons in the Kingdom of Canton, but throughout the whole
Empire, whom when they could not possibly behold in Presence, or carry those
admirable things with them that were so reported of, they called them unto them
every where, by Letters dated out of all the Kingdoms, to come and behold them:
for those things which were now grown common in Europe, were esteemed as
Miracles in China, being there as yet both unseen and unheard of. Now there
were amongst the rest a Clock, both exact and curiously framed, showing besides
the Hour of the Day, the Rising and Setting of the Sun, the Day of the Month,
and Age of the Moon: There was also a Trigonal Glass, which some thought to be
an inestimable Jewel, and others supposed it to be a part or portion of the
Celestial Orb: moreover, Geographical Maps which expressed the Globe of the
Earth, unto the great amazement and admiration of all: The ignorance of the
Chinese.
For as the Chinese were of opinion, that there was nothing else without the
vast Empire of China, so they could not apprehend that the Globe of the Earth
was furnished with so many, and those so Potent Nations and People unknown to
them, that it should be eucompass'd with so large an Ocean, with so great a
multiplicity of Islands here and there on every side scattered abroad; and
moreover, that Europe should be situate so far off in the ultimate Recesses of
the West, disjoined by the interposal of so many Lands and Seas, resplendent
for so many Kingdoms and Monarchs, and more especially for the Majesty of the
Roman Empire; also that China should be placed in the utmost Corner of the
East; this indeed they admired at, and were withal much displeased, that their
Empire, beyond which they imagined nothing to be remaining, yea, which was
fixed in the middle of the Earth as a Jewel in a Ring, should be cast into the
extreme Part of the World. Father Riccius being moved at this their
Displeasure, that he might not any way abate of that Reputation he had gained
amongst them, designed a new Delineation of the Globe of the Earth in a greater
Form, distinguished into two Hemispheres, that China, the proportion of the
Paralells and Meridians being observed and kept, should be in the middle.
Lastly, he Illustrated all the Kingdoms, Regions, Provinces, Cities, Mountains,
Rivers, Seas, and Lakes, in the Chinesian Characters and Language; which Work,
of so universal Diligence and Labor, you can hardly express how much it drew
and fastened the Mind and Eyes of all upon it, especially seeing that what
before they admired as a rude indigested Heap, having no farther understanding
of it; now they did not only behold the Constitution of each Part of the World
declared in their own Language, but also comprehended and discovered all and
every Place in it; whence, when the House was not able to contain the great
number of Persons that ^ame to view this hitherto unseen Work, that many might
become partakers of so great a Good, the Map, at the Cost of the Viceroy was
speedily Engraven, and abundance of the Copies of it were dispersed through the
whole Empire, which excited such a flame in the Minds of Persons that were
curious, that they believed Matthew Riccius, like a revived Atlas, to be the
most excellent Astronomer in the whole World, and to have fallen down from the
Clouds.

The Grandees of the Empire being smitten with those first Fruits of Curiosity,
every where labored to call our Fathers unto them; but by this means they were
unmeet for so great Undertakings, having sent for diverse of the Fathers of
great Abilities from Maccao, they employed them in Fishing: By this means,
first the Minds or Fantasies of the Great Personages being allured by such
preparative Inventions of curious things, as they acquired an high esteem of
their admirable Learning and incomparable Wit, so nothing was more easy than
by laying hold on the occasion, which was the chief inducement of their Voyage
into China, to discourse concerning the Christian Religion and the God of
Heaven.

Now the Chinese, who for a long space of time had a great Controversy about
the Worship of the True God, being captivated with their great Reasonings, that
were strengthened with the weight of Arguments concerning the One and True God,
and the nullity of the Gentile Figments and Images, presently submitted
themselves to be instructed in their Worship and Discipline; whence within a
few years, Men of Note, together with other Persons of all States and
Conditions, The Nobility of China receive the Law of Christ.
discovering the Vanity of their own Religion, being washed with the Sacred
Water of Baptism, were received into the Bosom of our Holy Mother the Church;
amongst which were many Noble Persons and Governors of the Empire, whom they
term Mandorins and Colao's, who acknowledging the Benefit of the Divine Call
unto the safe Harbor of Saving Faith, so warmly embraced the Law of Christ,
that they seemed hardly able to rest, before they had brought over many others
to embrace the same: Hence many Books which delivered the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion were written and dispersed throughout the whole Empire, to
the incredible advantage of Souls.

But the great Enemy of Mankind suffered not such a Prey to be rescued from
him; for now Places of Residence being established through the chief Provinces
of the Empire, and Churches also erected unto the Service of God, by the Envy
and Hatred of the Bonzii, that is their Priests, who were almost frantic at
the so great Advancement and Propagation of the Divine Gospel, so heavy a
Persecution was raised against our Fathers and Converts, that often being
clapped up in Prison and cruelly tormented, and lastly by their withdrawing,
and the total exilement of the Christian Profession, so happy a Progress of the
Faith was almost reduced unto the extremest hazard: but by the Assistance of
the Divine Favor, the Constancy of our Fathers, the Books published by Great
Persons whom they had gained unto Christ, and also by reason of the great
Authority they bore, and the Innocence of the Fathers, demonstrated by the
detection of the Calumnies of the Adversaries, they were restored unto their
former Liberty, they learning from this one Example, that it cannot possibly be
brought to pass that such another Persecution should ever go about to obscure
the so famous Fruits, managed for the Glory of the Divine Majesty, no more than
a Shadow can put out the Light of the Sun; therefore Matters being again
brought to this tranquillous Condition, Christianity arose to so much the more
height, by how much it had been the more lowly and violently depressed; for
the Faith did not only extend it self throughout the utmost Bounds of the
Empire, but also entered the Palace of the Emperor; and the inviolable force of
Verity was such, that it drew the Empress and her Son to the love of it, by the
Pains of Andrew Cosler, and Austrian; who being washed with the Water of
Baptism, the Empress had the Name of Helena given her, and her Son that of
Constantine; the chief Minister of whose Court, Pan Achilleus, having also been
instructed in the Christian Religion, and being a Person mightily inflamed with
zeal to propagate the Christian Faith, often solicited by ardent Entreaties,
that Letters might be sent unto the Pope, and to the General of the Society of
Jesus, for the sending over of a great plenty of Laborers into China: They had
so great a Devotion toward the Apostolical See, that what Homage and Obedience
they could not perform in their own Persons, they enjoined Father Michael Boim
to discharge at Rome unto the Pope in their steads.

Things thus prosperously succeeding, and according to the Desires of all,
behold a new Whirlwind with great violence from the North disturbed the
prosperous and fortunate Transaction of the Christian Affairs, which being
established and confirmed by the Broad Seal of the Emperor, they hoped might
have enlarged the Preaching of the Gospel throughout the whole Empire: But the
Tartars being allured or enticed by the Intestine or Civil Wars of the
Chinese, and breaking through the Fortresses of the Walls, did not only reduce
Pequin, but, like an Inundation, in little space subjected all China unto their
Empire. Vumly, The Emperor Vumly, when he had slain his Wife and Daughter,
hanged himself.
Emperor of the Chinese, being deserted by all, and forced to great Exigences,
when no Place of Safeguard was granted unto him by his rebellious Subjects of
China, that he might not be compelled to behold so great a Confluence of
imminent Calamities, having first with his own Hands slain both his Wife and
his Daughter, at length, heightened unto Despair, miserably concluded his Life
by the Halter: Concerning which Occurrences, he that desires farther to
understand the Catastrophe of Humane Concernments, may have recourse unto
Father Martinius, in his Tractate of the Tartar War, and from thence he may
learn not to be any farther inquisitive after the height of an unhappy Monarch
in such sort exalted, which lies subject and exposed unto so horrible
Precipices, and so great Ruins, in the so great disturbance of Affairs, and
Confusion of the Empire. The Christians placed between hope and fear, with
careful Minds expected the Inclination of the new Emperor, unto the Progress of
the Christian Faith; and at length they found it more propitious unto them than
ever they could have wished or desired, in the manner that follows.

There had now been residing in China for many years Father John Adam Schall,
Native of the City of Colonia in Germany, who as he was inferior to none,
either in respect of his Knowledge in the Mathematics and other Sciences in
which he excelled, or his excellent skill in the Chinesian Tongue; or lastly,
his Prudence in the management of Affairs, acquired by long Experience; so was
he much famed throughout the whole Empire; concerning whom when the new Emperor
had been informed many worthy things, as in reference to a Stranger, he was
very much joy'd with this Information, that he had found a Stranger, which for
a long space he had desired, so much knowing in all the Affairs of China, unto
whom he might safely and securely entrust the closest Secrets of all his
Councils, and whom he discovered happily to have conjoined the Chinesian Arts
unto an European Wit or Capacity; therefore having called him to Court, he
received him with great testimony of Friendship, and observing the gravity of
his Deportment, his Candor of Life, Prudence, and excellent Wid at sudden
Repartees; he was so well pleased with his Conversation, that he immediately
created him one of his intimate Counselors, a Mandorin of the prime Rank, and
assigned unto him the highest Place in the Astronomical Tribanal of the
Calender, and commanded all throughout the whole Empire to obey his
Astronomical Determinations; he especially wondering at his infallible
Prediction of Eclipse, in which the others did so much err, performed by his
accurate Calculation; he admired also his skill in the Mechanic Arts,
especially in casting of great Ordnance. The Emperor being taken with these
things, loved and honored him as a Father, looking upon him as more than Man,
as having something of Divinity about him; and when any Address was scarcely
admitted unto so sublime a Majesty, besides that of the Empress and Eunuchs, he
obtained without any Prohibition, a Favor granted to no other, a Privilege of
coming into the Emperor's Presence, whether at home or abroad; and therefore he
was esteemed as his Maffa, for so the Emperor called him, that is to say,
Venerable Father; a Privilege never read of in the Annals of the Chinese.
Four times in a Year the Emperor vouchsafed to visit the House and Church of
our Society, going into all the Corners of the House: he was pleased to
converse with the Maffa privately in the Lodging-Room, refusing all Ceremonies
of State befitting so great a Monarch, sometimes sitting upon the Bed Pallat,
and sometime in the old decrepit Chair, condescending to view some of our
Rarities, not refusing to smell Flowers which he Presented him from his own
Garden, and never seemed more pleasantly to recreate himself, than in the House
of the poor Priests; and in the Church he wondered at the brightness of the
Altars, and the elegancy of the European Images, cursorily enquiring concerning
the Books, their Characters and Images, with the Mysteries thereof; which when
explained unto him, he worshipped, especially the Fignres of Christ and the
Blessed Virgin, and asserted, That the Christian Religion was the best, and
excelled all others; that his Ancestors had formerly been of the same
Persuasion. And that he might not seem to esteem of the Christian Faith in
words only, he resolved to do something in honor thereof; for on a great Marble
Stone erected before the Doors of our Church, he caused to be Engraven in
Chinese and Tartar Characters, his Will and Pleasure for the Propagation of the
Faith of Christ, by a Regal Edict, which at this Day is to be seen Printed on a
China Sheet of Paper in the Library of the Roman College, and is as follows:

THE Heavenly Science of Astronomy (which our Progenitors so highly esteemed
of, as we also do who trace their Footsteps) deserves to be extolled to the
Skies, especially after the same, formerly under diverse Emperors being almost
wholly collaps'd, is restored, and especially has been rendered more exact by
Co Zeu Kim, in the time of the Empire of Iuen, Emperor of the Tartars, who
formerly Ruled the Chinese four hundred years; and lastly, was become very
erroneous in the latter part of the Reign of the former Emperor Mim. There is
found John Adam Schall, coming from the farthest part of the West into China,
who understands not only the Art of Calculation, but also the Theory of the
Planets, and whatsoever does belong unto Astronomy; he being brought unto the
Emperor our Antecessor, by his Command took upon him the care of restoring the
Mathematics and Astronomy in the University; but because that many apprehended
not the Fruit that would redound unto the Commonwealth from this Science, he
could not then conclude that his Subjects should employ themselves in that
Science; but now I being come unto the Empire, make the order of Time my first
care, as conducing to the Profit and Advantage of my Empire: for in the Autumn
of the first Year of my Rule, demanding an Experiment in that Art which John
Adam has restored, I commanded him to observe the Ecliyse of the Sun, which he
had most diligently Calculated long before, and having found both the Moments
of Time, and also the Points of the Eclipse most exactly to correspond in all
Circumstances with his Calculation; and also in the Spring of the following
Year, when there was an Eclipse of the Moon; commanding him with the same
Diligence to observe it, I also found this not to err or differ an Hairs
breadth: wherefore I presently discerned, that Heaven sent this Person unto us
at such a time, in which I undertook the Regiment of so great an Empire, whence
I committed unto him the whole Government of the Mathematical Tribunal; but
because John Adam is chaste from his Youth, and will not undertake any Business
contrary to the Rules of the Religious Order, I thought it necessary to bind
him with an absolute Command to undertake this Function, and to add the Dignity
of the second Order unto the Title of the Master of the Celestial Secrets; in
which Office he having been employed for some Years, has daily increased his
Diligence and Study: And because he has a Temple or Church near the Gate of
the City, named Xun Che Muen, in which, according to the Rites of his Law or
Religion he Offers Sacrifices unto God, I therefore contributed some
Assistance unto him for the building and adorning of it; and when I entered that
Temple, I discerned the Images and Utensils of it to have the shapes of strange
things; and when I had asked him what the Books of his Religion (which I found
on the Table) contained? he answered, That they contained the Explication of
the Divine Law: Indeed, although I had first applied my Study to the Doctrine
or Religion Yao Xun Cheu, and learned some things out of their Books Cum Cu,
and albeit I have read somewhat in the Books Foe and Tau, yet notwithstanding I
can remember nothing contained in them; and seeing I could not, by reason of
the Affairs of my Kingdom, hitherto peruse the Books of this Divine Law, but
only cursorily, therefore I cannot pass an exact Judgment out of them
concerning the Law; but if you reflect upon, or consider Father John Adam, who
for many years having been conversant with the Chinese and with us, follows
this Law, and Preaches the same, then I judge and esteem it the best; for John
Adam does so reverence his God, that he has dedicated this Temple unto him
with so great Modesty and Integrity, for so many years always conforming
himself in the same method of this Law, and not in the least point varying from
it: this indeed is an evident sign that the Law is most perfect, in which John
Adam shows himself of most approved Virtue, and fulfilleth that exactly by
his Fidelity which that Law teaches or commands, viz. To serve God, to obey
Kings and Magistrates, to do no wrong to any Person, and to have respect to the
Good and Welfare of the Commonwealth and our Neighbors: And would to God, that
all my Magistrates, Officers, and Subjects, would imitate this his Method in
serving of God, and keeping of this his Divine Law, and at a long distance
would but shadow this in the Homage they owe unto their Emperor; without doubt
it would fall out better, and far more happily with me and my whole Empire. As
for my own part, I praise, and greatly approve of this his Belief and Law which
he follows; and therefore in a perpetual Commemoration I affix this Title to
his Church, Tum hiuen hia Kim, that is, The excellent Place for ascending to
Heaven. Given at Peking the seventh Year of our Empire.

This Patent, written in the Chinesian and Tartar Languages and Characters, on
a black Table, by a polite and elegant Hand, is to be seen in our Study or
Gallery; and the Tartar Characters do indeed resemble the form of the Syriack,
wholly different from those of the Chinese. Now on what occasion the Tartar
granted this Privilege, is related before. From whence it is manifestly
apparent, what affection so great a Monarch had for the Christian Faith, and
how much he endeavored the promotion and promulgation thereof, even to the
embracing of it himself, confessing the only obstacle of his Conversion was
Polygamie; which Doctrine being so dissonant to the Customs and Nature of the
Heathen Princes, made them boggle at first, and then fly from that True Faith
they were ready to receive, to the perdition of their Souls. But to return to
our purpose.

From this most ardent propensity of the Emperor unto our Religion, Many Noble
Chinese converted to the Christian Religion.
immediately there succeeded a great Conversion of the Ladies of Honor, the
Eunuchs, and Mandorins; the Christian Law being spread abroad in the City of
Peking, there were gathered into the Bosom of the Church almost eighty thousand
Converts. But all this flourishing and Blooming Spring was blasted in the Bud
by the sudden Death of the Emperor, he not obtaining that Eternal Salvation
which he so much desired on the behalf of others; and although oftentimes he
requested the Ghostly Assistance of Father Adam, yet by the craft and subtlety
of the Lamas and Bonzii, who stood before the Emperor in the last Conflict of
Life and Death, it so fell out, that all Address to him was obstructed till it
was too late; for being frustrate of his hope, whom he thought alive, he to his
incredible sorrow found dead. Now when his Funeral Rites were performed, a Pile
being made of precious Wood, the Treasures of so wealthy a Prince were cast
into the Flames with the dead Corpse, which put an end to his Imperial
Magnificence and Grandeur.

The Son of this deceased Emperor, being a Youth of fourteen Years of Age,
succeeded him in the Government; who as he was under the Discipline and Tuition
of Father Adam, being wholly committed unto his Care by the Emperor, so he
divested not himself of that innate Affection which he had to the Christian
Faith and our Religious Fathers.

Now how much the Christian Concerns were augmented under these Emperors in
respect of former Times, is evidently shown by the Inscription of the new
erected and Consecrated Church at Peking, which, as being worthy of
Consideration, I shall here subjoyn in stead of a Conclusion.

The Inscription of the Church of Peking, belonging to the Society of Jesus.
AFter the Faith introduced by St. Thomas the Apostle, The Inscription of the
Church of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus.
and after the same was again, and that more largely Propagated by the Syrians
in the time of the Reign of the Emperor Tam; the same being again the third
time divulged in the time of the Regency of the Emperor Mim, by the Conduct of
St. Francis Xavier and Father Matthew Riccius, of the Society of Jesus, both by
Preaching, and Books published in the Chinesian Tongue, performed with great
Study and Labor, but by reason of the inconstancy of the Nation, not altogether
with equal success. The Empire being now devolved unto the Tartars, the same
Society, for a conclusion of their Labors in restoring the Calendar called The
XI of Hien Lie, has publicly placed and Dedicated this Temple to the most
High God, at Peking, the Royal City and Palace of the Emperors of China.

Anno 1650. and the seventh Year of Xun Chi.
Father John Adam Schall of Zell, a German, Professor of the Society of Jesus,
and Author of the forementioned Calendar, out of the Labor of his Hands
bequeatheth this Temple and his Patience unto Posterity.

P. MATTHAEVS RICCIVS MACERAT. of the Society of Jesus, the first propagator of
the Christian Religion in the Kingdo of Cluna*

LY PAVLVS GREAT COLAVS OF the Chinese propagator of y christian L^w.



P. ADAM SCHALIGER A GERMAN MANDARIN OF Y FIRST ORDER.



CHAP. VIII.
Of the Correction of the Chinese Calendar, and how much Good redounded from
thence.
THE Chinese never so much delighted in any thing, as in an exact Calculation
of Times and Seasons, without which they justly believed, that neither the
Actions of Princes, or Histories of any Age could methodically be composed,
always endeavoring to confirm the same, if their Rules of the Astronomical
Science had not failed them; for they relate in their Annals, that they have
had an Academy of Astronomers maintained at the Public and Royal Cost above
three thousand nine hundred Years, whose Employment was to compute the Course
of the Sun and Moon, and the Eclipses, and as accurately as might be to note
the Houses of the New Mons entering, and her other Apearances, that by these
Lunary Observations they might give Advice to the Husbandman, and others
concerned; for they had no knowledge of the various Walks of the Planets, but
were of an Opinion, before the arrival of the Fathers of our Society, that all
the Constellations of what Sphere soever, were equally distant from the Earth;
discovering thereby their gross ignorance in this Science.

The Chinese relate, The original of the Chinesian Astronomy.
That their Astronomy had its original from a very ancient King called Iao; who
had two Brothers, one named Hy, and the other Ho, most famous for their Skill
in Astronomy, whom he enjoined to declare and set down in a short and clear
Method whatsoever they thought might be known concerning the Compute of Times,
to be observed by a constant Rule; which they performed with such care and
diligence as was requisite; but after the space of about two thousand years,
Cin Hoam obtained the Empire, who in the thirty fourth Year of his Reign did
not only prohibit the use of all Arts, but also caused to be burnt all the
Books that he could find; but so it happened in course of Time, that amongst the
Ruins of vast Fabrics, the so long desired Astronomical Volumes were
discovered, to the universal joy of the Empire: but as they had lain neglected
for the space of so many years, so also they were found so erroneous, that they
were of little use without Correction; the Emendation of which was at length
undertaken by one Cofcencin, an Astronomer of great note in China. At length it
came to pass also, but how I know not, that a Book concerning the Diurnal
Motion of the Planets was found preserved in the Kings Library, which was
Presented by the Ambassador sent out of Persia to the Emperor of Tartary, when
the Tartars were expuls'd out of China by the Emperor Humun: He caused the same
Book to be Translated out of the Persian and Arabic Tongue into the Chinesian
Language, hoping that in time to come their Chinesian Calendar might be
restored unto its pristine Perfection. But the Mandorins most Learned in the
Arts, not fully understanding the subtle Theories of the Persians, it came to
pass that the Chinesian Calender remained uncorrected until the arrival of the
Fathers.

The Masters of the Astronomical Function being forced to make use of their
accustomed erroneous Tables in the yearly Publication of the Lunaries, with
such grand Escapes in the computing Eclipses; in which having in vain employed
themselves three years, they ingeniously acknowledged that they were
wonderfully mistaken; and therefore they Presented a Petition to the Emperor,
in which they showed the great necessity of correcting the Calendar,
recommending unto him the Fathers of the great Western part of the World, both
in relation to their Skill in Astronomy, and also the acuteness of their
Ingenuity in that Art. Our Fathers appointed to Correct the Calendar by the
Emperor's Edict.
The Emperor, when he had read the Petion, was very much rejoiced, and assented
unto whatsoever they desired, and presently by his Proclamation manifested his
Majesty's high Pleasure for the carrying on of the Work without delay.

Our Fathers being exalted to an Honor they never durst hope for, or ever could
desire a Means more commodious for the Propagation of the Gospel of Christ,
most willingly applied themselves to a Business of that great and weighty
concernment: Those that were first employed were Father Sabatinus de usrsis,
and Father Iacobus Pantoja, Anno 1611. Persons excelling in the Knowledge of
the Astronomical Sciences. Father Sabatinus immediately endeavored to have the
Theories of the Planets, very necessary to the understanding of the Motion of
the Constellations, Translated out of the Latin Tongue into the Chinesian, by
the assistance of two Mandorins, Paul and Leo, now become Christians, who with
great proficiency had sometime since attained the Astronomical Disciplines, by
the instruction of Father Matthew Riccius: Then he applied himself to find out
the Longitude of the City of Peking, by Observations made by his Correspondents
both in China, India, and Europe, without which the Calculation of Eclipses is
altogether in vain undertaken. Pantoja undertook to search out the Latitude of
the Cities of China; and beginning from Canton, he most exactly measured with
the Astrolabe through the Latitude of the whole Empire, in a direct Line from
the South unto the Limits of the North of Peking, sporting himself both Night
and Day in the indagation of the preparative Exercises, concerning which there
was not the least hint in the Chinesian Astronomy. The Errors of the Chinese
in Geography.
And although the Chinese vaunt so much of their great Excellency above other
Nations in subtlety of Wit, yet they knew not what the Longitude or Latitude of
Places was; so that when the Fathers of our Society first entered into China,
and caused some Sun-Dyals to be made, they admired that the Cities of China,
should be under diverse Elevations of the Pole, in regard they assigned but
thirty six Degrees unto the whole Empire, relying upon the Tradition of the
Ancients, who foolishly persuaded themselves, that the Earth was not Globular,
but that it was extended into an infinite Superficies, and that the Sun and
Moon about or under the West, entered into a certain deep Cave, from which
again they arose about the East: And moreover, that the Sun and Moon were no
bigger than what the Eye demonstrated them to be, viz. that those lucid Bodies
are not above six Handfuls in magnitude: from whence it is manifest, how
maimed, lame, and impefect the Chinesian Astronomy was.

But to return to our purpose: This happy beginning of the Emendation of the
Calendar continued not long, by reason that the Academy of the Mathematical
College being enraged at our Fathers for the great Honor conferred upon them
by the Emperor, Presented an humble Petition to him, in which, with great
eagerness, they complained of the suppression of the Studies of their Country
Sciences, and of the signal Advancement of Barbarians in the Royal Employment:
But the Emperor having fully discovered the imperfection and deformity of the
several Computations made by the Adversaries, and that the Calculations of our
Fathers always agreed to the Point of the Prediction, at length, by a new
Patent, granted unto the Fathers a plenary Power, in reference unto the
Astronomical Arts, Father John Terentius being more especially taken into this
Employment, at the Request of the Mandorins Paul and Leo.

This Father John Terentius was a German of the City of Constance, who before
he entered into our Society, was in great favor and request with Princes and
Noble Personages, for his exact Knowledge of the occult Secrets of Nature, and
happy Skill in Physic; but weary of his Honor and Fame, divulged far and near,
and renouncing the World, he resolved to employ his Talent in the Conversion of
the Infidels; wherefore he undertook the Indian Expedition, which he obtained
with no great Labor; for as he showed himself an indefatigable Searcher out of
the Mysteries of Nature, so now by this Opportunity he passed the vast Voyages
of the Ocean, not after the manner of idle Persons, and such as sleep away
their Time, or spend it in other trivial Employment; but our Terentius left
nothing uninquir'd after, whether you have an Eye to the natural Situation of
Promontories, or Coasts, the original of Winds, the Properties of the Sea, and
the varieties of Fish therein.

Terentius being now arrived in India in the Fields and Woods, and being a most
skilful Botanist, he met with no kind of Plant, but having most exactly
examined, he entered them in his Book, together with their proper shapes, and
distinct forms. Hence, having searched out the Coasts of India, Bengala,
Malaca, Sumatra, Couchinchina, and the Rarities of Nature worthy of
consideration, he at last arrived at Maccao, and from thence he came into
China, the accomplishment of his Desires, over all which he traveled by a
direct, transverse, and oblique Voyage; and because many Rarities of Natures
Secrets more perspicuously presented themselves in these most distant Climates,
viz. in Stones, Plants, Animals, and in the Customs and Manners of the
Inhabitants, he left no way unsearch'd, nor means unexamin'd, but made trial of
the Virtues of each by Philosophical Experiments; and as he was not unskilful
in Painting, he exhibited each of them Pencil'd to the Life with his own Hands,
according to the Prototype or Draught of Nature, unto the admiration of the
Chinese, in two large Volumes, which he called Indian Pliny, a Title becoming
so great and worthy a Work. It was the only intention of this Person by these
his admirable Secrets, first to lay open a way for himself, and at length for
others, both of the Learned, and also of the Mandorins, to obtain their Assent
for a Liberty of Preaching the Gospel; which he so dexterously gained, that
there was hardly any Person that did not esteem and honor him as a Man sent
down from Heaven; and being an excellent Physician, he was sent for at last
unto all Persons, of what Estate or Condition soever they were, that were
afflicted with any Distemper, whom with the Embracements of the Bowels of an
invincible Charity, he both cured of their Bodily Distempers, and healed their
Souls that were oppressed and infected with the Darkness of Gentilism, by the
Word of Life, unto the incredible Fruit and Advantage of the Christian
Commonwealth: Therefore being intent on these Concernments, after the so long
suspended Business of the mending of the Calendar, and the Return of our
Fathers from Exile, as a Master now a long while Exercised in the Astronomical
Disciplines, by the Labor of Leo the Mandorin, now Converted unto the Cristian
Faith, he was sent for unto Peking, at the Emperor's Cost to correct the
Calendar,; but while he was employed in this Affair, being seized on by Death,
the Business was obstructed, to the great Grief of all Persons, and more
especially of the Emperor: Yet there wanted not new Atlases; for in his Place
was substituted Father Jacob Rho an Italian of the City of Milan, and Father
John Adam, who by an united Force undertook the prosecution of this
Undertaking: But Father Rho departing this Life, the whole Management of this
weighty Affair was laid on the Shoulders of Father Adam, who with the Applause
of the whole Empire made a final Conclusion thereof. But the malice of their
Adversaries can hardly be expressed, who in their Apologetical Writings to the
Emperor, complaining, that they had prescribed the Laws of the Arts and
Sciences unto the Chinese, to the Disgrace and Signal Contempt of the whole
Empire; and that Barbarians, and Sons of an unknown Land, should be exalted
with so great Honor from the Emperor, and that by the Imperial Diploma or
Patent; as if the excellency of Wit of all the Learned Chinese concentred in
the Heads of two obscure Persons, leaving them for the future no hope of Glory.
And when they could accomplish nothing by such like Accusations, returning unto
horrible Calumnies, they were invective against our Fathers, as the
Overthrowers of the Republic, the Contemners of the Gods, Promulgers of a New
Law, wholly and diametrically contrary unto theirs. The Emperor perceiving
their Malice, answered, That the Astronomical Government had nothing to do with
their Religion, and that they should know his Royal Judgment was just and
right, which, laying aside all respect, was confirmed in the truth of reforming
the Calendar, and Calculation of the Eclipses, in which he had long since found
them very much mistaken, always discovering the Calculation of our Fathers to
answer exactly to their Predictions. Wherefore he commanded them to cease from
Contentions, or otherwise he would immediately inflict due Punishments with
Justice and Severity upon the unjust Slanderers. Therefore being as it were
thunderstruck, they desisted from any further Contradiction, judging it more
fit for some space to decline the Displeasure of the Emperor, than by such
Accusations to lose all hope of further Proportion, and to run the hazard of
Banishment, and the loss of Life it self.

Now the Emperor, by Nature most curious, respected and favored our Fathers for
the great Collection of Books which they made for reforming the Chinesian
Astronomy, which they Presented unto him. The first of these was an
Astronomical Book of Logarithms, adapted unto the Chinesian Account, which,
besides that it was involved with innumerable Difficulties, was altogether
insufficient for all manner of Astronomical Operations: for what they could not
perform by Addition, Substraction, and the other known kinds of Numbers alone,
those our Fathers, by introducing the European Compute, comprehended in a few
Lines.

They also published a Treatise of Trigonometry, so necessary to the
accomplishment of Astronomical Conclusions; concerning which, the Chinese even
unto that very Day had not received the least glimpse.

There also followed another Work of the Optics, in which was described the
Situations of the Stars, their Magnitude, their Distance from the Earth, and
also from one another, the Doctrine of Parallaxes, of their other Accidents and
Phaenomena's, or Appearances.

Next to this, succeeded the Mechanics, or the Use and Making of Astronomical
Instruments; with which the Emperor being much delighted, they reduplicated his
Joy, by Presenting him with each Instrument, as they were newly made in Europe;
and he was so taken therewith, that he gave a strict Order they should be laid
up in the most withdrawing Recess of his Bedchamber; and that he might exactly
understand each, he would be instructed therein by the Fathers. And from that
time they obtained not only what concerned Learning, but also the Propagation
of the Gospel of Christ, accompanied with Revenues necessary for their own
Private Support. Moreover, the Emperor deputed an hundred of the Chinesian
Astronomers, who should acquiesce in the Judgment of Father Adam Schall in the
Decision of all things, as the Supreme Head and Arbiter of the Tribunal of
Rites or Astronomical Council. Which Edict was confirmed with so great force,
that to this very Day no Person whatsoever durst so much as motion any thing
contrary unto it: And his Authority was such, that no Ephimerides, which was
wont every year to be divulged through the Empire, might now be Published,
without it were Composed or Authorized by him, a great Penalty being inflicted
on those that should act to the contrary.

They that desire to know more concerning the Matters abovementioned, may have
recourse to the Relation (if ever it chance to be Published) which Father Adam
Schall has compiled concerning the reformation of the Chinesian Astronomy,
which I have read in the Manusctipt; where the curious Reader will see with
admiration how much the Labors of these our Fathers have contributed to the
Propagation of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ throughout the vast and
extensive Dominions of the Emperor of China, and how much Glory, Honor, and
Reputation has thence redounded unto all Europe: And from the extraordinary
Favor and Kindness that Father Adam Schall received on all occasions from the
Emperor, we may conceive great hopes of the Conversion of these Infidels; ^or
certainly this Great Prince is himself so inclinable to the Faith of Christ, in
which he acknowledges his Predecessors to have been formerly instructed, that
being convinced by the undeniable Truth of our most Holy Faith he has for a
long while since determined to receive Baptism, but that the affection he
bears unto Polygamie, which consists not with the Purity of our Religion, and
the Precepts of the Divine Law which Christ has commanded us, has proved an
Obstacle to his Conversion; and this is it also which equally hinders the
Consents of all the Indian Princes to this Holy Resolution: Otherwise he
willingly admits of Christians, especially the Doctors of the Divine Law of
the Great Western World (for so he terms the Europeans) by whose means he
says he has learned from the Ancient Monuments of his Predecessors, that the
Christian Faith was formerly Preached and Received throughout all Tartary; to
confirm which his Opinion, he acknowledges, that in many Places of his Empire
of Tartary Crosses and other Emblems of Christianity have been found: And he
glories that the Characters which they use in Writing, the Tartars received
from the Masters of the Divine Law of the West: So that in this respect he has
very little favor or regard for the frantic and detestable Worship of the
abominable Deities of the Bonzii; and if at any time he be enforced by his own
Imperial Law to go to their Temple, according to the Custom of his
Predecessors, it is not out of Religious but Politic respects; for he has a
natural antipathy to the Manners of the Chinese, which is evident from his
rejecting the Habit which the Chinesian Emperors used to wear, and commanding
the Great Officers of his Court to follow his Example: And that the difference
may be the better discerned, the following Figure gives the Representation of
the Emperor in his Royal Habit; and also the Portraiture of Father Adam Schall,
in the Habit Generally worn there by the Fathers of our Order. The Emperor's
Robe is adorned with Embroidered Dragons, The Emperor's Habit,
and Feathers of Birds, as also with Jewels and Pearls of inestimable Value, by
which he strikes an awful and reverential Fear into the Minds of his Subjects.

Now the Cause why all that have Admission into the Emperor's Court stand near
the Throne with their Arms hanging down, is this; The Tartars esteem it a grand
Misdemeanor in the Presence, to Gesticulate acting with the Hands, or moving
with the Feet; from whence fearing his high Displeasure, they stand like
Statues without any Motion, with their Eyes fixed on the Earth: the Emperor by
the same Posture on his part, seems to demonstrate what others ought to do,
neither may any one dare to appear in his Presence in any other Habit but that
which the Dignity of his Office, or the Mode of the Royal Employment
prescribes; for by that Habit his Office is known, both by the Emperor and all
others. Hence by the Figure of a Crane on the Breast of Father Adam Schall, is
declared the Dignity of his Place. And because it is esteemed dishonorable to
come into the Presence on foot, therefore both the Colai and the Mandorins of
the highest Rank, are carried in magnificent Chairs placed on Men's Shoulders.

Now how much this Habit is different from the Habit of the Emperors of China,
the Reader may easily collect from that Figure which is exhibited in the first
place of the Geographical Chart of the Empire of China, where I have also set
down the proper Habits of the private Persons in each Province. Moreover, in
the time of Matthew Riccius, in which the Chinesian Emperors Reigned, the chief
Colai and Mandorins of the Tribunals were also Vested in a different Habit,
such as is this that follows, where you see the Habit of Father Paul Riccius,
which is proper and peculiar to the Doctors of the great Western World, which
the Fathers of our Society used constantly before the Invasion of the Tartars.

The other is the Pourtraicture of Doctor Paul, long since Converted unto the
Christian Faith by the aforesaid Paul Riccius, a Man of a most quick and clear
Judgment, who as he was a great Colaus of the Empire, and of great Authority
among the Chinese, so both by his Preaching and Writing he very much
Illustrated the Christian Religion: But seeing the Historians of China have
sufficiently described their Lives, and the Grandeur of their Actions, I
thought it not requisite to repeat them; wherefore it shall suffice here to set
down both their Pictures in the Chinesian Habit.

Now the Emperor of the Chinese, before the Irruption of of the Tartars, when
he went unto the Tribunal, was accustomed to present himself unto view, like a
petty Deity, from a lofty Place, at a Window; he bore in his Hand a Skreen of
Ivory to cover his Face, and another half a Cubit long over his Royal Diadem,
from which, Precious Stones of inestimable Price were so inserted on Threads,
that they hung down, and by their luster masked his Presence from the Eyes of
the Beholders.

As for the Women, the Chinese have this Custom: The Plebeians and poorer sort
buy their Wives, and as often as they please sell them again. The Emperor, and
the Royal Lineage, in their Matrimonial Contracts, have regard only to the
Beauty of the Body, not to the Riches or Quality of those they Marry: Neither
do the Noble Personages aspire unto such Marriages, by reason that the Queens
and Empresses have little Command, and being confined in their Palace, are for
ever deprived the of sight of their Relations; and also because in the Election
that is made by the Magistrates who look after the Concernments of Marriage,
very few of an innumerable company are advanced to the Dignity of the Royal
Bed. The Emperor has one primary Wife, besides which he and the Heir to the
Crown Marries nine others somewhat inferior; and lastly, thirty six others,
all which enjoy the Conjugal Title: Unto these are added a far greater number
of Concubines, which are neither termed Queens, Empresses, or Wives, reserved
for collateral Pleasure. The primary Wife only sits at Table with her
Husband, all the rest, especially those that are not of the Royal Kindred, are
Servants to the Prince, and Ladies of Honor unto the Empress, who in the
Presence are not permitted to sit; neither do their Sons call them Mother, but
the primary Wife.

It can hardly be expressed how strictly the Women are kept throughout the
whole Empire, not only those of Quality, but the common sort, who are obliged
by an inviolable Law so strictly, that not only those Persons that are not
allied unto them by any Affinity, but also those that are near unto them by
Blood, yea, their very Children come not at them; for the Women's Apartments are
so contrived, that they can neither see or be seen by others; from whence they
very seldom have liberty granted to go abroad, and if upon an urgent Occasion
they obtain it, they are so closed up in Sedans, that there is not so much as a
Chink or Cranny left open to show themselves.

The Chinese esteem their Beauty chiefly to consist in small Statute and
little Feet, so that what may seem unto us unbecoming, they esteem as Miracles
of Beauty; whence from their Infancy their Feet are so closely Swathed, which
continues all their Life, that they can hardly go without great pain: If you
demand a Reason of them, they answer, That they have observed this Custom
(derived to them about two thousand eight hundred years since) from the Example
of Tachia, the Wife of the Emperor Chei, which Empress for her incredible
Beauty they suppose to be placed amongst the Goddesses, and therefore she is
esteemed by them for the Chinesian Venus; and they feign the Beauty of this
Personage to have arose from nothing else but the strait binding of her Feet,
which consequently caused the smallness of them. Others say, That this
Coercitation was Enacted by a Law of the wise Men, that Women may learn to sit
at home, which if they do not voluntarily, they are by this means compelled.
Their Habit is modest and full of Gravity, being veiled so, that no part of
their Body is naked, except the Face: They adorn their Heads, especially the
more Noble sort (and those that live at Court) with diverse Wreaths or Fillets
beset with Precious Stones, which add wonderful splendour: Their Vests
interwoven with Flowers, Birds, and the like Ornaments, trail at their Feet,
but yet so, that what they esteem their chief Beauty is not obscured; and to
pass away their Time, they sport with little Dogs, Birds, and such Delights:
But that their Habit may be the better understood, the Attire of the
Court-Ladies is set forth in the annexed Figure, brought from China by some of
our Society.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Mode that our Fathers are wont to proceed in, in the Conversion of the
Chinese.
IF ever any Monarchy in the World were Constituted according to Political
Principles, and the Dictates of Right Reason, I dare be bold to say it is that
of Chinese; for in it I find all things disposed in so great order, that
whereas all in a manner are subject to the Pleasure and Command of the Learned,
so almost nothing is transacted in the whole Empire which has not a dependence
on them; neither is any one advanced to any Dignity before he is sufficiently
instructed in their Learning and Arts, and by a rigid Examination of the
Learned Tribunal has first been approved; and no Person can obtain any Office
of great Port and Honor, unless he be found to be eminent in the Knowledge of
the Sciences, and the Principles and Intrigues of Policy; and these have the
Charge of the Empire, whom they vulgarly term Mandorins, Governors of Cities,
or Viceroys of Provinces, who are distributed in such order, that nothing
happens throughout the whole Empire, which the Emperor is not made acquainted
with: And seeing the Dictates of the Emperor, have the Oligation of a Law
amongst his People, there is no Person but does forthwith put in Execution his
Will and Pleasure, under the Penalty of privation of his Office and Dignity,
than which nothing is more feared by them; so that the least Concernment
falls not out in so vast an Empire, that has relation either to the
Machinations or Plots of Foreign Enemies, or the Fidelity and Care, or the
negligence of the Mandorins in their Charge; or lastly, the Revenues of the
Empire, and Grievances of the Empire, which is not first made known by these
sorts of Mandorins unto the Colai, and by them immediately the Supreme Monarch
has Intelligence, whence every one discharges his Place with incredible Care
and Solicitude, without any respect had either to Friends or Kindred.

Now seeing that amongst all their other Laws, one of the chiefest is that by
which all Foreiners and Strangers are prohibited entrance into China, it may
easily be collected from this Discourse, compared with what is related in the
Histories of China, how great the Difficulties were which our Fathers labored
under for diverse Years, to procure a Dispensation from this Law, (which by the
favor of Almighty God they at last obtained,) if you consider their
unskilfulness in the Language, which is the most abstruse of all others to
write and speak, and in which if a Stranger be not well versed, he can neither
lie obscured without the Character of Treason, or Commerce in Public, without
evident danger of Banishment, or infliction of Torments, being presently
discovered not only from the pronunciation of the Chinesian Speech, but also by
their Persons very much differing from the Chinese. These things being proved
by experience, it was concluded, that none should undertake this Expedition who
was not in some tolerable measure instructed in the Chinesian Language at
Maccao, (where on purpose the New Converts, Teachers of the same, werekept)
that being skilled in the Tongue, and obliging the Minds of the Mandorins by
some curious Presents of their Ingenuity, they might the better expect a Return
of their Labor: for there is no Place for them to boast of Metaphysical
Speculations, nor Study of Scholastical Quirks and Subtleties, or more sublime
Theories; but you must extract and show some undertaken Specimens of the
Mathematics, and things sensible, both to cause admiration, and to gain a
Repute to the European World. Lastly, some Documents of Moral Philosophy, unto
which they are addicted, to be approved not by vain gaiety of Words, but
Example of an exquisite, excellent, and innocent Life, removed from all desires
of Mundane Pretensions, such as becomes the Apostolical Laborers in the
Propagation of the Divine Law.

And as the Precepts of the Christian Faith seem to differ as much from the
Religion of the Chinese as the Heaven does from the Earth, so it cannot be
expressed how many Toils and Labors must be undergone, and how many Dangers
passed through, that they may be rendered capable of receiving our most holy
Law, and the truth of the same genuinely explained: Here the Vanities of
Polytheism, or of having many Deities, must be confuted; here Polygamie, or
Marrying of many Wives, must be destroyed by strength of Argument; here the
incomprehensible Mysteries of our Belief must be inculcated with great
dexterity and caution, wherein laboring with more than ordinary patience and
continual subjection of the Body, how many Calumnies must they be subject unto!
But for this peruse the History of Father Daniel Bartolus, lately published in
the Italian Tongue.

And because the Preaching of the Gospel could not take root without the
publication of Books, I might treat opportunely in this Place concerning those
published on this Occasion. As first the Works of the Venerable Father Matthew
Riccius of Macera, the Founder of the Chinesian Expedition after St. Francis
Xavier. Secondly, Father Nicholas Trigautius a Flandrian of Doway. Thirdly,
Father Jacob Rho of Milan; all which writ many large and Learned Volumes. And
besides these, there were many who published large Treatises to satisfy the
Curiosity of the Chinese, as the twofold Universal History of Father Nicholas
Trigautius, Father John Terentius his Indian Pliny, and many more particularly
mentioned by our Author, from Fol. 117. to 121. in which are the Particulars at
large.

SOME Special Remarks TAKEN OUT OF ATHANASIUS KIRCHERS Antiquities of China.
PART. III.
Of the Idolatry of the Chinese.
THE Books of the Chinese mention only three Sects of Religion in China; The
three Sects of the Chinese.
First, that of the Learned; next, that called Sciequia; and the third they
term Lancu. One of these three all the Chinese, and other conterminate Nations
which use the Chinesian Characters, do profess; such are those of Iapan,
Corian, Tonchini, and Cocincina.

These three Sects do very much resemble the Egyptian Priests or Wisemen,
their Hierogrammatists, or those that were versed in the Sacred Writings, and
the Plebeians.

The Sect of the Learned Rule the Commonwealth, The first Sect.
abound in Books, and are applauded above the rest. They acknowledge Confutius
as the Author and Chief of the Philosophers, as the Egyptians do their Thoyt,
whom the Grecians call Hermes Trismegistus; and as the Egyptians do their Sages
worshipped one God, whom they termed Hemphet, so the Learned Men of China,
according to the Dictates of Confutius, worship not Idols, but one Deity, whom
they term The King of Heaven.

Concerning this Sect Trigautius in his Christian Expedition into China says,
They assert that the Function or Office of Sacrificing to, and Worshipping of
the King of Heaven does only belong to the Prince; and therefore the Emperor
has two most stately and magnificent Temples in his Palaces of Nanquin and
Pequin, the one Dedicated to Heaven, the other to the Earth: He himself
formerly Sacrificed in them, but now the most grave Magistrates supply his
Place; they slay and Offer up Bulls and Sheep in Hecatombs to the Heaven and
the Earth (as the Egyptians did to Osiris and Isis) and perform many other
Rites. The peculiar Temple of the Learned is that of Confutius, which is
erected by Law in every City, in a Place above their Schools. This stately
Edifice adjoyns to the Magistrates Palace, who is President over those that
have taken the first Degree in that Learning. In the most obvious place of the
Temple is the Statue of Confutius, full of Characters; or in stead of a Statue,
his Name inscribed in Golden Letters on an elegant Table: on each side of which
stand the Statues of some of his Disciples, whom the Chinese have Canonized
amongst the Deities of the inferior Order. All the City Magistrates meet every
New and Full-Moon in this Temple, with those that have taken the Degree of
Batchelors, to honor their Master with accustomed Crouching, even to
Prostration, the Temple being all the while illuminated with lighted Torches,
and burning of Incense.

Much after the same manner, the Egyptians, on the first Day of the Month
Thoth, performed their Solemnities unto Mercury.

There are also various Statues of this God, some of them very great, others
small, and easily carried about; one was communicated unto me by the Reverend
Father, Assistant of the Portuguese Society of Jesus, Nunnius Mascaremias, the
which Engraved I thought good to adjoyn.

The second Sect of the Chinese, The second Sect.
which answers to the Philosophers amongst the Egyptians, is called Sciequia,
or Oympto, but vulgarly Amida; the Iaponeses term it Xaca and Amidabu. This Law
came to the Chinese from the West, brought from a Kingdom called Threncio or
Sciuro, which Regions, as Trigautius affirms, are concluded under the only
Name of Indostan, situate between the River Indus and Ganges.

This Sect will easily appear by their Opinions to have proceeded from the
Gymnosophists, Brachmans, Persians, and Bactrians, who anciently inhabited this
Indostan, and have Planted their Colonies in China; for they hold a multitude
of Worlds, a Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls into Brutes, professing
all the Philosophy of Pythagoras. Father Martinius in his Atlas thus relates
concerning them:

Xekiao (says he) is a Sect which our Fathers hold to have been introduced
into China first after Christ: It admits a Transmigration of Souls after
Death, as a Punishment for Sins committed, and that both external and internal:
They worship Idols, and perpetually abstain from whatsoever had Life, a Law
judged necessary by them, for a withdrawing of the rude Multitude from Vice,
and as an incitement to Virtue. The internal Metempsychosis is that part of
Moral Philosophy most famous and excellent, as having reference unto the
Vacuity and universal Victory of the Passions and depraved Affections; that
this may take place, they hold, that they pass into Plants and Animals, as they
were obnoxious and inclinable unto their Affections. In their skeptical way
they will have nothing to have the stamp of Truth in this Life, but as we
apprehend it, and that Good and Bad are the same in respect of diverse.

Taigautius subscribeth unto this: This Opinion (says he) framed with
Democritus and others, many Worlds, but they seem chiefly to have borrowed the
Transmigration of Souls from the Doctrine of Pythagoras, and they have added
many other Fictions unto it, to color over the Falsity: Now they appear not
only to have received these Tenants from our Philosophers, but also to have
borrowed a certain Shadow from the Evangelical Light; for they introduce a
certain mode of a Trinity, in which they feign three Gods at length to co-unite
into one Deity.

Of this also the Spanish Epistles make mention in these words: They had notice
of the Gospel, because in the Province of Peking, amongst other Idols, there is
the Figure of a Man which has three Heads, and they look one toward the
other; and the Chinese say, That it signifies that all three of them have but
one Will and Desire. And a little after he says, There is another Image of the
Figure of a Woman, with a Child in her Arms.

Father Martin Martinius reports, That he has seen in many Images, the
Prints, or Footsteps of the Christian Faith in the Province of Fokien. And he
also asserteth, That he beheld ancient Crosses, and the Image of the Blessed
Virgin embracing her Son, which are now to be seen in our Church. Now we may
piously suppose these to be the Relics of St. Thomas the Apostle, or of some
later Propagators of the Gospel; and it is more probable that Idols had their
original from the Persians, Medes, and the Indian Philosophers, Heirs of the
Egyptians, amongst whom it was a peculiar Property to make many Statues to
signify the Effects of one thing. They continually shave their Heads, that
give themselves up unto Contemplation on Mountains, and in Caves. Their Temples
are so full of Idols, made of Brass, Marble, Wood, and Clay, that you would
take them of Egyptian Chapels.

The third Opinion of the Profane Religion called Lanzu, The third Sect.
answers to the Plebeians and Egyptian Magicians, and had its original from a
certain Philosopher who flourished at the same time with Confutius; they feign,
that his Mother bare him eighty years in her Womb, wherefore he was called
Lanzu, that is, The Old Philosopher. This Opinion promises Paradise unto those
that are made up of Soul and Body; and they hang up in their Temple the
Effigies of certain Persons, whom they fable to have soared up unto the
Heavens: they prescribe Methods of Exercises to attain the same, which consist
in v^rious Rites, and certain Prayers also in Potions, by which, and with the
favor of the Gods, they promise a long Life.

It is the peculiar Office of the Priests of this Sect, by impious Prayers to
Exorcise Devils out of Houses; which they attempt by affixing on the Walls the
horrid shapes of Demons, delineated with Black on yellow Paper; then they fill
the Houses with such strange Cries, that themselves seem to be Furies: They
also promise to fetch down Showers in a Drought, to stop great Rains, and to
avert Private or Public Misfortunes.

And these are the three chief Heads of the Opinions of these Idolaters; but
the subtlety of these Masters have wrought them into so many Meanders, that
they seem scarcely to be numbered, and the incredible number of Images
sufficiently show the same, which they do not only expose often to be adored in
their Temples, but also in each private Dwelling a Place is deputed for them;
and in the Market, the Streets, their Ships, and Palaces, they are first
obvious to the sight, wherein they imitate the Egyptians, who were infamous for
all sorts of Idols.

But to clear this: First, as the Egyptians and Grecians believed certain
Deities to preside over the Universe, so unto these do the Chinese build
mystical Temples; these they, after the manner of the Egyptians, pacify and
attract with various Rites and Ceremonies.

The second Argument, that the Religion of the Chinese was borrowed or derived
from the Egyptians, is so manifest, that no Person can in the least doubt or
question the same; and it is this, That unto this very Day there are found
Temples Dedicated unto Mars, Venus, Fortune, Peace, the Oreades or Nymphs of
the Mountains, and other Gods, common both to the Grecians and Egyptians, as
the Ichnography of the Metropolitan City of Nanking in China, no less elegantly
than exactly Imprinted on Chinesian Silk by our Fathers, and sent from China to
Rome some years since, will sufficiently prove, which I have here adjoin'd, as
I Copied it with great fidelity, to demonstrate the great Affinity that there
was between the Chinesian, Grecian, and Egyptian Religions.

The Temples of the Chinesian Gods.
THE Temple of the Dragon of the Sea, or Typhon. The Temple of the Queen of
Heaven, Dedicated to the Moon. The Temple Dedicated to Heaven. The Temple
Dedicated to Demons and Spirits. The Temple Dedicated to Mountains and Rivers,
that is, to the Oreades and Nereiades. The Temple of a Grateful Mind. The
Temple Dedicated to the Planet Mars. The Temple Dedicated to the President of
the Walls. The Temple Dedicated to Good Peace. The Temple Dedicated to the
Spirit of Medicine, Aesculapius or Apollo. The Temple Dedicated to the
President of the Woods, or Diana. The Altar of Heaven. The Altar of the Earth,
Ceres. The Altar of the God of Rain. The Altar of the King of Birds.
These are so agreeable to the Grecian and Egyptian Deities, that all their
Idolatry seems to have made a Voyage thence into China.

The third Argument is, That besides their Letters, in which they come very
near the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, as I have showed in the second Part
of my Oedipus, they have the same Ceremonies. It Is received for Truth on all
hands, That the Egyptians always adored the Figures of the Pyramids with a
certain Divine Honor, the Tracts of which sort of Worship continue in China;
for they have also Pyramids, which they call Chinees, and hold them in so great
Veneration, that no Person dares undertake any thing, till such time as he has
performed his Devotion there: I shall allege Petrus Iarricus as a Witness of
this Matter, who in the fifth Book of his Indian History, published in French,
Chap. 51. speaking of them, has these words following:

Besides these Wooden Idols there are others which they call Chinees, made for
Workmanship in the fashion of Pyramids; within which there is a certain kind of
white Ants or Emmets, which discover not themselves without, but have their
little Cabbins or Lodges within, so that none know from whence they receive
their nourishment. The Idolaters stand much in fear of these Chinees, insomuch
that when they buy a Slave, they first bring him before some one of these
Pyramids, with a Wine-Offering, or other things which they Present unto it,
supplicating the Idol, that if he should run away, he would cause the Serpents,
Lizards, and Tigers, to kill and devour him; whereupon the poor Slaves are so
fearful, that although they are ill used by their Masters, yet do they never
presume to forsake them.

From which it is apparent, that the Chinese borrowed all these Fopperies from
the Egyptians, Persians, and others, who (as I have shown in my Oedipus)
worshipped a Stone or Rock terminated in a Cone, or a Pyramid in stead of a
Deity; but for the Novizonian Pyramids, hear Father Martinius, who in his
Atlas, fol. 57. thus describes them:

In the Province of Foquien (says he) are many beautiful Fabrics, and not a
few Temples: But the Tower without the Walls excels all the rest in splendour
and magnitude of Work: The Figure is eight-square, rising from the Ground nine
Stories in height, and therefore is called Novizonia; its Perpendicular from
the Vertex to the Foundation is ninety Cubits, unto which the Breadth answers
in a due proportion: The exterior Wall is adorned with Carved and Painted
Figures made of the finest Clay, of which they make their Porcellane: The
inward Wall is vested with part colored Marble, which is so polished, that
like a bright Mirror it reflecteth the Face of the Beholder: You ascend by
Stairs, not built in the Tower, but within the double Walls; from which there
is a Passage unto each Story, and thence to most beautiful Footpaces cut in
Marble, and Gilded Iron Grates, by which the Galleries are every where
fortified and adorned: Without the Tower, about all the Galleries, and
especially at the top, small Bells and tinkling Instruments are so hung, that
being moved by the Wind, they make a most pleasant Musical Consort: The last
Round contains the Idol unto which the Tower is Dedicated, which is Cast in
Copper, and Gilded over. About the Tower are several other Temples of Idols,
which may easily compare with the ancient Fabrics of the Romans. And this is
one of those Towers which (as I formerly mentioned, was superstitiously erected
by the Chinese, they supposing that their Fortune and Felicity does depend
upon it. I have briefly described it, because I my self ascended it, and
diligently viewed every Corner of it; and though there be many which are more
beautiful than it, yet from the Description of this you may judge of the rest,
seeing they are for the most part alike, and built in the same order of
Architecture.

Moreover, as the Egyptians believed their Demons to be confined within
Statues, and Consecrated certain Temples unto them, so in like manner do the
Chinese; concerning which hear Iarricus before cited, in the place above
quoted, thus discoursing:

There is likewise in the Empire of China a Place Dedicated to the Devil, where
they go to make their most solemn Sacrifices unto him, in a little Isle; they
call the Idol Camassono, and those that pass by much dreading this Idol, and
fearing lest their Vessels should be cast away, when they are over against the
Isle, make an Offering, casting into the Sea either Oil, or such other
Merchandise as they have Aboard.

Concerning their Oracles, thus writes Trigautius, in the first Book, Chap. 8.
of the Voyage into China: Some of the Chinese (says he) consult the Devils,
and there are many familiar Spirits, which they commonly suppose to have more
of their good Demon, than any Fraud or Malice of an Evil Spirit; they discover
things, de^lare present, and foretell future Events: these we read to have been
common to all the Heathen. But there is one special Science, peculiar only to
the Chinese, which is the erecting of a Terrestrial Scheme, that is, by the
Configuration and Position of the Mountains as we may term it, in present
Prospect, as if they were moving Planets, aspecting variously several fixed
Constellations, all Landskips so altering by the least change of Place, either
in Longitude or Latitude, they Calculate, and so choose a piece of Ground to
build on, either Public or Private Edifices, in which those that reside or are
most concerned, may live happily, and be successful in the future, and also to
Interr the Deceased, supposing such Situation very much additional to their
Eternal Bliss and Happiness after Death; which choice Plot they so settle in
posture with the Dragons they dream of under Ground, affirming this Place to be
just over the Dragons Head, that his Tail, and there his Feet; for from these
subterraneous Spirits they more than superstitiously believe all Humane
Affairs, Private or Public, even to the Translation of Kingdoms and Empires
receive their Laws; and therefore many grave Persons are employed in this most
mysterious occult Science, who are especially concerned when any Public
Buildings, Machins, or Operas are to be erected; to which kind of Prediction
not only the Great Ones, but the whole Nation are inclined, every Corner of the
Streets and Houses of Entertainment swarming with these blind Prognosticators.
Thus far Trigautius.

And who beholds not here another Face of Egypt, in which all Affairs were
carried on by Auguries and Omens. He that desires to know more of this may
have recourse to the Authors cited.

These things being proposed, I shall add in this place a Scheme of the
Chinese mad Idolatry, by which the Learned amongst them are bewitched; and
that they may appear to be somewhat wiser than the Vulgar, they divide their
false Deities into three Orders, the Supernal, Terrestrial, and Infernal. They
place in the Supernal the Properties of the Divine Essence, whom to worship
under the Name of the One God, termed Pussa; but for this see our Syntagma, or
Treatise concerning the Cabala of the Hebrews: And for better Illustration, I
shall here annex the Effigies of the Chinesian Pussa, drawn from the Original,
which Father Gruberus not long since brought out of China to be perserv'd in
our Study.

The three Deities worshipped under the Name of one Pussa, are seated in a more
elevated place, together with two Attendants, which the Chorus or Quite of the
Deasters beneath, with stretched out and lifted up Hands seem to uphold; in the
middle is the Deaster termed Fe or Fo, which signifies A Savior, like another
Jupiter, resplendent with an august Face and wonderful Majesty, encompassed
with many Gods and Goddesses (whom they call the Heroes of the ancient Times
begotten by the Gods) under which are again placed a Troop of the Semi-Gods,
Gods of Nature and Kingdoms, which are usually exhibited as so many
Internuncii, who with great Veneration and signal readiness attend to execute
the Commands of the Great Fo or Chinesian Jupiter.

SOME Special Remarks TAKEN OUT OF ATHANASIUS KIRCHER'S Antiquities of China.
PART. IV.
THE PREFACE.
SEEING that many things related by our Fathers concerning the Indian Kingdoms,
and the Empire of China, are carped at by some Criticasters, as being feigned
and false, I shall here call them anew unto Examination, that it may be
manifest there is nothing in those Places so strange or exotic, which is not
found both in Europe, and also in several other Parts of the World.

CHAP. I.
Of the wonderful Situation of China, and the manner of the Peoples Living
there.
AS the Empire of the Chinese is the most Opulent, Potent, and Populous,
containing fifteen Kingdoms, so the Government is the most absolutely
Monarchical of all other Nations, being furnished both with the Arts and
Rarities of Nature, Policy, and good Order; so that being independent and
totally separated from the rest of the World, it seems a Microcosm or little
Universe within it self, Nature having on the North and West, besides a Wall of
three hundred Italian Miles, hedged it about with the vast and unbounded
Defense of a Sandy Sea; on the East and South she has so fortified it, both
with the unlimited, and as yet unknown Recesses of the East and South Ocean,
and also with wild Roads and unsafe Harbors for Shipping, that without manifest
danger you can hardly approach her Shores, both by reason of the boisterousness
of the Winds, and the most violent reciprocations of the Marine Tides: And lest
on the West some Entrance should be granted, Nature has blocked up her Paths
with rugged, inaccessible, and yet unpenetrated Mountains, and so Armed with
Garrisons of wild Beasts and venomous Serpents, ambuscaded in their obscure
Recesses, that on this side no one can hope for Passage; wherefore China is
often called in their Language Cunghoa, signifying The Middle Empire, believing
themselves to be situate in the midst and Navel of the World; and sometimes
Cungque, A Garden in the midst, or A Florid Garden, by reason of the affluence
of all things necessary for Humane Life: for the whole Empire is so much
enriched from the defusion of Lakes and Rivers, breaking out every where from
the Mountains of the West, and from the Mediterranean Parts of the continued
Mountains, that there is scarcely a Field that is not watered with, almost no
City but may hold a Correspondency with others by Shipping, that Sail through
Rivers and Trenches, to the great convenience of Merchants and Travelers: the
most perspicuous Rivers are, Kiang, for its largeness termed The Son of the
Sea, and Hoang, so called from his Saffron Color: These water all China, and
rising from the bordering Indian Mountains, by a divided Dominion separate the
whole Empire, and at length disembogue themselves into the Eastern Ocean. And
this is also most worthy of admiration in the Chinesian World, and which
happens unto no other Monarchy, that at this day the Empire is so situate from
the South toward the North, that not content with the proper Munificences of
the Temperate Zone, it has moreover subjected both the Torrid and Frigid unto
its Jurisdiction; beginning from the 18. Degree of the Torrid Zone, and
proceeding in a straight Line through the Temperate, it is extended almost unto
the 70. Degree of the Altitude of the Frozen Tartarian Ocean within the Frigid
Zone, in all 32 Degrees, which if divided into 15. make 780 Astronomical Miles,
of which 15 make one Degree; and 3120 Italian Miles, 60. of which Miles make
one Degree.

From whence it follows, that all sorts of Fruits, Aromaticks, Trees, and
Animals, are so common unto this Empire, as they are each of them proper to
their peculiar Climate, and therefore what is scattered in sundry Parts, is
here collected with abundant Increase. What Monarch ever had the happiness
every Day to have his Table furnished with the seasonable and proper Fruits of
the Indies brought from the Burning Zone, and to be delighted with the variety
and abundance of all Fruits peculiar to the Temperate Zone, and whatever else
serves for Food, Raiment, or Pleasure? For what this vast Empire has, either
rare, delicate, or admirable, is all served up for the Emperor's use.

The Supreme MONARCH of the CHINA TARTARIAN Empire,



CHAP. II.
Of the Political Government of the Chinese.
SEeing in the former Chapters we have treated at large of the Political Empire
of the Chinese, here I thought good to adjoin some things worthy of greater
consideration: The Emperor of China is absolute Lord of the whole Monarchy, and
the Empire is so Governed by him, that no Person may undertake any Business of
importance without his Assent. The Monarchy descends successively from the
Father to the Sons, and where the Direct Line fails, it runs Collateral; all
the rest, whether they be Brethren or Nephews, or otherways joined in
Consanguinity, are honored with the Title of Kings, each of them having a
Province assigned him, which they Rule, but yet with such a limitation of
Authority, that having certain Revenues assigned them, all the rest is
transferred into the Emperor's Treasury. There are six Tribunals or Courts of
Justice which determine all Causes and Controversies of the whole Empire: The
first for choosing of Magistrates: The second, the Exchequer of his Imperial
Majesty's Revenues: The third, for Emergencies in Ecclesiastical Affairs: The
fourth, for the Militia: The fifth orders Public Edifices, and such like
Buildings: The sixth spreads it self into several Courts, concerning Criminal
Causes. And by these six, with their subordinate Officers, all Business is
dispatched. The Emperor has Lords of his Privy Council, which they call
Colaos, who as they are Persons excellently versed in the knowledge of State
Affairs, so also they are had in estimation next to himself; he has likewise
his Governors, or Lords Lieutenants, of diverse Degrees, which are termed
Mandorins, and accomplished in variety of Learning and Knowledge; so that the
whole Kingdom is in a manner Ruled (as Plato's Commonwealth) only by Learned
Men; and that Kingdom cannot but arrive to (...) greatest height of Felicity,
in which either the Prince acts like a Philosopher, or a Philosopher Reigns.
This is manifest by the innumerable multi^^des of the Inhabitants, which the
Emperor Governs with as much facility, as the Master of a Family does his
House; it is also clear from the Magnitude, Splendour, and incredible
Magnificence of the Cities, and the frequency of ^ridges, the Structure of
which, whether you have respect to their Length, or (...) Rules of
Architecture, has amazed such as beheld them: Add unto this the convenience of
Public Passages, the afflux of Shipping from all Parts resorting to the
Metropolitan Cities, the indefatigable Labor and Industry of the Husbandmen in
Cultivating their Lands, the great Vigilance and unwearied Guard of the
Soldiery, the extraordinary Rigor and Severity of the Judges in punishing
Malefactors; all which cannot have their original in so great an Empire,
without the supposition of excellent Laws established for the confirmation of
the Peace and Tranquillity thereof.

As for the Emperor's annual Revenues, although they are not always fixed and
certain, by reason of the vicissitude and alteration of Times, yet for the most
part in Peace they easily amount to 150000000 Tayes, according to their
Exchequer Rolls, in which, as Father Martinius avoucheth, they have not only
the number of the Inhabitants in every Province and City, but also a Compute of
each Years Revenue most exactly Registered. In the Regency of the Emperor Vanly,
the number of the Inhabitants throughout the whole Empire amounted to about two
hundred Millions, not accounting the Emperor's Servants, Eunuchs, Women, and
Children, and the Revenue was estimated at 1500000. of Gold after our Rate; but
now, under the Regency of this Emperor, the Revenues of his Kingdoms being also
in the Audit, it far exceeds; and for better satisfaction, I have here annexed
a Table of the annual Incomes of each of the fifteen Provinces of the Empire of
China, paid into the Exchequer; together with the number of the Inhabitants
contained in every one of them in the time of the Emperor Vanly, which Table I
have extracted out of Martinius his Atlas.

A Catalogue of the Families, Fightmen-Men, not reckoning the Emperor's
Retinue, together with the Tributes yearly paid throughout the whole Empire,
excepting Tolls and Customs, taken from the Book of the Compute of the
Chinese, in the Year that the Empire flourished, according to Father Martine
Martinius and others.
Families. Fighting-Men Sacks of Rice. Pounds of Silk. Trusses of Hay. Pounds
of Salt of 24 ounces. 1. Pechinck Peckali, or Cambalu, the Metropolis, and a
hundred and thirty five Cities under it. 418989 3452254 2274022 45135 8737284
180870 2. The Kingdom of Xansi has five Chief Cities, unto which are subject
ninety two less. 589939 5084015 1929057 4770 3544850 420000 3. The Kingdom of
Xensi. 831051 3934176 2812119 9218 1514749 4. Xantung has six Metropolitan
Cities, and ninety two others subject to them. 770555 6759675 2414477 54990
3824290 5. The Province of Honan has eight Metropolitan Cities, and a hundred
others subject to them. 589296 5106270 6106960 9959 2288744 6. The Province of
Sucheu. 464129 2204170 2167559 6339 149177 7. Huquang has fifteen Metropolitan
Cities. 531686 4833590 1616600 17977 8. Kiangsi has thirteen Metropolitan
Cities, and sixty two others under them. 1363629 6549800 5995034 11516 9.
Nanking, or Quiang, has fourteen Metropolitan Cities, and under them a hundred
others. 1969116 9967429 2510299 28452 5804217 5808217 10. Chekiang has eleven
great Cities, and sixty two others subject unto them. It abounds in Silk.
1242135 4525470 883115 2574 8704491 44476^ 11. Fokien has eight Metropolitan
Cities, and unto them forty eight others. 509200 1802677 1017772 600 12.
Quantung, vulgarly Canton, has ten Metropolitan Cities, unto which are subject
seventy three. 483360 1978022 1017772 37380 13. Quangsi has twelve
Metropolitan Cities, and subject to these above a hundred others. 186719
1054760 431359 14. Queicheu has eight Metropolitan Cities, and to these ten
other are subject. 45305 231365 47658 56965 15. Iunnan has twelve
Metropolitans, and underthem eighty four Cities. 132958 1433110 1400568

CHAP. III.
Of the Cities of China, and the Customs of the Inhabitants.
FAther Martinius, Samedus, Trigautius, and Gruberus, Eyewitnesses, relate,
That the Empire of China is so full of Inhabitants, the Towns and Villages so
contiguous, that did the Wall reach the South Sea, it might deservedly be
termed but one City; but there are Metropolitans and Chief Cities of Provinces
to the number of a hundred and fifty, and of those of the inferior rank, a
thousand two hundred sixty two, all fortified with Walls, Works, and Trenches;
besides, there are Castles, Corporation-Towns, Villages and Granges without
number. The Cities for the most part are built apiece: Their Houses
generally are Wood, and not above one Story, poor and rude without, but within
very splendid; each House is bound to affix a Shield upon the Door, containing
the number of Inhabitants, and of what Condition each Person is, to the end the
Mandorins may know how many Persons every City contains, for the avoiding of
Seditions, and to gather in the Revenues; by which means it cannot be thought
strange, that if Foreiners come into China they are discovered, their Landlords
being obliged, under the infliction of a severe Penalty, not to conceal them.

The Mechanic Arts are in great esteem amongst them, and they so manage them,
that they suffer not the vilest Dross to perish, but convert it to some Gain.
The Learned apply themselves unto no other Sciences, but Politic and Moral:
They know not the Name of the Scholastic and Speculative Discipline, which is
wonderful in a Nation that abounds with Ingenious Persons; yet their
Physicians by Tradition are endowed with an admirable knowledge of the Palsy,
by which, with incredible Industry, they find out the most Latent Causes of
Diseases, and then apply for Cure their proper Remedies. But in the Arts
anvil'd out by modern Curiosity, as Architecture, Sculpture, and Weaving, if
you except the knowledge of Proportions and the Optics, they come not behind
the Europeans. For their other Acquirements, see what I have said in the
preceding Discourse; and he that desires more full Information, may have
recourse to the above cited Authors.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Mountains of China, and the stupendous Prodigies of Nature which are
observed in them.
ALthough in this Empire Mountains are so numerous, yet the greatest are the
continual Theme and Argument of their Studies; for what our Astrologers perform
by the Celestial Houses, they make out by the Terrestrial Hills. But amongst
their many Enquiries by Terrene Calculations after their good and bad Fortunes,
there is nothing they more labor in, than the Business of their Sepulture,
about which they spare no Cost or Pains, not only observing with no small
scrutiny the Summits, Tops and Superficies, but also making subtle Inspections
into the very Bowels of the Mountains, to find a fortunate Spot of Ground,
which they fancy to resemble the Head, Tail, or Heart of the Dragon; which
done, they joyfully conclude they have found a Place in which the Person
Interred shall be happy, and his Posterity successful: which Opinion I believe
to have been inculcated by some grave Philosopher, to advance a filial Piety to
the deceased Parents, and more special care of the honor of Funerals.

Now the Mountains of China are for the most part encompassed with great
Villages, pleasant for most beautiful Sepulchral Monuments, Chases, and Groves,
and a waving Sea of Rice makes them like a Plain, which when Groves and Woods
do smile with their Summer Attire, renders a most pleasant Prospect, the
Chapels placed on them excelling for Magnitude and Splendour: there are also
the Monasteries of the Priests; but yet in the thick and overgrown Woods lives
a barbarous Nation not yet subjected to the Chinese.

Many things are observed in these Mountains, which (if true) may be deservedly
accounted amongst the Miracles of Nature: Some by reason of their immense
height have a perpetual Serenity on their Tops; others are covered with a
continual dark Mantle of ambient thick Mists: there are some which triumph only
with wholesome Plants, exiling all venomous Weeds.

In the Mountain Queyu both small and great Stones are found, in a cubical or
apiece Figure, which are also in one of the Mountains of Calabria, of
which we have treated in our Book of the Subterranean World.

The Mountain Paoki, in the Province of Xensi, has the Figure of a Cock, who
on the approach of a Storm sends forth such Murmurs and Rorings, as may be
heard at a great distance; and Olaus Magnus, in his History of the Northern
Reigons, says, That such monstrous Sounds happen in the Mountains of the
Botnick Sea.

That is also worthy of admiration which the Chinesian Oreoscopists relate
concerning the Mountain Cio, That on the top of it there is a Stone five
Perches high; and another also in the Kingdom of Fokien, which as often (...) a
Storm is near, tottereth, and is moved hither and thither, as Cypress (...)
shaken by the Winds.

There is another Mountain continually covered with Frost, the cause of which
may be conjectured to be the Nitrous Spirits which the Mountain, together with
the Vapors of the Watery Receptacles therein laid up, perspireth.

There is a Mountain in the Province of Kiangsi which has two Tops, the
uppermost of which resembles a Dragon, seeming to stoop fiercely at the lower
Spire, which appears like a Rampant Tiger; from whose various Aspects the
Priests make many Rules of Divination for their Disciples.

Another Mountain by its seven tops configureth the seven Stars in the
Constellation of the Greater Bear.

But the Mountain fashioned in the shape of an Idol, near the City of Tunchue
in the Province of Fokien, exceeds all admiration; concerning which thus
writes Father Martinius in his Atlas, Page 69. The first Mountain of this
Province (says he) is worthy of admiration, being situate on the Banks of the
River Feu; for from this Mountain they have, as I may say, not formed a
monstrous, but a mounta^^^ Idol, which they call Fe; it sits with cross
Legs, or decassated Feet, folding the Hands in his Bosom: You may judge of the
Magnitude, the Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, and Mouth being perspicuous to the
Beholders at least two Miles. This they suppose not to have been cut out by the
Labor of Art, (as Dinostratus offered to Carve the Mountain Athos into an
Alexander, holding a City in one Hand, and a River in the other) but the mere
work of Nature much assisted by Fancy.

They report of the Mountain Taipe in the Province of Xensi, much celebrated by
the Oreoscopists or Mountain-Diviners, that a Drum being beaten on it raises
suddenly Thunder, Lightning, and great Tempests; therefore is there a strict
Law and severe Punishments provided, for whoever is found to offend in this
kind.

The Oreologists relate, that there is a Mountain in the Province Uquang, which
is so tenacious of its own Right, that if any one has feloniously taken any of
its Wood, Fruit, or the like, he shall never be able to depart thence, being
perpetually included as in a Labyrinth, but he that religiously abstaineth, may
go thence without trouble. But we reckon this amongst the Fables of the Bonzii.

There also are Aeolian, or windy Mountains, such as in Europe; for in the
Province of Huquang is a Mountuin called Fang, from which (as Martinius
relates, in the Spring and Autumn not the least Breath appears; but from the
hollow Caverns in Summer assiduous Blasts and continual Blowings issue.

CHAP. V.
Of wonderful Lakes, Rivers, and Springs.
THE Lakes of the Chinese are like their Mountains, full of Rarities. There is
a Lake in the Province of Fokien, which converteth Iron into Copper; the Water
being very green, we presume is full of Nitrous Spirits, and so discolored
with Coperas, which operates in the conversion of this Metal.

Another Lake called Chung in the Province of Fokien, has a greater Wonder;
for they report, that in a fair House there erected, as often as Rain or
Tempest is approaching, there is a sound heard like the ringing of a Bell.

In the Mountain Talaus, in the Province of Quantung, is said to be a Lake
which is most clear throughout the whole Year, except in the Autumnal Season,
in which it is tinctured so deep with a blue Color, that it Dies whatever is
dipped in it.

There is near Sining, in the Province of Quantung, a Mountain called Tenlu,
full of Caverns, and dreadful to behold; in it, as Father Martinius witnesses,
they report a standing Pool to be, into which if you cast a Stone from aloft,
you shall presently hear a roaring and noise like Thunder, and immediately the
Sky being troubled, disembogues violent Showers.

In the Province of Iunnan is the Lake called Chin, so much celebrated by
Geographers, and set forth in their Maps; concerning which their Histories
relate, That out of the Ruin of a great populous City, swallowed by an
Earthquake, (after whose dreadful devoration the Scene suddenly changed into
the Prospect of this pleasant Lake) none but a Child swimming on a piece of
Wood escaped. This Lake is called also The Starry Sea, from certain Weeds
appearing on the surface like beamy Stars.



CHAP. VI.
Of strange or Foreign Plants in China.
AS the Empire of China by a continued Tract of Lands participateth of the
Properties of many things with India, the Seas being subject to the Torrid
Zone, so also it produces various Plants, endu'd with rare and admirable
Qualities; of some whereof take the following Account.

The first is of the Rose of China, which twice every day changes its Color,
now being all Purple, and by and by becoming all White, yet without any sweet
Scent.

There is also the Plant called Cha, which not being able to contain it self
within the Bounds of China, has insinuated it self into Europe: It abounds
in diverse Regions of China, and there is great difference, but the best and
more choice is in the Province of Kiangnan, in the Territory of the City
Hoeicheu. The Leaf being boiled and infused in Water, they drink very hot as
often as they please; it is of a Diuretic Faculty, much fortifies the Stomach,
exhilarates the Spirits, and wonderfully opens all the Nephritick Passages or
Reins; it freeth the Head by suppressing of fuliginous Vapors, so that it is a
most excellent Drink for studious and sedentary Persons, to quicken them in
their Operations; and albeit at the first it seems insipid and bitter, yet
Custom makes it pleasant: and though the Turkish Coffee is said to produce the
like effect, and the Mexican Chocolate be another excellent Drink, yet Tea, if
the best, very much excels them, because Chocolate in hot Seasons inflameth
the Blood more than ordinary, and Coffee agitateth Choler; but this Liquor in
all Seasons has one and the same effect. Concerning this Plant, see more in
Martinius his Atlas Sinicus.

In the Province of Quantung grows a Plant called Chisung, that is,
Weatherwise; for the Mariners, as Father Martinius relates, do by the number
and distance of the Knots growing thereon, predict how many Tempests shall be
throughout the whole Year, and when they shall happen.



In the Province of Quangsi there grows a Tree which they call Quanlang,
which in stead of Pith has a soft Pulp like unto Meal, whereof the Natives
make Bread, and apply to the same Uses with Flour; of which Trees Marcus Paulus
Venetus makes mention, Lib. 3. Chap. 19.

There is said to be a Lake near the City Vuting in the Province of Hunnam,
which is called Hociniao, on every side beautifully surrounded with Trees; the
Leaves that fall from them are changed into small Birds of a black Color, in
such numbers, that the Inhabitants suppose them to be Spirits. So Martinius in
his Atlas. The like to these are reported to be in Scotland and elsewhere, as
Soland Geese, Clack-Geese, and Barnicles.

The Atlas of China mentions an Herb in the Province of Huquang, called Pusu,
which lives a thousand years, and has the virtue of restoring Youth, and
changing Gray Hairs into Black; the truth of which may well be doubted.

There is also found the Root called Ginseng in the Province of Leaotung, most
famous throughout all China; from the operation of whose wonderful Virtue the
vulgar Chinese believe strange Restoration of Health and Longevity. See Father
Martinius in his Atlas, Fol. 35.

It is reported, that there grows an Herb in the Province of Xensi, called
Quei, which being eaten causes Mirth and Laughter, somewhat like unto the Weed
Apiorisus.

Our Atlas reports an admirable kind of Withy or Vine to grow in the
Mountains of Quantung, called by the Chinese, Teng; by the Portuguese, The
Wheel; you would believe it to be a Rope wreathed by Nature, of a very great
length, creeping along through the mountainous Earth; it is full of Prickles,
and with oblong Leaves, and often spreads for the space of a Furlong; there is
such plenty of it in the Mountains, that the long Branches being entangled
within one another, make the Way unpassable for the Deer; they make of it
Cables and Tackle for Ships, and being wrought in fine Threads, it serves to
make Bee-Hives, Cratches, Chairs, Pillows, Beds, and Mattresses; for no Vermin
will harbor in it: in the Summer it greatly refreshes Persons wearied with
Heat.

There are also Trees in the Provinces of Iunnan and Chiangsi, whose Wood may
deservedly be reckoned amongst the precious Commodities; they call that which
is young and tender, Aqualin, and when it is grown to maturity, it is called
Calambi. The value of this Plant consists in the Odor, which is sweetest
when aged, and nothing can be more fragrant.

There is such plenty of the best sort of this Aqualin in the Mountains of
Couchinchina, called Moi, and in Iunnan and Chiangsi, Provinces conterminate on
Couchinchina, that it is free for all Persons to gather the same; and sometimes
it is transported to a hundredfold Gain, especially amongst the Brachmans, who
make sacred Pyles of it on the great Days of Solemnity, in which Women
Consecrate themselves to the Flames, out of love to their deceased Husbands; or
when the Corpse of great deserving Persons are burnt: for they sottishly believe
their false Gods are wonderfully delighted with such kind of Odours, and are
thereby rendered propitious unto the Souls of the Deceased, in their
Transmigration. But the Calambi is of a greater Price, and reserved for the
Emperor: It grows upon the Mountains, and is fetched thence by Night with
Torches, the better to evade the Incursions of wild Beasts there residing. In
Iapan the Noblemen make of it the Turpentine, although by the beneficiency of
the Sun and Climate, it is much improved.

In the Provinces of Suchuen and Xensi, and the City Socieu, near the Chinesian
Wall, is found in great abundance that so famous and Physical Drug Rhubarb.

There are such variety of Fruit Trees in China, that they answer to all the
Products of that nature in every Climate of the World, whether in the Torrid,
Temperate or Frozen Zones; but amongst them all she boasts of one Tree that
bears no Fruit, as we may say, and yet abounds with delicious Variety; it is
called by the Chinese for its thorny and prickly Leaves, Po-lo-mie; and in
stead of Buds and Blossoms it thrusts forth Excrescencies of a prodigious size,
bigger than our largest Pumpions, and not unlike, some of them as much as a Man
can carry; the Rind is tough and bristly, which opened, affords a Storehouse
of delicious Varieties, enough to satisfy twenty Persons, insomuch that the
Chinese call it A Sack full of Honey Fruit, the meanest of which for taste, as
some report, excels the choicest of our Mellons.

Like to this is the Tree which the Indians call Papaya, and the Chinese,
Fanyay-Xu; it bears a Bunch of Fruit no bigger than our Mellon, of taste
delicious; the Juice to be eaten with a Spoon: and throughout the whole Year it
glories in green Flowers and ripe Fruit.

There are in the aforesaid Regions, especially in the Province of Chekiang,
near the City Sungiang, Pine-Trees of such a wonderful bigness, that eight Men
with their Arms extended cannot fathom the circumference of one of them, within
whose vast Rind forty Men may well stand; also Reeds of so great bigness, that
the Joints betwixt the Internodes or Knots will serve to hold Liquor, in stead
of a Kilderkin or Barrel.

They have likewise in China a Tree called Kagin, yielding Fruit twice a year,
which by inversion thrusts forth the Seed or Kernels, like Warts, or such
Excrescencies, on the outside of the Fruits, and is in common to the East and
West Indies, who call it Ananas; but the Chinese call it Fam-Polo-Mie: it
grows in the Provinces of Quantung, Kiangsi, and Fokien, and is supposed to
have been first brought from Peru: The Tree on which it grows is not a Shrub,
but an Herb, much like to our Carduus, but called by them Catriofoli; on whose
Leaf a Fruit grows sticking unto its Stalk, of so pleasant and exquisite a
taste, that it may easily obtain the preeminence among the most noble Fruits of
India and China. The Spermatick Faculty is innate in all the Parts thereof; for
not only the Seeds shed on the Ground, but it is Sprouts and Leaves being
Planted, produce the like Fruits: Concerning which admirable Product of Nature,
see what I have discoursed at large concerning the Seeds of things, in the
twelfth Book of my Subterranean World. The Seeds of such Plants conduce much to
prove that new Philosophy of Plants, of which I have there laid the Platform.

The most noted Fruits, Manga, Lici, and Quei, are every where described; but
how Manga is inoculated in the Pomecitron, is much different from the Art of
the Europeans, being performed without Transfoliation or Inoculation; for they
only bind a Bough of the Fruit Manga to a Bough of the Pomecitron, and daub it
about with Clay; which being done, they conjoyn, and so bring forth the most
excellent Fruit of both.

The Author of Atlas Sinicus makes mention of a Tree in the Province of
Chekiang, which produces a Fruit that is fat, whereof they make most excellent
white Candles, which neither foul the Hands, nor make any ill Scent being
extinguished; The Tree is like our Pear Tree; when the Fruit is ripe, they
break the Bark, macerate and steep it in hot Water, and when they have watered
the heated Pulp, they make it up into a Lump, which looks like Suet; and from
its Nut they extract Oil, like our Oil of Olives, very useful in Winter; the
Leaves are stained with a Copper-like redness, which dropping to the Ground,
afford Sheep and Kine good Food, by which they become very fat.

CHAP. VII.
Of strange Beasts or Animals in China.
THere are in all the Empire of China, but especially in the Province of Iunnan
and Quangsi, great plenty of Elephants, Tigers, Bears, and other wild Beasts,
common to several Parts of the World; but I shall treat only of such as are to
be found no where else but in China.



In the Western Provinces of China, viz. Xensi and Kiangsi, is the Odoriferous
Stag or Deer, (for so the Chinese call the Xechiam) being an Animal which
produces Musk; Concerning which, thus the Author of Atlas Sinicus:

That there may be no doubt (says he) what Musk is, I shall discover it,
having been more than once an ocular Spectator of what I now relate: There is a
certain Bunch or Excrescency about the Belly of the Animal by the Chinese
called Xe, much like a Purse, consisting of a thin Skin, covered with Hair: the
Odor or Fragrancy thereof is called Xehiang, which signifies Musk; it is a
four-footed Beast, not much unlike a Deer, the Hair of it somewhat more black,
and altogether without Horns; the Flesh of it, when killed, is eaten by the
Chinese. In this Province, and in Suchuen and Iunnan, and the Places more near
the West, is found great plenty of Musk. Those Bunches or Purses, if they be
not adulterated, are of as strong a scent as the pure Zybeth; but the crafty
Merchants stuff the Purses which the Skin of the Beast makes, with the Blood,
Skin, or some part else, and sell them for the true and genuine: some mix it
with Dragons Blood, and by this means of one Bladder make two or three: but yet
the more skilful do discern the Fallacy; for if being burned it evaporateth, it
is believed to be true, but if it remains like a Coal or Cinder, it is
adulterate.

Almost the same is delivered by Father Philip Marinus in his History of
Tunchino, in which Place there is plenty of these Animals, which he says are
so simple, that not knowing how to escape, they will of their own accord
present themselves unto the Huntsmen to be slaughtered.

The Hippopotame, or Seahorse, by the Chinese called Hayma.
THese Animals are often seen on the Shores of the Chinesian and Indian Ocean,
in Hainam, the Philippine Islands, the Maldivas, and especially in Mozambique,
on the Southern Coast of Africa. They are very deformed Creatures, and terrible
to behold. Father Boim, whilst he staid at Mozambique, dissected and inspected
one of them; of whom take the following Account in his own words:

I have (says he) annexed a double Scheme of the true Seahorse, of which when
I was at Mozambique, I saw a great Company wallowing in the Sea in a Creek on
the Sands. The Judge of the City Mozambique sent the Head of an Hippopotame
unto the College, that I might peruse it; which measuring, I found it in
length three Cubits from the Mouth to the Shoulders; on the lower Iaw it had
two high bended Teeth, unto which in the upper Iaw the great Teeth were
consentaneous, and the Tongue lolling out. Afterward viewing the more Inland
Parts of Crafraria, Coasting the Shore in a Gally, we beheld at least fifty
Sea-Horses within a Stones-cast, neighing, and playing diverse Tricks in the
Water: a Slave with his Musket killed one of them; which bringing Ashore, and
dividing it amongst his Companions, they pulled out his Teeth, and gave me some
of the biggest of them. His Skin is very hard; he has no Hair but only in the
end of his Tail, which turns in; they cast a Brightness like polished black
Horn, and are about the bigness of a Quill or small Reed, of which the Cafres
make Bracelets, both for Ornament, and to prevent the Palsy: Of their Teeth
are made Beads, Crosses, and Images; some stop the Flux of Blood: but all have
not this Virtue, only those that are taken at a certain Season of the Year. In
the Royal Hospital at Goa there is a great Seahorse Tooth, which being applied
to a Vein that is opened, will immediately stop the Blood. The Story of a
Prince of Malabar slain by the Portuguese, is sufficiently known, whom they
finding wounded with many Bullets, yet without any sign of Blood, though his
Wounds were gaping, stripped, and pulling away a piece of the Bone of the
Hippopotame that hung about his Neck, the Blood, like a Torrent that breaks
over the Banks, flowed out of the dead Corpse, being before so stopped and
coagulated only by the frigid Nature of this Creature. Thus Father Boim.

The Province of Fokien has an Animal perfectly resembling a Man, but longer
Armed, and Hairy all over, called Fese, most swift and greedy after Humane
Flesh; which that he may the better make his Prey, he feigneth a Laughter, and
suddenly while the Person stands listening, seiseth upon him.

There are also in China Apes and Baboons of a different kind, whereof some
imitate Men, others, Dogs and Cats, and are also tractable and docile to
admiration; of which take Father Roth's Relation, he being an Eyewitness.

The King of Bengala (says he) in the Year 1650. dispatched unto the Emperor
of the Mogors a solemn Embassy, with many rich Presents, among which was a
Triumphal Chariot drawn by two white Horses, wonderfully adorned with Gold and
Gems: But that which was more worthy of admiration, the Charioteer was no
humane Creature; for a great Baboon guided the Reins with no small skill and
dexterity, his Livery Cloak and Cap shining with Scarlet and Gold; the
Champion, a great Mastive, sitting on the highest Seat, as in a Throne of
Majesty, Decked and Adorned with Gold and Jewels in so great Splendour, that he
seemed to be some great Prince and not a Dog; his Valets-de-Chambre, Pages and
Lacquies, richly Dressed according to their Place and Office, were all Apes and
Monkies, officiously attending round about him, who so well had learnt his
Lesson, that when any Person of Quality drew near, he not only performed due
Reverence, making low Congies, but his well instructed Followers did the like:
which the Emperor beholding with great pleasure and admiration, caused a high
Treatment to be prepared for them, where each had his own proper and peculiar
Mess, and his Guests Feasted themselves with good order and gravity. This
pleasant Comedy I saw acted in the Imperial Palace at Agra. So far Father Roth.

CHAP. VIII.
Of several Fowls no where found but in China.
AMongst these the Bird-Royal, which they call Fum Hoam, deserves the first and
chiefest place; of whom Father Boim in his Flora gives us this following
Account:

This Bird (says he) of most admirable beauty, if at any time absent, or a
while unseen, it is an Omen of some Misfortune to the Royal Family; the Male is
called Fum, the Female Hoam; they have their Nests in the Mountains near
Peking; their Heads are like a Peacocks: the Chinese emblem their Shoulders to
the Virtues, their Wings signify Justice, their Sides Obedience, and the Nest
Fidelity. This Pious Bird, as they term it, is in this like a Rhinoceros, that
it never turns, but goes backward, with the Majestic pace of a Stag; it has
a Cock's Train, Crested like a Serpent, Feet like a Tortoise, and Angels Wings.
The Emperor, Colaos, and Mandorins, have these Birds Embroidered on their Vests
and other Habits.

In the Kingdom of Suchue are Fleece-bearing Hens, they are small Duckleg'd,
yet bold and daring, and are much esteemed by the Women for their callow Down
and soft Plumage, resembling Wool, delightful to handle.

They also report, That in this Province there is a Bird produced of the Flower
Tunchon, which therefore is called Tunchonfung. This Bird does measure out Life
with the Days of the Flower, so fading, and so expiring: She is vested with so
great variety of Plumes, that her Wings expanded, lively deportray the Beauties
of the Flower when blown.

Between Couchinchina and the Island Hainan, are many great and small Rocks,
within which in the Springtime a multitude of little Birds, like unto Sparrows
or Swallows, flock to build their Nests; from whence they come is not known,
they fix their Nests to the Rocks, where with singular artifice they lay their
Eggs, hatch their young ones, and fly away: Their Nests are gather^d up, and
Transported by whole Cargoes into China and Iapan, where they are esteemed as
great Delicacies; they are in a manner diaphanous or transparent: I have three
of them in my Study; they are somewhat of a yellowish Color, of an Aromatical
Composition, and being mixed with any sort of Meat whatsoever, give it a
grateful taste; the Matter whereof these Nests are built, they produce out of
their Stomachs, which fixing upon the Rocks, they curiously form with a Liquor
they find issuing from the Clefts: But of this see more in Father Daniel
Bartolus his History of China, and Father Philip Marinus his History of China,
Fol. 42.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Fishes of China.
THere is in the Province of Quantung the so much admired Animal, by the
Chinese called Hoangioyu, that is, The Saffron-Fish, which in the Summer
Season is wonderfully transformed to a Bird of the same Color, and like other
Fowls flying over the Mountains, seeks its Nutriment; but when Autumn is
ended, returning to the Sea, it is changed into a Fish, which the Natives
esteem as a great Delicacy for its most pleasant taste.

They report of a Fish in the same Province, which they call The Swimming Cow,
that it often comes Ashore, and fights with the Land Cows; but continuing
long out of the Water, the Horn waxes soft, and becoming of no defense, the
Fish is compelled to return again to the Waters to recover the hardness of the
Horn.

The Author of the Atlas says, That there are a kind of Bats in the Province
of Xensi, which are as big as a Hen or Goose, and much sought after by the
Chinese as a singular Dish, their Flesh being much preferred before the most
delicate Meats that can be made of Hens. See what I have said before concerning
Bats in the Empire of the Mogor.

In the Province of Quantung is found a Sea Monster with four Eyes and six
Feet, which lives by feeding on Oysters, and vomits up things like Pearls; it
resembles the Creature called a Sea-Spider, and is not much unlike a Tortoise.

In the Province of Quangsi, in the Cleft of a Mountain, are Fish that have
four Feet and Horns, which the Chinese call The Delight of the Dragon, and
esteem it an Offense worthy to be punished with Death to injure them. They say
also, That there is in this Tract of Land an Animal which resembles a Bird in
the Head, and a Fish in the Tail, which they call Rondoves, that is Swallows; I
have one to show in my Study, which will turn it self unto that part from
whence the Wind blows.

The same Author likewise reports* That in this Province are found Crabs,
which when they have left the Water and come into the Air, immediately are
turned into a hard Stone, yet retaining their form.

CHAP. X.
Of the Serpents of China.
THere are in this Empire Serpents of so prodigious a size, that (as Martinius
in his Atlas relates) in the Province of Quangsi there are some thirty Foot
long, unto which if their Bulk answers, one would believe that greater cannot
be.

The Flora Sinensis reports of the Serpent called Gento, That it devoureth
whole Stags, yet is not very venomous; it is of an Ash Color, its length from
eighteen to twenty four Foot: Being hungry, it rusheth out of the Thickets and
seizes its Prey: Erected upon his Tail, he maintains a Fight with Men or wild
Beasts; and oftentimes will seize upon a Man by leaping from a Tree, and kill
him by its violent windings about him. The Chinese preserve his Gall to cure
the Diseases of the Eyes.

Marcus Paulus Venetus testifies the same of the Serpents of Carrajam, which
are so great, that some are in length ten Paces, in thickness ten Palm; a
Geometrical Pace consisting of five Foot, the length of this Serpent must be
fifty Foot, and so it exceeds the Serpents of Quangsi twenty Foot; but if the
common Pace, which is three Foot, then they are equal; But thus Marcus Paulus:
There are bred in the Province of Carrajam very great Serpents, some in length
ten Paces, and in thickness ten Palms, having in stead of Feet, Claws like
those of a Lion or Falcon; they have great Heads, and fiery Eyes, staring as
wide as Sawcers, and bunching forth like Footballs; their Mouth and Iaws so
wide, that are able to swallow a Man, with large and sharp Teeth, being
terrible to behold; they are taken after this manner: The Serpent in the
daytime lies hid in Caves of the Mountains, and in the nightime goes forth
to hunt the Dens of Beasts for Prey, which he devoureth, fearing neither Lions,
Bears, or any other Creature; and having satisfied his Hunger, returns to his
Cave, with the weight of his Body ploughing exceeding deep Furrows, the Earth
being Sandy, in which Tract the Huntsmen fix strong Stakes, pointed with sharp
Iron, which they conceal with the Sand; and when the Serpent comes forth to
seek his Prey, or returns back, as he creeps along, the Sand gives way,
and the Iron Spikes pierce his Breast, goring his Entrails; where being
fastened, and sore wounded, the Huntsmen kill him, and sell his Gall at a great
Price, it being Medicinal; the Flesh they sell for Meat, and Men feed freely on
it. Thus far Marcus Paulus Venetus. And though these may be reckoned amongst
Dragons, yet art they without Poison, of which there are diverse others (as
Martinius relates) in the Province of Chekiang.

There are also other Serpents in China, full of incurable Poison, called Cabra
de Cabelo, that is, The Hairy-Headed Serpent, of whose Stone we have made
mention.

In the Empire of the Mogor there is another sort, swollen with deadly Venom, and
exceedingly valued for the excellent Antidotes that are compounded of them. Let
this Serpent be steeped in a large Vessel full of rich Wine, so that his Head
may come out at a Hole made in the middle of the Cover, then put Fire under it
till the Wine be ready to boil, and the Poison of the Serpent breathe out, and
is all dissolved into Smoke, the Head being cut off, the Flesh is the most
precious Antidote against all Poisons.

There are Tortoises discovered in the Chinesian Ocean, as the Atlas
testifies, that afar off appear like Rocks.

The Flora Sinensis says, That there are found Tortoises in the Kingdom of
Honan, some green, and some blue; there are also others, that to mend their
Face, have Wings added to their Feet.

CHAP. XI.
Of the wondrous Stones and Minerals in China.
THe Author of the Atlas Sinicus, and other Writers say, That Nature has here
sported her self in Stones, and the Economy of Minerals, as well as Animals.
In the Province Huquang, at the Mountain Xeyen, especially after the fall of
Rains, are found Stones which they call Swallows, because they so exactly
resemble that Bird, that they want nothing; the Physicians distinguish them
into Male and Female, and use them in their several Compounds.

The Chinesian Genealogists report, That there is a Stone found in the Province
of Xensi of an inestimable Price, for that it increases and decreaseth with
the Full and Wane of the Moon.

Many Writers of Natural Observations report, That the Stone called Selenitis
has the same effect amongst us: This is a kind of Talcus or Specular Stone,
which I have oftentimes observed, not only to shine at the Brightness and
Splendour of the Moon, but perfectly to show, as in a Glass, the Figure of the
Moon, when at Full, when an Half Moon, and when in a Sextile Figure; whence I
suppose the Fable to have its original, That this Lunary Stone sometimes
increases, and sometimes decreaseth, according to the appearance of the Moon.

They have an Earth called Quei, a Mineral very bright, and much esteemed by
the Women, being endowed with a Cosmetick Faculty, which infused in Water with
a gentle Fucus, mundifies the Skin, taking away all Morphew, Freckles,
Flushing, Pimples, and such Rubifying Ebullition; they call it Quei X^, that
is, The Noble Lady.

There is in the Province of Xantung a Stone taken out of a Cows Paunch, of a
Clay color, about the bigness of a Gooses Egg, but inferior to a Bezoar in
solidity, being of a lighter Substance, and therefore thought by some to be the
more eminent in Virtue.

In the Province of Kiangsi, at the Mountain Yangkiu, is seen a wonderful
Stone, which being formed into an humane Shape, either by Nature of Art,
assumeth diverse Colors, according to the various Temperature of the Air, as
some affirm, by which they prognosticate either fair or foul Weather.

The Chinesian Atlas tells of an Herb called Asbestus, in Taniju, growing upon
a Stone, that defieth the Flames, not suffering in a fiery trial, but comes
forth a Conqueror, no way impaired by the fiercest ardor, though a fibrous
small Excrescency like Hairs; but being put into Water it moulders away like
Clay, and is suddenly consumed. How this Asbestus is hatchel'd into Flax, and
woven into fine Linen, whose Maculations, and all other Soil, is (as we may
say, washed and rinsed by Fire, as other Linen is by Water. See my Mundus
Subterraneus, Lib. 12.

There is a City called Iaocheu, on the Northern Bank of the River Po, in the
Province of Kiangsi, which alone has the honor to make the best Porcelane
Ware, or China Dishes, so highly esteemed in Europe and elsewhere; yet they
fetch their Materials from another City that has that precious Vein of Earth
in great abundance, which yields them small Audits, not being able to make the
like use thereof. The Body of this Earth is rather of a sandy than cla^ie
Substance, tender and brittle, which they knead, with often sprinkling Water,
into a contiguous Paste, thence raising and modeling Vessels of what size or
Shape they please, which they bake with great care by gentle, yet continued
Heats, till they bring it to some perfection; and being broken, they new mould
them, bringing them almost to their first value.

As the Mountains of China are replenished with other Metals, so also there are
plenty of Gold and Silver Mines; but by the Emperor's Edicts they are
prohibited to dig them, because from the virulent Exhalations of that Earth,
the Workmen are exposed to Diseases and Death. But they have Golden Ore, which
they extract from the Sand of Rivers and Springs. And besides, they have those
which promise to themselves and others, Mountains of Gold by the Art of
Chemistry; and there is a Place near Pukiang in the Province of Sucheu, that
boasts it self for the Birthplace of Hoangtius, the first Professor of
Alchymie, and Transmutation of Metals into Gold, two thousand five hundred
years before the Birth of our Savior. And that this Empire is rich in Gold and
other Metals, the plenty of hot Baths, the abundance of Nitre, Alumen, Vitriol,
Sulphur, and Subterranean Fires, do sufficiently evidence.

There is a Spring in the Province of Honan, the upper part of whose Water is
cold; but if you thrust your Hand in a little depth, you will find it to be
scalding hot.

But that which is most worthy of admiration is, That in the Province of Xansi
are Wells of Fire, and those as common as Springs of Water in other Parts: the
Inhabitants dress their Meat therewith, closing up the Mouth of the Well, that
it admits of nothing else but the Pot or Kettle; and the Heat so contracted,
easily makes the Pot boil. Father Martinius in his Atlas says, That this Fire
is thick, and not so bright as other Flame, and though very hot, yet consumes
not Wood cast into it; being collected as in a Stove, it may easily be carried
about, and used to boil Meat, but at last it will expire. They have also in
this Province Mines of Coal, like to that used in England, being of great use
to the Northern Chinese, especially for heating their Furnaces; they are
dug up in huge great Pieces, but they break them, and mixed with Water they
make them up into Lumps, which with difficulty take fire, but when once
kindled, burn fiercely, and continue long: The Fnrnaces in their Stoves are
like those in Germany, but sometimes they are made like unto a Bed, and serve
to lie upon in the Winter. Thus Martinius in his Atlas.

SOME Special Remarks TAKEN OUT OF ATHANASIUS KIRCHER'S Antiquities of China.
PART. V.
THE PREFACE.
ALthough the Chinese have not that knowledge of the Speculative Sciences as
the Europeans, yet they are very capable of them, and have profited so far in
the Mathematics, that although formerly they hardly understood any part but
Astronomy and Arithmetic; yet diligently studying the Books Composed by the
Europeans, they have attempted to publish somewhat concerning Occult
Philosophy, abundantly laboring in the Ethics and Politics, together with the
Oeconomicks, judging him fittest for the great Dignities and Employments of the
Empire, that is best Read therein. And in these Arts their Governors are great
Proficients, as will appear, if you consider with what admirable Order their
Laws are formed, for the Preservation, Glory, and Riches of so large an Empire.

CHAP. I.
Of the Bridges and wonderful Fabrics of the Chinese.
AND first the Bridge called Loyang in the Province of Fokien, built by a
Prefector Governor called Cayang, exceeds all admiration, the Longitude
whereof extends about sixty Perches, and the Latitude six* Where this Bridge
now stands there was formerly a Passage for Ships, but very dangerous, by
reason of the extraordinary violence of the Current. The building of this
Bridge cost 4000000 Crowns; concerning which the Author of the Atlas gives this
Relation: I twice beheld (says he) the famous Bridge Loyang with amazement; it
is all built of one sort of black hewn Stone, having no Arches, but is erected
upon three hundred Massy Stone-Piles, all of the Figure of a Ship, on each
side ending in an acute Angle, that, they may the less suffer by the force and
beating of the Waves; on the tops of these Piles are laid Stones of an equal
length, every one of which is twenty two Paces in length, and two in breadth,
as I measured them; and of these Stones there are 1400 all alike: and to
prevent falling off, there are Rails with Lions cut in Stone on both sides,
with many other Ornaments: A most stupendous Work, and deservedly admired: But
this is only the Description of part of this Bridge, which lies between the
Town Logan, and a Castle built upon the Bridge; the other part being equal.
That this Bridge should be built with so little Cost, is no wonder, considering
the greatest part of the Laborers serve gratis in Public Works, and those that
receive Wages have not the tenth part so much as our Laborers in Europe. Marcus
Paulus Venetus makes mention also of this Bridge when he describes the City
of Xartes.

There is a Bridge in the Province of Queicheu called Tiensem, that is, Built
by Heaven; it is a most excellent Work of Nature, consisting of one Stone, over
the Torrent Tanki, whose Latitude is two Perches, and the Longitude twenty.
This Place formerly was shut up within a Mountain; but by the force and
violence of the Floods, the Mountain being eaten away and hollowed, this Bridge
was left.

In the Province of Xensi is a Way made with Bridges by the General of an Army
named Chauleang, in the making whereof an Army of many hundred thousand Men
were employed, whole Mountains cut through at such a depth, that the sides
perpendicularly equal with the top of the Mountains, seem to brave the Clouds,
and yet every way admits the Light that elapseth from above. In some Places
he built Bridges with Beams and Spars laid from Mountain to Mountain, and
upheld by Beams placed under them; in places where the Valleys are, wide
Pillars are applied. The third part of the Voyage consists of Bridges of so
great height, that you scarcely dare look down; the breadth of the Way is
capable of receiving four Horsemen abreast, and to prevent falling, they have
placed Rails of Wood and Iron on both sides; it is called Cientao, that is, The
Bridge of Props and Rails, and was erected to shorten the Way from the City of
Hanchung unto the Metropolitan City of Siganfu, which before was 20000 Stadia,
through many Turnings and Windings; and now by the Passage through these
Mountains, their Voyage is but 80 Stadia.



There is another Bridge in this Province, near unto Chogan, on the Bank of the
River Fi, built on one Arch from Mountain to Mountain, whose length is forty
Chinesian Perches, that is four hundred Cubits; the Altitude or Perpendicular
to the Saffron-River, which passes under the Bridge, is reported to be fifty
Perches; the Chinese call it The Flying Bridge.

I have seen the like Bridge built from Mountain to Mountain in France near
Nemanse, which has three Stories; the first consists of four Arches, under
which Coaches pass, the other is raised upon twelve Arches, a Passage for
Horsemen; the third has thirty six Arches, and serves for an Aqueduct; Report
says 'twas built by the ancient Romans; it is vulgarly called Le Pont du
Garden, erected over a River of the same Name.

In the Province of Iunnan, over a most deep Valley, through which a Torrent
runs with a rapid and violent flux of Waters, is a Bridge reported to be
built by the Emperor Mingus, of the Family of Hame, in the sixty fifth Year of
Christ, raised not with the cementing of Stones or Plaister-work, but with Iron
Chains fastened to Rings and Hooks, so placing the Bridge to Beams above; there
are twenty Chains, and every one consists of twenty Perches; many passing
over together, the Bridge removes hither and thither, possessing the
Passengers with giddiness and fear of the ruin and fall of the Bridge.

I cannot sufficiently admire the dexterity of the Chinesian Architects, who
durst undertake so many difficult Works for the convenience of Passengers.

When once you descend from the Bridges upon the craggy Mountains into the
Campaign, you enter upon the public Ways, which are so pleasant, being Paved
with foursquare Stone, that you would think you went still through a City; and
where the rough Mountains deny a Passage, there their Ingenuity has contrived
a Way, though performed with great labor and difficulty; for in some places
they were compelled to cut down Rocks, in others to level the aspiring tops of
Mountains, and fill up the low Valleys, an incredible number of Hands having
been employed to make an easy Passage throughout the whole Region, which at
length they have performed: And in ^ertain Distances, at every Stone or Mile
Boundary, which contain each ten Chinesian Stadia, are appointed Posts, by
whose Diligence, in a very short time, all the Proclamations and Imperial
Edicts are carried unto the Governors with much speed. At each eighth Boundary,
that is one Days Journey, are erected Public Houses, which they call Cunquon
and Yeli, unto which the Magistrates direct those that Travel upon Public
Concerns, having first acquainted those to whose Charge the keeping of these
Houses is committed, with the Dignity of the Person, and the Time when they
will arrive, that so they may provide accordingly for their Entertainment and
Reception.

The Banks of the Rivers are as commodious as the Imperial Ways, no Tree o^
other Impediment being left within five Cubits distance of the Water, by which
the Towing of their Ships and Boats should be retarded. In many places they
have made Wharfs of square Stone, and placed where necessity requires, Stone
Bridges of diverse Arches; so that by the Magnificency of these Works they at
least equalize the ancient Greeks and Romans, if not excel them; so great is
the Zeal and Study of all Persons to advance the Public Interest.

I shall here say nothing concerning the Magnificence, Splendour, and almost
infinite multitude of their Ships, which are found in every River throughout
the whole Empire, and in so great a number, that, as the Fathers write, any one
may well doubt whether more Persons live in their Ships, especially in the
Kingdoms nigh unto the Sea, or in the Cities: But concerning these, see
Trigautius, Samedus, Atlas, Marinus, and others.

As for the Buildings within the Walls, those of Private Persons are not
stately, they having more regard to their Convenience than Splendour or
Ornament; for the most part they are but one Story, abhorring the trouble of
going up Stairs: but what they want in height, they recompense in length and
breadth, which makes it no wonder to find Cities in China of a vast extent: the
six Stories of the Roman College placed in length, would extend fifty Paces
more than half an Italian Mile, which with the Gardens, Schools, and Courts,
would make a City: Nor does the Splendour or Beauty of the Cities of China come
near those of Europe, for they admit of no Windows next the Street, but all
inwards, like the Religious Houses of Nuns amongst us. The Houses of wealthy
Persons are splendid and costly, but those of the Magistrates or Mandorins
exceed the rest, and may truly be called Palaces. In each Metropolis there are
fifteen or twenty, and oftentimes more; in the other Cities, for the most part
eight; in the lesser, four; they are all built alike, only some are bigger than
others, according to the Dignity of the Prefect or Magistrate, and all erected
at the Emperor's Cost, for his Officers either Civil or Military. Neither does
the Emperor only allow them Palaces and Ships, but also Furniture, Provision,
and Servants. The greater Palaces have four or five Courts, with as many Houses
on the Front of the several Courts; in the Frontispiece of each are three
Gates, that in the middle the biggest; both sides of the Gates are Armed with
Lions cut in Marble, at whose Bounds is a most capacious Hall supported with
mighty Pillars, called Tang; in this the Magistrate administreth Justice, on
each side whereof Public Posts have their Lodgings; next to this is the inward
Hall called Sutang, which is the Privy-Chamber for Retirement, Conference, and
Salutation: lastly, the great Gate and House, the Apartment of the Magistrate's
Wife and Children, being most richly adorned; to which is adjoin'd Groves,
Gardens, and Lakes, for Pleasure and Delight. But yet these Palaces being built
all of Wood, have this Inconvenience, that if a Fire break out, oftentimes
whole Cities are reduced into Ashes in a very small space, as it happened to
Peking, the greatest City in this large Empire, except Nanking, which was
totally consumed with Fire by a Rebel, at the beginning of the Irruption made
by the Tartars, in four Days space; yet it was restored to its pristine
Splendour by the Tartars in four Years time. But I will conclude my Discourse of
the Fabrics of China with the most stupendous, and never enough to be admired
Masterpiece of all their Works.

The famous Chinese Wall.
COncerning which, thus says Martinius in his Atlas: This mighty Wall
fortifies the Borders of four Kingdoms, the Longitude being three hundred
German Miles, of which fifteen make a Degree, i.e. twelve hundred English
Miles. This long Series continues without any Gap, only on the North part of
the City Siuen, in the Province of Peking, which is supplied with the
inaccessible part of a Mountain, and where the Mouth of the Saffron River
receives the Disembogues of lesser Rivers: The Avenues and Passes for
Strangers and Travelers repairing from Foreign Countires, are contrived
Archwise like Bridges, or through Vaults under Ground; all the rest uniform,
though carried on for the most part through rough and uneven Countries, forcing
a Way not only over the Skirts, but the Mountains themselves. At commutual
Distances, where one may assist the other, are planted high Towers, and strong
Gates or Sally-Ports, from whence they issue forth, or retire to, when any
Invasion or Assault requires; and convenient Fortresses also adjoin'd, not only
Defensive, but accommodated for the Reception of the Soldiers, which to make
good and maintain, takes up no less than a Million. The Wall is thirty
Chinesian Cubits high, twelve broad, and in some places fifteen.

Xius Emperor of China, and Founder of that Imperial Family, began this Wall,
who excelled all the Chinesian Princes in the Magnitude of his Works, and the
Glory of his Martial Achievements: Having conquered all China by subjugating
the Family of Cheva, from the Governor of a Province, he arose to be absolute
and sole Monarch, reducing the Tartars by many signal Victories; and to prevent
their future Incursions, he began this Work the twenty second Year of his
Reign, which was two hundred and ten Years before Christ, and in five Years
space completed the whole Fabric, impressing three Men out of ten throughout
the whole Empire, which amounted to many Millions. And such was the Composure
of this miraculous Work, being so strongly compacted and closely joined, that
if in any place of the Cementations a Nail might be driven between the Stones,
those that committed that Error, were to be put to Death without mercy; by
reason whereof the Work became so wondrous strong, that it is the greatest part
of admiration to this day; for notwithstanding the many Vicissitudes of the
Empire, Changes of Government, Batteries and Assaults, not only of the Enemy,
but of violent Tempests, Deluges of Rain, shaking Winds, and wearing Weather,
yet it discovers not the least sign of Demolishment, nor cracked or crazed with
Age, but appears almostas in its first strength, greatness, and beauty; and
well may it be, for whose solidity whole Mountains, by ripping up their rocky
Bowels for Quarries, were levelled, and vast Deserts, drowned with deep and
swallowing Sands, swept clean to the firm bottom.

There is also a Channel made by the Chinese, at a vast Expense both of Cost
and Labor, for commodious Navigation unto the Royal City of Peking: And
although many admire the Dutch for their Trenches or Cataracts cut through the
Land for Passage from Place to Place, yet the Channel Iun in China is
admirable, beyond all their Works; concerning which Martinius in his Atlas
gives the following Account:

The Province of Xantung deservedly boasts of the River Iun, the most famous
Channel throughout the whole Empire of China, dug with incredible Labor and
Industry, by which from most Parts of the Empire Ships bring Merchandise to the
Royal City of Peking. This Trench begins on the North of the City Socien,
from the Bank of the Saffron River, thence stretching it self unto Cining and
Lincing; from whence in that Channel it passes into the River Quei, being some
hundred Miles. I have counted upon it above twenty Cataracts or Waterfalls made
of hewn Stone, with a Passage for Ships, where they dam up the Waters with a
Sluice, which is easily heaved up by the benefit of an Engine with a Wheel,
affording an Outlet to the Waters; and if they want Water for great Vessels,
then in the middle Passage, before you come to Cining, they let it in from the
Lake Cang, through the greatest Cataract, as much as they please, timely
closing the Passage, to prevent an Inundation. These Cataracts are commonly
called Tung-pa, because they sustain the force of the Water flowing from the
Lake: Now when Ships arrive, that they may not be forced to Sail through the
Lake, they have cut a Trench or Channel on the Bank, fortified with Rampires,
by which all Ships do easily pass. At each Cataract are Persons maintained at
the Public Charge, to attend the Ships until they are passed the Cataracts.

The Province of Chekiang is rough and mountainous, not able to compare with
other Provinces for great Cities, multitude of Inhabitants; and richness of
Soil, yet affords two Commodities of great Profit, which none of the rest have,
and those of so great use, that they are an Ornament to the whole Empire. The
first is many thousand Bails of the best Paper, which plentifully furnishes
the fifteen Provinces. The other is that Gum which they call Cie, distilling
from Trees, not unlike that which drops from our Fir-Trees; and of this they
make that Varnish wherewith they so dress their Houses, that although the
outsides be but low and mean, yet within they far exceed all Europe for
Splendour, every thing therein being so transparent, that you can look no where,
but as in a Mirror each opposite Object is represented; and being tempered with
diverse Colors, and beautified with Birds, Flowers, and Dragons, the several
Effigies of Gods and Goddesses, and other Figures drawn to the Life, which at
once abundantly delight, and cause admiration in the Beholders. When the Gum is
gathered, they make it of what Color they please, but the Gold Color is in
most esteem, and next that the Black. Before it is dried, it sends forth
venomous Exhalations, which cause Swellings, the Pthysick, and Consumption; but
they who use this Preparation, have an Antidote ready, which defends them from
Infection. Things Painted with this Gum or Varnish, dry soonest in a damp
place; but once dried, never yields nor melts.

The Chinese also boast of other excellent Inventions; as first, that
ingenious Art of PRINTING, used by them long before it was known in Europe: But
yet they understand not the right use of it, being ignorant of the Art of
Founding Letters, or Composing with them, but Cutting or Engraving upon Wood
what they have to Print, like our Sculp'd Plates fitted for the Rowling-Press;
so that not being able to Distribute their Character, they are forced to have a
standing From for every Page, by which means the Printing of one Volume
oft-times fills a whole House with their Typographical Tables; as for
Example, if the whole have but 100 Sheets, they must have 400 Tables.

Secondly, Though we acknowledge they had the Invention of Gunpowder before
us, (because the Fathers of our Society have seen great Ordnance, as big as
Bazaliscoes, Cast for a Siege in diverse Provinces, especially in Nanking, which
are very ancient) yet they never arrived to our Perfection, being unskilled in
Fireworks; but their Art in Casting excells, as appears by the mighty Statues,
great Guns, and ponderous Bells every where frequent, and as the Bells
mentioned in a Letter from Father Ferdinando Verbist to Father John Gruberus in
Peking (in respect of which the greatest in Europe may be called Saunce-Bells)
shall demonstrate; his words are these: Anno 1403. there Reigned an Emperor in
China named Yum lo, he that first removed the Court from Nanking to Peking, who
the better to perpetuate his Name, Cast many Bells of a prodigious Magnitude,
whereof one of Iron, and eight of Brass, are now at Peking, the least of which
are 120000 weight: I saw seven lying in one place near unto Chum leu, all fair
and like ours, but the Margents are not so spreading, nor the top so Conick:
And because Father Athanasius Kircher, in his Musurgia, fol. 522. has set down
the Measure of the Bell of Erford in Germany, which for the bigness he terms
prodigious, I will here give the Dimensions of one of those which I saw at
Peking, and compare it with that of Erford, reducing Measures to the Cubits of
China. The Bell of Peking.
1. The Altitude included in the Curvature is 12 Cubits. 2. The Diameter of the
Orifice or Basis 10 Cubits and 8 Digits. 3. The thickness of the Bell 9 Digits.
4. The exterior circumference measured by the Diameter only three times taken,
that is omitting one Seventh of the Diameter, is 39 Cubits and 6 Digits. 5. The
weight 120000 Pounds.
The Bell of Erford.
1. The Altitude included in the Curvature is 8 Cubits 5 Digits and a half. 2.
The Diameter 7 Cubits 1 Digit. 3. The thickness 6 Digits and 3 quarters. 4. The
Circumference, or Periphery, according to the Measure alleged by Father
Kircher, is 26 Cubits and 1 Digit. 5. The weight 25400 Pounds.


The Diameter of the Bell of Peking, next the Canon, where it begins to
close at the top, is 8 Cubits 5 Digits, the Circumference of the Handle bended
is 3 Cubits, and there the Dameter is about 1 Cubit; the Altitude of the
Perpendicular Canon above the top is three Cubits: now the Chinesian Cubit is
divided into 10 Digits, where of 9 are equivalent to our Geometrical Foot.

SOME Special Remarks TAKEN OUT OF ATHANASIUS KIRCHER'S Antiquities of China.
PART. VI.
Of the Hieroglyphical Characters of the Chinese.
THere is no Nation so barbarous, but they have some way to manifest their
Conceptions one to another; but above others, the Chinese have the most
significant Characters; the first Inventor of which was Fohi, about three
hundred years after the Flood, as their Records say, who formed diverse Figures
drawn from Animals, Birds, Reptils, Fishes, Herbage, Plants, Trees, and
abundance of other things: so that according to the numerous variety of the
Products of Nature, and her several Resemblances, such, and so infinite were
their Characters; which though the modern Chinese, taught by Experience, have
rectified, yet at this day they have above eighty thousand, the Study of which
is the Apex of all their Learning; but they are able with ten thousand to make
out handsomely most Expressions upon all occasions: Yet those that wade farthest
into the Puzzles and Difficulties of so long Lessons, and so tedious a Science,
are preferred to the highest Offices and Dignities of Place, which seldom
happens till they grow aged.

The hardness of the Task arises from their having no Alphabet, Declinations,
nor Conjugations, but every Case and Gender in Nouns, and every Person and
Tense in Verbs, with the like, have their several and distinct Characters:
Formerly when they did treat about things of a fiery Nature, they used
Serpents, Asps and Dragons; in the description of Aerial Bodies, the various
Order of Birds; in a watery Subject, Fishes; in describing of Vegetives,
Flowers, Leaves, and Boughs; in the Constellations, Points and Circles, each of
which expressed a Star; in indifferent Arguments they exhibited Wood, Globes,
and Threads, disposed in a certain Order: But now in stead of these Figures,
they use Strokes and Lines, so contrived, that they answer to the
Significations of those drawn from Animals, etc. The Emperor Fohi invented the
Characters composed of Serpents, Dragons, etc. And the second was found out by
Xim Number, composed of the Husbandmans Tools, and used in describing what belongs
to Pasturage or Cultrature. The third sort were by the Emperor Xan Hoam
composed of the Wings of the Bird Fam Hoam. The fourth form of Characters were
contrived of Oysters and Silkworms, by the Emperor Chuen Kim. The fifth were
of Roots. The sixth made up of the Claws of Birds, used by the Emperor Choam
Ham. The seventh was the Work of the Emperor Yao, of Tortoises. The eighth sort
were Birds and Peacocks. The ninth are made of Wings, Reeds, and Herbs. The
tenth sort was their Art of Memory. The eleventh, of the Stars and Planets. The
twelfth were Characters used in Grants and Privileges. The thirteenth are the
Characters of Yeu Cha^ Chi Cyan Tao. The fourteenth are the Characters to
express Quietness. The fifteenth are composed of Fishes. The sixteenth is a
Composition that now is neither read nor understood. And these are the
Characters of the ancient Chinese, very much like the Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
but not adorned with such illustrious Mysteries; in making of which they did
not use a Pen and Ink, but a Pencil, and rather Paint than Write.

The Chinesian Characters being so numerous, the Language is wonderful
equivocal, and oneword oftentimes, only by the different Pronunciation; or
placing of the Accent, may signify ten, or sometimes twenty various things,
whereby it is rendered more difficult than possibly can be imagined.

The Mandorin Language is common to the Empire, and is the same as the Language
of Castile in Spain, and the Tuscan in Italy: The Characters are common unto
the whole Empire of the Chinese, as also to Iapan, Couchinchina, Corea, and
Touchin, though the Idiom is much different; so that the People of Iapan etc.
do understand Books and Epistles that are written in this sort of Characters
but yet cannot speak mutually to, or understand one another; like the Figures
of Numbers used throughout Europe, and by all Persons understood, although the
Words by which they are pronounced are exceeding different; so that it is one
thing to know the Chinesian Language, and another to speak the Tongue.

A Stranger that has a strong Memory, and does apply himself to Study, may
arrive to a great height of that Learning, by reading the Chinefian Books,
although he be neither able to speak it himself, or understand those that speak
it. But Father Iacobus Pantoja, according to the Musical Notes, Ut, Re, Mi, Fa,
Sol, La, first of all found out the rising and falling of the Accents to be
observed in the Pronunciation, assisted by which, they overcome the
Difficulties of the Language. The first of the five Chinese Accents answers
to the Musical Note Ut, and the sound of it is called in the Chinese, Cho Pim,
as if you should say, The first word equally proceeding. The second Note
answers to Re, and it is termed in the Chinese Language Pum Xim, that is, A
clear equal Voice. The third Note agrees with Mi, and the sound in the Chinese
is Xam Xim, that is, A lofty Voice, The fourth Note is sounded like Fa, and is
termed in the Chinese, Kiu Xun, that is, The elated Voice of one that is going
away. The fifth Note answering to Sol, in the Chinese is called Se Xun, that
is, The proper Voice or Speech of one that is coming in: For Example, that one
word Ya, written in the European Characters, and having the five Notes above
affixed, it must be prounc'd with diverse Voices and Accents; A Tooth, Ya; Dumb,
Ya; Excellent, Ya; Stupidity, Ya; A Goose, Ya: For as the same word suggesteth
diverse Significations, and the Speech spoken slower or faster resembles the
Modes and Times in Music; so from the Words of Monosyllables (for the Chinese
have none of bis, tres, or more Syllables) is a timely Harmony; by the help of
which Notes Strangers may attain to something of the Tongue, though with great
Labor, and indefatigable Patience: And though the same word has one
Signification in the Mandorins Language, and a contrary in Iapan and other
Places, yet knowing this one Speech and Character, you may Travel not only
through the Empire of China, but the adjacent Kingdoms.

THose that are earnest to make further scrutiny in quest of all these
wonderful Relations, may resort to the Author himself, and to those in his
Quotations; for this we thought a sufficient Appendix to the Dutch Embassy, the
one seeming the better to Illustrate the other, many of the same Concerns being
handled in both.
FINIS.

