THE STANDARD Of the Lord lifted up in New England, In Opposition to the MAN OF
SIN: OR, The Trumpet of the Lord sounding there, with a Visitation to the
suffering Seed of God in New England, or elsewhere.

With a Warning from the Lord, to the Rulers and Magistrates, Priests and
People of New England; but more especially to the Rulers and Magistrates of the
Bloody Town of Boston, who have put the Servants of the Living God to Death.

The Lion has roared, who can but fear? The Trumpet has sounded, who can but
prepare himself to Battle, before the great and notable day of the Lord come?

Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, which
placed the sands for the bounds of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree, that it
cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they
not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it?

Jer. 5.20. Written (in the Prison at Boston in New England, in America,) By a
Friend of Isreal's Commonwealth, known to the world by name, Joseph Nicholson.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Winde-mil in Martins Le grand, 1660.

The Standard of the Lord lifted up in New England; or the Trumpet of the Lord
sounding there.
THe mighty day of the Lord is coming, wherein the secrets of every man's heart
shall be revealed with the Light of Jesus Christ, which comes from Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, who lights every man that comes into the world, John
1. ver. 9. And this is my beloved Son, says God, hear you him, who lights
every man that comes into the world; Drunkard hates the Light, Liar hates the
Light, Swearers, and cursed Speakers, you all hate the Light; and all you who
live by stealth, you hate the Light; all you that live in envy, as Cain did,
who slew his Brother, you hate the Light; all you that are proud, as Haman was,
ye hate the Light; all you who commit adultery, you hate the Light; all you who
live by cozening and cheating your fellow creatures, by deceitful merchandise,
in buying and selling, and speaking otherwise by your commodities than it is,
you hate the Light; and all you who live in any form of Profession whatsoever,
and persecute them who are in the life, who come to witness forth the Truth, as
it is in Jesus Christ, made manifested in them, as it was in the Apostles, you
are all to be condemned with the Light that comes from Jesus Christ, For ^his
is the condemnation of the world, (the Light) says Christ, that Light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds
are evil; John 3. ver. 19. For every one that does evil, hates the Light,
neither comes to the ^ight, lest his deeds should be reproved; but he that
does truth, ^^meth to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they
are wrought in God: Therefore all people, high and low, rich and poor, bond and
free, take warning betime, and put not the evil day afar off, and the good day
afar off, and say in your hearts the Lord delayeth his coming, and so eat and
drink with drunkards, and beat and persecute your fellow creatures, who witness
the life and Power, as they did who spoke-forth the Scriptures, for the
Scriptures was given forth by Inspiration of the Spirit, holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Now people consider, the Scripture was not given forth for men to talk of, or
make a trade of, or for men to get money by, as your hireling Teachers of the
world do, who have so much a year for preaching, and talking of the Scriptures,
of things made ready to their hands, other men's conditions, saying in such a
Chapter, and such a verse, saying, Hearken my beloved brethren, in such a
Chapter, and such a verse, to the Word of God, as it is written for your
instruction, when truly people the Lord never spoke unto them: Why may some
say, is not the Scriptures true? yea, they are true, but the Scripture as a
declaration of other men's conditions, the Prophets conditions, and Christ's
words, and the Apostles words given forth from the life, but I am against him,
says the Lord, that steals the Word from his Neighbor, and says, The Lord
says, when the Lord never spoke to him, but as they find it written in the
Scriptures, other men's conditions, who were made partakers, and possessed and
enjoyed what they spoke, this was not a Chapter, or verse in Scripture, other
men's conditions, but this was, and is the same as ever was from the beginning,
the Innocent life, the holy life, Adams state, wherein he was created at first
in the Image of God, but being fallen from that estate in Adam, there must be a
coming back again, as the Scriptures speaks of, I will bring the blind by a way
that they have not known, and there must be a bringing back again the
Captivity, a restoration out of the fallen estate, For as in Adam all die, so
in Christ shall all be made alive: As many as believe on him whom the Father
has sent into the World, he was in the world, and the world knew him not, but
as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God; and he that
has the Son, has Life, he that has not the Son, has not Life, and this life
is the light of men; he was in the world and the world was made by him, and the
world became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the only begotten Son of
God full of Glory, Mercy, Grace, and Peace, and to him that is at rest, (says
Christ) will I give of the water of life freely; he that has an ear may hear
what the Spirit says, he that overcomes shall reign with me says Christ.
Therefore all people take warning berime, and do not deceive your selves by a
profession of God and Christ in words, and have not the life and power of what
you profess; for it is not profession without possession, that will stand you
instead in the day of the Lord God, which is coming upon all the ungodly of the
world; who are out of the life and power, of that which the Scriptures were
given forth from, for except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
God; this Birth is not by man's will, but by the will of God; and where this
Birth is known, and witnessed in the least measure, it is hated and persecuted
by the world, as ever it was in the days of the Apostles and Christ; for if
they persecuted me says Christ, they will also persecute you; and if they have
done this to the master of the house, how much more to them of his household?
for the Scribes and Pharisees knew where Christ should be born, but when he
came they put him to death. The same is now made manifest, as ever was in the
Apostles days, and in Christ's time, by the Rulers and Magistrates of
New England, most of all the Rulers and Magistrates of the Town of Boston in
New England, who have made a law in their own wills to banish any, whom they
call in scorn cursed Quakers, whom the Lord sends amongst them, to warn them to
turn from the evil of their doings, who witness, Christ made manifest in them
the hope of Glory, and after they have banished them upon pain of death, not to
come again into their Town or Jurisdiction, by their Law made in their own
wills, when they in obedience to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, as they were
commanded of him to come again, not in contempt of their Law, though made in
their own wills, but in obedience to the Lord, knowing it was better to obey
God than man; thy unchristian like have put them to death, and this is the
fruits of New-Englands profession, who are out of the life of what they profess
in words, as their fruits have made them manifest, who have put the Innocent to
death, who came to bear witness to the truth as it is in Jesus, and as it was
made manifest in them; but happy I say were they who loved not their lives more
than Christ, who have laid it down for his names sake, they shall receive a
good reward, When they that caused them to be put to death, shall howl and
lament; for their day of sorrow is coming on, for the Innocent blood cries
aloud for vengeance, upon them who put them to death, good it had been for them
they had never been born, or that a millstone had been hanged about their neck,
and that cast into the Sea, rather than they should have put them to death;
therefore all people, who have not had a hand in this thing, in putting the
Innocent to death, who have not suffered as evil doers, but because they could
not be subject to the Laws of men, for conscience sake, knowing it better to
obey God than men: take warning I say betime, while it is called to day, if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in a day of Slaughter, for
verily the day of the Lord God is at hand, wherein all the proud, and they that
do wickedly shall be destroyed: The axe is laid to the root of the tree, and
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, must be hewn down, and cast
into the fire. The Lord has said it, and he will bring it to pass in this the
the day of his mighty Power; for now is the Lord calling by his messengers to
all the inhabitants of the earth, to come to repentance, repentance from dead
works, to serve the Lord in newness of life, in holiness and purity, without
which none can see the Lord; for holiness becomes the house of God, whose
house we are, whom he has called out of the world to be a witness to his
truth, as it is manifest in us, as he has said, I will dwell in them, and walk
in them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, faith the Lord,
who is now risen, and arising to redeem a people to himself, zealous of good
works wrought in Christ Jesus, made manifest within, the hope of Glory, and
Glory be to the Lord God for ever more, who has redeemed many to himself out
of the fallen estate, Adams State, by Christ Jesus the Second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, for as is the earthly, such are they that are earthly; and as is
the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly; for the first man Adam is of the
earth, the second the Lord from Heaven, and by this Christ we witness
redemption from sin, the same Christ that died at Jerusalem for our sins, and
rose again for our justification, this we can truly say indeed and in truth,
that Christ is risen indeed, and become the first fruits of them that sleep,
and by this Christ we witness redemption from sin, and also the Law of the
members that wars against the Law of the mind that Paul spoke of, yet we with
Paul can say, we thank God through Christ Jesus our Lord, who gives victory,
over the law of sin and death, which the Law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh. God sent his Son born of a woman to condemn Sin in the
flesh, that we through him might have life, who believe on him, whom the Father
has sent into the world, whom the world cannot receive; for he that receives
me says Christ, receives him that sent me, and he that receives you, says
Christ to his disciples, receives me also, and he that keeps my sayings will
keep yours also: He that has an ear may hear what the Spirit says, and he
that is a thirst may come and drink freely without money, or without price; Oh!
dear people, why do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which does not satisfy? all you who have been learning may be
some tenn years, some twenty years, some thirty years, some forty years, some
fifty years, some sixty years, following the blind guides of the world, and yet
not come to the knowledge of truth; but some say, lo here in this form, and
some say in another; but I say believe them not, for where Christ is made
manifest, he is made manifest within to destroy the works of the Devil. Now
people, sin is a work of the Devil, and the Devil was a liar from the
beginning, he abode not in the truth; now he that commits sin abides not in the
truth, for Christ is the truth, the way and the life; no man can come to the
Father but by him: now as none can come to the Father but by Christ, so none
can come to Christ but by the light they be enlightened withal, which shows sin
and evil: now all who live in sin, and hate the light, which ye be enlightened
withal, they will not bring their deeds to the light lest they should be
reproved: so they that hate the light, and will not come to Christ that they
might have life, but goes on in the wicked ways of the world, in scorning and
dirision of their fellow Creatures, who love the light, and are guided by it,
and are come to Christ, the way, the truth, and the life, who never persecuted
any, neither taught he any such doctrine, as to imprison any, or whip, or
stock, or banish, or put to death for conscience sake, as the Rulers of
New England have done, who cannot receive strangers, but persecute them, who
come to bear witness to the truth, as it is in Jesus made manifest in them
the hope of Glory: but here in New England it is made manifest, as it was by
Herod, when Christ was born, he sought to worship him, under pretense to
destroy him; so here they call themselves a Church of Christ, but where he is
made manifest in his members, they put him to death, and casts them into prison
that comes to live among them, only because they are tituled Quakers; and thus
they have entertained their country men and friends in New England, and
especially at the town of Boston, where they cannot endure to see one walk in
the street, who they in scorn call cursed Quakers, though truly the people in
scorn called cursed Quakers by them, are they who truly fear the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, and are witnesses for him against the man of sin, against the
Beast and the false Prophet, which they worship here in New England much, most
of all at this Town of Boston: for all that will not worship in their way,
though a false worship, they must be banished out of their Town and their
Jurisdiction; and if they come again, put them to death. And their fruits have
made them manifest, to be no Church of Christ, but of Antichrist, hypocrites,
got above the Light of Christ in themselves, painted Sepulchers, having got the
Saints words declared from the life, but are found persecuting the same life,
where it is made manifest as they were in, that they gave forth the Scripture;
truly they are like the seven lean kine of Egypt, which eat up the
wel-favoured kine, and behold they wear still ill-favored; so they as much as
in them lies, they devour all the appearance of that which is good in any, and
yet they remain wicked still, so the Scripture comes to be fulfilled of them,
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived;
but truly their condemnation slumbers not, for the Lord is coming near to
Judgment to reckon with them for their Stewardship; for they have been long
persecuting, and now they have put to death, its like they have long thirsted
after blood, as their fruits have made it manifest indeed to be no Church of
Christ as they call themselves, but such as the chief Rulers and Priests were
of, who put Christ to death, who said, they had a Law, and by their Law he
ought to die; so here we have a law said they, if they come here again we will
put them to death, they are afraid their kingdom should fall, for it shakes
already; for they think either now or never when their kingdom of sin, which
they so much plead for, comes to be opposed, and the Priests trade called in
question, who have got so much a year by the Scripture, telling the people of
other men's conditions, things made ready to their hands, and pleading for sin,
it plainly appears that they are Satan's messengers indeed, who plead for sin,
and say men shall never be perfect while they are here, and yet they must have
so much a year for preaching the Word of God, (as they say) when the Word is
not to be bought and sold for money; but he that wills may buy without money,
or without price, as the Prophet of old have said, he that thirsts let him
come, and he that will may come, and buy wine and milk without money, or
without price, and the Word nigh in thee in thy mouth and heart; the word of
faith which Paul preached. So people, this is not a chapter or a verse in
Scripture, other men's conditions; but this is a measure of the Spirit of Truth,
which the Lord foretold by the prophet of old, says he, It shall come to pass
in the latter days that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
Sons and Daughters shall prophesy; and now is the Lord fulfilling his promise,
and his Sons and Daughters does prophesy; whereby the world begins to rage,
when they see the kingdom of Antichrist is like to fall, and the Merchants of
Babylon, their wave will not pass for current as formerly it has done,
therefore they have combined together against the Lord, and against his people,
whom they in scorn call cursed Quakers, and have made a law in their will to
put them to death; therefore all people who desires after the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, and hopes for mercy and forgiveness for your sins, (as you
will say) by Jesus Christ, to such I say own the Light of Jesus Christ, which
you be enlightened withal, which shows sin and evil, which lets you see when
you have done wrong, that condemns you for so doing, it will let you see all
that ever you have done in your life time, if you take heed to it to be guided
by it, and the same Light being minded and obeyed, it will bring you to hear
Christ's voice, for his sheep hear his voice and they follow him, but the voice
of a tranger they will not follow, and he that hears the voice of the Son of
God shall live, For the life that I now live ( said Paul) is by the faith of
the Son of God in me, and the same life is now made manitest in these our
days, as was in the Apostles time, and Christ's time, who said, He would send
the Comforter the Spirit of Truth, which should lead into all Truth. Now this
people is not a chapter or verse in Scripture, other men's conditions, for this
is no profit for me, or for another, what other men enjoyed, except I come to
enjoy the same as they did, who spoke forth the Scripture: so people it is not
for men and women, to take the Scriptures, or get words out of the Scriptures,
and say, Thus says the Lord, and this is the Word of God, because they find it
written in the Scripture; this was other men's works, the Lord said so to them;
But wait in the Light of Christ within our selves, to know the Word there, as
they did, who gave forth the Scriptures, and as David said, hark what the Lord
says, for he it is that speaks peace to his people, and to the Saints upon
earth, that they turn not again to folly, and you may read in the Scripture,
that Paul said to Timothy, thou ha known the Holy Scriptures which was able to
make him wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, the
second of Timothy the 3. Chap. and 15th verse. So all people that desires to
know the truth as it is in Jesus, you must come to that of God in your selves,
and know the Scriptures there, from that which is holy of God in you, as Paul
said to Timothy, that which (is or) may be known of God is manifest within, as
it is said, I have shown it to thee O man, what I would have thee to do, to
choose the good and hate the evil: So people, be not deceived, God will not be
mocked; for such as you sow, such shall you reap; He that sows to the flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corrvption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall reap
life eternal, and this life is in the Son of God, and where he is revealed and
made manifest, he is revealed within as Paul said, it pleased the Lord to
reveal his Son in me, and where he is now revealed as ever he was, he sets free
from sin, for if the Son shall make you free, then shall you be free indeed. So
people this makes it plainly appear, that they that plead so much for sin, they
plead for the Devil, for all sin is of the Devil, and also it appears plainly,
that they know not the Son of God that sets free, who pleads so much for sin,
(as the Teachers of the world do) though they can talk much of him by hearsay
what other men speak, who witnessed him made manifest in them, for the Teachers
of the world can say as the Prophets said, and as Christ spoke, and the
Apostles spoke, as they find it written in the Scripture; and thus says the
Lord say they, and may be they will begin to reckon up David's failings, (as
they say) and Peter's denying of Christ and such like, and so begin to plead for
sin, a thing truly abhorred of all them that fear the Lord, they dare not plead
for sin because God has forbiden it, so the Teachers of the world are out of
the true Prophets life that they spoke from, who were sent to warn people to
turn from the evil of their doings; and Christ said to his, as I am, so are
you in this present world; and I hope none will say Christ was a sinner, for if
any say, or think so they are liars, and knows not the truth, as it is in
Jesus; and the Apostles exhorted them who were turned from darkness to light,
To be perfect, and as many as were perfect be thus minded; and the Apostles was
sent to turn people from the power of Satan unto God; and that was and is out
of sin, for sin is of the Devil: so here the Teachers of the world, who have so
much a year for preaching as they can get more or less at such a Town, or such
a Parish as they call it, on such and such days, and may be some preach by a
glass a hour or more as their sermon holds out: so here they are limited to a
time, and place contrary to the Apostles, who were to go into all Nations to
Preach, and they were not to have so much a year where ever they came, neither
bargained before hand; neither taught any for filthy lucre, as the Teachers of
the world do, that people should never be free from sin, while they were upon
the earth, for the Saints of old were set free from sin ^^^^e they were upon
earth, and the same is now made manifest as ever was in the Apostles days;
Glory and Honor, be given to God for evermore, and the Lamb of God is now risen
and arising, who makes war in Righteousness, who is saving his people from
their sins, who is giving them victory dayle, who now follow him in the
regeneration or new birth, which is not born by man's will, but by the will of
God, which is heir of the kingdom, which never fades away. So all people
deceive not your selves (...) profession of God and Christ, which you have or
may not in words, and have not the life, which the words were given forth from,
and cease from your hireling Shepherds, and Teachers, who preach peace to all
for money, if you put into their mouths; but if you put not into their mouths,
they will prepare war against you, and may be rail much upon you, as they
have against others before; if you will not buy their stuff at their rate, they
will say you are deluded and bewitched; when any comes to bear witness
against their false worship, which they have set up, to compel all to bow down
to their God, though a false God: Now Christ and his Disciples, whom he sent
forth, they never taught any such doctrine, that all that would not come and
hear them, might be banished or put in prison, till they acknowledge their
fault as they call it, in not coming to their worship, or else pay such a sum
of money a week, as their Rulers and Priests of Boton in New England do, who
has put men to death for conscience sake, because they cannot obey their
wicked law made in their own wills; and this is the fruits of New-Englands
profession, burning men, as some men use to do with their oxen in the horns,
that they might know them from others, and cutting men's ears, as men mark their
cattle to know them by, and banishing of people, and putting them to death, and
beating them with pitch ropes even to death, and whiping of them that fear the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who are moved of him to come thousands of miles,
to bear witness to his truth, whiping of them, and banishing of them, and
putting of them to death, and casting them into prison, that come to inhabit
among them; all this is accounted but a small thing in New England, most of all
at the town of Boston, where they call themselves a Church of Christ; but let
all people that fear the Lord, or desire to know the truth, as it is in Jesus,
Judge what a Church this is, who neither fears God, nor reverences man, that
has dealt thus with their fellow creatures, who have been moved of the Lord to
come from far, to warn them of the evil of their doings; this is a bad requital
indeed, to requite the Lord evil for good, who has thus dealt with his
servants, whom he has sent among them, to exhort them to turn from the evil
of her doings, and yet these Rulers, and Magistrates, and Priests, will plead
for sin, and deal thus with them, that would admonish them to turn from it,
this is a filthy, and a horrible thing indeed, that is committed in this land,
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and people
love to have it so, and what will you do in the end thereof: Oh dear people
consider betime while it is called to day, if you will hear his voice harden
not your hearts against the Lord, least he vex you in his wrath, and trouble
you in his hot displeasure, which is coming on.

Some may object and say, at what time soever a sinner does repent, the Lord
will forgive.

To which I answer, at what time soever a sinner does truly repent, and turn
from the evil of his doings, he shall find mercy with the Lord, who is worthy
to be feared: But let none dare to continue in sin, and say, at what time
soever a sinner does repent, he shall find mercy, but while it is called to
day, if you will come to true repentance from dead works, to serve the living
God in newness of life, own the light of Christ in you, which shows sin, and
evil, in will bring you out of the worlds ways, and customs, and fashions, and
traditions of men, that you have long lived in, if you take heed to it to be
guided by it, you will come to Christ to feel him in you the hope of Glory, he
who saves his people from their sins, he who is the Power of God unto
salvation, to all them that believe in him, who own his light, and take heed to
that to be guided by it, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in their
hearts, for you have an unction which is holy, and you need not that any man
teach you, but as the anointing teaches; but first you must come to the light,
to take heed to that, to be guided by that till the day dawn, and the day star
arise in your hearts, and then you will come to know the anointing which
teaches all things, which is truth, and no lie. But people take heed of the
worlds words, which they think is repentance, when they have done evil, as
lying, or swearing, or being drunk, or stolen, or other sin whatsoever they
will say, when some thing within them condemns them for it, God forgive me; but
O! that will not serve people, when a man or woman has done wrong, and sinned
against God, and in the same nature that they committed the offense against
God, say God forgive me, for that's a taking Gods name in vain; for God hears
not sinners until they come to that of God in them, that shows sin and evil, to
be guided by that, that so they may be led out of sin; for all their praying,
and reading, and hearing, in the first nature is abomination to God, he hears
not that, it is but Cains Sacrifice, which God did not accept; but Abells the
righteous, God did accept; So it is the second birth, the Righteous that God
hears, that which is immortal of himself, that which he has given to every man
to profit withal, a measure of himself, which is Gods gift to man, to bring man
again to God, from whence he is fallen: In Adams State, the natural man knows
not the things of God, they are spiritually discerned; so people it is not
saying, when you have done evil, God forgive me, in that nature wherein you
have committed the offense, but if you hope for mercy, and forgiveness of your
sins (as you will say) by Jesus Christ, you must come to that of God in you,
that shows you sin, and evil, and tells you you should not have done so; now if
you turn to that which shows you sin and evil in your selves, to take heed
to it to be guided by it, it will lead you out of sin in a contrary way to the
world, and the vanities thereof, and from the hireling Shepherds, and Teachers
of the world, for he that is is a friend to the world, is in the enmity against
God, and that's out of the truth, for God is Truth, and with him is no
variableness nor turning at all, for he waits to be gracious to all them who
desires to turn from the evil of their doings, that so they may find mercy with
him, whose mercy is to be had in remembrance all the day long, so he that has
an ear let him hear: And so forsake his sin, and own the light of Christ Jesus,
which you be enlightened withal, it will bring you, if you take heed to it to be
guided by it from the hirelings, the greedy dum dogs that seeks for their gain
from their quarters: so if you come to the light of Christ in you, to be guided
by that, you will come to know the teachings of God in Spirit, for the Children
of God are taught of God, and they are established in righteousness, and they
are far from oppression: the just is at liberty, the witness of God within,
that which testifies against sin: So all people come to the light of Christ in
you, that so you may come out of bondage, for the bond-womans son, must not be
heir with the son of the free woman, bondsman must be cast out, that which keeps
the seed in bondage Ismael-like, which is wild, and heady, and angry, and rash,
and froward, that genders unto-strife, and every evil work, and workers of
iniquity must be destroyed; so to that which is pure of God in you, turn your
minds, and wait in that, that so you may come to know Gods worship, which is in
Spirit and in Truth; for now is he seeking such worshipers, and many are come
to know his worship, but this worship is not at a house made with hands, as
Steven was stoned to death, for bearing witness against temples made with
hands, Acts the 7th chap. and the 48. verse, but the worship of God is within,
its known there, and he is worshipped within, in the measure of his own spirit;
So all you that hunger and thirst after right cousnesse, come to the Light,
that so you may come to know and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, that you
may come to know the Law written in your hearts, and Spirit in your inward
parts, to obey the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, there to worship him. That so
you may come to know the teaching of the Lord by his Spirit, as the children of
the Lord do; That so you may come to know the Scriptures fulfilled in you, as
they did who spoke them forth; That so you may say, the Scriptures is yours
indeed, and Truth; And when you are come to know these things in your selves,
you will know Christ to be a Savior to you, saving you from sin; For this know
assuredly, that if you come not to know Christ within you, a Savior to save
you from sin, then you are reprobates indeed, from the Faith which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior; to whom be Glory, and Honor, and Praise, for ever
and ever, Amen.

To all you Rulers, and Magistrates, and Priests in New England, most of all of
the Town of Boston in New England, who have put the servants of the Living God
to death: Whereas you say in your Law, there is a cursed Sect of Heretics
risen up in the World, which are commonly called Quakers, who take upon them to
be immediately sent of God, and infallibly assisted by the Spirit, to speak and
write Blaspemous Opinions, despising Government, and the Order of God in Church
and Commonwealth, speaking evil of Dignities, reproaching and reviling
Magistrates and Ministers, seeking to turn the People from the Faith, and Gain
Proselites to their pernicious ways.
THE People in scorn and derision called Quakers by you, are they who truly
fear the Lord God of Heaven, and who in obedience to his Command, by his Spirit
have been moved of him to come amongst you, to declare the Word of Truth as, it
is manifest in Jesus, whom you have evil entreated, you have whipped many, and
cut of the ears of some, as men use to mark their baests, you have burnt some,
as men use to do their Oxen in the Horns, that they might know them from
others, and you have banished some, and you have cast many into Prison without
the breach of any Just Law, even them that were your Inhabitants; and also them
that have come from far to live amongst you, and you have unchristian-like put
some to death, having no just cause against any of them, but that you have
hatched mischief out of Hell, and in your wills have made a Law to punish the
innocent, by whom the Lord sends amongst you to warn you, to turn from the evil
of your doings; and thus you have requited the Lord evil for all his good to
you ward; and you do despite against the Spirit of Grace for the People called
Heretics and cursed Quakers by you, who take upon them, as you say, to be
immediately sent of God, and infallibly assisted by the Spirit; this we own and
witness to be true in our measures to be immediately sent of God, and to be
guided by his Spirit, that is of God; but to write or speak blasphemous
opinions, that we do deny, that has not been proved against us yet by any of
you or your hireling Priests; for they who are guided by the Spirit of God,
they neither speak nor write blaspemous opinions, for the Spirit of God is not
a spirit of blaspemy, as you may think or judge it to be, who make a mock at an
immediate Call; and you are the Heretics, who are gone from that of God in
you, who are erred from the Spirit as Balaam was, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, as you Teachers do; and the People by you in scorn called
Quakers, are not cursed, but blessed of the Lord, who came amongst you to bear
witness for the truth as it is in Jesus; for although you have used
incliantment as Balaak and Balaam did together to curse Jacob and defy Israel,
yet your Enchantments and Laws, which you have hatched out of Hell shall be
broken, and you both and the people in scorn by you called cursed Quakers,
shall inhabit amongst you, and you shall be broken to pieces, the Lord has
said it, and he will shortly bring it to pass, you cannot long strive against
God and prosper, for he is risen against you already; and though your trumpets
sound aloud amongst you, who delight to shed innocent blood; yet the Trumpet of
the Lord sound, louder in his ears, which cries aloud for vengeance against
you, who have put his servant to death, your condemnation is coming on apace,
you are all to be condemned with the light that comes from Jesus Christ the Son
of God, who lights every man that comes into the World.

And whereas you say, We despise Government, and Order in Church and
Commonwealth, speaking evil of Dignities, reproach Magistrates and Ministers;
that is false, for we own Government and Ministers, who fear the Lord, hates
covetousness, and are guided by the Spirit of the Lord; but if any Magistrates
makes Laws contrary to truth, as you have done, to put the innocent to death,
we utterly deny both the Laws and Magistrates therein; but Magistrates, who are
a terror to evildoers, and a praise to them that do well, we own; but such
Magistrates are not you, who shed innocent blood; and we own such Ministers as
are called of God, Who are sent out to preach the Gospel freely without money,
or without price; but such Ministers are not your Hirelings, who can never have
enough, who would limit the Spirit of God in others, who would have none to
speak but themselves, that so they might keep people still in ignorance, as
they have done, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; but you Magistrates and Ministers so called, are all made manifest as
Corah, Dathan and Abiram was, who rebelled against Moses, who said, All the
Congregation were Holy: but your end will be like theirs, for your Cup is
almost full of which you must drink, doubtless it shall be filled to you, your
reward you shall have, for God will be honored by you, but it will be your
destruction you generation of vipers, of serpents, who gnash your teeth for
torment already, for your torment is begun already, your sorrow shall never
cease nor fly away, your destruction draws near, you cannot escape the hand of
the Almighty, he rises against you, he will render vengeance in flames of
f^^^^^on you, woe be unto you who had no pity, good it had been for you if you
had not been born, on that a Mil-stone had been hanged about your neck, and you
cast into the Sea, rather than you should have made a wicked Law; and so put
the innocent to death, as you have done, whose innocent blood cries aloud for
vengeance against you inhabitants of this Town of Boston in New England, who
have shed innocent blood; Gods Judgments draws near all you, who had a hand in
shedding innocent blood, the blood of the innocent is upon you, woe will be to
you for evermore except you repent, you are grown fat and strong, and you spurn
with the heel against God; you are worse than Pharaoh was, who said, Who was
the Lord, that he should obey him to let Israel go; woe will be to you for ever,
who will not let the Lords people worship him in his own way, but they must be
cast into Prison, and whipped, and banished, and their ears cut, and burnt, and
put to death, because they come to bear witness to the truth against your
Idolatrous worship, and witness the true worship, who worship him in Spirit and
in Truth: And now is he seeking such worshippers, but you have rejected his
messengers, and slighted the day of your visitation, and put his servants to
death, and evil entreated many, whom he has sent amongst you to bear witness
to his truth as it is manifest in Jesus, but sorrow shall accompany you, where
ever you go vengeance from the Lord and punishment as came upon Cain shall come
upon you, cursed shall you be for evermore, in sorrow shall you lie down, and
so shall you rise up, and in torment shall you be where ever ye go, your God
whom you serve is not able to deliver you out my hand says the Lord, your
prayers and praises are accursed of God, your sacrifices is Cain-like, God will
never hear you, your bud shall rot as the drunkard, for you are drunk with the
Saints words, and you shall have blood to drink who have shed innocent blood;
and this is to you who have put the servants of the Living God to Death.

TO you the Inhabitants of Boston in New England, who have not had a hand in
putting the innocent to death, if ye will return, return unto me says the
Lord, or else I will visit your sin upon you with the rest, for when I begin, I
will also make an end; therefore if ye will return unto me says the Lord, I
will yet have mercy upon your unrighteousness, if you will break off your sins
by true repentance, and own the light of Christ Jesus which you be enlightened
withal, which shows you your transgressions, which lets you see when you have
done any manner of thing that is evil, which reproves you in secret when no eye
sees you, for whatsoever is done in secret shall be made manifest by the light,
for the day is dawning, and the sunrising is appearing amongst you, and woe
will be unto all you, who cover your selves, and not with the Spirit of the
Lord, for he will find you all out, your secret works of darkness must now be
brought to light, your covers will be too narrow, all you who are covered but
not with the Spirit of the Lord, your covers must all be rent off, root and
branch must be destroyed and burnt up of all you, who are covered but not with
the Spirit of our God, who is a consuming fire to all his enemies, who waits to
be gracious to all you, who have any desires to turn from the evil of your
doings, that so you may find mercy with the Lord, that you may be hid in the
day of the Lords fierce wrath, that so you may not perish with the rebellions
and stiff-necked, and uncircumcised Rulers and Magistrates, and Priests and
People, who have had a hand in putting the innocent to death, amongst you, who
have not suffered as evildoers, but for righteousness sake, because they could
not be subject to their wicked Law, made contrary to the truth; To you I say,
to you I speak, who have not had a hand in shedding innocent blood; Be ye all
warned betime, while it is called to day, if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts against the Lord; for verily I say unto you, except you repent,
you shall all perish, as they who have put the innocent to death, for all your
Meeting together, and Prayers, and singing and praising God as you think, is
abomination in the sight of God, he never hears you, it is but a sacrifice
offered in the first nature, which God never accepts in any, for the prayers of
an ungenerate man God hears not, as you may read in Scripture; its the second
birth God hears, as Abel was, the Righteous, whom Cain the murderer slew, his
sacrifices God did not accept, but Abels he had respect to: so until you come
to be guided by that of God in you which is immortal, which gave forth the
Scriptures, God hears not your Prayers, though there may be a Seal, yet it is
not according to truth, for Christ is the truth, and where Christ is known, he
redeems again to the Father, and so the lost estate comes to be recovered again
in him, so the immortal of God is known. and witnessed in and through Jesus
Christ, the same as ever was, which died at Jerusalem, who is now saving his
people from their sins; for now the blind see, the lame walk, the dumb speak,
and the lepers are cleansed, the same as ever was, glory be to God for
evermore, who is now shedding, his saving health abroad to all Nations; the
Glad Tidings of the Gospel is now going forth, and preaching Repentance to the
Spirits in Prison; but this Gospel is not the four books Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John, as many may think it to be; for if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost; but the four books are not hid, for many have got them, but
know not the Glad Tidings of the Gospel, for that is hid to all them who cannot
witness Redemption by Christ Jesus by their sins, but are in the old nature,
Adams state, driven out from God into the earth, groaping in the dark like the
blind Sodomites, but cannot find the door; for Christ is the door, He is the
good Shepherd the Sheep hear his voice and follow him but the voice of a
tranger they will not follow, they will fly from the stranger; they know
strangers, who have got the Saints words, but persecute the Saints life: they
are strangers indeed, who would limit the Spirit of God in any; for Moses the
man of God said, He would all the Lords People had been Prophets; and thousand
in Old-England, glory be to God, know the true Shepherd, who feeds with the
Bread of Life, from them who feed with the husk, who feed amongst Swine and
Dogs, who rent and tear, and devour their fellow creatures, who have marred
their Religion, and shamed their Profession, and stained their Nation with
blood; but all in vain do they worship God teaching for Doctrine the Precepts
of men; for the Mighty Day of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is coming upon
all them, that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein the
workers of iniquity must be destroyed; and all them, who keep the Seed of God
in bondage, without which we had been as Sodom and Gomorrah, which perished in
one day: And now is the Lord risen and arising for his Seeds sake, and woe to
all them that keep the Seed in bondage, who will not let the oppressed go free
to serve the Lord, and worship the Lord in his own way, but will dig up to
themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water, and so forsake Christ the
Fountain of living Waters; for he is Antichrist who denies Christ come in the
flesh, and such are they who put him to death in his Members; for if Christ be
not in you, then are you reprobates indeed from the true Faith, which is in our
Lord Jesus Christ. So dear people be not deceived any longer with a Profession
of God and Christ in words, and be strangers from the life of what you profess,
for it is not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter; but he that does
the Will of God, he knows the hidden things, which are hid from the Wise and
Prudent, and revealed unto Babes; so all people come down to the light of
Christ in you, that so you may come to the life of what you profess in words,
that so you may come to know the Power, as they did, who gave forth the Words;
for they are hypocrites who know not the Life and Power of what they profess in
words; such are hypocrites indeed, got above the light of Christ in themselves,
painted Sepulchers indeed, got the Saints Words to talk of, and persecute the
Saints life, and such know not God and Christ, but by hear say, what ever they
may profess in words, yet they know not the life, who persecute and put to
death for Conscience sake, and threaten others with the like, who are moved of
the Lord to live amongst them: So he that has anear let him hear, and forsake
the evil of his doings, and I will have mercy says the Lord, and turn to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon, if ye turn unto me says the Lord, by
timely Repentance before it be hid from your eyes; for if your Rulers and
Priests would have heard the truth, they would not have put the innocent to
death, but let them now beware, least it be now hid from their eyes.

From a Friend of Israel, Commonwealth, who here suffers for the truth as it is
in Jesus amongst you Inhabitants of Boston in New England, who cannot bow down
to your God, nor your worship, because a false God and false worship, but
stands a witness against your false worship, and wicked law which you have
made, even till death: Known to the world by name of JOSEPH NICHOLSON.

THE END.

