A LETTER FROM A JESUIT at PARIS, TO HIS CORRESPONDENT in LONDON, Showing the
most Effectual way to ruin the GOVERNMENT AND Protestant Religion.

Reprinted M. DC. LXXIX.

A LETTER from a Jesuit at Paris, to his Correspondent in LONDON, etc.
Honored Dear Sir,
POST varios casus, post tot discrimina -- After many fears and frights, I
thank our Blessed Lady, I am safe got out of the mouth of the Lion, and have
got the Sea between me and danger. It would be troublesome to repeat to you the
Hazards I have run; how often I was upon the brink of being discovered and
taken by the Heretics, who had laid all the Seaports, to arrest all such as
should attempt to pass over the Seas; but in regard I have something of more
moment and concern for the Catholic Cause to impart to you, I will not stuff
out this Packet with those relations, with the remembrance of which, I hope
hereafter to laugh away some pleasant hours with you.

I give you thanks for the Account of Affairs which I have now before me; and
you are desired still to continue it in, regard you may do it with great
security, both by reason of the Way by which it comes, and the Character to
which it is committed, which I think no person living besides your self has a
Key of: and how ingenious soever some in Haereticopolis may be in expounding
Ciphers, this will cost them some time to understand.

I understand by the Enclosed Proclamation, that the immortal Parliament, as
'twas believed, is at last dissolved; and immediately upon the receipt of
yours, I communicated it to their Reverences, the Fathers, L. C. D. F, and P.
The next day they summoned together such as we put confidence in, to enter upon
an immediate Consult upon this traverse of our Affairs. Their Reverences were
under as great disappointments, and as many disturbances as you can well
imagine; this short turn having utterly broken all the measures they had so
wisely taken: and for sometime they were unresolved what Course to steer, being
uncertain of what complexion, and temper a new Parliament might prove.

True it is, the late Parliament were in reality, as we had reason to believe,
mostly in their Judgment enemies enough to Catholics; but we had so well
managed our Affairs, as to possess some of the most active and hot-spirited
among them, the Bellweathers of the House, who lead the whole ^ock. That there
was an absolute necessity, First to run down some Great Ones, who interposed,
as we persuaded the World, in favor of us; and that unless they were taken out
of the way, there could be nothing done to purpose, either to discover the
bottom of the Design, or to punish the Persons principally accused for the
Plot, as they call it. This was a Method which it was judged would take them
off from the violent Chase and pursuit of poor Catholics, who were now upon
the dreadful brink of a most terrible Persecution; and to divert the Storm,
nothing could be more conducive, than to dash these black clouds one against
another, and discharge their Thunders mutually upon themselves: for if we could
this or any other way engage the Heretics deep enough in a Quarrel among
themselves, by the industry of our Party among them, we could not tell how far
these discords and oppositions might transport them, nor what would be the
consequences or events of a Fire-ball in the H. C. We have had no contemptible
success with such Engines in other occasions; and it was hoped it might at last
put the Nation, and especially the City, into a general Mutiny upon the
disappointment of their expectations; there being nothing so unanimously
desired, or so passionately longed for, as to see all private heats laid aside,
to prosecute the main business of the Plot. And should it have come to a
Popular Tumult, we should not have been wanting to have made considerable
advantages of it; and under the color of being Popishly affected, and
obstructing the prosecution of the Plot, few of our enemies should have
survived the fury of the Tumult; and it may be we might have made the Heretics
themselves help to reduce their new Babylon to Cinders a second time, and in
that confusion have done some executions which I will not name. However, if
that should not happen, we were hereby assured, that we should for some time
divert the imminent danger which threatened Catholics in general, and those
Noble Lords in particular; and no man knows what the very gaining a little time
may produce in favor of us; Multa cadunt inter poculum, supremaque labra.

This course we knew was very pleasing to many, who, as our worthy Friend, the
much lamented Mr. C. had judiciously observed, to revenge their private Piques,
had of a long time set themselves to oppose the Ministers of State, and to whom
such a promising opportunity was Muscadine and Eggs, and besides, it was
infinitely taking and popular to all the Discontented and Factious, who, I am
persuaded, would join with the Catholics, the French, or the Great Turk,
rather than lose the pleasure of seeing some great Persons take the Sommerset
from the Battlements of Honor, especially such as they are made believe are
Enemies to their Liberties and Religion, which are but one thing with two names.

However, we were sure of this advantage, that by degrees we should persuade
People, that there never was any such thing as any Design among the Catholics
against the King and Government, there being no more evident Demonstration,
that the H. C. did not believe there was any real Plot, than both, their
violent proceeding upon disbanding the Army, even when 'twas said and sworn
before them, that there were 20000. men in a readiness to attend the fatal
blow; and that the King of France with his whole Power was ready to strike in
with the Catholics; as also their running so furiously upon the Ministers of
State, in stead of the Catholic Lords, as being the more dangerous
Conspirators. And, it may be, we have lost no ground by this Artifice, and
thereby confirming what we did at first, and have all along given out and
spread abroad, That it was in reality a Plot of the Presbyterians against his
Majesty and the Government; and that under the pretense of a Plot of the
Papists, all such as were friends to the Church or Crown should be accused to
be Popishly affected; and thus by ruining the Supporters, the Crown must fall
of course; this was the way in which they, by our assistance, so successfully
proceeded in 41. and nothing could make it more plain, than that the same Party
was playing their old Lessons over again. And as we did then in a great measure
happily effect our Designs, and manage the Heats, till they burnt down all, so
we were not without hopes to do the same, and like flints, by striking them one
against another, to dash them in pieces, and fire the several Factions; and
when they were of all sides sufficiently weakened, under pretense of supporting
the weaker Party, to bring in the power of the most Christian King, to make
them Friends by subduing both; which was an advantage we might reasonably hope
for now, but could not expect in the former Revolutions, while his most
Christian Majesty was a Minor, and France it self engaged in Domestic troubles.

But this Parliament and our hopes of it being both at an end, we are to
consider, how we may manage the next, and succeeding Parliaments, so as nothing
may be done to our prejudice, and by consequence, that they may become
advantageous to our pious Design of extirpating Heresy, and propagating the
Catholic Faith in England again. Upon our serious Consult, it has been here,
after mature deliberation, agreed upon, to send you these following Resolutions
of their Reverences, who have done me the honor to assign me the Province, of
taking care to transmit their Resolves to you, and receive your Answers, and an
account of the movement of our Affairs. You are therefore with all speed and
secrecy, to take care of the dispatch of these Instructions to all such
Persons as we may confide in, and you shall judge qualified for an Employ of so
great Trust and Concern, that I may say, the whole Catholic Interest and Hopes
in England depend upon the success of this Negotiation.

And first, as a thing previous to the Elections which shall be made, let the
Emissaries in all Counties and Corporations, especially such as have Burgesses,
be vigilant to enquire who are to be the Candidates for the succeeding
Elections.

Secondly, Use all endeavors among the Dissenters, according to your interest,
to get in as many of the late Members as you can; especially P. C. B. M. etc.
Our excellent Friend M. has assured his Illustriousness the N. that he will not
fail to be in again, nor to do us the best service he can, now, as well as in
the last.

Thirdly, If that cannot be done, but that new ones are set up, if they be
Persons firm in their Loyalty, and such as have any the remotest dependence or
expectance upon the Court or Army; then give out among the people, though en
passent only, as you bait at your Inns, that to your certain knowledge such
Gentlemen are great Courtiers, and are of that party who design to reduce the
Nation to the Model of Framce, by the arbitrary power of a standing Army,
thereby to Introduce and Establish Popery among us; which you must be sure to
make most vehement and bitter Declamations against. If they are persons
strongly inclined to the Church of England, then give out confidently that they
are Papists in heart, and that you know where they have declared themselves
such, and that it is most visible by their being so much for Ceremonis. This
all the Dissenters will not only easily credit, but will be very helpful to us
in spreading and justifying the Reports; these things spoken with confidence,
and a pretense of some intimate knowledge of them, and that you now divulge
these secrets out of sincere affection to the Nation, ready to to be betrayed
to Popery and Arbitrary Government, will fly like Wildfire among the ordinary
People, who will snowball it from hand to hand, and father it upon persons of
Repute, not knowing the Original hand from whence it first came; and the
repeated Echo of their fears will both redouble and confirm it. By this means
you shall, with the Assistance of the Dissenters, who greedily lay hold of this
occasion which they have so long wished for and expected, be sure to promote
the election of such Burgesses, as are disaffected both to the King and Church;
and though possibly in many Counties the Loyalty and Interest of the Gentry
will carry it against us in the Knights; yet the greatest number consisting of
the Corporation Representatives, there we shall be too hard for them. And then
mark what will follow upon this, they will meet with an invincible prejudice
against the King and Established Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; they
will fall violently upon the Church as well as the Papist; they will be so
taken up with their own Affairs and the Embroilments our friends will engage
them in, that ours will sleep; and being so hot and disorderly, they will in
probability oblige the King to send them home again, and seek for another.

By this means the City and Country will be under the greatest disappointment
and dissatisfaction imaginable, the Army which is undisbanded will be thought
necessary to be kept up, but there being no money to pay them, they will be
burdensome and exasperate the Country, and augment the jealousy of a standing
Army; A Fleet must also be put to Sea, because of the Alarms of the French, and
when they come home, the Seamen must be turned adrift for their pay too; it may
be a new Parliament may not be called in some time, but such ways may be taken
to raise money for the Public necessity as may render the Government odious,
and dispose People to a General Insurrection, and then the day's our own, then
my Noble Lords, will save their heads, for they must be tried by a Parliament,
and if our affairs jump luckily, they shall outlive Methusalem, if they live
to see a Parliament so Loyal as to give the King money or endeavor to settle
the Peace of the Nation.

But in the second place, if the Parliament shall sit, and there appears any
danger to us by there being unanimous, and so like to continue, and to bring
the Lords to their Trial: all endeavors must be used by such as can be got to
be of our party, First to run them again upon the Ministers of State, as being
Popishly affected, and designing to Subvert Parliaments, and introduce
Arbitrary Government. I need not speak much of this, you are sufficiently
instructed how to mange it, and cannot want a Cry to set it up.

Secondly, Obstruct as much as possible the raising of money, and yet cry out
of the imminent danger and fears of the French; it may be you will have reason
and truth in that particular; however delay the money by asking such
unreasonable things in recompense of it, that the money Bill upon such terms may
be rejected, and be sure it may not be near enough for the present necessity;
urge the mispending of the great Revenue of the Crown, but lay all the blame
upon the Ministers, you cannot miss the King if you hit the other. This will
put the King out of all hopes of this Parliament, and may possibly occasion
either a long Prorogation, or a Dissolution, and we shall be better provided
against a new Parliament than we could be now, being so much surprised in the
dissolution of the last. And besides of this Parliament upon which the Factious
have built such hopes, be either Prorogued or Dissolved, it will still
exasperate the Nation, and they will be apt to receive the impressions of their
own fears and jealousies, as well as those we must now sow thick among the
discontented; if it continues, we must still play the same Game, and with
grievances, smart Votes, and ungrateful Addresses keep up and increase the
misunderstandings, and widen the differences between the K. and the H. C.

Thirdly, asperse all that are not of our Party, as Court-Pensioners or
Popishly affected, this will secure ours from being discovered, and will render
the other Odious to the People; and hinder their being elected into a future
Parliament, if this should happen to be hastily dissolved.

Fourthly, Let our Party bring in a Bill for Comprehension or Toleration, if it
does no other Good, it will occasion great heats and altercations, long debates
and will be an excellent Remora to all other affairs, it will make them highly
the favorites of the Separatists who will be most active against the Crown and
Government, and if that can be passed, it is no matter how severely it excludes
all Catholics from the benefit of indulgence; it will certainly ruin the
Church, and we shall be well enough able to do our business, and to prepare the
People for a Rebellion under the shelter of the several Sects who hate both the
King and Church sufficiently already, and will in a little time become so
numerous and confident, that by their help we may be able to effect our Design.
This politic Janus of a Toleration has also another face, for it will alienate
the affections of those who are zealous for the Church, from the Crown, when
they see that give them up as a prey to their Enemies; and if it does not yet,
it will disable them from doing it the service they would in case of necessity;
so that if it comes to a Rebellion, the K. will be destitute of assistance of
all sides, and must seek for aid among the Catholics and from foreign Power,
and which way soever the Game goes, we shall be sure not only to save our
Stakes, but to win by the hand.

Dear Sir, be diligent and vigorous in the prosecution of these Instructions,
and be assured that nothing shall be wanting on the part of their Reverences to
forward the Design, neither Money for the present, nor Power for the future if
occasion offers. His Most Christian Majesty is now at entire liberty in Case
of necessity, either to interpose for us, or assist us with his invincible
Arms, and to promote so pious and Religious a cause. Doubt nothiug, but be of
Good Courage in the discharge of this high trust reposed in you, and assure
your self of Success and proportionate Rewards on Earth, Eternal Fame, and
Eternal Glory in the Heavenly Paradise. The Fathers send you theirs and the
Apostolical Benediction; have me Recommended to all our Friends. Our Blessed
Lady and all Saints pray for you, and succed your endeavors. Fail not to
advertise us, how the wheel of affairs moves, that so we may be able to advise
and direct accordingly, Farewell.

D. P.
Paris Feb. 12. N. St. 1678.

