THE Present Interest OF ENGLAND; OR, A CONFUTATION OF THE Whiggish
Conspiratours Anti-Monyan Principle,

SHOWING From REASON and EXPERIENCE The ways to make the GOVERNMENT Safe, The
KING Great, The PEOPLE Happy, MONEY Plentiful, and TRADE Flourish.

Omne tulit punctum -- LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Harrow, at the
Corner of Chancery Lane in Fleetstreet* 1682.

TO THE READER.
SIR,
IF you are an honest Loyal Gentleman, and to such I write, here are some
things in the following Papers, which I doubt not but you will judge to be
conformable to the Title, and the Present Interest of England; if so, you will
do your self right, if you endeavor to promote the knowledge of it, to your
Friends and Neighbors, the Price will not affright you, if you dispatch one or
two of them to your Country Acquaintance. It is not vanity of foolish Opinion
in the performance, puts me upon this humor, but that once in our lives we may
come even with the Factious Whiggish Conspiratours, who have left no Corner of
the Nation unpoisoned with their Appeals, their Vox Populi's, their Growths of
Popery, and whatever might help to subvert the Government. And if there can be
any reason given, why we should be less industrious, considering what we must
expect from them, should they ever prevail, to support the Government and
secure our selves, I will be contented to be thought very impertinent, both in
my Design, and the request which is made by,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, N. N.

THE Present Interest OF ENGLAND.
IT is now almost a Century of years, since this Nation, the Glory of all
Islands, the Mistress of the Ocean, fitted by Nature, and the very complexion
of its Martial, Seafaring and numerous Inhabitants, if not for the Empire, yet
to give Laws to the Peace and Traffic of the Universe, England, has
languished under the wasting Hectic of its own intestine Disorders, the
miserable Scars of our Civil Wounds, and unnatural as well as unreasonable
Dissentions, are but still too visible marks of our past folly and present
weakness. To what degrees of Glory and Reputation in the World, the English
Name and Nation might have been advanced, had those Conquering Arms, that
Valiant Blood, and those Prodigious Treasures, which were so prodigally
expended in the late Rebellion, been employed for the Honor and Advantage of
the Kingdom, it is almost impossible to make any near conjecture; but most
assuredly Alexander and Caesar rendered themselves Masters of the Greatest
Empires of the Earth, at a far less Expense of Blood and Treasure. A
Consideration, capable of transporting Generous Spirits into an excess of
Indignation, and the most just abhorrence of those men and Principles, whose
Turbulent and Ambitious Actions have robbed the English Nation at once of so
much Glory abroad, Peace, Men and Money at home, as might have made the British
Diadem shine among the most Illustrious of the Universe. But what Patience is
able to support the assaults of those afflicting Considerations, that whereas
we might have rendered our selves the most potent, formidable, happy and
flourishing People of the World, we have by our own madness and Civil Rage, not
only lessened our own Strength and Glory, but have at the same time and by the
same ways advanced the Power, and dangerous Reputation of our Neighbors; who
seem to owe whatever they possess that is Great or Formidable, more to our
brutish and wretched Folly, to give it no worse Character, then to their own
Prudence, Conduct, or Extraordinary Policy; France and Holland, who can now
upon occasion cover the Narrow Seas with Hostile Sails, must have been still
contented, as formerly, to beg Permission for a few Fishing Boats to spread
their toiling Canvass upon the English Main, had the tenth part of the Money
which was consumed in Rebellion been employed to maintain the Royal Prerogative
of our Princes, and the just Dominion which they have in Right of their
Imperial Crown, over the four Seas.

It was a sharp Observation which Mounsieur the Duc Rohan made concerning
England, in his Book entitled Interest des Estates; Angleterre est un Grand
Animal qui ne mourira jamais s'il nese tue luy mesme. England is a great Animal
which can never dye, unless she Kill her self.
Bystanders it seems will ever see more then Gamesters, otherwise one would
think it impossible that this French Duke should see at so remote a distance,
what some of our Dukes, Lords and Commons too, will not see, at the nearest
view, that if ever England perish it must be by her own hands; but the truth
is, they do see it too plainly, and have therefore entertained those hopes to
satisfy their own ambition by the common ruin; and how deeply this Nation
therefore stands indebted to those People who have taken such Immortal pains to
Ruin it by intestine Wars, and to weaken it by continual Disorders and
Commotions within it self, I think to our shame as well as irreparable damage,
is obvious to all the neighboring World.

We seem now to be upon the very turn of our Affairs, and there appears a
promising Crisis, and favorable Prospect of Recovery, and though it is at all
times, yet more especially in such a conjuncture, certainly it is a Duty which
every Englishman ows to God, his Prince and Country, to endeavor to promote
the Peace and Happiness, the Tranquillity and Glory of his Native Soil; and he
is unworthy to reap the advantages and privileges, which the Subjects of this
Kingdom Enjoy beyond any other in the World, under the most admirable
Constitution of the English Laws and Monarchy, who shall refuse or neglect at
such a time to lend his utmost assistance to support, maintain and defend it,
and to contribute what he can toward the Recovery of this Nation from its
disorders and distractions, to its pristine State of Strength and Glory.

Now the certain method for the Recovery of that true condition of health in
the Body Politic, seems to depend upon our right understanding of what it is
that has hurt us, and what will help us. The last of these necessarily depends
upon the knowledge of the first: For if we once knew from what Causes all our
former mischiefs have taken their Original, the removing those Causes, will
certainly cease the dangerous Effects, and afford us an Easy as well as an
undoubted Cure.

Now there are two things upon which the rebellious Antimonarchical Faction of
the Nation to whom we are owing for all our Miseries, have ever laid the whole
stress and weight of their wicked Designs, and from the good or ill success of
those two great Engines, they have always stated the measures of their hopes.
The first has been to distress the Crown; the second to distract and disaffect
the People. By the one they divest the King of those necessary supports which
should enable him to keep up the Strength, Honor and Dignity of the Government:
And by the other they disrobe him of the hearts, and affections of the People;
and these being the two Pillars of the Throne, the shaking and undermining of
these, must needs make it totter, and be in danger of sinking, both in its
Interest abroad, and its Power and Reputation at home.

I do not now write a bare supposition, but plain matter of Fact both these
particulars; and such matter of Fact, as has in a thousand dismal Instances
produced in this Nation from these Causes the most deplorable Effects; Even the
total Ruin of the whole Frame of the Government; the subversion of the
Monarchy; the overthrow of the Established Religion; the entire loss of our
Magna Charta, English Laws and Liberties; the solemn Murder of a most
Righteous, just, wise, and Excellent King; the slaughter of many thousands of
Loyal Subjects of all degrees; the banishment or imprisonment of others; the
Sacrilegious Robbing and irreligious defacing of Churches, those Monuments of
Piety and Antiquity; the Confiscations, plundering, Arbitrary Taxing, and
Spoiling of the Freeborn People of their Legal Property in their Goods and
Estates, to such degrees as surpasses the skill of the ablest Accomptants to
make a true Estimate of; and were it possible to state the account, and take a
perfect audit of all the Expenses in the late wicked Rebellion, the incredible
Sums then profusely wasted, would not only Exceed belief, but every thing,
except the Crimes of thoses men, who were the black contrivers of the occasion
of those Expenses, and that irreparable Damage of the Nation; and if, as it is
usually observed, the English Nation be such lovers of their Money and their
Liberty, one would think, they might here find sufficient reason to detest and
abhor these Factious men and Principles, who have once robbed them of both
these, and have offered so fair to do it a second time; and be so wise for the
future as never to suffer themselves to be imposed upon, by such notorious
Impostors and Pretenses; and that they may be enabled to do so, it is to be
observed,

That in order to the accomplishment of the first of these Designs, the
Distressing of the Crown, the continual Address and Labor of the Faction has
been employed in these two things; first to shorten the Prerogative, and clip
the wings of it in all its several Branches; Secondly, Either to deny those
legal Aids of Money, by Subsidies and other ways absolutely necessary to
support the Charges of the Government; or to give them so sparingly, as not to
answer the unavoidable Expenses of the Crown; and this too, out of pretended
good Husbandry and Frugality for the Nation, and with perpetual quarrelling at
the public Ministers, and Eternal Complaints of the mis-mannagement of the
Treasure: when as in truth, the real design of this popular Parsimony, was to
keep the Prince's Exchequer at low water mark; and to have opportunity to
barter with him for some part of his Prerogative, and for every penny granted,
still to have some Jewel or other out of the Crown.

My narrow limits will not allow me to descend to particulars, but whoever
doubts the truth of this, let them consult our Histories, and they will
presently receive satisfaction, that since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in
whose latter years the Faction began to appear numerous and troublesome, the
Prerogative has constantly diminished in proportion as the power and confidence
of the turbulent Faction has been augmented, insomuch that that Queen in the
35th year of her Reign, Anno 1592. sent Mr. Peter Wentworth an Sir Henry
Bromely to the Tower, where Wentworth dyed, only for delivering a Petition to
the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords to become Suppliants with them of the Lower
House, unto Her Majesty for Entailing the Succession of the Crown, for which
purpose there was a Bill ready drawn, and Privilege of Parliament did not then
so much as once openly murmur against Prerogative; whereas, when King Charles
the First, upon an Impeachment of High Treason, came in person, and demanded
Five Members of the Commons House; the whole Nation was put into as great a
flame, and combustion, with the Intrenching of Prerogative upon. Privilege, as
if the King had come with Fauxes dark Lanthorn, to give Fire to a Mine which
should have blown up that and all future Parliaments.

But though the Enemies of the Monarchy endeavored to lessen the Power of the
Crown in this particular of Prerogative, yet this was nothing so dangerous as
the withdrawing necessary Supplies of money: For Treasure is the very Vital
Spirit of the Government, and according to the proportion which it enjoyes of
that active metal, the Pulse of the Government will certainly beat either full
and strong, or weak and languishing. Sine vectigalibus nullum Imperium diu
subsistere potest, says the Politic Historian. And this the Blessed Son of
God himself has confirmed both by his Doctrine and Practice; for though his
Kingdom was not of this World, yet he so well understood that the Government of
the Kingdoms of this World were to be supported by Tributes, and was so
sensible of the necessity of Government, for the common benefit of Mankind, and
that this Common benefit ought to be supported at a Common charge, that for our
Example, he would not Exempt himself from paying Tribute, but wrought a Miracle
to furnish his Quota of the Tax imposed upon his Nation, that so he might
contribute his proportion to the maintaining of the Government, and this though
our Antimonarchical Demogogues know so well, yet notwithstanding his positive
Precept to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he must work a greater
Miracle to persuade them to comply with their Duty, and his Command; and if
there were no better Christians or Subjects then the men of the Faction,
notwithstanding this indispensible Law and Precept, the more obedient Fishes
must bring their Miraclous Tribute and Subsidies to the Exchequer, or else the
Crown must starve and Fall, or which is worse fall into their usurping hands.

My Lord Shaftsbury's infamous Speech to this purpose, is still fresh in all
men's memories, and indeed I think it was so good a piece of Service, in
discovering the great Secret and the Design of the Faction, that it ought never
to be forgotten; If you part with your Money, etc. the Nation is betrayed. From
whence it is Evident, what stress his Lordship, who was then the Oraculous
Mouth of the Faction, laid upon this matter of Supplies, and granting money to
the King. For he and the next of his fellow Inspirators, as is since
discovered, and was then by all knowing and honest men justly suspected, were
then busily complotting, with Security to themselves how to overthrow this most
admirable and ancient Monarchy; and this they took to be the most certain
Expedient to effect it. It is probable that at that time he and his Associates
were not advanced to those infatuated degrees and methods of desperation and
madness, to which the blasting of their Hopes and Designs by the Breath of
Heaven and its Miraculous Providence, did afterward transport them; the
Debate was, how to Escape the odious Character of Rebels, and yet decently to
destroy the Government, by taking off the Wheels from the Chariot of State; and
for this purpose nothing appears it seems so conducive as No Money.

Nor was his Lordship singular in his Judgment, the whole Body of the Faction
in their smart Adresses to the Patriots of their Party, collected into a Vox
Populi, or Vox Patriae, sung the very same note, and were all set to the same
Tune of Without ever a penny of Money; and at the same instant that they were
so profuse of their promises to their popular Tribunes, to assist and stand by
them with their Lives and Fortunes, yet the sting in the Tail of the little
Cockatrices was still, Not to part with any Money, or at least not without
good Security, the Mortgaging of the Crown Jewels to the Faction, the King if
he would have any money, though they knew Tangier ready to be lost, and made the
Nation believe the French Philistims were upon them, yet must pawn the Militia,
Forts, Magazines, Navy, for their Security, all which must be put into the
hands of the principal men of the Faction, who were to be the Royal
Pawn-Brokers, or else No Money: Nay this would not satisfy them neither, the
King must also, by a Bill of Exclusion sacrifice, not only, his only Brother,
but the very succession in a lineal and hereditary descent, and by consequence
the Monarchy it self, otherwise, Not one penny of money.

Nay so eagerly was the Faction set upon this, No Money Expedient, and at this
mark were all their hopes of success in their wicked Designs so fixed; that
they became resolute not only, not to grant the King any supplies of money
except upon these terms, but lest he should be able to subsist for the present
without it, and by advancing Money upon the Reputation and Credit of his
Established Revenue, preserve Tangier then in imminent danger of being lost,
and and support the Government, the enraged Faction, that they might do their
utmost to reduce the Crown to the last extremities raised those tempestuous
Votes of Jan. 7. 1680.

Resolved, etc. That whosoever shall hereafter lend or cause to be lent by way
of advance, any Money upon the Branches of the Kings Revenue arising by Customs,
Excise, Hearth-mony, shall be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments,
and shall be responsible for the same in Parliament.

Resolved, etc. That whosoever shall accept, or buy any Tally of Anticipation
upon any part of the Kings Revenue, or whosoever shall pay such Tally,
hereafter to be struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments,
and shall be responsible therefore in Parliament.

It was then become a terrible thing to be Voted a hinderer of the sitting of
Parliaments, and to be responsible in Parliament; for the next Vote was to
brand them for Favorers of Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom, with
which Characters they stigmatized the Lords Halifax, Clarendon, and Feversham,
and the now Earl of Rochester; for adhering to the King, and opposing the
Faction, and doubtless could a Vote have made it Capital and high Treason for
any person to lend money by way of Anticipation, they would have proceeded to
that too.

And the practice has held an exact conformity to the Principle upon which it
is grounded; for not one single Farthing has been granted to the Crown, since
this Faction of Shaftsbury-Commonwealths-men have had any manner of power to
hinder it. By all which it does most evidently appear, that the subverting of
the Government which was intended, was to have been effected, by bringing the
Crown into the utmost necessity and distress, that the King might not have a
penny to help himself withal, and consequently be forced into those
compliances, destructive to the very Essence of the Monarchy.

But now, in regard it must appear, even to the most indifferent apprehensions,
most undutiful, unnatural and unreasonable for the Representatives of the
People, to treat the Father of their Country, their natural liege Lord and
Sovereign at this unkind rate; therefore the second Engine of distracting the
People, and alienating their Hearts and Affections from the King, is next to
come in play, and to be advanced as the Reason of the former. It would appear
barbarous, and lay the Design too open and bare faced, to deny supplies
necessary for the support of the Government, and to be able to give no Reason
for it; and because it is impossible there should be any true Reason assigned,
therefore that defect is to be supplied by such Artificial Reasons, as may
recompense what they want of truth, by their being plausible, fair and popular.
For this is most certain, that there are some things which the Populace will
always believe to be true, though they are never so false. And there are some
things which the Popular Ringleaders of Faction, know to be most false, yet
because they are apt to be credited by the Jealous Multitude, they
industriously endeavor to impose them upon them as the greatest Truths. As for
Example, the People are always easily persuaded that they labor under real
Grievances, though they be never so imaginary; and then again they are apt as
readily to believe, that these pretended Popular Patriots, will, as they
constantly pretend, really redress those Imaginary Grievances. The Faction
constantly accuse the Government of Miscarriages in the management of public
affairs, and though nothing be more false, yet the People will believe the
accusation. A more pregnant Instance of which cannot be given then in the Case
of Ship-mony. This was represented as the most intolerable Grievance and
illegal Imposition upon the People, though all the Judges, except two, gave
their Opinions for the legality of it. But so was the matter managed and
improved by the popular Men of the Faction, that the whole Nation seemed to
groan under the burden as a most insupportable Grievance; the great Sticklers
Pym, Hambden, Strode, etc. ingratiate themselves by opposing it, and inflame
the People against the King and Government for imposing it. The King upon their
Remonstrating and Importunities takes it quite away by Act of Parliament. But
what was the event? Did these Patriots ease the People ever a whit the more? No
such matter; their Design was to lessen the Crown not to Ease, the People. For
did they not invite the Rebellious Scots to invade the Nation, which cost the
People above a Million of Money? And after they had accomplished their own
design in cutting of such a limb of Prerogative, and by other ways so weakened
the King, as that they durst, venture to grapple with him in Rebellion in the
open field, they thought no longer of Redressing the Grievances, or easing the
People of illegal Impositions, but on the contrary, laid such intolerable
Impositions and Arbitrary Taxes upon the People, as had not the least color of
legality to countenance and support them; insomuch that for 300000 l. per
annum, which was the utmost that ever the Ship-mony was computed to amount to,
they levied by Taxes, Excise, Public Faith, Contributions, Sequestrations,
Free quarter and plunder, a large sum, above so many Millions in the year, and
yet then the stupid People could not be persuaded to believe, but that their
Arbitrary Tyrants and Illegal Oppressors were their great Friends, and their
lawful King, and his Ministers their greatest Enemies; and though the Faction
exercised actually that Arbitrary Power, which they only accused the King with
designing, yet the besotted People would still believe them innocent and
suspect the King to be guilty.

There are two things, of which all mankind are naturally most infinitely
tender, the Liberty of their Persons, and the Property of their Estates; and a
third which all men pretend to be wonderfully Zealous for, and that is their
Religion; though of late we have seen, that they who have the least share of it
and by their Actions the least value for it, have made the most noise and
clamor about the danger of losing it; and in probability they did so too in
former times; but these are three things, which the Faction have constantly
endeavored to possess the People with a belief, that they were in the utmost
danger of losing, and that this danger proceeded from the ill Designs which the
Government had against them; and further, that if the worthy Patriots of the
Faction had not opposed the Court, Popery and Arbitrary Power had long since
robbed the Nation of whatever is most valuable in this world. And it is
incredible, not only, what Art and Industry has been used to infuse this
intoxicating Poison into the heads of the People, thereby to inspire them with
Fears, Jealousies and hatred of the Government, and to countenance the denial
of Supplies, which the People were made believe by the men of Shaftsbury, if
granted, was but to contribute toward betraying their own Interest and
Liberty, and to enable the King and Government to impose upon them and their
Posterity the Shackles and Manacles of future slavery; but is also most
wonderful, what success the strong impressions of these Forgeries, Falsehoods
and Calumnies have had amongst the People. All the Tongues and the most
virulent Pens of the Faction, have for this forty years and upwards been
continually employed in creating and infusing these Fears and Jealousies into
the heads of the People; and in improving them, to raise in the People a
distrust, dislike and hatred against the King and Government. This was the very
method by which the late wicked Rebels debauched the minds of the People, and
withdrew them from their Affection, Loyalty, Duty and Allegiance to the King,
and having once prevailed with them to cancel those obligations, they bewitched
them still with new, or repeated Fears and Jealousies, into a most execrable
Rebellion, which was carried on by all the steps of Cruelty, Injustice and
Tyranny, and consummated in the utter overthrow of the Established Government,
the destruction of the Church, the subversion of the Crown, and the most
infamous and barbarous cutting off the Sacred Head that wore it.

And how far the modern Conspirators proceeded, and advanced by the very same
steps, toward the accomplishment of the late damnable Conspiracy there are as
many Witnesses, as Subjects in the Nation who have taken any notice of the
actions of the Faction, which will therefore supersede the trouble of
recounting: Let it suffice to say in short, that there has nothing been left
unsaid, unwritten, unprinted, or undone from the Right Honorable and Right
Worshipful, to the meanest Whifflers of the Faction, From the Lord Shaftsbury
with his Speech of a Noble Peer, to pitiful Care, Curtis, Smith and Harris with
their Pacquets, Appeals, Intelligences and Vox Populis, from the very
Parliament House, down to the Coffee-house, from the City to the Country, from
the spawning and licentious Press, the Conventicle Pulpit, down even to the
scolding blew Apron Rethorick, which might be any ways thought conducive
toward incensing the People of all Ranks and Degrees in the Nation against the
King and the Government, and to push them headlong into a second Rebellion: And
when all these ways failed, the Ringleaders of the Faction, driven on by the
Fury of their ill Destiny, betook themselves to the desperate Refuge of raising
Insurrections, and that most Execrable design of Assassination of the King, the
Duke, and all those who had in any measure rendered themselves conspicuous for
their Loyalty in opposing the Attempts of the Faction, and adhering to the
Crown and Government in their distress.

By this time it is easy to see, what it is that has hurt us, and it will
then be no difficult matter to tell what it is that will help us; For if these
unreasonable. Fears and Jealousies for our Liberty, Property and Religion, and
the denying of necessary supplies of Money to the Crown, have been the Occasions
of all those Disturbances and Dangers which have for these late years
distracted this Nation; then by undeniable consequence, the taking off those
Weights will immediately surcease those violent motions, which have so
disordered our affairs, and restore Tranquillity, Peace and Happiness to the
Nation.

All the difficulty rests in persuading the People to make use of these
Expedients, for though they may be convinced of the necessity and usefulness of
the Medicine, yet it is not without difficulty that they are to be induced to
take Physic. Especially this opening of the Money Vein, makes them shrink, as
much as if they were to part with as many drops of blood, as they are to drop
pence. I cannot tell what effect the Experiment will have, but I will endeavor
to try if I can make it appear to be the true Interest of the Nation, first to
damm the sluice of these Fears and Jealousies, and secondly to set open the
Money Gate, and let in a Fresh Spring into the Exchequer.

For the first of these, the exploding and for ever banishing those destructive
Jealousies, and disturbing Fears of the danger of Innovation in Religion, and
setting up of Arbitrary Government in the State, I will not spin out a long and
tedious discourse upon any of the Common Topiques, made use of upon this
subject, but I will tell the Reader a story, which if well applied will give a
Supersedeas to any other Arguments.

When at the beginning of the late Rebellion, there were some overtures of an
accommodation to the King at Oxon; the City of London sent a Petition by some
of their Aldermen, who being admitted into the Presence; Alderman Garret
undertook to be then Speaker, and told the King, that his Majesty had many
times promised to secure their Religion, Laws and Liberties, and Sir, said he,
could we but be secure and assured that you would do so, we would soon make an
end of the business. At this pretty confidence of the Aldermans, the whole
Court had much to do to forbear laughing outright; but the King according to
the accustomed goodness of his Nature, with a gracious smile only, made him
this mild reply, Mr. Alderman, I know not how to make you confide in me, but
you shall do well to believe those that lie least.

Now to apply this passage, I will beg the Readers Patience to enquire into
these particulars, and to examine who have spoke the greatest truth, the Kings
in their repeated promises, to secure our Religion, Properties and Laws; or the
Faction who have made such extraordinary promises to the Nation in all these
particulars; and have endeavored by assuming to themselves all the glory of
securing our Religion, Laws and Liberties, most invidiously to cast an Odium
upon the Crown, as intending to divert the People of them.

I do therefore in the first place peremptorily challenge the whole Faction to
give one single Instance, during the whole Reigns of King James, King Charles
the Martyr, or his Illustrious Son our present Sovereign King Charles the
Second, wherein any man's Property to particulars or that of the English Nation
in general, has been contrary to the known Laws of the Land invaded; or to
show wherein the Monarchical Constitution has governed Arbitrarily: What life
has been taken away except in the just defensive War against the Rebels, but
according to the known Laws of the Land? Who has been outlawed or banished,
disseized of his Freehold, imprisoned, or any other ways damnified by the Kings
or their Ministers, but per legale Judicium Parium, by the Common Law of
England, and by the Verdict of their Peers? What money has been raised but by
legal and Parliamentary ways? What Force of armed. Men has been made use of to
overawe the Nation, how much necessity soever there has appeared of more then
ordinary Force, both against Foreign dangers, and intestine Rebels? Certainly
if there could have been found any Instances of this nature, we should have had
them soundly repeated in the Ears of the Nation, and every man of the Faction
would have been a Trumpeter to proclaim them;. for it is a maxim with them
never to conceal any Action that may redound to the disparagement of the
Government, and rather to create falsehoods, where they fall short of truth.

And for want of particular Instances wherewith to charge the Government, and
fortify their Calumnies, the Faction have always been so well aware, that in
all their Clamorous and most virulent Pamphlets, which have been stuffed out
with so many bitter Invectives against the Government upon this Topique of
Slavery and Arbitrary Power breaking in upon the Nation, they have either
charged the Government with Design and Intention only, or else with Generals
only; cunningly foreseeing, that if they had descended to give particular
Instances, they must have betrayed the weakness as well as falseness of their
accusation, and have exposed themselves and Cause to the View of the whole
World as guilty of Forgery and Imposture: and the two most remarkable Pamphlets
of this kind, entitled the first and second Part of the Growth of Popery and
Arbitrary Government; the one written by Marvel, sometime one of Oliver
Cromwell's Latin Secretaries; and die other, by that notorious Traitor
Ferguson, the Independent Tubster, the most daring and malicious of any thing
of that Nature; yet have strictly observed this Rule, and have therefore
endeavored to impose upon the Credulous, or those that were willing to be
deceived, by charging the Government with Generals, and wresting the most
innocent Actions and Words of the King and his Ministers, to make them depose
some extorted Sense, tending toward introducing of Arbitrary Government in
these Nations; but from the one End to the other, more cautiously then
honestly, avoiding the giving any particular Instances wherein the King, or his
Ministers, have actually exceeded the Limits of the Laws: Which is a
Demonstration as clear as the Meridian Sun, that they durst not adventure at
what they knew there was no possibility of proving, and consequently, that the
Government is clear and innocent of what they accuse it.

But now on the other hand, notwithstanding all the horrible Outcries against
the Government, and all the smooth Pretensions which the Commonwealth Faction
have made of securing the Nation against Arbitrary Power and Slavery; there is
not any one Branch of Liberty and Property which they have not violated; and
wherein there may not be a thousand dismal Instances given of their Exercising
the most illegal, tyrannical, and exquisitely Arbitrary Power over the Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, not only of some particular Persons, their Enemies or
Opposers, but of the whole English, Scottish, and Irish Nations: Volumes will
not contain the Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Sequestrations, Decimations,
Imprisonments, and what ever can be thought of, that was Cruel, illegal,
Unjust, or Arbitrary, which were exercised promiscuously over their Friends and
Enemies, by those Persons to whom the Gracious Act of Oblivion was granted at
his Majesty's happy Restoration. And who were these Arbitrary Tyrants, but
those who complained of the danger of that Bugbear from the Monarchy, who
fought with the King to secure the English Liberties, as they pretended; and
who so often promised the People to ease them of their Grievances, and defend
their Liberties and Properties? but the Liberty ended in the most absolute
Slavery: Nay, I do positively averr, that the Slavery of the English Nation
under this usurping Republican Faction, was in some measure greater then that
which is exercised by the Turkish Sultan; for where he Conquers, he leaves the
Vanquished at entire Liberty to keep their Religion: Whereas when these English
Turks had gotten the Victory over the King and the Royal Party; though they
tolerated all Sects, Heresies, and Schismatics, yet so far as they could, they
made it Unlawful and Criminal for the Loyal Subjects, to Exercise, even that
Protestant Religion, which by Laws unrepealed, and the most solemn Oaths, from
which they could not be, by any Power whatever, dispensed with, they were bound
to perform: So that they had no Choice left, but Perjury or Punishment. For
during all the time of the late Usurpation, the whole Body of the Clergy, many
of those who were the forwardest, even from the Pulpit to promote Rebellion,
such as Barges, Marshal, Nigh, Case, etc. were under the Obligation of their own
voluntary Oaths of Supremacy and Canonical Obedience to their Ordinaries the
Bishops, and the King as supreme Head and Governor of the Church, and to his
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws; and the whole Body of the Laiety of the Nation
were obliged by the Act of 1. Eliz. for Uniformity and all those other Statutes
made during hers, and the Reign of King James for maintaining Episcopal
Protestancy, both against Papists and Schismatics, which then, and to this
present Day, stand unrepealed: Insomuch, that by obliging the whole Nation to
take the Solemn League and Covenant, and thereby to Swear and Vow the utter
Extirpation of Episcopacy, the Liturgy, and all the Ceremonies of Divine
worship, which were established by Law, and secured by most Sacred Oaths, they
necessarily and unavoidably forced the People into a manifest and damnable
Perjury on the one hand or the other: For if they took the Covenant, as they
compelled all Men, so far as they were able, to do, all those who endeavored
the Extirpation of Episcopacy and the Common Prayer, were guilty of the Breach
of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and if they did not endeavor it,
they were by their Covenant perjured and forsworn. So that here was Arbitrary
Tyranny with a Vengeance, not only over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates; but
over the Souls and Consciences of the People of these three Nations in general;
such an Arbitrary Power as the Devil himself could not have exceeded, unless in
that downright Traitorous and Damnable Engagement, which they afterward
imposed, point blank contrary to the Oath of Allegiance, their Protestation,
and the Covenant too, for maintaining the Privileges of Parliament, by which
they obliged the Takers, To be true to the Government, as it was then
Established without a King and House of Lords.

And now for their great pretense of securing the Nation against Popery; what
Advantage could that be to the People, after they had done their uttermost
Endeavors to Damn them Eternally, by an Universal Perjury? For my part I can
see very little difference in the Case, whether a Man goes to the Devil for
Perjury or Popery, and I believe such of them as have tried, will find it comes
all to a Reckoning. But after all the Noise, I do not find upon the matter that
the Nation was ever a whit the more secured from Popery, but on the contrary,
that Popish Principles every where gained ground upon the Nation, and that
Priests and Jesuits in the Dress of the several Sects were as busy as ever,
and that by the very force of the Argument of our Divisions, and by the kind
usage of those who were driven into Exile by these Protestants they made more
Proselytes in twenty Years, then they had done in a Hundred before. It was a
very notable Observation of Dr. Laud, the suffering Archbishop of Canterbury,
in his Speech upon the Scaffold in the Year 1644. I pray God, (said that
admirable Prelate, who as he there tells us, lost his Head upon the Popular
Clamor of Venient Romani,) this Clamor of Venient Romani, of which I have
given no Cause, hasten not to bring them in; for the Pope never had such a
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and
Divisions that are among us.

And after all, what did it signify to keep out one Great Pope, and let in a
thousand little ones? just as much as if Beelzebub had been cast out, and the
whole Legion of lesser Devils left behind in him that was possessed. For the
plain Truth is, they kept out the Pope, but kept in Popery, the rankest and
most mischievous Doctrines and Practices of the worst of Men of that Religion.
What Mariana, Allen, Suarez, and other traitorous Jesuits had writ concerning
the Deposing and Murdering of Princes, they Aced; and from these Authors, they
borrowed Arguments to justify their Rebellion and the blackest of Crimes. And
whereas the Papacy was by so many Laws driven out of England for Errors in
Doctrine, for Sedition, Rebellion, and Treason against the Monarchy and
Government in Principles and Practices, there was not one Error or Heresy in
all the Romish Religion which was Treasonable by the Laws, but what was put in
practice by these Pope-Haters. And for the other Errors of a lower Form, what
was wanting of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Masses, Prayers to the Saints,
etc. was abundantly supplied by ten thousand other Errors and Heresies, which
were held, maintained, and propagated by the several Sects which were tolerated
by them, under the notion of Liberty for Tender Consciences; and such Errors as
were destructive, not only of the Reformed, but of all manner of Christian
Religion. Such as denying the Articles of the Creed; the Divinity of Christ;
the Validity and Infallibility of the Scriptures; the Obligation of the Moral
Law; the Immortality of the Soul; the Resurrection of the Body; the Lawfulness
of an Oath; the Necessity of a Priesthood, or Sacraments; the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and innumerable others which were held and maintained by the several
Schismatics of the Nation, and preached to the deluded People for saving
Truths, whereas they were indeed most damnable Heresies. Thus did they secure
the Nation from Popery, and kept out the Whore of Babylon, by letting in the
Devil of Babel, and letting open a hundred Gates to Hell under pretense of
stopping up one.

Let the best Manager of the Faction now show us, where the Government has
since the first of Queen Eliz. made one single step toward a return to Rome,
or to any other of those damnable Errors and Heresies, which are every whit as
dangerous to the Peace and Quiet of the Nation, and to the well-being and
happiness of both the Souls, Bodies, and Societies of Mankind.

So that, now to come to my Story again; since it does plainly appear in Fact,
that the King and the Government have never deceived us in their Promises, to
secure us against Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that on the other side, the
Faction, notwithstanding all their fair Pretenses and repeated Covenants,
Engagements, Vows, Protestations, and Promises, have broken with us in every
one of these particulars, a thousand, and a thousand times over; we must be not
only most stupidly besotted, but infatuated and bewitched, if either we believe
such notorious Deceivers any longer, or if for the future we do not repose an
absolute and entire Confidence, in the Goodness, and Wisdom, Justice, and
Honor of the King and Government, when they give us such repeated Assurances,
and such undeniable Demonstration, that they will protect us in the Enjoyment
of our Laws, Liberties, Properties, and Religion.

And if we could once get clear of ibis Rub, which the Faction have always
thrown as a stumbling Block in the Peoples Way, we should with less difficulty
get over the second. For if the Nation, as the wise Alderman said, were but
assured and secure, and that they may be as much as of any thing in this World,
that under the Protection of the Government they should enjoy their Laws,
Liberty and Religion, they would then certainly, for their own Sakes, be not
only willing, but forward to supply the Crown with Money, not only in a bare
proportion to the necessity of the Charges which constantly attend the
Government, but also to provide such certain Supports, as might secure the
Crown against any incident and unforeseen Accidents, and maintain the Honor and
Dignity of it, so as to make it sit easy upon the Royal Head.

All this is certainly the Duty as well as Interest of the People, his
Majesty's loving Subjects of all degrees of this Nation; for it is the highest
Reason and Justice in the World, that a common and universal Good and Benefit,
should be promoted and advanced at a common Charge: and if it be every Man's
Duty and Interest, as undoubtedly it is, both by the Laws of God and Nature, to
support that Government under the Protection whereof he enjoys all: It is as
certainly every Man's Duty to contribute such a Proportion of his Estate, as may
enable the Government to give him Protection. And we should learn this Wisdom
from the Enemies of the Government, that if the most certain and expeditious
way to ruin and destroy it, be to withdraw the necessary supplies; then on the
contrary, the most certain way to preserve it, is for the Nation generously,
and in a due proportion to the Charges of the Government to supply the Crown
and recruit the Exchequer. And since it is most evident that they were the
mortal Enemies of the Kingdom, the Conspirators in this late Hellish Plot, who
by their Councels and Endeavors hindered the granting of Supplies, it is to be
hoped, that hereafter, no Persons will oppose it, who have hot a mind to be
esteemed so too, and to be suspected to be influenced by those Persons and
Designs.

I know it will presently be objected, that the Nation is poor, and the
Countries unable to raise Money.

To this, I shall, it may be, give a very uncommon Answer, when I reply, that
one, and possibly one of the greatest Reasons and Occasions of the Scarcity of
Money in the Country, is the not granting supplies of Money to the Crown. And how
much soever a Paradox this may at first view appear to be; it may be, upon
second thoughts, it may be found to be true; however, I will fairly leave it to
the severe Consideration of the most Judicious, and the strictest Examination
of the most Scrupulous. If it be true, let it be allowed and cherished, if it
be false, let it be first refuted, and then rejected.

I first then take it for granted, that the present scarcity of Money in the
Country, does not arise from the real decrease of Coin in specie: and on the
contrary, that there never was greater plenty of Coin, it appears most
evidently from the notable fall of Interest; for the Law allows the taking of
Six per Cent. but four and a half, or five, is as much as is generally given,
and it is incredible, upon good and sound Security, what Sums may be had at
four per Cent. and what Catching there is by the Scriveners, and Mony-Brokers
at such Customers, especially now since the Bankers have declined in their
Reputation. Now nothing in the world can be a greater Demonstration of the
Plenty of money, then this falling of Interest; and it is plain by many other
Projects, as the Ensuring, Building, and the Lumbring Designs, that there is a
vast Bank of Money lies unemployed; and yet the Nation never had a greater
Trade, to employ Money, never more shipping, never more Merchants, as will
easily appear by comparing the Custom-House Entries, both for Importation, and
Exportation, with what they have been in former Years. And if any Person
disbelieves the Truth of so well known matters of Fact, they must disprove it,
not only by saying Money is scarce, but they must show in Fact, by assigning
how, where, and when, the Money of the Nation is sunk and drawn off in specie,
so as in that Sense to make the Objection true, that the Nation is poor, i. e.
that there is not actually so much Coin in England now this present Year 1683,
as there was in 1653, when Money, the Republicans say, was so plentiful, and
every thing bore a Price. For though all the Coin in England were actually
drawn into the City of London, and other trading, especially Maritine Towns, so
that a Man could not find a Cross in the poor Countryman's Pocket to keep the
Devil out, yet must not the Nation be therefore said to be the poorer, so long
as the same Treasure is actually in it, tho drawn into fewer Hands, which I
take to be our present Case; Nay, I am of Opinion, that the Act for free
Mintage of Money, which is so beneficial and tempting to the Merchant, has
brought more Money into England, then the East India Trade has carried out, and
yet I believe there goes more Water by that Mill, then the Miller knows of.

In the second Place therefore, I take it for granted, that the want of due
Circulation of the Money that is in the Nation, is the true Reason of the
present scarcity of Money. There is more Money in the Nation, then the Trade of
the Nation can Employ, that is most apparent: the Surplusage lies still in
private Banks unimployed, but ready upon Occasion to be issued out upon
Purchases, Mortgages, or any other way which shall offer a considerable
Advantage to the Owners. The lying still of this Money, together with the
constant drawing up of Money out of the Country to these little banks for the
same purposes, still drains the Country and keeps it bare. For in effect, there
is little more Money circulates in the Inland Counties of England, than London
and the other good Towns afford them for Provisions for the Mouth. The rest of
the Inland Trade, is upon the matter but barter and exchange of Commodity for
Commodity, each Country mutually supplying themselves in what they want from
the other, so that here is still part of the Running Cash of the Country
marching up into these little Petty-bag Offices, but vestigia pauca retrorsum,
no circulation from thence again.

Thirdly therefore, I take it also for granted, that whatsoever will be found
to give Money a greater circulation, will make it more plentiful in the
Nation; and the more Money does circulate, the more it will: for the Countries
are not wanting in Commodities, but there is a want of Money to advance the
Rates of them; and therefore the more plentiful Money is, the better prices
every thing gives; for all Markets rise or fall in proportion to the number of
Buyers, and Chapmen are few or many in proportion to the plenty of Money which
they have, and by consequence therefore, till more Money does circulate, the
Countryman will find little of it, and but indifferent Markets for his
Commodities; and till Markets are better, Rents are not like to rise; nor these
little Bankers bring out their Hoards, till Lands rise, and that they see hopes
of advantage by becoming Purchasers.

In the last place, the other three being granted, viz, That there is as great
a stock of Money in the Nation, as ever; That the want of circulation makes it
scarce; and, That whatever will make more Money circulate, will make it more
plentiful. I say, these being granted to be true in fact, as I cannot see any
possibility of disproving any one of them, the only way to make more Money
circulate, and by consequence sequence, to make it more plentiful, is by a
liberal supply or the Occasions and Expenses of the Crown and Government.

This it may be at first view, especially among the Republicans, who cannot
endure to hear of parting with Money to the King, may look like a pretty
Court-project and Paradox: but as I am no Courtier, nor have the remotest
dependency upon it, so I doubt not but both by Reason and Experience, so to
support my Assertion, as to make it evident, that I am a true Countryman, not
according to the Factious distinction of a Countryman, as opposite to a
Courtier, but such a Countryman, as would by supporting the Honor, Safety and
Dignity of the Crown and Court, also advance and improve the Interest of the
Country. For let the Commonwealthsmen say what they will, the Court and the
Country are not two separate Interests; and it will never be found that a Poor
Exchequer made a Rich Country.

And therefore first in point of Reason. In fact this is most evident, that the
more Money the King has, the more Money circulates through the whole Nation;
and that except as before, what London and the good Towns of England expend in
Provision for the Mouth, the greatest part of the Money that runs through the
Kingdom, is what arises from the Branches of the King's Revenue; for the King's
Money is really current Coin in all senses, it does not rust in the Exchequer,
it does not lie there for Purchases, Mortgages, or other Bargains and Trade,
but does continually issue out again to defray die constant Charges and
Expenses of the Government, and is distributed into a multitude of Hands who
have their dependence upon the Crown, and these again issue it out to supply
their own Necessities to the trading part of the Kingdom, for the Native
Commodities of the Nation; so that it runs in a continual circle. Now the
Revenue manifestly falling short of the Expenses of the Government, insomuch,
that his Majesty has not only been forced to retrench his Household Expenses,
which occasioned a great consumption of our Native Production, and by
consequence the circulation of so much Money into the Country, but has
notwithstanding been involved in a very great Debt; the supplying the Crown
with such Aids, as may enable the King to set up his Royal Tables, and
Discharge his Debts, and not be forced to involve himself in new ones, as it
would be highly honorable for the King and Nation, so it would be no more in
effect, but the Kingdoms giving their Money with one hand to receive it again
with the other, and the putting off so much more Money to circulation
throughout the Nation: And this again would likewise be abundantly recompensed,
both in our Foreign Traffic, and Domestic Trade, as I will endeavor to make
appear in its due place.

But secondly, the truth of this is most evident as from Reason so from
Experience, which in my opinion is an Argument of the greatest force and
strength: for many times Reason may be so brought to oppose Reason, and the
combat of Arguments may appear so equal, as to leave the: Judgment in suspense
to which Party it should incline to yield the Laurel of Truth and Victory; but
though one cannot possibly see into every minute Circumstance and the little
concatenations of Causes and Effects, especially where the number of them
renders it intricate, so as to be able to penetrate into the abstruce and
entangled reasons of things, which like a ruffled skain of Silk may be
difficult to be wound up to a bottom; yet if constant Experience shows, that
thus it has always been in such and such Cases, then it is a very sound
Argument; that thus it will be again; and that certainly there is a true reason
why it should be so, though possibly it be too intricate to be drawn into a
Demonstration: though for my own particular, this point of the circulation of
Money before discoursed of, seems so forcible, as to be undeniably the true
foundation of the following Experience in matter of fact.

We will not travel out of our Kenn in this particular, though we might run as
high as Queen Elizabeth's golden Reign, which we have been told was as
plentiful in Money as it was in Glory; the true reason whereof was that She
was never denied any Money by her Subjects for the support of the Government;
though sometimes she rejected the Money Bills when the Golden Hook went a
fishing for Royal Prerogative. But to come nearer home, it is in the Mouths of
the Countryman and Citizen, and has been mainly improved and insisted upon by
the Faction, to beget in them a good opinion of their Commonwealth Cause, and
to put them out of conceit with Kingly Government, That Money was never more
plentiful in this Nation, than during the times of the late Usurpation. The
Fact is plain, though the Reason is not so to the many; but this will unriddle
the Matter. For it is evident that the Trade of the Nation was nothing so
considerable then as now; and the losses at Sea were extraordinary, it being
computed that the Nation lost during the War with Spain above 300 Sail of Ships
besides their Goods. But the true reason was this, those Usurpers raised what
Taxes they pleased upon the Nation, and constantly above double the King's
present Revenue yearly, and many times treble; and there being a necessity for
the defense of their Usurpations to keep up great Fleets at Sea, and Forces at
Land, the payment of these, and the charges they were at to keep themselves in,
and the King out of possession of these Kingdoms, obliged them to issue out
that Money which came in upon the Assessments, Excise, Customs, Crown and
Church Lands, Sequestrations, and other Funds, for the defraying of their
Charges; by which means, there was double and treble the quantity of the King's
Revenue, which constantly circulated through the whole Nation, by reason
whereof Money was made plentiful, and all Commodities bearing a considerable
rate, Lands let at good prices, and those heavy and illegal Taxes were the less
felt. And sure it is a very hard Case, that the Nation receiving a benefit by
it too, they should be unwilling to assist their Lawful King, since they could
so tamely submit to do it to those Usurpers.

And to come a little nearer, let it be inspected, and it will be found true,
since his Majesty's happy Return, that Money was never more plentiful, nor
Lands let better, than when by reason of the free supplies which the Loyal
Long-parliament gave him, the circulation of the Crown-revenue ran briskly
through the Nation. And on the other hand, that Money has never been so scarce
within the memory of Man, as for these last six or seven years that the
Conspiratours of the Faction getting into the House of Commons, stopped the
Money-springs, according to the advice and project of the E. of Shaftsbury, the
English Achitophel, whose devilish Counsel this was; and though not in it self
treasonable, yet was by him, and his Traitorous Adherents, designed as one
principal Way and Means, to enable them to accomplish their Execrable
Conspiracy, so miraculously discovered, by disabling the King and his Friends,
and depriving the Government of the Power to oppose them in case they had
proceeded to actual Hostilities and Insurrections.

And now, according to my promise, I must answer the obvious Objection which
the Gentlemen and People of better rank in the Nation will certainly make to
this that has been said; they know their Rents are fallen, their Lands every
day thrown into their hands, and that they are forced, for want of Tenants, to
turn Farmers themselves, and to stock and employ their own Estates. All this is
most certainly true, and I know it experimentally my self. Now will they say,
This would be very hard upon us, to pay the same Rates and Taxes as formerly,
when our Estates are lessened a third part of their yearly value.

To this I answer. First, that admitting what before has been said to be true,
and till it is disproved by stronger reason than that upon which it stands, it
ought to be so esteemed, I know no way to raise and increase their Rents in
probability like this; for upon the circulation of more Money, it must
certainly be more plentiful, and all those little Hoarders and Bankers will be
obliged to let some part of theirs circulate, who now keep it up, and Money
becoming more plentiful, all Country Commodities will advance in their price;
the rising of Country Commodities will enable and encourage Tenants to hire
Lands, and will advance their Rents: So that upon the matter, the Money granted
to the Crown, is but the best way of putting out some part of a Man's Estate,
for die improvement of the rest; and like sowing Sain-foin, or Clover, which
from three or four Shillings per Acre, will raise the Land to double or treble
the value: And if there were nothing else in it, the Experiment is not so
chargeable, but that it is worth the Nations trying; and I dare presume to say,
there is scarcely that Gentleman of Estate in England, but would upon as
slender Inducements, venture as great a proportion as his part of any Royal Aid
yet granted has amounted to, for the improment of his Estate; And at the worst,
should it not succeed, yet the Nation has but done their duty to the King and
themselves in supplying the Occasions of the Government, by parting with some
part of their Estates in order to the securing the Remainder from Foreign
Force, or Domestic Usurpers, so that at most it is but so much Money to insure
the Kingdom from the devouring Flames of a Civil or Foreign War. But if it
should succeed, as I cannot see how it can do otherwise, it must make the King
the greatest Prince, and the Nation the richest People in the World.

For, besides the advantage and security we reap by inabling the Government to
protect us in all our just and legal Rights at home, against the Machinations
of Factious Traitors and Commonwealthsmen, this will give extraordinary
encouragement and countenance to our Foreign Commerce, which is of mighty
influence to the Inland Trade, by disburthening the Nation of the surplusage of
its Native Commodities; for how desirous soever any of our Covetous or
Ambitious Neighbors may be to spoil our Markets, or rob us of our Trade, they
will difficultly be persuaded to break with us, or come to blows for it, when
they shall see the Crown of England in capacity, by strong and powerful
Fleets, to give Laws to the Ocean, and to redress the wrongs and injuries done
or offered to our Merchants, though in the remotest corners of the Earth. Nay,
it is more than possible, that the Strength, Riches and Reputation of England,
may thereby come to be so advanced, as to render it the great Emporium and
Exchange of the World.

But secondly, I answer, that for my own particular, I am for easing the Land
as much as is possible, and think those Impositions the best, which grow and
arise upon such things as are least felt, such as the duty upon Liquours, where
the burden is born by so many and in such small proportions, that it is
scarcely felt by single persons. And possibly it would not hurt the Nation, by
some Imposition, to restrain the excessive luxuriance of buildings near the
Cities of London and Westminster, which certainly make the Nation weak and
Riketty, and depopulate the Country; and by withdrawing so many hands from
Husbandry and Manufactures, in the several Counties of England, make Tenants
scarce and Rents fall.

But thirdly, I am clearly for setting the Saddle upon the right Horse; and
since the Dissenters have occasioned more than common necessity for the
supporting the Crown, and securing the Government against their Attempts, to
oblige them to bear the greatest part of that Charge. We have had many boasts
from them of late years, how considerable they are for number and wealth: now
since they have by their repeated endeavors made it visible, that they would
misimploy their Strength and Riches, to the subversion of the present
Government, there is all the reason in the world, and their own reason too,
when they had the power, that they should bear the Charges, which they have
created; and that the honest and Loyal Party should not be obliged to suffer in
their Estates, to secure the King and Government against their disturbances and
wicked attempts.

But besides, it is not only reasonable, and the practice of all Governments,
but mavelous just too. They cannot complain of Adonibezeck's Law, especially
since the return will be but to pare their Nails, in requital of their cutting
off the Thumbs, nay the Hands and Heads of the Royal Party. They have had their
day, and took all, it is but just the Royalists should have theirs too, and
take some. The Riches they value themselves so much upon, what are they, but
the spoils of the late Rebellion, when they grew rich and great by oppressing,
sequestring, taxing and plundring the King, the Church, and the Loyal Party?
For when they had the poor Royalists under their power, they made them defray
the greatest part of the Charges of the Nation out of their Estates; and surely
they can have no reason to complain, if they receive some part of the measure,
which they then called the highest Justice, and did so liberally dispense to
others. And truly it is but a Pig of their own Sow, the Child of their own
Politics; for if they can believe it so high a point of Reason of State, to
keep the King from Money, that so he might not be able to traverse their
Designs, or hinder their Attempts; the same and far greater Reason of State
lies against them, not to permit them to be Masters of so much Money, as to be
able therewith to hurt the King, or disturb the Government. And truly it will
be a great kindness to them to disable them from doing mischief; like the
taking of a Sword out of a Madman's hand for fear he should kill himself, or
some other with it. and seeing they cannot make a better use of it, it is the
best way of employing their Talent for them, to the public good and safety of
the Nation, and thereby prevent their running to the Gallows and the Devil too,
and losing all.

I know Mr. Trimmer will presently be upon my bones, with the danger of
exasperating a Party so considerable as the Dissenting Brotherhood would have
us upon occasion believe they are, though I fancy if every Conventicler in
England were to be taxed three shillings to my one, they would all like the
Scotch man cry, I'se eat Peark, and the Porridg too of Common Prayer, and
dwindle into a very pitiful Muster-Roll; but by Mr. Trimmer's favor, and for
all his fear of running them upon Extremities, they are mightily out of love
with Hemp and wry Faces; and I believe they are now already as mad as Malice
and Despair can make them, but as cursed as they are, they know their Horns are
as short. And if they be so dangerous when they are angry, it is the more
necessary, to abate their strength; for my life for yours, Mr. Trimmer, if they
want money, they will not want wit in their anger; and most certainly, they who
are so apt to be angry, and whose anger is capable of transporting them to such
Extremities, as to fly in the face of the Government, ought like Mastiffs and
Bull Dogs, to be well muzzled, that they may not bite, though they bark never
so fiercely. And if this be their Temper, that they have not duty enough for
God and the King, to secure them against Rebellion, it is most sure, that they
will be no longer quiet or honest, than they are kept so by wanting opportunity
and strength to show their anger, and fly to Extremities. Fear only restrains
them, Love and tenderness never did, never will. And so long as they have Power
they will be dangerous; let us take that from them, and then let Mr. Trimmer
and his Exasperado's do their worst.

But let the ways of raising be never so just and necessary, easy and
advantageous for the support, safety and Dignity of the Government, how we
shall come by this Money will be the next inquiry? Truly I know no other way but
by a Loyal and brave House of Commons. And for my own particular, I cannot see
the least Cloud to darken the Prospect, but that whenever the King shall please
to call a Parliament, the next Elections will generally fall upon such Worthy
and Loyal Gentlemen, as will effectually do the business of the King and the
Nation. And the Faction have by their late actions, and the discovery of their
Execrable Conspiracy, laid themselves and their wicked Intentions so open, and
exposed to the detestation of the whole World, that I cannot conceive in any
future Parliament, there should be found in any Gentleman so much wanting to
his own Reputation, as to appear a Patron or Advocate for such a sort of People
as stand convicted of ill Designs against the Government, as the Mony-opposers
and Dissenters do. And though possibly some few of the same Persons with their
Old Principles, may get again into the Commons House, yet I am apt to think,
they will be very cautious of their Words, since it may be the turn of the
Loyal Party too to call to the Bar, and purge the House of Associators,
Exclusioners, the Men of Shaftsbury, the Gray Coats and Monmouth Caps. It may
happen, that the Votes and Voters of Eighty, may be as low in Reputation in the
Opinion of the House, and all honest and Loyal Men out of it, as those of 40
and 41; and that some persons who used to be liberal Speakers heretofore, may
sit there as if they were in the School of Pythagoras, with their Fingers,
either in, or, upon their Mouths, a better way to deserve the Title of the
Wisdom of the Nation, which they have so much affected, than by making such
Speeches as will not be heard with Patience, nor go off with Impunity.

And since before the Elections of the late Parliaments, the Faction used
lustily to bestir themselves to give aim, it is but one good turn for another,
if we pay them in their own Coin. For their List of Unanimous Votes, which they
impudently Printed, purposely to expose so many Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen to
the contempt and hatred of the People; and to hinder them from being Elected
into future Parliaments, it were easy to repay them with a List of Nemine
Contradicente's, That the King should neither have Money nor Credit to take up
any upon the Reputation of his Revenue; It were easy to give a Catalogue of
such as were Zealous, by the Bill of Exclusion, to turn the Monarchy from an
Hereditary and Lineal Descent, into an El ctive Parliamentary Title, and for
backing this with an Association, to enable the Dissenters to take up Arms
under the pretense of securing his Majesty's Person, to destroy both Him and
the Government; according to the Printed Vote of Dec. 15. 1680. When it was
Resolved, etc. That a Bill be brought in for an Association of all his
Majesty's By which was always in the Cant of the Faction, understood
Dissenters.
Protestant Subjects, for the safety of his Majesty's Person, the Defense of
the Protestant Religion, the Preservation of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
against all That word is well expounded in the Trial of the Conspirators.
Invasions and Oppositions Not excepting the King.
whatsoever, and for preventing the Duke of York, or any Papist from succeeding
to the Crown. It were easy to mark every individual person who was then busy
in promoting the Commonwealth Design, some of which as Trenchard, Booth,
Hambden and the late L. Russel, are now sufficiently detected, and some of them
rewarded according to their Traitorous Practices. But their Names as well as
Actions, are public enough in the Printed Votes, and the Nation knows them to
a man, and therefore, I need not waste Paper to repeat them.

But in regard I think it is the Duty of every good Subject who loves the King,
and wishes well to England, to contribute all that lies in his Power, that such
Gentlemen may be chosen, and sent to represent them in the next Parliament, as
may comport themselves within the bounds of Duty and affectionate Loyalty to
the King, such as will pursue the true interest of the Kingdom, by securing the
Government and Peace of both Church and State, I cannot think it amiss to offer
some Qualifications, requisite to recommend such Persons to the Considerations
of the Freeholders and Freemen of England, as may speak them fit for that great
Trust and Honor.

And therefore first negatively, No such Persons as have been either open or
secret favorers of the Dissenters, and courted by them. Such of all men are
most unfit; for it is most certain that no good can be expected from them, who
are imbarqued in an interest diametrically opposite to the Church and Crown, as
all the Dissenters in England notoriously are; and it is as certain, that the
Dissenters never bestow their Regards but upon such as favor them, nor ever
endeavor to set up any person to be a Member of the Commons House, but in
expectancy, and upon assurance from them, that they will be serviceable to
their Cause and Interest.

Secondly, No such Persons, nor their Descendants as have been actually engaged
in the late Rebellion, who were themselves, or whose Ancestors were possessed
of any part of the Crown or Church Lands. For Principles and aversion do
descend to Posterity; and for those who were actors in the War, and sharers of
the Booty, they are not to be trusted, unless they have given eminent
testimonies of their Repentance; otherwise assuredly they retain the same
Antimonarchical Principles, which overthrew the Government before; they cannot
forget the sweetness of that Arbitrary Power which they then exercised, when a
Colonel or a Captain domineered over a whole Country; they look upon themselves
as injured in the loss of those fair Estates, of which in the times of
Usurpation they were the foolish purchasers and unjust possessors, and upon all
these accounts will not only do no good, but all the hurt they can, in hopes if
the Government were but again overturned, they might come into their Estates
and Power again.

Thirdly, No such as have been busy sticklers, against granting Money, no
Exclusioners, Associators, spreaders of jealousies of the Designs of the
Government to introduce Popery, slavery, and such abominable Calumnies against
the King and his Ministers; for all such if they have not been actually
engaged, though it may be so secretly as to escape discovery, in the late
Conspiracy, yet gave countenance and encouragement to the Conspirators, and
though the secret was not plainly communicated to them, yet were such as the
Conspirators assured themselves, would certainly join them upon success.

Fourthly, No such as have been Zealous promoters of branding, or Tophamizing
the best and most Loyal of his Maj sties Subjects, as betrayers of the Nation,
Enemies to the King and Kingdom, favorers of Popery; no such as have been
promoters of real Arbitrary imprisoning and punishing such of his Majesty's
good Subjects, as in their several stations only did their Duty and discharged
their Consciences in discountenancing tumultuary Petitioning, and in opposing
the violent courses and proceedings of the Faction. For such Men are very
unlikely to secure our Liberty and Property, who have been such notorious
invaders of them, and can never be true Friends to the Crown and Government,
who have branded the most Loyal Subjects, with the infamous character of,
Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Fifthly, None of those who have been for their being disaffected, put out of
the Commission of the Peace, or Offices in the Militia, or discarded from
places of Profit, Trust and Honor in the Government, for they will think
revenge better than Muscadine and Eggs, and will study that more than to serve
the Public.

And for an even half dozen, none of that wretched Generation of Trimmers,
those Janus-faced Protestants, those State Otters, neither Fish nor Flesh nor
good red Herring Statesmen, for it is a clear Case, He that is not with us, is
against us, and these pretended moderate Men, are immoderately false and rotten
at Core, outside Friends, inward and secret foes, and by far more dangerous
than open Enemies: like Joab they kiss and stabb; these, if they can do no
more, will keep the head of the Faction above Water: and in short they are too
like the Devil to be trusted, for like a true Trimmer, where he can do no hurt
as a Devil, he will do it as an Angel, but they are easily known, the one, as
they say, by his cloven foot, and the other by his cloven tongue.

Put in the last place affirmatively, Such Gentlemen are fit for the Public
Honor to serve their King and Country as its Representative in Parliament, who
have either heretofore in the late Rebellion, or in these later times of
disorder, manifested their steady Loyalty to the King, and hearty affection to
the Government established in Church and State, whose Reputations are not
blemished by any suspicion of confederacy, intimacy, kindness, or
Correspondency either with such of the late Conspirators as are convicted or
fled from the Justice of the Laws; but who have given proofs of their fidelity
to the Crown by opposing the Faction. For these are the Men of Honor and
integrity, who equally detest Popery and Phanaticism, Pickering's screwed Gun,
and Rumbolds unscrewed Blunderbusses; who will really endeavor to secure the
Protestant Religion and the Monarchy against their Enemies on both hands. These
and only such are the Men that are the true Patriots and Englishmen, that will
trust the King, and therefore are fit to be trusted by the Country, who will
not only according to the Mode of the Faction, make a loud clamor and Bawling
of the danger of the Protestant Religion and the Kings person, but apply such
effectual remedies, as may contribute to the real safety of both, who will not
only scorn to be Pensioners to France, but will enable the King upon occasion
to oppose the too near greatness of that Ambitious Monarchy; and not like the
Men of the Conspiracy cry out against French Pensioners and French Councils,
and yet themselves do the business of the French, by tying the King of
England's hands, and tying up the Purse of England, whose weight is only able
to balance France; not amuse and incense the People with dismal stories of the
danger of France, and at the same time by keeping up the divisions of England
augment those dangers, and find the Government work enough to consult and take
care of its own security at home, so as neither to have Money nor leisure
enough to look after, or be able to prevent any dangers abroad: in a word the
Nation must have a new house of Commons, if a new Parliament, and a new
Parliament if they expect any good, and Peace of settlement either in Church
and State at home, or security and Honor abroad, and therefore by clear
consequence either not the Old Members with the Old Principles, or the Old
Principles with New Men.

It is very probable however, that the Dissenting Faction will not abandon all
their hopes, but being still in many places animated by the Principal Men of
their Party, and led by their ill Destiny to pull down vengeance upon their own
heads, it is possible they will struggle hard in some Elections to over vote
the Loyalists, and obtrude the same, or Men of the same leaven upon the Nation.
Now though I know nothing that obliges me to give them good advice, but pure
Compassion, yet I would desire them to look before they leap; and if they have
not forfeited all their share of Common discretion, to see where their Interest
lies. Every man that has but a grain of sense, will consult his own advantage,
and before he adventures upon any thing the consequences whereof may be very
great, consider seriously of the matter, and make a computation of what gain or
loss it may be to him; and truly if they do not now in this conjuncture, they
will no longer be the sober Party, but act like rash, inconsiderable Bedlams,
and men drunk with Rage and desperation.

I would therefore as a true Friend, that would have them see the worst of
their Case, advise them first to look up and see what time of the day it is
with them; for upon the matter they will find that the Sun of their Hopes is
just upon setting in a black Cloud of Eternal Night. They will find, that they
have nothing in the World left to expect, unless some Miracles, to which they
may trust their Expiring Cause. They will find that the House of David is
grown, and will grow overy day stronger, and their House of Saul, forsaken of
God, every moment weaker. They will find, that the Nation is thoroughly
awakened with the danger of Blood and Confusion, in which the Leaders of their
Faction had designed to involve it. And what can they now possibly hope for by
opposing the Government, and the Loyal Party of the Nation, by endeavoring to
send disaffected Representatives to the Parliament? there is scarcely a bare
possibility, considering how many will every where for very shame fall off from
them, as well as others out of fear or honesty, that they should gain a
Majority in the Commons House: and if they fail in that, the disturbance which
they have made, and the endeavors to oppose the Loyal Party, will oblige them
to enforce the Execution of the Penal Laws against them, and to provide greater
severities for the future. For if they shall now dare to struggle with the
Government, and make disturbances, when they are under all the disadvantages
imaginable, it will show that they are a People of such desperate as well as
dangerous Principles, that there cannot be too great Caution used, nor too
great care taken, by the utmost severity of Laws, and the due Execution of
them, to take away their strength, suppress them, and hinder the growth and
progress of such Principles, and numbers of Men, as in time may be fatal to the
Government.

And were it possible, which truly they must be of very sanguine tempers that
can hope it, that the Faction should get such another House of Commons
according to their wishes, yet what would they be the better for it, since
there is no hopes of a Perpetual Session? And because they shall have an easy
way how to compute what they may get for the future, I would desire them to
take Pen, Ink and Paper, and set down what they have got already by the former
disturbances of this nature which they have given the Nation. I am of opinion,
when they have stated the matter, they may put all the gains in their Eyes, and
whereas we commonly say, see never the worse, I fancy it will make them see
much the better; see their folly and madness, and if they have any remainders
of prudence or discretion, teach them to leave trading upon that
New-found-land-bank of a Commonwealth, where they will catch nothing but, had I
Fish, and Poor John. There was a time when they had some hopes, they can have
none now; for most certainly the Nation will never be at rest, till it has by
repeated trials and changes purged off this old Commonwealth Scurvy, and got a
sound new Representative Body; and till it comes to that period, the
Dissenters, who are the only hinderers and opposers of it, must expect to be
treated by the Laws and Government, as the enemies of the peace and happiness,
the quiet and settlement of the Kingdom.

The Government may be very tender and unwilling to proceed to extremities of
severity; but when it shall appear that compassion to the Dissenters and the
Enemies of the Government, is cruelty to it self and to all the Loyalists its
true Friends, the Dissenters have little reason to promise themselves impunity,
or that the Government will run the hazard of disobliging Friends, and turning
them into Enemies, in hopes of making their Old Enemies, New Friends. And the
Dissenters cannot take any course more effectual, to convince the whole Nation
of the necessity of such severe procedures against them, than by making such
opposition to the peace and settlement of it, by sending or endeavoring to
send ill men to the Representative Body: And they may assure themselves, that
particular notice will be taken in every place of all such Dissenters to a man
as make it their business to set up, or vote for ill Men, and they will be sure
to be remembered upon occasion.

Whereas would they be contented with the liberty and indulgence which the Laws
allow them, which truly are very great, would they leave stickling, creating
disturbances, and exasperating the Nation against them, they may reasonably
hope to enjoy the favors already allowed them, which otherwise they will also
in the conclusion be sure to lose. But if they would hear reason, I would
advise them to an entire submission to the Laws and Government in Church and
State: this will be the best way of uniting Protestant Dissenters, for them to
unite with the Church of England, where they will infallibly learn two short
Lessons, which will save their Purses, their Persons and their Souls, Truly to
fear God, and honor the King. This is their indispensible duty: This is their
true interest: This would make them easy, the Government safe, and the Nation
happy. And if they shall obstinately persist to oppose all these, they will
declare themselves open Enemies to God and the King, the Church and the
Kingdom, and must expect as a reward of their Actions, not only the hatred of
the Nation, but the severity of such punishments in this World, as are justly
allotted to the common Enemies of Mankind and humane Society, but also that
dreadful Damnation hereafter, which the great Apostle, as an Oracle of God
has intailed upon all such as resist the Higher Powers; whose command to the
contrary is absolute, is peremptory, is universal, Let every Soul be subject to
the Higher Powers, and that for Conscience sake; for the Powers that be are
ordained of God, so that they who resist the Higher Powers, resist God himself,
and what the issue of such a Combat will prove, I need not tell them, but
heartily wish they may by repentance escape the dreadful end of those men, who
for speaking evil of Dignities and despising Dominions, must certainly perish
in the gainsaying of Corah, that Primitive Dissenter.

I have but a few words more to add, and those are to the Loyal Party, that
they would not be less assiduous to support the Government, than the
Conspiratours and Faction have been to subvert it: and since the happy turn of
their Affairs does in so great a measure depend upon the good constitution of
their Representatives, that therefore they will not be wanting to themselves,
either in diligence or caution, to elect and send such Men to die Commons House
as may answer the just Ends of all good Parliaments; which have ever been
called to consult for the common good of the Kingdom, and to tender to the
Royal Assent such Bills to be passed into Laws, as might promote the Interest
of the Kingdom, secure the Government, and support the Crown, by granting such
aids of Money as may enable the King to protect his Subjects, make good his
Alliances, assist his Friends and subdue his Enemies.

I have in all my observation, ever taken notice, that the Dissenters have
outdone the Loyalists in their diligence; they would go through fire and water
to a public Election, and at a Common Hall in London, or a County Court in the
Country for Elections, the whole Party to a man be present. What will do their
business, will certainly do ours; and I am confident, generally speaking, it
is impossible they should overvote the Royal Party, if they could but be
persuaded with the same zeal to stand up for the true Interest of the Nation,
as the other do for that of the Faction. But above all the Freeholders of
England, the Clergy have the most reason, both by themselves, and the united
Interest of the Church Party, to promote good Elections; for they are not only
the particular Mark and Butt of the Factions hatred, but in the late endeavors
and Bills for regulating Elections, the design was laid, to take away the Votes
of all the lesser Freeholders of England, especially to divest the Clergy of
their ancient Free Liberties in that particular: and if that Project had
succeeded, they would have seen such Persons made Electours, and such Elected,
as would quickly have eased them of their Benefices as well as Voices; since
they might almost with the same justice take away the one as the other. I know
not by what artifices in many places several of the Clergy have been persuaded
to go along with the Faction, but I am assured, that either they did not
understand their own Interest, or if they did, they had little regard either to
that, or the Duty which they owe to God, the King, the Church, or to their
Successors, all which are obligations which do more strongly bind them to be
true and Loyal, than any other rank of men whatsoever.

The impending Rupture between the two Crowns of Spain and France, will
necessarily draw in England, both upon the account of stipulation by Articles
of Treaty, and by the true Interest of the Nation, which is to keep the Balance
even, and to prevent France from growing too great a Neighbor by the accession
of the Netherlands, especially by Conquest, to that Crown. And the King of
England will stand in need of the assistence of his Loyal Subjects, to make him
the more able to accommodate that matter, either as a Party, or a Mediator, or
both; so as that England may be thereby secured from the danger of France. This
therefore, will be a Critical juncture, wherein the King will try who are
really his Friends, and who will stand by him and the Interest of England, in
sending such Gentlemen for their Representatives to the Commons House, as may
assist him effectually, both with their Counsels, and, with Supplies sufficient
to go through with that Important Affair, to die present honor, and future
security of the English Nation. For England may be assured, that what France
gains in Flanders, England loses; and that the Maritim Provinces of the Union
will not be long able to avoid submitting to the Yoke, if once Flanders be
lost. And what would become of our Trade and Navigation, if that Crown, already
very potent at Sea, were by so much Shipping, and so many able Seamen, enabled
to contrast with us the Sovereignty of the Ocean, which they now difficultly
acknowledge, it is easy to foresee. And most assuredly it is better and more
easy to prevent so great a mischief, than to disintangle our selves after
having fallen into it. And in short, let England be assured, that if she tamely
suffer Flanders to be lost, she can expect no other favor from France, than
what Ulysses was to have had from Polyphemus, to be the last of her Neighbors
that is to be devoured.

To conclude, be it Peace, or, be it War, whether we expect to enjoy quiet at
home, or honor abroad, security from Domestic or Foreign Dangers, increase of
Trade, or plenty of Money, and whatever can make this Nation happy and the
Monarchy great, all will in a very large measure be found to depend upon what
has been said in these few Sheets; which are therefore earnestly recommended
to the consideration of all true Englishmen, of what Names of Persuasions
soever, in hopes, that they will all unanimously endeavor to promote the Glory
of God, the Honor and Safety of the King, and the Interest of England, which
is and ought to be not only of these Papers, but of all Men's Actions and
Endeavors, the Aim, the Scope,

THE END.

