THE NORFFS PRESIDENT OF PERSECUTION (UNTO BANISHMENT) Against some of the
Innocent People CALLED QUAKERS, FOR Meeting in the Name and fear of the Lord.

OR, A RELATION OF THE Proceedings of the Court at the Quarter Sessions holden
at the Castle in Norwich the 20 day of the 12. Month called February, 1665.
where Francis Cory Recorder of the City of Norwich sat for Judge with John
Crafts Dean of Norwich, with other Justices of the peace (so called) upon Henry
Kittle Jun. Edmund Rack, Richard Cockerel, and Robert Elden, called Quakers.

Printed in the Year 1666.

The Norffs President of Persecution, etc.
FIrst, the Prisoners presented a Letter to the Grand Inquest (because they
understood they were to pass upon them and not to hear them personally to make
their defense) to state the Innocence of their cause to them. Which was as
follows, Friends,
We who are Prisoners in the Castle, who are (reproachfully) called Quakers,
understanding that you as the body of the County are to pass upon us, either to
be our Accusers or Excusers; and that our Cause must pass through your hands
without hearing of us personally to make our defense, We desire to lay these
few Considerations before you.

First, That the Sessions lately past were sufficiently known, and that our
Prosecutors were here; and if they had any thing justly to have charged upon us
they ought to have proceeded then.

Secondly, That we being Prisoners at Common Law (or a penal Statute) ought if
any thing had been charged upon us to have been tried forthwith at the next
general Sessions and Goal delivery; and that by the ordinary Jury that served
upon other Prisoners; and not to have a particular Sessions and Jury picked on
purpose for us; but if nothing had been charged upon us, we ought to have
enjoyed the benefit of the Goal delivery.

Thirdly, We have cause to believe that our Prosecutors have misinformed the
Court, thereby to procure an Adjournment, that so either they might bring some
new evidence, or procure some other to join with them that so their evidence
might appear more specious.

Fourthly, We desire you to take notice that the Records for the first and
second Convictions (so called) were not made in Parchment, and so no Records in
Law. And those Writings that were made were not made under Seal (as we
remember) and so no evidence or conviction in Law: And if any other then such
shall be presented to you we desire you to require proof of them.

Fifthly, At the second Conviction (so called) we conceive there were not a
sufficient number of persons to bring us under the Act, although an exercise in
Religion had been proved against us in other manner then is allowed by the
Liturgy, or practice of the Church of England.

Sixthly, We desire you to consider the third Provizo in the Act; which says,
that no persons shall be punished for any offense against this Act, unless such
offenders be prosecuted for the same within three Months after the offense
committed. And there being above three Months passed since we were charged and
committed as offenders, whether we be not to be discharged by the said Provizo
in the Act: For it does not say you shall be prosecuting such offenders within
three Months but that such offenders shall be prosecuted within three Months,
or else not to be punished for any offense against this Act.

Seventhly, We desire you carefully to examine such Witnesses as shall be
brought in against us to prove what Religious Worship they see us in the
exercise of? and whether it were contrary to what the Liturgy of the Church of
England does allow of: For the Law is not against meeting to worship God
according to the Liturgy; (which says) (See Communion upon the Feast of
Trinity so called) It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty that we should
at all times and in all places perform duty to God. But against such as (under
pretense to meet to worship) contrive Insurrections as late experience had
showed. Which can never be proved against us.

These things we desire to lay before you, not with any desire or intent to
divert you from justice and equity, but that you may in some measure understand
the innocence of our Cause; and where the Law provide for our Acquital you
might not be our accusers, but that justice and equity may run in its right
chanel, and judgment and loving kindness and Righteousness may be exercised by
you, in which the Lord does delight, and so the Blessing of the Lord may be
upon you: Which is the desire of us who seek the good of all Men,

Edmund Rack. Richard Cockerele. Henry Kittle Junior. Robert Elden.





A Relation of the Proceedings of the Court, etc.
THe Court being set the Prisoners were called to the Bar. The Clerk read the
Indictment, the substance of which was for being at an unlawful Meeting under
color and pretense of exercise in Religion, contrary to the Liturgy of the
Church of England with force and aims contrary to the peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the Statute in that case made
and provided.

Clerk. What say you, Guilty or not Guilty?


Prisoner. I desire to be heard a few words.


Judge. You must first plead.


Pris. I desire to be heard; I stand here as a Prisoner, and not barely as a
Prisoner, but as a free born Englishman, and conceive I have right to all the
Privileges of the Law of England which have a tender care of the life of Man,
and also their liberty. Now I conceive we have had very hard measure that we
have been Prisoners almost four Months, and the Sessions past over and we not
called. I desire to know what was the reason that the Sessions past over and we
not called as well as other Prisoners?


Judge. You must plead.


Pris. I desire to know a piece of a Reason why we might not enjoy the benefit
of the Goal delivery as other Prisoners did?


Clerk. The Court is not bound to give you a Reason.


Judge. You must plead (the Question is but short) Guilty or not Guilty?


Pris. I desire to know why we were not tried the last Sessions?


Judge. It is the same Sessions, will you plead?


Pris. But I desire some information about the Indictment that I may know what
I am to plead to. What do you mean by the Liturgy of the Church of England, for
I understand I am indicted for an exercise not allowed by the Liturgy?


The Dean. By the Liturgy is meant the Common Prayer Book with its
Appurtenances.


Pris. Does not the Common Prayer allow of that which it lays down as a duty?
And which it seems to pray for?


The Dean. The Common Prayer does not allow People to Worship God but by it.


Judge. You know the Penalty, will you plead or not?


Pris. I desire to be heard for my Information.


Judge. When you have pleaded you shall be heard.


Pris. Well then, I am content to plead: I am not guilty of this Indictment as
it is laid down in matter and form.


Another Pris. I am not guilty of the breach of any just Law.


A Justice to a Prisoner. I believe you will not tell a lie will you?


Pris. I did not come hither for that purpose.


Justice. Did you not wilfully meet in opposition to this Law?


Pris. I never met in opposition to the Law, neither I believe did I do any
thing justly to bring me within compass of the Law.


Then the Justice sat down and said no more to the Prisoner. Pris. I desire to
have some words with John Crofts (who was the Dean) concerning the Liturgy what
it allows of?


Judge. The Court cannot wait upon you.


Pris. F. Cory did thou not promise me that when I pleaded I should be heard?
have thou so soon forgot thy promise, is thy memory so shallow?


Judge. Well, well, you are very saucy.


Dean. I would willingly have some conference with you but privately. And why
not publicly?



Pris. With all my heart. Another Prisoner said we have been here almost 16.
weeks and none of you would come at us, and you could not choose but be
sensible we were here.


Clerk. You are to come upon your trial in the Afternoon, therefore prepare for
your trial.


The Court adjourned till two of the Clock. About four of the Clock the Court
sat, and the Prisoners were called to the Bar, and the Jury called to be sworn.
Pris. Let the Jury come to the Bar that we may see them, and they see us.


Clerk. The Jury is well enough.


Pris. But we cannot know them from the people, neither can they well hear us,
they stand so thronged among the people; let us have the privilege that Thieves
and Murderers have, to have the Jury come to the Bar, that God and Man may
hear and see their Judgment, whether it be just and equal or not.


Judge. You must not prescribe Rules to the Court.


Clerk. You are very bold. We may see Innocence is bold in this Age also.


The Jury was sworn, and the Clerk began to read the Indictment.


Pris. That is none of our What Justice could be expected from such as will
change an Indictment against Prisoners?
Indictment.


Clerk. It is your Indictment.


Pris. But it is not the same that we pleaded to in the Forenoon.


Judge. How do you know that it is not the Indictment?


Pris. I see it, and know it is not the same; By these reasons it will appear 1.
the color of the Parchment the 1st. Indictment being a course Parchment with a
flaw in the back, and the Writing much obliterated; and the 2. Indictment was a
clear Parchment and a fair hand writing without obliterations or rac^ings, and
longer by 2. or 3. fingers breadth in our apprehension; 2ly. the day of the
Conviction was altered for the first Indictment, ran the 28. of Feb. and the
second was dated the 22. of February.
It Is not the same Parchment, we are abused: Jurymen, take notice the
Indictment is altered.


Judge. It is your Indictment.


Pris. Let it be proved, was ever the like seen that we should have our
Indictment altered after we have Pleaded: Is this Law?


Judge. Go one.


So the Clerk read the Indictment. Clerk. Do you desire to have the Records
read?


Pris. Yes by all means, and proved.


Part of the Records were read (and the Clerk said, there is enough read to
serve your turns) and two Witnesses sworn. Judge to the Witness, Did you see
the Records sealed?


Witness. Yes.


Pris. When?


The Witness silent. But the Clerk answered, the Court takes no The Court takes
no notice of that which makes for the benefit of the Prisoner, what manner of
Council will they be then for the Prisoner? for they will say sometime to
Prisoners we are to be your Council; as we know they should according to Law,
if they could keep to the Law, and inform the Prisoner what makes for his
benefit.
notice of that the Records are sealed now.


Pris. I desire the Court to ask the Witness when these Records were sealed.


Judge. It is no matter if they were Sealed but yesterday.


Then one of the Witness replied, I saw Mr. Kendle seal them on Friday last.


The Prisoner pressed it upon the other Witness to know when he saw them sealed;
but he would not speak at all to it. But Witness should testify the whole
truth.
Clerk to the Jury, You see we have proved the two first Convictions. Now to
the Third.


Pris. They are not proved yet.


The Witness called and sworn to prove the third Conviction. Capt. Morris
Shelton gave in evidence that he received a Letter from his Cousen Wright that
there was an unlawful Assembly at Edm. Rack's of Kilverston. And so he came
according to his duty, and found about 14. Persons in the House, fitting
together in a Malencholy posture; but neither saw them do any thing, nor heard
them say any thing. O sad, what a lamentable age we live in, that a Judge
should pass sentence upon men to be banished for 7. years out of their Native
Land for neither saying any thing, nor doing any thing.
The other Witness said he was not within in the Room but looked in at the
door, and saw them sit there, but neither heard them say any thing, nor see
them do any thing. Judge. Wherefore came you thither? what was your intents?


Pris. Ask the Witness, etc.


Judge. Can they tell your intent.


Pris. Ask them, try if they cannot I may.


Another Witness sworn, Tho. Wright, one of the Is this legal proceedings that
one of the Justices that sat in the Court should be a Witness against the
Prisoners? and does the Law intend this also? for shame let not these
proceedings be ^^^thered upon the Law of England.
Justices (so called) that sat in the Court, and gave in a paper called our
Examination, which said we confessed we And what is that all the Evidence you
have against them to banish them 7^ years out of their Native Land for being
met in the Name and fear of the Lord? Is this become a crime in our English
Nation? O horrable, it is too hear, and it even grieves us to think these
things should be related; for shame let not these things be told in other
Nations. And let there be warnings taken by the Judges and Justices not to
pe^sist any more, in bringing the guilt of thus sadly oppressing the Innocent
upon them, and our English Nation; f^r by such unjust proceedings will it be
brought into more misery, dishonor, and a reproach among other Nations.
met in the name and fear of the Ld. Pris. That is none of my Examination.


Judge. The Justice have sworn it, that is enough.


Pris. Then he have done me the more wrong, for I never yielded to an
Examination, but always sent them to the Witnesses: And if any other said so,
it ought not to be put upon my head. (If that be a Crime) Is Rob. Kedingtons
hand to it?


Clerk. Yes.


Pris. Then they have done me the more wrong.


Judge to the Jury, You see the whole matter of the Indictment is proved.


Judge to the Prisoners, What can you say for your selves?


Prisoner to the Jurymen. I stand here indicted for a threefold Crime; first as
being twice Convicted for being at an unlawful Assembly at times mentioned in
the Indictment; and then after such Convictions being at a third unlawful
Assembly mentioned in the Indictment. Now I would desire you seriously to
consider the business; and first of the first, the matter charged against me
was upon the 31. of Jan. which is more then a year ago, the evidence is the
Record, now one of the Witness have sworn possitively that he saw the Record
sealed last Friday, (as he calls it) now if I had committed an offense a year
ago, yet I was not Convicted in Law till last Friday: look upon the Act, Which
Records so made shall be a Conviction in Law. So as I could not in Law be
guilty of a first offense till convicted and not convicted till the Records
were sealed, for the Records are the Conviction, and no Conviction till sealed:
For the Words of the Act are, to make a Record of such an offense under their
hands and seals. And I am not indicted here for being at an unlawful Assembly
but for being convicted for being at an unlawful Assembly. Now Jurymen take
notice that the matter charged in the Indictment differ from the proof more
then a whole year: A gross mistake, is it possible that men should so grossly
mistake as to charge us with an offense, and fail in their proof more then a
whole year, so as I cannot possibly in Law be found guilty of this first
offense by this evidence if you regard either Law, Equity, or Conscience.

Now as to the second offense I need not say much; I cannot commit a second
offense till I be convicted of a first, which according to the evidence was not
till Friday last. Now we having been in Prison almost four Months, how could I
possibly commit a second or third offense when convicted but last Friday (so
called) for a first, consider it Jurymen. The Words of the Statute being that
if such Offender so convicted as aforesaid shall at any time again commit the
like offense. So as it is plain to every man that will but use a grain of
understanding, that we cannot be guilty of a second offense till convicted of a
first. Thus you see plainly Jurymen this first part of the Indictment dashed, it
is gone, yea it is quite blown away in Law. But now least you should stumble at
the third, upon which the Court seems to lay the greatest stress, because there
is Witness (Viva voce) which seems to testify something. I shall speak
something as to that, and to this end I desire you to consider the Act, and
first of the Title, An Act to prevent Seditious Conventicles. Here you see the
Act is not to prevent all Meetings but Seditious Meetings, now what Sedition
is, I leave it to the Court to define, to whom it does belong. There might be
something spoken to the Preamble, but I pass by that and come to the Act. Be it
enacted that if any person being a Subject of this Realm shall be present at
any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, etc. Here you see Jurymen to whom the
Act extends, it is to every one indifinately, as well one as another, if they
be Subjects of the Realm; yea it reaches from the Prince that siteth next to
the Throne to the Beggar that seteth upon the Moulehill. I speak this to take
off that brainless opinion that have possessed the heads of Thousands that
there is an Act made against the Sectaries, or such like, when as the Law
reaches to all alike, if they do any thing that comes under it; yea, you your
selves or the Court are as much concerned in the Act as we, if you do any thing
that comes under it. Now it is to be considered what a man must or may do to
bring him under the Act, for this look upon the Statute, Be it enacted, etc.
that if any person, etc. shall be present at any Assembly, etc. under color or
pretense of any Exercise of Religion in other manner then is allowed by the
Liturgy, etc. Here Jurymen you may see the Fact that can be a Transgression of
the Law which is to be present at a Meeting under a pretense of some Exercise
in Religion, in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy, etc.

Now Jury you see the Stress of the Matter lies here, in the Exercise.

Here the Court stood up as in an uproare, calling to the Jury to go forth; As
appearing, loath the Prisoners Rational Plea should take place in them. The Act
is not against Meetings barely as Meetings, for that would be a Rediculum
Caput, that men could not be together but they must be Transgressors, for you
your selves which pass upon us to day, If you have an envious Neighbor or
great Man that can but spy out six or a douzen of you together, may come your
selves upon trial for your Liberty: If being together barely be a
Transgression; but it is plain by the Letter of the Law that it is the
Exercise, or pretense of Exercise, that is the Transgression; so as if there be
no particular Exercise proved against us, (as here is not) ye ought not to find
us guilty for, for it is a common Maxim among Law men, that Generals in Law
signify nothing, but it must be the particular matter. As if a man were
indicted for Treason, if the Witness come to prove Treason in general, and
cannot prove the particular matter, be it words or otherwise; what Jury could
possible be so mad as to find this man guilty? And so likewise of Felony, and
shall not we have as much benefit as Traitors and Fellons, and Murderers?


The Court hindered the Prisoner from pleading furthe^, by the ordering the
Jury to go for^h. Judge to the Jury, You see the whole Matter of the Indictment
is proved, they have confessed it upon Examination, and I have asked them several
times what business they have there? and they will not answer; the Law intends
them guilty in as much as they were found together, and will not give a reason
wherefore they were met.


So they pressed upon the Jury to go forth. The Foreman of the Jury called for
the Examination and looked upon it, and returned it to the Court again. Pris.
Jurymen hear me, I have a great deal more to offer; what will you not hear me,
I have something to offer concerning the Examination: was there ever such a
Jury as will not hear me; Hear the other Prisoners what they have to say in
their defense, they have not spoken yet.


The other Prisoners, Hear us, what will you go upon us and not hear us speak?


Pris. Well if you will not hear us, the Lord judge between you and us; and
remember the eye of the Lord is upon you, and sees the intent of your hearts,
and if you pass upon us thus and condemn us, the Lord God will assuredly
require it at your hands.


The Jurymen went forth, and in a little time returned. Clerk. Are you all
agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. All but one Man.


Judge. Why do not he agree?


Jury. He desires to give his Reasons to the Court.


Judge. No, no, you must all agree.


Judge. Swear them another, Bailiffe, and let them be shut up, and have neither
meat, drink, fire nor Candle till they be agreed.


Some in the Court said to the Prisoners (when the Jury was gone out) why did
you not answer wherefore you were met, he have asked you several times, and you
will not answer?


Pris. I was not aware of his Asking me so often, if I had I should have given
him an answer; I can give him an Answer yet if he will hear me.


Judge. Well, what is it?


Pris. We are Christian men, and the Lord has begotten us into one life, and
we love one another, and desire often to be together, that all Men may know and
see that we love one another.


The Jury went forth again, and soon after the Court sent after them to hasten
them to agree; and shortly the Jury returned again and brought them in all
Guilty. Pris. What of the whole Indictment?


Clerk. Yes, yes, of the whole.


The Prisoners were returned to Prison again, and about half an hour after were
commanded again to the Bar. Pris. All Honor and Glory be given to the Lord.


Judge beginning a long Oration of the Mercyfulness of the Law. Pris. The Law
of God is a Mercyful Law.

(It was in another Prisoners heart to say) but the Executioners of the Law are
very unmercyful.


And when the Prisoners perceived the Judge crept in to sentence, one cried,
hold, hold, I have something to offer before Sentence be past, as to arrest of
Judgment, but the Judge went on. Then the Prisoners cried again, hold, hold, if
you will not hear me, take my Exceptions and read them, and so held his Paper
forth; but the Judge went on and passed Sentence, that they should be carried
from this place to Yarmouth, and from thence to be Transported to the Barbados
for seven years. Then one of the Prisoners said, But where shall the Liar and
the Drunkard go? And when he had passed Sentence asked a Prisoner, saying, Come
what have you now to proffer. Pris. I had something to offer before Sentence
was past, as to arrest in Judgment, but thou wents on and would not hear.


Judge. Now it is too late, Judgment is past.


Pris. I called before, and offered my Exceptions, but thou would not stay.


Judge. Let us hear what they are?


Pris. First, that the two first Offenses were not Recorded under the Hands and
Seals of the two Justices of Peace before the 29th. of October last, the time
mentioned in the Indictment for the third offense, but since this present
Sessions, namely upon Friday last, so that the persons concerned did not stand
convicted of the two first offenses urged against them at the time limited for
the last offense.

Secondly, That the Indictment upon which they went was not the same to which
the Prisoners did plead.

Thirdly, That the Prisoners ought not to be punished for any offense against
the late Act because above three Months are passed.


Judge. But you were committed presently in order to your Prosecution.


Prisoner. But we were to have been Prosecuted, and not Prosecuting.


Clerk. Your Commitment was your Prosecution.


Pris. That could not be by the Judges own words, for he said, we were
committed in order to Prosecution; and if in order to Prosecution then it could
not be the Prosecution its self.


A POSTSCRIPT.
AS to the Courts proceedings against the Prisoners, The unreasonableness and
unjustness thereof, is so apparent and will so plainly appear to every
indifferent and impartial Reader, that little need be paraphrased upon it, to
manifest that spirit of envy and persecution which thus rigorously, and cruelly
showed it self against innocent Persons; even to banish or separate them from
their Native Countries and Relations. We never yet knew any Law extant or in
being, that Men should be reckoned such deep Offenders, for meeting together in
a Christian spirit; singly and spiritually to wait upon and worship God, as the
intent of our Meeting is.

And where the evidence was, that they were neither saying, nor doing any
thing; and yet for this, thus severely to be sentenced by the Judge, whose
prejudice and enmity against diverse of our Friends in Norwich, in persecuting
of them has so much appeared, that little better then what he has done against
the Prisoners could be expected; nor yet from the Deane who is so deeply
concerned with his Brethren of the Clergy, who make use of the Magistrates as
their servants, to terrify and compel People to come under their worship and
Ceremonies, and to worship by their Liturgy; but many are gathered out from
them by the Power of the Lord God; and come to worship and serve him in the
newness of the spirit, and the spirit of Prayer and Supplication being poured
forth, wherein the People of God pray to him, and which Spirit sometime
intercedes with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered, so this is not to be
limited to an imposed form of prayer, nor to Men's wills; who in Antichrists
spirit go about to hinder and limit the spirit of truth, and to keep the
Creature from the freedom of it, as the Deane in his asserting that the Common
Prayer does not allow People to worship but by it; which is a very strange and
unreasonable doctrine, and appears both contrary to the Common Prayer Book,
and the Priests practice; for the Common Prayer Book, or allowance of the
Liturgy extends further then the Bishops and Deans allowance, for that it
allows of the Scriptures, and that they are written for our Learning, (and so
are to be practiced and fulfilled by us) and of the Worship of God, at all
times, and in all places; and therefore they had need to consider their
Liturgy a little better, and peruse the several Collects and Epistles in it,
and see how the Scriptures is both allowed of, and made use of therein, and
consequently how that way and Worship which the Scriptures own (which was
before the Liturgy was) is allowed of by the Liturgy, which how the Deans
Assertion and the Liturgy herein should hang together, does not appear whiles
he would make the Common Prayer allow of no Worship but by it self; which also
does contradict and disallow of his own Generation the Priests when they use a
long Prayer before Sermon, which is not expressed in the Common Prayer Book; and
besides diverse particular occasions of Praying to God many times do and have
fallen out, which are not mentioned in the Common Prayer; as also it does not
follow that the Common Prayer disallowes of all manner of Worshipping that is
not by it self because not in its own express form, for diversities of things
where no prohibition is, does not disallow one of another, because they are
diverse in the manner and form of them.

Much might be said in this particular to show the absurdity and ignorance of
the Dean's Assertion, but whiles we know the leadings of the Spirit of Truth,
and the Worship of God therein for which many of us at this day suffer; We must
not be tied to their allowance in Worship, who by their ways and proceedings
against the Innocent have as much as in them lies, opposed, limited and
withstood the Spirit and Truth of God; which will outlive all their enmity and
cruelty against the Righteous.

Here follows a Letter sent to the Judges of the Assizes holden at Thetford,
from the Prisoners aforesaid, to spread before them the illegal Proceedings
against them; so that Ignorance of Injustice cannot be pleaded.

To the Judges of the Assizes,
These in humility present,
WE whose Names are here under written, who lay under a sentance of
transportation; finding our selves grieved by the proseedings of the Sessions
holden at the Castle in Norwich, which we think were not reasonable nor Legal.
And not knowing the Law how we may be releived; yet, thinking the Law have not
left us without relief in case there be error in judgment, desire in humility
to spread these our grievances before you, who are judges of the Law, and know
the Law, and are sent as we think, by the King, as well to relieve his
subjects that are oppressed, as to minister judgment.

First, That we were indicted in the first part of the indictment for being
convicted upon the 30. or 31. of January so called, in the sixteenth year of
the King, which was almost half a year before the Act came in force, this we
think a mistake and error in Law. But we were forced to plead and could not
make our exceptions to this and many other errors.

Secondly, That we pleaded to an indictment in the forenoone; and in the
afternoon had an other indictment brought forth against us to which we had
not pleaded, and were forced upon Trial by it, although we made our
exceptions against it.

Thirdly, That we have great cause to suspect that the Jury, or most part of
them, were not indifferent persons but men pickd on purpose.

Fourthly, That the Jury was commanded from the Bar before we had made our
defense; and we were hindered from our just (though plain) plea: And some of us
not suffered to speak at all in our defense.

Fifthly, That the Records produced to prove the first and second convictions
(so called) were not made by the Justices of Peace, but by the Clark of the
Peace or some other, by the procurement of Thomas Wright our prosecutour; and
sent to the Justices to seal but a week before the Sessions.

Sixthly, That Thomas Wright was both our Accuser, Witness against us, and one
of the Judges upon the Bench, and also helped the Clerk to translate the reading
of our indictment, which we think unreasonable, if not Illegal

Seventhly, We believe the Act does intend our relief by the third proviso in
regard we were not prosecuted within three months.

These things we desired to lay before you in short as part of our grievances,
but if the Law do allow us to come before you as we are desirous to do, if you
please to grant an Habeas Corpus for that purpose we hope to clear the matter
more fully, or if the Law do allow us any relief; we desire the Benefit of it:
but if not, then we quietly yield our bodies to the execution of the sentence,
and return (as prisoners of hope) to the rock of our Salvation; where the Lord
has planted us, there to repose our selves, until the Lord arise and plead our
cause, and bring forth our innocence in brightness; and our Righteousness as
the light that goes forth.

Edm. Rack. Henry Kittlesmior. Robert Elden. Richard Cockerel.

From Norwich Castle The 28th of the 12th month 1665.
THE END.

