GODLY ADVERSITY Far better than WICKED PROSPERITY: OR, The Rage of the Wicked,
should not Hinder the Race of the Godly.

Being a few Comfortable Reasons or Encouragements against the Fear and Terror
of Man: Very Seasonable and Suitable for the Consideration of God's People in
this Day of Trial, to Fortify them against all Troubles and Oppositions
whatsoever.

Together with a Heavenly Discourse concerning the Saints in their Kingdom;
Wherein is Discovered the Excellency of the Kingdom it self; and the Wonderful
Glory and Happiness of the Saints in their Heavenly Habitation.

By Edward Noble, an unworthy Servant and Prisoner of Jesus Christ.

Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou, Worm Jacob, and the few Men of Israel; I will help
thee, says the Lord. Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall
Suffer; Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be
Tried: And ye shall have Tribulation certain Days: But be thou Faithful unto
Death, and thou shall receive a Crown of Life. Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are they
which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. London, Printed by S. Dover in Christophers Alley in Martins, near
Aldersgate, 1661.

To his Dear and much Respected Father (according to the flesh) FRANCIS NOBLE,
one of the Lords faithful Servants, and Stewards of his Household: And one of
the Right Honorable Society of Saints, in the Faith of the GOSPEL.
Dear and Well-beloved Father,
NOt only the Bonds of Nature, and the knot of Relation betwixt us, but also
the great Cord of Affection and Christianity, has drawn me forth, and induced
me to Dedicate these my weak fruits of Labor and Love unto your serious and
pious Consideration: judging it may be a great Manifestation of my Duty toward
you, and a signal Token of that tender Love and Respect, which your Deserts
(through Grace) calls for at my hands: It is not Silver nor Gold, Money nor
Riches that I have here to present unto you or to accommodate you withal; but
such as my Heavenly Father has (out of his abundant treasures) bestowed upon
me: It is not Earthly shadows of a Temporal Concernment, but Heavenly Substance
of a Spiritual Nature; Therefore what I have Received, I freely and cordially
impart unto you, hoping it will be an acceptable Token unto you. Your Aged
Years I Honor, and your Gray Hairs I Reverence, especially being found in the
Path of Righteousness: for give me leave to tell you, that it is Virtue and
Piety that makes Age truly Honorable and Precious, more than Treasures of
Riches, where Godliness is wanting. It Is no small Joy unto me, when I Consider
you, not only as my Father in the flesh, but also Related to me in the Spirit;
That there is a nearer Relation betwixt us than what is outward, and a more
excellent Affinity between us than that of Nature; Our Natural Relations are
but shadows and husks, and of a momentary standing; but Spiritual Affinity is a
fountain of Joy that abides for ever; the former will perish and cease from
being, but the latter shall continue, and never have an end. It Is matter of
great Rejoicing to me, when I Consider how you press forward and persevere in
the ways of God, even to your latter days, and in the midst of Troubles, that
you are not frighted from the Truth, by the frowns of men, but still you
continue faithful to the Purity of the Gospel, notwithstanding the threatening
ruin and spoil that attends it. Oh! how many have run well in their young
days, and gone on eminently for God in a Day of Prosperity, and yet in the
time of Persecution, or else in the time of old Age have grown weary of God,
and declined his ways and Worship; and have minded their own ease and
Interest, more than the Glory of God! But blessed be the Lord, it is otherwise
with you, it is not length of time that has diminished your Love to God; nor
Changes of Providence that has abated your zeal to the Truth, nor Alterations
in Church and State, that has altered your Resolutions in the Work and Service
of your Heavenly Father.

Dear Father: You have lived to behold sundry and various Dispensations of God,
and you have seen much of the outgoings and in-comings of the Lord in this
Land of our Nativity; and you have experienced much of the Power and Goodness
of mighty Jehovah in several Conditions, both in Prosperity and Adversity, in
Sickness and in Health; yea, in the midst of Discouragements, you have received
Comforts from God; and in the midst of Troubles, you have received Strength
from the Lord: You have seen the Churches of Christ flourishing and shining in
these Nations, and the Enemies thereof confounded and brought to shame: Your
eyes have beheld what a Wall of Defense the Rock of Ages has been to his
People, and how he has made their Enemies (though more and Mightier) to become
Tributary and Servants to them; and how he had placed men fearing God, in great
Places of Trust; and those that followed Virtue and Piety, in Places of great
Affairs; by which means Magistracy became a Terror to evildoers, and a Praise
to them that did well; and Religion, Virtue and Holiness was Countenanced,
Upheld and Maintained by a face of Authority in these Nations, in your days.

But now you have lived to see a mighty Change, and a wonderful Alteration,
another World (as it were) flowing with sin and Iniquity, wherein the Church of
Christ is very low, poor and contemptible; and the Vineyard of our God has
been laid open to ravenous Beasts, and the Boar out of the Wood has laid it
waste; and they have through their Subtilty caused many tall Cedars to fall,
and by their Power have Crushed and Oppressed the tender Plants and Vines, and
a great Inundation of Sin and Profaneness over-flows the Nation. Well, our God
is at Work, and he will certainly do great things for Sion, and will in his due
time turn all things to his own Glory, and his Peoples great Good and Benefit:
Whether you may live to see the Redemption of Sion, or the Churches flourish
again in this Nation, I cannot tell; But of this I am persuaded, That you will
one Day enjoy a far better state of Joy and Perfection, without mixture or
Changableness; and therefore as a Cordial to your Soul in this earthly
Pilgrimage, I have briefly set before you a glimpse of that Glory and Happiness
which the Saints shall enjoy in their Father's Kingdom; which Portion I doubt
not but you can claim an Interest in, and I hope you will assuredly enjoy and
possess it, when the Earth and Heavens shall be no more. Indeed, Considering
your day is drawing to a period, and the great Troubles, Calamities, and
Afflictions which you have seen, felt, and undergone; I did judge that I could
not present unto you a more serious, suitable, and seasonable Subject than this.
And Considering the Troubles of the Day, and the Rage of the Adversary, I have
here drawn forth a Cord of Encouragement, out of the Scriptures of Comfort, as
a means to Arm and Fortify our Souls against the Fear and Terror of Man; that
we may Cheerfully and Faithfully stand to the Work of the Lord, notwithstanding
the great Oppositions which we may meet withal from the Sons of Men.

It Is that which I Penned in the time of my Restraint and Imprisonment, when my
Soul was much exercised in the Thoughts of God's Goodness; And truly, my Soul
has sucked much sweetness out of this Heavenly Fountain; and it is that which
has much Refreshed, Comforted and born me up in the midst of my Sufferings and
Trials; And I hope it will (through the Blessing of God) be of the same use
unto your Soul.

If the Lord by this Discourse should make me (who is the Fruit of your Body)
an Instrument of Joy and Comfort to your Soul, in this Day of trouble and
difficulty, I shall think my self largely Requited for my Labor in Writing;
and shall earnestly desire that God may have the Glory: Therefore to that end,
I shall Commend the following Discourse to the Blessing of God, and your
serious perusal; and Rest,

Yours by Relation and Affection, to serve you as a Son, and a Servant in
Christ, EDW. NOBLE.

To the Honest, and Well-Affected READER.
Christian READER,
IF thou art willing to walk in the Paths of Righteousness, that thou may
enjoy Peace and Favor with God; Thou must expect to meet with many Troubles,
and Afslictions, Trials and Temptations in this Earthly Pilgrimage, and many
Disquietments from the hands of men: For here thou art but as a poor Traveller
in a strange Country, subject to be much wronged and abused by the men of this
World; because thou belongest to another Country, and can not Travel with
them in the Road of Iniquity; insomuch that thy Portion (it may be) here may
seem to be grievous, and thy Burden may seem to be heavy: Therefore out of
tender Love to thy Soul, I have here Compounded a Choice Cordial for thee, as a
means to Comfort and Encourage thee in thy Christian Progress, that thou may
not faint, nor be weary in well-doing; for this I can assure thee, and that by
Experience, That if thou do but carry this Heavenly Cordial along with thee
upon thy Heart, it will make the bitterest Cup of Affliction sweet and pleasant
to thee; and the greatest Burden of Grief and Misery shall be light and easy
unto thy Soul: And if thou can but taste the sweetness of it, by Experience
upon thy Soul, it will make thee think thy self happy, though in the midst of
Misery, and make thee Rejoice, though in the midst of Sorrow, and give thee
occasion to bless and praise the Name of the Lord, for the worst of
Dispensations.

And lest thou should at any time be filled and overcome with slavish Fear,
under the Consideration of thy Earthly Adversaries, and be frighted from the
Truth by the frowning Rage of thy Enemies; I here present thee with an
Excellent Antidote against the Fear and Terror of Man, which is known by
Experience, to be of a wonderful strengthening Nature, and if it be kindly
received into thy Soul, it will sufficiently Fortify and Encourage thee
against all Oppositions whatsoever, and make thee Bold and Courageous for the
Cause of God, and Crown thee with Victory in Life Eternal.

So I shall commit both thee, and the following Discourse, to the Blessing of
God, desiring thee to Read it Considerately, and peruse it in Love, that so it
may prove as Food to thy Soul, and Strength to thy Inward Man, to the Praise
and Glory of him, who has called thee out of Darkness, into his mavelous
Light; which is the Earnest desire of his Soul, who is,

Thy Faithful Friend and Servant, in the Concernments of Jesus Christ, EDWARD
NOBLE.

A Strong Motive to faithful Perseverance in the Work of the Kingdom; drawn
from that Excellent saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, recorded in Luke 12.32.
Fear not Little Flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom.
THese Words were spoken by no meaner a Person, than Him, whom all Christians
do freely and readily acknowledge to be the Son of God, the Lord of Life, and
Prince of Peace, even Jesus Christ the Righteous: And therefore this in the
first Place Considered, the words themselves do in a special manner loudly Call
for, and require our more serious and sober Consideration: And the
Consideration thereof should mightily induce us to be ready and willing to
receive and embrace that Doctrine and Counsel which is comprehended in these
Words, because they proceeded out of the mouth of so gracious, wise, and
wonderful Counselor; One, whom his very Enemies could not but Confess did
speak as never man spoke, Joh. 7.46. And those that were his Followers, and had
much Experience concerning him, do faithfully declare, that he had the Words of
eternal life, Joh. 6.68. Therefore surely these Words must needs be of an
excellent nature, and of great Concernment unto our Souls, if we do but give
diligent heed thereunto; and without doubt, if the Doctrine of this Text, were
but the Practice of our Lives, we should be able to grapple with, and get
victory over all the Temptations, Trials, and Difficulties of this Life, and
our Conversations would mightily conduce to the Glory of God, and to the
Eternal well-being of our Souls in the World to come.

Well, but let us come a little closer to the Words themselves, and let us see
what this blessed Counselor would have us learn from thence; and let us a
little examine, what Encouragement he will give us to receive his Doctrine.

In the Words themselves, you have Chiefly these Three Things.

1. Here is an Exhortation, or rather a Dehortation, to dehort us from
something which ought not to be found amongst us: Or more plainly, here is an
Injunction; something enjoined upon us by way of Duty, which is, Not to be
Afraid; Contained in chese words, [ Fear not.]

2. Here are the Persons included, upon whom this Duty is enjoined; and they
are the Disciples and Church of Jesus Christ, Comprehended in these words, [
Little Flock] Fear not Little Flock.

3. Here is a great Reason or Encouragement laid down to enforce the
Exhortation, or to stir us up to put this necessary Duty into Practice; and
that is in these words, [ For it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom.]

A Reason sufficient to enforce the Duty, and to Balance al^ Oppositions
whatsoever.

It is somewhat requisite that I should speak something concerning this word [
Fear] before I come to the Observations of the Text: For the better
understanding of our Savior concerning this word [ Fear] if we do but peruse
the fore going part of the Chapter, it may very clearly be discerned, that he
chiefly intends the Prohibiting of these two sorts of Fear: First, Not to be
afraid of man, nor of any thing that man can do unto us; as you may clearly see
in verse. 4. And I say unto you, My Friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the
Body, and afterward can do no more: For the Lord Jesus Christ know right well,
that his Disciples would be exceedingly hated by the World, and that they would
meet with implacable Enemies and Adversaries, which would oppose them with
great force and cruelty, in their journey toward Heaven. Now as a means to
Establish them in the Truth, and to arm and fortify them against the terror
of these implacable Opposites, he spreads several Considerations before them,
from verse. 4. to verse. 13. And at length sums up all into this Exhortation and
Encouragement, Fear not little Flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom.

Secondly, By Fear in this Text, is intended thus much, viz. That we must not
be afraid of wanting Wordly things relating to the outward Man, as Food and
Raiment, or any thing that may be convenient and necessary for us; for many
times the World proves such a snare, and such a clogge to Christians, as that
it fetters and intangles them so, as they cannot run with patience the Race
that is set before them; and is ready (many times) to pull them back again into
Egypt, when they are Traveling toward Canaan; And to make them, with Demas,
forsake the Communion of Saints in the ways of God, and to close in with their
Affections to the Transitory things of this present World. And many times
Christians are very much filled with Fears, and Cares, and Perplexities of
Spirit, upon the account of this World, fearing that Holiness and Purity (being
to much opposed by the World) will tend too much to Poverty: And if they
continue and persevere in that Path, they shall not be able to find Temporal
Subsistence: And so under that Consideration, they are incident many times to
corrupt themselves, and close in with any thing for Profit and Advantage.
Therefore it is the great Care of our Savior Christ, to arm and fortify them
against this kind of Fear also; As you may read at large from verse. 13. to the
words of my Text; and there he comes to fasten his Concluding Injunction, and
backs it with a very Glorious Encouragement, Fear not, what ye shall do for
Food and Raiment; do but you continue faithful in your Duty toward God, and to
be sure he will continue faithful in his Mercies toward you; and whatever
Crosses and Losses you may sustain in this World, yet be of good cheer, keep on
your way, the time will come when you shall largely be made amends for all;
when you shall receive a hundred fold for every particular lofs: For it is your
Pather's good pleasure, to give you the Kingdom.

The Words being chus Opened and Explained, I shall now come to deduct
something from them by way of Doctrinal Observation, hoping it may (through the
Blessing of God) be of some use unto our Souls.

Observe. 1. That Christ's Flock is but a little Flock: A Mean, Contemptible,
Despised little Flock: Little in comparison of that great Multitude which runs
the contrary way. Mean and Contemptible (in the eyes of the World) in
comparison of the many Mighty, and the many Noble which belongs to the Prince
of this world. There are but few will come and abide in the Fold of Jesus,
because he will not grant his Flock Liberty to feed upon the fat Pastures of
worldly Pleasures; nor glut themselves with Sin and Iniquity. There are a great
many that will run freely and swiftly into the Path of Iniquity; but there are
but a few that will run so freely into the highway of Holiness, and continue
in the Paths of Righteousness. Again, there are a great many that will take
abundance of Care how they may make themselves Rich, and how they may grow
Great in the World; but there are but a few that will take so much Care how
they may please the Lord, or how they may make themselves Rich in Faith and
good Works, that so they may be great in the Kingdom of Heaven. And again,
There are a great many that follow the Devi in the broad-way to Destruction,
but there are but a few that follow Jesus Christ in the narrow-way to
Salvation; For strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it. And again, many are Called, but few are
Chosen: So that it seems, Christ's Flock is but Little, and the Children of
Election are but few.

Well, But what is the Reason that Christ's Flock is so Little? And what is the
Reason that there are so few runs the narrow-way to Salvation? What is the
Reason or Cause (may some say) why so few are saved? I shall therefore (through
the Assistance of God) offer to your Consideration some few Reasons or Grounds,
why I judge so few belong to the Flock of Christ.

First, Negatively, What is not the Reason.

I do not believe that the Cause lies at all in God, but altogether in Man: It
is not because God has determined, or absolutely Decreed that no more should
be saved, as some weakly imagine; for God desires not the Death of a Sinner,
nor delights in the Destruction of any man; but rather Grieves and Mourns over
Persons for their Iniquities, and for destroying themselves; and is troubled,
and sorrowful that they will not turn unto him, that they might be saved, Psalm.
81.13. Jer. 4.14. compared with Chap. 13.27. and 44.4. Luke 19.41, 42, etc. So
that it is clear from all these Scriptures, together with many more which might
be given, That it is not because God has absolutely Decreed before the
Foundation of the World, that no more should be Holy and partake of Salvation;
for he is not willing that any should perish, but that ALL should come to the
knowledge of the Truth, and be saved.

Neither is it, because Christ Died for no more, and so they want a Savior;
for this is most certain, That Christ Died for All, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 10.10. for
EVERY Man, Heb. 2.9. for the World, Joh. 3.16. and 4.42. yea, for the whole
World, ^ Joh, 2.2. Therefore glad Tidings is to be Preached to every Creature,
and all are Commanded to Repent and Believe the Gospel; so that it cannot be,
because Christ Died for no more; for Christ Died as well for those that deny
him, and for those that perish, as for those that believe in him, and are
saved, 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Cor. 8.11.

Neither is it because God withholds the Means of Salvation from any man; for
God affords sufficiency of Means to all People for their Salvation, and puts
every one into a Capacity to perform that which he requires at their hands; and
God never did, nor never will Condemn any for that which they could not do, but
always for that which they would not do, Psalm. 81.11. Luke 13.34. Joh. 5.40.
Therefore it is not because. God withholds the Means of Salvation from any;
for he never Requires that from any man to Salvation, which they are not in a
Capacity to perform: nor he never Commanded Impossibilities.

Well, having now showed you Negatively, What is not the Reason: I shall also
endeavor to show you Affirmitively, What is the Reason why the Flock of
Christ is but Little.

And the First Reason, I judge may be this:

Reas. 1. Because the Reward which Christ has promised to his Flock, is in
another World, it is not to be found here below on this side the Grave, but it
is to be enjoyed in another Life. And men generally love present things, and
are much taken with that which is of a present enjoyment: Therefore it is, that
most men are so Careful, and so desirous after the things of this World,
because the Benefit and Pleasures of the things here below, are of a present
enjoyment; but the Benefit of Holiness, and the Reward of God's People is not
to be enjoyed in this Life, but in the World to come: Therefore it is that men
do so little regard the Service of God, because the reward seems to be at a
great distance from them. For I am very much persuaded, That if the Reward of
Godliness were but of a present Enjoyment, there would be abundance of Godly
People, and Christ's Flock would be the greatest Flock in the World: As for
Instance, Go to a Covetous Worldly-man, and Exhort him to Charity, and desire
him to lay out great part of his Estate for the good of the Poor; and tell him,
That he shall be sure to Receive a Hundred fold for it about a Week or a
Fortnight hence; and if he were but really Convinced of the Truth of this, I am
persuaded, he would presently become a Charitable Person, and would easily be
drawn to part with his Money willingly upon this account: But if you should go
to him, and bid him, Sell all that he has, and give it to the Poor, and come
and follow Christ; and tell him, That he shall be sure to have Treasure in
Heaven, and be eminently Rewarded at the Resurrection of the Just; Oh! how
little would this be Regarded by him? Oh! How little would this prevail upon
him? Oh! The Reward seems to be such a great way off, that he durst hardly part
with his Money upon such terms: Yea, I am persuaded that he would be so far
from embracing your Counsel, as that he would rather be troubled and grieved at
you, for speaking such Language to him: So that I judge this may be one great
Reason, why the Flock of Christ is but Little, and the Number of the Elect but
few.

But Secondly, Another is this:

Reas. 2. Because the Flock of Christ must expect to meet with Troubles and
Tribulations in their journey toward Heaven: They must expect to carry a
bitter Cup of Afflictions along with them in their Christian Progress; They
must not expect to spend their days in Pleasure and Pride of Life, to promote
their own Honor and Reputation in the World: but rather Troubles and
Afflictions, Trials and Temptations, must be their daily Portion in this Life:
Yea, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution:
Therefore this I also judge to be another Reason, why so few follow Jesus
Christ; because his way is attended with Sufferings, and men generally seek
after their own Pleasure, Ease, and Worldly Advantage; and do not love to
Travel in a Suffering-Path, nor walk in a Way that is attended with Straits and
Difficulties. Now you shall find most men are very willing to be saved, if they
could be saved upon their own terms, by walking in Pleasures, and in the vanity
of their own minds; but they are not willing to go through Sufferings to
Salvation; they are not willing to go to Heaven upon God's terms, nor to follow
the Lord Jesus Christ no further than it consists with their own carnal
Interest and Advantage. Most men are willing to are the Death of the Righteons,
but they are not willing to live the Life of the Righteous: They are very
willing to receive the Reward of the Righteous, but they are not willing to Run
the Race of the Righteous: They are very willing (it may be) to Reign with
Christ and wear the Crown, but they are not willing to suffer with Christ, and
bear the Cross: They are very willing to accept of the Crown of Glory, and
drink Wine with Christ in his Kingdom: but they are not willing to accept of
the Crown of Thorns, and drink Vinegar with Christ upon the Cross: Therefore
this may be one great Reason, why so few walk in the way of the Gospel, because
it is attended with Persecution; Therefore says Christ, There are some which
hear the Word, and receive it with joy, and keep it, and continue in it for a
while, so long as the world smiles upon them; but when Tribulation, or
Persecution arises for the Gospels sake, then presently they fly off, and
leave the Gospel; and by and by are angry and offended with it, for bringing
Troubles upon them, Matthew. 13.20, 21. So that it is the Tribulation of the
Gospel, that many times keeps Persons at a distance from the Gospel, and makes
many fall away from it, after Professing of it. And this we can too clearly
evidence, and witness by experience at this day, That many Persons could very
willingly follow Jesus Christ in his own way, and walk in the true Order of the
Gospel, according to God's Appointment; but for fear of Trouble and
Persecution, they dare not: For they think, if they should embrace the Truth as
it is in Jesus, and walk in Obedience thereunto, then they may come to lose the
Love (it may be) of Father, or Mother, or some other Relations; and all their
former Friends will now turn to be their Enemies, and hate them: And those,
that use to speak well of them formerly, will now Mock and Reproach them, and
do them what mischief they can; and so by this means, they may come to expose
themselves to a great many straits and difficulties; And therefore under this
Consideration, they stand off at a distance, and dare not obey the Gospel, nor
come into the Fold of Christ. Hence it is, There are many Persons, that if you
should say unto them, and ask them; Are you willing to go to Heaven, and dwell
with God to all Eternity in the Kingdom of Glory? They will be ready to Answer,
Yes; Oh! with all my heart; It is the desire of my Soul to be with God in the
Kingdom of Glory. But if you tell them, That they must go through much
Tribulation, and suffer much Persecution, if they will enter into the Kingdone
of God: Then they will be ready to ture their backs of the Kingdom, and
satisfy themselves without it, rather than expose themselves to so much
trouble about it. So that I judge, this may be another great Reason, why
Christ's Flock is but little.

But Thirdly, Another is this.

Reas. 3. Because there are but a very few great Men that walk in the Truth of
the Gospel; very few eminent Men in Authority will come into the Flock of Jesus
Christ; but the Flock of Christ generally consists of a Company of Poor,
Contemptible Men and Women, who are always accounted as the filth and the
offscouring of the World; Poor Fishermen, and Tent-makers, and such
Mechanical Persons, are generally the honourablest Persons in the Flock of
Christ. But now, most People love to follow the Example of Great Men; and that
Way which is lightly esteemed amongst the Nobility and Gentry, is commonly
little Regarded, amongst the most of Men; but that Way and Religion that is
honored, and promoted by them, is very prevalent upon the Affections of most
People, and much followed and highly esteemed amongst the Multitude: But now
the Way of God is very little honored and promoted by great Men; For, not many
Wise men after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called; But God
has Chosen the Foolish things of the World, to confound the Wise; and the Weak
things of the World, to confound the things which are Mighty: And Base things
of the World, and things which are Despised, has God chosen, that no flesh
should glory in his presence. So that it seems, the Flock of God consists of a
Company of base, foolish, weak, despised, contemptible Creatures, as to the
eyes of the World; and there are but very few Mighty Men of the World will lay
aside their Honor and Gallantry, and Travel in such a mean, contemptible path;
So that this may be another Reason, or Cause, why the Flock of Christ is but
little; Because most People delight to follow the Example of great Men: And
there are but a few great Men belong to the Fold of Christ. Therefore there is
a notable Text for this purpose, in Joh. 7.47, 48, 49. where the Jews Officers
were so much taken with Christ, as that they could not but speak wonderful well
of him before the Chief Priests and Pharisees; saying, Never man spoke like
this Man: But when the Pharisees perceived, that they began to relish the Words
and Doctrine of Christ, They presently began to put a Block in their way: And
cry out, ARE YE ALSO DECEIVED! Are you so mad and foolish to be deluded by such
a one as He is? Surely we hope you have more Wisdom in you than to be his
Disciples; For pray Consider, Have any of the RULERS, or any of the PHARISEES
Believed on Him? No, There is none follows him but a few Ignorant Cursed
People, which knows not the Law, therefore you must needs be deceived if you
follow Him, because you know the RULERS are all Enemies to Him: So that you
see, the main Argument that they made use of to diswade these Persons from
following Jesus, is this, The RULERS RUNS the Contrary way.

But Fourthly, and Lastly.

Reas. 4. Because there is no Honor, Credit, nor Worldly Reputation to be
gained, by walking in the Fold of Christ: There is very few that will open
their mouths to commend and speak well of those that walk faithfully with God
in his own way; but rather the contrary; Those that will follow Jesus Christ,
in the simplicity, and sincerity of the Gospel; must expect to be reproached,
reviled, defamed, and evil spoken of by most People; yea, they must expect to
be made a Reproach to their Neighbors, a Scorn and a Derision to them that are
round about them, a Byword among the Heathen, and a shaking of the Head among
the People: But now most men love Honor and Reputation, and delights in the
praises of Men; and that which is highly esteemed, and had in admiration by the
World, is very pleasing, and acceptable to most People: Therefore this is
another great thing that keeps many off, from closing in with the way of the
Gospel, because most men love that which is Honorable in the Worlds eye:
Therefore says Christ, Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe, which receive Honor one
of another, and seek not that Honor which comes from God only? So that while
Persons are ambitious, and desirous of Worldly Honor, they can never be
faithful Followers of Jesus Christ; for that which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is abomination in the sight of God. And again, there is a notable Text for
this purpose, in Joh. 12.42, 43. where there were several Persons, among the
Chief Rulers, believed on Him, but because of the Pharisees, they did not
Confess Him, lest they should lose their Credit amongst them, and so be cast
out of the Synagogue. Why, what was the Matter that they were not faithful to
their Consciences in this Case? Why, here is the business; They loved the Praise
of men, more than the Praise of God. They did see, and perceive, that if they
had Confessed Him openly, and had declared in good earnest for Christ, then
they should presently have lost their Credit and Reputation amongst the Jews,
and have exposed themselves to shame and reproach; for they knew, that the way
of Christ was every where spoken against, Acts 28.22. Therefore they would be
none of Christ's Disciples, because they were in love with Worldly Honor.
Hence it is, that so many Rejects the pure Commands and Institutions of Jesus
Christ, because they are mean and contemptible in the eyes of the World, and
are not trimmed and garnished with Rich outsides; Therefore it is, that so
many mock and scoff, and jear at that Heavenly Ordinance of Jesus Christ,
Believers Baptism; and would not suffer it to have any Being or Entertainment
in the World, because it must be done in a poor, mean, and despicable manner; I
mean as in the account of the world. But if you come to talk with them about
that foolish foppery, that Humane Invention of Infant Sprinkling, Oh! that must
be had in Reverence by them, and that must be highly extolled and magnified by
them, because it is so neatly and handsomely done, and gilded with outside
gallantry; and of great Repute and very Commendable almost in the eyes of every
one: For many times there is a brave Silver Basin to hold the Water in, and
that makes an honorable show, and pleases the Fancy of People exceedingly. And
again, many times there is a fine Soarlet Mantle to cover the Child, with a
broad Silver Lace upon it; and that is very pleasant to behold in a Carnal eye:
And several other Ceremonies and Circumstances, which are very decent and
commendable in the account of the World; and therefore it is, that this vain
and Scripture-less Practice is so acceptable to most People. So that I judge,
this may also be another great Reason why Christ has so few Disciples, because
there is no worldly Honor to be found in the way of Christ; and most men love
not Shame and Reproach.

So I shall leave these few Hints to your serious Consideration, and Conclude
this short Point with a brief Word of Caution, and so proceed to a Second
Observation.

Well then, seeing it is so, that the Flock of Christ is but Little, let us
take heed that we do not run astray from Christ, and so make it lesser: Let us
take heed that we do not wander out of the Fold of Christ, and run after other
Shepherds. Let us take heed that we do not leave the voice of Christ, and
hearken to the voice of Strangers; but seeing we have given up our Names to
Jesus Christ, let us endeavor (through the strength of the Lord) to follow Him
cheerfully and willingly in all his Temptations; and let us remember the Lord
is our Shepherd, therefore we shall want nothing that is good and convenient
for us; and then the Lord will take special care of us to deliver us out of
Egypt, and to preserve us in the Wilderness, till we come to that eternal Rest,
which yet remains for the People of God: And though we may be scattered in a
cloudy and dark Day, yet the Lord will in a short time Return to his Flock and
seek them out, and gather them together, and carry them in his bosom, and feed
them upon the Mountains of Israel; and they shall no more be a Prey to the
Heathen, neither shall the Beasts of the Land Devour them; but the Lord their
God shall be with them, and they shall Dwell safely, and none shall make them
afraid.

But I shall Proceed now to a Second Observation from the Text, which is this;

Obser. 2. That the Saints and Servants of God, should not be afraid of the
worst that man can do unto them.

A Third and Last Observation from the Text, is this,

Observe. 3. That it is the good pleasure of Almighty God, to provide and
prepare a Kingdom for his People.

I shall not speak any thing further concerning that Covetous kind of Fear,
which I last spoke of in the Explanation; But I shall endeavor to Apply my
self to the Two last Propositions, they being Chiefly upon my Heart to
Prosecute at this time, from this Text; Therefore I shall return to the Second
Observation, which was this;

Observe. 2. That the Saints and People of God should not be afraid of the worst
that man can do unto them. They should not be daunted, nor terrified at the
worst News that they can hear out of the mouths of men; nor at the worst
Punishment that they can receive from the hands of men: but they should still
be bold, and courageous, strong and valiant for the Cause of God, and for the
Interest of Jesus, though it may be attended with never so many Troubles and
Oppositions: Yea, though stripes and buffettings should daily attend us (if it
be upon the account of God) we should be so far from being afraid, as that we
should rather Rejoice, that we are counted worthy to suffer any thing for the
Name of Jesus. Possibly the men of the World may be filled with madness against
us, and put us in Prisons, by Hundreds and Thousands, and violently threaten us
with Halter and Gibbet: Well, be it so; we should notwithstanding, be Resolute
in the strength of the Lord, and not be afraid nor discouraged at Rabshekah's
Railing, nor yet at Nebuchadnezzar's Fury. See a notable Text to bind this
Duty, Ezekiel. 2.6. And thou Son of Man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid
of their words: As much as if he should say, Though they may magnify
themselves against thee with high and lofty Language, and insult over thee with
great and swelling words; yet fear them not, neither let their words terrify
thee. Again further, says the Text, Though Briars and Thorns be with thee,
and thou do dwell among Scorpions: As if he should say, Though they should be
rough as Thorns, and sharp as Briars against thee, and put forth their
persecuting hands against thee, to scratch and tear thee in pieces (as it were)
with their Stocks and Whipping-Posts; and though they should Hiss and Spit
their venom at thee, like so many Scorpions, and threaten thee with Death; yet
be not afraid, for all this; neither be daunted nor dismayed at their proud
looks, though they be a Rebellious House. Oh! that Professors at this day were
but thus valiant for God, and thus bold for the Cause of Jesus Christ. But Oh!
how does the Contrary appear amongst Professors at this Day, to the great
dishonor of God, and to the great grief of those who are truly sincere? Oh!
how base and cowardly does many eminent Professors prove in this day of
Adversity? How are they ready to cast off all their Religion, and to close in
with the Worshippers of Antichrist, and all out of a slavish fear of their
persecuting Enemies? Well, but the Lord has a Controversy against such
Backsliding Professors, and they shall not escape the hands of his wrath; for
those that forgets the Name of the Lord in such a Day as this, and stretches
out their Hands to a strange god, the Lord will surely search them out, for he
knows the secrets of the heart, Psalm. 44.20, 21.

But we will see what the Scripture says in another place, for the Proof of
this Proposition, Isa. 51.7. Hearken unto me ye that know Righteousness (says
the Text) the People, in whose heart is my Law: Well, what is the matter that
the Spirit of God calls so loudly for our Attention? What is it that the Lord
does so earnestly endeavor to press upon his People? See the following words,
Fear ye not the Reproach of men, neither be afraid of their Revilings: Though
the Wicked may Reproach and Revile you, and make you as the offscouring of the
World, yet that must not be regarded by you; that must be no excuse for you to
be weary in well-doing, but you must still go on in the Work of the Lord, and
follow after Righteousness; and fear not, but God will make you more than
Conquerours, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thus much shall suffice for the Proof of this 2d. Proposition: I shall now
come to give you some Reasons, or Encouragements, against the fear of Man, and
show you (in some measure) why the Saints and People of God need not be afraid
of the worst that man can do unto them.

Reas. 1. Because the Lord himself will be continually with them in all their
Troubles, to support and comfort them: He will come and visit them (if they
continue faithful to him) with his supporting Presence, and be a Companion with
them in all their Troubles: He will never leave, nor forsake his People in the
worst Condition that may befall them; Therefore great Reason why we should not
fear what Man can do unto us: You shall find by Consulting the Scriptures, That
the People of God in old time, did make this Consideration a grand Reason, or
Encouragement against the fear of Man in the worst of Troubles. And indeed,
this is a very glorious Encouragement for poor Souls to stay themselves upon in
time of Trouble, to Consider, That the Lord is with them in all their Troubles,
and takes special notice of all their Afflictions, and he is ready at any time
to put under his everlasting Arm to bear up their Souls, and support them under
the worst of Trials, and in his due time to deliver them out of all their
Afflictions. Well, but we will see what the Scripture says concerning this
matter: See first, Psalm. 23.4. Yea (says the Psalmist) though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of Death, yet will I fear no evil: (Mark) how bold and
resolute the Psalmist is in the midst of strange Difficulties: As much as if he
should say, Although I should walk in a dangerous valley, and mine Enemies at
the top of the Hill, ready to overwhelm me with destruction; and though Death
should pursue me, and be as near to me as my shadow, yet will I fear no evil.
Why David, what is the matter, that thou art so exceedingly transported above
the fear of evil? Certainly, thou have some Reason for it, thou could never
be so full of Courage in such eminent Danger as thou speak of, if thou had
not something more than ordinary to Support thy Spirit. See the Reason
therefore in the following words, THE LORD IS WITH ME. There Is the business;
there is that which is sufficient to fortify my Soul against all fear
whatsoever: Thy ROD and thy STAFF, they Comfort me: As much as if he should
say, Although thy Rod does a little Correct me, yet thy Staff does exceedingly
Support me, and thy PRESENCE does very much Refresh me; and betwixt them all, I
am mightily filled with Comfort and Encouragement.

Thus the Saints, and People of God, should Plead their Interest in him, in a
day of Adversity, and he will make all things Comfortable and pleasant unto
their Souls, and nothing shall be able to make them afraid. See also, Psalm.
46.1, 2, 3. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present help in time of
Trouble: Well, what then? What use does the Psalmist make of this? Why,
therefore will we not fear, though the Earth should be removed, and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the Waters thereof roar
and be troubled, and though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
Here Is an admirable Spirit filled with Confidence, and godly Resolution in the
strength of the Lord, Challenging (as it were) the greatest Terrors on Earth,
to show themselves in their greatest Rage and Fury; yet they shall not so much
as diminish his Courage, nor make him afraid: And the Reason of all is this,
GOD IS OUR REFUGE AND STRENGTH: So that it seems, the Consideration of God's
supporting Presence, is, or ought to be one great Reason or Encouragement to
bear up our Souls in the worst of Troubles: Therefore when troubles do attend
us, and when our Enemies are most implacable against us, and talk of Stoning of
us, and Banishing of us, and putting of us to Death, and the like; let us with
David, encourage our selves in the Lord our God, 1 Samuel 30.6. And let us
consider, the Lord is with us, and he is a present Help in time of Trouble; and
if God be for us, who can be against us? Therefore (says God) Isa. 41.10. Fear
thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness: As much as if God should say, Although all the World
should be against thee, yet fear thou not, keep close to me, and I will be with
thee; and although thou have never so many Enemies and Adversaries to oppose
thee, yet be not dismayed, for I am thy God, and I will strengthen thee; And
though they set themselves against thee, to wrong and oppress thee, yet be of
good cheer, I will help thee, and take thy part against them: And though they
think to Conquer thy Spirit, and subdue the strength of thy Inward-man, by
Imprisoning and Punishing of thee; yet be not troubled at that, do but put thy
Trust in me, and depend upon me, and I will uphold thee with the right hand of
my Righteousness; Therefore seeing the Lord is so much engaged for the good of
his People, let us not fear what man can do unto us.

Reas. 2. Why we should not fear man: Because the Lord himself will engage and
fight against the Enemies of his People, and bring them to a reckoning for all
their Malice and Cruelty toward them, though they may tyrannize and insult
over God's Heritage for a time, and magnify themselves against the Lord and
his Jewels; yet the time will come, when the Lord himself (...) appear against
them in Wrath and Judgment, and dash them in ^^^ces like a Potter's Vessel,
for their Rage and Cruelty against his People; Therefore this may be another
Reason to arm us against the fear of Man, because the Lord has engaged to deal
with our Adversaries in Judgment, and Recompense Fury upon our Enemies for all
their Tyranny toward us, and will assuredly work Deliverance and Salvation for
his People from all their Troubles. See that notable Text, Isa. 49.25, 26. But
thus says the Lord, Even the Captives of the Mighty shall be taken away, and
the Prey of the Terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend with them that
contendeth with thee, and I will save thy Children; and I will feed them that
oppress thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own
blond, as with swoet Wine; and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior, and the Mighty One of Jacob thy Redeemer: Thus the Lord will one Day
deal with the enemies of his People, when they have filled up the Measure of
their Iniquity, then they shall assuredly Drink the dreggs of the Cup of God's
Fury; and when they are at the highest, raging, and roaring, and swelling in
Malice like the Sea, against the People of the Lord, then is their destruction
the nearest, and then is Sions Deliverance near at hand. Read and Consider well
that Scripture, Isa. 17.12, 13, 14. compared with Chap. 59.15. to the latter
end; Woe to the multitude of many People, which make a noise like the noise of
the Seas, and like the rushing of many Waters; the Nations shall Rush, like the
Rushings of mighty Waters; But GOD SHALL REBUKE them: And they shall flee, and
be chased as the Chaff of the Mountains before the wind, and as Thistle-down
before a Whirlwind: Behold, this is the Portion of them that spoil us, and
the Lot of them that Rob us, etc.

Oh! Little does our Enemies Consider, what mischief they are a heaping upon
their own heads, when they drive on so furiously against the People of God, and
Persecute the innocent Lambs of Jesus Christ without a Cause: What account do
you think they can give to the Lord, when he shall call them to a Reckoning for
these things? And how will they be able to stand before the Lord, when he shall
bring them to a Trial, for dragging his People out of their Houses from their
Callings, and casting them into Prisons and Dungeons, and keeping of them there
by Hundreds and Thousands for nothing but because they are Godly, and because
they love the Lord Jesus Christ, and dare not sin against the Lord? Surely the
Hand of the Lord will one Day take hold of Judgment for these things, and he
will assuredly render Vengeance to his Enemies, and reward them that hate him,
for the Arrows of the Lord are ordained against the Persecutors, Deuteronomy. 32.41,
42. Psalm. 7.13. Therefore, though the enemies of God may now flourish and
prosper for a while, and lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the
Stall, and drink Wine in Bowels, and anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments; yet when the Lord comes to Plead with the Nations for the
Controversy of Sion; Then they will be ready to run and hide themselves in the
Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and call to the Mountains and Rocks to
fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb.

Therefore under this Consideration, let us not faint, nor be discouraged in our
Progress toward Heaven; for if the Lord be on our side, we need not fear what
Man can do unto us.

Reas. 3. Because our greatest, and our worst Adversaries (I mean our
Persecutors) are but Men that shall die, poor, vile, sinful, mortal men, whose
Breath is in their nostrils, whose Lives are uncertain, and whose greatest
glory is but perishing vanity, and when they are at their greatest strength,
and in their greatest Pride; The Lord can but put forth his hand and touch
them, and lo they become as nothing; and the Lord can but put forth his voice,
and call for their Breath, and lo they become but dust, and meat for Worms;
Therefore great Reason why we should not be afraid of their greatest Terror:
For alas, they may threaten great things against the People of God; yea, and be
ready to Swear (it may be) that such and such things shall be done unto them
the next Week, or the next Month, when (it may be) the next day they themselves
are summoned to their Graves, and so never live to see their wicked Designs
accomplished. Therefore see how the Scripture Reproves Persons under this
Consideration, for being afraid of man: Isa^. 51.12, 13. Who art thou, that
thou should be afraid of man, that shall DYE, and of the Son of man which
shall be made as GRASS; And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched
forth the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the Earth; and have feared
continually every day, because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were
ready to destroy: and where is the fury of the Oppressor? So that it is below
the Spirit of a Saint, to be afraid of any perishing Creature: it is a shame
for a Living Saint, to be afraid of a Dying Sinner; it is a great dishonor to
God, for Saints to be afraid of a mortal man, and forget the fear of the living
God; it is a shame for a Saint, whose strength is in the Lord, to be afraid of a
man whose greatest strength is weakness; it is a shame for a Saint, whose hope
and Confidence is in the God of Jacob, to be afraid of a man, whose Expectation
shall perish; it is a horrid thing that Saints should be more afraid to serve
the Lord, then wicked men are to serve the Devil: Therefore let us hold fast
the Profession of our Faith without wavering, and never fear what man can do
unto us.

Rea. 4. Because though we may be troubled, and disturbed on every side by man,
yet we have Peace and Favor with God; and though men may account us as the
filth and the offscouring of the World, yet the Lord does esteem us as his
Jewels, and his peculiar Treasure; And this may be sufficient to bear up our
Souls in the greatest of troubles, to consider, That though the World may hate
us with cruel hatred, yet the Lord loves the Righteous, and takes pleasure in
his People; and though the World may be our Enemy, and frown upon us, yet the
Lord is our Friend, and will smile upon us, with the Light of his Countenance,
and refresh our Souls with the choice manifestations of his Spirit, and
presence; and though in the World we may have Tribulation and Sorrow, yet in
God we may have Peace and Comfort, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Therefore see where our Savior Christ makes this a great Reason against Fear,
Joh. 14.27. where he speaks thus; Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto
you, not as the world gives, give I unto you; for alas the world many times
gives Peace, and presently takes it away again; it may give Peace and rest a
little to Day, and (it may be) Sorrow and Trouble to Morrow; But now says
Christ, I give not Peace after this manner; But my Peace ILEAVE with you, that
is, it shall continue and Tarry with you, and none shall be able to take it
from you; Well what then? suppose it be so why, let not your hearts be
Troubled, neither let them be afraid for though your Enemies may Rob and
Deprive you of your outward Comforts, and outward Enjoyments, yet they shall
never be able to east you out of my Favor, nor Deprive you of that inward
Comfort and Spiritual Refreshment, that I will give unto you, and leave with
you; Therefore be not afraid of their Terror, neither let your hearts be
Troubled. And so, likewise see the Apostle, Romans 5.1, 3. Therefore being
Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; So
that now, we do not only Rejoice in the hope of Glory; But, we also Rejoice
and Glory in all our Tribulations, and are filled with Comfort in all our
afflictions, 2 Cor. 7.4. Therefore let us endeavor to keep in the Love and
Favor of God, and then we need not fear what man can do unto us.

Rea. 5. Because all our Sufferings, (which are for Righteousness sake) work
together for our good and great advantage, and will add to our future Glory and
happiness; there is no misery that can befall us, upon the account of
Godliness, but it will prove an addition to to our Eternal Happiness; Every
step we trace in sorrow, will be to the increase of our Eternal Joy. Therefore
this may be another great Reason, why we should not fear the worst that man can
do unto us; for alas, whatever they do unto us they cannot hurt us, if we keep
close to God, they can do us no Injury at all; Nay, the more they Persecute us
(if it be for Christ) the more it will conduce to our Good and Benefit. Oh what
a glorious Encouragement is this for poor Persecuted Saints, to hold out in a
Day of Trial, and to bear up their Souls with Joy in the midst of Troubles! How
is it possible (me thinks) for Souls to be dejected and cast down under
Afflictions, and to turn their backs of God in a day of Adversity, if they did
but seriously consider of these things. For who is, he that can harm you, if
you be followers of that which is Good, 1 Pet. 3.13. See also that notable
place, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. where the Apostles themselves made this consideration a
great support to their Souls under all their Troubles: For which Cause, (says
the Apostle) we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet our inward
man is renewed Day by Day; For our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory. So that you
may see, All our Temporal afflictions, are but so many Soul Advantages, and all
our Earthly L^s^es, will be made up to us in Heavenly Treasure, and all our
Crosses will but make our Crown of Glory the greater; therefore under this
Consideration, Let Us go forward with Boldness in the way of the Lord, and never
fear what Man can do unto us, Genesis 50.20.

Rea. 6. Because, (if we continue Faithful to God) he will give us a Crown of
Life, and a Kingdom of Glory; he will Eminently reward us with an unmovable
Kingdom, and with an Incorruptible Inheritance which fades not away: Though we
may for a time be attended with a great many Troubles and Difficulties, and may
be exposed to many outward Calamities in this Life, yet the time will come,
when we shall be wholly Freed from all Sorrow and Trouble of what Nature
soever, and shall be filled with unspeakable Joy in the Kingdom of Glory to all
Eternity; And this is that which may exceedingly Support us under Sufferings,
and Arm us against the Fear of Man, to consider, that we who are now Despised,
and Trampled under Foot, and made as the offscouring of the World, shall one
Day be Honored, and Dignified with a Crown of Glory, and Exalted with Jesus
Christ in his Throne and Kingdom; Therefore says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.12.
Compared with Romans 8.17. If we suffer with him, we shall also Reign with him,
and be Partners together with him in Glory. Oh this may mightily encourage us
to presevere with Boldness in the Work of the Lord, and exceedingly Fortify us
against the Fear of Man, and Balance all Oppositions whatsoever; and therefore
you shall find, our Savior Christ makes this a grand Reason or Encouragement
against Fear, in the words of my Text, Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock;
though you are but Little, Mean, and Contemptible in the Eyes of the World, yet
Fear not, be not afraid of them which kill the Body, and Endeavor like Wolves
to destroy you; Why what is the matter, that we must so little regard the
Terror of our Adversaries? Why here is the Business; For its your FATHERS good
PLEASURE to give you the KINGDOM; Therefore seeing we have such a glorious
Portion to receive from the hands of our Heavenly Father, let us never be afraid
of our Earthly Enemy See also that notable Text, Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those
things which thou shall Suffer; Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison, that ye may be Tried, and ye shall have Tribulation certain Days; yet
notwithstanding, Fear none of these things. Though the Devil and his
Instruments may prevail against thee for a season, to Imprison and Persecute
thee; yet be not afraid, but be thou faithful unto death, and for thy
Encouragement herein, I will assure thee thou shall lose nothing by it, for
thou shall certainly receive a Crown of Life, and be exalted with me in my
Throne and Kingdom: Therefore, let us have respect unto this Recompense of
Reward, and choose rather to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season. And let us not be dejected, nor cast
down, nor be afraid of our Adversaries, when they reproach and imprison us, and
deprive us from our Callings and Relations, and threaten us with Ruin and
Desolation, as to our outward man; but let us be content and cheerful, if it be
for Christ, let them do their worst, we shall have satisfaction enough at the
day of Account, when God makes up his Jewels, and calls his People to their
Crown and Kingdom: For what man is there, that would not be content and willing
to lose a Penny, or two Pence, if he were sure to gain a Thousand Pounds by it?
How much more should we be content and willing to lose any thing of this World
for Christ, so long as we are sure we shall receive such an Eternal, and
unspeakable Portion in the World to come? For every one that has forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Pather, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands for Christ's sake, shall receive an hundred fold at the Resurrection of
the Just, and in the World to come, Everlasting Life, Mat. 19.29. Therefore
says the Apostle James, Chap. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive a Crown of Life; which the
Lord has promised to those that love him: Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom,
which cannot be moved, Let us abound in the Work and Service of the Lord, and
never fear what man can do unto us.

I shall now come to make a little Use, or Application of this Point, and so
proceed to a third and last Observation.

Use 1. Well then, is it so, That the Saints and People of God, ought not to be
Afraid of the worst that Man can do unto them? Then in the first place, by way
of Caution, Let us take heed of being fearful and faint-hearted in the Work
and Cause of God: Let Us take heed of neglecting any part of our Duty toward
God, out of a slavish Fear toward the Threatenings of Man; Oh! let us take heed
now, that we do not Dishonor the Lord, and wrong our own Souls, by a base,
fearful, unbelieving spirit, in this Day of Jacob's Troubles; when the Lord
shall call us forth, to bear a Testimony for his Name and Cause, which are so
much Blasphemed and Trampled under foot, as it is at this day: Let us take
heed, that the Devil do not catch us in the snare of slavish Fear, and so
hinder us, and stop us in our Proceedings for God, and in our Resolutions for
Christ; and cause us to Comply with the Enemies of Godliness, and join issue
with the Workers of Iniquity; to the great Dishonor of God, and to the
encouraging and gladning the hearts of our Enemies; and to the wounding and
sadning the Souls of those that are truly faithful: I say, let us take heed of
these things, lest we shamefully turn our backs of God in a day of Adversity,
out of a slavish Fear, of Suffering from the hands of Men. Oh! we might here
lament the Apostasy of abundance of Professors, since the Lord has been
pleased to turn his hand of Trial upon them: Oh! how have many Professors at
this day, made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and highly opposed the
purity of the Gospel, and basely turned their backs of the Truth, as it is in
Jesus; and all out of a slavish Fear of the Frowns and Displeasure of Man? Oh!
how have many Professors at this day, who have formerly born a glorious
Testimony for God, and against Antichrist, yet now has filthily defiled their
hands with Iniquity, and corrupted their hearts with Covetousness, and lifted
up their Souls to Vanity, and Sworn Deceitfully to Babylon; and all to avoid
Sufferings, and to advance their own Interest and Advantage in the World:
Therefore I say again, Let us take heed to our selves, lest there should creep
into any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; for
we shall be made partakers with Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our
Confidence steadfast unto the end. Therefore, whatever we may Suffer or undergo
for God, let us take heed of declining the Cause of God, and forsaking his
Interest: for it is written, The just shall live by Faith; but if any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And again, the Backslider in
heart, shall be filled with his own ways, Heb. 10.38. Prove. 14.14.

Therefore when we meet with oppositions in the Ways of God, Let Us not be
afraid nor terrified at them; if they shall threaten us with a Prison for our
Integrity, let us not be afraid of a Prison, but cheerfully and willingly
forsake all, and embrace a Prison, rather than forsake our Interest in God, to
embrace this present world: If they shall threaten us with Banishment, for our
Love to the Truth; Let not the fear of Banishment, cause us to turn our backs
upon the Truth, and be afraid to own it; knowing, that neither Imprisonment,
nor Banishment, can deprive us of the presence of God, nor cast us out of the
favor of him, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand,
are pleasures for evermore: But if we out of a slavish Fear, neglect our Duty
toward God, and turn from the Commandments of the Lord; then we shall lose the
favor of God, and draw the Judgments of the Lord upon us, and split our Souls
against the Rock of his Displeasure; Therefore says God to Jeremiah, Jer.
1.17. Gird up thy loins and arise, and speak unto them, all that I command
thee; be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.

There is a notable place in Psalm. 44. which is worthy of our Consideration,
and also of our Imitation and Practice; it is a glorious Account of the
Churches Faithfulness in an evil Day, and in a persecuted State, Psalm. 44.9.
and so forward: Thou have cast off, and put us to shame; Thou have given us
like Sheep appointed for meat, and have scattered us among the Heathen: Thou
make us a Reproach to our Neighbors, a Scorn and a Derision to them that are
round about us: Thou make us a Byword among the Heathen, a shaking of the
Head among the People. Here Is a miserable State indeed, for a People to
undergo, full of Troubles and Sorrow, and full of Contempt and Reproach, and
full of Distress and Misery: Well, but did they not turn back in such a day as
this? Is it possible for them to hold out, in the midst of so many
Difficulties? Did they not forsake the Cause of God, and decline his Interest,
in such a Persecuted State as this? Noe, not at all: See verse. 17, 18. All this
is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee; neither have we dealt falsely
with thy Covenant; Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps
declined from thy way. Therefore now let us consider, and make this Application
of it unto our Souls; whatever Sufferings we may meet withal, upon the Account
of Godliness; Let us not fear, let us not be dismayed, let us not value the
worst that Man can do unto us.

Thus much in the first place, by way of Caution; But Secondly, by way of
Exhortation.

Use 2. Is it so, That the Saints and People of God, should not be Afraid of
the worst that Man can do unto them? Why then, let us not only be Cautioned
from Fear, but let us be Exhorted to Courage; Let us no only be Dehorted from
the Vice of Fear; but let us also be Exhorted to the contrary Virtue; Let us
not only be found passive in that which is not our Duty; but let us also be
found active in that which is our Duty; that so we may be complete in the Will
of God, and glorify him in the whole course of our Lives and Conversations.
Hence then, let us be Exhorted to be Bold and Courageous, strong and valiant
for the Cause of God, and the Interest of Jesus Christ; though we meet with
never so many Dissiculties and Oppositions in this World: Let us count nothing
too dear to lose for Christ, feeing he has counted nothing too dear to lose
for us: If the Lord shall call for loss of Liberty at our hands, in the
management of his Cause and Interest, let us cheerfully give up our Liberties
to the Lord, and embrace a Prison: If the Lord shall call for the leaving of
Friends and Relations, and take us from our Callings, and call for the loss of
Goods and Estate; let us freely and willingly give up all for God, and be
content without them, and still contim^e as bold as Lions in our Testimony for
Christ; knowing that the time will come, when we shall have a hundred fold
returned into our bosoms; and the time will come, when we shall serve God in
his holy Temple, and he that fitteth on the Throne shall dwell amongst us, and
we shall hunger no more, neither shall we thirst any more; for the Lamb which
is in the midst of the Throne shall feed us, and shall lead us into fountains
of living Water: Therefore I say, let us go on with much boldness in the Work
of the Lord, and let us make it appear to the World, that we are resolved
(through the strength of the Lord) to obey God rather than man; yet, let us
manifest so much Courage in our Christian Warfare, as to be content to become
any thing, yea, to become nothing, so the Glory of God may be promoted and
advanced by us: Therefore in this Case, let us take the Counsel of David to his
Son Solomon, when the Lord requires any thing at our hands to be done for the
honor of his Name; Let us be STRONG and of good COURAGE, and do it; Fear not,
nor be dismayed, for the Lord God, even our God, will be with us; he will not
fail us, nor forsake us, till we have finished all our work for the Service of
God, 1 Chronicles. 28.20.

Oh! we should very much glorify God, and adorn the Profession of the Gospel,
if we are but valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and take the Tribulations
of the Gospel cheerfully and joyfully; yea, we shall make our very Enemies
admire at us, if we have but a right spirit upon this account: when they shall
see and take notice, how we are troubled on every side, and how we are
Persecuted and Afflicted, and trampled under foot, and yet we are cheerful, and
full of Courage, and not at all daunted nor terrified at it: They must needs
think there is more than ordinary in our Profession, and so by that means God
is exceedingly glorified, and his Truth admired by his Enemies; though possibly
they may still obstinately and willingly oppose it, yet notwithstanding, they
shall by this means be left without excuse; and the power of the Truth shall
witness against them, to the praise and glory of God, and to the peace and
comfort of our own Souls: Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.14 If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory
rests upon you: On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is
glorified. There is also a notable passage of our Savior Christ concerning
Peter, John 21.18, 19. Verily, verily, (says Christ unto Peter) when thou wast
young, thou girdest thy self, and walk whither thou would; but when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not; This spoke he, signifying by what
death he should GLORIFY God. So that it seems, those that have so much
Courage, as to suffer cheerfully for the Name of Christ, and to lay down their
lives for the sake of Christ, their Death and Sufferings will tend much to the
Glory of God, and to the Eternal Bliss and Happiness of their own Souls.

Therefore when our Enemies shall threaten us, and command us to speak nor
preach no more in the Name of Jesus, nor Meet any more to Worship God in his
own way; Let us (with Peter and John) ask them, Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye? And let us
tell them plainly to their faces, That we must obey God rather than Men;
Therefore we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, and we
cannot but practice the things which we have learned, and received in Command
from Jesus Christ.

There are two notable and very remarkable Examples worthy of our
Consideration, which I shall briefly urge, for our Encouragement in this
matter: The one is concerning the three Children, in Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. Oh!
that there were but such a spirit amongst the People of God now, in this day of
Sions bleeding.

Well, but let us a little consider how they behaved themselves; the King had
made a Decree, and given forth Command, That all People should fall down and
Worship the Golden Image which he he had set up, and whosoever would not,
should the same hour be cast into the midst of a Burning fiery Furnace. Well,
but Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, they broke his Decree, and disobeyed his
Command, and was not at all afraid of his fury, nor terrified at the
punishment; and when they were called to an account before the King for this
their Disobedience to his Decree, he proffered them Pardon upon condition of
their now complying; But if not, they must expect to feel the effects of his
Rage and Fury in the Fiery Furnace; and who is that God, that should deliver
them out of his hands? Well, now it is come to this with them, they must either
Turn, or Burn; they must either Bow to the Image, or be Burnt in the Fire; they
must either conform with their Bodies to the Kings Command, or else expose
their Bodies to the Burning Flames. Well, and how did they behave themselves in
this Case? See the story, and you shall find it at large, Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, answered and said to the King (O Nebuchadnezzar) we are not careful
to answer thee in this matter; If it be so, our God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the Burning Fiery Furnace; and he will deliver us out of thine
hand (O King.) But now, Herein consists chiefly the Excellency of their Spirit,
in the next words, therefore mark; But if not, whether God will deliver us or
no; Yet be it known unto thee, (O King) that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the Golden Image which thou have set up. Here Is an admirable Spirit for
the service of God, full of Confidence and Resolution, for the Glory of the
true and living God; As much as if they should say; If it be so (O King) do thy
worst, we matter it not; our God whom we serve is able to deliver us; and he
will deliver us from thy Rage and Cruelty, (O King) therefore we are not
careful to answer thee in the Business; And further we testify unto thee, (O
King) that whether he will deliver us, or not deliver us; whether we Burn, or
not Burn; come Life, or come Death; yet we would have thee to know (O King)
that we will not serve thy Gods, nor we will not worship the Golden Image which
thou have set up.

Oh therefore now let us endeavor to bear upon our hearts the Example of these
three Famous Children, (or rather Champions) of the most High God; That we may
through their example, be provoked and Encouraged, to hold fast the Name and
Faith of Jesus Christ, even in the worst Condition that may befall us, that so
being Faithful unto Death, we may receive the Crown of Life, and sit with
Christ in his Throne and Kingdom.

Another Example that I shall take notice of, for our Consideration and
Encouragement, is concerning Paul, in Acts 21.13. which indeed is very
Remarkable, and worthy of our observation and practice. Paul, it seems, had
some Work to do for God at Jerusalem, and was much pressed in Spirit, to go,
and bear witness to the Name of Jesus there; But it seems before he went, he
was foretold in a Figure, how he should Suffer when he came there; and how he
should be delivered into the hands of Persecutors; for there was a certain
Prophet named Agabus, came down from Judea, and when he was come among the
Disciples, he took Paul's Girdle, and Bound his own hands and Feet with it; and
Prophesied in the Spirit, that so the Jews at Jerusalem, should bind the Man
that owed that Girdle, and should deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles;
And when the Disciples heard that, they began to persuade him, and earnestly
entreat him, not to go to Jerusalem, and laid before him the Consideration of
his Sufferings, thinking to prevent him of his Journey. Well, but what does
Paul do in this Case? Does he neglect the Work of the Lord to avoid his
Sufferings? Does he forbear to go, because of Danger? No, its almost Death to
him to think of forbearing, and leaving the Work of the Lord undone at
Jerusalem, what ever it Costs him: Therefore said he in his Answer to his
Disciples; What mean you to Weep, and to Break my heart? As much as if he
should say; what mean you to be thus earnest, to hinder me from the Work of the
Lord; away with all your Entreaties, and away with all your Persuasions; for I
am more afflicted and wounded in heart, at the Consideration of your
persuasions (in this Case) than I am at the Consideration of all my Sufferings
at Jerusalem; For I would have you to think that I am Ready, not only to be
Bound, but also to Dye at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Oh that this valiant Spirit of Paul's, were but Seated and Grounded in the
hearts of all Professors at this Day; how would it Glorify God, and make his
Truth and Gospel shine in the World, and mightily amaze, and astonish the
hearts of our Enemies, and exceedingly Engage the Lord, to Crown us speedily
with Victory and Deliverance!

Therefore now let us seriously weigh these things, and lay them to heart; And
let us Rouse up our Dull Spirits, and be Valiant for God, and the more our
Adversaries increase in their Rage and Fury against us, the more let us
increase in our Zeal and Courage for Christ; and let us Remember the Lord is
with us, and for us; and if we continue Faithful to him, he will never leave
us, nor forsake us, But continually Support us, and Comfort us, and in his due
time deliver us out of all our Troubles and Afflictions.

Therefore to conclude this point, Let us be strong in the Lord, and in the
Power of his might, and take unto our selves the whole Armor of God, That we
may be able to stand, and withstand, in this evil Day; That so having fought a
good Fight, and having finished our Course, and kept the Faith, we may at
length receive that Crown of Righteousness, and that Eternal weight of Glory,
which is laid up for all those that love the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I have done with this point of Doctrine, and shall now come to the last Branch
of the Text, wherein is comprehended the third and last Observation, which I
raised from the words; I shall now endeavor to Manage and Prosecute that, as
the Lord shall direct me.

Therefore I proceed and say; That it is the good pleasure of Almighty God, to
provide and prepare a Kingdom for his People. The Lord has so much Love and
Affection for his People, as that he takes Delight and Pleasure in their Glory
and Happiness; therefore he will be sure to have so much Care and Tender
Respect toward them, as to provide a Reward for his Flock; And their Reward
shall be no less than a Crown and Kingdom: I say, it is the good Pleasure of
Almighty God to provide an Eminent Reward for his People; yea to prepare a
Kingdom for his despised little Flock; Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

Though possibly now, they may not be counted worthy of a poor contemptible
Cottage by the Men of the World, yet the Lord himself will one Day count them
worthy of a Crown and Kingdom; though now (it may be) they are not counted fit
to have a being in the World, yet the LORD will one Day count them fit to have
a Being in a Glorious Kingdom; though now (it may be) they are so much despised
by the World, as that they are not counted worthy to dwell amongst Sinful Men
upon Earth, yet they are so much honored by the Lord, as that he will one day
count them worthy to dwell with Glorious Angels in Heaven; though now (it may
be) they are poor, and despised and trampled under Foot, yet they shall one Day
be Rich and Honorable, and sit upon Thrones; Though now (it may be) they are
clothed with Reproach, and covered with shame, yet they shall one Day be
clothed with Majesty, and Crowned with Glory; though now (it may be) they are
tossed to and fro, and have no certain dwelling place, yet they shall one Day
enjoy a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. Here Is a
Glorious Portion laid up in store for the poor despised Flock of Christ; Here Is
that which will abundantly make them amends for all their Sorrow and Travel in
their Earthly Pilgrimage; though now (possibly) they are counted the filth and
the offscouring of the World; yet the very poorest and meanest of God's
People, shall one day be promoted, and advanced to an Honorable Kingdom; I say
a Kingdom shall one Day be the Portion of the poorest and meanest of Gods
People; yea, even those that are the most despised, and most abused, are no
less than Heirs of a Kingdom, they have it now in promise, and they shall
assuredly one Day have it in possession.

But for the better Confirmation of this Glorious Truth, I shall endeavor to
give you some Scripture-Testimonies which strongly bear witness thereunto; See
one in Mat. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, (which is
his little Flock, being then Separated from the Goats) Come ye Blessed of my
Father, (A Glorious Invitation indeed) he does not only invite them to come,
But, come ye BLESSED; Why what is the matter? Wherein does their Blessedness
consist? See the next words, and you shall find; Inherit the KINGDOM, prepared
for you from the Foundation of the World: Herein does their Blessedness
consist, and herein are they Blessed Persons indeed. It was the good pleasure
of Almighty God to provide and prepare a Kingdom for them, and now they are
called to come and possess it; therefore this is one clear Scripture
Testimony, to prove the Truth of this Proposition; namely, That it is the good
pleasure of Almighty God, to provide and prepare a Kingdom for his People. See
another, in Mat. 5.10. Where our Savior Christ speaks this Language; Blessed
are they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is the KINGDOM
of Heaven, (Mark) Blessed are they which are PERSECUTED for Righteousness sake:
Though in a PERSECUTED State, yet in a BLESSED State: though in troubled
Condition, yet in a happy Condition: Why so? How does it appear, that they are
Blessed in a Persecuted State? Why here is the business; there is a
Kingdom-Portion prepared, to make them amends for their Suffering-Portion;
therefore though they may be Persecuted, and Reproached, and evil spoken of,
yet their Condition is blessed and happy, Because their Reward shall be great
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Alas now we are but strangers and Pilgrims, Traveling toward our Fathers
house, and we must expect to meet with many Rubs and difficult steps in our
Journey; we must expect to meet with many Storms, and bitter Blasts in our way
to Heaven, and to climb over many troublesome styles, before we come to the
Land of Rest; But when we come home to our own Country, and Arrive at our
continuing City; Then we shall receive a Glorious Portion from the hands of our
Heavenly Father, which will be no less than a Crown and Kingdom.

See another Glorious Testimony for the Truth of this Proposition, in Luke
22.28, 29, 30. Says Christ there to his Disciples, Ye are they which have
continued with me in my Temptations. As much as if he should say; you are they
which have been with me in all my Troubles, and have followed me faithfully in
all my Sufferings, and have Traveled with me in a difficult path; and now, for
your Comfort and Encouragement, here is a promise for you, to make you amends
for all your Trials, I Will see that you shall be sufficiently requited for every
thing that you have lost in my service; Therefore take notice, That I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, even as my Father has appointed unto me; And you shall eat
and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit upon Thrones Judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel.

Thus you see, what Honor and Dignity, what Glory and Majesty, the poor
despised Saints of God shall one Day have conferred upon them; and what an
Eminent Portion they shall one Day receive from the hands of their Heavenly
Father: therefore, Here they have no continuing City, But they seek one to
come: Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared
for them a City. Therefore I shall conclude the proof of this Proposition, with
that saying of the Apostle, Jam. 2.5. where he speaks thus; Hearken my beloved
Brethren; Has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs
of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him. Though they are
poor in this World, yet they are rich in Faith, and Heirs of a Kingdom; and
though now, (it may be) they are Branded and Stigmatized with filthy names, and
called Phanaticks, and Schismatics, and Heretics, and the like; yet they
shall one day appear to be the Jewels of God, and all Nations shall call them
Blessed, in a delightful Land; and they shall dwell with God in his heavenly
habitation; For this we know, when our Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, we
shall have a Building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the
Heavens, Mal. 3.12. 2 Cor. 5.1.

So much shall suffice for the proof of this Proposition, viz. That Gods People
shall one Day Receive, Possess, and enjoy a Kingdom. I shall now come, to
speak a few words concerning the Excellency of this Kingdom, and endeavor to
show you (in some measure) what manner of Kingdom this will be, that shall one
Day be the Portion of Gods People.

First, That Kingdom, which God will one Day give unto his People, It is a
Heavenly Kingdom: It is not an Earthly corruptible Kingdom, Adorned with
worldly Vanities; But it is a Heavenly Incorruptible Kingdom, Adorned with
Celestial Majesty: It is not a mean contemptible Kingdom, attended with Earthly
corruption; But it is a High and Lofty Kingdom, filled with Heavenly Beauty: It
is not an ordinary Kingdom, to be found here upon Earth; But it is an
Extraordinary Kingdom, reserved now in Heaven; It is such a Kingdom, as all the
Kingdoms on Earth, and all the Monarchs in the World, are not worthy to be
compared, nor put in the Balance with it: Therefore this is one thing which
may (in a great measure) Demonstrate the Excellency of this Kingdom; It is such
a Heavenly Portion, as that all the Earth, is not able to afford such a
precious Jewel. See what the Scripture says concerning this Kingdom, in this
very particular, 2 Timothy 4.18. Says the Apostle there, The Lord shall deliver
me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his HEAVENLY Kingdom, (Mark)
he will preserve me not only unto his Kingdom, but unto his HEAVENLY Kingdom;
An excellent Kingdom, of a Heavenly Nature, nothing on Earth comparable
thereunto. Therefore says Christ also, Mat. 5.3, 10, 12. Blessed are the poor
in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are they which are
Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven;
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. So that it
is not only a Kingdom, but a Kingdom of Heaven; it is not only a Reward, but
a Reward in Heaven; it is not only a Jerusalem, but a Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb.
12.22. It is not only a Country, but a Heavenly Country, Heb. 11.16. It is not
only a Building, but a Building in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. A City which has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. So that this is the
first thing, that bespeaks the Excellency of this Kingdom; It is a Heavenly
Kingdom, A Portion which this World is not able to afford.

2. It is a Gloriom Kingdom, or a Kingdom of Glory; It is not only a Heavenly
Kingdom, But a Glorious Heavenly Kingdom, or a Heavenly Glorious Kingdom; It is
not a Kingdom mixed with worldly pollutions, but it is a Kingdom filled with
Heavenly Glory; It is not a vile Kingdom, attended with shame and dishonor,
But it is a precious Kingdom, full of Honor and Glory; It is such a Kingdom,
as all the Kingdoms on Earth, are not worthy to be compared with it for Glory
and Beauty; there is no Kingdom on Earth, so Glorious, out it is mixed with some
shame and contempt; But the Saints Kingdom, is altogether lovely, clothed with
Glory and Majesty; there is no Kingdom on Earth, so Beautiful, but it is mixed
with some silthiness, and Deformity; but the Saints Kingdom, is altogether
comely, full of Spendour and Beauty; there is no Kingdom on Earth so pleasant,
but it is mixed with some filth and corruption; but the Saints Kingdom, is
altogether pure, full of Excellent Brightness. Oh the Excellency and Purity of
this Kingdom! Oh the Glory, and Dignity of this Kingdom! who is sufficient to
express the Majesty and Beauty of this Kingdom? The tongue of Men and Angels
is not able to speak forth the fullness thereof.

But now to prove, That it is such a Glorious Kingdom; see first that saying of
the Apostle, 1 These. 2.11, 12. You know (says Paul) how we exhorted and charged
every one of you, That you would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto
his Kingdom and GLORY: (Mark) he has not only called you to his Kingdom, but
to his Kingdom and GLORY; (that is to say) to that Glory which is in that
Kingdom, which plainly shows it is a GLORIOUS Kingdom. And further it appears,
that the greatest Glory, and the greatest Excellency that this World can
afford, is not worthy to be compared with the GLORY of this Kingdom; For the
Spirit of God in Scripture, does frequently call the greatest Glory, and the
greatest Honor of this World, But vanity and vexation of Spirit, and it is of
no Esteem in the account count of God and good Men; but the Apostle Paul in
this Text, Reckons it a great Privilege, and a wonderful happiness, to have an
Interest in this Kingdom and GLORY; Therefore he strictly charged them, to walk
worthy, or suitable to that great Love of God, which had graciously called them
to such a GLORIOUS Kingdom; And further says he, in another place, Romans 8.18.
I Reckon that the Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the GLORY which shall be revealed. There will be such Inestimable
Glory revealed, in and for the Saints, when they enjoy this Kingdom; as there
is nothing comparable thereunto there is nothing here below worth the naming in
comparison thereof. Therefore says he in another place, 2 Cor 4.17. Our Light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
Eternal weight of GLORY: So that this is also another thing, which does very
much Demonstrate the Excellency of this Kingdom; It is not only a Heavenly
Kingdom, but a Heavenly Kingdom of GLORY; And there is a Crown of Glory in it,
laid up for all the Little Flock of Christ, 1 Pet. 5.1, 3, 4. verses.

3. Lastly, It is an unmovable Kingdom, or a Kingdom which cannot be moved; It
is such a Kingdom as can never be shaken nor moved, by all the Powers on Earth;
nor it can never be thrown down nor destroyed, by all the strength in the
World; All the Force and Violence, that men and Devils can use against it, can
never shake nor move the Foundation of this Kingdom; It far exceeds all the
Kingdoms on Earth in this particular also: For alas, all the Kingdoms on Earth,
are Changeable, and Mutable, and are very subject to be subdued, and destroyed,
by Power and strength; But the Saints Kingdom, is Unchangeable, and Immutable,
an Inheritance which fades not away. Alas the Kingdoms of this World are at no
certainty, they are often altering and changing in their affairs; Sometimes to
one thing, and sometimes to another; sometimes High and sometimes Low;
sometimes Rich, and sometimes Poor; sometimes Gaining, and sometimes Losing;
sometimes Peace, and sometimes War; sometimes Prosperity, and sometimes
Adversity; Always Ebbing and Flowing; Rising and Falling; Changing and
Turning, from one thing to another; Till many times, Kings are even weary of
their Kingdoms. And again, in the Kingdoms of this World, things are so
Mutable, and subject to Change, that it is possible a man may be a King to day,
and a Beggar to morrow; a man may be upon the Throne to day, and upon the
Dunghill to morrow; a man may be in great Honor to day, and in great Reproach
to morrow; yea, a man may be a Ruler to day, and overruled himself to morrow:
so variable and changable are even the best things of this life: By which means
all things here below, are but vanity and vexation of spirit: But now it is not
so in the Saints Kingdom, it is altogether Unmovable and Unchangable, there is
nothing can alter or change the Excellency of that Kingdom, there is nothing can
stain the Glory, nor diminish the Beauty of that Kingdom, but as it is a
Heavenly Kingdom now, so it will be a Heavenly Kingdom for EVER; and as it is a
Glorious Kingdom now, so it will be a Glorious Kingdom for Ever; and as it is
full of Beauty and Majesty now, so it will be full of Beauty and Majesty for
EVER: So that this is also another thing, which does exceedingly proclaim the
Excellency of this Kingdom; Therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 12.28. Wherefore
we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be MOVED, let us hold fast Grace, whereby
we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and godly Fear: (Mark) not only a
Kingdom, but a Kingdom which CANNOT be MOVED; not only a Building, but an
ETERNAL Building, 2 Cor. 5.1. not only a City, but a City which has
FOUNDATIONS, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. not only an
Inheritance, but an INCORRUPTIBLE Inheritance, which fades not away, 1 Pet.
1.4.

So that these three things seriously considered, do exceedingly discover the
unspeakable Excellency of that Kingdom, which the Saints and People of God
shall one day receive for their Reward and Portion.

First, It is a HEAVENLY Kingdom. Secondly, It is a GLORIOUS Kingdom. Thirdly,
It is an UNMOVABLE Kingdom.
Which being put together, make a HEAVENLY, GLORIOUS, UNMOVABLE Kingdom.

An excellent Habitation, an appointed Portion, a precious Reward for the
People of God.

So much shall suffice concerning the Excellency of this Kingdom it self: I
shall now come to speak something concerning the Privileges of God's People in
this Kingdom, and endeavor to give you a glimpse, or a Discovery of that Glory
and Happiness, which the Saints shall be made partakers of in this Heavenly,
Glorious, Unmovable Kingdom.

The Happiness and Privileges of God's People in this Kingdom, consist in
these two general Heads.

First, A Freedom from all Evil. Secondly, An Enjoyment of all Good.
But more particularly.

First, They shall be all Righteous, and without Sin; they shall be altogether
pure, and without spot; they shall be altogether clean, and without Corruption;
they shall be altogether Holy, and without Pollution: This is a glorious State,
and one excellent Privilege that the Saints shall be made partakers of in this
Heavenly Kingdom; They shall be wholly freed from Sin and Iniquity, and put out
of a Capacity of ever Sinning more; Oh! this is a blessed Privilege indeed,
and much to be desired and longed after; Oh! says many a gracious Soul, If I
were but altogether free from Sin and Iniquity, I should think my self in a
happy Condition indeed: Oh! If I were but in such a State, as that I could
never Sin against God, what a blessed Condition should I be in? But this is
such a Condition, as cannot be attained on this side the Grave; this is such a
Privilege, as cannot be found in an Earthly Pilgrimage; for alas! now we are
subject to Sin every day, and liable to fall into Iniquity every hour, and many
Temptations offer themselves unto us, and spread themselves before us, and many
times occasion us to Sin against the Lord, and endanger the destruction of our
Souls: But now when the Saints enjoy this Kingdom, they shall be altogether
free from Sin and Iniquity, and perfectly Pure and Undefiled before the Lord;
And all Temptations, and all occasions of Sin, shall be wholly removed and
taken away, and they shall never be in a Capacity to Sin any more against the
Lord; but they shall be all a Tree of Righteousness, planted by the pure hand
of the Lord; And there shall be no more Curse, but the Throne of God and of the
Lamb, shall be in it, and his Servants shall Reign, and serve him for Ever and
Ever, Revel. 22.3, 5. See also, Revel. 14.5. And in their mouth was found no
guile, for they are WITHOUT FAULT before the Throne of God: There Is nothing of
GUILT to be laid to their Charge; there is nothing of BLAME to be found amongst
them; there is none can accuse them of any FAULT: But they are altogether
RIGHTEOUS without SIN, and they shall inherit the Land for Ever, that God may
be Glorified, Isa. 60.21.

This is one great Privilege, and one Branch of that Happiness, which the
Saints shall be made partakers of in this HEAVENLY Kingdom.

But Secondly, Another is this.

2. They shall be wholly freed from all Sorrow, and from all Trouble of what
nature soever; they shall be wholly freed from all manner of Grief and Anguish;
from all manner of Distress and Misery, and they shall never know what belongs
to Sorrow any more: Alas! now we are subject to much Sorrow and Misery, to much
Trouble and Distress, and many distempers of Body, and defects of Nature, do
daily attend us; and several Afflictions are every day ready to seize upon us,
as Sickness, Lameness, Blindness, Hunger and Cold, and many other Troubles and
Miseries, are every day ready to fall upon the outward man in this life, which
many times occasion great grief and sorrow of heart, and great trouble and
perplexity of spirit, and great complainings under the burden of bitter
Afflictions; But now it is not so in this Heavenly Kingdom, for when the Saints
receive their Portion there, then all Sorrow and Trouble shall quite be
removed, and all occasions of Grief and Anguish shall be wholly taken away; and
there shall be no more cause of Complaint under the burden of any Affliction,
nor no more cause of Grief under the sense of any Misery; for they shall hunger
no more, neither shall they thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on
them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed
them, and shall lead them into Fountains of living Waters; and God shall wipe
away all Tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more Death, nor no more
Sorrow, nor no more Crying; neither shall there be any more Pain, for all such
things shall be past'd away, and shall never have a Being in this Heavenly
Kingdom, Revel. 7.16, 17. and 21.4.

Here Is another excellent Privilege, that the Saints shall be made partakers
of in this glorious Kingdom; they shall never any more taste of Sorrow, nor
never any more be acquainted with Grief; they shall never any more be troubled
with Afflictions, nor never any more fall under Distress; though now (it may
be) they may be laden with Afflictions, and burdened with Misery, yet the time
will come, when Afflictions shall fly away, and Misery shall be no more; For
all Trouble shall be swallowed up in Victory, and the Lord God will wipe away
Tears from off all Faces, and the rebuke of his People shall be wholly taken
away; for the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 25.8.

Oh! what an Eminent Privilege will this be, for poor despised Saints to be
made partakers of! Oh! what a blessed condition will they be in, that are
subjects of this Glorious Kingdom! There is no condition on Earth so happy, nor
no State in the World so Excellent, nor no enjoyment under the Sun, worthy to
be compared with the least Privilege in this Heavenly Kingdom; there is no
condition on Earth so happy, but it is subject to misery; there is no condition
on Earth so joyful, but its subjects to sorrow; there is no condition on Earth
so pleasant, but it is subject to pain; but now the Saints in their Kingdom,
shall be wholly delivered from all their afflictions, and shall never know what
belongs to Trouble any more; They shall be wholly exempted from all their
Infirmities, and be crowned with Perfection, without any change.

So that this is another Excellent Privilege, or a second Branch of that
Happiness, which the Saints shall be made partakers of in this Heavenly Kingdom.

But Thirdly, Another is this.

3. They shall dwell with God and Christ, and see them Face to Face; they shall
be received into the presence of God, and behold his Glory; and they shall sit
down in the presence of the Lamb and behold his Beauty; they shall be so much
honored by God, and promoted by Jesus Christ, as to be Companions with them in
Glory, and dwell in their presence continually. Here Is another Excellent
Privilege, and Emninent Dignity; which the Saints shall be made partakers of
in this Glorious Kingdom. They shall not only be freed from shame and
reproach, but they shall also be Crowned with Honor and Dignity, Their eyes
shall not only be freed from vain sights, and Terrible objects; but they shall
also be Blessed with Heavenly Visions, and Sights of God, and dwell in the
presence of the Lamb continually. It Is counted a great Honor, and an Excellent
Privilege, (amongst the Men of the World) to behold the face of an Earthly
King, or to be admitted into the presence of a great Person; But it is counted
more Honor, to be one of the Family and DWELL in his Presence, and to be a
Companion with Him in his Honor and Dignity. But now, the Saints in their
Kingdom, shall have tenfold more Honor and Dignity than all this; (I mean in
Reference to this particular, besides all the Rest) they shall have more
Honor, than to behold the face of an Earthly King; for they shall behold the
face of him that is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; they shall have more
Honor, than to be admitted into the presence of a great Man on Earth, for they
shall be admitted into the presence of a Great God in Heaven; And not only so,
but they shall be of his Family, and DWELL with him, and be Companions with him
in his Glorious Kingdom: Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 140.13. Surely the
Righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name, The Upright shall DWELL in thy
presence. (Mark) it does not say only, They shall BE in thy presence for a
Little Time; But they shall 'DWELL in thy presence; They shall continue and
abide in thy presence as Persons belonged and related to thy House and Family;
And they shall sit at the Table with Jesus Christ, and see his Face, and his
Name shall be in their Foreheads, and they shall be known to be his servants
for Ever, Revel. 22.4. Luke 22.30. Therefore says Christ, Joh. 14.3. If I go
to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my Self,
that where I am, THERE Ye may be also. So that it seems, where the Lord Christ
is Exalted, there must the Saints be Exalted; And where the Lord Christ takes
up his habitation, there must the Saints be received; And they shall dwell in
his presence, and see him, as he is: Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a Glass darkly, but then we shall see face to face: now we
know but in part, but then we shall know, even as also we are known.

So that this is also another Excellent Privilege, or a third Branch of that
Happiness which the Saints shall be made partakers of in this Heavenly Kingdom.
They shall DWELL in the Presence of the Lord, and continually behold the
Majesty of God.

But Fourthly, Another is this.

4. They shall be like unto Jesus Christ in Splendor and Beauty. Their Bodies
shall be clothed with glory and Majesty, like unto the Body of Jesus Christ.
As Christ is Glorious and Beautiful, so shall the Saints be Glorious and
Beautiful; and as Christ is fair and comely, so shall the Saints be fair and
comely; and as Christ is pleasant and altogether Lovely, so shall the Saints be
pleasant, and altogether Lovely; and there shall be no spot of Deformity in
them, nor no Infirmity nor Blemish upon them; But they shall shine in Beauty,
like the brightness of the Firmament, and exceed the Stars in Luster and
Purity. Here Is another Excellent Privilege, and a lovely Branch of heavenly
Happiness, wonderful to consider of, and Mavelous pleasant will it be to
enjoy the same. It Is counted a great Honor, and a high Privilege, amongst the
People of the World, to be but a little Adorned with Earthly Beauty, or to have
but a comely Face, Garnished with a little Natural Brightness; yea, many times
it is so highly esteemed, and counted such a Rare Privilege, as it makes many
Persons proud, and high-minded, Because of their Earthly Beauty, and because of
a comely Face: but alas, this is nothing in comparison of that Glory and
Beauty, which the Saints shall be Adorned withal, when they enjoy this
Heavenly Kingdom; this is not worthy to be named, in comparison of that Purity
and Comeliness, which shall be the Saints Portion in their Fathers Kingdom;
they shall have greater Honor, than to be Adorned with Earthly Beauty, and
Natural Comeliness, for they shall be Adorned with Heavenly Beauty, and
clothed with Celestial Majesty; yea, they shall be Equal unto the Angels for
Splendor, and like unto Jesus Christ for Glory. Therefore says the Apostle,
Phil. 3.20, 21. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for our
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Bodies, that they may
be fashionod like unto his GLORIOUS Body; according to the working, whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

Though now they are vile bodies, attended with earthly corruption; yet then
they shall be precious Bodies, attended with Heavenly GLORY; though now they
are defiled Bodies, attended with many Infirmities; yet then they shall be
Lovely Bodies, attended with perfect Purity, and mightily Adorned with
Excellent Beauty. Therefore says Christ, Mat. 13.43. Then shall the Righteous
SHINE forth as the SUN in the Kingdom of their Father. (Mark) here is glorious
Beauty, and wonderful Brightness; Here Is Eminent Purity, and Heavenly
Splendor, the Righteous shall Shine like the SUN in the Kingdom of their
Father, even whilst others are weeping and wailing in a Furnace of Fire. Oh
what unspeakable Glory, and Excellent Majesty is here prepared, for poor
despised contemptible Creatures! Oh! how happy and blessed, will all those be,
that shall be counted worthy of this Kingdom and Glory! All the Pleasure and
Glory on Earth, is not worthy to be compared with one Branch of this Heavenly
Happiness: All the Honor and Beauty under the Sun, is not able to Parrallel
the least Glimpse of this Heavenly Glory. See one notable Text more for this,
and so I shall leave this Particular, and proceed to another, 1 John 3.2. Where
the Apostle is giving a short discovery of the Honor and Dignity of the
Saints, both here, and hereafter; Beloved (says he) now we are the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: (Mark) Though we have so much
Honor and Dignity conferred upon us now at present, as to be called the Sons
of God, and though the Lord is pleased to extend his goodness so far toward
us, now at present, as to make us his Children by the Spirit of Adoption, yet,
it does not yet appear what we shall be; and yet this is such a wonderful
Privilege, as it makes the Apostle exceedingly Admire at the Consideration
thereof; Crying out, BEHOLD what MANNER of Love is THIS, that we should be
called the Sons of God! He was mightily filled with Admiration, to consider of
this wonderful Dignity; but yet for all this, it does not yet appear, what we
shall be; for we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be LIKE him: (Mark)
we shall be like unto Jesus Christ, Blessed as he is Blessed, Beautiful, as he
is Beautiful, Glorious, as he is Glorious; Every way Adorned with Heavenly
Happiness like unto Jesus Christ.

This is also another Excellent Privilege, or a fourth Branch of that
Happiness, which the Saints shall be made partakers of, in this Glorious
Kingdom.

Fifthly, Another is this.

5. They shall have wonderful Glorious Company, and blessed Society; they shall
be continually honored with Heavenly Company, and blessed with Glorious
Companions. The meanest, and worst of their Companions, shall be Blessed and
glorious Angels. Though now it may be, they are so much despised by the World,
as that they are not counted worthy to dwell in. the Society of wicked Men; yet
they are so much honored by the Lord, as that they shall one Day be counted
worthy to dwell in the Society of Blessed Angels, and THEY shall be their
meanest Companions. This is another Glorious Privilege, and excellent Dignity,
for the People of God in this Heavenly Kingdom, they shall never have cause to
complain of their Company, nor never have cause to be weary of their Society;
for their meanest Company shall be glorious Angels, and their worst Society
shall be Heavenly Spirits: And indeed this is a Privilege, which is very
acceptable, and delightful unto God's People, and highly esteemed, and much to
be desired amongst good men now upon earth, (I mean godly Society) for indeed
those that truly fear God, do count it a great Privilege to enjoy the Society
of good People; and would reckon it a great Happiness, to be wholly and
altogether freed from evil company, that they might always enjoy the Society
of godly People: Therefore says David, Psalm. 16.3. My goodness extends not
only unto thee, (O Lord) but unto thy Saints, and excellent ones, in whom is
all my DELIGHT. But now in this Heavenly Kingdom, they shall not only have the
Society of Saints, and enjoy Communion one with another, without any mixture of
Evil; But they shall also enjoy it with God, and fellowship with Jesus Christ,
and have the Society of blessed and glorious Angels; Therefore says the
Apostle, Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the
living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of ANGELS; to
the general Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Here Is Glorious Company, and
Heavenly Society; here is pleasant Companions, and beautiful Partners; here is
honorable Equals, and lovely Objects, and all to attend the People of God, to
increase their Happiness in their Father's Kingdom.

So that this is also another excellent Privilege, or a fifth Branch of that
Happiness, which the Saints shall be made partakers of in this Heavenly Kingdom.

Sixthly, Another is this.

6. They shall have fullness of unspeakable Joy, and fullness of Glory and
Happiness; they shall be exceedingly filled with Gladness, and wonderfully
crowned with Pleasure; they shall not only be freed from Sorrow and Trouble,
but they shall also be filled with Joy and Rejoicing; they shall not only be
freed from Pain and Misery, but they shall also be filled with Delight and
Pleasures; they shall not only be freed from Grief, and exempted from Misery,
but they shall also be exceedingly filled with Comfort, and crowned with
Happiness; they shall have Beauty for Ashes, Joy for Sorrow, Pleasure for Pain,
Glory for Shame, Honor and Dignity, for Reproach and Contempt, the garment of
Praise, for the spirit of Heaviness; that every way they may be crowned with
sulness of Joy, and unspeakable Glory, according to that saying of the
Psalmist, In thy Presence is PULNESSE of Joy, and at thy right hand are
Pleasures for evermore.

Oh! the excellent Privilege, and wonderful Happiness of God's People; Oh! how
blessed are all those that shall be counted worthy to enter into this Glorious
Kingdom? Who is able to express the Happiness of Heavenly Subjects? Therefore
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.19. Oh! how great is thy Goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in
him? (Mark) what unspeakable language the Psalmist makes use of in these words,
he is not able to express the great Provisions that the Lord has laid up in
store for his Saints; Therefore says he, Oh! how great is thy Goodness, which
thou have laid up for them that fear thee? He wants a tongue to express it, and
therefore his heart admires it. See also a notable saying of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 2.9. where it is thus written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. (Mark) Here Is wonderful things prepared,
here is unspeakable Glory provided; Eye has not seen (says the Apostle) the
things which God has prepared; and yet the Eye of man has seen many glorious
things, and has beheld many wonderful Objects, and eminent shows full of
Delight and Pleasure; but yet the Eye of man has not seen SUCH Things, as God
has prepared for his People: But further, Ear has not heard; yet what
wonderful, strange and excellent things, has been reported to the Ears of man?
Yea, the Ear many times may hear, that which the Eye never has seen; but yet
the Ear never heard of such Things, as the Lord has laid up for his SAINTS:
But yet further, Neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, Yet
what unspeakable things may the heart of man conceive to it self? What glorious
and excellent things may possibly enter into the Imaginations of the heart?
Yea, the heart may fancy to it self, things which are impossible to be, and
things which cannot be uttered; the heart may conceive that which the Eye never
saw, nor the Ear never heard; out yet the Heart of man cannot conceive SUCH
Things, as the Lord has provided, prepared, and laid up in store for them that
love him: The tongue of men and Angels are not able to express the FULNESS of
that Joy, the GREATNESS of that Glory, the incomparable Happiness of Saints in
their Kingdom; All the Joy and Pleasures on Earth, are but Sorrow and Misery,
in comparison of this Heavenly Joy in the Saints Kingdom; All the Glory on
Earth, is but Shame and Contempt, in comparison of the Saints Glory in Heaven;
All the Happiness that can be enjoyed under the Sun, is but Vanity and Trouble,
in comparison of the sweet and heavenly Happiness in the Kingdom of Glory: Oh!
how may this rejoice and make glad the spirits of Saints, to consider of their
Portion in their Father's Kingdom; Oh! how may this ravish and strengthen the
hearts of Gods People, to think of their Fathers love, that he should extend
his grace and goodness so far toward his Children, as to make them Heirs of a
Glorious Kingdom, and crown them with unspeakable Joy and Happiness.

So that this is another Excellent Privilege, or a sixth branch of that
Happiness which the Saints shall enjoy in their Fathers Kingdom.

But Seventhly, and Lastly.

7. That which is the main thing of all, and that which is most remarkable, is
this: All this Glory and Happiness, and all this Joy and Blessedness, will be
ETERNAL, and shall continue, even for ever and ever: They shall always be
glorious, and never know an end of their heavenly Beauty: They shall always be
blessed, and never know an end of their Happiness; They shall always be
joyful, and NEVER know an end of Gladness; They shall always be rich and
honorable, and NEVER know an end of their Excellent Dignity; They shall
always abound in fullness of Joy, and never know an end of their unspeakable
Plenty.

This is that which does eminently and chiefly demonstrate the Excellent
Happiness of the Saints in the Kingdom of Glory; for if they were to enjoy
never so much Glory and Happiness, and never so much Joy and Blessedness: yet
if this were to continue but for a short time, or a little while, then indeed
it would not be altogether so much worth the prizing; but the Glory and
Happiness of the Saints in this heavenly Kingdom, is not only for a little
time, but for ever and ever; as their Happiness begins, so it shall continue,
and NEVER have an end: as they shall be pure and without sin at first, so they
shall be pure and without sin for EVER; as they shall be freed from sorrow and
trouble at first, so they shall be freed from sorrow and trouble for EVER; as
they shall dwell with God and Christ at first, so they shall dwell with God and
Christ for EVER, and enjoy the society of glorious Angels to all Eternity.
There Is nothing can alter nor change the affairs in this Kingdom, nor nothing
can bring the Glory of the Saints to an end. Oh what an incomparable Privilege
is this! where is there such a durable habitation in this world, or where is
there such a resting place on earth? Alas! if the glory of the world do chance
to (mile upon a person at present, and riches and honors do seem to increase;
all is so vain and uncertain, that there is no confidence to be put in their
lasting: The world may soon show a frowning countenance again, and quickly turn
its own glory into shame and contempt; and quickly turn riches and plenty into
poverty and want, and all may quickly make themselves wings and vanish away,
and so procure great trouble and vexation of spirit. But now in this Kingdom,
ALL their Happiness, and all their Privileges are ETERNAL, and shall NEVER
have an end: Their Perfection shall be ALWAYS complete, and NEVER be
diminished; Their Reward shall be SURE, and NEVER be removed; Their Joy shall
ALWAYS continue and NEVER be taken away: But as they are glorious and
beautiful at first, so they shall be glorious and beautiful for EVER; and as
they are rich and honorable at first, so they shall be rich and honorable for
EVER; and as they are blessed and happy at first, so they shall be blessed and
happy for EVER: ALWAYS rejoicing in fullness of Glory, and praising the Lord to
ALL ETERNITY.

Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for EVERMORE. So also the Prophet Esaias, in
Chap. 61.7. For their shame, they shall have double; and for confusion, they
shall rejoice in their portion: they shall inherit the Land for EVER, and
EVERLASTING Joy shall be unto them. (Mark) Not only Pleasures, but Pleasures
for EVERMORE; not only Joy, but EVERLASTING Joy: They shall not only have
double Glory for all their Shame, and a joyful Portion for all their Confusion;
but it shall be of an EVERLASTING nature, and shall continue for EVER. There Is
nothing shall be able to diminish their Joy, nor nothing shall be able to put
an end to their Glory; for the portion of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the
effect thereof ASSURANCE for EVER. Therefore says Christ, Mat. 25.46. The
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life*
ETERNAL. Again, Whosoever shall leave or lose any thing for the sake of Christ,
shall be sure to receive a hundred fold, and shall inherit EVERLASTING Life,
Mat. 19.29. They shall not only have a living portion, and a plentiful reward
for all their losses and crosses in this life; but their portion shall be an
EVERLASTING Portion, and their Reward shall continue for ever and ever.
Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap Life EVERLASTING.

Here Is an Excellent Privilege, and a wonderful Portion; here is a blessed
Reward, and a happy Inheritance: who is able to express the Heavenly happiness
of glorified Saints, in this eternal and unmovable Kingdom? They shall not
only be filled with joy, and crowned with glory, but they shall so continue for
ever and ever, and enjoy the same to all ETERNITY.

So that all these things seriously considered, do exceedingly discover the
wonderful Happiness, which the Saints shall be made partakers of in this
heavenly Kingdom of glory.

Consider all these branches briefly in order together, and then judge whether
you have not great cause to admire the goodness of God toward his now Despised
Saints and People. Although indeed, all that I have spoken concerning it, is
but a glimpse (as it were) of that Glory and Happiness which they shall enjoy
when they shall come to receive the fullness of it in their Fathers Kingdom.

But yet in a Glass behold their Happiness.

First, They shall dwell in a heavenly, glorious, unmovable Kingdom.

Secondly, They shall be altogether holy and pure, without sin and iniquity.

Thirdly, They shall be wholly freed from all manner of sorrow and trouble, of
what nature soever.

Fourthly, They shall dwell in the presence of God, and of the Lamb, and see
them face to face, and behold their Glory.

Fifthly, They shall have glorious bodies, full of splendour and beauty, like
unto Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, They shall have altogether glorious company, and blessed society;
their meanest companions shall be heavenly Angels.

Seventhly, They shall have fullness of unspeakable joy, and be exceedingly
crowned with unspeakable happiness.

Lastly, And all this shall be eternal, even for ever and ever.

Oh taste and see that the Lord is gracious! blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Thus having given you a discovery (in some measure) of that Glory and
Happiness which the Saints shall enjoy in their Fathers Kingdom. I shall now
come to make a little Use or Application of this comfortable Doctrine, and so
conclude this Heavenly subject.

Well then, is it so, That God is pleased to provide and prepare a Kingdom for
his People? Then in the next place, by way of Discovery, this will serve to
discover two things to us concerning the People of God.

First, It discovers the excellency of Gods People; for if it be so, That the
Lord has prepared such an excellent Kingdom for his People, and accounts them
worthy to enjoy such an excellent Reward: Oh! then it must needs be true, that
the People of God are an excellent People, and that they are wonderful high in
Gods esteem. And if it be so, that the People of God shall be crowned with
Glory, and clothed with Majesty in a heavenly Kingdom: Oh! then it must needs
be true, that the People of God are a glorious People, and wonderful precious
in Gods account. And if it be true, that the People of God shall be counted
worthy to dwell in his presence, and behold his Glory; then it appears, that
the People of God are an honorable People, and wonderful famous in the sight
of God: Though (it may be) they are much despised and trampled under foot by
the men of this World; yet be it known unto all, That there is none in the world
so excellent as they: And though they are much reproached and branded with
shame by the men of the world, yet of a truth, there is none in the world so
glorious as they: And though they are counted the filth and the offscouring of
the world, by ungodly people; yet there is none in the world so honorable as
they: For pray consider, The poorest and meanest of Gods People are Princes of
Heaven; and they that are most despised, are now Heirs of a glorious Kingdom,
and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. It Is counted a great honor and dignity
amongst men, to be an earthly Prince, or an Heir to an earthly Kingdom; and he
that is Heir to an earthly Crown is counted an excellent Person, and worthy of
honor and great respect: But the meanest of Gods People are far more excellent
than he, for they are all the Sons and Daughters of the living God, and Heirs
with Christ to a heavenly Crown and Kingdom. And they are so lovely and
honorable in the sight of God, as that he accounts them his Jewels, and
esteems them his peculiar Treasure, and tenders them as he tenders the Apple of
his own Eye. This is such an honor and dignity, as all the Kings on earth are
not able to reach unto, nor all the Princes and great men under the Sun are not
able to claim an interest in such an Excellent Privilege: I mean, not by
virtue of their earthly power and greatness, except they are such as belong to
the number of Saints, and so invested with glory from Heaven. Therefore the
meanest Saint in the world, is far more excellent and honorable than the
greatest Monarch on Earth: Therefore says David, Psalm. 16.3. My goodness
extends not unto thee O Lord, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to
the EXCELLENT, in whom is all my delight. But as touching the wicked, this is
his language concerning THEM: Dogs have compassed me about, the assembly of the
wicked have enclosed me, they are altogether become filthy and abominable;
their POISON is like the POISON of a SERPENT; they are like the deaf ADDER, and
the filthy BOAR. Therefore I will not know a wicked person, but I will say unto
them, Depart from me, ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my
God. From hence you may observe; That wicked persons (though never so great in
the eyes of the world) are loathsome and abominable persons, and very
contemptible in the eyes of good men; but the meanest Saint is excellent and
honorable, and very precious, both in the sight of God, and in the account of
his People. Therefore little do the foolish world think what they do, when they
mock and reproach the People of God: And when they strive to persecute and
afflict the Saints, they little think that the Lord takes it as done unto
himself; and when they villisie and abuse such as are godly, they little think
that they are a trampling under foot the Jewels of God, and fighting against
the Lord: Oh! what enmity do such poor souls manifest against the God of
Heaven? Oh! how contrary and opposite such persons are to the living God? For
pray consider, they hate them, but God loves them; they reproach them, but God
honors them; they abuse them, but God vindicates them; they afflict them, but
God comforts them; they frown upon them, and pronounce them cursed, but God
smiles upon them, and proclaims them blessed; they rob and spoil them, and
endeavor to deprive them of their earthly being, but God takes care of them,
and satisfies their souls with his goodness, and will one day crown them with a
heavenly Kingdom. Thus the Persecutors of Sion do set themselves against the
Lord, and oppose the mighty God of Jacob.

They count them odious and filthy, but God counts them excellent and
honorable. And all this is their privilege now in this life, before they come
to their Crown and Kingdom.

So that this is the first thing that I gather from this Doctrine of the
Kingdom: It informs us, that the People of God are an Excellent, Glorious, and
Honorable People.

But, Secondly.

2. It discovers the Happiness of Gods People. The People of God are not only
an Excellent People, but also a Happy People: for if it be so, that the Lord
has prepared such a glorious Kingdom for his People, and accounts them worthy
of such a blessed Reward, Oh! then it must needs be true, that the People of
God are a happy People, and wonderful high in the favor of God. And if it be
so, that the People of God shall have fullness of joy and unspeakable glory, in
a Kingdom eternal: Oh! then it appears that the People of God are a blessed
People, and mightily concerned in the love of the Lord. There Is no condition in
the world can make them miserable, they are always happy, though in the midst
of troubles; they are always blessed, though in the midst of difficulties;
they are always rich, though in the midst of poverty; they are always
satisfied, though in the midst of hunger; they have always enough to make them
joyful, though in the midst of sorrows; they have always enough to comfort
them, though in the midst of discouragements; they have always enough to
support them, though in the midst of weakness; they are always at liberty,
though in the midst of bondage: There is nothing in this world can harm them,
so long as they are followers of that which is good, 1 Pet. 3.13.

Oh! what a wonderful privilege is this, for traveling Saints to enjoy, for
Strangers and Pilgrims to partake of, before they come at their rest: How does
this exceedingly proclaim the happiness of Gods People, and the blessed
condition of all those that belong to Jesus Christ? Oh! how may this comfort
and encourage the sorrowful hearts of many suffering Saints, and bear up their
souls in the midst of Trials? To consider, that though the world is their
enemy, yet still the Lord is their friend; And though the World hates them, yet
still the Lord loves them; And though they are deprived (it may be) from
friends and relations, yet still they have an interest in God, and he is their
Father, and he is able to make up the loss of any relation: And though they may
want earthly enjoyments and worldly possessions, yet still they are rich in
Promises, and Heirs of a Kingdom, and the Lord has prepared an everlasting
Portion for them. Therefore now, these things considered, does exceedingly
discover the happy condition of Gods People, whilst they are here on earth in
their Pilgrim-state, besides that forementioned glory prepared for them in
Heaven; for those that can claim an interest in this heavenly Portion, are
abundantly happy, and continually blessed; for its an excellent Fountain, full
of spiritual refreshment and soul-satisfaction in the worst of troubles:
Therefore you shall find that our Savior Christ does abundantly proclaim them
blessed under this very consideration, Mat. 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God:
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake, for GREAT is your Reward in HEAVEN. So
that it seems, the consideration of their future Reward in the Kingdom of
Heaven, is that which proclaims them blessed and happy now upon earth. Though
in a mourning condition, yet in a blessed condition; Though in a persecuted
state, yet in a BLESSED state: whatever their condition is, yet they are
blessed, because their Reward is great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

So that this is the second thing, that I gather from this Heavenly Doctrine;
It informs us that the People of God are a blessed and happy People. Thus much
for the first Use, by way of Discovery.

But Secondly, by way of Examination.

2. Use. Is it so, that the Lord has prepared a Kingdom for his People? Then
let US seriously examine, whether WE have an Interest in this Kingdom or no?
Let US search and try, whether WE have any thing to do with this Heavenly
Portion? Or whether WE have any share in this Glorious Reward, or no? For pray
consider seriously, what will it profit us to hear of a Glorious Kingdom
prepared for the Saints, if we have no part nor portion there? Or what will it
benefit us to hear of the glory and happiness of Saints in the Kingdom of
Heaven, if it do not belong to us? Alas it will avail us nothing to hear of
these things, nor to talk of these things, except we our selves have an
interest in them, and can call them ours: It will do us little good, to hear of
the Saints happiness, if we our selves are miserable: Therefore I say, let us
take heed, and diligently examine how it is with us, lest any root of
bitterness spring up in our souls and defile us, and make us unfit for this
Glorious Kingdom; for no unclean thing, nor no unrighteous person shall ever
inherit this Heavenly Kingdom. There Is none shall be blessed with the visions
of God, in the Kingdom of Heaven, but such as have clean hands, and a pure
heart, and are cleansed from sin and iniquity: There Is none shall receive the
Kingdom which cannot be moved, but such as serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear: There Is none shall dwell in the presence of God in his Heavenly
Habitation, but such as are humble and upright in conversation: There Is none
shall be happy in Heaven, but such as are holy and heavenly minded on earth;
for without holiness no man shall see God; and to be carnally minded is death,
but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Therefore let us not flatter
our selves with vain fancies, nor satisfy our selves with a bare profession of
Godliness, nor proclaim peace and safety to our selves with sin in our bosoms;
for if we do, we shall be deceived and undone for ever, For God cannot be
mocked, but whatsoever a man sows, that he shall also Reap: And his servants
ye are to whom you yield obedience. Therefore says Christ, Not every one that
says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. (Mark) Not every one that professes his
Name and calls him Lord, but he that lives in obedience to the Will of God:
There must be a walking with God, as well as a talking of God; There must be a
DOING the Will of God, as well as a SPEAKING the Will of God. It is not enough
to say, that Jesus Christ is our Lord, but we must make it appear by our
actions, and by our obedient conversations, that he is Lord of our hearts, and
that he Rules and Reigns in our Souls; for there are a great many that can call
Jesus Christ Lord, Lord, with their tongues, and yet work iniquity with their
hands, and intend mischief in their hearts: But alas! such shall never find
acquaintance with God at the last day, nor never be entertained, nor received
into this Heavenly Kingdom; For every one that names the Name of Christ must
depart from iniquity, and abhor that which is evil, or else they must expect to
be denied by Christ, and to depart out of his presence, as workers of iniquity;
and all their profession will be so far from doing them any good, as it will
rather rise up in Judgment against them, and condemn them at the last day:
Therefore it highly concerns us all to examine seriously how the case stands
with us, and to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, by an
humble walking with God, and by a constant persevering in the pure ways of the
Lord, lest we should deceive our own souls, and miss of his Glorious Reward in
this Heavenly Kingdom.

And if upon Examination we find our selves to be in Gods way, standing upon a
sure foundation, then we may rejoice in the goodness of God, and satisfy our
souls at this Heavenly Fountain; and so long as we continue faithful to God in
purity of soul, we may challenge an interest in this Heavenly Portion, and call
the Kingdom and all its glory ours; and all the Promises of God in Christ
Jesus, are Yea, and Amen to us, that by them we might be encouraged to continue
and persevere in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our lives, to the
praise and glory of him who has called us to this Heavenly Kingdom.

But now give me leave to intermix a word of Caution into this Use of
Examination, and that is this: If upon right Examination, we find that we have
an interest in this Glorious Kingdom, Then let us take heed that we do not turn
aside out of the ways of God, and travel again in the paths of iniquity, and
so lose our interest, and be deprived of that Kingdom which once we had a right
unto. Let us take heed that the Devil do not beguile us with his golden baits
of sin and iniquity, and so rob us of our Heavenly Portion. Let us take heed
that we do not fell our Heavenly Birthright for a little worldly pottage, nor
change our Heavenly Kingdom for a little earthly profit or worldly advantage: I
say, let us take heed of these things, lest there should spring up some Root of
Bitterness in our souls, and cause us to depart from the living God, and grieve
his holy Spirit with our evil ways, and give him occasion to swear in his
wrath, That we shall never enter into this Heavenly Rest; for it is not every
one that begins well, But he that endures to the END shall be saved; not every
one that follows Jesus Christ for a little season, and so leave Him, that shall
receive the Reward, But he that continues and abides faithful unto DEATH,
shall receive the Crown of Life; it is not every one that begins to fight well,
that shall obtain the prize, But he that overcomes shall inherit all things.
Therefore let us take heed that we do not grow weary of well doing, and so
faint before we Reap: Neither let us give place to the Devil, lest he deprive
us of our Eternal Harvest, and plunder us of our Heavenly Treasure, but let us
continue and persevere all our days in the work and service of our Heavenly
Father, and never turn again unto folly: for Alas, we had better never begin
well, except we continue so, and end well; For if after we have escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, we are again
entangled therein and overcome, then our latter end will be worse than our
beginning; for it had been better for us, never to have KNOWN the way of
Righteousness, than after we have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto us, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Therefore now let us take our last leave of
every evil work, and wholly apply our selves to the work and service of God,
and make it our meat and drink to do the Will of our Heavenly Father: And as
the Lord has called us to a Heavenly Kingdom, so let us exercise our selves in
heavenly things, and be no more in love with the beggarly things of this life,
but let us always be found acting suitable to our Profession, and walking in
such ways as become those that are Heirs of a Glorious Kingdom, confessing
that we are but Strangers and Pilgrims here on earth, having our affections
estranged from the things of this world; That we may declare plainly, that here
we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come, that so in all things we
may dignifie our Heavenly Profession, and walk worthy of God, who has called
us to his Kingdom and Glory, always remembering the counsel of the Apostle,
Heb. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved; let us hold
fast Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.

Thus much for the second Use, by way of Examination, intermixed with a word of
Caution.

But Thirdly, by way of Encouragement.

3. Use. Is it so, that the Lord is pleased to provide and prepare such a
Glorious Kingdom for his People? Oh then, this may mightily encourage us to
hold out in a time of Trial, and to continue faithful for God in a suffering
day. Oh! the consideration of this blessed Reward may exceedingly support us
under Sufferings, and make us valiant for God in a day of Trouble, and balance
all oppositions whatsoever; for whatever we suffer or undergo for Christ, will
be nothing in comparison of the Glory that shall be revealed for us in this
Heavenly Kingdom: whatever we lose for Christ, shall be exceedingly rewarded
with great advantage; whatever difficulties we are exposed unto for God, shall
be wonderfully requited in this Kingdom of Glory. Oh! how may this bear up our
souls in Trouble, and make us rejoice under all our sufferings? Oh! how may
this greatly encourage us to run with patience the Race that is set before us,
and lightly esteem the storms and styles that lie in our way? for consider,
What can we suffer here, that is worth the naming, if we compare it with this
Recompense of Reward? Art thou in Trouble? well be content, it is but for a
while, and this Kingdom will ease thee, and thou shall never be in Trouble any
more. Art thou in Sorrow? well, endeavor to be cheerful, remember, in thy
Fathers Kingdom there is fullness of Joy, and there thou shall be eternally
happy. Art thou deprived of worldly possessions, and so exposed to hunger and
want? well, be of good cheer, still thou art Heir to a Heavenly Kingdom, and
there thou shall never hunger any more. Art thou in danger of losing thy life
for the sake of Christ? well, be it so, part with it freely, this Kingdom will
make amends for all, thou shall be sure to find it again, and be crowned with
Life Eternal. Oh! who then would part with this Heavenly Kingdom for a little
outward ease and bodily advantage, which may last but for a day? who then would
leave and forsake this Eternal Reward, to avoid a little temporal Trouble, and
turn their backs upon a Glorious Kingdom, to escape a few light afflictions?
Who then would change this infinite Portion, for a little trifling vanity, and
sell this eternal Inheritance for that which profits not? but rather let us be
encouraged to continue faithful in our Testimony for God, whatever it may cost
us; and let us lift up our heads with Joy, and be exceeding cheerful under all
our persecuting Troubles? for whatever our condition is, yet still our
Kingdom-Portion remains firm and sure without corruption, and can never be
taken away from us, unless we deprive our selves of it, by our sinning against
the Lord.

You shall find, that this very consideration did exceedingly encourage the
primitive Christians in the Apostles days, to hold out with joy under all
their sufferings: see that notable instance, Heb. 10.32, 33, 34. where the
Apostle is putting of them in mind of their former great and grievous
sufferings, and commending of them for their excellent behavior under them:
But call to remembrance (says the Apostle) the former days, in which after ye
were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions, partly whilst ye
were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst
ye became companions of them that were so used; for ye had compassion of me in
my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods. Here was a great storm
of afflictions, and abundance of sufferings, that befell these poor primitive
Christians in their journey toward Heaven. Here were mockings and reproaches,
and many other afflictions, together with plundering and spoiling of goods; and
yet they were so far from being discouraged at these things, as that they did
not only take them patiently, but joyfully: Why, what was the matter that these
Christians were so joyful under their sufferings, and so much supported and
encouraged under all their afflictions? why this was the business: They knew in
themselves that in HEAVEN they had a BETTER and an ENDURING Substance; They
knew that though they were Losers now, yet they should be great Gainers in the
Kingdom of Heaven; They knew that there was a Reward laid up for them in
Heaven, which would abundantly make them amends for all their losses and
sufferings here; They knew that their Portion in Heaven was unmovable, and
nothing could spoil that eternal Inheritance: Therefore they did not value the
loss of any thing here below, so long as they had an interest in such a
Heavenly-enduring Substance.

See also the example of Moses, where it is notably laid down for our
encouragement, under this very consideration, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Who when he
was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharoah's daughter; choosing
rather to suffer afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. (Mark) He left and forsook all the pleasures of
Pharoah's Court, and denied the Princely promotion of Egypt, and made a
voluntary choice of a suffering path, with despised People, rather than a
pleasant Pasture, with honorable Society; Esteeming the Reproach of Christ
greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt; when he might have enjoyed great
honor and dignity in the Court of a King, he chused rather shame and reproach,
in a suffering Wilderness, and accounted that the wisest choice, and the
greatest happiness. Why, what was the reason of all this? what was the matter
with Moses, that he did so wilfully choose to suffer afflictions, when he might
have en^oyed his pleasure; and content himself with shame and reproach, when he
might have enjoyed great honor and dignity? Why here was the busifiness: FOR
(says the Text) he had respect unto the RECOMPENSE of REWARD. He had such a
love to the Kingdom of Heaven, that he did not value the Treasures of Egypt; he
had such an eye to the Reward in heaven, that he did not matter the pleasures
on earth; for he knew, and did believe that all things should work together for
his good and great advantage, and that he should be abundantly requited in this
Heavenly Kingdom: Therefore so long as he kept up his interest there, he had
more comfort in suffering afflictions, than he could have had in the enjoyment
of all the world without it; for the least Branch of this Heavenly Happiness,
is better worth than all the pleasures under the Sun: Therefore the
consideration of this Heavenly Reward, did make him deny his earthly Glory and
Dignity, and did mightily bear up his soul in the midst of sufferings.

Yea further, let me tell you; this very Consideration was a great support even
unto our Savior Christ himself under all his afflictions, and a great comfort
to him in all his sufferings; therefore we are exhorted to consider his
example, and to make him our pattern in this very particular, Heb. 12.2, 3.
where the Apostle bids us, Look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our
Faith; who for the JOY that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, and is now set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. (Mark)
The JOY that was set before him, and the Crown that was laid up for him, was
that which did exceedingly bear up his Soul to endure the Cross, and carry him
forth to despise the Shame; for he knew, that though he was attended with
sorrows here on Earth, yet there was joy enough in Heaven to make him amends
for all: And though he was now clothed with shame and reproach, yet he should
shortly be clothed with Glory and Majesty in his Fathers Kingdom; and for his
Cross he should receive a Heavenly Crown: Therefore he willingly bore the
Cross, and patiently underwent the Reproach, knowing that this Glorious Reward
would largely requite him for all his Troubles: Therefore says the Apostle;
Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
ye be wearied, and faint in your minds. When we are surrounded with Sorrow, and
compassed about with Troubles, let us remember our Heavenly Portion, where we
shall have fullness of joy and pleasures for ever; and when we are attended with
crosses and several calamities, then let us remember our Crown of Glory,
reserved for us in our Fathers Kingdom: Let us in all things consider the
example of Jesus Christ, and be sure to follow his steps; and then we shall be
sure to partake of the same encouragement, and be in a better capacity to run
with patience the Race that is set before us.

Thus much for the third Use, by way of Encouragement.

But Fourthly, by way of Exhortation; this may serve to exhort us to three
things:

First, Seeing it is so, That the Lord has so much tender love and respect for
his People, as to provide and prepare a Kingdom for them: Oh! then let us be
exhorted to increase and abound in our love one toward another: Let us be sure
to continue steadfast in Brotherly Love, and to abound in Christian charity one
toward another, as becomes the Elect of God; for if the Lord himself have such
Bowels of Love and Affection for them, as to honor them with a Crown and
Kingdom; how much more should we have Bowels of Love and affection one toward
another, for whom this Kingdom is provided? And if the Lord himself tender his
People as the Apple of his Eye, and count them worthy of Eternal Glory: Oh! how
may this engage us to be tender one toward another, and count one another
worthy of respect and love? yea, it may engage us to manifest abundance of
tender love, and cordial affection, even to the meanest and poorest of the
Lords People; yea, though they be never so contemptible in the eyes of the
World, and never so mean and low in their earthly stations, yet let us be
tender toward them, and embrace them in love, and let us account them
honorable, and esteem them lovely; for they are all Heirs of a Glorious
Kingdom, and they are all the dearly Beloved of the Lord: Therefore this may
engage us to love one another, and this may engage us to be exceeding careful
of each others welfare: Therefore says the Apostle, 1 John 4.11. Beloved, if
God so loved us, how ought we to love one another? If the Lord himself has so
much love for us, as to make us heirs of life and glory; how should this enjoin
us to endeavor to exceed in our love one toward another, and to abound in our
affections toward all Saints? Oh! let us take heed of slighting and contemning
one another, and let us take heed of scorning and setting at naught, even the
very poorest and meanest of Gods Jewels: But let all those that truly fear the
Lord, be dear and precious to us, though they are never so vile and ridiculous
in the account of the World; for they are all lovely in the sight of God, and
they are all precious in the eyes of the Lord; and we are all his Children by
faith in Jesus Christ; therefore let us live in unity and love like Brethren;
Let us get and maintain an affection suitable to our Spiritual Relation, and be
sure to discharge a tender duty one toward another; for we are all Children of
one Father, and we are all fed from one Fountain, and we all belong to one
Family, and we are all Heirs to one Kingdom: Therefore let us take heed of
dividing in our Love, and of difference in Affection; seeing we are all one in
Spiritual Relation, and all concerned in one Portion; and seeing we are all
traveling toward one Country, and all journying toward one Land: Oh! let us
take heed that we do not quarrel and fall out by the way; but rather let us
like honest Travelers, love and pity one another, and comfort and encourage
one another, and bear one another burden, and help one another forward in our
progress toward Heaven; that so we may manifest our selves to be the Children
of God, and the Disciples of Christ, by our love and affection one toward
another; and that we may make it appear to the world, that we are living
Christians, by our love to Christians; and that we are Born of God, by our love
to his Begotten: for says the Apostle, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren; for he that loves not
his Brother abides in Death. (Mark) He that has not love and affection
toward his Christian Brethren, it is an evident sign that he is in a state of
Death, and that he is very unfit to stand as a Member in the Church of Christ;
for he is of no more use there, than a rotten Branch in a fruitful Tree, or a
wooden leg in a man's Body, which stands only for an outward show, but has no
life in it to refresh the Body; and if all the members of the Body should be
afflicted with grief, yet still that would feel no pain, nor would not at all
be sensible of the Bodies sufferings; and the reason is, because it is a dead
member, and wants the life that maintains and feeds the Body: even so it is
with a professed Christian that wants love to his Brethren; he can hear of the
afflictions of his Brethren, and not at all be troubled; and he can understand
that his Brethren are in great want and misery, and have no sympathy nor
fellow-feeling with them in their condition: and the reason is, because he is a
dead member, and wants that spiritual life that feeds and maintains the power
of Godliness in the Soul; for if he be acquainted with the Spiritual Birth, and
if his Soul be alive for God, he cannot be without love to his Brethren.
Therefore says the Apostle in another place: Beloved, let us love one another,
for love is of God; and every one that loves his Brother is Born of God, and
is acquainted with the Lord. Therefore let this Doctrine of the Kingdom
persuade us to continue and abound in this fruit of the Spirit; and seeing we
profess our selves to be all Partners in one Kingdom, let us be all Partners
together in Love and Affection.

Thus much for the first word of Exhortation.

But again, Secondly.

2. If it be so, that the Lord has provided and prepared a Kingdom for his
People, and will one day Crown them with Eternal Glory: Oh! then let us be
exhorted to bless and praise the Lord for his goodness toward us, and to
magnify his Glorious Name for this his unspeakable Love. Oh! the exceeding
Riches of his Grace in this very particular, does mightily engage us to
celebrate his praise to the utmost of our power, both in word and action: Oh!
how are we bound to set forth his Glory, and to magnify his Mercy, and to
speak well of his Goodness, for this his tender respect to his People: yea, all
his Attributes shines and shows themselves beautifully in the accomplishment of
this our great and wonderful Privilege, and loudly calls for a thankful Return
at our hands. Oh! how are we engaged to the Lord for his Goodness? and how are
we bound to praise him for his rich Grace? To consider, that we, even such poor
Creatures as we, even when we were in a lost perishing state, and lay polluted
in our Blood, in an undone Condition, that then the Lord should vouchsafe to
cast his Eye upon us, and pity us, and manifest his Love and Goodness so far
unto our Souls, as to find out a way for our Recovery, and to bring about our
Redemption by the death of his own Son, and to put us into a capacity of
Salvation, that we might be honored with the Dignity of Adoption, and enabled
to call him Father, through faith in his only Begotten; That so we might be
partakers of a Heavenly, Glorious, and Unmovable Kingdom. Oh! what unspeakable
Love, and excellent Kindness is this? Oh! what rich Grace, and infinite Mercy
is here extended to our Souls? How do we stand engaged to the Lord for his
infinite Goodness? Pray let us consider how it is in natural Cases: If in case,
that we were poor and miserable, and wanted relief and comfort for our outward
Man, and could not tell where, nor which way to find any succor: And now if a
rich Man that has fullness about him, should take our Condition into
consideration, and merely out of Love and Pity toward us, should hand forth
Relief and Comfort to us, and plentifully supply all our Wants, and put us into
a happy Condition, and after all this, make us Heirs of a Rich Inheritance. Oh!
how should we be engaged to esteem such a Courtesy as this? And how should we
be engaged to prize such a wonderful Kindness? Oh! how would this bind us to
acknowledge his Love, and draw forth our hearts with thankfulness toward him?
Or else, if we did not, almost every one would be ready to condemn us for our
Ingratitude: And besides, we should even give our Friend just occasion to cast
us out of his favor, and take our Inheritance from us. Well, but now the Lord
has done abundance more for us than all this, and he has extended his Love
toward us in a wonderful manner, even beyond comparison: yea, he has done
that for us, that all the men in the World, and all the Angels in Heaven, could
never have done by their greatest power; and he has provided and prepared such
a Rich and Glorious Portion for us, as all the World is not comparable
thereunto.

Oh! then consider, how are we bound to prize and esteem this infinite Kindness
of God, and thankfully to acknowledge his unspeakable Love? And how are we
bound to bless the Lord for his Goodness, and to show forth the Praises of him
who has thus called us out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light? Therefore
seeing the Lord has been so much enlarged in his Love and Goodness toward us:
Oh! let us endeavor to be enlarged in our thankfulness toward him, lest we
give him occasion to withdraw his Love from us for our gross Ingratitude, and
deprive us of our Portion, for our ill improvement of his great Love: Therefore
you shall find that the Apostle himself makes this use of this very particular,
1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant Mercy has Begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us. (Mark) The
consideration of Gods Goodness manifested in our hope of Glory, and the
consideration of our reserved Inheritance, is that which does here occasion him
to bless and praise the Lord, and exceedingly draws forth his spirit with
thankfulness toward him, and causes him to acknowledge and admire his
abundant Mercy toward us; who has Begotten us to a lively hope of such a
Heavenly Inheritance; Therefore says the Apostle Paul, Col. 1.12, 13. We do
not cease to give thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; who has delivered us from
the power of Darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
Oh! therefore let the consideration of our Heavenly Portion dwell upon our
hearts, and exceedingly draw forth our souls with thankfulness toward our
Heavenly Father; and let us mightily endeavor to set forth the Praise and
Glory of him, who has provided and prepared such an Excellent Kingdom for his
People.

Thus much for the second word of Exhortation.

I shall now come to the Third and last word of Exhortation, and so conclude.

3. Seeing the Lord has provided and prepared such a Glorious and Heavenly
Kingdom for his People; Oh! then let all those that profess an Interest in
this Kingdom, walk worthy of God, who has called us to such a Glorious
Inheritance: Let the consideration thereof mightily engage us to a Holy, and a
Heavenly Conversation. Oh! let us be sure to walk suitably and answerably to
such an Honorable and Heavenly Profession; as becomes those that are Heirs of
a Kingdom, and as becomes those that have an Interest in such an unspeakable
Portion: Oh! let us consider what a Glorious Profession we bear, and what a
Heavenly work we are called unto; and let us be sure to walk so, as that we may
honor our Profession with a suitable Conversation, and answer the end of our
Heavenly Calling, by a cheerful continuing in the paths of Holiness. Oh! let us
take heed that our Actions do not witness against our Words, and our
Conversations give our Profession the lie; But as we bear a Heavenly
Profession, so let us lead a Heavenly Conversation; and let us not suffer our
hearts and affections to run out after the things of this Life; But if we be
risen with Christ, let us seek those things which are above, and set our
Affections there where we profess our Portion is; and let us manifest our
selves to be Heirs of this Kingdom, by our constant continuing in the work of
the Kingdom; and let us not shame our selves, nor disgrace our Royal Profession
with doring upon the beggarly things of this World; but let us make it appear
to the World, that we are the Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven, by abounding in
the fruits of the Spirit, and devoting our selves to Heavenly things; and let
us take heed that we do not defile our selves with any of the works of
Darkness, nor stain our Heavenly Reputation with wandering in the filthy paths
of Iniquity: For we that profess our selves to be Heirs of this Glorious
Kingdom, we must not expect to walk as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of
their minds, and in the lusts of the flesh; (for if we do, we must expect to be
rewarded accordingly) But we must if we expect a better Reward than others,
exercise our selves in a better Work than others; and we must put off our
former Conversation, and cast away the old Man with his deeds, which is
corrupt, and be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and put on the new Man,
which after God is created, in Righteousness and true Holiness, that so we may
adorn our Princely Profession, and walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are
Called. For pray consider, what an unsuitable thing it would be for a Prince,
or one that is Heir to an Earthly Kingdom, to go up and down in Beggars
Apparel, and associate himself with the meanest and basest of the People, and
expose himself to such a contemptible Course of life, as to spend his time in
the works of drudgery and slavish employment, and take up his lodging (with
Beggars) on a dunghill, or under a hedge; and yet keep up his Princely
Profession, and proclaim himself to be the Son of a King, and Heir to a
Kingdom; I say it would be accounted a very unsuitable thing, and a great
dishonor to one of his degree, and it would very much stain and diminish his
Reputation in the eyes of the World, and render him very ridiculous amongst his
Friends and Relations: How much more would it be an unsuitable thing for us
that profess our selves to be the Children of GOD, and Princes of HEAVEN, and
Heirs to an ETERNAL Kingdom, if we should suffer the rags of unrighteousness to
rest upon us, and go along with the wicked in the paths of impurity, and
exercise our selves in the Devils drudgery, and set our affections upon the
unprofitable dunghils of this Life, and take up our lodging here under the
hedges of Earthly Vanity; Oh! how unsuitable would it be to our Heavenly
Profession? And how greatly would it derogate from God, and diminish the
Reputation of Godliness? And how unworthy and unfit should we render our selves
of such a Glorious Inheritance: and we should cause the way of Truth to be
mightily abused, and manifest our selves to be no better than Hypocrites:
Therefore now let us endeavor to regulate and order our Conversations aright,
in the fear of the Lord, and to walk circumspectly, both in Words and Actions,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil; and let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of our mouths, nor no corrupt Actions be seen in our
lives, but rather let the appearance of Gods Grace unto our Souls, teach as to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously in this
present evil World, that so we may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing,
increasing and abounding in the fruits of the Spirit, and continuing and
persevering in the way of the Lord, all the days of our lives, to the Praise
and Glory of him, who has called us to such a Heavenly, Glorious, unmovable
Kingdom.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant;
make us perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with the
Father, through the Spirit of Grace, be Blessing and Glory, Wisdom and
Thanksgiving, Honor and Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now, henceforth
and for evermore, Amen.

THE END.

