Vox Populi, Fax Populi. OR, A Discovery of an Impudent CHEAT AND FORGERY Put
upon the People of ENGLAND by ELEPHANT SMITH, and his Author of VOX POPVLI.

Thereby Endeavoring to instill the Poisonous Principles of Rebellion into the
Minds of His Majesty's Subjects. Humbly Recommended to all Loyal Subjects and
True Englishmen.

Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare, multo fortiu contra factum
suum venire.

Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 8 nu. 5. De Dignitate Regis. In Solomon's English;

My Son fear thou God, and the King, and meddle not with them, that are given
to Change; for their Calamity shall arise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of
them both?

Prove. 24. v. 21, 22. LONDON, Printed by S. R. for Benj. Took, at the Ship St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

Vox Populi, Fax Populi: OR, A Discovery of an Impudent Cheat and Forgery put
upon the People of England by Elephant Smith and his Author of Vox Populi, etc.
THere is nothing more self-evident, and apparent, than that the poisonous
Dregs and Lees of the late horrid and unnatural Rebellion begin again to rise,
and put the Nation into a Ferment, and yet men must not be allowed to speak,
but presently their Mouths must be stopped with the Reproach of Tories, if they
be Laymen, and Tantivies, if they be Ecclesiastics; And Forty One, and Forty
Eight must by no means be named, for fear of disuniting Protestants.

I cannot tell what Union they mean, but if this Paper be the true Sense of the
dissenting Protestants, they seem but too closely united already against the
Government, and with their predecessors, who actually levelled the Church, and
State with the Ground, and by the same Principles, and pretenses of this Paper,
which is but the Commonwealth of England drawn in Miniature by a Cunning Hand,
and his Vox Populi an Echo of the last Barbarous Civil War.

But that which was most surprising, was, to see it Fronted with an Humbly
recommended to the King and Parliament at their Meeting at Oxford the 21. of
March, though I doubt not to make him, I cannot hope to blush, but ashamed of
his Present before we part, unless he be of the Metal of that Sinner of David's
Psalm. 50. v. 19, 20, 21. Thou give thy Mouth to evil, and thy Tongue frames
Deceit. Thou sit, and speak against thy Brother thou slanderest thine
own Mothers Son. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, and thou
thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self. And then comes in a Scrap
of Bracton, which has been boiled into Crambe in the Pipkin of the
Commonwealth, with the Sons of the Prophets Death in the Pot, and yet is but a
piece of Justinian quoted by Bracton to serve another purpose, than our
Scribler intends, as he knows it, if he knows any thing besides the Art beyond
that of Madam Brinvillers, of poisoning Men's Souls as well as Bodies. But why
he should bring in the Scripture of removing the Landmark I cannot imagine,
unless to wrest it to his own damnation, as the Unstable do, since nothing is
more evident than that the Principles of his Book did not only remove the
ancient Bounds, and Landmarks, but the true Possessors of the Lands, a far
greater Sin sure, and slew the Heir, that they might possess the Inheritance.

He begins with the Popish Plot, which is the only popular, and taking
prologue; but yet by his favor, he does not seem to believe it all, or if he
does, he seems to be an Actor, if not a Contriver in it; for the Original
Narrative acquaints us, page 64. That the Royal Family of the Stuarts are
condemned to be cut often, Root and Branch, and namely the King, the Duke of
York, and the Prince of Orange; and this was to be effected, by disaffecting
the Kings best Friends, and Subjects against his Person and Government,
charging him with Tyranny, and Designs of Oppression, Governing by the Sword,
and without Parliaments: And this was to be done by false Intelligencers, and
Seditious Preachers in private or public Conventicles; Look here the Author,
and the Publisher. For compare Vox Topuli, and Frank Smith the Anabaptist
Preacher in Vox Populi, page 1. And you shall see, they are a perfect Tally,
and notch exactly; For, says he, so prevalent has this Interest been under so
potent a Head as the D. of Y. as to stiffle in the Birth all those hopeful
Parliament Endeavors by those many surprising, and astonishing Prorogations,
and Dissolutions which they have procured. This was not at all designed to
resfect upon his Majesty, to disaffect the Subjects, I warrant you, no, not for
the World, Mr. Vox Populi had never such a thought, Good Man.

I know some persons will presently stumble at the Threshold, and cry out, A
Papist, a Yorkist, according to the breeding and manners of the Time; as if a
man could not honor the Duke as Son of the Martyr, and Brother to our Gracious
Sovereign, and yet hate Popery, with more ease than the old Commonwealths Men
divided the Person from the King. To these I have only this to say, I would
desire them seriously to consider, how far the Intention of some People may
carry on the Design of Rooting out the Family of the Stuarts sworn to be Part
of the Popish Plot, the Duke being one Branch of the Family, and as the matter
has be managed by the Intelligencers of the Nation, all the Lords Spiritual,
the greatest part of the Lords Temporal, All the Churchmen, and Loyal Gentry
are declared Adherents to the Duke, and if it were time of day to speak
English, you should have Vox Populi go to the end ont. Now the Duke cannot be
laid aside, but his Adherents must be so too, and then the Management of all
must come to the hands of those Loyal Dissenters, who about 50000 strong
attended the King at Worcester, which was a very Extraordinary Guard.

I have no design to multiply words to no purpose, and therefore will not
quarrel with every thing he says, though I confess he has so mingled Poison and
Antidote, Truth and Malice, Falsehood and Artifice, that there is scarce a Line
in his two Sheets that is not liable to Exception.

I own the Excellent Constitution of an English Parliament, and honor it with
all the becoming Veneration of a Subject born in England, a Lover of Liberty, a
sincere Protestant according to the Excellent Doctrine of the Church of
England, as now it stands, and one that hopes to enjoy the Advantages of the
well tempered Government here, and the Happiness promised by the Reformed
Religion hereafter; but I hate, and abhor all Usurpations, and more especially
those of the Late Commonwealth Rebels, which I find summed up by Mr. Vox Populi
under these Heads:

1. That the Law makes the King. Title Page.

2. That the King is only a King, while he rules well, but a Tyrant, when he
oppresses. Page 2.

3. Especially when it comes in with an Innuendo, that his Majesty has not
ruled well in those many surprising and astonishing Prorogations and
Dissolutions, and when it is positively affirmed, That not to suffer
Parliaments to sit to answer the great ends for which they were Instituted, is
expressly contrary to Common Law, and to the Law of God, of Nature, and a
violence offered to the Government, an Infringment of the Peoples fundamental
Rights, and tends to the breaking of the Government, and introducing Arbitrary
Power. p. 5, 6.

4. That the King and his Predecessors Power of Proroguing, and Dissolving
Parliaments, is only an Argument a facto ad Jus, and not concluding their
having done so, or doing so does not create a Right, which is in plain English
to say, This Prerogative is an Usurpation, and by clear Consequence strikes
directly at the King, as an oppressor, which before he has told us, does Unking
him, and make him a Tyrant. page 13.

5. That according to Magna Charta, Nulli negabimus, the King ought to have no
Negative Voice, or to deny passing such Bills as the Peoples needs call for.

This is a short Abstract of this Vox Topuli; But can you imagine, whence this
Godly Piece was borrowed to be presented to the King and Parliament for a New
Mirror of Justice, and Model of Government? from a very Celebrated Authority, I
assure you, no worse Man than the English Pilate, the scarlet villain
Bradshaw's Reports, Charles the First his Case, and Mr. Solicitor Cook, who
was hanged, drawn, and quartered for his pains, as his Master would have been,
if the Devil had not saved the Hangman the Labor.

The Charge of the Commons of England against Charles Stuart, etc. There Is his
Title, Vox Populi.

That the said Charles Stuart, being admitted King of England (there is his
first Maxim that the Law makes the King) and therein trusted with a limited
Power, and by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to use the Power
committed to him for the Good of the People, and for Preservation of their
Rights and Liberties: yet nevertheless out of a wicked Design, to erect, and
uphold in himself an unlimited, and Tyrannycal Power to rule according to his
Will, and to overthrow the Rights, and Liberties of the People, yea to take
away, and make void the Foundations thereof, and of all Redress and Remedy of
Misgovernment, which by the Fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom were
reserved on the Peoples behalf in the Rights and Power of frequent, and
successive Parliaments, or National Meeting; He the said Charles Stuart, etc.
Here is the sum and substance of Vox Populi, which I leave to the Reader to
compare, to save him the expense of Money, and my self of time. And is not this
a very pretty Looking Glass to present to a King and Parliament at Oxford,
wherein the King is arraigned of Misgoverning, Proroguing, Dissolving, etc. as
indeed his two Sheets are nothing else but this Compendium beaten a little
Thinner.

But that I may give some account to the People whom this Mr. Vox will needs
represent, though he was never chosen by them, and they have other
Representatives at Oxon, who will not be pleased with his Usurpation upon their
Rights and Privileges. In Answer to his First Thesis, That the Law makes the
King. First, It is contrary to express Scripture, By me Kings reign, and the
Powers that be are ordaind of God.

2. It is against the Law of Reason, and Nature, Causa est prior Causato, the
Cause must be before the Effect, and by consequence the Kings, who are
Lawmakers, before the Laws.

3. It is against the Civil Law, as it were easy to instance in a thousand
places. Take one or two that are at hand; Sacrilegii instar est Rescripta
Principis obviare. Vnde ipse Legibus Civilibus non astringitur, nam in omnibus
Imperatoris excipitur Fortuna, cui ipsas Leges Deus subjecit. Zouch. Pars 4.
Sect. 4. De Jure Principis. It is a kind of Sacrilege, says he, to disobey the
Commands of the Prince, though he himself is not confined by the Laws; for in
all things the Prerogative Royal is excepted to him to whom God has subjected
the Laws.

Licet legibus soluti simus, attament Legibus vivimus. Just. 2.17. a. Though
the Emperor be free, yet he lives according to Laws. And as his Most Excellent
Majesty in his late Speech to the Parliament at Oxon, assures his People in
these Words, I conclude with this one Advice to you, That the Rules and
Measures of all your Votes may be the known and established Laws of the Land,
which neither can nor ought to be departed from nor changed but by Act of
Parliament; and I may the more reasonably require that you make the Laws of the
Land Your Rule, because I am resolved they shall be Mine. A Resolution worthy
so Great and Good a Prince, and which will sure be satisfactory to all Loyal
Subjects, and is alone an Answer to Mr. Vox Populi. And to convince Mr. Vox
Populi with an Argument ad Hominem, If the King be not above the Laws, which he
cannot be, if he be their Creature, what will become of him for a Pardon, which
if he, and his friends do not procure, indeed Mr. Vox Populi is in danger of
having his Singing spoiled by the Laws for being guilty of Colemanism, and
turning Secretary of State before his time: The Crimen laesae Majestatis, which
I think, if the King will not, the Law cannot pardon.

To his great Authority of Bracton, I oppose the no Learned and Famous Sir
Walter Raleigh, whose words, a Commentary upon Bracton, are these: Whereas
there are two Powers of the Law, the one Directive, the other Coactive; to the
Power Directive Kings ought to be subject, but not to that which Constrains:
For as touching Violence or Punishment, no man is bound to give a prejudicial
Judgment against himself: And if Equals have not Power over each other, much
less have Inferiors over their Superiors from whom they receive their Authority
and Strength.

The Prince, adds he, is so much above the Laws, as the Soul, and Body united
is above a dead, and senseless Carcass; for the King is truly called Jus vivum
and Lex animata, an animate, and living Law. But this is true, that by giving
Authority to Laws, Princes both add greatness to themselves and conserve it,
and therefore was it said of Bracton, Merito debet Rex, etc. But whereas
Bracton ascribes this Power to the Human Law, he is therein mistaken, for
Kings are made by God and Laws Divine, and by Human Laws only declared to be
Kings. Raleighs Hist. Lib. 2. part 1. c. 4. number. 16.

And in another place Bracton explains himself, and puts the Case; If the King
should do injury, what is to be done; and tells us, If upon humble petitioning
he cannot be brought to alter his mind, he is to be left to God almighty, Cum
Superiorem non habeat, nisi Deum, etc. Having no other Superior, but God. Lib.
5. Tract. 3. de defaltis. c. 3. number. 3.

And for a more ample satisfaction I refer the Reader to Mr. Dudley Diggs his
Discourse concerning the Unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms against their
Sovereign, in what Case soever; where he shall find this point sufficiently
winnowed, and the Chaff of this Commonwealth-Maxim blown away by the strength
of Law, Reason, and Religion. page 77, 78, etc.

To his Second Aphorism, Rex a been Regendo: That he is only King while he
rules well, but a Tyrant when he oppresses. If he means that he ceases to be a
King, and by consequence his Subjects are free from their Allegiance, which is
a Doctrine strenuously maintained by Papists and Commonwealth-Protestants, I
say, it is utterly false, and I oppose to it. First, his own allowed Maxim of
our Law, Rex non moritur, etc. The King cannot dye or do wrong.

2. It is contrary to Scripture: God Almighty, who must not be said to speak
improperly, calls Pharaoh, Saul, Agag, Nebuchadnezzar Kings, nay, and which is
more, commands Obedience to them. And if Mr. Vox will be wiser than the Maker
of Kings, I think he is fitter for Bedlam and Hellebore himself, than to
prescribe to a King and Parliament, as State Physician in ordinary to them both.

To his Third, which is a charge of Misgoverning, slily thrown upon his
Majesty: I shall refer him to the Attorney General, who I presume at leisure
may answer him more appositely, and to the purpose, if he be not Vox and
praeterea nihil: Only I must say, It is the most false, and groundless,
malicious, and impudent Calumny thrown upon a just, good, and merciful Prince
that ever was since the times of Pilate, and Bradshaw, and a very ill Requital
for the Act of Oblivion, and the last Free and General Pardon, of which by his
Speech I cannot but suspect this Galilean to have had some benefit: The comfort
is, his Majesty cannot, after all this Noise, be taxed with so much as one
Arbitrary Action, nor of having ever denied his People any one thing requested
of him in a fair and Parliamentary way.

His fourth Thesis puts me in mind of the poor Country Fellow's Mistake, who
read, The Devil was a Lawyer from the beginning; Just such another Huntscrap of
Law is our Little Vox Populi, who says, The Kings Prerogative of Calling,
Adjourning, and Proroguing of Parliaments, is arguing a Facto ad Jus, and that
their doing so, does not create a Right.

Say you so good Mr. Vox Populi! What think you to Prescription of above a
Thousand years, which I am sure is time beyond which the Memory of Man cannot
prove to the contrary. Is it no Argument that because the River Thames always
ran from Oxon to London, that theresore that is its proper Channel, but that it
ought to run over Black Heath, or Highgate-Hill? For shame! If you had the
quiet Prescription of Possession for a good Estate of 40 s. per Armum to make
you a Freeholder, would you not take it ill to be shouldered out of your
Tenement with a non sequitur of forcible Entry drawn a facto ad Jus; And must
the Crown hold by Copy of Court-Roll at the will of the Little Lord Mr. Vox
Populi?

But Secondly: Pray what was the meaning of the Parliament of Nov. 3. 1640. to
get an Act to perpetuate their Sitting, during the Pleasure of the two Houses,
though it may be his Majesty had with more Advanrage advised upon it, and (as
they would have the Judges Patents) to have inserted a Clause into it, Quandiu
se been gesserint; for Parliaments are but Men, and no more Infallible than
Popes.

3. What is the meaning of that Act of Parliament, 16 Car. 1. c. 1. It is
declared, That the Appointment of the Time and Place for the holding of
Parliaments, has always belonged, as it ought, to his Majesty and his Royal
Progentiors? Or of that Aphorism, Cujus est instituere, ejus est destituere, He
that has the Power to make, has the Power to unmake? Will you force us to
that of the Poet for an Oracle?

Aetas parentum pejor Avis
Nos tandem protulit progeniem vitiosiorem.
Must we grow every Age worse than others? this is a sad Doctrine to be heard
from a Reforming Vox Populi.

What means that Statute 16 Car. 2. c. 1. It is acknowledged, That it is a
Prerogative Inherent to the Imperial Crown of England, the Calling and
Assembling of Parliaments, etc. Good Mr. Vox, is this too, Arguing a facto ad
Jus, or a Jure ad factum? What a Dolt was the Reputed Oracle of the Law to tell
us; None can begin, continue, or dissolve the Parliament but by the Kings
Authority, Co. Litt. fol. 110. a. And in another place to argue so simply a
facto ad Jus, when he tells us, The King is Caput, Principium and Finis
Parliamenti; The Head, the Beginning, and End of Parliaments; Co. 4. Inst. f.
3. How happy are some Persons in their Illuminations, and their Discoveries!

His Fifth Position, That according to Magna Charta the King ought to have no
Negative Voice, is like the rest of his Reasonings, and agreeable to his
Principles, who would have the King have nothing at all. Good Mr. Vox, as you
are Valiant, so be Merciful: What, must the King be subject to the Laws, and
yet have no power at all to refuse any? Pray Mr. Echo of the Late Rump, do as
you would be done by. Must the Commons have a Negative Vote, and the Lords have
a Negative, Non Content, and the Sovereign be Content with what ever is
afforded him? Pray, Sir, how much younger do you think is Le Roy S' avisera,
than Le Roy Le veult? Here Is a pudder and a stir about denying and denying
Bills, and yet Queen Elizabeth, in a Parliament in the 39th. year of her Reign
rejected but 48. Bills which had passed both Houses, and sent the Speaker of
the Commons word, That it was her Majesty's Pleasure, that if he perceived any
idle Heads that would not stick to hazard their own Estates, but meddle with
Reforming the Church, and Transforming the Common Weal by exhibiting Bills to
that purpose, the Speaker should not receive them, till they were viewed and
considered by those who are sitter to consider and judge of them.

And yet then Mr. Vox Populi made no words about the matter: And if he had
recommended his Story to that Queen and her Parliament, he would have been
recommended to some Ballad Singer, to compose a Doleful Ditty, upon the woeful
Life, and deserved Death of Vox Populi, for Conspiring against our Gracious
Queen Elizabeth. And there is a positive Statute, affirming the Kings having a
Negative Voice, 2 H. 5. Rot. Parl. At the same Rate and Ingenuity he reasons
about the King's having no Prerogative, but what the Law allows him, when
nothing is more frequent than Salvo's of the Royal Prerogative, Vide 3. E. 1.
c. 5.8. E. 1. c, 2.28. E. 1. c. 20.18. E. 3. c. 1.34. E. 3. c. 15.
which sure supposes the King had some such thing, which the Laws did not give,
nor should take the meaning of these words tas, Cap. 2. And what is the meaning
of these words so frequent in our Law Books, Salvo Jure Regio? Pray Mr. Vox
inform the King and Parliament.

And for his Story of the Honest Proclamation, that no Parliament should be
Dissolved so long as any Petitions were not answered, he should have acquainted
the People, that at the Opening of the Parliament such a Number of Lords, and
Commons were appointed Tryers of Petitions, which were to be brought to them,
and they were the Judges, which were fit to be preferred to the King, and which
to be rejected; And it would little avail his Design of protracting of
Sessions, since as it would be unreasonable, so Honorable an Assembly as the
Parliament should sit waiting for Petitions, so most certainly a Day would be
appointed for the People to bring them in; and if they came not, the Parliament
would not be obliged to attend longer, having dispatched the more weighty
Affairs.

I do not know, who this Anonymus Author is, but it may be himself; or at best,
it is but asking his Companion whether he be a Thief, and calling his
Accomplice to be his Voucher, and Compurgator, and that does not add much
weight to his Arguments or strength to his Cause.

In short, the Pamphlet is the Compendium of the Assertions, and Positions of
the Long Rebel Parliament; the Epitome of Bradshaw, and Cook; an Affront to
his Majesty, and the Parliament; a Firebrand of Sedition; a Trumpet to
Rebellion; and a most shameful Abuse of the People, of whom he has made himself
the Representative: It begins with the Plot, and for any thing I see, may end
with the Doom of the Plotters; and to the Law and his Deserts, I leave
him:Wishing a Happy Union between the King and his Parliament, and that they
may be delivered from the Presents of such Vox Populi's, as are designed to
pull us all in Flames.

FINIS.

