THE Night-Walker of Bloomsbury: Being the Result of several late Consultations
between a Vintner, Judge Tallow-Chandler, a Brace of Fishmongers, and a
Printer, etc. In a Dialogue between Ralph and Will.
Entered according to ORDER.

RAlph, Do You hear the News?


Will. What News?


Ralph, Why, they say my Lord Russel walks.


Will. And do you believe it?


Ralph, Why not? may not Lords walk as well as other people?


Will. That Is not the business -- but I perceive you have heard but a piece of
the Story -- you have not heard how the Ghost came to be raised, nor how he was
laid.


Ralph, Raised and Laid! -- why then I warrant you take it to be nothing but a
piece of Imposture.


Will. Nothing more certain, -- a mere silly, idle, foppish contrivance of a
Cabal of bigoted Papists.


Ralph, I must confess a Bigoted Papist is a very sottish sort of Animal --
But what did this deep design drive at?


Will. Why, Sir, a certain Vintner not far from Southhampton-Square, a
well-wisher, you may be sure, to any Religion he could get by, had a mind to
draw custom to his empty House -- For he had a vast prospect of gain from the
success of the Action -- For quo he to himself, the people will cry, whether
shall we go? Go! says another, we will go to the Hobgoblin that counterfeited the
Lord Russels Ghost -- for thought he, every body will be glad to see a
Hobgoblin.


Ralph, Puh -- This is some invention of yours to put a trick upon the poor
Papists.


Will. An Invention of mine! It Is all about the Town -- and besides, there is
nothing more common among the Papists then to counterfeit Spirits and Ghosts --
I find you never read the Story of the four Monks of Bearn in Switzerland, that
were hanged for counterfeiting the Virgin Mary; not of the Country Curate that
lay with his Niece in the shape of St. Barbara. But the Friar had not so good
luck: For he living in a young Widows House, would fain have frighted the young
Widow into his Lascivious Embraces -- and to that purpose haunted her Chamber
every Night in a Winding Sheet: But she being a Woman of mettle, hid a Friend
of hers privately in her Chamber, that gave the Spirit such a severe
Cudgelcorrection, as made him quickly beg Quarter for his bruised Bones.


Ralph, But all this while, where was the Profundity of the design?


Will. The profundity of the Design was to put the Lord Russels Speech upon Dr.
Burnett -- And of this they were resolved to have an acknowledgement out of the
Lord Russel's own Mouth.


Ralph, That was hard to do, when his Head was cut off.


Will. Oh -- but though the Head of his Body was cut off, the Head of his Ghost
was still on -- However, though it be not to be denied, that a Spirit without a
Head has a very brisk motion, yet the Committee were not so cunning, as to know
how to bring his Ghost out of Buckinghamshire into Bloomsbury-Square -- and
therefore another expedient was to be found out -- The Committee was extremely
puzl'd to find out this Expedient, till the Vintner, inspired no doubt with his
own Pipes and Tierces, had it presently in his Pate -- Quo he, Ladies and
Gentlemen, why may not I act a Ghost, as well as Matt. Medbourn?


Ralph, Frolic for Frolic now, it would be a very good humor to Indict this
Vintner upon the Statute of 21 Jacob. 26. for endeavoring to personate the
Lord Russels Ghost, on purpose to procure an acknowledgement contrary to his
will and consent.


Will. Faith Sir, the very Action it self procured him punishment enough, to be
well drub'd, and two such lovely Forehead marks of Knave and Fool, that Ten
Fountains, with all the Soap in the City, will never wash off.


Ralph, Pardon me, Sir, I have a greater opinion of the Vintner, and that he
acted what he did in the imitation of Theseus and Eneas, who both went to visit
Pluto's Dominions; but this same Vintner undertook to be even a tormented
Inhabitant of the Lower Shades himself, to advance the Popish Interest, which
was much a more daring deed then that of Theseus. The Vintner had Listed
himself in Hell, which Theseus never did.


Will. Ay -- but Theseus was Theseus; Theseus kicked Proserpina's Dog before
her Face, in her own Dining Room* But this Bugbear of a Vintner suffered
himself to be thrash'd like any mortal Coward, and yet the Fool had not the wit
to Vanish. -- They say, had the Earth yielded never so little, the first blow
the Beadle hit, had struck him down to the place from whence he pretended to
come.


Ralph, But can you tell who hatched this Chicken of a Design?


Will. Politic Heads, Sir, Politic Heads -- very Politic Heads -- and of
both Sexes too I assure ye.


Ralph, I must confess, I admire neither of their ingenuities; and as for the
Women, I find 'em much more famous for the crafty carrying on a Love intrigue,
or concealing their private enjoyments, then in managing Hobgoblin Plots.


Will. Sir, I do tell ye, this Committee consisted of several Persons Male and
Female -- Imprimis, The Man of the House, and his Wife, chief Presidencess of
the Council. In the next place, two Fishmongers in Bloomsbury, if you hunt
after the name of the one, you may easily find it: The other a most rude and
ungraceful acknowledger of the Lord Russel's former favors, as who had all
along served his Table from his own Shop; his Grandfather seems to have bin the
Son of Tomlins.


Ralph, These Fishmongers, Sir, were notably drawn into this Conspiracy --
'twas emblematical -- For as great undertakings require great silence, so none
more likely then Fishmongers to bear the Proverb always in mind, As mute as a
Fish.


Will. The next was a Tallow-Chandler, who, though he live by the Night, takes
his name from Noonday.


Ralph, Why that was it that spoiled the whole Plot, to engage a
Tallow-Chandler in deeds of Darkness.


Will. Oh Sir, but he was to have been a Witness -- and none so fit to be
witness as a Man of Light -- besides, Sir, he was to attend the Hobgoblin, and
none so fit as a Tallow-Chandler to hold a Candle to the Devil. But observe how
the Tallow-Chandler was matched; for the other witness was to be a Papistical
Printer in the Neighborhood.


Ralph, There you are right again -- for if the Truth should chance to slip out
of the Chandlers memory, the Printer had always a Register ready to refresh it.


Will. By what I hear, there is no such need of rubbing up the Tallow-Chandlers
memory. A my word Sir, yare got into pleasant Company -- Here Is a Vintner acts
the Devil -- and a Tallow-Chandler acts a Judge -- and Judges Sir, are no Fools
to have their Memories rubbed.


Ralph, Who the Devil made the Tallow-Chandler a Judge?


Will. Wine and Fat Venson, Sir, at the Crown-Tavern in Bloomsbury; For there
it was that the Tallow-Chandler, a witty Jocose Droll of a Tallow-Chandler,
finding there was something to be done to gratify the Company (for it was at a
public Venson-Feast) took upon him the Dignity of the Coife, and causing Mr.
Hamden to be arraigned before him, Mercilesly Condemned him to be Hanged.


Ralph, What had the Tallow-Chandler to do with Mr. Hamden -- Surely he is to
stand or fall by another sort of Judicature then six in the Pound.


Will. Oh Sir, 'twas done to please a brace of Reverend Justices that were
Stewards of the Feast -- And such frolicks as these, Lord Sir, you cannot
imagine how they digest Venson Pasty Pudding-Crust -- There are some people so
hot, that you would admire they do not melt their Grease, and get the Scratches
with Galloping after such fancies as these.


Ralph, And yet when this Tallow-Chandler served Mr. Hamden with Candles, he
did not scruple to take his Money, notwithstanding he might not then be of his
severe Judges present opinion: And therefore there is some hope yet left, that
Mr. Hamden may sweeten up his Judge into a Reprieve, upon a promise of laying
in his Winter store out of Bloomsbury.


Will. There was an Apothecary too, whose spleen was extremely tickled at the
Conceit of their design. Repute makes him a person of a bulky stature, famous
for the beauty of his Wainscot Lady, and the wit of his Son, whom he teaches to
curse the D. of M.


Ralph, Why truly, this Pothecary is highly to be applauded for his Loyalty:
for to show the Exquisiteness of his Allegiance, he sends his Child to the
Devil to confirm it.


Will. There were several others that met at two or three of these consults,
that have opened their Purses to save their Reputation.


Ralph, I am not apt to believe, that people who concerned themselves with such
a ridiculous Sham as this, had much Reputation to lose; and therefore their
Peter Pence were ill bestowed. The Proverb is, Discover, and shame the Devil.


Will. That never could be better don then by the Dress with which they
disguised him: For certainly all the Fools and Zunies in Bartholomew-Fair were
never so quaintly rigged, as this same Hob-thrush of a Vintner was equipped to
act his Tragick-Comedy.


Ralph, As how?


Will. First they hung about his Neck a large Night-Rail, which the Gentlewoman
of the House lent him out of her Zeal.


Ralph, Most Enigmatical, Problematical, Emphatical, and Emblematical -- for a
Night-Rail being a kind of a Cloak, was most proper to cover a piece of Knavery.


Will. To hide his lower parts, the Fishmongers lent him their Aprons.


Ralph, More Enigmatical still -- For Fishmongers being men of Lent and Fasting
days -- the Fishmongers Aprons were to put the Ghost in mind of his sorrow,
contrition and repentance, for owning a Speech that was none of his own.


Will. By your favor, Sir, here is a Breach of an Act of Parliament discover*d,
to bring a Spirit* out of his Grave in Linen, whereas the ought to have
appeared in Crape; and being a Lord, in Lac^ Crape too.


Ralph, well! But what had the Goblin about his Head?


Will. His head was muffl'd up in a white Dlaper Napkin -- to show that the
Letter was diaper'd with the Inventions of several Writers, and not of one
plain Woofe.


Ralph, Shame saw the Luggs on 'em, for a Company of Dotards -- as if the Devil
were grown as fantastical as the French, to change his Old fashions -- Now the
old fashions of Ghosts, ever since I heard of Ghosts, was always the same, a
Winding Sheet with two Knots, and a Taper in the Spirits hands, with which the
Chandler might easily have furnished the Devil. Or if the Spirit must needs
rise in the same clothes he was bur^^, the Cab^ had much better have (...)b'd
for a new Crape Funeral suit -- I would have serv'^ the Goblin of a Vintner*
another time, when the juice of his own Lime-Fa^^ had burnt up his Liver. I Will
undertake there is ne re* a Booth in Pork^ (...) would have dressed*up a
Hobgoblin more artificially than such a consultation of Ninny-Hammers -- But
when the Devil was thus betrumpery'd, what did he do?


Will. In this Mere-maids Attire, he went attended with the two Fishmongirs for
his Guard, and the Chandler and Printer were to be Witnesses they saw the
Apparition -- At length, when he came to his Posts, as the Contrivers had laid
it, *it is to be supposed, near the House where the Lord Russell Lived, he fell a
groaning like an Ox at the first Sticking; nay, he groaned even like the
Groaning-board it self; and after a short preamble of Lamentations lewdly
uttered, He cried out, Oh -- I have no rest because of the Speech that I never
made, but Dr. Burnet.


Ralph, There Is no fear ont', but he will be taught to groan better when he comes
to groan for himself. One would have thought he should have practiced the Art
of Groaning more accurately before he went to groan upon such an Occasion as
this -- He should have groaned as if he had been groaning for his Life, that
had taken such a part upon him -- but it seems he rather fell a braying, then a
groaning, and so discovered himself -- for upon the noise, as some Report, or
at least as the Goblin deserved, one of the Watch coming up to him, and
perceiving by his Shoes, that he had no Cloven-Feet, Cannot ye be quiet, quo he,
in your Grave? I Will make ye quiet; and with that, gave him such a Palt o'th
Pate and the Thigh, as quickly changed the Color of his Ghostly Habit.


Ralph, IN good faith, the Watchman did more then all the Comittee could do --
For they only strove to make him a feigned Goblin, but the Watchman made him a
real Raw-Head and Bloody Bones -- A Catastrophe that such an enterprise justly
deserved -- But what became of poor Raw-Head and Bloody-bones?


Will. The now real Goblin was forced to confess his name, and the names of his
Associates, and to cheer up the Watch with Drink and Money for the fright he
had put 'em in, and so they let him go, to groan forth his own Lamentations to
the Gulls that set him at Work.


Ralph, Well, I will say nothing of the Speech one way nor other, but sure it
was an act neither generous nor Christian-like, to raise up an Impostor to
disturb the silence of a Gentleman's Grave that had paid his last debt to
Justice.


Will. Barbarous and papistical, which is as much as needs be said of it.


FINIS
London: Printed by J. Grantham, MDCLXXXIII.


