A JOURNAL Of The Most Remarkable Occurrences that Happened BETWEEN His
Majesty's Army And The FORCES Under the Command of Marshall de SCHOMBERG IN
IRELAND, From the Twelfth of August to the 23th of October, 1689.

Faithfully collected by James Nihell Esquire Under Secretary to the R. H. the Earl
of Melfort, His Majesty's P. S. of S.

DVBLIN, Printed for Alderman James Malone, Bookseller in Skinner-Row

A Journal of the Most Remarkable Occurrences that happened between His Majesty's
Army; And the Forces under the Command of Marshall de Schomberg, etc.
ON the 12th of August 1689 a numerous Fleet appeared off the Coast of
Donaghadee in the County of Down, out of which two hundred men made that Night
a descent on the land, and entrenched themselves.

On the 13th Marshall de Scomberg who Commanded the Forces on Board debarquing
his men, Horses and Train of Artillery, set foot on shore without opposition.

On the 14th he ordered the 200 men that first landed to March to Belfast, and
the next day he followed in Person with the gross of the Army, and refreshed
himself there till the 19th.

On the 19th he invests Carrigfergus and having Summond the Garrison to
surrender in vain though with offers of fair and honorable conditions, He drew
out his lines and the next day played upon the town from four Batteries of
Cannon, and three of Mortar pieces, besides all the Gunns of the Navy to which
the place stood exposed with in distance, whilst he made his approaches by
land, where he found the works, or walls most accessible, yet though he with
Bombs (of which he threw in a thousand) had laid all the buildings in Ashes;
and though the Garrison could not reasonably hope for any succor, they kept it
nine days, and even then reduced to one Barrel of powder made Soldier-like
Terms, marching out with their Arms, Colors flying, ball in mouth, and other
usual ceremonies of War, to be attended by a convoy until they were within
three mile of the Newry; yet the Articles (though signed by Scomberg) himself,
were nevertheless barbarously violated by the soldiers who without regard to
age, sex or Quallity disarmed and stripped the Towns people, forceing even women
to Run the Gantlet stark naked.

On the 26th of August the King came from Dublin to Tredath attended with 200
of his Guards, and gentlmen Volonteers on Hors-back, and found there no more
then seven Regiments of Foot, and some few Troops of Horse; a strong Party of
the Cavalry being commanded out as Far as the Newry, under the Duke of Berwick.

The sixth of september His Grace to hinder the Enemies advancement upon him,
and render his march to the Newry incommodious, and difficult broke up all the
Causwayes, and other defile's through which he must pass, and to make all secure
burnt even the Town, and retired to Dundalk, where he found Monsieur D'esco
with two Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horse sent out from the Army to
bring up his Rear for their Forces united were very insufficient to make head
against the enemy, who then pressed their March; so they all faced about, and
drew off together.

The King now in Tredath was informed by some Irish and one French Deserter,
that Schomberg's Troops were very much diseased, and already in want of
provisions.

The 13th all His Majesty's Forces were come down to the Camp near Tredath.

On the 14th the King marched the Army from Tredath to Atherdee about 8 Irish
miles, and there met with intelligence that about 12 Sail of the Enemies Fleet
were the day before up with the Skerries, and fired many Guns, which drew the
Militia and people in such numbers down to the Shore, that they durst not
venture upon it, but bore away large to the Southward, where they plied too and
again betwixt Hoath and Bullock, with design as it is thought, to animate the
malignant Party (if any such were in Dublin) to rise. But matters were so well
secured there by the conduct and vigilance of Colonel Simon Luttrell the
Governor, that disappointed of all expectations, they vainly stood off to Sea,
and were soon out of sight.

On the 16th His Majesty at the first appearance of day marched the Horse and
Dragoons from Atherdee to Allardstown near Affayn-Bridge about three miles
short of Dun^lk, of which he possessed himself about twelve. By ^d i^ht
following his Foot-Guards came up to him, and ^e Body of the Infantry by noon
the next day. Having ^rt fled the Bridge, he placed the Guards on the further
^de of the River, and sent Parties out to discover the E^emy. Toward the
evening six Troops of the Cavalry ^ade up to a small advanced Party of fifty
Horse, and ^ome few Volontiers that attended His Majesty's Army, ^ho
nevertheless receiving the Enemies Fire, immediate^^ charged, and put them to
flight.

On the 18th the whole Camp was formed with as much ^egularity and advantage as
the ground would admit of. The King in his person having traversed it all over,
after ^ewing the Intrenchments, and posture of the enemy.

On the 19th several Prisoners were taken, and some ^^serters came with
intelligence that Schomberg had set all ^ands to work to secure himself by
fortifying Dundalk, and seemed rather to prepare against a Siege than a Batt^l

On the 20th the King drew out his Army, and marching in the Head of the first
and second Line, within less than Cannon-shot of the enemy, He immediately put
them in order of Battle (according to a method agreed upon) with wonderful
expedition and silence. The Lines ^^tended themselves ftom South-east to
North-west along a ^^^ge of Hillocks that front the Town; the second Line
showed it self between the intervals of the first. In this posture they stood
for three hours, the Soldiers transported with Courage, by the Presence, and
great Example of their King in the Head of them, could not forbear by shouting
and other demonstrations of Joy. to dare, and challenge the Invaders; who
nevertheless could not be provoked, nor invited hy any means, out of their
fortifications: And therefore the King, disappointed in his hopes of deciding
the War by a Battle, commanded his Troops just under the Mareschals view, to
march easily back to their Camp again, His Majesty Himself remaining in the
Rear of all His Army until He saw the last Soldier drawn off. Seven Prisoners
were that night brought in by a detacht party of Dragoones from a Village
called Haggardstown on the sea side The Captains O Neil and Murphy likewise
with 50 Foot, Surprising a party of 80 Dragoones behind a Mountain that covered
the Enemy killed two o^ the place (mong whom some French Hugonets refused
Quarter) took six prisoners the rest escaping by Flight.

On the 21th the King gave Orders for the Fortifying Atherdee with Ditches,
Ramparts, and other Necessary Works; a retrenchment was likewise cast up before
the left wing of the first line.

On the 24th the King viewed the Country on all sides resolving when he found
it necessary, or convenient to dislodge from the ground he then stood encamped
on, and to pitch his Tents on the Edges of small Hyllhocks that arise between
the Rivers of Mapastown, and Atherdee, and therefore gave general Orders for
preserving the Forage in all parts within Command of his Army.

On the 26th a Commanded party of Horse-dragoones with 35 Companies of
Granadiers, set fire to all the Forage and Corn, on the other side of the
Lurgan River for 3 miles along the sea coast, and under the Enemies Nose who
nevertheless made a faint Sally, but were easily forced back to their Trenches
again.

On the 28th toward the evening the discharge of the enemies Artillery three
times pursued with as many Volleys of small shot, and huzza's amused the Kings
Camp for some wile until disabused the next day by a deserter who said all
that noise was in celebration of a great victory obtained by those of
Iniskillen againk the Kings party at Sligo; but this mighty Action upon better
intelligence proved a Skirmish between a small band of that County Millitia and
a Troop of Rebels, wherein 3 of the Loyalists fell, and that number twice told
of the enemy.

On the 30th an Ensign from mac Ca^y More's Regiment, returned to his
Majesty's Camp with advice that 3 ships whereon were imbarqued Colonel
Villiers Troop horse and men were newly cast away, that 500 French officers and
Soldiers suspected to be Catholics, and well wishers to his Majesty's cause
were sent a shipboard their place of confinment that seven Frenchmen, and a
Captain were Hanged upon suspicion of affecting the Kings party. That
Four-score a day at the least were sent from the Enemies Camp to the Hospital,
and that all their Horses were turned out to Grass for want of Hay and other
necessary Forage.

On the 31th (...) Regiments of Foot were Commanded to Sligo, and the parts on
all sides adjacent to it to preserve the inhabitants under his Majesty's
Obedience, and check the excursions from Inniskillen.

On the (...) of October A party of 150 Foot were detached under the command of
Lieutenant Coll. Stapylton and Captain H^gh Macnemarra to Relieve and bring off
the 500 French that Schomberg had caused to be stripped and carried by water to
Carlingford; suspecting they had a design of changeing their party; The march
was difficult and hazardous, For they could not avoid the English camp, but by
a detour of at least 30 miles, and that through almost impassable Mountains,
nevertheless they Marched cheerfully over them to a vale within six miles of
Carlingford, where making a hault to fix their Arms and cover their Primeing
against a shower of rain that hung over their heads, a party of the Enemy came
upon them, and being demanded whom they were For, they answered they were For
King William, so are we said stapylton with purpose to take his oppertunity of
Surprizeing them, but the Zealous Soldiers ignorant of his Meaning declared
loudly they were For King James and made good their words with a Volley, 14
they killed on the spot Seized all their Arms and made Eight Prisoners without
Receiveing a wound.

On the 5th of October (Forage becoming now scarce) the King thought fit to
return to Atherdee, and on the 6th very betimes in the Morning the Army was in
a Rediness to March, But the smoke of the Soldiers Hutts set on Fire by Command
made their first setting out a Little Incomodious and Difficult, but that was
soon over For when they saw Clear they easily fell into their Ranks and Marched
in great Order, The Right Wing of the Horse and Dragoones with (...) Brigade^
of Foot, the Canon and all the Kings Equipage by Mapastown bridge; The left
Wing with the reserve of the Foot and all the Baggage of the Army by the Road
that led to the Bridge of Tallanstown, and that Afternoon the Foot encamped in
two Lines near Atherdee, having the River, and a long Morass before them. The
Horse and Dragoons for convenience of forage, and shelter, were sent to three
Villages lying on the right of the Infantry, and the Brigade of Foot that made
the Corp de reserve to another Village beyond them. But the next day His
Majesty visiting that part of the Army, thought the Corpse de reserve (as indeed
it was) too far advanced, and therefore gave orders that they should return to
the Village where the Duke of Tyrconnel's Regiment lay, and sent the Lord
Dongan's Dragoons, with three other Battalions of Foot from the Camp, to
reinforce that Post. He then ordered a Brestwork to be made at the end of a
narrow Causeway that passes thorough the Bogg, and a guard of 60 foot to defend
it. Colonel Purcell's and Sir James Cotters Dragoons were posted on the Left
at Dowdstown and Peppardstown to secure the two Bridges. The Earl of Abercorn's
Regiment of Horse stood encamped at a small Village between the two Lines. But
the Horses of that and Colonel John Parker's Regiment being very much
harrassed, and no danger appearing from the Enemy, His Majesty thought fit to
send them to their Winter Quarters.

The King having reason to believe that Marshall Schomberge would not easily
quit Dundalk, called a Council of War, and proposed the fortifying of Atherdee,
to hinder his advance, and to facilitate the carrying on of the War the earlier
in the Spring. Some of the chief Officers were of opinion against it; yet the
Duke of Tyrconnell, who chiefly seconded the King's resolutions of marching
from Tredath with his Army, in order to engage the Enemy; to which, (under God)
we owe all the success we have met with, joining in opinion with His Majesty,
the work was set on foot, and that place made so strong a Frontier before the
King left it, that tho Schomberge stayed for almost ten days after at Dundalk,
where he lost by Distemper above 1000 men, yet made no attempt upon the Party
left at Atherdee under the Command of Major General Boiselot, but was glad to
make a safe retreat with the reviving part of his Army, leaving many sick
behind, and a number of dead Bodies unburied.

Imprimatur,

Will. Talbott.


