Martii 30. 1677.
IMPRIMATUR Hic Liber ( cui Titulus, The True Liberty and Dominion of
Conscience, etc.)

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

THE TRUE Liberty and Dominion OF Conscience Vindicated, from the USURPATIONS
and ABUSES OF OPINION, AND Persuasion.

Prove. xx. ver. 27. The Spirit of a Man is the Candle of the Lord.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses
in Ludgate Street. 1677.



The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Introduction. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Reason why there are so
many Pretenders to Conscience; and of the Advantages they make of it, to
promote their Interest, and favor their Designs. Page 7 CHAP. III. Of the
great Influence, which true Conscience has upon all the Affairs of Humane Life;
and therefore the great necessity there is, that all men should be rightly
informed concerning it. Page 13 CHAP. IV. Some necessary and universal
Principles laid down, upon which Conscience depends, and according to which it
acts. Page 23 CHAP. V. Of Conscience, its Description, what is its proper
Employment; and the manner of its Operation. Page 28 CHAP. VI. The occasion of
those Differences amongst us, about matters of Conscience, proceeds from the
mistake of Opinion, and private Persuasion for Conscience. What Opinion is, and
what Persuasion? and how they differ from Conscience? Page 44 CHAP. VII. How
far Men are obliged by Opinion, or private Persuasion; and what influence these
have upon Humane Affairs. Page 55 CHAP. VIII. The Differences betwixt the
Church of England, and all Dissenters, brought into Examination, by the
forementioned Rules of Conscience, Opinion and Persuasion. Page 60 CHAP. IX.
The pretenses of Dissenters, that their ways of Government are the best, and to
be preferred before Episcopacy, examined and tried by the same Rules
abovementioned concerning indifferent Things and Actions. Page 74 CHAP. X. Of
the manner and circumstances of Divine Worship; and how from being indifferent,
they may become necessary to be done, and obliging to Conscience. Page 87 CHAP.
XI. Of the Way whereby indifferent things become obligatory to Conscience, not
only upon a Man's private Persuasion, from the forementioned Rules, but so as to
oblige all persons who live under Government, viz. by the Determinations, and
Commands of Lawful Authority. Page 98 CHAP. XII. Some Considerations, showing
the unreasonableness, and impracticableness, of the desires of those persons,
who, under pretense of Conscience, are for erecting new ways of
Church Government, or for Toleration or Liberty of Conscience. Page 117 CHAP.
XIII. A vindication of what is before laid down as a fundamental Principle in
this Discourse: viz. That God Almighty made Mankind for an excellent End; that
is, his Glory; and in order thereunto, by obedience to his Commands, their own
happiness both here in this Life, and hereafter in the Life of Immortality.
Page 125 CHAP. XIV. Some necessary Corollaries from the former Discourse; with
the Conclusion, to all Men to endeavor after Peace and Unity. Page 135
THE TRVE LIBERTY AND DOMINION OF Conscience.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
IT is the Excellency of humane Nature, that all its Actions are the Effects of
Choice, and not of Chance: and therefore they are constantly addressed to some
determinate End; this End is always Happiness, either Real, or at least that
which Men believe to be so. Now for the more certain attainment of whatsoever
kind or degree of Happiness Men desire, they always propose to themselves,
some Way or Rule, by which, they may direct and steer the course of their
Actions, and Endeavors; which otherwise (like a Vessel in the midst of the
main Ocean without Charts and Compass,) must be left to the mercy of all
Accidents, and have only the bare possibility of uncertain Hazard, to conduct
them to their wished Port. From hence it is, that there is no Art nor Science,
Liberal nor Mechanical, but in the first place proposes necessary Rules, for
the direction of those who are to be guided, or instructed therein, in order to
the accomplishment, or attainment of their designed End. Now wherever there is
such a Rule, in regard there are many ways of Error, though, but one of Truth,
and that nothing is more Natural than for Men to Err; Humanum est errare.
by not attending to, or acting according to the Rule; there is a necessity of
some Supreme Judge, who, by an impartial determination, shall judge all humane
Actions, whether they are according to the command and direction of the Rule;
and, by consequence, whether they are right or wrong, in order to the End which
is proposed and designed. This Judge in the Affairs of the World, such as are
Life, Honor, Riches, Fame, etc. is the determination of Reason, according to
the best of every Man's knowledge and understanding. In the Concerns of
Religion, it is called Conscience. This is that universal Monarch, whose
Ubiquitary Throne is established in every mortal Breast. To this the ancient
Heathens owe all that little sense they had of Religion and Virtue. It Is this
that makes the zealous Mussleman adore the false Arabian, and his ridiculous
Alchoran. It Is this, has raised the Roman Mitre to its Triple height; and in
short it is Conscience, that has rent so many puissant Crowns, from his
pretended Universal and Infallible Chair. Not that all these powerful Effects,
have proceeded from a Conscience rightly informed, but on the contrary, many of
them from a most barbarous and stupid Ignorance of the best Rule, by which
Conscience ought to judge, and Men to act.

However, this does most manifestly demonstrate, the Sovereign and Imperial
sway, which even a pretended and imaginary Conscience challenges in the
management of all Humane Affairs.

It is beyond my Province as much as it surpasses either my power or hopes, in
the following Papers, to think of regulating those mighty Evils, which from the
want of a right measure of what is matter of Conscience, and what not, have
overspread the face of the whole Earth: and I shall arrive at the most happy
period of my design, if I can do so charitable a Subject as this is, so much
reason, as to inform some, and convince others of my dear Countrymen, that
hitherto, they have labored under some dangerous mistakes, in this great
concern of Conscience: the fatal effects of which misunderstandings, we have by
the most deplorable experience been too deeply sensible of already; and still
lie under just apprehensions, by reason of the great divisions and distractions
of mind, which daily prevail and increase amongst us, that the same, or (if
possible) a worse Iliad of Tragical Miseries may be repeated over again.

Happy were that Moses, who could stand in this gap; and by seasonably
interposing his charitable endeavors, successfully repair those dismal
breaches in our Holy Church, which threaten that glorious Fabric (and with it
the State, which are embarked in one common bottom) with Ruin and Subversion.

The Sincerity of my Intention, free from Passion and Animosity, as from
Interest and Partiality; the Excellency of the Design, which is the Public,
and by consequence the particular good of every Person; the pressing Necessity
of our present Affairs; and the incomparable, and almost incredible advantages
which may succeed; as they gave the first motion to my thoughts, so they still
give me encouragement to hope the best, and that our wound is not incurable.
Certainly, if there be any Balm in Gilead, to heal the ulcerated Sores of the
miserable People of these Nations, it must be such a Medicine, as will unite us
into one common Principle, whereby those mistakes, and misunderstandings, the
principal occasion of all our differences, may be removed for the present, and
prevented for the future.

As for those Persons, whose Religion is their Interest; Zeal, Malice; and
Gain, Godliness; those Proselytes of Demetrius; I am not over-confident, that
this will be accepted of by them, as a Bill of Divorce, between them and those
gainful Persuasions, which they have so unluckily espoused: however, Truth will
prevail, and may convince, where it cannot convert.

But if they be resolved to raise Uproars for their dear Diana, they are out of
my Sphere; and must be left to the Town Clerk, the Secular Power to appease,
and convince with such coercive Arguments, as indeed are more fit for them,
because more powerful than any that can be drawn out of all the Arcenals of
Truth or Reason.

CHAP. II.
Of the Reason why there are so many Pretenders to Conscience, and of the
Advantages they make of it, to promote their Interest, and favor their Designs.

THere has nothing made a greater noise for some Years past, in this our little
English World, than loud Clamors about Matters of Conscience, for Liberty of
Conscience, Toleration and Indulgence to Tender Consciences. Nor is it less
obvious, how grossly and notoriously Conscience has, by some People, been
abused. There will appear no occasion for wonder at all this, to any person who
does but consider, what incredible advantages have been made of that single
Word. I will not recount the prosperous Wickednesses of the late unhappy Times,
in which the principal Actors and Contrivers, were obliged to that great Name,
for the most of their Victories, Glory, Fame and Riches, and all those unhappy
Triumphs and Trophies which they did erect upon the woeful Ruins both of Church
and State: but let us consider the present advantages which are made of
Conscience.

First, Conscience is a keen and two-edged Sword; a Weapon both offensive and
defensive; and indeed nothing cuts so deep in vulgar minds, who are most apt to
be afrighted with awful apprehensions of what they least understand. With this
Weapon it is, that all Dissenting Parties in their Religious Wars, arm and
fortify themselves one against another: with this resistless Sword, they make
no more to untie the most solid Arguments from Scripture or Reason, than once
it is said the young Alexander did of the famous Gordian Knot; who untyed that
with his Scymiter, which he could not effect with all his Curiosity. It Is with
this victorious Sword they conquer and subdue; and it is with this they do
preserve their conquered Proselytes. I mean only the Name.

Secondly, Conscience is a most invincible shield, a sure defense against all
the blows of Adversaries: so that though Nature, Art, Eloquence, nay, and
Scripture too, do all conspire to bring the most combined Demonstration of
Truth and Reason against them, the mighty blow shall be prevented from doing
execution, and be received upon this Aes triplex, this invulnerable Target; and
it is no more but saying, It may be so as you say; but it is against my
Conscience, and therefore I cannot believe or do as you would persuade me.

Thirdly, Conscience is a certain Asylum, an impregnable Sanctuary and defense
against all accidents. Hither, as to their last refuge, all Dissenters retreat
securely, and are at as much ease, and in as undoubted safety, as if both
Heaven and Earth were entered into the strictest League, Offensive and Defensive
(as they think they are bound to do) to protect and defend them.

Lastly, This is a never failing Cordial in times of suffering; and has a
secret virtue to sweeten that, which of it self is most bitter, and
insupportable to all the world. Thus an Opinion that it is for Conscience, can
make the justest and severest of humane punishments, to pass over the palate,
with the sugared relish of Persecution for the Gospels sake: Thus Death,
though the deserved merit of Rebellion and Treason, has, by some, been styled
Martyrdom; and the suffering Persecution or Death thought meritorious both here
and hereafter. Nay, so strangely have some men been blinded with the opinion of
acting for and by Conscience, as to pronounce Divine Vengeance, Ireton.
Mercy; so that a villainous Contriver and Acter of Murder and Rebellion, O.
Cromwell.
and an infamous Regicide and Usurper, though one taken away by the immediate
stroke of God, the Sword of the destroying Angel; and the other dying with all
the agonies of Mind and Body, shall yet be said to be gone to God, and taken
away from the evil to come; and, which exceeds all belief, by the blasphemous
Rhetoric of a Posthumous flattery, shall be affirmed, to rival the most
glorious Jesus, and be set on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

For these and such like reasons it is, that all Parties, of whatsoever
persuasion, pretend to so great a share and interest in Conscience. Upon this
foundation, as they persuade themselves, they build the Pile of all their
Religion; and from the Dictates of this supposed infallible Guide, it is that
they receive their Principles, and to which they conform their Practice. Ask a
Quaker, why he will show no respect or reverence to his Superiors? Why he will
not take a lawful Oath before a lawful Magistrate, though for the manifestation
of truth, the end of strife, or the vindication of injured innocence? Why he
admits of no Sacrametns? or about any other of his Tenants. Demand of an
Anabaptist, why he will not allow Infants under the Gospel the same privilege
they did enjoy under the Law, though he must acknowledge the Gospel a better
Covenant? Inquire of a Presbyterian, why he starts at the Surplice and
Ceremonies? and any Sect, why they separate from the Communion of the Church of
England? Show them all the advantages of Union, both as to Religion and Policy;
demonstrate all the dangers and inconveniences of separation: and yet for all
you can say, after all their wild, roving, and unconcluding Discourses,
Objections, Scruples, and Allegations, to wind themselves off from the main
point; when they find themselves forced from one of their strong holds to
another, and at last straightened by the prevailing strength of unavoidable and
Dilemmatical Reason; the result of all shall be, that they are not satisfied in
Conscience; or that their Conscience will not give them leave, to believe or do
this or that to which you would persuade them. Though after all this, I doubt
not to make it appear, that the greatest part of those who talk so loud about
Conscience, I mean the Vulgar, who have little to say for themselves besides
that, do scarcely understand the Word, and are absolute strangers to the true
sense and meaning of the thing.

That such therefore as are not resolved to be wilful, may be undeceived; and
that they may not give to this pretended Conscience a greater Sovereignty, than
ever God almighty did design the true one, by setting it up as an Omnipotent
Idol in their hearts, I offer this following Discourse; which if perused, with
that sobriety and impartiality of consideration, as becomes a Concern of so
great moment, may, I hope, conduce much to the present satisfaction of many,
and the public advantage of my Native Country; by removing the occasion of so
many heats and animosities, separations and divisions, as draw their original
principally from these mistakes about matters of Conscience.

CHAP. III.
Of the great Influence which the true Conscience has upon all the affairs of
Humane Life; and therefore the great necessity there is, that all men should be
rightly informed concerning it,

HAving now shown the great power of a pretended Conscience; before we proceed
any further, it will be requisite to show, of what concern it is for all men
rightly to understand themselves in this affair of Conscience: which cannot be
better done, than by displaying the powerful Influence, which Conscience
challenges in the management of all Humane Actions. We will therefore briefly
trace it, through its vast Dominions of Oeconomicks, Ethics, Politics, and
Divinity.

We will begin then with private Families, and there we shall find Conscience
to be the only bond of Union, the only maintainer and preserver of those
respective Duties, which are owing from one to another, in those little
primitive Societies of Mankind: And therefore we see where this bears the sway,
there is always the most Domestic peace, concord, and tranquillity; on the
contrary, where this Principle is wanting, neither the obligations of Nature,
Education, or Reason, are powerful enough to keep men within the limits of
their Duty: but Cain shall imbrue his hands in the innocent blood of his only
Brother Abel: Amnon shall commit a Rape upon his beautiful Sister Tamar:
Absalom shall rebel against, and endeavor to depose his Father: in short,
without a sense of the Obligations of Conscience, the Master of the Family will
be unkind to the Wife of his bosom, cruel to his Children, tyrannical to his
Servants: The Wife will be false and treacherous; the Children will be
undutiful and unnatural; the Servants will be negligent, faithless, and
disobedient; and all extremely vicious: And, in a word, there will be neither
Order, Government, Peace, nor any kind of happiness, in these little
Communities, without Conscience.

If we step out of private Doors into the wider World, we shall find, that
without the ties of Conscience, to oblige men to their several and respective
Duties, there would be no such thing as Virtue to be found in all Humane Race:
and one might as successfully seek, and, it may be, more probably find,
Temperance, Chastity, Justice, Fortitude, Prudence, Magnanimity, Fidelity, and
Gratitude, amongst the savage Inhabitants of the Woods and Deserts. Without
this, men resign themselves up so wholly to the conduct of their blind Passions
of Lust, Hatred, Anger, Jealousy, Fear and Despair, that they seem not only
divested of all Morality, but even of Humanity it self. Let the late discovered
Inhabitants of the Western World attest this truth; amongst whom, for want of
this, there was so little to be found of Morality, that had it not been for
Humane shape, and, amongst some of them, the name of Religion, it had been
impossible to distinguish them from the so nearly related Brutes; some of which
wanted little advantage of them, but a Language to express themselves in, so as
to be understood.

But leaving these barbarous Regions, if we come where Morality has civilized,
and common necessity has united men into Combinations and Societies; where
there is the best established Government, the most prudent and excellent Laws,
for the promoting the common good, and securing every man's particular Interest
and Property: yet still the great Obligation to these Laws, and this
Government, must be Conscience: which seems to have been the Reason, why all
the ancient Lawgivers, in imitation of Moses, have pretended a familiarity, and
frequent intercourse with the Divinity; and therefore proposed their Laws to
the People, as the will of the Gods, as being well assured, that no other
Principle was capable of laying such a powerful Obligation to Duty and
Obedience upon the minds of men, as such a belief. For all Obedience must be
resolved into one of these Principles, Hope of Advantage, Fear of Punishment,
or Conscience of Duty to God. Now if either Hopes of Advantage, or Fear of
Punishment, are the only Inducements to Order and Obedience; less degrees of
this Fear, or however a belief that they are out of the reach of punishment; or
greater, though only hopes of private advantage, shall cancel all the
Obligation to Humane Laws, and the public advantage; and, like an impetuous
Torrent, shall violently break all the banks of Laws and Government, and tear
up the foundations of whatever does oppose its furious rage. Nor was there ever
any popular Insurrection, Disorder, or Rebellion, in any Nation, but took its
original from one of these tempestuous Principles. Whereas on the contrary, no
hopes of Impunity from Humane Laws, no private Interest or Ambition, can
persuade a man from that Duty which he ows to Laws and Government, upon the
account of Conscience; nay, we have further seen, that Cruelty it self, with
all its terrors and tormentors, has not been able to shake men off from this
firm and solid foundation of fixed Obedience.

Thus we see Conscience the best preservative against the threatening dangers of
Intestine Mischiefs; nor is it less available against Foreign Force. For unity
of mind, which is the genuine and natural effect of Conscience, is certainly
the greatest policy, as well as strength, of any People; whereas Discords,
Divisions, and mutual Dissentions, give all the hopes and encouragements to a
Foreign Power to invade, and all the helps and advantages to subdue. This made
the Roman Eagles stretch their victorious Pinions over the greatest part of the
World; the civil Dissentions of their Neighbors amongst themselves, made many
potent, and otherwise invincible People, become an easy Quarry to their
ambitious Arms: And whilst, with a show of Justice, they pretended to espouse
the Quarrel of the weaker part, by overpoising of the Balance, both sides, at
last, became their prey, and thrust their own necks under the fatal yoke,
which, by unity, they might easily have avoided. It is to this the Ottomans owe
the prodigious successes of their prevailing Crescents, which had either never
been so, or had long since been in their Wain again, if the Divisions amongst
the Christian Princes had not given them those great advantages against
themselves. And if we consult the Histories of all Times, Places, and Nations,
we shall find, that no People can bid fairer for their own ruin, or give a
stronger invitation to their Enemies, than by their own Divisions and
Dissentions. Nor did any Government suffer a dissolution, without these
foregoing, and too often fatal Prognostics, of its approaching Fall; In se
magna ruunt --

Now there is nothing can beget, maintain, and preserve this necessary Unity,
like the Principles of Conscience. This is that which cements men's Souls
together with so close and indissoluble an union, as nothing is able to divorce
them from, but what separates the Soul and Body. This begets true Love, and
real Friendships, Knots never to be loosed, but with that of Life.

Lastly, Let us take a short turn within the Confines of Divinity, and there we
shall find, that the Consciousness which men have to themselves, that they owe
an indispensible duty to God, as their Great and Almighty Sovereign and
Creator; and to all Mankind, as their common Brethren, is the only true
foundation of all the Religion in the World. Without a due sense of the first
of these, men are Atheists; without the second, they are worse than Beasts;
without them both, they would be worse than Devils, who believe, though it
makes them tremble.

So that it appears, that without this inward Principle of Conscience, there
would be neither Honesty, Fidelity, Justice, Civility, Morality, Policy,
Government, or Divinity in the World, this being indeed the
Foundation-principle of all these; and all other things without, but
inducements, and persuasives to Goodness; which men may resist, and (though not
without difficulty) overcome; but till they can fly from themselves, they
shall never be able wholely to subdue, and conquer all the power and influence
of Conscience: or though they may be so hardy to rebel against it, yet can they
never be able to escape its Tortures and Punishments, but that of the Poet will
be an universal truth, -- Hostu Evasisse putes; Juvenal. Sat. 13. prope finem.
quos diri Conscia facti Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum? Poena autem vehemens, ac multo
saevior illis Quas and Caeditius gravis invenit and Rhadamanthus, Nocte, dieque
suum gestare in pectore testem.


Well rendered into English in those few words of the wisest King Solomon, A
wounded Conscience who is able to bear? Prove. 18.14.
For let men say or do what they please, this Imperial Principle will rule in
the minds of men, either with the Golden Scepter, or the Iron Rod.

CHAP. IV.
Some necessary and universal Principles laid down, upon which Conscience
depends, and according to which it acts.

PHilosophy tells us, Corruption optimi est pessima; the best things abused,
become the worst: there is no poison so invincible, as that which comes
compounded with a Cordial, which by its treacherous agreeableness to the
deluded palate, obtains an easy admission, and a speedy passage to the vital
Spirits. It is therefore the common Interest of all Mankind, to endeavor after
a true and right understanding of this Principle, which does so universally
influence all their Lives and Actions. That we may therefore take a true
measure of it, it is requisite that we consider of some common Principles,
which are to be found in the minds of men; whether innate or traditional, it
matters not; for from these, Conscience derives its Original: upon the belief
of these it does depend: and according to these, if it be permitted its native
liberty and freedom, it always acts.

The first of these is, That there is one Supreme Being, which is the first
cause of all other Beings in the World. And this is that which under various
names and notions, has yet in all Ages, and amongst all Nations, past for the
most blessed, eternal, and by all to be adored Deity.

Secondly, That this Supreme Being is of a most perfect and excellent Nature,
infinitely happy in Himself, so as nothing can add to, or diminish his absolute
and eternal Felicity. This was the Ancient and Universal belief of the World
concerning the Divine Nature; Nay, Lucretius, a man not over kind to that which
he calls Gravis Religio, endeavors to establish his Demi-Atheism upon this
foundation: that the Divine Nature being transcendently happy within it self,
since it could receive neither addition, nor diminution, therefore did not
concern it self with the management of the affairs of the World; as appears by
those well known, and too much abused Verses of his Omnis enim per se Divum
Natura necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur
Semota a nostris rebus, sejunciaque long:
Nam privata dolor omni, privata perielis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nil indiga nostri
Nec been pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.


Thirdly, That according to the excellency of his Nature, his Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, he made all things, and Mankind especially for a most excellent End.

Fourthly, That this End was primarily the manifestation of his own Glory, in
his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. Secondarily, and in order thereunto, the
Happiness of all his Creatures, according to their several capacities, either
only here in this World, or if they be capable of it, both here and hereafter
in a future state.

Fifthly, That therefore there is a future state after this life.

Lastly, That in that future state, there are Rewards and Punishments.

These several Positions, have a natural dependency and connection one upon
another, and are such, as have generally, if not universally been believed in
the world, or at least by the far greatest part, best and most understanding of
men: and indeed they are such Truths, as no man can deny any one of them,
without the manifest danger of ruining all the rest.

Now from these common Notions, these necessary Consequences follow.

First, That all the Creation, and especially the Nobler parts of it, and
particularly Mankind, owe, unto this most excellent Being, all Duty and
Obedience, and such service as they are capable of and he requires.

Secondly, It follows that all the whole Creation, and particularly Mankind,
ought, according to their capacity and ability, to promote the great Ends of
the Creation, which are the praise and glory of the great, good, and wise
Creator, and the happiness and well-being of the whole, and every part: And for
this, Man may go to School to the inanimate Creatures, who all perform their
obedient service, with the most punctual and exact decency and order, both for
his praise, their own preservation, and the happiness of the Universe:
according to that of the Royal Psalmist, Fire and Hail, Psalm. 148.8.
Snow and Vapors, Stormy Winds fulfill his Word, and praise his Name; strictly
observing those Laws which at first he did impose upon them.

Lastly, it follows from the justice and power of this excellent Nature, that
those parts of the Creation, which do, in obedience to his Will, endeavor to
promote those excellent Ends and Designs of his Glory in the happiness of the
Creation, shall, as the Reward from his Bounty upon their Obedience, be made
partakers of that happiness they are capable of, and which, in his wisdom, he
sees best for them both here and hereafter: And that those parts of the
Creation, who, in opposition or contempt of so great goodness, excellency and
power, endeavor to cross, hinder and obstruct these great Ends of the Creation,
shall therefore be miserable, both here and hereafter, by the want of that
happiness; as also, by such other penalties as the greatness of their Crimes
deserves, and their Natures are capable of.

CHAP. V.
Of Conscience, its Description, what is its proper Employment; and the manner
of its Operation.

HAving shown what Principles are the foundation of Conscience, viz. a sense of
that Duty which we owe to God, and to one another. The next inquiry must of
necessity be, how these Duties are to be performed, so as they may be agreeable
and acceptable to those to whom we are to pay them. And herein common Reason
obliges us to believe, that we are bound to follow the directions of the
Supreme Being, so far as he has been pleased to manifest his Will and Pleasure
to us. Amongst Christians, the Canon of the Holy Scripture, has always been
taken for this Rule of Direction, as being the Divine Revelation of the Will of
GOD. And whosoever does seriously and attentively consider the scope of those
Sacred Writings, must of necessity confess them to owe their Original to the
Divine Nature, supposing it such as has before been described, and universally
believed: for all their Commands, Instructions, and Exhortations, are directly
levelled at these great and glorious designs of the most excellent Spirit, by
promoting his Glory, and the happiness of Mankind, both here in this life, and
hereafter in the life to come. So that now having found we owe a Duty, and
having likewise found a Rule for our direction, how we ought to perform this
Duty, there will be no great difficulty to find what Conscience is; for it is
no other thing than that Principle which judges whether we have discharged our
Duty according to this Rule, and these Directions.

I do purposely avoid the Niceties of the Schools, as too full of Curiosity,
and not at all conducing to my design, which is to avoid all intricacy and
perplexedness, and to give such an easy, proper, and natural description, and
notion of Conscience, that every man may find it in his own breast.

Conscience therefore, is that Power which every Man has within his own mind
of judging all his thoughts, words and actions, whether they are agreeable to
that which is the best Rule, by which they ought to be directed. Thus from a
belief that there is a GOD, and from the commands in Scripture to worship Him,
and Him only, my Conscience, or Power that I have of judging my self,
immediately informs me, that I ought not to neglect his Worship, or to give it
to any Creature: If therefore I do either wholly, or in part omit it, or
misplace my Worship, my Conscience tells me, I have done amiss, because I have
not followed the direction of the Rule. Thus from the belief, that I ought to
contribute all I can, to the accomplishment of the great and good design of the
Almighty Being, in promoting the happiness of all the parts of the Creation, my
Conscience presently informs me, that I ought to do all the good I can in all
senses unto all Men: And on the contrary, that therefore I must be careful to
avoid doing any wilful injury to my self, or to any other person, whereby their
present happiness may be impaired, or their future lessened or prevented;
because in so doing, I follow the directions of the Rule, which only is
satisfactory to Conscience; whose office is to accuse me, if I do wrong; to
encourage and acquit me, if I do what is right, and what I ought to do. So that
to make up Conscience, there must be first, a true and exact Rule for all our
actions, which we take the Scriptures to be, as being, as St. Paul says,
sufficient to make the man of God wise unto salvation, which I think is a
sufficiency for a Rule beyond all exceptions; and they who expect a better
Rule, certainly expect another End, better, I am sure, it is impossible: And,
as before was intimated, if there were a necessity, it were no hard task to
prove the Scriptures, in all particulars, the most excellent Rule for the
management of all humane Actions, in order to the forementioned Ends of Gods
Glory, and the Happiness of the Universe.

Secondly, There must be a true knowledge of this Rule, Scientia before
Conscientia; which Preposition denotes only the private application of this
knowledge to particular persons and things: for this is most clear and evident,
that I must first know this or that is to be believed, or done, and after this
or that manner, before I can believe it to be my Duty, or be able to pass a
judgment upon my self, that I have done well, or ill, in believing, or not
believing, doing, or not doing any thing, or not doing it as I ought, according
to the direction of my Rule.

Lastly, there must be an impartial and true judgment of my actions, by this
Rule, that is, whether they have been according to the directions of the Rule,
which is the proper employment of Conscience, whose work is to measure my
thoughts, words, and actions, and to try whether they are conformable to the
Rule by which I am bound to act, and according to that judgment either to
absolve or condemn me for them.

So that Conscience, thus properly taken, can only be exercised about such
things as are certainly known, and by consequence, absolutely necessary to be
done, for such are all and only the commands and directions of the Rule,
according to that remarkable place of St. Paul, Acts 24.16.
concerning his own practice, which ought to be a pattern to all men. And
herein do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward Men. That is, the proper and peculiar Employ of Conscience, is to
judge and determine, whether I do my Duty to God and my Neighbor, according to
what I know is his Will revealed in his holy Word.

Now in regard, that upon this true Notion of Conscience, there lies a great
deal of weight; and it being the common mistake amongst weak minds, to take
every thing which is offered to them as such, without a due examination, for a
matter of Conscience in the strictest sense: I will endeavor to clear this
Point, and make it appear, that Conscience is only directly concerned about
such things as are certainly known, and therefore absolutely necessary to be
believed and done, or not done.

First therefore we will inquire into the Nature, and, as I may call it, the
Essence of Conscience.

Secondly, we will examine and consider its manner of operation and acting in
all men.

Now the very Essence of Conscience is Knowledge, for no man can have a
Conscience to himself of any thing which he does not know, nor of any thing
further than he does know it. For Example, I know that GOD is, and that He is
to be worshipped; and therefore my Conscience tells me, I am obliged to act
according to that knowledge, and that I ought to adore him. I know that no
Creature is to be worshipped with Divine Adoration, and therefore my Conscience
tells me I sin against knowledge, if I give Adoration, by worshipping either
Men or Angels, much more if I bestow it upon the more ignoble parts of the
Creation, Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, Creeping Things, Birds, or Four-footed
Beasts. I do not certainly know whether Saints departed this Life can hear my
Prayers, though made to them in the most modest sense, and in the same nature
as I would do, if they were alive, beg of them to pray or intercede for me; and
therefore, if I do not pray to them to pray for me, my Conscience does not
accuse me of having neglected a Duty which I ought to have done, or sinning
against my knowledge: So that it is clear, that to Know is of the Essence of
Conscience, so that there can be no Conscience without it. Now Scientia est de
certis and indubitatis, all knowledge is of certain and undoubted things; and
this certainty, which is the foundation of knowledge, is grounded either upon
the demonstration of Sense, Reason, or Divine Revelation; and whatever I know,
it is because I have a certainty that it is such in its own nature; either from
the evidence of Sense, which cannot deceive me, or from clear and plain Reason,
or else from a positive Divine Revelation; which proceeds from him who
therefore will not, because he cannot, deceive me, being Truth it self: And
therefore if the things I would know, be either in their own nature uncertain,
as are all future contingencies, and many past actions of former Ages, about
which I want sufficient means of a certain information, I can have no knowledge
of them; and by consequence, no obligation upon my mind, to believe them, or
act according to them. But wheresoever there is a certainty of knowledge,
either from Sense, Reason, or Divine Revelation, there my mind is not left at
liberty; but has an obligation laid upon it, to act, or not to act, according
to the commands of that knowledge. And that this is not my private opinion, but
agreeable to the greatest Truth, let the most learned Apostle St. Paul give his
testimony, in that well known place, Romans 14. ult.
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. For by Faith there cannot be meant that
supernatural Gift and Grace of believing to salvation, because every thing to
be known or done, is not the object of that Faith: and therefore, as appears by
the fifth Verse, by Faith, there he understands that (...), that full assurance
of a man's own mind, which is no other thing but the result of a certainty of
knowledge of what he ought to do, or not to do, and is properly opposed to that
doubting and wavering of a man's mind, occasioned by the want of knowledge; and
therefore he tells us, it is a damnable sin to do that which I doubt I ought
not; For, says he, he that doubts is damned if he eat, because it is not of
Faith; that is, of a full assurance of knowledge, that what he does is lawful:
for to such a person, till he have a full assurance from a certain knowledge
that it is not, it is sin, because for ought he knows it may be so; and the
Rule tells him he is to abstain from the very appearance of evil; and Reason
tells him, Tutum est errare a dextra, it is the best to err on the right hand,
by abstaining from that, which I am not fully assured of, but it may be sinful:
and for this very reason the same Apostle tells us, that the occasion of those
mistakes in the Church, about eating things offered in sacrifice to Idols,
proceeded from a want of this knowledge: Howbeit, says he, there is not in
every man this knowledge; and for want of this, he tells them, their
Consciences were weak; that is, their minds were doubtful, and some were of one
persuasion, others of another about it.

So that knowledge being of the Essence of Conscience, and certainty being of
the Essence of knowledge, it follows, that Conscience properly so called,
cannot be exercised, but about such things as are certainly known, and
therefore absolutely necessary to be believed or done; which plainly shows the
unwarrantable doctrine and practice of some men, who impose many things upon
People as indispensible matter of Conscience, which in their own nature admit
of the greatest doubt and uncertainty, and which they have no lawful authority
to establish, as obligatory to the Minds and Consciences of Men.

But to confirm this, Secondly, let us examine the manner of operation and
acting of Conscience in all Men: Now the exercise of Conscience, consists in
these two things: First, I inquire with my self whether I have done what I
ought, or abstained from what I ought? Secondly, I inquire, If I have done or
abstained as I ought, whether I have done it after that manner, and with those
due circumstances as I ought? Now in both these operations, the necessity of
them is the Rule, and the foundation of that necessity, is my certain knowledge
that they are so: for thus I judge, I have done this, because I certainly know
in obedience to the Rule, I ought to do it: I have abstained from that, because
I certainly know, that I ought of necessity not to do it: I have done it after
this manner, because I am certainly assured that this was according to the way
directed by my Rule; therefore my Conscience, that is my power of judging my
self, pronounces for me, that I have done right and well: and then my Mind or
Conscience being satisfied, I am at ease and quiet within my self; and this is
called a good Conscience, or peace of Conscience. On the contrary, when I have
done either what I certainly know I ought not, or but doubt I ought not to have
done; or omitted what I am assured I ought to have done; or where I have not
done what I ought to do, according as I ought to have done it, for the manner
of performance, with all due circumstances; my Conscience tells me, I have not
done well, or according to my knowledge, and therefore my mind is unquiet and
unsatisfied, haunted with guilt of the evil, and terrified with the fearful
expectation of punishment; and this is called an evil Conscience, or to speak
more properly, a Conscience of evil. But if there be no command to act, or to
abstain, nor any directions for the manner and circumstances of my Actions, I
find no certainty of knowledge, and so no absolute necessity within my self to
act, or not to act; to abstain, or not to abstain; or if I do any such action
where I am left at liberty, I find no necessity of doing it this way, or the
other, but am left to my own freedom, because I have no certainty of knowledge
from the Rule to determine me: so that if I do it, my Conscience does not
accuse me; if I do it not, I find no uneasy guilt to sit heavy upon my mind
for the neglect; and what way soever I perform it, still my mind is at peace
and quiet with it self; and all because there is no certainty of knowledge from
the Rule, and therefore no necessity or determination, and so by plain
consequence, no part of the dominion of Conscience, for this necessity of
knowledge is the Law of Conscience, and where there is no Law, Romans 4.15.
there can be no transgression, no obligation, nor afflicting guilt.

Let not any person now think, that I have straightened the Diocese of this
Universal Bishop, or, to speak without offense, this Overseer of the World; for
thus far his proper and absolute Jurisdiction does extend it self: But
Conscience has likewise a collateral dominion over all indifferent Actions,
which is thus. All our Actions which may be done, or not done, without sin on
either part, are called Indifferent: As for example, If for my health or
pleasure I design to take the Air, it is indifferent whether I ride, or walk,
or whether I go into that fair Field, or this fresh Meadow. Now all these
actions, though in their own Nature free and indifferent, have yet this
necessity upon them, that they ought to carry a respect to the forementioned
great designs of God's glory, and the happiness of the Universe, and therefore
ought to be addressed to those ends, and managed accordingly: and if any
indifferent action does not in some measure contribute to these ends, I am
bound in conscience not to do it: Which seems to be the reason of the great
severity our Savior pronounces against idle words, S Matthew, 12.36.
not only such as are contrary to those ends, but such as by their being
incapable of contributing to those great designs, are therefore sinful and
unlawful, because useless and unprofitable. Thus for me to ride or walk to take
the benefit of the fresh and free air, though in its own nature free, and left
to my choice; yet I have this obligation upon me, that I ought to choose that
part, which either from my own, or better judgments, may be thought most
proper, and conducive to my health, that so I may be in a better capacity to
praise and glorify my Creator, for, and by the advantage of health, strength,
vigor, and alacrity of Mind and Body; and that by these I may be enabled, both
for my own part, to participate of the bountiful happiness, which kind Heaven
has so plentifully bestowed upon this life; and also, that I may be in a better
capacity to promote and advance the happiness of my fellow Creatures, so far as
my power does extend it self: and therefore in order to this, I am not to be
injurious to any person, nor in taking the Air, to ride or walk over the eared
Corn, or full grown Meadows; and all this, not only out of an obligation to
Humane Laws, or for fear of an Action of Trespass, a Clausum fregit, or Pedibus
ambulando; but for Conscience sake, because I am bound by the Rule, to do good
to all, but injury to none. And this truly explains the meaning of St. Paul, in
those two places, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, let all be done for the glory of
God. And, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: Romans 14. ult.
that is, Whatsoever indifferent action I do, I ought to have a full assurance,
that it is not contrary, but conducive to this great design of the glory of
God, in the happiness of the Creation.

CHAP. VI.
The occasion of those Differences amongst us, about matters of Conscience,
proceeds from the mistake of Opinion, and private persuasion for Conscience.
What Opinion is, and what Persuasion? and how they differ from Conscience?

THus far I think it is clear what Conscience is, and how far its proper
Dominion does extend. Now that Conscience thus rightly understood, does
universally and absolutely oblige all men, I cannot think there are any will
make the least scruple; unless it be such, whose Consciences are seared with an
hot Iron, and given up to that unthinking sense, which the Apostle speaks of;
and to those who are past feeling, I do not address my self, or this Discourse.
But the misfortune of our Age does not lie in this particular; we may have some
of those who have no Conscience; but we have multitudes of others, who are so
far from having none, that they are all Conscience, who strain at every Gnat,
and make every thing a scruple and matter of Conscience in the strictest sense:
I do heartily wish, whilst they do so, that they do not swallow many a Camel,
and in the end make shipwreck of true Faith, Charity, and, by consequence, of a
good Conscience. For such as these are, were these Papers intended, with all
Christian tenderness and compassion; if possible to give them a right
understanding of what is so infinite dear and tender to them. For to my certain
knowledge, as by much experience, and frequent conferences with many of them, I
am able to affirm, most of this sort of People, who pretend to be acted by
Conscience in every thing, are not yet able to give a tolerable account what
Conscience is: It Is something within them, but they know not what: some of
them, I am confident, are so stupid, as to believe it to be some living thing
within them, distinct from both Soul and Body. And I remember a Quaker, to whom
I put the Question a little hastily, What was Conscience? after he had shown
his great surprise and ignorance, by being in every joint a Quaker, and the
first that ever I saw do the trick, he very confidently, as well as
blasphemously told me, it was the Spirit of the Lord. I demanded if he meant
the Holy Ghost, the Third Person in the Blessed Trinity? To which he answered,
Yea. Which makes me fear, that more, who are not of his persuasion, yet may be
of his sense, and believe what they call Conscience within them, to be some
Omnipotent thing, to which every thing ought to bow and obey.

There have been, and will be in all Ages, some men who do ill, with a design
and knowledge of doing ill: others there are, who do ill, with a design of
doing well: to both these it is, that we may ascribe those unhappy divisions
amongst us, under the pretense of Conscience. And had they taken half that
pains and care rightly to instruct People what Conscience is, that they have
done, positively to tell them, This is matter of Conscience, and that no man
can do with a safe Conscience; whilst in truth, they were either not matter of
Conscience, in a strict and proper sense; or if they were, they were such
matter of Conscience, as all people were obliged to act in, contrary to both
their Doctrine and Practice: I say, had they done this which was their duty,
they might have done God good service, and promoted our common happiness, by
Peace, Unity, and Charity: which now, to the great dishonor and decay of
Christian Religion and true Piety, and irreparable mischiefs in our Politic
capacities, are almost grown strangers amongst us. For whosoever shall, without
partiality, consider the affairs of these Nations, for this last Century, shall
find, That Liberty of Conscience has introduced amongst us the Synagogue of the
Libertines, which now has more Votaries than the true Religion, and all others
put together.

There are two things which of late have been obtruded upon us, (whether
ignorantly or maliciously, God he knows) under the specious name of Conscience;
and these are, Opinion and Persuasion: To this luckless Mother, and fatal
Daughter, we owe all those divisions, that strife, those bitter envyings,
debate, variance, and, in truth, all those intolerable mischiefs, under which,
both Church and State have, for many years, so heavily groaned, and so deeply
suffered. Some men, it is to be feared, out of Pride, Avarice, Ambition, or
desire of Novelty, having embraced such Opinions, as were most suitable to
their private Interest or Designs, presently usurp Heaven's Royal Prerogative,
and stamp these courser Metalls with the Divine Impress of Conscience; which
immediately makes them current Coin amongst vulgar and undistinguishing
Judgments. These Opinions, countenanced by the success of numerous Disciples,
and warranted by zealous Defenders, and over-eager Promoters, grew amongst many
into firm Persuasions; and having been rooted by long continuance, and
naturalized by Custom, then they must be matters of Conscience, then they must
be obliging to all, and give indispensible Laws to all: then they are to be
defended, and maintained with Life and Fortune, and supported with no less
rigorous Penalties than Eternal Damnation, to all those who will not fall down
and worship this golden Image of Conscience.

I will therefore endeavor to show, what Opinion, and what Persuasion are; and
how they differ from Conscience; how far they do oblige; and wherein their
lawful right and dominion, in the management of humane Actions do consist.

Let us act like Men and Christians, with prudence and justice; let us render
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to GOD the things which are GODS;
let us not blindly, injuriously, and dangerously, transfer the Title, Dignity,
Power, and Supremacy of Conscience, the immediate Vicegerent of our Almighty
Sovereign, unto these two Usurpers, who, in reality, are but his Subjects.

I will begin therefore with Opinion, as being the elder of the two: And that
you may know, that it is far inferior unto Conscience, this is the description
which the learned Aquinas gives of it, Opinio est dispositio ad Scientiam, it
is a disposition to Knowledge; that is, Opinion is an imperfect degree of
Knowledge, where still there is a liberty to doubt or suspect that this or that
Opinion, may not be exactly true: As for Example, that the Sun shines at high
Noon, this is demonstrative knowledge; but because the Sun when it shines, does
communicate both light and heat; that therefore the Sun is a vast Globe of
Fire, this is but Opinion; because it may be so, and it may not be so. Or that
the Moon is peopled with Inhabitants, is but Opinion, because being capable of
doubt; I can have no way to ascertain my self, of the truth of either of these,
whether in reality, the Sun be a Ball of Flame, or the Moon another habitable
Region: so that Opinion is that private judgment which a Man makes of things or
actions which are of an indifferent nature, without any certainty of knowledge,
where he wants the assistance of some rule or way, and means, to attain to such
a certainty. And that I may not give only instances of Philosophy; thus, that
there is such a place as Hell, the residence of the damned, is a matter of
knowledge, as being of Divine Revelation, besides that it is founded upon the
reason of rewards and punishments in a future estate: But whether the Fire of
Hell be material, or sigurative, or both, these are matters of Opinion; and it
is indifferent to believe either or both, because I am not positively directed
to believe either of them, more than the other; neither if I do believe one of
them, rather than the other, is any other Man obliged to believe it, upon my
affirmation of one part to be my Opinion; but is still left at his liberty, so
he believe any, to follow that part of the Opinion, which to him appears most
robable; and the reason is, because I want a certain Rule to determine me,
there being no Divine Revelation of it, nor any way or means to attain to a
demonstrative knowledge of it; and further, in its own nature it appears
indifferent, whether those infernal Flames be material, or figurative, or both;
since whatsoever they are, God Almighty is thereby able to accomplish his
design, which is the punishment of the fallen Angels, and such of Mankind, as
must there be eternally miserable and tormented, because they would not accept
of happiness upon Gods terms and conditions.

Come we now from Opinion, to Persuasion; which, as before was said, is the
Child of Opinion: and is nothing more but that belief, which a Man embraces of
any Opinion in indifferent things or actions, which are undetermined, by any
certain way, or rule of knowledge, where the mind follows that part which
appears most probable and likely to be true; so that in Persuasion, as well as
Opinion, there is no absolute certainty of knowledge to determine the mind,
only Men sit down with that as a determination for the present, which carries
the fairest appearance of Truth, and with that rest satisfied; though still
they reserve to themselves a liberty to change their Judgment and Persuasion,
so soon as a clearer evidence, or better way to find out the Truth about which
they are uncertain, offers it self unto them. Thus to one Man, the flames of
Hell appear most probably to be material sire, because the Bodies of the
damned, as well as their Souls, must be there most exquisitely tormented, and
for that purpose, he thinks this sort of sire most proper; and therefore that
part of the Opinion, passes with him into his Persuasion. To another, who
considers that the condemned Spirits, and Souls of Men which are of an
immaterial substance, must there be punished as well as their Bodies, a
figurative Fire appears most probable, and that is his Persuasion. To a third,
who considers, that both Souls, Bodies, and the wicked Spirits, must have their
share of pain and torment, both a sigurative and material Fire seem most
agreeable to the design, and therefore that is his Persuasion.

So that the difference between Opinion and Persuasion, seems to be no more
than this, whilst I embrace, with an equal indifference, either part of a
doubtful thing, it is but Opinion. When from the greater probability, I pass to
a determination of my mind, then it is my particular Persuasion.

The difference between matter of Conscience, and matter of Opinion, or
Persuasion, is, That what is matter of Conscience, is always certainly known,
and therefore absolutely necessary to be believed or done, or abstained from.
What is matter of Opinion, or Persuasion, is not clearly and certainly known,
but admits of doubting, and therefore is not absolutely necessary, but in its
own nature indifferent to be believed or done.

CHAP. VII.
How far Men are obliged by Opinion, or private Persuasion; and what influence
these have upon Humane Affairs.

HAving now shown what Conscience, Opinion, and Persuasion are, and how they
differ one from another; it follows in the next place, that we show how far
these two last do oblige any person in the management of humane Actions
relating to Divinity.

First therefore, every Man is obliged by his private Opinion or Persuasion,
only in things indifferent in their own nature, and undetermined; which is the
proper sphere of their activity, to act, or not to act; to believe, or not to
believe; so far as in acting or believing, he does not contradict a known Rule
of Conscience, which is an absolutely necessary Duty. Now the great and general
Rule of all our Faith and Actions, being Gods Glory, and, in order to that, by
our Obedience to his Commands to that purpose, to promote the happiness of the
Universe, both here and hereafter, it is very easy for any person, in any part
of his Belief, or in any of his Actions, to see whether they have a respect to
these ends; for if they have not, they certainly cross the great design and
intention of our Almighty Creator, to whose Will we owe all ready Obedience;
and then, by necessary consequence, they become absolutely unlawful. Thus
suppose I am of Opinion, for very good and religious considerations, that I
ought to keep one day in the week a voluntary day of Fasting or Abstinence, and
I choose Monday as an indifferent day; I am obliged by my own private
Persuasion to keep that day so; but neither my Persuasion, nor Example, can
have any influence to oblige others to do so, who are not of the same
Persuasion with me: But if either a Command from my lawful Superiors forbid me
Abstinence on that day, or enjoin it to be observed as a Festival; or if I
find, that by Fasting I impair my health or strength, I am then obliged to
observe it no longer as a day of Fasting, because then my private Persuasion
would cross a certain known Rule of Conscience, by disobedience to lawful
Authority. And I should also be injurious, both to my self, and, it may be, to
many others, who may have a dependence upon my life and well-being; whereby I
should act contrary to the Will of God, who would have me, by all lawful and
prudent ways and means, to promote my own happiness even in this life; and all
theirs, with whom I have a Concern, so far as I am able by just and honest
endeavors.

Secondly, every Man's private Opinion and Persuasion obliges him so far, as in
the determination of his Belief, and Actions, it follows the better, more sure,
and warrantable part. Now the better, and more warrantable part of our judgment
and determination in indifferent things and actions, is first, that which has
the Consent, Judgment, Approbation, Example, or Practice of the best Men, in
all Ages, as nearest to the necessary Rule of Life and Actions. But because
this cannot so easily be known, or found out, especially by the unlearned and
ordinary sort of People, who have neither opportunity nor ability to discover
what the Judgment and Practice of the best Men in forepast Ages has been, by
searching the Histories and ancient Records of former Times; therefore
secondly, that is the better, more sure, and warrantable part of our judgment,
in indifferent matters of Opinion or Persuasion, which follows the judgment of
Charity, Peace, Unity, and, by so doing, contributes most to Gods glory, by
promoting the happiness of all Men, both here and hereafter: for these are
universal Rules, and known Commands, and therefore necessary to be observed,
being given us for the guidance and management of our Actions in general. Now
there is no Man that has the free use of his Reason, and will make use of it,
but may easily discover, whether any of his Actions are agreeable, or contrary
to these Rules, and this great End.

So that it appears plainly, how different the Obligation of Conscience is,
from that of Opinion, or Private Persuasion. Conscience obliges all Men,
always, at all times, and in all places, universally and absolutely, they
being known, evident, and certain Duties, which are thereby commanded. Opinion
and Persuasion, oblige only some private Persons, in some Cases, and at some
Times, and never further than they have a just respect to some general Rules of
Conscience, in regard they are not so certainly known, but that they may admit
of Doubt, and have a possibility of being other than they appear, or are
thought to be.

CHAP. VIII.
The Differences betwixt the Church of England, and all Dissenters, brought
into Examination, by the forementioned Rules of Conscience, Opinion and
Persuasion.

IT is a Divine, as well as Mathematical Truth, Rectum est mensura sui and
obliqui, a right Line shows both its own straightness, and the crookedness of
that which is oblique: Having therefore shown this Rule of Truth, and which I
have not in the least endeavored to warp or bend, so as to sit any private or
sinister design of my own, or of any Party; let us now lay it to the Work, and
it will quickly discover, who are the Workmen that need not be ashamed, 2 Timothy
2.15. 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 15.
who have rightly divided the Word of Truth; and have built upon that good
foundation, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, in beauty far superior to the
polished corners of the Temple: And who are they, that have built Straw, Hay,
and Stubble, such combustible stuff, as has set the glorious Fabric of the
Church into flames of Contention, and which to the loss of the Builders, must
be burnt up; though they themselves may be saved, so as by fire, provided they
did it ignorantly, and not of malicious wickedness, yet their work must perish.

We will therefore consider the most material, and chief things, which are in
difference amongst us, and, by an impartial applying of this Golden Rule of
Conscience, see who come nearest the Truth and Right.

I do purposely avoid the knotty Questions of Divinity, and the different
Opinions about them, in regard, that these may be diversely believed and
maintained without breach of Communion; and I know there are, and have been
many eminent Men in the Church of God, who have wholly differed in their
judgments, about some abstruse Points of Divinity, without prejudicing the
Peace and Unity either of the Church or State: in regard they defended them
only as their private Persuasions, and were both too modest, prudent, and
charitably honest, to disturb the Peace and Quiet of the Church or State, by
endeavoring to impose their particular judgments in things not clear and
evident, as necessary Doctrines of Faith, or Practice, upon the Consciences of
all other Men.

The main and grand Differences between the Church of England, and all those
who have separated themselves from her Communion, so far as I am able to
discover by the Writings of the several Parties, are either about the
Government it self, or about the circumstances and manner of Worship.

That there ought to be Government in the Church, I suppose all Parties will
readily acknowledge, because a great Apostle tells us, God is the God of Order,
and not of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33, 39.
in all the Churches of God; by which it is plain, that that is no Church of
God, which is not under Government; or which countenances Confusion; and
therefore the same Apostle absolutely commands, That all things be done
decently, and with Order. The thing that is complained of, is, That this way of
Government, by the Episcopal Hierarchy, being no where in plain, and positive
Words, and Commands, thus set down, ordered, and established in Scripture,
which is the Rule of Conscience, therefore it ought not to be imposed
tyrannically and imperiously, upon Men of weak and tender Consciences;
especially, when another, and better way of Government, more agreeable to the
Scriptures, and Primitive Simplicity of the Gospel, is now found out, and
discovered. For though Government in its own Nature be absolutely necessary,
yet where God does not interpose any positive Command, or Directions, as he did
concerning the Jewish Church, there this or that Government are equally
indifferent, and the best is to be chosen and preferred before the rest.

How weak a Plea and Refuge this is, to call for and expect plain and express
Words, Commands, or Directions from Scripture for every thing we do or believe,
every Man must acknowledge who does but consider, that we owe even the Belief
of some of the Articles of our Faith to consequences from Scripture, and not to
plain, positive, and express words: As for Example, that of the Mystery of the
Glorious Trinity in Unity, three Persons, but one God; which words are not to
be found in all the Holy Canon. How much more unreasonable is it then, to
expect express Words and Commands of Scripture for Government in the Church,
which is of a far more inferior Concern than Faith? And how dangerous a matter
it is, to admit of this Proposition, That nothing is to be believed or done,
for which there cannot be brought a clear and positive place of Scripture, let
all Christians judge: And whether, if it were as heartily practiced, as it is
by some Men vigorously pressed, it would not root out the very foundation of all
Religion?

But we will join issue with them upon the Point, and give them a fair trial at
the Bar of Conscience, their own Judge, upon their own Assertion: If therefore
Government, being undetermined by Scripture, be indifferent whether this or
that; and the best to be preferred; How shall it be determined, and by what
Authority, which way of Government in the Church is the best? For till there be
such a determination, as before has been made appear, it can be no more than
Private Opinion, and therefore can lay no more Obligation upon any Man's
Conscience to yield Obedience to it, than any other particular Persuasion does,
which can only oblige those who are of the same Persuasion, and only so long as
they continue so, and no longer, nor any others who are not so persuaded; and
therefore by the Rule of Liberty of Conscience, are free, and ought not to be
imposed upon, for fear of wounding their tender Consciences; which is the
direct and ready way to have as many several Governments and distinct Churches,
as there are Men of several Minds and Persuasions about which is the best; it
being certain that if Men be left to their liberty, every Man abounding in his
own sense, will esteem best of his own way, and according to the Proverb, Every
Crow will think his own Bird fairest; which, in plain English, at last must
amount to Anarchy, instead of Unity; and Confusion, in the room of that Decency
and Order which God expects and requires in all his Churches. For the
Scriptures leave it in suspense, and at least are silent as to most
particularities of Government, there being no more plain and express words for
any sort of Government, which any of the Dissenters would establish, than there
are for that against which they contend; and all Parties will plead the
Scriptures, speak as much, or more, for their way of Government, than for any
other.

Let us therefore try who will have the advantage, and bid fairest for such a
determination, as shall oblige all men's Consciences, according to the
forementioned Rules, how any indifferent matters of Opinion or Persuasion (such
as the Question in dispute must be, according as they have stated it) become
necessary and obligatory to all men's Consciences.

First therefore, we have reason to believe, that the way of Government now
established in the Church of England, is the best, because we find it does not
contradict any known Rule or positive Command of Scripture; but, on the
contrary, all its Commands, Directions, Doctrine, and Practice, are founded
upon, and derived, if not from plain words, (as most of them are) yet from most
evident sense, and consequences of Scripture; which, as before was intimated
concerning the Articles of Faith, are as obligatory to Conscience, as Scripture
it self.

Secondly, This way of Government, as it is now established, appears to follow
the better, more sure and warrantable part of our Judgment, in indifferent
things, so as to make them become obliging, and that in both its branches; viz.
First, it is agreeable to the Judgment, Approbation, Example, and Practice of
the best men in all Ages, from the Apostolic times, as will be evident to all,
who shall, without partiality, peruse the Scriptures themselves, where there
are many not imperfect traces and footsteps of this way of Government, so far
established, as the Powers of the Heathen Governments, who then had all the
Civil and Temporal Jurisdiction, would permit. But there is a whole Cloud of
Witnesses for it, in the universal consent, practice, approbation, and defense,
of all those holy men from the Apostles times; who though not divinely
inspired, yet were men of such eminent Integrity and Piety, as would not permit
them to write any thing directly contrary to the Primitive truth, which some of
them did immediately receive from the mouths of the Apostles and Disciples of
our Lord; and many of them were such, as by Martyrdom did, with their dearest
blood, set their Seals to the testimony of Jesus. Such who lived in those Ages,
before Rome and her Bishops ever thought of usurping the Title of Universal,
and therefore cannot be thought guilty of any combination with them, in
erecting or imposing this way of Government upon the Christian World. Secondly,
The Determination of the Judgment, that this way of Government is the best,
follows the better, more sure and warrantable part, viz. the Judgment of
Charity, Peace, and Unity: Charity, with the first, best, and past Ages of the
Church, who all lived and died under obedience to this way of Government; of
all which glorious Martyrs, Saints and Confessors, it were the most
uncharitable opinion to judge and condemn them, as being guilty of living and
dying in, defending, maintaining, and practicing a way of Government,
altogether unagreeable and contrary to the Word and Will of God; as all
Dissenters would persuade the World, whilst they tell them, this Government is
unlawful and Antichristian. It follows likewise Peace and Unity, both with that
part of the Church which is now Triumphant, and with the Universal Church
Militant, over all the World, who, except some few of the Disciples of Calvin,
all agree in this way of Government.

Lastly, We have reason to believe this way of Government to be the best, in
regard that it does more, than any other whatsoever, promote the great designs
of the glory of Almighty God, and the happiness of mankind, here, by Piety,
Peace, Justice, and Unity, in order to their eternal happiness hereafter;
following herein the Doctrine, Commands, and Example of the blessed Jesus, and
his holy Apostles, without turning to the right hand or to the left.

Besides, We have other very strong inducements to persuade us, that this
Government in the Church is the best, as being that which by Gods own
appointment and approbation, was established in the very infancy of the Church,
by the Divinely inspired Apostles; and for this belief, these, amongst many
others, are very probable and persuasive Reasons.

First, The great blessings which God has imparted to the World under this way
of Government by Episcopacy; for it is notoriously known, that all the World,
which did embrace the Christian Faith, received it with, and from this
Government.

Secondly, which is very remarkable, and a confirmation of the former; It is
impossible to find any Church, which wears an ancient Name, and pretends to be
of Primitive Conversion to the Faith of Christ, but how much soever they may
have degenerated in other things, yet still they retain this way of Government:
witness the Roman, Greek, Armenian, and even the barbarous Russian and
Ethiopian Churches, who though in other matters they differ as wide in
Opinion, as in Climate, which, according to the Adage, is toto Coelo; yet in
this they do all most harmoniously agree, retaining both the Name, Dignity, and
Office of Bishops, as the Governors of the Church amongst them: And I do not
know any one thing, excepting the Canon of the Holy Writings, which contain the
Fundamentals of our Faith, which Heaven has appeared so solicitous to preserve
unaltered and uncorrupted, as this way of Government in the whole Christian
World.

Lastly, This very argument, which with so much pomp and triumphant solemnity,
is perpetually, by all Dissenters, urged as invincible and unanswerable, if it
be well examined, will depose plainly for Episcopacy, and that there is no
positive Rule or Command in Scripture for it, is a^ strong, and, it may be, a
more powerful argument for it, than they who make use of it are aware of. And
the true Reason why in Scripture there is no more said to justify it, with the
highest probability, may be believed to be, because with a Nemine
contradicente, it was by an unquestioned consent acknowledged by all those, who
did embrace the Christian Faith; and there were none found then, nor in many
Ages after, so impious or audacious to oppose or contradict it. And had there
been any thing in the Government, either unreasonable, or contrary to the will
of God, the Jews and Heathens, whose hatred made them curiously inquisitive
into whatsoever might appear a defect in Christian Religion, would certainly,
with their quicksighted malice, have discovered it, the discovery of which
would have imported as much as they did desire, that was the subversion of the
Church from the very foundation. But so great was the Unity of the Christians
in this point, and so excellent and irreprehensible did the Government appear,
that in all the opposition Religion met withal, though not an Article of the
Faith could escape their censures, we do not meet with any thing against this
way of Government; and well it was there was then such Unity: for could those
Enemies of our Religion have met with half those divisions, which now
Christians have made amongst themselves, they would certainly (without the
assistance of a Miracle to preserve it) have improved them to the utter ruin
of the Church, to which there is no Road leads so directly, as that which
undermines the Government. In short, I do heartily wish, that all those who are
so zealously, it were well if I might not say furiously, bent and opposite
against Root and Branch of Episcopacy, would consider seriously at what they
strike, and whether they do not really affront him, who, as the Root of it, is
by St. Peter styled, the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. 1 Pet. 2.25.


CHAP. IX.
The pretenses of Dissenters, that their ways of Government are the best, and
to be preferred before Episcopacy, examined and tried by the same Rules
abovementioned concerning indifferent Things and Actions.

LEt us now see any other form of Government in the Church, which can make so
fair, so true, so just a plea for it self as Episcopacy has done; whether
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, or any other of what name or
distinction soever, who dissent from the Church of England, and fly from her
Communion, upon the account of the present Government by Bishops.

First, There is not any of these that can show express words, or commands of
Scripture, for that way of Government, which they would introduce: And
therefore they are unjust to us, whilst they cry up their own way, and
endeavor to impose it upon the world, as matter of Conscience; since, as
before has been proved, nothing can be so in its own nature, for which there is
not a plain and positive command, or a natural and true consequence, from
Scripture the Rule of Conscience.

Or admitting their Proposition, That all Governments being in their own nature
indifferent, and the best to be preferred; how does theirs appear to be the
best? I hope they are better reconciled to common Sense, Reason, and Custom,
than to think their own Assertion or Testimony sufficient to convince us that
it is so; since the Son of God, who was Truth it self, yet tells us, If I bear
witness of my self, my witness is not true; that is, Joh. 5.31.
if he had no other witness: And therefore he refers the unbelieving Jews to
John, whom all men accounted a Prophet; to the Scriptures, which he bids them
search; to Moses, in whom they trusted; and, in another place, to his Miracles
and wonderful works, which they saw with their own eyes.

Come we therefore to the common Rule; and it is no more but just, that they
should receive the same measure, and stand to the determination of the same
Judge, to whom they have made their Appeal.

In the second place therefore, Every one of these ways of Government which
they would establish, with the ruin of the present, contradict a known Rule,
nay, many plain Commands of Scripture; for whilst they go about to overthrow
the old Government, and introduce a new One, they are disobedient to those that
have the rule over them, both in Church and State, whom they found vested with
that Authority, and which, for any thing they are able to prove to the
contrary, was of Gods own appointment, for so says St. Paul, The powers that
be are ordained of God; even those Heathen and truly Antichristian Powers: how
much more then the Supporters and Defenders of the Christian Faith? They resist
an Authority, warranted with long succession, supported with many prudent and
ancient Laws; Laws to which they themselves, and their Ancestors, by their free
Representatives in Parliament, had given their Vote and Suffrage; and
therefore, by their own voluntary Act and Deed, (and some of them by the
stricter obligations of most Sacred and repeated Oaths) they were bound with
the strongest ties of Conscience to live under, in all dutiful obedience; which
St. Paul enjoins under the pain of Damnation, the severest of all the penalties
God Almighty can inflict upon Mankind: and therefore he tells them, they must
needs be subject for Conscience sake.

Thirdly, in their determination, that their way or form of Church Government
is the best, they do not follow the better, more sure and warrantable part of
judgment in indifferent things. Let them show us in all Antiquity, (except some
mistranslated places in the English New Testament, where Presbyters are falsely
rendered Elders) the least footsteps, approbation, defense, or practice of any
other manner of Government in the Church for this Sixteen hundred years and
upwards, besides the Episcopal; if they can do this, then they may lawfully
pretend, they do not overthrow the Old, but revive it, by overthrowing the New
Model of Government; but if they cannot, as I am sure if it could have been
done, we had heard it on both sides of our ears long before this; let them
dread the fearful doom which the wise Solomon pronounces against those who
remove the ancient Landmarks, Prove. 24.22.
and are given to change; for their calamity shall come suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? Both of those who fear not God, because they
fear not their lawful King his Vicegerent; but are given to change, delighted
with Novelties and Innovations.

Lastly, this their determination is far from the judgment of Charity, Peace,
and Unity, either with the past or present Ages; and much further from
promoting the great designs of Gods glory, and the happiness of Mankind either
here or hereafter. Let all Europe witness this sad Truth; and particularly
these British Isles, which by this best way of Government, of ancient Albion,
White and Happy, was changed into Aceldama, a dismal Field of Blood; it were
endless to recount what Wars, Rapine, Sacrilege, Desolation and Confusion,
Bloodshed, and most unparalled Solemn Murder of Majesty, the most sacred
thing on earth; have been the effects of endeavoring to set up, and establish
these new ways of Church Government. And wherever any of these new Disciplines
did prevail, they quickly verified the Advice of young Rhehoboam's hotheaded
Counselors, making their little Fingers, heavier than the Loins of Episcopacy:
and changing the Whips, with which those Reverend Fathers chastised such as
really deserved it, into Scorpions, Axes and Halters; nor did they spare either
Life or Fortune that stood in their way, or durst oppose them: And this was the
true reason, why even those persons, who were so violent against Root and
Branch of Episcopacy, notwithstanding their Solemn League and Covenant, yet
their Wisdom, Fear, or Policy, would never give them leave to establish
Presbytery, which they found a Government so imperious, absolute, and
insupportable.

Nor is this fair and honest dealing, in Dissenters; to pretend that because
all sorts of Government are indisserent, therefore why should not theirs be
chosen which is the best? when by experience we have found the contrary, and in
the mean time not to allow ours a bare indifferency: but to persuade their
credulous Followers, with the greatest confidence, That our way of Government
by Bishops, is Popish, Unlawful, and Antichristian, contrary to the Scriptures;
and that their own way is agreeable to them, and the Primitive Discipline of
the Church; and therefore as a matter of Conscience, and the main matter too,
the one to be avoided, and the other to be embraced by all those who hope for
Salvation of their Souls. That Cause (though it be the Good Old Cause) betrays
it self to be very weak, which is to be supported by such unworthy, feeble, and
Corner Arts and Arguments, as Pagans, and Heathen Philosophers would blush to
have been found guilty of.

As for that common objection of theirs against Lord Bishops; we will easily
grant them, that the Primitive Clergy did not abound in Temporalities; but
then, they had such advantages, as, I believe, none of these People will be
willing to gratify the most beloved of their Pastors withal, when they who
had possessions sold them, and laid down the price at the feet of the Apostles,
Acts 4, 34.
to dispose of as to them seemed most sit. This would be a hard saying, who
would bear it? nor indeed could it be convenient, as the affairs of the World
stand at present. But these Honors which the present Clergy do enjoy, being
Temporal, are not by us believed to be at all essential to the Office of a
Bishop, and are only annexed by the bounty of Princes, as are also their
Estates, for the necessary support of the Rank they are in, for the
encouragement of Learning and Piety, and for the advantage of the Public, as
it is a Politic Society of Men. And they may as well maintain a Levelling
Principle, and quarrel with all Honors and Estates that are above theirs, as
with these; for if any Temporal Estate or Dignity may, by free Gift or
Succession, divolve upon a Churchman, why not these? And that this may happen
without offense or scandal, besides the experience we have had in an
Illustrious Peer of this Nation, who, Earl of Kent.
not many years ago, from a private Priest, by succession, came to the Honor
of one of the first Earls in England. I appeal to themselves, who would think
it the greatest injustice, upon the account of their being Churchmen, to lose a
good Temporal Estate from their Ancestors, or a Barony, either by Descent, or
Royal Bounty. Besides, let all men judge, if this would not be the way to
furnish us with Jeroboam's Priests, of the meanest and lowest of the People,
not only for Birth, but Learning, Parts, and Ability: And what a
discouragement it would be to the Gentry and Nobility, who, by their Generous
Birth, Advantageous Education, Noble Alliances, and many other Excellent
Circumstances and qualifications, are fitted by the great influence they may
have both upon the Prince and People, to do both the Church and Sat the most
considerable Honor and Service? I am afraid few of them would addict
themselves to the more serious and painful Studies of Divinity, if by their
devoting themselves to an immediate attendance upon God's Altar, they must cast
off the Entail of Temporal Honors and Estates from themselves. Nor does this
derogate a little from the superlative Bounty and Goodness of the Divine
Nature, to think, that he who does so plentifully, frequently, and freely
bestow these Honors and Estates, as blessings, upon all other Conditions of
men, should prohibit and deny them to those, who have voluntarily obliged
themselves to his peculiar Service, and upon whom he is pleased to confer the
excellent Title of his Ambassadors; 2 Cor. 5.20.
and therefore most certainly does allow them honorably, so as to be able to
support the Dignity of so high a Character: especially since they have his
Royal word and promise for it, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor. Prince and Priest, were not by God thought
inconsistent under the Law, in that Government, which he himself constituted
and established. And therefore one word in the Hebrew Language signisies both.
(...)
And till such time as he is pleased to declare his mind to the contrary, I
know not upon what pretense any man should divorce those two, which he had once
made one. Neither by virtue of these Lordships, do Bishops Lord it over Christ's
Flock, as by the scoffing wantonness of some men (who should be more serious,
than to be witty at the expense of Scripture) they are said to do: since it is
clear, that their Temporal Baronies give them not the least influence upon
Church affairs, more than they give unto the other Noble Peerage of the Realm.
And the Jurisdiction of a Bishop, as a Bishop, and a Bishop as a Baron, are as
wholly distinct, as that of a Lord of a Manor, or any other Lord is from the
power of a Bishop in his Diocese. 1 Timothy 3.2.


In a word, A Bishop must be given to Hospitality; how shall he be able to do
that without an Estate? If he must have an Estate, he must be Lord of it, for
so is every man of what he does possess: and if it shall be thought fit by
Royal Authority, the Fountain of Honor, to add to that common Right, a more
particular and distinguishing Title of Honor, that may offend some men's
Ambition or Envy, but can never be found to be either diadvantageous to the
church or State, or contrary to the Scripture, the Rule of Conscience.

From what has been said, it appears, that no other way of Government in the
Church can really pretend to those advantages, which may make an indifferent
thing become necessary and obliging to Conscience, except the Episcopal; by
which it follows, that to submit to this Form of Government, as it is now
established in the Church, is so far from being against a good Conscience, that
no man can resist it, without sinning against Conscience, since it has all the
qualisications which are necessary, for the making an indifferent thing become
obligatory to every man's Conscience, which all the other pretenders want: viz.
It comes nearest to the Rule of Scripture, it follows the better, more sure and
warrantable part of our judgment; it answers all the ends of Government, by
promoting the Glory of God, and contributing to the happiness of mankind here,
by procuring Peace, Unity, and Concord; and hereafter, by teaching, commanding,
and practicing true Piety and Holiness. And it is evident, that to dissent from
this Government, can never be the effect of Conscience, but of Opinion or
Persuasion, neither of which can lay any obligation upon men's minds, which is
absolute and indispensible, as before has been made most evidently appear.

I wish that all Dissenters would seriously reflect with themselves, whilst
they do so violently cry up Conscience, and pretend it for their separation,
whether they have not abused themselves and the World, in mistaking Opinion and
Persuasion for it? of which they may easily be satisfied, by an impartial
application of what has before been said of this particular.

After all this, we shall difficultly be persuaded to relinquish the Plea of a
Divine Right in Episcopacy, for which so much reason has been, and may be
brought to prove it; and upon which we shall have occasion briefly to touch
hereafter.

CHAP. X.
Of the manner and circumstances of Divine Worship; and how from being
indifferent, they may become necessary to be done, and obliging to Conscience.

THus have we seen, that though private and false Opinion, or prejudiced and
mistaken Persuasion, and, it may be, malicious Design and Interest, combined
with discontented Envy, may be loud and clamorous against this Government of
the Church, by the excellent and ancient way of Episcopacy; yet Conscience is
so far from being against it, that it is wholly and clearly for it. Let us now
come to examine the manner of performance of Divine Worship, which has
occasioned no small stirs, tumults, and divisions amongst us.

And here likewise I suppose, that all Parties do thus far agree, that there
ought to be some Modes and Circumstances in the Worship and Service of God;
that is, some Time, some Place, some Words, Gestures, Postures, and Habits, for
the performance both of Public and Private Worship, which Conscience tells us
we are bound to pay unto Almighty God. Herein likewise I suppose, that all
Parties are agreed, that these things, or however, such of them as are in
controversy amongst us, are, in their own natures, indifferent; and therefore
properly the subject of Opinion or Persuasion: and were there no determination
on either side, provided the Duty of Worship were performed, it might be done
this way or the other: And from hence likewise it appears, that no Circumstance
of Religious Worship, is in its own nature simply unlawful, because no where in
Scripture prohibited, either in direct words, or by necessary consequence: so
that no man's Conscience can be justly offended by the performance of any of
them, since where there is no Law, there can be no transgression. Let any
Dissenters therefore show, either a positive command, or a plain consequence
from Scripture, why I should not serve God in a set form of Prayers and
Praises? or why I, or any other persons, should not perform all the several
Offices in the Book of Divine Service mentioned? Why such Gestures, Habits, or
Signs should not be made use of? And then something is said to make them
unlawful; then every man, in point of Conscience, would be obliged to abstain
from them: but till that be done, they will remain in their own natures simply
indifferent, and so far lawful. And so long as they are so, which will be to
the Worlds end, they act falsely and unjustly, who endeavor to persuade weak
minds, (and such as are not able to Judge) that these Circumstances of
Religious Worship, now in use in the Church of England, are absolutely
unlawful, and that they ought neither to use them, nor to have any communion
with those who do use them; which is the true reason and foundation of their
separation. And that the treacherous dealers deal thus treacherously with us,
is plain; for that the Ignorant and Vulgar always make this their Plea, for
their forsaking our Communion, that their Consciences will not give them leave
to join with us in our unlawful Ceremonies, as, in derision, they call all the
Service of the Church. And this they must needs have from their Teachers, who
either ought not to have been Teachers, if they themselves were not come to the
knowledge of the Truth; or if they were, they ought to have taught them the
Truth; and that these Modes, or Circumstances of Religion, being in their own
natures indifferent, were only matters of Opinion, and not of Conscience,
until such time as they were, some way or other, lawfully determined. And to
prove that this they ought to have done, and more than this, have taught their
Hearers, That they ought to have submitted to such determinations, I will
endeavor to make it plainly appear, by showing how indifferent Circumstances
of Divine Worship become obligatory to Conscience, and so necessary to be
performed.

Now all indifferent Circumstances in Religious Worship become necessary, if in
general they answer the great Design of God's glory, and the Happiness of
Mankind, both here and hereafter: it were enough therefore to demand, which of
all these indifferent things are contrary to these great Designs, and wherein?
which I am sure it is impossible for them to make appear. But for the
satisfaction of some, who may retain their prejudices, for want of a better
information, I will show more fully and distinctly, how indifferent things
become necessary; with some short reflections upon such of them, as in the
Ceremonies and Service of the Church of England are most objected against.

First therefore, an indifferent Circumstance in Religious Worship becomes
necessary, if in general it conduces to the advancement of Piety and Holiness;
because whatsoever does so, is absolutely necessary to be done; and it is every
man's duty, to endeavor to promote goodness, by all lawful ways and means.
Thus therefore, set and appointed times for Public Worship and Service of God
become necessary; such are the Lords Day, and all other holy Fasts and
Festivals, in which People assemble together to call upon and praise God, and
to give him that devout Worship, and humble Adoration, which in duty they are
bound to do; where sin is reproved, the ignorant are instructed, the weak are
confirmed and strengthened, the Holy Sacraments, those Pledges of God's Love,
and Seals of our Inheritance with the Saints in Light, are celebrated; and all
people are exhorted, directed, persuaded, and encouraged to the performance of
their respective duties, toward God and all men. And that such set times are
necessary, will appear, because, were men left to their own liberty, when and
where to perform these Duties of public Worship, such is the treachery and
backwardness of men's natures, that if they were not determined by a necessity,
they would generally neglect the Service of God, and find out perpetual excuses
and evasions to delay the performance of it, to the great decay of Piety and
Religion, and the great hazard of the salvation of their Souls. For this
purpose also, public Places of Assemblies, decent and convenient for those
uses, become necessary: and by such Dedication, and solemn setting apart to the
Service of God, they become his Houses, and cease to be common, or indifferent,
by obtaining a Relative Holiness; Exodus 3.5. Ezekiel. 42.13, 14. and 44.19.
such as did the ground about the burning Bush, the Temple and its Vessels, the
Vestments and Chambers of the Priests; all which are called Holy: And therefore
the Royal Psalmist does prophetically tell us, Psalm. 93. ult.
Holiness becomes thy House for ever; which must either be false, or else be
understood of Christian Temples.

Secondly, Indifferent things and Circumstances in Divine Worship, become
necessary, if they promote Peace, Unity, and Charity, according to those great
and necessary Rules of the Gospel, Live in peace, if it be possible; 2 Cor.
13.11. Heb. 12.14. 2 Cor. 13.2. Coloss. 3.14. Ephesians. 4.3. 1 Cor. 13.13.
as much as in you lies, follow peace with all men. Finally, brethren, be of
one mind. Above all things put on charity, which is the bond of persectness.
Keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Now remains Faith, Hope,
and Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity. Now that one set and
prescribed form of Public Worship, Administration of the Sacraments, and other
Religious Duties, does extremely promote all these, nothing can be more plain:
for where men are left to their own liberty, one likes this way of performance,
another likes and prefers another way; from hence immediately arises a breach
of Unity, from thence men come to Disputations and Controversies, which is the
best way. And whilst each party is equally obstinate in the defense of their
own Opinion, many heats of passion happen, which vent themselves in bitter
words; from thence men come to variance, division, and separation; from thence
to hatred; and then the door is set wide open to violence, force, confusion,
war, and all the innumerable mischiefs, which are its dreadful consequents, and
constant companions. That these are sad and experimented truths, I appeal to
all sober and considerative men: but lest their Judgment should not be
satisfactory, let us hear the judgment of an Apostle, who was guided in what he
writ by an infallible Spirit; Jam. 3.14.
But if ye have bitter envyings and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie
not against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish: for where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and
every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits;
without partiality, and without hypocrisy: and the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace of them that make peace. Nor is it possible to find out any way
to make peace, and bring men to unity and charity, but by some determination of
these indifferent things; which is not only my sense and opinion, but that of
all dissenting Parties, who therefore propose the determination of them, by the
establishment of their way, as the only expedient to obtain these excellent
ends.

Thirdly, Indifferent things become necessary, if they promote Decency and
Order, because so they are agreeable to St. Paul's general Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. Thus, that all should kneel at
the Prayers where it is appointed; besides, that it is a posture of
supplicating, humility, and devout adoration; That they should stand up at the
rehearsal of the Articles of our Christian Faith, and at the Hymns, Psalms, and
Praises, are all matters of great decency and order. Whereas that one should
sit, another stand, a third lean, a fourth lie along at his ease, are no less
indecent and irreverend, than disorderly and confused. Thus, that Churchmen
should wear distinct Habits, both when they celebrate the Divine Service, and
at other times, such as may show gravity, sobriety, purity, innocence, or
distinction of degrees, are all decent and orderly, and so far therefore
necessary.

Lastly, Indifferent things become necessary, if they be significantly
expressive of our inward profession. Thus the Cross after Baptism, the Ring in
Marriage, the Surplice and other Vestments, Postures and Gestures, having all
their outward significations of the inward profession of our minds, are
necessary for those ends. I should speak more fully of these things, had not
the Learned Mr. Falkner taken such pains about them, and sifted them so
narrowly, as not to leave any just pretense of a quarrel against them; to which
incomparable Discourse I therefore refer the Reader, for an ample satisfaction
in all these particulars.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Way whereby indifferent things become obligatory to Conscience, not
only upon a Man's private Persuasion, from the forementioned Rules, but so as to
oblige all persons who live under Government, viz. by the Determinations, and
Commands of Lawful Authority.

THus far I have shown the chief, among many Considerations, whereby any
indifferent thing may become necessary: so that if any person finds these or
any other indifferent things in the Worship or Service of God, conduces to
these Ends, he is obliged in Conscience to the performance of them; but this
lays only a private obligation, and the same that it does upon all other
indifferent things and actions, which yet remain so, by being undertermined.
But now in regard some of these things, though innocent and indifferent in
their own Natures, may, to some Men's Opinions and Persuasions, appear very
conducive to the beforementioned Ends; others may appear more effectual to some
other Persons: lest from diverse Opinions, about these Circumstantials of
Religion, which are best, most decent, orderly, and edifying, there should
arise division, distraction, and confusion in the Service of God, as by
miserable experience we daily find there does; it is requisite that we seek for
some stronger obligation whereby those things which are indifferent may become
necessary to all; and this must be, by the determination, and commands of a
lawful Authority, which has power to judge, which amongst all indifferent
circumstances of Divine Worship, conduce most to Gods glory, and the good of
Mankind, especially those under their charge and jurisdiction, by promoting and
maintaining Peace, Unity, Concord, and Piety: and after such judgment, to pass
a final determination, which shall lay the double obligation, both of a prudent
and necessary Law, and also of Conscience upon all who live under their
Government, and expect the advantages of it, and therefore owe Obedience to it.
For otherwise disputes and differences must be endless, if Men will not refer
themselves to some Umpires and Arbitrators to decide them; which must (after
Men have tired themselves to find out what these Arbitrators must be?) at the
last be lawful Authority. Now that all Dissenters are of the same judgment with
us in this Point, and believe that a lawful Authority has this decisive Power,
it is most plain, from the frequent instances, and repeated importunities which
they make to the Supreme Authority, to make Alterations in the present, or to
establish another manner or form of Worship according to their way: or however,
if they cannot hope for such Concessions, yet they will Petition, that
Authority will not interpose it self in these Religious Affairs, but leave them
to their freedom in the manner of the exercise of their Religion; and this is,
if I mistake them not, that which they call Liberty of Conscience: And they
must either be the greatest Dissemblers and Hypocrites in Nature, by begging
that from Authority, which they believe it has no real Power over; or else it
plainly implies, That it is in the Power of a lawful Authority to determine
that Liberty, in indifferent things, which concern the circumstances of Divine
Worship. This therefore being acknowledged, we have nothing to do but to prove,
That the Authority which has determined these indifferent things, and by
consequence now made them necessary to be done, and matter of Conscience, had a
just Right and Power, as well as wise and prudent Reasons and Considerations so
to do, as being a lawful Authority.

We must therefore consider and examine what is requisite to make an Authority
so lawful, as that it may of Right challenge such a decisive and determinative
Power, as that all Persons who live under it, shall be obliged in Point of
Conscience, to submit to its definitive Sentence, and take it for a finalis
Concordia, in all indifferent things; and to which no Man can be disobedient,
without a manifest and wilful sin against Conscience, in the breach of those
known commands, Obey them that have the Rule over you. Romans 13.1.
And let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers.

First therefore, that Authority which is of Gods appointment, is, without
controversy, a lawful Authority, as pleading a Divine Right from him by whom
Kings reign. Such was the Authority of Moses, Aaron, Samuel, and the Judges;
and even of Saul, a wicked and tyrannous Prince, of whom therefore David said
to Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.9.
Destroy him not, for who can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed, and
be guiltless? And it was well for him that he fell into the hands of a Man who
was after Gods own heart. We have seen some, whom a lesser interest than David's
in his death, would have tempted to serve him as Epominondas did his sleeping
Sentinel; had they found him sleeping, they would have been of Abishai's
judgment, and have left him sleeping his last.

But to proceed, secondly, That Authority is lawful, which is warranted by long
Succession: Prescription is accounted a good and safe Plea and Title, for all
other Men for their Estates and Possessions; certainly much more for the Crowns
of Sovereign Princes: for hereby their Title passes into Inheritance, which is
a Right which no Man can violate or invade, without being guilty of the breach
of that positive and known Command, Thou shall not covet.

Lastly, That Authority is lawful, which by Choice, and common Consent, for
their mutual benefit and advantage, Men agree to, and by lawful ways
stipulate, and oblige themselves, one or more to govern, and rule, and the rest
to obey: for this is founded upon the Law of Nature and Nations, which teaches
all People, that Faith in solemn, deliberate and lawful Contracts, such as this
is, is most sacredly to be kept inviolated; otherwise there could not be any
Society, Government, Law or Living in the World. And the Holy Writings confirm
the same, when they tell us, our solemn Compacts and Contracts are to be
observed, though to our loss and detriment, or else we must never expect to
ascend the holy and heavenly hill; Psalm. 15.4.
except we be such as though we swear, that is, make a solemn lawful Contract,
though to our own prejudice in the event, and yet nevertheless change not, but
stand firm to our promise and obligation.

Now all these several ways of any Authorities becoming lawful, so as to have
a just Power and Dominion in making Laws for the determination of indifferent
things, which, amongst many, are most conducive to Gods glory, and the Public
advantage of those under their Dominion, both in Civil and Religious Affairs,
are most eminently to be found in the present Authority of these Nations.

First, there is Divine Appointment and Ordination, whether we respect Monarchy
or Episcopacy? And if we can prove there were Kings and Bishops in the World,
when St. Paul wirt his Epistles, I think, notwithstanding what many have said
against it, the Case will be clear; Romans 13.1.
For, says he, there is no Power but of God; that is, lawful Powers, such as
the then Roman Emperors, who by succession became lawful; for we cannot imagine
he meant to countenance unlawful and usurping Powers: and therefore he adds,
the Powers that be, that is, the present Roman Emperors, and their subordinate
Magistrates and Ministers, are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive
damnation. Now that there were Kings when he writ, is plain from that place,
where he commands, That first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of Thanks, be made for all Men, for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.1.
and all that are in Authority. If St. Paul's Writings were a Rule for those
Ages, they are likewise a Rule for us, and for all People to the Worlds end,
and then the Argument will hold good, If Kings in St. Paul's time had a Divine
Right to their Crowns, they have so still, or else what was Scripture then, is
not so now; the danger of which consequence is so apparent, that I cannot
imagine there will be found any that will venture to own it.

The great question will be, Whether there were Bishops then? For if there
were, they likewise, by the Apostles Rule, were ordained of God, or else they
had no Power. That there were Bishops, it is plain, for we have the Name very
frequent in Scripture, Christ himself, from whom the rest so often mentioned
derived their Office and Authority as before we took notice, being called the
great Bishop, as well as Pastor of our Souls.

And that these Bishops had a Power and Authority in the Church, and exercised
the same office in the Government of the Church as the present Bishops do, is
no less evident; and that in this very Point of determining indifferent things
in Divine Worship: Thus St. Paul takes upon him to order the Church of the
Corinthians, about the Celebration of the Lords Supper; and after that done,
tells them, If there were any other thing in difference or disorder, the rest
will I set in order when I come. 1 Cor. 11.34.
And that he did this by virtue of his Office, and by a Power derived from
Christ, the first and great Bishop, he tells them, That he received of the
Lord, that which he delivered unto them: Ver. 23.
And wherever he is positive in giving any Rules or Directions of Government,
Decency, or Order, we may assure our selves he does it by virtue of this Power
of his Office; for otherwise he would tell us, it is but his private Judgment
or Persuasion, which he would not impose upon Christians, though he had a fair
pretense so to do, as appears by that place concerning Virginity and Marriag: 2
Cor. 7.25.
Now concerning Virgins, I have no Commandment of the Lord; yet I give my
judgment, as one that has obtained mercy to be faithful. But if any Person
shall pretend he did this by virtue of his Apostolical Office, which was an
immediate Commission from the mouth of Christ at his miraculous Conversion; to
convince them that a Bishop, who was no Apostle, had the same Power, and
exercised the same Office, there is nothing more plain, than that place in his
Epistle to Titus: For this purpose left I thee in Crete, Tit. 1.5.
that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City; in which place I think our English Translation has not
rightly expressed the meaning of the Original Greek. And this seems to be the
proper sense of the words; that St. Paul having been himself in Crete, The word
(...) translated Ordain, signifies to constitute and appoint a person over a
certain place and employment.
and set many things in order, he left Titus there, to place such Priests as he
before had Ordained, in the several Cities of that Island; and put them into
the Power and Office of Bishops, which he had not done, as may appear by the
following description of a Bishop, what manner of Man he ought to be; and for
the word (...), which is Translated Elders, it signifies in all Antiquity, (the
best Expositor of the Idiom of words) Priests who were therefore so called,
because always chosen out of the ancientest Converts to Christianity, and the
longest standers in Religion; and the Rule held good, concerning Priests as
well as Bishops; that in their Elections, they should not choose a Novice; that
is, one lately converted, lest wanting the ballast of age, experience and
discretion; the height of so honorable an office should puff up such an one
with pride, and so he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. And that Titus,
who was the first or chief Bishop in Crete, as well in order of place as time,
1 Timothy 3.6.
and so had many inferior Bishops under him, we have the Postscript, or rather
Superscription of the Epistle, which for any thing can be proved to the
contrary, may be as ancient as the Epistle; besides, that he was the first
Bishop in order of time, we have the testimony of all Antiquity, who never once
doubted the truth of it.

So that Monarchy, and Episcopacy, being then Powers in the World; and the
Powers that then were, being ordained of God: it follows plainly, that they
have a just and warrantable, if not an undeniable Plea to a Divine Right.

Secondly, There is long succession of both: of this very Race of Kings for
above 600 years: and long may their Imperial Crown and Royal Dignity flourish
and increase; even so long as the Sun and the Moon endure: And for the
succession of Bishops, it is of much an ancienter date; and though the time be
not certain, yet that the Britains did very early receive the Christian Faith,
and with it Episcopal Government, is a thing not to be doubted, if we will give
any credit to the ancient Historians, some of which would persuade us, that
Britain was Christian as soon, or even before Rome it self.

Lastly, there is Choice, and a freedom of Election in the House of Commons,
which represents the gross Body of the Nation; and is one part of the Authority
thereof: as for the Interest which the rest of the most Honorable Peerage have
in the management of Public Affairs, it being one of the dear bought
Fundamentals of the Magna Charta, it was a thing never disputed till the late
days of Confusion, when the very foundations were violently torn up by the
roots, with the Tempest, or rather Hurricane of Religious Rebellion; and I hope
it will never come to a second Vote, that the House of Peers is useless to this
Nation, or a Government without them.

So that here is whatsoever is requisite to make any Authority lawful, so as to
have a just Right and Dominion over all those who live under it, for the final
determination and conclusion of all indifferent things, both in Religious and
Civil Affairs.

That this may appear plain to every apprehension, we will give an instance in
a point controverted amongst us. Prayer is an immediate act of Divine Worship,
and of it self absolutely necessary to be performed to God, Psalm. 65.2. Matthew.
21.13.
who is the God of all flesh, and therefore unto him shall all flesh come;
because he hears prayers, and his house is the house of prayer for all
Nations. But to pray in a set and prescribed form of words, or to pray as a
man's abilities give him leave, or as it is called, by Extempore prayer,
according as the present occasion may seem to require, are in their own natures
indifferent: and I doubt not, but if either be done with all due circumstances,
they may be acceptable to God. But now one man is persuaded, that set forms in
the public service of God are the best, another thinks, Extempore prayer the
best way. So long as this is undetermined by a Lawful Authority, every man is
obliged to follow his private Opinion, because Conscience obliges him to follow
that determination of his judgment in indifferent things, which he is fully
persuaded is the best, and conduces most effectually to God's glory, and the
promoting of Piety. But because diversity of Opinion, Persuasion, and Practice
in this Duty, is apt to breed Division and Dissension; and to prejudice, if not
ruin that Unity, Peace, Charity, and Order, which ought to be preserved
inviolate amongst all men, especially Christians; therefore that Authority,
which has a just power over us, as being of God's appointment, of long
succession, and of our own choice; to prevent these disorders, and the
confusion and dangers which may ensue upon divisions of Mind, and difference of
Practice, interposeth it self: and considering, that our great Lord and
Savior, who tells us, he was to be our Example, prescribed a set form of
Prayer, and positively commanded his Disciples so to pray, Luke 11.2.
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. That both the Ancient and Modern Churches
did, and do use and approve set Forms of Prayer in Public Worship, that
hereby, rash and inconsiderate men, shall not have liberty to utter any thing
before God; Mat. 6.7.
nor to use vain repetitions, as the Heathen did; nor (which is much worse than
they were guilty of in their much speaking, for which they thought to be heard)
nonsense, indecent or irreverend expressions: that men of greater abilities
should not be puffed up, and those who have not that freedom and fluency of
utterance, should not be despised, in regard for their Piety, soundness of
Judgment, integrity of Life, or ability to Govern, they may be of as great use
in the Church as others. That hereby the ignorant and unlearned shall be better
able to join with him that Ministers, knowing what he is to say, than if they
did not; and with a safe Conscience may say Amen, which I am sure to every Ex
tempore Prayer they cannot; and that all men may, by Uniformity, be brought to
Unity, that so necessary Bond of perfection, both as to Religion and Civil
Policy. For these, and many other necessary and prudent considerations, this
Lawful Authority judges it most conducive to God's Glory, most agreeable to his
Will, and most effectual to procure the happiness of those under their
Authority, both here and hereafter, to prescribe and command a set Form of
Prayer, in the Public Worship of Almighty God.

And now that which before was indifferent, becomes necessary in point of
Conscience: because the Scripture is clear in the case, that Lawful Authority
is to be obeyed, in whatsoever it commands, that is not simply and absolutely
unlawful, and that for Conscience sake; and the obligation which before I might
have from my private Opinion or Persuasion, ought, in Modesty, as well as Duty
and Charity, to give way to the Determinations of my Lawful Superiors, in all
indifferent things.

And therefore they who, now it is determined, either despise it, or refuse to
use it, or to join with those who do use it, sin against Conscience, because
against many plain and positive commands of Scripture before mentioned, and for
which St. Paul seems extremely solicitous, as well knowing Pride and
Disobedience to be the most natural sins: and therefore commands, that men be
put in mind (as being apt to forget their Duty) that they be subject to
Principalities and Powers, Tit. 3.1.
to obey Magistrates.

The very same may be said of any of the rest of those things which are
enjoined, by the present Authority of this Nation, which, by being commanded,
from indifferent become necessary, and with such a dreadful necessity, that
whosoever resists a Lawful Power, if St. Paul be to be credited, shall
receive to themselves damnation.

And let them seriously take notice of it, how light a matter soever it may be
made, there is no man who does thus wilfully resist and disobey Authority, that
can hope for Salvation. As for those who do it in ignorance, I will not
determine how indulgent God may be to them. But they must know, that though God
may have winked at their former ignorance, yet now he commands them, and all
men, every where to repent. And they will be inexcusable, if they be ignorant,
because they will be so. It is their duty therefore, to look for a better
Information of their minds; and laying aside all partiality and prejudice, to
submit to the truth, how contrary soever it may be to their Opinions, which, by
long continuance in, are become very strong and habitual to them: for without
Repentance and Reformation, there can be no Pardon.

I cannot, without amazement, see some men, who appear in other things most
nicely Conscientious, yet make so slight a matter of this; nay, many of them,
the greatest and only differencing part of their Religion, themselves to
disobey Lawful Authority, and by their Example and Practice, if not Doctrine,
at least in private, to teach others to do the same. I wish they would
consider, what dangerous influences such Practices have had, and still have,
upon their Bodies, Souls, Reputation, and Estates, and indeed upon every thing
that ought to be dear and tender to them. Besides, the most fatal, mischievous,
and dangerous consequences they have had, and, if pursued, will have still upon
the safety and well-being of the Community in which they live: which, by their
disobedience to Laws, the only Fences of Religion, Life, Right, and Property,
those Deliciae Humanae generis, the Darlings of all Mankind, they do as much as
in them lies to ruin and destroy.

CHAP. XII.
Some Considerations, showing the unreasonableness, and impracticableness, of
the desires of those persons, who, under pretense of Conscience, are for
erecting of new ways of Church Government, or for Toleration or Liberty of
Conscience.

TO show the great unreasonableness and impracticableness of the desires of all
Dissenters, there need no more to be said, than to make them this Proposal,
which I dare say may most safely be done, That so soon as they shall
unanimously have agreed in all particulars, and so as to reconcile all
Interests, and satisfy all Parties, what way of Government they would have
established, they shall receive a gratification of their desires; provided in
the mean time they submit, as becomes good Subjects and Christians, to the
present. And if they shall, in answer to the offer, say, That it is impossible
to find out such a way of Government, as shall please all Men, Interests, and
Parties; would it not be the highest frenzy imaginable, by removing the
present Government, of the goodness of which we have had so long experience, to
introduce any other, which can gratify but one, and, it may be, an
inconsiderable Party; and, in recompense, disoblige all the rest; and, for any
thing we know, even those who so eagerly desire it, as soon as any others,
since having never yet made a full trial of it, though it may look bravely,
like Readiness Armor upon David, 1 Samuel 17.39.
it may not prove so easy or convenient, but, with him, they may be willing to
put it off again, and stick to the old and plain Episcopal Armor of the
Shepherds Staff and Sling.

Besides, this way of Government in the Church, is so curiously twisted and
interwoven with the Politic Government in the State, that it is impossible to
pick out this part, without spoiling the Beauty, and unravelling the whole Web
and Frame of the Government; it is one of the main Pillars, upon which this
weighty and well built Fabric stands; and cannot be taken away, but it must
endanger the fall and ruin of the whole Building: and they must be as full of
revenge, and as blind as Sampson, who would, by pulling down this Pillar, bring
the House about their own heads; since it is odds, but, with him, they must
perish in the common ruin; and I hope, what ever will they may have, their
Hair will never be suffered to grow so long again, as to recover their
Sampson's strength, so as to be able to effect it. It was this consideration
which made as wise and learned a Prince, as ever swayed the British Scepter, so
frequently tell the Dissenters of his Age, No Bishop, no King: which by the
most deplorable experience, was verified in his Successor. Nor did the fatal
consequence end there; but after, No Bishop, no King, came marching up a
dreadful Army of Negatives, No House of Peers; No free, no full House of
Commons; No Law, no Justice, unless it were the High Court so called; No
liberty, no property, no safety, no security, and, at last, nothing but
consusion; all admirable effects of changing that Government, which before was
most safe and easy, into that which was most Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and
insupportable. If experience be not sufficiently convincing in this particular,
I know not what new School of Fools, or rather Madmen, we must seek for, to
persuade us to the belief of these Truths.

But further, I wish that all Dissenters would consider with themselves,
whether this will lead them, and what must be the end of it. For a Toleration
of Disobedience to the Commands of a Lawful Authority, is a Principle
destructive of all Government, of all Religion, and even of that which these
men would endeavor to establish: for we will suppose what they desire, that
that way of Government, which they are so fond of, were, by the Authority, in
favor of them, established and settled as firmly and strongly, as the present
Church Government is; it is impossible that it should please all people, nay,
it is most certain, it would displease all other Parties, whose way was either
abrogated to make room for the new one, or theirs which was rejected, and in
probability therefore, the greatest part of the Nation: and there would not
want those, who would be able to raise and manage more forcible Objections and
Arguments against their way, than any they can bring against what is now in
being. Now they must be unreasonable in the highest measure, if they would not
grant the same liberty to others, who dissent from them and their way, which
now they desire for themselves; since it is not to be doubted, but they would
have the same (and possibly a juster) plea of Conscience for themselves, which
these now make, and therefore ought to have Indulgence and Toleration: and I
would gladly know whether that can be called a Government, or only an Image of
it, and an empty name, where men have liberty to obey it, if they please, or
may be disobedient to it by its own consent, if they so please?

But further, what reason can they have to expect any other, having shown them
the way to change, but that the Authority should still make trial of new
Governments, and not confine all their kindness to them, but still gratify and
oblige, first, one Party, and then another, according as the persons, who
compose that Authority, may be favorably inclined to one persuasion or
another? I hope they would not complain of Injustice in the Lex Talionis, or
grumble to resign that Power, which, for their sakes, others before them were
obliged to do. And should the Wheel turn thus round, they must with their way
expect to be laid in the dust. And what strange Alterations, Revolutions,
Settlements, and Unsettlements must there be? What face of Government, or
rather what Confusion, must of necessity follow the Practice of this Principle?

And that these are the natural effects of Disobedience to Lawful Government,
let us but turn our eyes a little backward, and we shall plainly see: And these
Dissenters, however they seem to have forgot it, may remember they have seen
the days, when the Presbyterian was in favor, and full of hopes, having trodden
upon the neck of dismounted Episcopacy, to advance into the Chariot of
Government: but the crafty Independent coming slily behind him, whipped up his
heels, and laid him in the dirt; and was just going himself to take possession
of the vacant seat, when the surly Anabaptist, Quaker, Leveller, and several
others, rushing in all at once upon him, told him, with the Hand all the while
upon the Hilts, that they had as just a right as he, and that they would not
part with it, without a fair Trial of skill, who had the longest Sword? And
there was nothing gave the late Usurper more trouble, than the importunities of
these several Interests, which he kept from falling foul one upon another, by
tollerating all for the present; and cajolling the Heads of the Parties with
Protestations and Assurances, that in his heart he was of their persuasion,
and, in time, would declare himself to be so: though for the present, in regard
of the Malignant Party, it did not stand with his Interest, nor theirs, so to
do, till they were more fully assured against the common Enemy: though at last
they all found him to be a mere Proteus, or Polypus in Religion, and that he
could change himself into the shape and color of that Party which was nearest
to him.

Lastly, Let them consider, That this Principle must give increase, growth, and
encouragement to all Sects and Heresies; since all pretend Conscience, and
plead for Toleration. And if this Liberty of Conscience be granted them, there
must of necessity follow infinite and unavoidable Divisions, Separation upon
Separation, Confusion, and at last Atheism; since amongst so many pretenders to
the true Religion, all will at last come to be suspected to be false.

These are certainly the necessary effects, and inevitable consequences, of
unsetling the present Government in the Church, either by changing it for a new
one, or permitting Toleration, or what men call, Liberty of Conscience: And we
must either believe, that these Dissenters do not foresee, or understand the
danger of this Precipice, to which they make such haste; or if they do, that
they are the most malicious of Mankind, since they would sacrisice all Law,
Government, Liberty, Property, and Religion, to their own private Opinions and
Persuasion.

CHAP. XIII.
A vindication of what is before laid down as a fundamental Principle in this
Discourse: viz. That God Almighty made Mankind for an excellent End; that is,
his Glory; and in order thereunto, by obedience to his Commands, their own
happiness both here in this Life, and hereafter in the Life of Immortality.

THus far I have endeavored to follow the Clue of Truth and Reason; which if
others would likewise do, I doubt not, but it would bring them out of those
Mazes and Labyrinths of doubts, which perplex their minds, and make their Lives
so uneasy both to themselves and others, by making many things matters and
scruples of Conscience, when in truth they were not such. And not only so, but
likewise it would conduce much to the calming of those storms and tempests,
which are gathering from so many several Quarters, and seem to threaten both
Church and State, if not with Shipwreck, yet with most violent agitations and
commotions.

But before I conclude, there is one thing which I have laid down as a
fundamental Principle in this Discourse, and upon which a great part of this
weighty building of Conscience does depend, as upon a main Pillar; which I
think it will be necessary to make clear and evident. And that is, That the
great Creator, out of the Excellency of his Nature made the World, and
particularly Mankind, for a most excellent End; viz. his own Glory, and, in
order thereunto, the happiness of Mankind here in this Life, as a preparative
to Eternal happiness hereafter.

That this is a most certain and undeniable Truth, (however some
narrow-spirited men, who would engross all the Bounty of Heaven to themselves,
may think otherwise, by taking such low measures of the Divine Goodness and
Beneficence, as may be proportionable to the Stature of their own
understandings, though far short of Infinite, which is the only true measure
of the Deity) I doubt not but to make it most evidently plain and apparent, to
all those who do not wilfully close their eyes against the brightest beams of
Truth, Reason, and Scripture.

First therefore, we must consider the Incomparable Excellency of this Infinite
Being, who is the Author of all things; for he himself tells us, Psalm. 57.10.
that his mercy reaches unto the Clouds, and his goodness far above these
visible Heavens; and that it is over all his works. And lest we should be
mistaken, by judging him according to our selves, he gives us to know, Isa.
55.7, 8, 9.
that his thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways like our ways; low,
narrow, and short: But as the heavens are high above the earth, so are his ways
and thoughts high above our ways. A comparison large and wide enough, to show
us the vast disproportion betwixt Finite and Infinite Goodness. Now there can
be nothing more suitable and agreeable to the Goodness, Bounty, Wisdom, Power,
and Justice of his Essence, which is Infinite, than a Design, that all his
Creatures should be happy according to their several capacities, which he, who
made nothing in vain, created them with. And on the contrary, to suppose he
made any thing with a capacity of enjoying any degree of Happiness, as its
ultimate End, and chief Good; and yet with an intention and design, not only
of not attaining it, but of being for ever miserable, is so far from magnifying
his Goodness or Justice, that it would argue him of such a cruel nature, as
were the highest derogation, and most proper blasphemy, to believe it of him.
And that his Justice will be glorified in the punishment and misery of some of
his Creatures, even of the Noblest Rank, he assures us with the highest
protestation imaginable, is far from being an effect of his Will, and is
perfectly occasioned by their own choice, and wilful folly. As I live, says
the Lord; Ezekiel. 33.11.
that is, as surely as I am, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
had rather that he should turn and live. Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die? And
if he has no pleasure in his death, a smaller punishment, undoubtedly not in
his Eternal Damnation, the greatest of all miseries.

But secondly, let us consider, That the scope of all Religion, and the
Commands of God in Scripture, all aim directly at this White; viz. the
happiness of all Mankind, even here in this Life, in order to an Eternal
Happiness hereafter, in the Life of Immortality and Glory: and therefore does
so frequently promise to the Obedient all those things, which may compose the
happiness even of this Life; the Bona Corporis Animi and Fortunae, all the good
things of Body, and Mind, and Estate; according to that saying of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 6.6. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness with contentment (which it only can give) is great gain, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Now the means
which God commands us to use, and the means which he directs, are the most
certain Rule for us to make a Judgment, what is the End at which he would have
us arrive. For God is true, and cannot lie, though all men may be liars, and
therefore we are bound to believe him; and that he cannot tell us one thing,
when he means another directly contrary to it: as some men, who call themselves
Divines, have both by Word and Writing publicly avowed, and published to the
World.

If we look upon the Commands of the Law, such as were not only particular to
the Jewish Nation in their Typical Service, but common to all the children of
Abraham by Faith; we shall find, that they all aim at this: And the Two Tables,
written with the Divine Characters, by the immediate Finger of God, direct,
first, his Worship; secondly, man's happiness, by obedience to Superiors, in
the first Commandment with promise; by Justice, Chastity, Temperance, Truth,
and Honesty, and all other Virtues, which conduce to our happiness here in this
Life: and by making us partakers of the Divine Nature, fitting and preparing us
for the enjoyment of Heaven and Happiness hereafter.

And if we examine either the Doctrine or Practice of all holy Men, so far as
their Practice is recorded for our example, we shall find, that they have all a
tendency to these very Ends.

If we come to look into that Royal Law of Liberty, the Gospel, we shall find,
that all its Commands and Directions, lead us to our own happiness: witness
that Golden, and, even by Heathens, much celebrated Rule, of our blessed Jesus,
To do to all men, Matthew. 7.12.
as we would that they should do unto us. A Rule to make all the World happy,
and a Rule which, I am sure, no Dissenter dare abide by, and which surpasses
all that ever went before it, and is the highest exaltation of Humane Nature,
even to such a degree, as brings it to a near affinity and resemblance of the
blessed Divinity, Matthew. 5.44, ad finem.
who makes his Sun to shine upon the just and unjust. To love our enemies. To
bless those that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for
them that despitefully use us and persecute us.

And the Disciples spoke the same Language of their great Lord and Master, who
left his Peace, and command of Unity, to love one another, as a Legacy among
them; and enforces it upon them with the most powerful persuasive, If ye love
me, keep my commandments; Joh. 14.15.
telling them, this love and unity should be the badge and distinction of their
profession, Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
Thus there fore they command Piety and Unity, Peace and Charity, Love
unfeigned, Obedience to Magistrates and Ministers; that Duty, Honor, and
Respect, which is due to any, to be given unto them: to live Justly, Soberly,
Religiously in this present World; in all Honesty, Quietness, Humility,
Chastity, Temperance, and all other Virtues and Goodness, one toward another,
and as we have opportunity to do good unto all. Let any man judge, if these
Rules were exactly followed, if the Golden Age would not return, and all men be
as happy as heart can wish. The Effects which they would produce, plainly
demonstrate the Ends for which they were designed.

Besides, all agree to this, That the great design of the Creation was the
glory of the Creator; now the same thing which glorifies the Creator, does also
make the Creature happy; and that is, Obedience to his Will, Laws, and
Commands. And that the Will of God is to be glorified by the Obedience, and not
Punishment of his Creatures, as his first design in their Creation has already,
from his own protestation, been shown. And the Apostle is as plain as positive
in this point, That God would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 3.3,4. ver. 6.
by coming to the knowledge of the truth. And for this purpose, that Christ
gave himself a ransom for all.

And whosoever does peruse the holy Gospel, shall be forced to acknowledge,
that the whole design of it is, That all men, by the knowledge of God, and of
Jesus Christ, might come to yield obedience to his holy Laws and Directions;
and that by following them, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
they might escape the pollutions and corruptions that is in the world through
lust; and be made partakers of the Divine Nature, by living justly,
righteously, and Godlike, blameless and harmless, as the Sons of God here in
this world: that so through the all-sufficient merits and satisfaction of the
only Son of God, they may, as the end of their Faith, Hope, Charity, and
Constancy, be made partakers of that glorious Life and Immortality, which he
has purchased for them with his most precious Blood.

So that as nothing can be more suitable to the excellency of the Divine Being,
than a design in their Creation, that they should all be happy according to
their several Capacities; so nothing is more clear, from the unanimous consent
and design of the Holy Scriptures, which contain the Will of God, than that
this was the great and ultimate End of the Omnipotent Creator, in the framing
the World, and particularly in the Creation of Mankind, to be happy both here
and hereafter in a future state.

CHAP. XIV.
Some necessary Corollaries from the former Discourse; with the Conclusion, to
all men to endeavor after Peace and Unity.

FRom what has before been said, we may draw these necessary and practical
Consequences and Conclusions.

First, That every man is obliged to yield obedience to Conscience, upon pain
of Eternal Damnation: because every man is obliged, under that penalty, to walk
according to the Scripture Rule, which is that by which Conscience judges every
man, whether he does right or wrong: according to what St. John tells us, 1 John 3.5.
If our heart, that is, our Conscience, condemn us, God is greater than our
heart, and knows all things, and most certainly will condemn us in that great
and fearful Judgment-day. And whosoever violates a known command of Scripture,
however he may color it over with the fair pretense of Religion, yet, as St.
Paul says, Romans 3.7.
Though the truth of God should abound, through my lie, unto his glory, yet I
shall be also judged as a sinner. And so shall all those, who with pretense of
advancing God's glory and the truth, act contrary to the Rule of Truth and
Righteousness. But if at the last it shall be found, that they have not been
managed by Conscience, but Opinion and Persuasion, what can they expect, but
the greatest severities, and insufferable torments and agonies of Conscience,
the worm that never dies? which should put all men upon a strict examination of
themselves, especially those who pretend to be so much managed by Conscience;
whether it be a true and good Conscience, or only these Deceivers and
Usurpers, Opinion and Persuasion.

Secondly, it follows, That Indifferent things in Religious Worship, laying no
further Obligation upon men's Consciences, than as they conduce to God's glory,
and the happiness of the Universe; and a Lawful Authority having a Power to put
a final determination upon every man's private Judgment and Opinion, by
declaring which of all these indifferent things they judge most conducive to
God's glory, and the happiness of all those under their Jurisdiction, by
promoting and preserving Peace, Unity, and Charity. Therefore that all persons
who live under their Authority, are bound in Conscience to submit to those
Determinations: and from thence-forward to esteem that, which before was in its
own nature indifferent, to become necessary: because hereby many known Duties,
and particularly that of Obedience to Magistrates (without which, there can be
no happiness on Earth) are performed, to the satisfaction of an absolute and
indispensible Obligation of Conscience.

Lastly, it follows, That all men are bound in Conscience to promote and
endeavor the well-being of the Lawful Government under which they live; and,
as much as in them lies, the happiness of all Mankind even here in this life.
Nor can they follow the Dictates of true Religion or Conscience, whatever they
may pretend or imagine, who for their private Opinions, make Parties, break
Laws, despise Governments, give disturbances to the Peace and Security of their
Native Country at home, and by promoting Faction, Dissension, and Division,
give encouragement to our Enemies abroad. And by too just fears, from what has
been, of what may be again, by the same ways and artifices, to make men's minds
uneasy, and their lives unhappy. And should their Designs succeed a second
time, to involve so many millions in the calamities of War, Confusion, Ruin,
and Desolation.

These have been, and are the proper effects of Disobedience to Laws and Lawful
Authority: and let all Dissenters look well to it, for they will find, here is
no Conscience, no Religion to be found in such ways and ends, to which their
Separation and Division do most infallibly lead them.

I wish I could conclude this Discourse with the most persuasive Arguments, and
irresistible Reason. That all Christian People, and especially those Dissenters
of these Nations, would seriously consider with themselves, whether these
Discords and Differences about Religious affairs will in the end lead them; and
in time turn back again, before they come to the dismal brink of those
Precipices, Misery here, and Damnation hereafter; which when by a too late
Repentance they would avoid, they will not be able.

I wish they would no longer abuse that glorious name of Conscience, to
countenance those Irreligious practices, of Disobedience, Uncharitableness,
Dissension and Separation.

Let them consider, what it is in this World that is most desirable; and
whether they do not act point blank contrary to their own Interest and
Happiness, both here and hereafter; and directly against the public Good of
the Community of which they are Members; and whether they may not justly fear,
that by these dangerous and unlawful practices, they should so far exasperate
Authority, as to exercise its utmostrigors and severities upon them, as being
out of all hopes to reclaim them by gentle means, and justly jealous of their
malicious, secret, and ill designs, in reality against the State, though the
pretense be only against the present Church and its Government.

Let them consider, that if they desire to have peace within their private
Walls, and plenteousness within their stately Palaces; if they desire to enjoy
quiet of mind at home, tranquillity, peace, and unity one amongst another; that
Justice should run down as a River, and Righteousness us a mighty Stream. That
Truth should spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness look down from Heaven.
That Mercy and Truth should meet together, Righteousness and Peace should kiss
each other; and that glory may dwell in our Land. If they desire to be safe
from intestine and domestic troubles, secure from Foreign force and invasion:
to be loved, respected, and honored by their Friends and Allies; dreaded by
their greatest Enemies; to be great in Riches, great in Fame, and greater in
all Goodness and Virtue, to be the joy and glory of all Lands. If they desire
these, there is no way to obtain them, but by uniting our selves with this
common Bond, and indissoluble Chain of a good Conscience, toward God and all
men: which will teach every man his duty; keep every man quietly, peaceably,
and contentedly in his place and station; and secure unto us all those dear
Delights of Humane Nature, Peace, Property, and Religion. If they desire these,
thus must they endeavor after them; and if they will not endeavor after them,
we cannot but judge, that they do not desire them. And I am sure, if they do
not desire these blessings, both for themselves and all others, they neither
deserve them, nor any love, pity, favor, countenance or kindness; but ought to
be looked upon, not as men, but fierce and savage Beasts, Wolves, Tigers, and
Bears, given to Prey, Rapine, and Ravage; and they may easily ghess what will
follow, if once they come to be looked upon and esteemed such.

Lastly, if they have any love or kindness for their Souls, or ever hope for
eternal Salvation, it must not be expected without obedience to God, obedience
to Government, and obedience to Conscience.

After all this I will hope that those happy days will shine upon us, Psalm.
122, 3.
in which we may say, Our Jerusalem is built as a City that is compact, or at
unity with it self: And that we shall be able to sing that glorious and
triumphant Song of Praise and Thanksgiving, Psalm. 48.1.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the
mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth
is Mount Zion on the sides of the North the City of the great King. God is well
known in her Palaces as a sure Refuge.

To hasten which blessed and happy Age, let every good Christian lay to his
helping hand, and his praying heart, by endeavoring to follow the example of
the great Apostle St. Paul, which is the great Concern and Interest of every
Man, both in reference to Happiness here and hereafter, Keeping always a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward all Men.

FINIS.

