Imprimatur

Hic Liber cui Titulus (The Project of Peace, etc.)

June 12. 1678. Guill. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

THE Project of Peace, OR, UNITY of FAITH AND GOVERNMENT, The only Expedient to
Procure PEACE, BOTH Foreign and Domestique: AND To PRESERVE these NATIONS From
the DANGER OF Popery, and Arbitrary Tyranny.

By the Author of the Countermine.

Is there no Balm in Gilead? No Physician there?

Si penes singulos Jus and Arbitrium erit Judicandi, nihil certi constitui
poterit: quin potius vacillabit tota Religio. Call. Inst.

London: Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Sign of the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. 1678.

TO THE DISSENTERS FROM THE Church of ENGLAND, OF WHAT NAMES or DISTINCTIONS
SOEVER.
AS it is very Possible, that nothing will be less Welcome to you than these
Papers, so contrary both to your Inclinations, and what you believe your
Interest: So, it may be, nothing is less customary than Dedications of this
Nature. But since I neither propose to my self the Hopes of any Patrons
Beneficence, nor can submit to such unmanly Complyances, as are usually the
Effects of such Hopes and Expectations; I have rather chosen to Address my self
to you; where even the Hope of a Charitable Reception is scarcely to be hoped
for, as the Reward of my Charity: And where the Flattery of Swelling Hyperboles
would prove as false, and unsuccessful to me, as to Millions, who have made
large promises to themselves of Recompenses and Gratifications, for that
Gentiler way of Begging: And of all the World, it would be most Pernicious to
You, who have been too long accustomed to your own, and the dangerous
Flatteries of your Party.

There is nothing that is at all times more Welcome to the World, than Peace.
Pacem te poscimus Omnes. But most Men would be Conquerors, and oblige the World
by giving it upon their own Terms: And there are but few who will be content to
receive it as Christians, upon God's Terms and Conditions. Here I have
endeavored to Manifest the true Foundations of a solid and a lasting Peace:
Which are Faith, Unity, Government, and Obedience to the Laws of God and Men. A
Peace capable of rendering the Universe Happy; and any particular Society of Men
prosperous here, and Glorious hereafter in the Peaceful Regions of Joy and
Immortality.

I am not ignorant of your Plea of Zeal and Sufferings. But must the Church of
England be allowed nothing for hers? Has not She, by your means, been forced to
drink the very dregs of your Animosity; whilst like the Children of Edom, in
the day of her Calamity, You cried, Down with her, Psalm. 137.8.
Down with her even to the ground? Did you ever suffer such Persecution from
Her, as She has suffered from you? Whose Zeal therefore or Afflictions must
entitle them to the Character of the truer Church? Would you Establish the
Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth? So would She, only with this Difference,
that what you would effect by the Rude Method of Force and Violence, the Power
of the Sword; She labors to do by the Power of Persuasion, and the Spirit of
Meekness; as her Treatment of you now She is in Power, so far from Retaliation,
or Revenge, does abundantly testify, to the Shame of your former Cruelty, and
present Obstinacy, and endeavors to compass and effect her Ruin. Is She
therefore Criminal for endeavoring that Lawfully, which you would, and do, and
as you persuade the World, are bound in Conscience to do, Per fas and Nefas,
either Lawfully, or Unlawfully, it matters not? is not the same Obligation of
Conscience, and far greater and a truer Conscience upon her? And if one must be
satisfied, whose rather, Hers which is True and properly Conscience, or yours,
which is only your Private, and uncertain Opinion, clothed with that Venerable
Name? Your Way of Establishing this Worship has been notoriously guilty of
Rebellion, Disorders, Confusion, and many Evil Works. The Civil State of
Affairs has been ruined and overturned; Houses have been made Desolate, and
left without Inhabitant; Churches have been robbed, defaced, abused,
demolished; Holy things set apart and dedicated to the Service of God, and so
made Holy, have been profaned. The Church of England is innocent of any such
Crimes: The infamous Brand of Rebellion, Sedition, Tumults, Sacriledg, or
Rapine, were never burnt upon her hand: She endeavors to prevent this for the
Present and the Future, by teaching all men their just Duty toward God and
toward Man, and obliges them to the Performance of it: You call this
Persecution, and Hate her for it. This may be Zeal in you, but it is not
according to the knowledge of God.

She imposes some Methods and certain Directions, in their own Nature
confessedly indifferent, only in order, and with no other Design than for
Decency, avoiding Confusion, and to bring all Christians to maintain the Unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. You refuse these Means, and therefore the
Great End of Christian Religion, and Religion it self. You prefer your own Way
and Means before Hers; and by Obstructing Peace, pretend that her Impositions
are inconducive to those Excellent Ends; when as in Truth, it is not their want
of Efficacious aptness, but your want of Will, and your traversing them, by an
obstinate Disobedience, that frustrates their desired Effects.

You quarrel her Commands, and call them Traditions of Men, and Will Worship;
when in reality yours is so: And it is perfectly, because you are not permitted
to have your own Wills in the Worship of God, that makes you Accuse Her of what
you are most horribly guilty of your selves. She appoints nothing but what is
agreeable to the Will and Word of God, and the Primitive Usage of the Church:
You term those Determinations, Antichristian, Popish, Superstitious; As if God
Almighty, whose Word and Rules She follows, where he does not please your
Humor, or suit your Interest, or Designs, were Popishly inclined; As if the
Scriptures in declaring for Episcopacy, were Antichristian; As if the best and
purest Ages of the Church, and the whole Succession of Saints and Martyrs were
Superstitious; Because many of them Bishops, and all of them Worshipping God,
at least as to the Main, according to Her Way and Method. Whereas, it is you
that are Popish, while you endeavor to Obtrude upon us your own Infallibility;
It is you who are Antichristian, who ruin the Foundation of all Christianity,
Faith, Government, a Catholic Church, Obedience, Charity, and Unity; It is
you who are Superstitious, (if (...), a needless Fear of any thing in Religion,
be Superstition,) whilst you start at an Innocent Rite, as if it were a
Goblin; And for fear of a Ceremony, run from the Church, as if it were hanted
with Evil Spirits: And though you strain as if you were afraid of being Choked
at these Gnats, yet you can swallow the Camel of plain and barefac't
Disobedience; That goes smoothly over your Palate, being gilded over with the
Title of Religion. You call Rebellion, Reformation; Schism, and Separation,
Godliness; Division from the Church, Communion, and Union with God. You put
Darkness for Light, and Worship the blackest Crimes, and Vices, in the habit of
Virtue, Piety, and true Religon.

Thus, whilst you spy the Moat in your Mothers Eyes, and would pull that and
them too out, to make her see clearly, you never consider the Beam that is in
your own: And whilst you Vehemently accuse others of Worshipping God in vain,
according to the Traditions of Men, you never regard how you make the
Commandments of God of no Effect by your Traditions. Matt. 15.6.
God says, Honor the King, and thou shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy
People; Obey Magistrates, etc. Your Traditions say, Dishonor him by
Disobedience; Insinuate Jealousies and evil Surmisings concerning him and his
Government. Your Actions are a thousand Tongues, and every Tongue a Trumpet to
Proclaim your thoughts. And however with your Lips you may pretend to honor
the King, and with your Mouths to draw near to God, your Heart is, in reality,
far from both: Your Will is your God, the Idol of your Heart, which you set up
and Worship.

For what, I pray, is your way of Worship, but Tradition from the Heads of your
Party? Is there ever a Word in Scripture for your long Extempore Prayers, full,
not of Tolerabiles ineptiae, with which Calvin charges our Liturgy, but of
Intolerable Tautologies, vain Repetitions, rash Expressions, and indigested
Matter? Christ is Positive against them; Use them not, says he, as the
Heathens, who think to be heard for their (...), their much speaking. The Wise
King, who had Surveyed all the Vanities of the World, makes this not only a
Vanity, Eccl. 5.1, 2.
but a dangerous Rashness, and a Sacrifice of Fools. And yet you use it,
commend and applaud it, as the only way pleasing and acceptable to God.

Is the Scripture clear, that there ought to be no Bishops in the Church? Or
that Lay Elders, who understand neither Sense, nor it may be English, and in
some places, who cannot write their Name, should yet be empowered to Define and
Determine in Matters of Faith? Are you any where forbidden to wear a Surplice;
or to use the Sign of the Cross; or to bury Christians in hope of Charity, and
Resurrection to Eternal Life? Or to pray in set and appointed Words, which is
true praying by the Spirit, when we pray with understanding also, knowing what
will be said? If these be not Gods Commands or Prohibitions, they are Yours;
and if they are not in Scripture, as I am sure they are not, they are not only
the Commandments and Traditions of Men; but of Men, who have no Power to
Command, or Impose the most indifferent thing. And yet you persuade all Men,
every where, that they owe Obedience to these; forgetting that God is to be
Obeyed rather than Men; and that he commands you to Obey those that have the
Rule over you.

If you will be Followers of God as Dear Children, you must, if it be possible,
and as much as in you lies, be Followers of Peace with all Men; much more with
your Superiors, both in Church and State: But this is very possible for you to
do. And that it is not only Possible, but Honest, and Necessary, and your Duty,
the Ensuing Papers will plainly inform you: To them therefore I refer you; they
were designed for you; And if you will Esteem me your Enemy, because I tell you
the Truth without Flattery, Interest, or Partiality, yet I had rather be so
Esteemed, than be so in Reality; by Skinning over your Festred Gangreen with
words smooth as Oil; Whereas in Truth it ought to be laid open, to prevent the
further Eating of the Canker. And this is the only way that I know, to approve
my self to be,

Your most Affectionate And real Friend.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. The INTRODVCTION. CHAP. II. OF the Obstacles of Truth and Peace; The
necessity of removing them, before we can obtain the other. The great value all
men have for Truth, and for Imposture under its Name. The first Obstacle, Self
Interest; of its prevalency upon Jews, Pagans, Mahumetans, the Romish Church,
and all Dissenters. p. 10 CHAP. III. Of the second Obstacle to Peace, Truth,
and Unity, Prejudice and Prepossession of Mind. The Nature and Effects of
Prejudice. Of Ceremonies. The reason why hated. Of the meaning of the word
Ceremony. Some Ceremonies absolutely necessary in all Religious Worship. All
not Popery which Papists do. Of Education and Custom, how they are the
Foundation of Prejudices. p. 25 CHAP. IV. Of Pride and Ambition: most dangerous
Obstacles of Truth and Peace, because Vices of Temper and Inclination. The
Difficulty of subduing these sins of Complexion. Religion made their usual
disguise. The danger of them manifested in a short Character of Oliver
Cromwell. Of the danger of these in Churchmen. The Methods of such Persons as
are infected with them, to advance themselves to dignity. A way to discover
such fiery spirits from the Peacable spirit of Christianity. p. 40 CHAP. V. Of
the necessity of Union; That the only way to Establish Happiness in any Nation.
The Intent of Religion the Happiness of Mankind here in this Life as well as in
a future state. That the truest Religion which advances this great Intention
for which God gave it. Of the true Church. Of degrees of Purity in Churches. Of
the Seven Churches of Asia. Distinction and Coordination of National Churches
proved. Faith the Common Bond of Union in the Catholic Church. Of the
Independency of National Churches one from another in point of Limits and
Jurisdiction. How the Peace of the Church Universal is thereby preserved. p.
64. CHAP. VI. Objections against the Independency or Coordination of National
Churches. Why it cannot be admitted in several Churches in the same Nation? It
takes away the Power and Sovereignty of the Prince. It is the Ruin of the
Society. Of the Foreign Protestant Churches. The reason of their Disunion from
Rome, matter of Faith, not of Ceremony only, or of Government. p. 78. CHAP.
VII. Of Unity in Government: that it is the bond of a National Church, as Unity
in Faith is of the Catholic. The Practice of the Primitive Church. Of the
Difference about Easter. The Opinion of Irenaeus Bishop of Lions about it. A
National Church an entire Polity of Christian Men. The Laws of the Church and
State, mutual and recipocral, design the same End, viz. the Happiness of the
Society. Disobedience to either is so to both. All Society as well as Happiness
destroyed by Disunion. The necessity of Unity in Government upon a Religious
account. No Charity without it, and without Charity no Religion. p. 96. CHAP.
VIII. Of the Power of the Keys, by Excommunication and Absolution. How rendered
impracticable by Tollerating many Churches in the same Nation. Of the Decay of
Christian Piety. That, and the Growth of Errors must lie at the door of
Separatists and Schismatics, who by frustrating this Power, render it
contemptible; and set open the door to all Impiety and Atheism. p. 122. CHAP.
IX. Of the Necessity of Unity in point of Government, as well as Faith in a
National Church, upon the account of Civil Policy. Such Unity the Design of all
Religion in Reference to Humane Society. No Happiness without it. Government
appointed by God with an Intention to promote this Design, and therefore
Disobedience a damnable sin. p. 149 CHAP. X. A further discovery of the
Impolitickness of Disunion in point of Church Government. No Domestique Peace
to be hoped for without it, but perpetual Quarrels under pretense of Religion
and Conscience. The Rise and Spring of Fears and Jealousies from the several
Interests of Dissenters. p. 165 CHAP. XI. The mischief of Disunion in respect
of Foreign Affairs. It Weakens any Nation, and Exposes them to the Arms of
their Enemies. Robs them of their Alliances and Confederations. Interest and
Mutual Support, the Foundation of all Leagues. Different Churches in the same
Nation incline People to Democracy. p. 190 CHAP. XII. Of Tolleration. Some
Animadversions upon a Book entitled, The Advocate of Conscience, Liberty, in
reference to all Dissenters. p. 203 CHAP. XIII. A further Examination of the
same Author in his particular Plea for the Papists. A short View of and Answer
to their Boasting to be our Apostles. Of their Antiquity, Succession, Visions,
Miracles, etc. Of the Oath of Supremacy. Of the Powder Treason or Fifth of
November. p. 229 CHAP. XIV. Of the Difficulty of Understanding the Modes of
things sensible, much more those of the Intellectual World. The
Unreasonableness of Obtruding things not certain, as De Fide. Of Faith. It must
be such a Condition of Salvation as All may perform, because All have a Title
to the Common Salvation. The Scriptures the only Rule of this Faith, which is
the necessary Condition of being saved. Of the difference between a Rule and a
Guide. p. 248 CHAP. XV. Of Episcopacy. Proved to be of Divine Institution; and
the Government appointed over the Church by the Holy Ghost. The Testimony of
Scripture. Of Ignatius the Disciple of the beloved Apostle St. John. From the
constant Use and Consent of the Church in all Ages. Of Aerius; the Reason of
his Heresy. All Heretics against Government. The Doctrine of Calvin, of the
necessity of some to determine Differences. p. 276 CHAP. XVI. Of the Judge of
Controversies. No Humane Authority the Judge of Faith. God only Infallible.
That part of the Catholic Church which is Militant may Err. The difference
between not Erring, and the Impossibility of Erring. The Rulers of the Church
the Interpreters of Scripture. In all things not absolutely of the Essence of
Faith, which nothing can be that is not Evident in Scripture, either in plain
Words or necessary Consequence. All private men Excluded from Interpretation of
Scripture. p. 302 CHAP. XVII. The CONCLUSION. p. 317
The Project of PEACE.
CHAP. I. The INTRODUCTION.
THEY must certainly have little good Nature, and far less Christian Charity,
who are not most sensibly afflicted for the miserable Distractions, the
deplorable Differences, and unnatural Divisions which are among those who
profess the glorious Religion of Christ Jesus: That Heart must be more flinty
than a Stoick's, which does not bleed it self, and supply the Eyes with Tears,
whilst Christians (who by the Command of their Great but Meek and Tender Lord,
ought to be harmless as Doves, and innocent as Lambs) are transformed by
preposterous Zeal, and pious Pretenses, into Wolves and Tygres; and with a
fierce and savage fury, mutually Worry and Devour one another: nay, even exceed
the madness of those Brutes, and divest themselves of all Humanity, to put on
this new Nature (as they term it) of Religion. For, Saevis inter se convenit
Vrsis. The Greenland Bears are kind one to another. But to the shame of those
who call themselves Christians, (but are of the Synagogue of Satan that
Aboriginal Murderer) men are not so modest as to be confined within the limits
of making true the Horrid Adage, Homo homini Lupus, that one man is a Wolf to
devour another, but they proceed to the utmost extremity of Malice and Madness,
and become Homo homini Demon, Devils to damn one another, not Anthropophagi,
or Canibals, but Psychophagi, feeding upon humane souls: turning that innocent
Wisdom of the Serpent, which our Lord commands to preserve our selves, into the
restless Malice of the Old Serpent, to destroy others, Souls, Bodies, and
Estates; and to infuse the Mortal Poison of Adders, which is under their Lips,
into the Souls of Credulous Men, through their Ears and Eyes, with the pretext
of Piety and true Religion. The Glorious Company of Saints and Martyrs now
triumphant in Heaven, went thither through a Red Sea of Blood, but it was their
own which was shed by the cruel hands of Heathenish Persecutors, who did it
ignorantly in Unbelief; and with joy it was, that they set their seal to the
Testimony of Jesus and his Truth in their dearest blood, Emptying their Veins,
that their Souls might be filled with a glorious Immortality. But now
Christians who all profess one Common Name and Faith, think they do not set to
their seal to that Truth, unless they shed the blood of one another: and that
most commonly for differences in Opinion, for Words, Names, Fancies, and
Conjectures, at least if we may believe there is no more in the bottom, which
they conceal, than there is in what they pretend openly for the ground of the
Quarrel. Oh Barbarous Christianity! Oh Heathenish Impiety! In the importunate
Crowd of such mournful thoughts and considerations, of former Experience of our
late Shipwreck, and fear of future Events, which the Noisy Tempest that seemed
to threaten our Crazy and bruised Vessel, suggested to my mind; my Soul was
overwhelmed with Grief and fear, and ready to sink into Despair, both at the
remembrance of the past, and the terrible Consequences of that Inevitable Ruin,
which Truth it self has pronounced against a house and a Kingdom divided
within, and therefore against themselves; and distracted by Intestin Discords.

THE prophetique Caution of the Apostle came presently into my mind: Gal. 5.15
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another. I saw, me thought, with Horror, the too plain truth of it in those
once Golden Candlesticks, Vid. Mr. Smiths Travels to the Seven Churches of Asia.
the Seven Churches of Asia; who by their Discords were laid in ashes; and are
the habitations of Owls and Dragons, or far worse Inhabitants, the sordid
Worshippers of that Great Imposter Mahomet. I could not stand upon the Brink of
such an amasing Precipice without extreme Horror, nor see the Cause so Evident,
without a dreadful apprehension of the Tragical Issue. Which made me break out
into the Passionate Wish of the afflicted Jeremy: Oh that my Head were Waters,
Jer. 9.1, 2.
and mine Eyes a fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night for the
daughter of my People! Oh that I had in the Wilderness a lodging Place of a
wayfaring man, that I might leave my People, and go from them, for they are an
Assembly of treacherous Men. For I found my self like the Royal Prophet; Psalm.
55.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
My heart was sore pained within me, fear and trembling came upon me; then said
I, Oh that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest;
I would wander far off, and remain in the Wilderness; I would make haste to
escape from the windy storm and tempest. But what, said I, will Tears avail;
though I could raise them to a Deluge? can they atone the Sins, or drown the
Miseries of a Nation? Oh blessed Jesus! thou great and compassionate Shepherd,
look down from thy glorious Habitation upon this miserable Flock, which with
thy precious blood thou have redeemed: pour out thine Indignation upon the
Heathen, who either have not known thy Name, or Hate it. When shall that happy
Unity and perfect Charity bless thy Church, in being one Flock under thee, that
great and only Shepherd? when shall the breaches of Zion be made up? when shall
Jerusalem, by being at Unity in it self, become the Glory of the whole Earth,
the City of the great King? I begun then to meditate upon the Goodness of that
wise Physician who gives Medicine to heal their Sickness, and makes men to be
of one mind in a House: But alas! when I came to put our Sins (and especially
our Ingratitudes for Mercies that were Miracles) into the Balance against Gods
Mercy, I found but too true what the same afflicted Prophet says of himself,
in a Case not much different from ours; Jer. 8.18.
When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart was faint within me; we
looked for Peace but no good came; for a time of Health, but behold trouble.
Long have we hoped to see good Days, and expected better Times; but the
harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not delivered. Nay rather, our
Symptoms appear more dangerous, and our wound almost incurable. With which
consideration, I burst out into the sensible Expression of the holy
disconsolate, in the following Verse: For the hurt of the Daughter of my People
am I hurt; I am black; astonishment has taken hold on me! I had no sooner
uttered those Words, but my Eye was Encountered with the succeeding Expression;
Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why then is not the
health of the daughter of my People recovered? Yes certainly (said I) there is
Balm in Gilead, but where is the Physician that shall apply it? The wound is
deep, and Fester'd; and will not endure the least, the gentlest hand to touch
it. They who are sick even to the Extremest Agonies and Convulsions, believe
themselves in the most perfect state of Health; they reject, contemn, and
despise the Physician, and his applications; and though they are in the most
dangerous Delirium, they are so strongly possessed of this belief, that they
think the Physician mad and brainsick; and are so far from receiving his advice
and skill, that they cry out, He wants it himself, and they pretend to give it.

I knew that many there were who had attempted the charitable design in vain; I
knew their Talents far exceed my Mite; I can give but all, they can give no
more, and that I will give. I know my Lord will expect an account, a strict one
from me; Matt. 25.27.
and to receive his own with Usury; why should I then hide my Lords money in
the Earth? There may be as much Charity in a Mite as in a Million; all will
help the treasury toward the rebuilding of the Temple: and God who knows all
things, knows, I think it too small to boast of, or to give to be seen of men.
They who have received more, may be more Liberal; and I hope they will. Thus
did I struggle with my troubled thoughts; but at the last I considered that of
the Incomparably wisest of Men: Eccl. 9.11.
I returned (says he) and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the swift,
nor the Battle to the strong; and my hopes received a strange assistance, and
my Courage a reinforcement by the Parable of the poor Man, Verse. 14.15.
who delivered the City from the iminent danger with which it was surrounded;
Nor did the reflection of so great a Judge, upon the poor Man's going unrewarded
for his service, discourage me. For since I dare neither pretend to his
Character, nor success; I am secured against the discontents and danger of
Oblivion. The Glory of good actions, if they succeed, is Reward enough for
innocent Minds; and if they fail, the satisfaction of having attempted them, is
beyond all other Recompenses; and I may truly say, my greatest fear is, lest I
should not be able to accomplish the Good Design, which I do so passionately
desire to do: My Intention is my Satisfaction, and if it will procure my Pardon
from some, it is beyond my Expectation: and however, I am assured, that
whatsoever reception or Effect my Intentions may find amongst Men, yet that
even this inconsiderable Cup of cold Water, Matt. 10. ult.
shall not fail of a proportionate reward, from him who recompenses sincere
Intentions and poor Endeavors (for all our best Actions are no better) done in
Faith and Charity, with transcendant degrees of real Glory.

IN the Name therefore of God Omnipotent, I will Enter upon this Rugged way,
which is therefore Uneven, because few there are that tread it: and in my
Travels through these Regions of good and bad Report, I will endeavor to
Follow the bright Star of Truth; and to avoid the dangerous Rocks of Partiality
and Passion: I will not Court the Kindness even of that Party which I own, by
unmanly, and much less Unchristian Flattery, nor treat those who are Enemies to
themselves and truth, with heat and Animosity, as if they were my own. And if
at any time I may appear transported, too sharp or Rugged, I desire it may be
remembered, that the Samaritan was no less Compassionate or Charitable, for the
sharpness of his Wine, than for the smoothness of his Oil; the one was as
necessary to cleanse the Wounds, as the other to heal them; and both previous
to his binding them up. All the Request I have to those who at present differ
from me in Opinion is, That if I speak truth, I may be Credited, and they
persuaded to Embrace the same Design which all good Christians are bound to
promote as well as I, if they expect Salvation; viz. Peace on Earth, and good
will toward Men, as well as Glory to God on high. And if I be mistaken, since
I do not Err of Malicious Wickedness, that they will pity me, and inform me
better. No person shall more greedily Embrace a clearer beam of Divine Truth,
that darling of my Soul; nay, I will further engage, that though it comes
disguised and wrapped up in Calumnies and reproaches (the most disadvantageous
dress to apparel Persuasion in) yet will I not refuse to Embrace her. Nor
because it comes from my Enemies, and with all the Circumstances which may make
it appear so, will I therefore become theirs, and my own, by being an Enemy to
Truth. The sword which was designed to kill, may sometimes by a happy accident
Cure, by cutting the Imposthume; and though the Lancet be sharp, yet if it
Cures my Feavor, by discharging the Malignant humor of my blood, I shall not
refuse the assistance I may receive from such a profitable Wound; and would be
glad to escape a Shipwreck, even by the Rock upon which I am split.

CHAP. II.
HE that will Build secure, must first clear the Foundation; and if he finds
either Sand or Rubbish, he must remove them; and not think his time or labor
lost, which is spent in sinking deep to find a firm and solid Bottom, where he
intends to set a weighty Pile, and raise a lasting Fabric. For otherwise he
can expect no better success, than the foolish builder in the Parable, Matt.
7.26.
who built upon the Sand, which was not able to endure the violent shock of the
noisy Tempest; but when the Wind and the Rain made their attaque upon it, it
presently Fell, and great was his Folly that built it, as well as the fall of
it.

WHOSOEVER they be that will Embrace Truth, and put on Charity, the Bond of
Christian Perfection, and the fulfilling the Royal Law of Liberty, must
seriously Resolve to divest themselves of what is contrary to it; The great
inquiry of the World is that of Pilate to our Blessed Lord, Joh. 18.38.
What is truth? but with him, they scarcely put the hasty Interrogatory, before
they go out, not finding Patience enough to stay for an answer; and therefore
they take up that which first offers it self to them under that Sacred Name,
which all Impostors challenge, but none possess. And having once received the
Counterfeit Metal with that Character and Superscription, so great is the
Authority even of the Name of Truth, that it goes for Current Coin with the
Credulous; who are either Unable, or Unwilling to bring it to the Touchstone
themselves; or to suffer others, who can, to Give it the Test: Nay, so strong
and forcible are the Impressions which this Counterfeit Treasure makes in the
Minds of Men; that it is a matter of the greatest difficulty to persuade them
to relinquish it, or to change their flawy Bristol, or their fiery Flint, for a
Real Diamond, the inestimable Pearl of Price: so that you cannot go about to
undeceive and disabuse them, but they take you for a Cheat; and suspect you
guilty of a Design to Rob them of that Treasure which they value as their Life,
and it may be above it; and though you be able to prove and demonstrate that it
is only the shining and Chemical Glass of overheated Zeal, yet will they
jealously suppose all you say is only to deceive them; and that you disparage
theirs, to give a luster to your own, which they believe you would put off to
them for your own advantage.

WE must therefore endeavor to show what are the Enemies of Truth, and by
consequence, of Unity, and Charity, before we can come to discover her from the
Crowd of pretenders; for it has always been the successful industry of him who
is the Enemy of all Truth, to ruin Unity and Charity, by setting up
Counterfeits, and apparelling them like this Glorious Queen; thereby to rob her
of her Lawful Empire over the Minds of Men, and make them pay Homage to Error
and Falsehood under her Usurped Name.

THE first Enemy of Truth is self Interest. There is in all Mankind a Natural
Love to themselves, and a kindness to the present concerns of Life; and
therefore, nothing is more Common, than to make an Estimate of truth in
proportion to the advantages they possess by her; and though men talk much of
Naked Truth, yet they Generally leave the Courtship of her to Fools or
Philosophers; and Esteem that worth marrying which has the fairest Ornaments,
and the best Portion; and whoever does molest and disturb, or in their opinion
go about to divorce them from such an advantageous Alliance, shall difficultly
persuade them that he is their Friend. Men usually are as jealous of a rich and
profitable Error, which they have Espoused, as they can be of the greatest
Treasure they possess. And whosoever shall go about to persuade them out of
this, must be looked upon as an Enemy to their real happiness, of which he
would rob them under the pretense of being theirs, and the Friend of Truth:
Nay, though you be able to give them the clearest Demonstration that they shall
advantage themselves, even in these beloved Circumstances of Interest, Riches,
Honor, and Reputation; yet shall you gain little Credit by your pains, and
rarely persuade them to make an Experiment, in regard, that they look upon
their present Condition, as a most sensible certainty, but upon what you
propose, as a hazardous Contingency; and are unwilling to exchange one Bird in
the hand for two in the Bush.

DAILY Experience convinces of this; for though it is evident both to Sense and
Reason, that Temperance, Sobriety, Justice, Chastity, Fidelity, and Honesty,
are the most certain Methods whereby men may obtain Health, Reputation, Honor,
and Riches, and even long Life, to Enjoy all the Happiness of this World, yet
few there are that will venture upon the Practice of these Excellent Virtues:
the Interest of present pleasure prevails more with the Lascivious and
Intemperate; the Interest of certain, though unlawful Gain, which they do
possess, is more valuable to the Unjust, the Dishonest, Fraudulent, and
Covetous, than all the promises in Reversion, and future Expectancies that you
can make them; and they are so Enamored of these profitable Falsehoods, that
they will neither believe you, nor Truth it self: Nay, so powerful is this
Interest, that it will manage men even against the Dictates of Nature and
Common Reason; against the Infalliable Testimony of Experience; for, who is he
that does not love and value his Life above all things? and yet every month
produces many sad Examples of Men and Women, who have not been deterred from
pursuing what they thought their Interest, by Thefts, Robberies, and Murders;
though they did in every such Undertaking, run, not only a private hazard of
their Lives, from the just revenge of persons so injured by them; but the more
certain Arms of Public Justice, which in a thousand Instances, before their
Eyes, they know to have so long a reach, and so sure a stroke; and the Old
saying, Non nosti longas Regibus esse Manus? has not been able to restrain
Ambitious Minds from profitable Treason, and the Great Interest (as they have
falsely thought) of Rebellion against their Sovereign.

It was with this Ingine that the mistaken Jews gave the first shock to
Christian Religion, in the Person of our Savior; and though they in reality
confirmed it, by fulfilling the Prophecies concerning him, in his Araignment,
Trial, Sufferings, and Death; yet was that an Effect of the Wise and
overruling Providence; and no part of their Intention; their Design was their
own Interest, the preservation of their Power, and the Safety of their State
and Nation: for, when he had done as great a Miracle as it was possible, Joh.
1.8.47.
in raising Lazarus after he had been dead four days, and that Martha told him,
Lord by this time he stinketh; Nay, after they themselves did acknowledge not
only this, but many Miracles to have been done by him; yet Powerful Interest,
not only closed their Eyes against the bright beams of Divinity, which broke
forth through the Clouds of his Flesh, and contemptible Condition; against
those Gracious Words which proceeded out of that mouth, which spoak as never
man spoak; but hurried them on obstinately, blindly, and in all appearance
maliciously to contrive, compass, and procure his ignominious Death: for, then
gathered the Chief Priests, and the Pharisees a Council, and said; What do we?
for this Man does many Miracles; if we let him thus alone, all Men will believe
on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place and Nation. Upon
which followed the Politic (and beyond his sense, Prophetic) Determination of
Caiaphas; Te know nothing at all, nor consider that it is Expedient for us (it
is our great Interest) that one man should die, and that the whole Nation
perish not; and from that Day forth, they took Counsel together to put him to
death. And this Resolution grounded upon Interest, they pursued with that
Animosity and Violence, that neither the Innocence, nor Miracles of his Life,
the Justification of Pilate, who openly pronounced him innocent, and that he
found in him no fault at all; could prevail for his Release, but that rather a
Tumult was made, and they cried out, Away with him, Away with him; Crucify
him, Crucify him; preferring a Thief and a Murderer to the Privilege of their
Custom of having one released at the Feast: Nay, even Pilate himself, perhaps
terrified with the dream of his Wife, to have nothing to do with that Just man,
yet contrary to his avowed Judgment, as appears in that it is said, he sought to
release him, yet was hurried down the swift torrent of Tumult and Interest, to
condemn the Innocent; for no sooner had the Jews cried out, If thou let this
man go, thou art no Friend to Caesar, for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks
against Caesar; though he knew the Kingdom of Christ was not of this World, and
therefore stood not in Competition with Caesar for the Empire; Yet when Pilate
heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the Judgment seat;
and though not without a scossing Reluctance, (What, shall I Crucify your
King?) he gave Sentence upon the Innocent, and delivered him unto them to be
Crucified: in that Action showing, how much he was, not a Friend to Caesar's
Power, but, a slave to his own Interest in the Esteem of Caesar, by whose
favor he possessed the Government of Jary, and and that he could rather
violate the Laws of Equity and Justice, disoblige his dearest Relations, and
slight the Importunities of his own Conscience, than not worship this Idol of
his own Interest.

A most notable Instance of the Power of Interest we have in that giddy
Commotion which happened at Ephesus, upon the account of the Gospel; where
though the crafty Silversmith made the people believe that all was Gold that
glister'd; and cunningly insinuated, that he was the great Patron of their
Ancient Religion, which was in Danger to be lost; and therefore laid that
powerful Motive uppermost upon his Tongue; yet Interest was at the bottom, both
of his Heart and Design. For a certain man named Demetrius, a Silversmith,
Acts. 19.24.
which made silver shrines (Medals bearing the stamp of Diana's Temple) for
Diana; brought no small gain unto the Craftsmen; whom he called together, with
the workmen of like Occupation; and said unto them, Ye know that by this Craft
we have our Wealth; This was the main Ground of the Quarrel, that of Religion
comes in only to give the better Color to the Mutiny with, a colateral
Moreover: Moreover, you see, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout
all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much People, saying, that
they be no Gods which are made with hands; so that not only this our Craft is
in danger to be set at naught, (there it was the shoe pinch't, this was the
principal Motive of his Discontent, and his main argument against Christianity)
but also, that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be despised, and
her Magnificence should be destroyed, whom Asia and all the World worshippeth.
And of the same stamp where those of whom St. Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 6.5.
who supposed Gain was Godliness, Interest, true Religion, from whom he
commands therefore to withdraw.

It Is this Interest which seems to be the great obstacle to the Conversion of
the Mahumetans and Pagans to the Faith of Christ, and the Truth of the Gospel.
For though the Vulgar amongst them, are, by reason of their stupid Ignorance
and Custom, wrapped up in clouds of darkness, and have not a Capacity of
Understanding, much elevated above that of Brutes; yet doubtless those of
better Condition, even by their conversations with the Christians, cannot but
have better conceptions of things; and however they may varnish over this
Obstinacy to their ridiculous Faith and sordid Principles, with the pretense of
Zeal for the Law of their Great Prophet; yet doubtless finding the security of
their Absolute and Arbitrary Dominion, and Tyranny over their Subjects,
receives an Establishment from this blind Obedience and powerful Ignorance;
that Consideration sways them against all the Reason and Arguments in the World.

NOR will the Reman Religion Escape the danger of this overpoise of Interest.
It Is this which has hitherto been the Obstacle to all the Endeavors which have
been used, or proposed, to reform both those grosser Errors which they have
introduced into Faith and good Manners; and those lesser profitable Follies,
which have crept into their Church, by the back-stairs of Advantage, Riches,
and Esteem. For by laying it down as a certain Foundation of Faith and Divine
Verity, that the Pope is Supreme Head of the Church; above the Scriptures,
above Councels, the Infallible Rule and sole Judge of all Controversies; they
necessarily Captivate all the Laity, with the chains of blind Obedience and
implicit Faith: and that necessary and even Meritorious Ignorance, especially
of the Scriptures, which they commend and encourage; together with the easy
Exercise of Religion, which is made Satisfactory, Meritorious, and
Supererrogating without the Intention, or even Understanding of the Mind; the
Mercinary way of Expiating Guilt, and Purchasing Heaven, after all the
Enjoyments of a sensual, lascivious, and debauched Life, by Confession here,
and Masses bought to be said hereafter; and at the worst the pains of
Purgatory; all which Doctrins bring in Treasure and Authority to the Priests
and Church, which generally shares with them in the purchase, and permits them
not to have lawful Heirs, that so she may be their Executrix; these and a
multitude of the same Nature, which are made matters of Faith, and Sacraments
in their Church, essential to Salvation; Fasten on the Manacles, and make their
Proselytes voluntarily entertain a slavery, so agreeable to their Wishes and
Desires. For who would not like a Religion which permits him to Enjoy all the
Liberties of the World and the Flesh (though renounced by his Baptismal Vow)
and yet puts him out of the danger of Hell and Damnation; that allows him to
serve his Mammon of Unrighteousness, and yet expect a Reward from God, whom he
may at the same time serve (though Christ says Nay to it) and please with a few
random Prayers, repeated only with the labor of the Lips; which at one Heaven
according to their Quantity, and are Efficacious by their Multiplicity; who
would not be a Papist, who can believe, that though he live all the Year like a
Heathen in Sensuality and open Impiety; yet if at Easter he make Confession to
a Priest, he shall thereby clear the score betwixt God and his Soul, and be a
good Catholic; though he is no sooner parted from his Ghostly Father, but he
repeats the same Crimes, or it may be worse, and returns to the former Vomit
and wallowing in the Mire, perfectly upon the encouragement of the same Remedy?
who would not be such a Catholic? when a few knocks upon his Breast shall be
Contrition, and some austerities and hardships practiced upon the Body, shall
satisfy for the sin of his Soul; and the most flagitious Offenders may hope
for, and be certain of Reconciliation to God, and yet never be sensible of the
severe Agonies of Spirit, and the insupportable Wounds of Conscience, the
dreadful Horrors of a guilty Mind? Is not this a soft and easy way to Heaven,
which makes the Way so broad, and the Gate so wide, which is set open by St.
Peter's Keys, that it is impossible any man should either Miss the one, or not
Enter the other, who is not either so miserably Poor, or so wretchedly
Covetous, or so great an Unthrift, or so destitute of Charitable Friends, as
not to be able to leave a small sum of Money for Masses and Dirges to reskue
him from the Pains of Purgatory. O dangerous Simony, which sells Heaven, and
the Holy Ghost (without which the other cannot be had) for Money! And if the
Pope has such a Power to relieve the Quick and the Dead, he is the most
Uncharitable person (to say no worse) in the World, who when for a word of his
Mouth he can Save so many Souls from the Horrid Pains of Purgatory, will not do
it unless he be hired to it; the Good Shepherd lays down his Life for the
Flock; but the Hireling will not spare his Breath to Cool the Flaming Tongues
of those who suffer such Intolerable Pains, unless he be paid for his.

AND if at any time the more Learned or Intelligent, come to discover the pious
Frauds, the Great Severities which are made use of against them, if they do but
mutter against the Church, the Fear of loosing their Lives or Estates, and
wearing the Infamous Brand of Heretics, is the Interest which seals their Lips
in silence.

AND for the Clergy, the High Honors to which they may arive, and the dazeling
Luster of the Tripple Diadem shines so full upon their Eyes, that it takes away
their sight; and the innumerable ways of obtaining Dignities, Riches, Esteem,
and Veneration with the Laity, generally prove too strong Charms to be resisted
by feeble Nature. For who would turn a poor Protestant Priest, when thereby he
shall be so great a looser? when thereby he shall part with all the fair
Revenue of Masses for the Dead, Money for Pardons, Indulgences, Licenses,
Dispensations, and the more than Almighty Privilege, and Miracle of making his
Creator, and transubstantiating a poor piece of Bread into the real body of the
Son of God? when he must renounce all hopes and pretensions to the Red Cap; the
Title of Eminency, and the Princely state of S. E. R. Cardinal; the next step
to Vice Deus, and the Supreme Honor of the Triple Miter? and when in Exchange
he must confine his Ambition to (it may be) a small Benefice, and a great
Charge, in his vigilant Cure of Souls; a heavy Burden, and it may be a light
Gain; and which if he does endeavor faithfully to discharge, shall procure him
in the room of Love, Honor, and Esteem, Hatred, Scorn, Contempt, and
Reproaches. And when the highest that can be hoped, is but a Pastoral Staff,
and humble Mitre, the Load and Envy of Government, the Constant Care of the
Churches, and a certain Revenue of Malice, for the little Temporal Honor, and
Estate which it may be is but just sufficient to maintain Charity, and
Hospitality, those Honorable Characters as well as Expensive Duties of a
Primitive Bishop.

I could heartily wish, that even this Interest, and the Revenue of the Church,
could not be objected against any Dissenters, as a former Motive that induced
them to Ruin her, that so they might Rob her; and that the same Spur did not
still continue their Career, in the same Design; I know they will disown it;
and I wish we could believe them and our senses at the same time. I wish the
advantages they make of Tones, Phrases, long Prayers, sanctified Looks, and
Religious Disobedience, with which they please the Factious, shelter the
Seditious, and agrandize themselves both in Riches and Reputation; might not be
objected against Dissenters, as a greater Reason for their Nonconformity, than
any real Power of Conscience. And they give a just occasion to suspect that
they have not a Conscience void of offense toward God and Man, who dare daily
break the Laws of the one and the other; and make no scruple to wound the
Consciences of others both weak and strong, under pretense of keeping their own
from being wounded; which is just so charitable, as for me to wound another
man, and say it was in my own defense, and lest he should have injured me.

So that it appears how great an influence Interest has upon the minds of Men,
to obstruct the Entertainment of Truth, and that therefore in Order to obtain
Peace and Unity, there is an absolute necessity that Men should lay aside the
Clog of self Interest.

CHAP. III.
IT is not Interest alone that obstructs the happy Union that ought to be
amongst Christians; and occasions those Divisions amongst them; but there is
also a necessity, that Men should divest themselves of their prejudices, and
prepossessions of mind: for these do always keep those Differences alive; and
are the constant food and nourishment which does not only support, but increase
and augment them; till they grow at last beyond all hopes and possibility of
Composure. Would all persons endeavor heartily to take the Beam out of their
own Eyes, they would see clearly to remove the Moats out of their Brothers; and
would hereby advance a large step toward Reconciliation, by coming to a good
Understanding, and a clear discovery of what it is they differ about:
Controversies being many times in mere Words rather than in Substance, and are
rather the Effects of prejudice and misunderstanding one another meaning than
in the things themselves about which we seem to disagree: for Prejudice is an
ill Opinion of Persons or Things, arising from a false judgment which we
entertain concerning them; which makes them appear to us of monstrous and
deformed Shapes and Colors; it is a certain Jaundice of the Mind, which stains
every thing with the disagreable appearances with which, not the things
themselves, but the Conceptions we have of them are vitiated; and our Judgment
by that misinformation deceived and abused: for when the Mind comes to be
infected with prejudice, it renders those things ill and unlawful, which to a
mind cleared from those obstructions and gross humors of the Understanding,
appear as in reality they are in themselves, Innocent, Good, Lawful; and many
times expedient and necessary; or however at the worst, in their own Natures
simply indifferent.

THIS is the Common Lot of all those things in Divine Worship, which are not of
the Essence, but Circumstantials of Religion; which are the things that raise
the greatest Dissentions and Differences amongst Christians. It is at once the
occasion of Wonder and of Pity, to see Christians who all agree in the Main,
Ephesians. 4.5.
That there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God the Father, of whom
are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6.
and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him; who all consent in one common End, and Design, which is Eternal Happiness
in Heaven; and one hope of this Common Salvation; that yet they should
disagree, and fall out by (and about) the Way that leads to those Blessed
Regions of Light and Immortality. When Joseph (the Type of our blessed Jesus)
had given his Brethren changes of Raiment, and Provision for their Journey, in
order to bring them out of the Land of Famine, to the Country of Goshen, it was
not an unnecessary Command which he laid upon them, Genesis 45.24.
See that ye fall not out by the Way. Should they now have fallen out into
Disputes and Differences about their Apparel, because it was not all of a Size,
Color, or Fashion; or whether they should travel the same way back again, and
not seek another? would not the one have been as ridiculous a dispute, as the
other dangerous? and yet this very Folly there are too many Guilty of; who
leaving the old Road of Charity, because their Brethren will not comply with
them in their Novel Dresses of Religion, seek out a new Road to Heaven, which
the foot of Saint or Martyr never trod before. Thus shall you see some People
start at the very word Ceremony, as if it would convey the Plague into their
Ears, and Damnation into their Souls; and yet they themselves can perform no
Religious Office of bodily Worship without it; and if St. Paul be to be
credited, God expects we should offer our bodies a living Sacrifice, Romans 12.3.
holy, and acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service.

A Ceremony is nothing more than a Solemn way or manner of performing Religious
Duties, which word some derive a Carendo, quia Religio non potest Exerceri
Caeremonijs carens, because no Religion can be performed without some
Ceremonies; though others it may be more aptly a Charitate, from that Charity
which the agreement of People in one way and manner of Worship, does naturally
produce among them: or it may be from the old Latin word Caerus, which is the
same with Sanctus, holy, for which reason the Latins call their Holy Days,
Caeremoniosi Dies, and it is no more but a Rite or Custom appropriated to holy
Uses. Some there are, who to render it Odious, derive it from the Heathen
Goddess, Ceres; how like Scholars, or rather Schoolboys, let the Learned
Judge. But supposing it were true, is it a good Argument, the Heathens had
Ceremonies, therefore the Christians must have none? By the same reason, the
Heathens Worshipped false Gods, therefore Christians must not Worship the True,
for all Worship is Ceremony.

BUT when once this prejudice is fixed to the Word, it is no more but fixing
the Word to what People dislike, and it presently looks black and ugly; and
becomes a Mormo, a Bugbear to their thoughts; and like Children, they start and
Cry out at the shadow which they make themselves: but if they can add the word
Popish, that it is a Popish Ceremony, then it is Impious, Unlawful,
Superstitious, and Damnable, and all that can be said to render it Execrable,
and Abominable: when as in truth all that Papists do, is not Popery, nor
Abominable, and Unlawful; but however, by the strength of this prejudice, those
things which are truly Primitive, are made Popish; kneeling at the receiving
the holy Eucharist, bowing at the Name of Jesus, and the whole Book of the
Liturgy, though for the generality express words of Scripture, are made
Ceremonies, and Popish; and then, how innocent soever, if a Tumult can but be
made, Away with them, Crucify them: whereas sober people ought to Consider
that there is a Necessity of some Solemn Ways, Rites, Modes, and Methods of
Expressing our Devotion, and Worship; and since these Modes, or Ways, are
Ceremonies, and some Ceremonies are not only Lawful but Necessary, why not
these? which have been approved in all Ages of the Church, ever since the times
of Apostolical Purity, rather than any new ones of Private Invention, in
opposition to Public Authority, which thinks fit to Continue, Establish, and
Command these to be Used in the Church?

I am not ignorant that here is a strong suspicion of Malice, as well as
Mistake; and it is much to be doubted, that there is a Combination of Interest,
as well as Prejudice, in some of the Principal Fomenters of Division; who
appear so transported against all Ceremonies; and that though they know better
things, yet they mightily endeavor to maintain these Prejudices in the Minds
of the Easy Multitude; who hang their Faith upon the Oracles of their Lips; and
in this are absolute Papists, believing with an implicit Faith the Infallible
Decrees of the Heads of their Church: for upon this Depend the Benevolences
which their Followers do so freely bestow upon them for this Industrious
Flattery, that these Prejudices are Marks and Signs of their Christian Liberty,
and being Escaped from the Yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, and Egyptian
Darkness, into the glorious light of Gospel Truth; as they are pleased to call
even these Prejudices and Mistakes; though to the certain loss of Christian
Charity, and Unity; the great hazard of Temporal Peace, and the ruin of
Religion it self, as I shall hereafter more fully make appear.

THIS dangerous Prejudice, which does infect the minds of Men, as it has its
foundation in misunderstanding of things; so it receives strength from two
things which are almost as difficult to change and alter, as the Course of
Nature: and they are, Education and Custom. Of the last the Holy Ghost speaks
most plainly by the Prophet Jeremy. Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye do
good, who are accustomed, (or as the Hebrew word signifies, taught) to do evil,
learn to do well. Of the other, that of the Heathen Poet may pass for good
Divinity, having been confirmed to be truth, by the Universal Testimony of all
Ages: Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit Odorem
Testa diu. --


the first seasoning Principles and Prejudices which we receive in our Youth,
stick closely to us for a long time after. The wise Philosopher tells us, the
Soul of Man is Rasa Tabula, like a white sheet of Paper, out of which therefore
it must be more than Common Art, that can so clear take out the first writing,
as to super-induce a new Copy fair and legible.

THIS is the true Reason why any person finds it so difficult to quit those
Notions of Religion, which have been Established in his Mind from his Early
Infancy: there is a Mavelous Agreement, and Natural Kindness to those
Opinions which we suck in with our Milk; they are like Foster Brothers, to whom
it has been observed, there is as strong an inclination as to the Natural; we
play and converse with them from our Cradles, and as soon as we can go alone,
we take them by the hand; we sleep with them in our bosoms, and contract an
insensible Friendship with them, a pleasing Familiarity, which takes off all
deformities; we love them, and we like them, and their very blackness is a
Beauty, as it is with the Affrican Nations, to whom even that which we judge
deformity, appears more lovely than the most delicate Europaean Beauty. What
can be more impertinent and ridiculous than the Alchoran of that great
Impostor, Mahumed? and yet a natural Turk, born to those prejudices of
Education, and Custom, believes him the greatest of the Prophets; and the only
friend of God: And though he have a great veneration for Christ, yet would he
spit in your face, and call you Hog, (the most disgraceful term they think they
can affront a Christian with) if you should contradict him, or go about to
convince him of his Errors, by showing the absurdities and impossibilities of
what he calls his Religion.

WHAT can be more Barbarous and Savage, than the Rites of the Pagan Idolaters?
and yet, you may almost as soon remove a Mountain, as one of them, from what
has been the Religion of his Ancestors; and his, ever since he knew any. What
can be more unreasonable, than some of the Tenets of the Romish Church? more
ridiculous and antic than some parts of their greatest Solemnities; more
fabulously extravagant than some of their Legends, and most of their Miracles?
and yet we see, how tenacious not only most of the vulgar, but even of the
learned amongst them are; that they will not retrench even the fopperies of
their Faith, as they call it, to advance one step toward an Union with the
whole Catholic Church, of the past, and present Ages; but on the contrary, by
the Anathema's of the Convention of Trent, have cut off all hope and
possibility of such an accord; by establishing the very Minutiae and
Quisquiliae, the punctilio's and parings of their Religion, as things necessary
to be believed in order to salvation.

WHAT can be more hard and cruel, than for those who profess to be of the
Reformed Religion, to run to the very extremities of ruining themselves, by
mutual Divisions? and so far to weaken themselves and disparage their Religion
by intestine Quarrels, to open an easy way for Conquest to the Enemies both of
our Religion and Country; for some differences in Circumstances of Divine
Worship? And yet we see, such is the strength of some men's prejudices, and the
education of others, in the late unhappy times of our Misery and Distraction,
(from which we were rescued by so many Miracles) that they will rather venture
upon the same tempestuous Sea again, from whence we have so lately escaped
shipwreck; nay use all Arts and Arguments to push men headlong from the Shore,
into the foaming Main again, which they have but just recovered, still wet and
shivering, rather than by a compliance with the modest commands of the wise
Pilots, their lawful Superiors, even in the most indifferent things, endeavor
to repair the leaky vessel of the Church and State; by advancing their peace
and happiness by a blessed Union. The glory of God, and the salvation of men's
souls, which certainly are never to be promoted by variance, hatred,
emulations, seditions, swellings, and tumults, are of no force or power, in
comparison of their Prejudices; but they will in obedience to the tyranny of
their education and custom, persist in these practices, fearing neither the
Laws of God or men; the transgression of which they call Zeal, and their
disobedience Religion; but by their example teach others to do the same, and
confirm them in it.

NOR is Custom a less Tyrant over men's minds, to the introducing of prejudice,
than Education: For hereby men acquire habits, which are a kind of second
Nature: And by long continuance are so rivetted into our good esteem, that they
are not to be put off without great difficulty, how inconsiderable soever they
are; this is not more visible in any thing, than the use and opinion which
several Nations have of their several habits of Apparel; for to a mind
unprepossed with custom, all habits which are decent, convenient and useful,
appear equal and indifferent; yet does a Spaniard abhor the fashion of the
French, nor does the other use to be behind hand in his requital of the same
nature: A Turk believes a Turbant and a long vest the most ornamental dress in
the World, and wishes it as a great curse to his enemy to have the plague of a
Christians hat: And so it is with other Nations; The Indian prefers his
adressful nakedness before the cumbersome vestments of the Europaeans, the
stones in his Lips, Nose, and Ears, he esteems better set, than all the Artists
in the World can do in Gold. All these are purely the effects of a prejudiced
Custom, which makes People gaze even to rudeness and incivility upon
Foreigners when they appear amongst us; and with a ridiculous curiosity, spy
imaginary defects and deformities in the unaccustomed dresses of other
Countries: Nay, even the antiquated fashions of our own, though once the high
and only becoming modes in their time; yet by Custom become so uncouth, as to
help us to proverbs of derision, by way of comparison.

I choose to instance the rather in this strength of prejudice acquired by
Custom, because it bears an Analogy to the prejudices which possess peoples
minds about the Habits and outward dresses of Religion. Thus he who has not
been used to see a Churchman in his Canonical habit, looks upon him as a
strange undrest Monster; he who has not been acquainted with the Surplice, and
other decent Vestments of the Church, used in the Celebration of Divine
Service, especially if he has by his Education been principled with a dislike
and detestation of them, looks upon them as antic and useless Formalities: He
who has been accustomed to sit at the Lord's Table, and to hand the Bread and
Wine to his next neighbor, thinks kneeling an unnecessary part of his
Devotion; and if he has been taught so, Superstition and Idolatry; and to
receive it from the hand of the Minister, with the usual Benediction, a tedious
and troublesome Custom: He who has been long used to sudden and Extempore
Prayers, and believes them a fruit of the Spirit, and having it may be acquired
a Talent that way, and pleases himself and others with it; looks upon being
tied up to the words of the Liturgy as a hard confinement, and the imprisonment
of the Spirit, because it ties up his tongue and his parts from their
accustomed Liberty of saying any thing to God Almighty, and offering to him the
Sacrifice of Fools: Which makes him abhor the Sacrifice of Praise and
thanksgiving when tied by the Authority of the Church, and the Cords of Royal
Commands, Psalm. 18.27.
to the horns of the Altar. He who has been accustomed to certain studied,
passionate, and languishing Tones, his Ears are grated with the Music of the
Church; though anciently used in the Jewish Church in the Worship of God; the
Employment of Angels, and commended to us by the holy Ghost, by the mouth of
the Psalmist, upon so many Instruments: concluding the Psalm which will reach
them both as to the Matter, Manner, Psalm 150.6.
and Time, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord, praise ye the Lord.

AND for this reason it is, that the Politic Heads of Division and Separation,
both Papists and other Dissenters, do industriously Prohibit or Estrange their
People, from joining with us in our Worship; well knowing, that the prejudice
of Custom will in a little time do more to persuade weak Minds to a dislike,
than all the Reason in the World can to approve; and when once People have gone
so far in Custom, to forsake the Congregation and Public Service and Worship
of God, for their own or the private phancies of their Teachers, then do they
labor all they can to justify their Separation against those who either
oppose them, or endeavor to reclaim them; if they meet with weak Opponents,
they do not only fortify themselves in their prejudice, but stagger the others
with their own weak defense; and so talk themselves into a Custom of
Disobedience: if they meet with such as are too hard for them at dint of
Argument, that is Carnal Reasoning, and Worldly Wisdom; and the defect of
Reason to make good their pretenses, they either supply with wandering and
shifting Wranglings, or however with the strength of Obstinacy: as I have heard
one, who being too close hunted from his Shifts and Evasions, plainly said, It
was a folly to talk to him of Reason, for he would hear no Reason, for he was
sure he was in the Right: which though some may look upon as a Subject fit for
laughter, for my own part, I look upon them as the greatest Objects of
Compashon; their Condition being certainly most deplorable, who are past the
Use of their Reason; and one may have but too just grounds to apprehend, that
more of the Separation are in the same Condition of Obstinacy contracted by
long Custom and Education. And we have a great deal of Reason both to Pray for
them, and with the Apostle, To be delivered from Unreasonable Men.

So that the great influence of Prejudice, whether by long Custom, or
Education, is most apparent; and till such time as men can be persuaded to
abandon these Fortifications and Barricado's of their Souls, they will remain
impregnable against all the Attempts of Truth and Reason, which may be made Use
of, to endeavor to bring them to a Christian Compliance, into Reconciliation,
Peace, and Unity.

CHAP. IV.
WHERE Interest combined with Prejudice have taken deep Root, they are very
hard to be overcome, or extirpated from the Minds of Men; but there are two
things yet behind, which are more stubborn, because more natural to us; as
being usually interwoven with the very Tempers of our Nature, the Vices of our
Complexions, as well as contracted with time. For no Man is born with any
Designs in his head, nor are Prejudices and Customs, ex traduce, derived from
our Parents: but Pride and Ambition are Vices to which the very Constitutions
of some men's bodies do more powerfully incline them; some Natures are infected
with hot and tumultuary Spirits, a restless and a boiling Blood, impatient of
the Rein of Government, as the Poet long ago observed in his Character of
Youth, Caereus invitium flecti, Monitoribus asper: and it is descernable many
times in the Earliest Sallies of Life, and so soon as Reason begins to show it
self, Pride and Ambition begin to appear and discover themselves; thus you
shall see some Natures Meek and Malleable, soft and tender; others, as if with
Romulus they had sucked the Wolf, will like him, play the King amongst their
Companions; and at that Age, are so ambitious of the little Honors, and
Superiorities above their Equals in Age, and sometimes their Superiors in
Quality, that they will venture the severities of the Ferula, and their Blood
too, in the Quarrel, to be Caesar aut nullus: and there is scarcely a Public
School, where one may not be furnished with a Specimen of this Nature. Now to
subdue these congenial Inclinations, does doubtless require not only the
greatest force of Virtue, but the greatest stock of Grace: and many times
without the last, all the power of the first proves too weak a Dam to stop
these impetuous Torrents of Natural Ambition, and Pride, when swelled with the
Tides of inviting and feazible Temptations; and violently raised above their
Shoars, with the turbulent Air of Popular breath; the most dangerous Tempest
that can blow upon these swelling and foaming Waves.

I join these two together, because they are seldom found asunder; and it is
not common to find a proud man that is not Ambitious, or an Ambitious person
that is not proud; and one can rarely be tempted by one, without the assistance
of the other, and if they be not Twins, I cannot decide their Pretensions which
should be the Elder Brother; but which soever is the first born of Folly, Pride
usually sets Ambition upon Action: and what the one Projects the other
Executes. For that any person should despise the Precepts of Virtue and
Religion, the Principles of Loyalty and Obedience; per fas and nefas, (the
Common Ladder of Ambition) aspire at high things, great places of Trust,
Honor, Dignity, or Command in the World; must certainly be the Effect of
Pride: for such Tempers are always Opiniatres of their own Merits; Haughty
Minds think and believe therefore, that they deserve whatsoever they can
Desire, and more than they have; and the higher they rise, still the more Proud
and Ambitious they grow; looking upon their past Acquisitions, as the just
reward of their Wisdom and Conduct; which still swells them with bigger
Desires, and larger Thoughts; so that in reality Ambition knows no Hercules
Pillars, because Pride cannot write a Ne plus ultra upon their Merits: for this
is the Dropsy of the Mind, and the more Men drink, the the more they thirst:
-- Totum licet hauserit Hermum,
Ardebit majore siti. --


thus the young Macedonian swelled with his Victories over the Unfortunate
Persian and his Allies, and being told of more Worlds, Aestuat infelix angusto
limite Mundi.

his Ambition boiled over at his Eyes, that he was confined to one: nay, so
strangely was he transported with this unruly Tumor, that nothing would
satisfy him but to be a God, as if he had intentions to depose his adopted
Father, and conquer Heaven too, when he came there.

Now it is the Constant Temper of these hot Complexions, to make every thing
stoop to their Designs, because they think every thing ought to bow to their
Merits; nor will they spare even Religion it self, to which they will yet
seemingly bend, only to bend it to their Interest; and they do most frequently
abuse that Sacred Name, because by that Method they are enabled more easily to
abuse others with their well acted Hypocrisy, and double-gilt Dissimulation:
and it being the sole Prerogative of Heaven to know men's hearts, their Great
Masterpiece is to cover their Ambition with the soft Mantle of Religion, and
to act that part of their Lives so to the Life, as rather to outdo the most
sincere and innocent, as to what is visible, than by any remissness in their
outward appearance, to hazard a discovery of what lodges within: Nor indeed is
it possible to distinguish such golden Sinners from the most splendid Saints,
without a narrow consideration whither their Designs must lead them, and in
what they will End; and this is the true Reason why the innocent and
wellmeaning among the ordinary rank of People are so often imposed upon,
surprised with, and carried on in a good opinion of their proud and Ambitious
Leaders, who cover those horrid Vices, with the Glorious Names of Zeal for the
Lord of Hosts, Fervency of Spirit, and Active Piety for the Cause of God: for
if they would consider, whither of necessity these Principles of Disobedience,
which they infuse into them, both against their King and their Church, would at
the last lead them; and of what nature the Practices are, which are deduced
from them; it were impossible that People should be seduced by such Troops to
adore and almost Deifie those persons, whose main Design is only to serve their
own present Interest, and the future Aims of their Ambitious Pride.

BUT lest any Person should think the Expression of Deifying too harsh, I can
bring Evidence from those who heard it from the persons mouth that spoak it,
who affirmed, That be did believe, that if our Savior were upon Earth, he
could not speak more Heavenly than such a One (naming the Person) who was then
the admired Orator of the Place; but lest he should be Exalted above measure
for his Golden and Divine Talents, (and to show you how Fickle and Unconstant
these Hosanna's are) it was not long after, that the very same Person who had
so Exalted him to Heaven, did as much debase him; and being an illiterate
Fellow who could neither Write nor Read, yet he had it seems made so good use
of the others Gifts and Talents in Preaching and Extempore Prayer, that he
offered to wager 20 l. that he would quote Scripture with his Master from
Genesis to Revelations; and you may be assured then, that he would Preach and
Pray with him for 40 l. having so much more confidence of Himself and his own
Abilities, as he wanted Learning to know Himself and his own Deficiencies.

THE Nature of Pride and Ambition is always to Establish its own Greatness upon
the Ruin of whatsoever does oppose them; and by all ways and means to lessen
others, in order to greaten themselves; that so by trampling upon the necks of
their Enemies, they may Exalt their own Power and Esteem: and because there is
nothing that does Elevate men to that degree of Excellency in the Minds of the
Multitude, like an Opinion of their Sanctity and Devotion; therefore it is,
that this is the beloved Ingine which Ambitious Minds make use of, to carry on,
cover, and effect their own Designs of Greatness, by the assistance of Popular
Tumults; which they usually inrage like Elephants, by showing them the Scarlet
Robes both of the Prince and Priest, as objects of hatred; to animate and
inflame them against those Sacred Persons by whom they are worn.

I might confirm this by many Foreign Instances, but I rather choose one at
home; both because it nearly concerns us, and ought to make the greater
Impression upon us: The late Usurper Cromwell, was in this Art so perfect and
accomplished, as not to deserve to be undervalued as a Copy, but Esteemed an
Original of Pride, Hypocrisy, and Ambition. One would admire that People, who
many of them knew the Man and his Conversation; who saw the Curious Disguise of
his Dissimulation and Flattery thrown off by his own hands; who are sensible
how by this only Artisice of pretending Religion (though by the assistance of
their Blood and Money) he threw down the peacable Government both of Church and
State; how by a bloody Civil War, and the Murder of his Royal Master, he
himself aspired to the Throne; and how he Established an Arbitrary Tyranny,
against which he pretended, and made the People believe he fought; and how to
the great affliction of all Parties, especially the Presbyterians, he took away
one Religion, but set up none; nor indeed had any, because he was of all, as
they were most serviceable to his present Interest and Affairs: One would (I
say) admire that those, who though they saw not these gloomy Days, yet have
sufficiently heard of the Horror and Confusion of those times, and cannot but
believe the truth of the Relations, should yet swallow down the hook which is
baited with Liberty and Sanctity.

But because it may not be unuseful in this present Age (so fond of outward
shows) I will give a short Character of his Ambition, and those Arts by which
Heaven for our Sins permitted him (who might well style himself with Tamerlan,
Flagellum Dei, the Scourge and Wrath of God) to accomplish his wicked Designs.
Which may be a Sea-mark to the Unwary, to take Care of the Rock; and not to
Credit the charming Voice of the Siren hereafter, who therefore shows her
beautiful Face, and sings her bewitching Airs, that she may more easily Effect
the desired Shipwreck.

HE was a Person who in the first sallies of his Youth, was Debauched even to
the Terror of all the Villages of the Neighborhood; who were used to give the
Allarm when they saw him at a distance, with Look to your selves, here comes
Mad Cromwell; his great Frolique was the Destruction of Glass Windows, which he
persisted in to his last, beginning with those of Cottages, and not sparing at
last those of Churches; when his Debauchery only changed the Name but not the
Nature, and one was the Effect of Wine, the other of his Drunken Zeal. Having
run the small Barque of his Fortune aground by his profusion, he begun to think
how to get her off again; and finding that impossible, he imbarqued himself
into the Acquaintance and Friendship of one Tims of Cambridge, an Eminently
disaffected person to the King and Government; and being naturally of a quick
and sagacious Spirit, he easily found the soft place in the head of Tims, who
was the head of the Faction thereabouts; and believing, that if he could but
act, a Convert to the Life, he might thereby get a Livelihood, and by swimming
down their stream, buoy up his sinking Fortune, by fishing in the Waters which
they troubled; he therefore joined himself to their Congregation: and because
his Reformation was Miraculous, he did not doubt, but, for the Credit he did
their powerful Gospel, they would pay him for a Miracle of so great use and
advantage for their intended Reformation, which being then a brewing, he might
be looked upon as a necessary Instrument strument and skilful in the Trade of
boiling up Jealousies and Fears to the highest strength of Intexication:
however, he could not doubt, but by his Credit amongst them, and the Credit of
the Party, he might retrieve his past Losses, and prop up his desperate Fortune
by more desperate Principles and Practices. Upon these considerations he
forsook his wild and loose Companions, and with an Ego non sum Ego, reproves
them wherever he met them; he composes his Habit, his Looks, and Words to the
Tune of the greatest Sobriety, Repentance, and Sanctity; he frequents the
Meetings, and Exercises of the Godly, and there by the strength of his Natural
parts, and that Learning which the University had unluckily bestowed upon such
a Crocodile, he like an apt Scholar quickly learned from the then
Nonconformists, not only the Talents of making Public and Private Harangues
against the Bishops, and particularly against Dr. Wren then Bishop of Ely,
against the Abuses of the Government, the Designs of the great Ministers of
State, and the Prelates, to introduce Arbitrary Government, and swallow up
Privilege and Liberty by Prerogative, to whisper the great Jealousies and Fears
of the Danger of Popery; but he became miraculous in the Gift of Extempore
Prayer, in which, by the volubility of his Tongue, and his great Industry and
Constant Practice, he arrived to that perfection as to outdo his Masters: and
so diligent was he in obtaining and exercising this necessary Qualifiation to
recommend him to the disaffected Vulgar, that being then a Farmer at Ely, he
was used to send for his Plough-men out of the Field, to go to Duty with them;
and to keep them sometimes so long at it, till other people (having done their
Mornings work) were ready to come out of the Fields; by which good Husbandry
whatever returns he had of his Prayers, he had a very slender return of his
Seed, which he sowed in Tears, but could not reap with Joy; or say it came a
hundred fold into his Bosom, or his Barns: so that in a short time he threw the
Plough in the hedge, (as the Husbandmen say) and by the unfortunate breaking
out of those Misunderstandings between the King and his Parliament (he being by
Tims's Party got into the House of Commons as Burgess for Cambridge) and a
great Promoter of those Rebellious Hostilities, he betook himself to reap with
his Sword in the Field of Disloyalty, that Harvest of Treason, which he and his
Confederates of the Association had been so long sowing in the minds of a
Discontented Populace. He became presently one of the Heads of that
Combination; and by his own Gifts, and those of Ireton, and Peter's (formerly
expelled from the University for a Rakehell, but now converted by his voyage to
New England, and returning to ruin the Old, and by destroying the Hierarchy of
the Church, to make himself Oliver's Muphti so soon as he should come to be
Englands Grand Signior) by these assistances, and the Art of Wheedling with
fair words and long Prayers, all Parties, (how different so ever in Persuasion)
he advanced himself into their Esteem, and by that, into the Affections and
Command of the Rebel Army: Whereby a Series of strange successes he appeared
the Favorite of Heaven, and the Darling both of Fortune and his Party; and
having ruined the King and Loyal Party, outwitted the Presbyterians and their
great Patrons, Essex and Fairfax, men of better hands than Heads gently laid
them aside as Eclipfing his Glory and Designs; he then had the Game wholly in
his own hand, and arrived at length, by the strength of Dissimulation,
Protestations, Prayers, and Arms, to the highest degree of Supreme, Arbitrary,
and absolute tyranny; and wanted but little of profaning the Imperial Diadem
with his Traitorous Temples.

BUT what is observable of him, after he had prayed the Kings Crown off his
head, and his head from his Body, and the power and Revenues of the Crown into
his own hands; then the Spirit began to fail him, and he left that necessary
Gift which was beneath him (who was now got above all ordinances, even of the
House of Commons) to the management of Peter's, Sterry, and other his Domestic
Chaplains: By which it appears, that he made use of extempore only pro tempore,
as a Strastagem to serve his own Designs; and the Sword of the Spirit was with
him always taught the good breeding, to give the Wall to the spirit of the
Sword; Nor was he wont to go to prayer with his Legions, so as to obstruct the
Duty of the Day; or to miss the favorable opportunity of an advantageous
engagement; in the observation of which he was a Great Master, and owed most of
his Successes rather to his cunning than his valor; and therefore, he never
went to wrestle with God for victory, when a fair occasion offered to wrestle
with the arm of flesh.

IN short, he made the same use of this curious Network of his pregnant
Invention, which'tis said a certain Cardinal did of that Net which he always
used to spread upon his Table; alleging for his humor, that it put him in
mind of his Apostplical Function, which was to be a Fisher of Men, but coming
to be possessed of the Triple Crown, the Net was no longer seen; and being by
an intimate Consident demanded what was the Reason, that since he wore the
Annulum Piscatoris, the Papal Signet of St. Peter the Fisherman, he had now
left off his Net? He pleasantly replied, That now he had got what he had so
long been fishing for.

Thus did our English Massaniello, by the pretense of Sanctity and
Nonconformity, by the help of long Prayers and a longer Sword; by the promises
of Liberty of Conscience, Liberty of the Subject, propagation of Truth, and
giving the Gospel a free course that it might run and be Glorified; by the help
of new Gospel Lights and Revelations which shone in his Army; by these Arts did
he advance himself to the most unlimitted Power over Laws, Liberty, Life,
Estate and Religion, to that degree, that a look from him, like Plinies
Basilisk, was death even to his fellow Snakes, and as if with Mithridates he
had lived upon Poison, his very breath was Mortal, not only to the Royal Party,
but to those who had sometime been of his own; and even to bodies Politic, the
Conventions which he called Parliaments, one of which Assemblies, I remember,
exceeding the Limits he had set them (a free debate being then no Privilege of
Parliament) he swore by the Living God (a venial sin in so great a Saint) he
would dissolve them, and immediately sent Colonel Pride, the constant Friend
of his Ambition, with the Janissaries of his household, to put the bowstring of
his Authority about the neck of the House; which, with the resignation of a
Turkish Bashaw, with, Suchis the will of my Lord, bowed the head to the
execution, and departed that Life without a Murmur against his Highness, Artic.
3. of the Instrument, that he should not dissolve a Parliament till it had sat
5 Months, this begun Sept. 3. and was dissolved Jan. 10th. 1654.
or the lest complaint of breach of Privilege, or his Oath to the Instrument of
Government, that he should not dissolve them in five Months; or his intrenching
upon the Liberties of a Freeborn People.

Tantum potuit Religio Suadere Malorum. THIS is a sufficient Caution to all
People not to trust their Lives, Liberties, Privileges, or Religion, to the
Protection of such Prayers, and Pretenders to Piety, Zeal, Reformation and
Sanctity.

I know such instances are rare, and Ambition does not usually prove so
fortunate; but this it never fails of, to make the Lives of those with whom it
dwells, uneasy to themselves and others, and if it happens among men of the
Church, it certainly occasions great Commotions, the breach of Peace, and loss
of Unity: And if we search the Records of Church- history, we shall find that
most of the Schisms and Heresies which have occasioned those Great Disorders,
drew their Original from the Pride and Ambition of the discontented Clergy: for
nothing is more natural than for such Persons, where want of Temper renders
them most unfit for Government in the Church, to be most desirous of it, and to
believe they best deserve it; if they fail in their Expectations, which it is
more than probable they will, being measured by the Standard of the Sober and
Judicious, and not by their own flattery of themselves, presently they fall
into discontent, and endeavor to obtain that Esteem and Authority by unlawful
Methods, which they could not arrive at in the regular, modest, and peaceable
ways of Order and obedience. This discontent pushes them violently forward, to
be revenged of those who, by not advancing them, they think depress them, or by
advancing others, they believe despise and disparage them; and at the same time
they endeavor to satisfy their Ambition and Revenge by Exalting themselves.

Now there are no Arts which they can more successfully use to accomplish their
design, than these which follow.

FIRST, to appear more strict, holy, devout, and righteous, than those whom
they call their Enemies, who shall therefore be thought ill themselves, for not
advancing those who appear so good: And by this means they shall certainly be
so esteemed by such who look no further, and indeed cannot discover the Depth
of their hearts, or the secret malice that lodges so closely there. This
presently creates them a Name, and wins them a Party, who celebrate their Fame,
sing Hosannas in their Praise, Espouse them, their Interest, and their Quarrel.

SECONDLY, That they may appear more than common, and difference their Party
from the rest, thereby to keep them to themselves, they must broach some new
Doctrine, or revive some old one; there must be an Altar erected, and though it
be (...); yet will there never want some, who will ignorantly Worship the
stranger God, and entertain the Traveling Deity; then must the old Rites and
manner of Worship be exploded, to make room for the New; and though a man may
truly say of them, as our Savior of the Wine, the old is better than the new,
so unsettled, unfermented, and full of mutinous Spirits, that it flies, and
froths, and and foams, breaks the old Bottles into which it is put; yet will
even this Wine upon the fret, please some Capricious Palates better than the
Old.

THIRDLY, Then all those who oppose them must be exclaimed against, and cried
down; Especially their lawful Superiors and Governors, as formal
out-of-fashion-Christians; all endeavors must be used to rendered them
contemptible and Odious: And all this must be done out of pure Zeal to Truth;
when in reality, it is out of pure Revenge, and for no other Design, than that
these Ambitious Spirits may satisfy their Pride, by obtaining that
Pre-eminence by fraud and force, which they can never hope for by any other
ways.

THIS is the true procedure of Pride and Ambition, and which leads directly
into the Red Sea of Blood. I wish most heartily that all sober and
considerative Persons, who dissent from the Church of England, and even those
who are principally guilty of our Divisions, would enter into a serious
Examination, whether there be not some of the furious Spirit which our Savior
Rebukes in his Disciples James and John, Luke 9.54, 55.
which puts them upon Desiring fire from Heaven upon such as will not recieve
them, and since they cannot obtain that, makes them throw about their own
wildfire, to set the Church and Commonwealth into a Blaze: And to help the
Discovery, I will give them some Indications of such a Spirit, though lurking
never so cunningly under the Cloak of Zeal and Piety.

AND first therefore, Disobedience to Lawful Authority, and all the ways which
manifest that Disobedience, whether Words or Actions, are certain Symptoms of
the Pride of Men's Hearts, and the secret Ambition of their Minds; for whosoever
disobeys his Superior, does at the same time despise him, and whosoever
despises any person in Authority, does it because he is confident he knows more
and better what he ought to do, than he who has Power to Command him: This is
the knowledge which St. Paul says puffs up, but Charity edifieth: 1 Cor. 8.1,
2.
And therefore he subjoyns, If any man think he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know; that is, if his knowledge occasions a breach of
Charity, he does not yet know himself, or his Duty to God and Man. This is so
clear a Case with those of the Separation, who break both Charity and Unity, by
their Disobedience, that they must shut the clearest beams of Truth out of
their Souls, if they do not discover it.

SECONDLY, An obstinate adherence to any private Opinion, whereby the Peace of
the Church is destroyed, especially in things no ways in themselves Essentially
necessary to Salvation, must of necessity proceed from Pride; for why should
any person prefer his private Judgment before the Determination of his
Superiors, before that of the Catholic Church in all Ages? but because he
thinks himself wiser and more able to discern what is for the Public Good than
all that were before him, or that are above him: though hereby Solomon will
tell him from the Spirit of God, that he only purchases the Character of a
Fool; Prove. 12.15.
The way of a Fool is right in his own eyes, but he that hearkeneth unto
Counsel is wise. And therefore the Prophet pronounces a Woe against such, Woe
unto those that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.
Esa. 5.21.
Which must be meant of private persons, for the Wisdom of Superiors is not so
much their own, as the Wisdom of all former Ages? and for this Reason St. Paul
commands, Romans 12.16.
Be of the same mind, mind not high things (prompted by Pride or Ambition) but
condescend to men of low Estate; (much more to those of high) be not wise in
your own conceit. And for Encouragement to this kind of Private Wisdom, once
more hear Wisdom it self speak by the wise man. See thou a man wise in his
own conceit, Prove. 26.12.
there is more hope of a Fool than of him. And it is impossible to give any
other Reason, why men should not submit to Truth and their Superiors, when they
may be sensible to a demonstration from Reason, Scripture, and Experience, that
their private Opinions are unlawful, because dangerous, contrary to Charity,
and Gods Command: but because they think such a Submission a Retractation, or
Compliance with Authority would be a lessening of them, as to that Opinion for
Wisdom and Sanctity, which others attribute to them; and that dangerous
Flatterer Pride, persuades them they are Masters of.

THIRDLY, To endeavor to strengthen themselves by making a Party, to secure
them in their Disobedience and Obstinacy, is the certain and unseparable
Symptom of Ambition, as well as Pride: for if I dislike any thing, I may do so
to my self, but to persuade others to it, must have respect to a further
Design, and declares that I intend not only to own my Disobedience, but to
justify and maintain it by Power. The best Men in the World may Err privately,
but it is to be suspected they are the worst, who make their Errors Public,
to draw Disciples after them; by Disobedience a man Equals himself to his
Superiors, for it is a plain denying their Authority over him; by Obstinacy he
shows his intention to stand his Ground, and make good his Incroachment upon
their Power; and by his making of a Party he does as it were make secret
Levies, and inrols a Militia to defend himself from the Power of his Superiors,
and looks as if he meant to struggle with them not only for Precedence but
Dominion.

I wish these were only Suppositions, and that we could not from woeful
Experience say they are but too true: but it was this very way that lately laid
the Crown as well as the Mitre in the Dust, too lately to give us the least
reason to doubt, that the same Methods may do it again, if not in time
prevented, either by the vigilance of Authority, or by reducing the disorderly
and disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just; and by informing their
Understandings, to oblige them voluntarily to abandon those Men and Principles,
whose Practices will infallibly lead them to these Conclusions; or oblige
Authority by the utmost Severities of Laws, to prevent the Danger and Ruin of
the whole Frame of Government both in Church and State.

AND as Pride and Ambition are but too visible amongst the Principles of
Dissension amongst us, and the principal Obstacles of our Peace and Unity, so
are they no less Obstructions to a Reconciliation with the Roman Church; for it
is the Ambition of Supremacy over all other Churches, and over all Temporal
Powers, and even over our Faith it self, the incommunicable Prerogative of our
blessed Jesus, Heb. 12.2.
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, which has rendered all Reunion with them
not only dangerous, but impossible, unless we will resolve, by believing as
that Church believes, to disbelieve not only our Sense and Reason, but
Scripture and all Antiquity; and not only those, but God himself, who has given
us them to assist us in our Faith.

IT is the Ambition of the Clergy which obliges them to keep the Laity in
Ignorance, so blind, that they are not permitted to inquire, or doubt. And for
the Clergy, as before was observed in the point of Interest, they are
constantly fed with the nourishment of Ambitious Thoughts, hopes of Dignities
and Promotions: The meanest Priest or Recluse may come to be head of his House,
Superior, and after General of his Order; a Prior or Abbot; and it may be a
Bishop: the Bishop may advance the Mitre to the Honor of a Cardinals Hat, and
the Red Hat may turn to the Triple Mitre; and all this by being a Zealous
Maintainer of the Usurped Power of that Church, justifying her Encroachments
upon the Crowns of Princes, and the Mitres of all other Bishops, Primates,
Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, owning her Monopoly of the Word Catholic,
avowing her Canonical and Decreed Errors for Rules of Faith and Manners, and
divulging her fictitious Collusions for real Miracles, though to the hazard of
rendering the true ones of Christ and his Apostles suspected, upon which the
sole confirmation of our Religion depends. These are the Stairs by which men
ascend to the Papal Dignity, which now out-flies the Imperial Eagle as well as
the smaller Royal Birds of Majesty: Et Caput inter Nubila condit.

for to oppose any of these, is a certain way to be preferred to the Torments of
the Inquisition, to be branded with Heresy and Apostasy, and to Expire in
Flames and Torments.

So that I hope by this time, it is evident how pernioiously powerful the
Principles of Interest and Prejudice, Custom and Education, Pride and Ambition
are in the Minds of Men, to hinder them from Embracing Truth, and her Beautiful
Children Peace and Unity.

To these I might add Envy, the Canker of the Mind; the daughter of Discontent,
and constant Enemy of Peace, Covetousness the Root of all Evil. Envy being the
shadow of Honor and real Worth; and Sacrilegious Covetousness, the Ravenous
Harpie, that preys upon the small Patrimony of the Church; which usually is the
great persuasive to profane and Rapacious Natures to treat her, as the
Atheistical Dionysius did his Apollo, who robbed him of his golden Robe,
alleging it was too cold for his Godship in Winter, and too heavy in Summer;
but because these Fall in with Interest and Ambition, I will not under
different Names repeat the same things over again, to nauseat the Judicious,
and tire the indifferent Reader with reiterated Tautologies.

CHAP. V.
HAVING thus shown what it is that impedes our Happiness, and which therefore
must of necessity be removed from the Minds of Men, before there can be any
Possibility of their Embracing Truth, Unity, and Charity; in the next place we
come to manifest the necessity of Union, the only Expedient which can procure
the Common Happiness of Mankind.

Now to make this appear, we must look into the Main End and Design of all
Religion here in this Mortal State of Life, in order to that future Condition
of a Glorious Immortality: and that we may the better apprehend what that is,
we must consider the Commands and Precepts of Religion, and at what they aim.
And because all the Rules of our Holy Profession direct us to it, we must
believe that God Almighty gave us those Precepts, Rules, and Directions, to
promote our own and the Common Happiness of all Mankind, even here in this
present State of Life; to render our short Journey through the troublesome Stage
of Time, more pleasant and easy, till we arrive at the unchangeable Happiness
of Eternity. This Easiness of Mind, this real Happiness of Life is only to be
obtained by following the precepts of Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Prudence,
and the other Noble and God-like Virtues which Religion teaches; for the
substance of Happiness does not consist in any thing without us (though there
are good Circumstances) but in the Innocence of Mind, and purity of Life; Nil
Conscire sibi, nulla pallefcere culpa.

in our being good, and doing good; which is the great Employment for which we
came into the World. So that there is a necessity of Religion in the World in
order to the happy posture of humane affairs, which all Mankind desire for
themselves, with unlimited wishes; but are too narrow in their endeavors to
promote it in Common unto others. That this was the Wise and good Design of the
great Creator, is most apparent, in that, even in those obscure Ages of
Barbarism and Ignorance, Act. 14.16, 17.
at which the Apostles says God was pleased to wink, yet he left not himself
without a Witness: When in times past he suffered all men to walk in their own
ways, they were not without some Religion, which taught them their Duty in some
Measure (though imperfect) both to the Gods (for they supposed many) and also
to Men.

THAT must of Necessity therefore be the truest Religion, and most agreeable to
the Will of God, which approaches nearest to this Great Design; and would
certainly accomplish the End for which all Religion was intended: And therefore
the truth of any Religion must be measured according to the Proportion which it
holds to promoting Peace, Unity, and Charity, the only ways to obtain happiness
in this World, as well as Faith whereby we hope to obtain the happiness of a
future state: And what Religion soever separates these Good Works from Faith,
is so far vain, and destroys that Faith it seems to profess; for Faith without
Works is dead. If therefore any Religion ruins Peace, Unity, and Charity, we
must judge it so far false and erroneous, let it make never so many Boasts of
holding the true Faith of Christ. Of all the Religions which ever were in the
World, the Christian Doctrine may justly challenge the Pre-eminence, as
conducting men, if they would be managed by it, the nearest way to Happiness
both Temporal and Eternal; and among all the variety of Opinions in the
Christian Religion, that must therefore of necessity be the best and truest,
which does most powerfully promote innocence of Life, purity of Mind, Unity,
and universal Peace; not by external force and violence, but by the same
Methods which God Almighty made use of to plant and propagate it in the World;
which was not by Tumults, Seditions, or Disobedience to the Civil Magistrate,
but by meekness, humility, Charity, and a Conversation unblameable: Which were
the Weapons by which the Primitive Christians were taught to put to silence the
ignorance of folish Men: The Church indeed had a power, but it was purely
Spiritual, and those spiritual Arms were the most powerful to the pulling down
and dismantling the strong holds of Sin; and therefore even while the Temporal
Powers of the Earth did all they could to suppress them, yet mightily did the
Word of God grow and increase, not by opposing, Rebelling, or imposing Laws
upon their Sovereigns, but by submitting and suffering, demonstrating upon all
occasions their Innocence, and that they were free from any ill designs upon
the Civil Government of the World, or the Temporal concerns of Mankind.

BUT because all and every Profession of Christian Religion, every Church would
have us believe this of them; and that therefore, every one Challenges the name
of the true Church of Christ, here lies the Difficulty and the niceness of the
Point; Which is the best and truest? And because all desire the Glorious Title,
therefore they quarrel about it, who it is that is the Spouse of Christ?
Whereas one would Modestly believe, that to be without Spot and Wrinkle, is not
to be appropriated to any particular Church, in which there must be Tares and
Chaff, as well as Wheat, but to the Holy Catholic Church (I do not mean of
Rome; for She is but one Member) that glorious Company of true Believers, the
General Assembly of the Church, which have been, and shall be in all Ages of
the World, and out of all Nations, united unto Christ their Head.

A Church may be a true and a visible Church of Christ, and yet have many
Errors; and so long as they keep the foundation of Faith, though they may build
Hay and Stubble upon that Foundation, yet I do not see how they can be denied
that Name. Thus we see St. Paul writes to the Church of God, which is at
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2.
to them that are Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints: And yet in
that very Epistle he Complains of great Errors and Disorders among them, Cap.
11.
and an Abuse of the very Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and so to the Church
of the Galatians, and yet he tartly calls them foolish Galatians, and tells
them they were bewitched into this Disobedience against the Truth, and that he
was afraid he had bestowed upon them Labor in Vain; for that they were
relapsing to Jadaism, and to the observing of Days and Years according to the
Mosaic Law.

THIS has been a Constant Quarrel amongst Christians, this bred those Mortal
Divisions betwixt the Eastern and the Western Churches, which has almost
entirely ruined one of them, and not advantaged the other as to Truth; for
whilst both pretended to be the only true Church of Christ, by that exclusive
Arrogance, they were both so far False; and this Unlawful claim was the Mother
of the Doctrine of Infallibility in the Catholic Church, which if it be
understood of any particular company of Men, and not of the whole Body of the
Faithful, which are in all Churches, have been, or shall be guided by the
Spirit of God into all truth, must be False; for whoever is infallible, must be
without Sin, which none can be in this imperfect State. For if we say we have
no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us; and the Maxim is
undoubtedly true, Quod predicatur de singulis universalium, predicatur etiam de
universalibus singularium; If all men are Sinners, they are fallible, and if
every man is a Sinner, then are all men, here in this Mortal State. So that if
men would with Justice and Modesty allow degrees of Truth, and that every
Church possessed some, so long as they retain the foundation of one only true
God and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, whom to know is Life eternal; if they
would strive more for Peace and Purity than for this Supremacy, and
impossibility of being the only true Church, they would certainly have more
Truth, because more Charity, Peace and Unity.

THERE were Seven Churches in Asia, (though now nothing but the Names, and
those scarce Legible in their Ruins) to which our blessed Lord commands St.
John to write. Rev. 1, 2, 3 Chapters.
What thou see write, in a Book, and send it to the seven Churches which are
in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira,
and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. Every Church was a
Golden Candlestick, and every one had a Star, which was the Angel Guardian, or
Governor of the Church, and which Christ held in his right hand. These
Candlesticks were all of Gold, but some more refined and purer Metal than
others; the Stars were all bright and shining, but some more dim and obscure
than others: for one star exceeded another star in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42.
even in the Firmament of the Church, as well as in Heaven. And doubtless if
that place be true, shall hereafter, for so is the Resurection of the Dead.
From this Instance of the Seven Churches, these Deductions seem evidently to
follow.

FIRST, That several Nations are several Distinct, Coordinate (not subordinate)
Churches: for so the Son of God calls these Seven, which yet were comprised in
the lesser Asia, and People of one Language, though of distinct and separate
Polities, which seems to be that which differences Nations, and not Languages.

SECONDLY, That distinct, and several Coordinate Churches, may all be true
Churches, and United in the Common Bond of the same Faith, and Charity, who yet
may not be of equal Purity: two only are here commended for their Purity, viz.
Smyrna, and Philadelphia; the other are condemned; Ephesus, for having forsaken
her first Love, her Zeal and Devotion: Pergamos, for the Doctrine of Balaam,
and for suffering the odious Sect of the Nicolaitans: Thyatira, for suffering
Jezebel, a woman to teach, contrary to the Express Command of God, and
therefore to seduce the People, by eating things offered to Idols: Sardis, for
having a name to live, but being dead: Loadicea, for being lukewarm neither hot
nor cold, a Church of Latitudinarians: all these are threatened and reproved,
but not rejected from the name and being of Churches.

THIRDLY, That the holy Catholic Church is composed of several distinct
National Churches; for we must not think the Son of God could be guilty of an
impropriety of Speech; he distinguishes them by the places where they were
planted, and by their degrees of Purity, as so many several Churches, without
giving them any precedence on pre-eminence one over another: he does not direct
the Angels of the several Churches, to Rome, or Alexandria, or Jerusalem, or
Antioch (though all then famous Churches) for redress of their Errors; he does
not send them to St. Peter, or his Successors, the Catholic, Apostolic,
Roman Church, as the Pillar and Ground of Truth; not a word of the Sancta seeds
Apostolica, Petri Cathedra, Ecclesia Principalis, nothing of the Romanorum
Fides, ad quos perfidia habere non potest accessum, which place of St. Cyprian
the Romanists boast so much of, whilst they endeavor to appropriate the word
Catholic only to their Church; which is as good sense as that any one man is
humane Nature. But for the redress of their Errors, amendment of their Lives,
and reformation of their false Doctrines, he gives them all this short
Direction; He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; and that to every one of them distinctly; so that what the Spirit of
God speaks to the Churches, was to be the Rule of Faith, Life, and Doctrine:
and what was it which the Spirit spoke unto the Churches? was ever any
Tradition said to be spoken by the Holy Spirit? No certainly, nothing was ever
spoken by the Spirit to the Churches, but the Books of the Holy Canon, which
all Ages have consented to, without the least Addition or Diminution (as the
late Bishop of Durham, Dr. Cosins, has made appear more distinctly) till such
time as the Absolutissima Syndus Tridentina, as they call the Trent Session,
for some passages which seem favorable to Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead,
was pleased to adopt these into the Holy Canon; though nothing is more evident
than that till then they were Esteemed only Humane Writings, and Apocryphal:
however hereby they have given a Specimen of the Power they pretend over our
Faith; for by the same Authority they may impose Aesops Fables, and the
Alchoran, as matters of Faith. Neither did the ancient Churches, when Heresies
sprung up, resort to Rome for infallible Determinations, but to Ecumenical and
General Councels, not Esteeming their Determinations valid neither, unless
agreeable to the Holy Scripture, which was always accounted the Norma, or Rule
by which they were to be guided: and at which Councels the Pope did assist, not
as the Head, but as a Principal Member; and the respect he had given him was as
Patriarch of the Imperial City, and the Western Churches, and not as Monarch of
the whole Catholic Church; and even some later Councels, as that of Basil,
have undertaken to reform Errors and Abuses, and to depose the Pope, being
found guilty of them.

LASTLY, It may from hence be concluded, That Christ himself is the only head
of the Catholic Church, which is composed of several distinct Churches, who
are all Members of that Mystical Body: he walks among the Candlesticks, he
holds the Stars in his right hand; The Angel of every distinct National Church
is to be the mover of the Orb, to guide it by the Light of Divine Truth spoken
by the Spirit of the Churches; the Temporal Power may be Supreme Head of the
Church, as they are a Society of Christian Men; but neither the one nor the
other, can justly pretend a Power over the Angel of another Church, or the
Dominions of another Prince; for that is the Prerogative of the Son of God, who
Unites them in his Right hand, and who alone can challenge the Title of that
Name of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

NOR will this Independency of Churches one upon another, which is only in
point of Jurisdiction and Limits, which was anciently practiced and commanded
by the Decrees of Councels, give the least disturbance to their Charity and
Union; so long as they maintain the same Universal Doctrine of Faith as to the
substance, and all acknowledge one Catholic Church, and themselves Members of
it. Nay, it is observable that this incroachment of the greater Churches upon
the less, and endeavoring to aggrandize themselves, by imposing upon all other
Churches a Sovereignty and Dominion never intended for Christian Religion, and
striving by force to oblige them to use their Rites and Ceremonies in
indifferent Circumstantials; and not only so, but to receive all their Opinions
as matters of Faith, were the first occasion of the most remarkable Schisms and
Divisions, and the loss of Peace and Unity; and still continue so to this very
day. Whereas, did they all resolve to content themselves with their own
Precincts, and not endeavor (...), and act out of their own Provinces, but
would permit others to make use of such indifferent Rites as the Governors of
the several Churches judge necessary and expedient in their respective Charges;
and if any Controversies should arise in Point of Doctrine, resolve amicably to
compose them, by hearing what the Spirit says to the Churches, and how the
Universal Church has already determined in the same or like Affairs, according
to the Rule of Scripture; would they study more to propagate Peace and Unity,
than Dominion and Sovereignty, to increase Piety and Purity of Life, more than
outward agreement of Rites and Ceremonies, the ancient Happiness of the Church
in her first and Vnambitious Age, (when the Office of Government was the surest
way to Martyrdom) would in a great measure be restored to the Members of the
Catholic Church; and there would be that Unity which is by God Commanded, and
by all good Christians not only to be desired, but promoted to the uttermost of
their Power.

Were it possible that this true and ancient Temper, Modesty and Moderation of
Primitive Christianity, might obtain in the World, the Names of distinction,
with the occasions of them would be taken away; one would not be of Paul,
another of Apollos, another of Cephas, one a Romanist, another a Calvinist,
Lutheran, Hugonot, or a Zuinglian, but all would be of Christ; but alas! what
hope? so long as the Church of Rome will be Universal, and will exclude all
those who Refuse the tyranique Yoke of both her Declared, and Implicit Faith;
and to be subject to her absolute Dominion; not only from the Name of Churches,
and being Parts of the Church Universal, but from the Communion of Saints, from
all hopes of the Resurrection of the just, nay, even from her Purgatory too,
(which is very severe, if there be such a place as admits of Hope for Sinners
after Death) and in a word, from all possibility of the Life everlasting.

How disterent is this from the ancient Charity and Doctrine of St. Peter and
St. Paul, whom they believe the Founders of their Church, for they encourage us
to hope we may receive the Benefit of the Common Salvation; Act. 10.35.
for God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears him
and works Righteousness, is accepted of him: for with him there are no
Distinctions, neither Greek, nor Jew, Col. 3.11. to v. 16.
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but all
are Christ's, who have put on as the Elect of God, holy, and beloved, bowels of
Mercy, kindness, humbleness of Mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearance one
of another, and forgiveness one toward another, if there be differences, as
Christ also forgave us, and above all things they who have put on Charity,
which is the bond of Perfection, and whose Hearts are ruled by the Peace of God.

But in regard that this is to be dispair'd of, and may well seem foreign to
the Design of these Papers, let us come to consider what Influence this ought
to have upon us as to Unity amongst our selves, which (without Excluding our
Neighbors from our Charity, though they do us from theirs, and Heaven) is the
principal Intention of this Discourse.

CHAP. VI.
HAVING shown that the Peace and Unity of the Catholic Church Militant upon
Earth depends in a great Measure upon this Justice, in preserving the Common
Faith of Christ as the bond of Union, not only among our selves, but with that
part of the Church which is now Triumphant in Heaven, and in order thereunto,
in allowing every distinct and National Church their particular Bounds and
Jurisdiction free from Encroachments and Invasion, permitting them a freedom of
Using such Rites and Customs in the Celebration of Divine Worship, as the
Governors of each respective Church shall judge to be nearest the Rule of
Scripture, the Constant Usage and Determination of the Catholic Church in the
best Ages, and of the best Men in all; most conducive to the Great End of all
Religion, by promoting the Happiness of Mankind both here and hereafter: before
we proceed any further, it will be requisite to answer what may and will be
certainly objected by all Dissenters.

FOR, if an Independency of Churches of Distinct Nations and Polities, so long
as they agree in matters of Faith, may be permitted a distinct Jurisdiction,
different Rites and manner of Worship, to the increase of Charity, Peace, and
Unity, why may not the same be likewise practiced by several Churches in the
same Nation?

To which I answer, That as Unity in point of Faith is the Bond of Union in the
Universal Church, so Obedience to the Supreme Government of any Nation, is that
which Unites them into one Polity, and distinguishes them from all other People
who do not own that Subjection and Obedience: And this Union of Obedience is
also that which preserves and maintains them, as well as Constitutes them a
distinct Political Body from all other Nations. Herein lies their Strength,
herein their Security, their Safety and Happiness. For as I may be Lawfully
permitted to disobey the King of Spain, or France; nay, and ought to do it in
many Cases for the Interest of my Nation, but cannot disobey my Natural Prince,
but to the prejudice of my Country and my own, because I owe them no Obedience
in point of Jurisdiction, as I do my own King. So I may for the same Reason
refuse the Jurisdiction of a Foreign Church, but cannot of my own, which has a
lawful Power over me, and to which I owe Obedience, because I am a Member of
her Polity. For every person, and all Persons who live in the World, must own a
Subjection to the Government where they live, and because that affords them
Protection, therefore they are to pay their Obedience, both as a Duty of
Gratitude, the Foundation of Society, and the Interest they have to maintain
that Government and Power which does protect; secure, and defend their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; and in effect, all the Happiness of Humane Life.

Now since the Light of Nature, Reason, and Interest does oblige all men to own
this as a necessary Truth, and those who have opposed it, have ever been
esteemed the common Enemies of all Mankind, Traitors not only to the Government
they have opposed, but to the Foundation and Principles of all Society, and to
the happiness of Mankind in general: Therefore it is absolutely necessary in
any distinct Society of Men, that the Circumstances of Religion (for the
Substance of Faith is not in the power of any Mortal man to Alter or Establish)
should be adapted to the attainment of this Common Design of all Government
both Civil and Religious, the Happiness of the Society. But this is impossible
to be effected where there are many distinct Churches in the same Society? For
either the Supreme Authority has Power over them all, or over none at all; if
none at all, the Society is ruined, and he is no longer King, nor they own
themselves his Subjects, who deny his Authority; and that they owe him
obedience if he has Power over them, it must be in Circumstantials of
Government, Order, and the manner of Divine Worship. Now either he can command
them to perform these all one way, and then they are no longer distinct
Churches, but the same; or he cannot lawfully command them, nor are they bound
to Obey; and so he is no longer their King, nor they his Subjects, then he
obliges them by parting with his Sovereignty, and they please (upon that
Condition that he permits them to do what they please) to afford him their
Subjection. So that in effect, distinct Churches, and Independent upon the
Sovereign in the same Nation, which is one entire Body Politic, are so many
Spiritual Electors of Germany, who own an Emperor in Name, but are absolute in
Reality, and Sovereigns within their own Territories and Dominions.

BESIDES, there is so near a Connection between all Temporal and Religious
Laws, the Laws of Men having their Foundation and Stability from the Original
Laws of God; and being only Lawful so far as they are agreeable to them, that
it is impossible for the most Nice Curiosity to distinguish the Limits of these
two Powers, the Temporal and the Spiritual. Now if we suppose several distinct
Independent Churches in one Nation, we must suppose them to have distinct Forms
of Government, and it will be impossible for the Prince to make any Temporal
Law, which some of them may not pretend is against their Jurisdiction; Let it
be to raise Men or Money for the common Defense of all by War, it may be an
easy Scruple whether the War be Lawful? whether that be his Intention? whether
it be for the Common Benefit; and according as these distinct Churches judge it
Lawful or Religious, Safe or Dangerous, so shall he receive their assistance;
So far and no farther goes their Obedience; A too visible Effect, of which, it
is to be seared we have at present, when these Churches and their Jurisdiction
is not by Law permitted; and what might we expect, if this Power which they
challenge were either Tolerated, or by Law Established? So that if Obedience be
a necessary Duty, both Civil and Religious, in order to the Happiness of any
Society or Nation, one Church owning that Subjection and Obedience in point of
Government (not of Faith) is necessarily to be Established in that Society and
Nation. But I shall discourse more fully upon this Particular hereafter, and
therefore refer the Reader thither; only I desire it may be taken notice of,
that the Design and Quarrel of all Dissenting Parties, however they may pretend
only purely Spirituals, Conscience, and Religion, yet ends in the pretense to
Sovereignty and Dominion; and though it talks only of the Altar, yet is levelled
at the Throne; and that therefore the Church of England, which makes not the
least pretentions to the prejudice of the Princes Right, but by her Doctrine
and her Practices teaches Humility, Obedience, and Submission to the Prince,
renders her true Sons the best of Subjects, as well as the best of Christians;
and that nothing but Unity in Government can teach men rightly to Honor the
King, as Unity in Faith teaches them truly to fear God, and be true Members of
the Holy Catholic Church.

BUT secondly, It will be Objected, That by this Position of the Necessity of
Unity in Government, and Uniformity of Worship, in Rites and Ceremonies, in a
National Church, Men will be obliged to submit to those things which are
against their Consciences.

FOR answer to this at large, I refer them to a small Treatise Entitled The
true Liberty and Dominion of Conscience, where they may see how they impose
upon themselves and others, by obtruding upon them Private Opinion or
persuasion for Conscience; for unless they be certain by Divine Revelation of
clear Scripture, or consequence of Scripture which will not admit of a Doubt,
that the things imposed are Unlawful; Conscience is not concerned in them, and
it is only their Opinion, which ought to submit to Public Peace, and
Government, which are clear and evident Commands of God. If the things
commanded are Unlawful, show us the Prohibition: If they be not Unlawful, they
may be imposed; for any man may by Authority be lawfully commanded to do what
is Lawful, for the obtaining Peace and Happiness to himself and all others of
the same Society; Nay he is bound in Conscience to do it.

BUT for a further satisfaction, and a short Answer, I desire it may be
considered, that every submission to the Judgment and practice of another who
is of a different Opinion, is not an Error, if the thing be indifferent about
which we disagree; and that I may without offending my Conscience, do what I am
commanded, though in my private Judgment I do not approve of it, if by doing of
it I promote Peace, and show my Obedience: For where the Question is, whether
by not doing this, I shall obey my own Judgment, which doubts whether I may do
it Lawfully; or disobey that Power which commands me to do it, which I cannot
deny but has a Lawful power to command me? The Resolution is easy; for I am not
by my obedience to a private doubt, to break a known Command of God, who
commands Obedience to my Superiors in all things which are not contrary to his
commands; and whether we should obey God or Man, our selves or the Magistrates
and Rulers of of the Church, is no such hard Question as some people have made
it.

BESIDES, Though wilful Errors in Faith are Damnable, yet Errors in
Circumstances neither are nor can be so, unless we make them so our selves by
Disobedience to God, in refusing for Peace and Unity to submit to our
Superiors, which is Damnable. Nor indeed can any of the several Rites and
Ceremonies of Religion be properly called Errors, though they be different, nay
contrary one to another: For where there is no positive Command of God to
Determine us, either part is lawful or unlawful, only according as it is
commanded or forbidden by those who are in Authority; and if it be not
determined by them, then as we in our own Judgment shall be persuaded, that is
conducive to Gods Glory and the Happiness of Mankind. For whether I should pray
in a Surplice, or in a Cloak, is not a point of Salvation; for I may do it with
either, or neither, and yet go to Heaven; but Disobedience to my Lawful
Superiors, should they command me to pray to God in Public, in either of
them, is an Error in Faith; for who ever is guilty of that Disobedience, must
either believe that God is not the Author of that Command, or that it is not
true, which is Infidelity and Error. Now let any person of Sobriety Judge
whether such a Conscience is a good Conscience, and void of offense to God and
Men, which will strain at the Gnat of an indifferent Ceremony, and swallow the
Camel of Disobedience? And whether all good Christians ought not to join with
the National Church in such Ceremonies and manners of Worship, as admitting
them to be as bad as any Ceremonies can be, which are not Damnable, rather than
by endeavoring to avoid them, and refusing to use them, to run the certain
Hazard of ruining the Peace of the Church and Nation, and certain Damnation,
by their Disobedience to the Command of God?

I desire to make this as clear as I can; and therefore we will Instance in the
sign of the Cross after Baptism; This Ceremony is by many so much abhorred,
that they will rather not have their Children received into the Covenant of
Grace by Baptism, or (which is the same thing) have the Sacrament from those
who, having no lawful Ordination, have therefore no Commission to go and
Baptize all Nations: Now, supposing the sign of the Cross after Baptism a
superfluous or superstitious Ceremony (which yet will never be proved as by the
Church explained in the Office of Baptism, and the 30 Canon) yet still the Use
of it could not be injurious to Salvation, or Damnable, because it is no where
in Scripture forbidden; nor ever asserted to be Essential to the Sacrament; Nor
condemned by either Councels, or the Practice of the Church in any Age, but
frequently used by the Primitive Christians, both upon that and many other
Occasions: what a man may do without fear of Damnation, he may do safely; nor
is he to be judge of the Expedience or edifyingness of the Ceremony; for who
made any private man a Judge over others? that very capacity Excludes him from
that Power. But for any person to refuse to have his Child Baptized, because of
this Ceremony, or to refuse to obey his Superiors, is to make himself a Judge
over them, and a damnable Sin: Washing with Water in the Name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, is the Essence of the Sacrament, but there are
some Prayers to be made; 1 Timothy (...)
For every Creature of God is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, some
Gestures, some Postures to be used in such a weighty Solemnity, some Praises
due for so great a Benefit: and these being no where directed what they shall
be, are left to the Care and Wisdom of the Governors of the Church, who to
avoid Confusion, and to Establish Unity by Uniformity, to preserve the Decency
of so Sacred a Duty, prescribe this Form of words, these Gestures and Rites,
and this sign as of great signification, that as St. Paul says, We should Glory
in the Cross of Christ, and receive that as a Badge or Cognizance of our
Christian Profession.

THE same Answer will serve for all the Ceremonies which are made use of, or
commanded by the Church of England. Nor shall we need to fear lest by this
Power of the Church, the Ceremonies should swell to such a bulk as to be
burthensom by being too numerous; since the Governors themselves are not
without a Rule in this particular, which is the Determination of the first
General Council at Jerusalem: Acts 15.28.
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden than these necessary things: one of those necessary things was before
indifferent, viz. to abstain from things strangled; and St. Paul seems to make
even the other, about the things offered to Idols, the same; which now were
made by the Council necessary.

BUT supposing that there were a real Clog of Ceremonies (which none can justly
complain of amongst us) yet would any man loose the substance for fear of the
shadow, refuse to Eat good and wholesome Diet, because the Dish was Silver, and
too much Garnished; and by Schism and Disobedience run the hazard of his own
Soul, and all those seduced by him, merely to avoid the doing of those things,
which if he does them cannot in the least prejudice his Salvation? for these
are only the Conditions of our maintaining Peace, Unity, and Charity, but not
the Conditions upon which our Salvation depends; because God has no where said,
he that does these things shall be damned, and he that abstains from them shall
be saved; but he has said, we must hear the Church, and if she Commands this,
for Peace sake, we must Obey, lest we be justly esteemed as Publicans and
Heathens.

BESIDES, they who Command must answer to God for themselves, and they who are
to Obey shall not answer for the Errors of their Superiors; but no man can
answer to God for his disobedience against them in these Commands, not only
because they are not Judges whether they ought to do or not to do what they are
Commanded, but because there can then be no such thing as Obedience, if every
man may be his own Judge; for what one man may do out of pure doubt or scruple
of Mind, thousands will pretend to do; and it being impossible to discover the
Tender Conscience from the Obstinate and Designing, all Duty to our Superiors
in the Church will be Evaded with pretense of Doubting; or else consist in
obeying only so far as we like the Commands; which is for fear of Popery to
make every Man his own Pope, to dispense with the Laws of God and Man, just as
they suit his Interest and his Inclination: to make the Scriptures a Nose of
Wax, and the King and Church mere Heads of Wood; and since the reason of
Obedience is, because we think it truth which is Commanded, and that they who
Command are better able to Judge for us than we our selves, as being by God
appointed over us for that Design, should they be mistaken in what they
Command, yet the Judge of all the Earth, who cannot do wrong, would be so far
from punishing, that he would reward such Obedience, because done according to
his Command. Nor shall the other for Commanding, because they did it with a
good Design, provided when it does appear to them to be of ill consequence,
they cease to impose it any longer; which is the true reason why many things in
the service of God have been altered and abolished upon several Occasions.

THIRDLY, It will be objected, That by this Rule, all the Gallicane, German,
and other Protestant Churches, who live under a Government which owns and
Commands the Romish Discipline and Church, will hereby be made Schismatics to
those several National Churches, of which they are Members; and that hereby a
necessity is laid upon us to return to the Obedience of the Church of Rome; for
if those Churches may dissent from their National Churches, and yet hold the
true Faith, why may not we; why should their Disobedience be Lawful, and ours
Damnable?

To this I answer First, That the Difference between those Churches, and the
National Church in which they are, does not consist in Matters of Circumstance
or Ceremony but in Matters of Faith; and though I will neither undertake the
Defense of those Churches either in Doctrine or Discipline; yet, I suppose,
they separate from the Roman Communion upon the account of the Impositions of
that Church in Points of Faith, such as are the Popes Supremacy (never owned in
France even by the Catholics) the Doctrines of Infallibility, the real
Presence by Transubstantiation, Merit of Works, and Supererogation, Invocation
of Saints, Purgatory, Adoration of Images, etc. and the Roman Church who
imposes these as Articles of Faith, is her self Schismatical (if not Heretical)
from the Catholic Apolique Church of all Ages; and therefore to depart from
her where she departs from Truth, is no more Heresy or Schism, than it would
be to depart from the Law of Moses, or the Jewish Communion in Circumcision,
etc. or of Mahomet, if those were imposed as Matters of Faith by that or any
other Church: for the Apostles Rule holds good to the End of the World for all
Christians in Matters of Faith and Manners, Be ye followers of me as I am of
Christ. 1 Cor. 11.1.
And would the Romish Church Impose no more upon Christians as necessary to
Salvation, than is contained in those three famous Creeds of the Apostles,
Nice, and St. Athanasius, and what is clearly contained in Scripture, which
have ever been the Standards of the Catholic Faith, I think every good
Christian, over whom they may challenge a Lawful Jurisdiction, ought to join
with them in Communion of Government; and even those over whom they can rightly
challenge none, ought yet to agree with them in the Communion of Faith; Nay,
should they command many Ceremonies in the Service of God, more than they do,
yet those who live in the Jurisdiction of that Church, ought to submit to them
for the maintaining of Unity, Peace, and Charity: and I doubt not but the
Foreign Protestants (at least in Charity I hope so) if there were no other
matters of Difference between them, would easily be persuaded to submit to all
the Points of Government, Ceremony, and much more. I remember what a Famous
French Minister said to this Purpose, when he was told that some of the English
Nonconformists refused Communion with the Church of England, because they were
Enjoined to wear the Surplice, and other Vestments; I wish, says he, that the
King of France would command me to perform my Function in a Fools Coat: so
little did he think the outside and dress of Religion to be of the Essence of
it, and so necessary did he judge Obedience, as well as true Faith, to the
Peace, Unity and Happiness of the Church.

BUT Secondly, Many of those Protestants have License and Tolleration given
them, to Celebrate the Worship and Service of God according to their own Way,
and by that Dispensation, they are free from the guilt of Disobedience to the
Civil Magistrate; and for the Obedience they owe to the Church of Rome, I
presume they are willing to give it with all their hearts, if Rome Exacted no
more in matters of Faith than God Almighty requires as necessary to Salvation.

BUT the Case is clearly different betwixt our Dissenters, and the Foreign
Protestants; for our Differences are, or at least are pretended to be, about
matters of Polity, and the Manner of performance of the Offices of Religion:
and let the Nonconformists prove us but Guilty of destroying one Article of
Faith, or imposing any thing to be believed or done contrary to the Scriptures,
and let them dissent from us in Gods Name; and till they can do that, their
Separation will be a horrid Schism, and their Nonconformity a manifest
Disobedience to the Laws of God and Men. And should the Foreign Churches refuse
the Communion of the Church of Rome, and disobey the Princes whose Subjects
they are, commanding them, if there were no greater Differences than Matters of
Ceremony and Circumstance, I doubt not but their Separation and Disobedience
would deserve the same Character.

BUT supposing the Supreme Power of those Countries should absolutely prohibit
the Protestants the exercise of their Religion, I think they ought to obey, and
fall to the Old Arms of the Primitive Christians, Prayers and Tears, and not to
the new Methods, of Manaces, making Parties, and endeavoring by force of Arms
to obtain that from Authority by Violence and Compulsion, which they cannot by
Persuasion: A Practice shameful to the Protestant Cause, and for any thing I
can see, if they Judge of all by the Example of our Dissenters, more likely to
persuade all Princes to Extirpate them out of their Dominions for Seditious
Schismatics, and Dangerous Rebels, than to Tolerate them as Innocent and
Religious Christians.

THIS was the Custom of the Ancient Christians, who Conquered more by the
Cross, than the Persecutors by all their Cruelty; who overcame by Suffering,
and not by Rebelling. A remarkable Instance of which. we have in the Army of
Julian the Apostate, who were obedient to him as their Temporal Sovereign so
long as he lived; but after he had jested out his impious Soul with a Vicisti
Galilaee, and that Jovinianus was chosen Emperor, which he refused as being a
Christian, and thinking the whole Army Pagans, they all cried out, Et nos sumus
Christiani, We are all of us also Christians. Here were men in Arms, a Powerful
Number of Veterane and Victorious Legions; and yet had they not so much as a
Rebellious thought of Establishing Religion by force or violence.

CHAP. VII.
BY what has been said, it appears that the Foundation of all Charity among
Christians, is built upon Unity in Faith, which is the necessary bond of the
Catholic Church, which is the Company of all faithful People which are, have
been, or shall be in all Ages and Places of the World; and that Unity in
Government as well as Faith, is the Bond of Peace; and Obedience a Duty
therefore which all men owe to their Lawful Superiors, as the Necessary
Ligature of a National Church; which being a Political Society of Religious
Men, does therefore require a Political Government in Religious as well as
Civil affairs.

THE not well considering of this Difference between a National and the
Catholic Church, seems to be the chief Ground of the Quarrels among
Christians: for the Catholic Church being the Spiritual Body of Christ, is
United in it self and to him by the Spiritual Bond of the Catholic Faith;
which Faith may be kept Whole and Undefiled, though there be great Differences
in External Rites and Ceremonies. For all Ceremonies are not fit for all
Places; as for Example, Submerging of the person Baptized may do very well in
the warm Climates, but would be very hazardous in the more Northern Regions of
Muscovy, Rushia, etc. Thus we see it was adjudged in that Great Controversy
about the Celebration of Easter, between the Eastern and the Western Churches:
For when Anicetus Bishop of Rome, and Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, differed in
their Opinion about it, they came to this amicable Determination, that each
Church should celebrate it according to their own Custom, for which they gave
this Reason, Quia non oportet propter Caeremoniarum dissonantiam, rumpere Fidei
Consonantiam, and Ecclesiae Concordiam: The Peace and Concord of the Church in
the Harmony of Faith, ought not to be broken for a disagreement in matters of
Ceremony; And because this Difference made a great Noise in the Church for many
years, ^^d in regard it Confirms my Position of Unity of Faith, being the Bond
of the Catholic Church, and Unity of Government as well as Faith, that of a
National Church, I will relate the History of it in short as it is Recorded by
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24, 25, 26.


Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, and a great many of the Asian Bishops, alleging
the Practice and ancient Custom of St. John, the beloved Disciple of our Lord,
who was himself Bishop of Ephesus, Polycarp, and several others observed Easter
upon any day of the Week according to the Custom of the Jews. The Christians of
the Western Church observed it, as we do, upon the Sunday, being the day of his
Resurrection. Upon this, Victor Bishop of Rome, pronounces them Excommunicate
and separates from their Communion; Irenoeus Bishop in Lions, shows Victor his
Error, and that for Ceremonies and Circumstances the Unity of the Church ought
not to be broken; which he manifests by the Diversity of several Churches, in
observing the time of Fasting before Easter, some only one day, some two, some
more, to forty, and yet for all this, says that Excellent Father, they were at
Unity one with another, and as yet retain it; for this Variety of Fasting
commends the Unity of Faith; and thereupon writing to Victor, he acquaints
him, that Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesephorus, and Xystus his Predecessors,
though not observing the same Custom with the Bishops of Asia, yet nevertheless
were at Unity with them, and sent the Eucharist unto the Brethren of other
Churches, that observed a Contrary Custom; showing him also how Polycarpus did
not endeavor to alter the Judgment of Anicetus, but told him that he ought to
observe the ancient Custom of his Predecessors: Upon which, for the reason
beforementioned, they friendly received the Holy Eucharist together, the
Symbol of their Unity in Faith, and parted from each other in Peace; and all
such, adds he, as held contrary Customs and Observations throughout the
Universal Church, held fast the Bond of Love and Unity; no Church endeavoring
to impose upon the Liberty of others in point of Circumstances, so long as they
all held the Catholic Faith as the only necessary bond of Union in the
Catholic Church, and Unity of Government as the Bond of Union in the several
Distinct and National Churches, whereof the Universal is composed, and which
therefore it appears, had Originally a Jurisdiction among themselves, over
which neither Rome nor any other had a Power.

So that is clear, that several National Churches may lawfully differ in
External Rites of Government from the Catholic, without the danger of Schism;
But now in a National Church there is a necessity of Unity and Obedience to the
Determinations of those who are the Lawful Governors of it; and all
Disobedience there is a Schism, in regard the Peace of that Church, the Order,
and Charity of it, without this must be destroyed; and therefore there is a
Necessity of this Unity in point of Government in any National Church.

Now every Distinct Nation, as before was said, being a separate Society of men
Distinguished from the rest of the World, by a different Government, and their
Obedience to it, as well as by their Place of Habitation; there is a Necessity
that Religion should conduce all it can to the preservation of that Political
Frame, upon which the Well-being and Happiness of the Society depends; For the
Civil and Religious concerns are so mutually interwoven, that no man can be a
Good Citizen who is an ill Christian, or an ill Christian who is Bonus Civis, a
good Publiquewealths-man; and these do mutually support one another; true
Religion Improving this Interest of all Men, by making the Civil part of the
Polity, a Duty of Religion among Christians, whereas among Heathen, it was only
a duty of Interest and Policy: For even in this sense we may truly say as our
Savior of himself, Matt. 5.17.
that Christian Religion came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; to
conform Humane Laws to the Rule of Divine Equity, Truth, and Justice; and for
this reason our Lord himself gave that Universal Precept to Render to Caesar
his Due; which also he confirmed by his Practice, paying him Tribute even with
a Miracle.

NOR do we ever find the Primitive Spirit of Christianity opposing any humane
Laws or Power, unless they were such as directly struck at the Root of Faith
and a holy Life; such as were the severe Edicts of the Persecuting Emperors, to
compel them to renounce and Blaspheme Christ; to adore the Pagan Gods; or to
offer Incense to the Statues of the Emperors. Nay, when they were treated with
more than inhumanity, they never had recourse to Violence, or attempted to
justle the Temporal Power out of the Throne, or force it to a compliance with
their Wills, but suffered patiently, even when (as Tertullian Apologizes for
them) they were grown so numerous, that if they should by a Common consent have
deserted the Empire, they would have left Desolation behind them.

THIS being therefore granted, That our Obedience to the Laws of the Polity or
Nation wherein we live, (so long as they command nothing contrary to the Divine
Law) is a part of our Christian Religion, (as may be easily made appear from
Reason, Scripture, and the Practice of the best and purest Ages of Primitive
Christianity) even in such Constitutions as concern the Government of the
Church, as well as the Temporal Affairs of State, which was done with great
happiness to both, in the Reigns of Constantine the Great, and many other
Christian Emperors; I will therefore proceed upon this Position, to show that,
in Order to the happy Condition both of Civil and Religious Affairs, there is
an absolute Necessity of Unity and Uniformity of Government Ecclesiastical in a
National Church.

THIS Necessity is grounded both in the Prudence of the Lawful Policy, and
Religious Wisdom. I will begin with the Religious Necessity.

WE must therefore consider the Essence, the Nature, the Design, and the
Intention of the Gospel, in that part of it which differences it from all other
Religions, both Pagan, Jewish, and Mahumetan, for the Intention of that must be
our Great Design, if we will be true Followers of Christ, and not in Words
profess we own him, but in Actions deny him, and his Royal Priesthood over us.

NOW the very Essence of Christian Religion consists in Love, or Charity; this
is the New Commandment, and the fulfilling of the Old: and herein it is that
Christianity differs from and Excells all other Religions. The Heathens knew no
more of this than their Interest obliged them to; and therefore all those of
Different Nations, Manners, or Religions, were esteemed Barbarians and Enemies;
and accordingly treated: and had not God Almighty permitted the Regiment of the
World to be Absolute and Tyrannical, this want of Charity one to another, would
certainly have thrown them into perpetual Civil Wars and Confusion amongst
themselves, there being then no Rein upon Ambitious Spirits, but Fear of the
Arbitrary Power, and Will of their Princes, which was the Supreme Law by which
they Ruled their Subjects. And even the Law of Moses (according to the corrupt
gloss of the Scribes and Pharisees) said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor and
hate thine Enemy; Matt. 5.43.
and according to the letter of it, Exacted Life for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth
for Tooth. But when the Eternal Son of the Blessed came into the World, both to
Redeem it and Renew it; to Exalt men who were sunk into a Degeneracy below the
Beasts that Perish; and to make them partakers of the Divine Nature, he teaches
another Doctrine very harsh to Flesh and Blood, but such as would in reality
make them resemble God their Heavenly Father. He teaches them to Love their
Enemies, to Bless them that Curse us, to do good to them that hate us, to Pray
for them that despightfully Use us, and Persecute us; by which Methods we shall
come to be the true Children of the true God, whose Glorious Sun rises upon
the Evil and the Good, Matt. 5.44, 45.
and whose fruitful Showers fall upon the Just and the Unjust. This Love he
makes the Foundation of Religion which he was to introduce into the World,
proceeding from the infinite Love of God to Mankind, and from the God of Love;
and therefore he tells us that the whole Law is comprised in these two
Commandments, Matt. 22.37, 38, 39, 40.
to Love God and our Neighbor. And therefore he does so often repeat that
which he calls the New Commandment; Joh. 13.34, 35.
A new Commandment I give unto you, That ye Love one another, as I have Loved
you; that ye also Love one another; by this shall all men know that you are my
Disciples, if ye have Love one for another. And what he taught he also
confirmed by his Example, In that he died for us when we were Enemies.

NOW the Command being Universal, to all those who are the Disciples of Christ;
they who hate another, because they differ or dissent from them in some things,
which Christ having left indifferent, has therefore left to the Wisdom of those
with whom he entrusted the Government of the Church, to determine as they shall
Judge most conducive to this great Design of Charity, cannot be the true
Disciples of Christ; 1 John 4.40.
for, If any man say, I love God, and hate his Brother, he is a Liar. And
therefore the holy Apostles, and particularly the beloved Disciple St. John,
lays such weight upon this Duty, and so frequently commands it, that his three
Epistles are scarce any thing else but a repetition of that Command, and the
reasons for it: which brings into mind what I have somewhere read of that
Apostle, that in his extreme old age residing at Ephesus, and governing the
Churches of the lesser Asia; when he was not able to perform the Offices of the
Church, yet he would be carried in his chair to the Assembly of Christians,
where he would several times repeat this Sentence; My little Children love one
another: and being demanded the reason of this short, but Excellent Sermon, he
made answer to this Effect, because, It did comprise the sum of all Religion,
and that Charity would cover a multitude of other faults. And therefore St.
Paul doubts not to give it the pre-eminence above the two other principal
Graces. 1 Cor. 13.13.
Now (says he) abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the greatest of these is
Charity. For when Hope shall be completed by possession, and Faith changed
into Fruition, then shall Charity be most triumphant, as being the Life of
Heaven, and the pleasing employment of a glorious Eternity. And certainly it is
this love unseigned both toward God and toward our Brethren, that is so of
the Essence of Religion, that without both these, it is but a mere Impostor:
for no person can truly fear God, who does not smcerely love him; and no man
loves God sincerely, who does not love his Brother also: 1 Timothy 5.1.
For the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, and Faith Unfeigned.

NOW taking this for a Foundation, which no good Christian can deny, I proceed
to show that it is absolutely impossible to maintain this Charity without Unity
both of Faith and Government in a National Church; and to make it evident, I
should need no stronger Argument than what the holy Apostle St. Paul subjoyns
in the words following those of his last repeated: From which (says he) some
having swerved, have turned aside to vain Jangling. Here is the source of all
the Churches Miseries; this vain jangling has ever been the occasion of all
those Dissentions and Divisions, those mischievous Quarrels which have not
confined themselves to Words, but have proceeded to the Outrages of Blows and
Blood; it is want of Charity, and that pure heart and good Conscience which
commands Peace, and forbids all Disorder and Disobedience, which are
destructive of it in the Church of God.

BUT to make this apparent, so as that no Evasion may be found, let us consider
that Unity of Faith is not sufficient to maintain Charity in a National Church,
unless there be also Unity in point of Government; for where men Live together
imbodied in one political Society, and are therefore daily conversant together,
it is impossible but they will discourse about the Modes as well as the Essence
of Religion: and supposing that all People had free Liberty to choose after what
manner they would serve and Worship God; no doubt is to be made, but every man
would prefer his own choice both of Opinion and Practice, before that of
others; and Esteem it most agreeable to the Will of God, and most conducive to
the great Design of all Religion, the Eternal Salvation of Men's Souls: This
undue preference of their own Way, as it would naturally incline them to make
as many Proselytes as possibly they could, (a Duty they would judge themselves
necessarily and indispensably obliged to perform) so would it necessarily put
them not only upon defending and maintaining their own Way, but of lessening,
and it may be debasing and vilifying all others in comparison of it. Nor would
others be less eager in searching out and Exposing their Errors and Defects,
thereby to Establish themselves, and their Way of Worship, in the good Opinion
of their Followers, to which Revenge (for affront and indignity offered to what
they Esteem most Sacred) would contribute not a little: so that all Religion
would come to consist in frivolous and endless Disputes and Differences, what
kind of Breath, what Tones, Words, Habits, Gestures, or Postures God Almighty
is best pleased with; and instead of that Charity which covers a multiude of
Faults, that would be the best, which had the least, and was best able to
discover the Infirmities of all others; and would seem to consist not so much
in its own Excellencies or Perfections, as by discovering the defects of those
who did oppose it. Nor would these foolish differences terminate in mere Words
and Wrangles, but proceed by degrees to the highest Animosities and Extremities
of Hatred, and such a hatred as inspires Men with the devilish Principles of
endeavoring to Extirpate Root and Branch with Fire and Sword, all those who
differ from them it may be but in the Punctillo's of outward Ceremonies: and
they who shall appear most Zealous in Executing this blind and furious Rage,
shall be accounted most godly and Religious Murder shall be called Justice;
Wrong, Violence, and Oppression, Punishments justly inflicted upon the Wicked;
Sacrilege shall pass for Piety, and the most horrid and slagitious Enormities,
shall be dedicated to the Glory of God; and be reputed acceptable service to
him, being done, or however pretended, with the design of propagating the
Gospel, rooting out Superstition, False Doctrine and Heresy.

O meek and blessed Jesus! thou innocent Lamb of God who take away the Sins
of the World, is this the Religion which with thy precious blood was planted in
the World, and watered with the blood of so many of thy holy Saints and Martyrs?
Assuredly God is not in such terrible Hurricanes, Whirlwinds, and Earthquakes,
Tempests or Fires, as rend the Mountains, 1 Kings 19.11, 12.
and break the Rocks in pieces; as shake and put all the Foundations of the
World out of Course, and consume all before them: No, no; it is in the small
still voice, the calm, and soft voice of Peace and Meekness that God and true
Religion are to be found. Alas! it is not in this man's pompous breath, nor that
man's Eloquent Harangue that God is delighted; it is not the rude and undecent
Religion of him who despises all Ceremonies in the Worship of God, who will not
bend his knee or uncover his head for fear of he knows not what Idolatry; Nor
is it the over superstitious and courtly service of him who makes all his
Religion groan under the Load of splendid Ceremonies, that God is pleased with:
he has no more satisfaction in these Exterior demeanors, than, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 147.10, 11.
in the strength of an horse, or in the legs of a man; but the Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his Mercy. And all these
outward Demonstrations of our Worship, are only valuable according to their
inward intention of promoting the main Design for which he intended them, which
is Peace, Unity, and Concord among the Sons of Men.

NOW this blessed Peace, this happy Unity, and this Christian Concord, are not
to be hoped for in any National Church, but by submitting to such common
Expedients in the Celebration of the Public Worship of Almighty God, as by
putting an End to these Differences, may lay asleep all these occasions of
Divisions, Disputes, and vain janglings; and may therefore cut off the root and
occasion of Quarrels about the How God shall be served. And this Power must
either be granted to be in the Governors of the Church and Nation, or otherways
all falls to Confusion: For if it be not in the Church, then have not any
Dissenters that Power over their Churches; and therefore they go about an
unlawful Action, and are bold Usurpers over the Christian Liberty of their
Brethren, whilst they go about to Establish any Government in their
Congregations; if it be in the Church, then either that Authority is in the
Church of England, or She is not a true Church. Let them prove that, and we
will fairly and quietly yield them the Cause; But if the Church of England be a
true Church, and a true Church have such a Power, then ought all who are in
that Community and Nation, to be obedient to her Determinations; because they
are within the Verge of her Jurisdiction; and they who are disobedient, are
guilty of the breach of Unity and Charity, and Enemies to Peace; and if the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews be of any Credit, they who do not follow
Peace with all Men, as well as Holiness, (and much more then with that Church
which brought them forth, and has nursed them in her tender Arms) shall never
see God. And into what a desperate condition then have they reduced themselves,
who for want of this Charity, Peace, and Unity, run themselves and their
Disciples into the danger of being Excluded, (notwithstanding all their
Holiness) from the Glorious presence of God, which in plain English is Eternal
Damnation.

AH poor Church of England! how justly may thou take up the Mournful
complaint of God Almighty by his Prophet Isaiah; Hear o Heavens! Esaias 1.2.
and give ear o Earth! I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me! O miserable and deceived People! How vainly do you
Establish your hopes of Eternal Happiness upon principles of Dissension? Who
are made believe no way so secure to attain Salvation, as Disobedience to the
Government of the Church your Mother? Who lose all Charity, the substance of
Religion, for the Watery shadow that appears in the smooth but treacherous face
of the specious words of Reformation, and greater degrees of Purity; not
considering in the mean time, that these are all (the best of them) but outward
Forms of Godliness, common to the Good and Bad; but that Charity and Obedience
in order to Brotherly Unity, are the Power and the Life, the Soul, and very
Essence of all true Religion: With these, Religion may be false, but without
the other, it can never be true. Esaias 5.21.
Woe unto them (says the Prophet) that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent
in their own sight. And what can be more Evident than that these People must be
so to the highest degrees of Folly and Frenzy, who expose the Peace and
Welfare of the Church, to ruin and Destruction, in complaisance to their
private ill-grounded Opinions in mere matters of Indifferency; who neglect a
certain Duty, for a Doubtful Supposition; and have less Esteem for Charity than
a Scruple or a Fancy; who by their obstinate Practice so contrary to all
Antiquity, and so wholly new, and therefore Uncertain, set themselves in the
Throne of Wisdom and Prudence, much above all the Learned, Pious, and glorious
Governors of the Church, Saints, and Martyrs, which have been in all Ages since
the Son of God laid the Foundation of it with his precious Blood: Nay, even
above the Son of God himself, who not only left that Government in his Church,
(as shall be shown hereafter) but by the Miraculous continuance and
preservation of that Government, has manifested that he does approve it, and
that he has upheld it by his mighty Power and Wisdom.

LET Dissenters therefore show us perspicuously when there was any other
Government in the Church than that of Bishops? Let them show us when ever the
Church was without a Public Liturgy, since that composed by St. James? When
ever Christians were without Priests to attend the Altar, Heb. 13.10.
of which they who serve the Jewish Tabernacle have no right to Eat, or that
these were of the Peoples choosing, and not Ordained by Bishops to their Sacred
Function? Let them show us where ever any person was permitted to Entertain the
People with a long Extempore Prayer, more to the displaying his own Abilities
than to edify them; more to disparage others who cannot, who dare not if they
can, be so bold with the Dreadful Majesty of Heaven, than to bring them into
Charity with such Persons, whose considerative Modesty stands amazed at the
thoughts of the Divine Omnipotence, as having been taught by the Holy Spirit,
Eccles. 5.1, 2.
That God is in Heaven and we on Earth, and therefore our words ought to be
few; and that it is a foolish Presumption to think we can please him by
breaking his commands, by being rash with our Mouths, and hasty with our hearts
to utter any thing before God, for they who do so consider not that they give
the sacrifice of Fools, Romans 3.8.
and do Evil; which an Apostle tells us we must not at any Rate be guilty of,
not though we may reasonably hope for a good Effect from evil Actions, whose
Damnation he there says is just.

LET them show us these things either positively commanded of God, or
prohibited, Universally practiced by the Church, or condemned; or otherways let
them confess that they are wiser than the Generations of their Forefathers in
Christ; wiser than the Apostles and all the holy Martyrs, who with their Blood
Sealed and Delivered the Truth of these things down to us. And if they will
call these Practices Antichristian, Superstitious, and Unlawful, if they will
tear off the Ornaments of their Mother, nay and Murder her too, because she
will not consent to betray her self and her trust to their Novel Wisdom, if
they will more barbaroufly than the Roman Soldiers rend the seamless Coat of
Christ, to patch up another of their own Inventions; we must pity them and pray
for them in the Language of our blessed Jesus, Father forgive them for they
know not what they do: Luke 23.34.
and yet even that Charity does not deprive us of using all Lawful ways and
means to defend our selves from their injurious encroachments; nor is it meant
that our Charity ought to be so defenseless, as voluntarily to Expose us to
their Injustice and Cruelty: And that glorious Law which commands us to love
and pray for our Enemies, does not oblige us to offer our throats a Sacrifice
to their Swords, nor are we bound to be so kind to them, as to be Cruel to our
selves.

I could heartily wish the sad Effects of the Decay of Christian Charity among
us were only the Cloudy apparitions of my own fears and imaginations; Airy
Combats and Meteors of the Mind: But alas! we may but too sorrowfully invert
the saying of the Royal Prophet; Psalm. 44.7
We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us; nay, miserable
people that we are, we have seen with our Eyes these afflicting Truths: For no
sooner was the Church of England, stepped out of the Errors and Darkness of Rome;
but the Devil, the great Incendiary of the World, envious of our Happiness,
begun to sow the Tares of Dissension among us. I will not repeat the Names of
those Authors of our Misery, but I desire all Dissenters of what Names soever,
to consider what have been the Effects of these Differences which for this 80
years they have with such Hereditary Violence and Animosity maintained against
the Church of England? What is it that has banished all Charity from the Minds
and Lives of Men? What is it that has made all those Heats, Strifes, and
Divisions, those bitter Railings, that Hatred, Emulation, and at last
Separation from the Communion of Saints (which is one Article of our Faith)
between people of different Opinions? What is it therefore that has sacrificed
Faith to Opinion? From what Fountain flowed all those fearful streams of blood,
which so lately staind our yet blushing Fields, Scaffolds, nay our very Temples
and Altars? From what Coast blew those Whirlwinds of Rebellion and Sedition,
not privy but public Conspiracy, which threw down all, Crowns and Mitres,
Churches and Palaces, every thing Sacred and Civil; which occasioned the ruin
of so many Millions of Souls, Bodies, and Estates? This Cloud which was at
first no bigger than a Man's hand, which afterward covered the face of the
Heavens with Storms and Tempests, Thunder and Lightning, like the dismal Plague
of Egypt, Fire mingled with Hail, was nothing but the dislike which some
persons had that their sense was not made the standard of Religion; and
because, contrary to their good liking, some Ceremonies were thought fit to be
retained in the Church, as being of great Antiquity, of Excellent Use and
necessity, which they would have had totally abolished.

THESE men, whose Tempers were warmer than their Charity, and whose Zeal was
much too heavy for their Judgment; either not considering, or not caring what
must be the necessary consequences of these sparks of Dissension; set their
Lungs to work as well as their Wits, to blow them up into a Flame; pretending
to the Unwary, that that Fire which was indeed of their own kindling, was the
only Gospel Light; and that which by its future Effects has proved it self a
Portentous Comet, was the Day star from on high which was sent to visit them,
to lead them to Eternal Light, under the Glorious Sun of Righteousness. Had it
burnt like the kind and wondrous lambent flame in Moses his bush, without
consuming it, we might have been induced to believe that God was in the Fire.
But alas! it was too ravenous to permit us to continue in that belief; and the
World has found by dear Experience, that it was of the Extraction of that Fire
St. James describes unto us, Jam. 3.6.8.
Behold (says he) how great a matter a little Fire kindles; and the Tongue is
a Fire, a World of Iniquity, it sets on fire the whole Course of Nature, and it
is set on fire of Hell; being an untamable little Animal, an unruly Evil, full
of deadly Poison, Especially when therewith we bless God even the Father, and
curse Men who are made after the similitude of God.

HOWEVER, to justify their Division and Dislike, they did endeavor with might
and main, to pull down Babylon, as they called not only Rome but the
Reformation, (that being the odious name of whatever displeases them) because
it was not modeled according to that Platform which they therefore fancied,
because it was of their own devising: Discourses full of Gall and Wormwood,
instead of Meekness and Humility, flew like lightning from their Pens, as well
as Invectives, and bitter Reproaches from their Mouths. And to make some show
that they were not without Reason, a new Frame of Church Government, wholly
unpresidented, and never before practiced, was minted at Geneva: This
glistering Medal (as the coursest Medals will do when they come first off the
Mint) shone with such a dazeling luster in the Eyes of those who Coined it, as
the silver shrines of Diana did in the Opinion of Demetrius: and presently (I
will not say positively for the same Reasons) it gained as many, and as
tumultuous Worshippers, who like the wild Ephesians cried up this (...), a
Thunderbolt newly dropped from the Clouds, with as much Ernestness and as little
Reason, Where some cried one thing, Acts 19.32.
and some another, for the Assembly was confused, (as it always happens where
any thing is managed by Tumult and Passion) and the greater part knew not
wherefore they were come together: but some there were who did; and they who
did not, yet were made believe they were as good as the best. Yet was not even
this Glorious and thorough Reformation, though new run and cast, so pure and
perfect from all the dross of Superstition and Corruption, but that some of
quicker sight and sounder Judgment among themselves, espied some Babylonish
rust upon it; and straight they began, after the Example of Presbytery, to make
use of their Christian Liberty, and to separate likewise the Pure from the Vile.

THUS was the Unfortunate Ichabod of Presbytery born amongst us, with the Death
of his Mother, and the Dismal overthrow of the Holy Church: 1 Samuel 4.
The Glory departed from our Israel, the Ark was lost, and there was a great
slaughter among the People. Then arose whole swarms of Sects, or rather Insects
in Religion, with gilded Wings, but Scorpions Tayls, painted Bodies, but still
poisonous Stings; and as if Beelzebub the God of Flies, and Ekron, had been let
loose among us, nothing was heard but the confused buzzing of these differing
Opinions, who all pretended to gather Honey for the Hive, but were in truth
Sacrilegious Robbers; agreeing in nothing but their mutual hatred, and common
design against the Church of England, whose utter Extirpation was the mark of
their United Conspiracy; in order afterward every one to Establish themselves,
not only upon hers, but the Ruin of their differing Confederates.

THESE have been, and I wish I could say they were not at present the sad,
natural, and necessary Effects of breaking the Unity of Government in the
outward Administration of the Service of God; which crumbles a glorious Church
into the Epicurean Atoms of Faction and Confusion, till at last there remains
little of it, besides the Name: and most certainly they who have once shaken
hands with this Unity, must of necessity in a short time take their leave of
Charity; for these are the Twins of true Religion, which live and dye together,
and when these are gone, the tongues of Men and Angels, the Faith of Miracles,
and the flaming Zeal of Martyrs, are but sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals,
they may make a little jingling noise of Religion, but it is to be feared, the
louder they are, the more Empty of the soul and substance of true Piety, and
Christianity.

So that those who do believe that Charity is so of the Essence of Religion, as
good Works are of Faith, without which the one is as dead and vain as the
other; will easily be convinced, both by Reason and Experience, of the absolute
Necessity that there is of Unity in Point of Government to preserve that
Charity alive: since without this Unity of Government to determine and give a
Period to the Differences of several Opinions, which shall be obtruded as
Matters of Faith, all Religion presently degenerates into vain and endless
Disputes; these produce Divisions, Factions, and Parties; those run immediately
into separation of Communion; that leads men headlong to Animosities and
Hatred, and Hatred always ends in Confusion and every evil Work, as St. James
has well informed us. Jam. 3.17.
For (says he) the Wisdom which is from above is peaceable as well as pure,
full of Mercy and good Fruits, and the fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace
of them that make Peace, and all other Wisdom which banishes Charity with a
pretense of Establishing Piety, is Sensual, Carnal, Devilish; Excellent
recommendations of Reformation carried on without Nay against this Charity and
Unity in the Government of a National Church!

CHAP. VIII.
THUS we see that Unity in Point of Government, as well as Faith, is absolutely
necessary in a National Church to preserve it in Peace and Charity, and that is
in plain Terms to render it truly Christian, and a part of the Catholic
Church, which we all profess to believe as an Article of our Faith. We shall
see in the next place how necessary this Unity in point of Government, is to
maintain Christian Discipline in the World; and how without it, that great
Power of the Keys which Christ gave to his Apostles and their Successors, for
the Government of his Church, becomes impracticable, and of no Use or Authority
for suppressing Vice, or Encouraging true Piety and Religion.

LOUD and clamorous are the Complaints and Declamations against the vitiousness
and Debauchery of the present Age; and not without too evident Truth and
Reason: Impiety which was formerly used to wait for the twilight, dare now walk
bare faced, and stare upon the Sun: St. Paul says of the modest Debauchees of
his Age, They that are drunken are drunken in the Night; but now licentious men
are become so impudent as to scorn to throw the Mantle of Darkness over their
vicious Intemperance, that they take a Pleasure and a Pride to Riot in the day
time, and to affront God and Men, and even humane Nature it self, by their
prodigious and Public Sins and Follies. They who did ill formerly, hated the
light, but now Men study to affront it, and oblige that pure and innocent
Blessing, to become not only a Witness but an Assistant to their Brutish, and
shameless Disorders: and would loose their greatest pleasure, should they not
expose themselves and their deeds of Darkness to the discovery of the Day.

ALL this is laid upon the Government of the Church, which though it be as
innocent as the light by which they are boldly acted; yet must they conspire in
the guilt of these horrid Crimes, if we will believe Dissenters; who blush not
to lay this false Accusation to the Charge of the Government, that thereby they
may render it Criminal and Odious, and themselves and Party Clear and Innocent;
when as in truth and reality, the Guilt of these miscarriages will be found to
lie at their own Doors; and let them wipe their mouths never so demurely, and
say they have done no Evil, Prove. 30.20.
with Solomon's Common Woman; let them wash their hands with Pilate, and say
they are guiltless; I doubt not to make it appear to the contrary. It is a bold
Charge, and I know they will start at it as much as the Disciples did, when our
Savior told them, That one of them should betray him; and be as forward as
they to Cry out, Is it I? Who we? but what if it prove true; and be made good
against them? I will endeavor it; and yet with all the Christian Compassion
that I am capable of; for I have no design to Expose their Persons to hatred,
but to bring them to true Repentance, by showing them the Danger of those Ways,
which with the specious show of Righteousness and Holiness, deceive them into a
Contempt of the terrible Authority of the Church, and others, by their Example,
into all Sensuality, and Impiety.

THAT Christ left to the Governors of his Church the Power of the Keys, is most
Evident from his own plain and clear Words. For when he was to leave this
World, he called his Apostles to him, and Then said Jesus unto them again, Joh.
20.23.
Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent me, even so send I you; there is
their Mission and Commission for their Function and Government; and when he had
said this, Matthew. 18.18.
he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost: there is
their Unction and Ordination, their ability to perform the Duty, and discharge
the trust reposed in them; Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained: There is the Office
and the Power which was put into their hands; the Expedient by which they were
to govern and Rule the Church of God. And though the Romanists endeavor to
Monopolize (even in the literal and worst sense) this great Power only to Saint
Peter and his Successors, as they pretend the Roman Bishops only are; yet
nothing is more clear, than that our Savior intended them all an Equal share,
and a Power to derive it to their Successors in all Churches, to the End of the
World; His gracious Promise of being with them extending unto all Times,
Places, and Persons, who should succeed any of the Apostles, as well as St.
Peter: The Church being built not only upon him, but upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being himself the Chief and Cornerstone,
in whom and by whom the whole glorious Fabrique is United and Completed.

THIS Power of the Keys, of binding and loosing, is the Power of
Excommunication of Offenders, and Absolution of Penitents, and is indeed all
the Power which Christ left with his Church, and the only Jurisdiction which
the Governors can exercise in and over it: For all Corporal Punishments are
properly and peculiarly vested by God himself in the power of the Temporal and
Civil Magistrate, who carries the Sword, and is ordained of God for that very
purpose and Design; as St. Paul acquaints us, Romans 13.
for he bears not the Sword in vain, but is the Minister of God, a Revenger
to Execute punishment upon him that does Evil.

AN Instance of this terrible Sentence of Excommunication, we have inflicted
upon the Incestuous Corinthian; and that with a great Formality: 1 Cor. 5.5.
This is my Determination (says the Apostle) In the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, when year gathered together, and my Spirit with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan; as he tells us in another place,
that he had delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, that they might learn
not to Blaspheme.

By virtue of this dreadful Power it was, that the Primitive Governors of the
Church, even when they had no assistance, but all opposition from the Secular
Powers, yet kept the Flock of Christ in all Obedience, Subjection, good Order
and Discipline: Then were Christians Miracles of Charity, Piety, and Devotion,
to the wondering Pagans, when they were obliged to those Duties by no Humane
Laws, when there were no fears of Prisons, Tortures, Confiscations, or
Banishment, unless for being and owning themselves to be Christians; but the
only fear of Excommunication, and being put out of the Fellowship of the Saints
here on Earth, and denied Entrance into the Congregation of the Faithful; of
being debarred from receiving the Holy Eucharist, and joining in the public
Service and Worship of God, was more forcible to make them Holy, Obedient, and
Unanimous, than all the Torments devised by Persecution, were able ^o make them
Profane or Vicious: For why? They did believe, that unless the Governors of
the Church, the Successors of the Apostles, did remit their Sins on Earth, they
should not find remission in Heaven; they therefore believed it, because Christ
the Eternal Truth had said it: They did believe, that unless they were United
by Communion to the Holy Catholic Church, they could never hope for the
Remission of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body unto Life Everlasting; which is
the most ancient Confession of the Christian Faith; and which with great
probability is supposed to be delivered by the Apostles, to the Church, as a
short sum of Faith necessary to Salvation.

NOR were they more fearful of this formidable Sentence of Excommunication,
than desirous of the Absolution of the Church, to restore them to the Honor of
God Almighty after they had offended; and by serious and Solemn Repentance,
were thought ^orthy to be readmitted into Communion. And this is the other
branch of the Power of the Keys, and from hence arose the necessity of
Confession; for Christ having left a power with his Church to forgive the
Penitent, it was supposed, that this was not to be done at random; but the
People looking upon the Priests as the Physicians of their Souls, and as
standing between God and them, as Internuncij or Celestial Ambassadors, as St.
Paul terms them, when they expected Spiritual Remedies for the Diseases of
their Souls, they thought it necessary, Especially in imminent danger of Death,
truly to state the Case and Condition of their Souls to these Spiritual
Physicians, that so they might be Judges of it, and accordingly apply suitable
Remedies; and from hence sprung these excellent Effects.

FIRST, Men avoided the Danger of flattering themselves into a dangerous
persuasion of the Goodness and safety of their Condition; and by consequence
from that security and false Peace which has betrayed Millions into Eternal
Misery: For as nothing is more natural than for men to love themselves, so
nothing does more powerfully incline them to Judge favorably, and with a
dangerous Partiality concerning their Eternal Condition; it being with Diseases
of the Soul as with those of the Body, where no Persons, not even the Learned
in the Art of Hermes, when sick themselves, are more incompetent Judges of
their own state, than those who labor under it; who many times Flatter
themselves with delirous Fancies of Life and Health, even when they are under
the Agonies of approaching Death.

SECONDLY, Hereby many heinous sins which men commit in secret, were nipt in
the Blossom; and believing that without Confession there was no Absolution to
be expected, the very fear of Discovery, or of Damnation without it, gave
strange checks to such Tempers who had not abandoned all Modesty: Nor is it to
be esteemed a Wonder, that Men should receive a more powerful Control from the
fear of Humane Knowledge, than from the apprehensions of the Omniscient
Divinity, since it is so well known, that all men are more affected by the
power of sensible Objects, than of Faith and Reason; and every man's own
experience will convince him that the fear of Shame and Reproach upon
Discovery, has at least in some part of his Life been more powerful to preserve
him from some Sins, than all the terrors of a Future state of Misery; and the
witness of a little Child which might make a Discovery to the World, has
prevented the Execution of some wicked Designs, which the Considerations of the
Divine presence in all places, would have had no great influence upon.

THIRDLY, Hereby People came to have a true Love and Veneration for their
Spiritual Guides, a love of Reverence, and a love of Tenderness; looking upon
them as their Spiritual Fathers, and honoring them as such: Then men did not
set an Estimate upon them, only proportionate to their abilities of making
Extempore Prayers (a thing wholly unknown to the first Ages of Christianity) or
for their gifts of Eloquent Orations in the Pulpit; no more than they would do
their Physicians for those Talents; which though very excellent
accomplishments, yet were not thought Essential to their Profession, nor
conducive to the Health of their Patients; who are not to be discoursed or
courted by the power of Rhethorique into recovery; but they looked upon them as
those who had the charge of their Souls, and that they were set by God to watch
over them, Heb. 13.17.
as they that must give an account; and for this Reason it was that they obeyed
those that had the Rule over them, and submitted themselves.

THEN was there no quarrelling, no Litigious Suits at Law about the Maintenance
of the Priesthood, (one thing, and the main one, which renders the present
Clergy so slenderly possessed of the affections of the People) but they thought
with the good Apostle, That those who sowed unto them Spiritual things, ought
to reap a share of their Carnal things: and after the Maintenance of the Clergy
was Established by the Donatives of their Pious Ancestors, who gave those
Revenues as Free Alms to God Almighty, Frank Almoigne Libera and perpetua
Eleemosyna, The Tenure of the Church.
and for the support of his Servants and Service; they thought it no less than
Sacrilege to rob God of Tithes and Offerings, dedicated to the Use of those
who by their Attendance upon his Altar, were incapacitated to amass up Riches,
or even Competencies for a future subsistence, as the Secular People were by
several Arts and Trades. Nay, so cautelous and nice were they in this
particular, that they thought they could not dye with a secure Conscience,
unless they gave something by way of Compensation for Tithes forgotten to be
paid in their lives; an Opinion which descended down to the days of our
Grandfathers, as is apparent by the several Wills of ancient Date.

I am not ignorant that this will expose me to some Obloquy, and that I shall
be Censured hereby to aim at an Establishment of the Clergy, in Honor, Profit,
and Dominion; or it may be I may suffer in my Reputation, as going about to
introduce Popery by Auricular Confession.

FOR the First, I can make no other Vindication of my Innocence, but an
unfeigned Protestation with Saint Paul, that according to the best of my
Understanding, I speak the truth in Christ, 1 Timothy 2.7.
and lie not; and that I have no other Design, either in particular or general,
but the Peace of the Church, the Glory of God, and the Salvation of all Men; to
which I am persuaded this would extremely conduce: and not a little to the
quiet of men's Lives, and advantage of their Temporal Affairs: by cutting away
the root of Unkindnesses about Meum and Tuum betwixt the Minister and his
Parishioners: since we daily see, not only that this is the divorce of their
Affections, but that this petty Sacrilegde is injurious to their Estates; for
what they do thus by an evil Covetousness unlawfully substract from the
Established maintenance of the Clergy, is usually to their treble damage
repaid to the rapaciousness of the Under Officers of the Law, and in conclusion
both parties are loosers; but the greatest loss is that of Charity and mutual
love one toward another.

AS to the accusation or suspicion of being a Papist; I am as far from it, and
it may be farther than they who shall endeavor to fix that Calumny upon me:
for I neither believe with the Romish Church, that it is a Sacrament, and
absolutely Essential to Salvation, since Children who could never speak, and
Mutes may be saved without it; neither am I for those private and Auricular
Confessions, or think those Pennances which are enjoined as the consequence of
them, can make satisfaction for the Sins. I remember very well the Scandal and
Inconvenience which such confession brought into the Church, which joined with
the Vow of single Life in Priests, may give both great Temptation and
Opportunity to repeat. I know that for this Reason, as Socrates reports, Socra.
Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople, by the advice of Eudemon, banished it
from the Eastern Church: and though I am not so hot as Baronius, who calls him
Cacodemon, Bar. Tom. Ann. 1.56. Nu. 28. Andrad. Orth. Exp. p. 633.
or so violent as Andradius, who terms it, Impudentissimum illud Nectarij
factum; the most Impudent Fact of Nectarius, yet I cannot tell whether modestly
one may not say it was Impudent. For whosoever will cooly consider the History
of those Churches of the East, shall find, that the loss of this Advantageous
Post in point of Discipline, gave Entrance to those swarms of Heresies, and
that profane Licentiousness which in conclusion brought down Vengeance from
Heaven upon them, and was completed in the Ruin and Subversion both of the
Church and Empire of the Greeks, by the barbarous Mahometans. Whereas the
Western Churches did for many Ages preserve themselves in great degrees of
Purity of Doctrine, and still by retaining the Use of Discipline, continue
their being, notwithstanding their great Corruptions in matters of Opinion,
which they call Faith.

I know that all this supposed danger might have been prevented, and
confessions made in public in the Church before the Congregation, and yet so
private, that none might hear them besides the Minister to whom they were made;
and custom of Usage would have taken away that dangerous shame and modesty
which makes men hide their Sins and cover their Trangressions.

I know that humble confession to God Almighty is the way to find Mercy; but I
know not yet how to understand that command of St. James, Jam. 4.16.
Confess your Sins to one another, and Pray for one another, and ye shall be
healed, unless it be meant that we must confess our Sins to those who are to
Pray for us, and have Power given from above to heal us, which cannot be
supposed to be given to all the Congration of Christians, and therefore in
reason must be referred to those who are their Guides; such public
confessions being more likely to procure disgrace and reproaches, and breed
division and contempt among Christians, than either Pardon or Peace, where any
person shall by discovering how he has injured his Neighbor, expose himself
much sooner to his Revenge than to Remission. Nor can I tell how the Church can
bind or loose on. Earth the Sins of Men, without a knowledge of them first; and
it is impossible they should know many private, great, and deadly sins, without
the Confession of the Criminals. Mat. 3.6. Mark 1.5.
Saint John the Baptist received the People to his Baptism; confessing their
Sins; and Saint John the Evangelist tells us, Joh. 1.4.9.
If we confess our Sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. God
knows all things, our very thoughts a far off, but he usually works by Means,
and always where he has appointed Instruments he makes Use of them; and having
conferred this Honor and this Power upon the Ministers of his Church to
declare Sinners absolved upon true repentance, it is but reasonable the
Plaster should be both proper and sit for the Sore: Now let a man discourse
never so home and pressingly to People, the necessity of Repentance and
Confession to God Almighty in general Terms, it is but like the Arrow that a
certain man drew at adventure, which may hit between the joints of the harness;
but usually men fence off Generals, and secure themselves in Multitude and
Number, that that is not adressed to them, or that they are not concerned: Nor
does any thing cut so home, and pierce to the quick, dividing like a two edged
Sword the very joints and marrow, as a particular Charge, like Nathan's to
David, Thou art the Man. 2 Samuel 12.7.
The random Parable never affected the sinful King, till he came to that close
touch, and then he comes immediately to Confession and Repentance. Now how any
mortal man should come to discover the secret sins of others, which are ever
most dangerous, I am not able to tell without their confession; and how those
secret sins should be healed by the Prayers of the Church, without being known,
I confess my self wholly ignorant; but that the Church has this Power given by
Christ, that I am not to learn; for Christ himself has taught me to know and
believe it, because he has said it. The wise man tells us, Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them shall find Mercy. Who can hide his sins from the knowledge of
God, before whom all things are naked and open? Since therefore God. knows them
already, to whom should we confess them but to Men, and to what Men, but to
those whom God has entrusted with the charge of our Souls, and from whom he
expects an account? and what account are they likely to give of the sins of
those under their charge, or of the applications that they have made use of to
cure and heal them of those most dangerous wounds, which never came to their
knowledge: and which makes me more confident in my persuasion, even those who
cry out against Auricular Confession, and under that Name against all
Confessions as Popish; yet will (if I am not misinformed,) admit none into
their Congregations, without something like it under another Name; nor will
they receive any to the Sacrament without Examination; one part of which, I
presume is, of the state of their Souls as to sin, as the other is of their
Faith and Knowledge of their Duty: and thus they confess the necessity of the
thing, whilst they go about to Establish their own Church Government, by what
they make a Crime in others, and make use of as an Engine to overthrow them.

SO that notwithstanding what Censure I may fall under, I speak it with
humility and submission to better Judgments, I cannot see how any Church can be
happy without this Expedient: The Clergy will never recover that Veneration and
Respect due to their Sacred Function; nor the love of those under their Charge,
which is so necessary an ingredient to their doing good in their several places
and stations; Nor will People ever be brought to know themselves, and the
necessity of having Spiritual Guides, or the danger of wholly relying upon
themselves and their own Knowledge and Judgment, till this Power of the Keys,
in the Absolution of humble Penitents, upon Confession to their Pastors, be in
some measure restored and put in Practice: and by how much more it prevails, by
so much more will the Church grow in Peace, Unity, and Godly Love. For a man
may be born with all the Capacities of Mind, and Endowments of Nature, to
enable him to Preach and Pray most Eloquently, or he may by Art and Industry
acquire them; Nay, he may by Sorcery obtain those which some People will call
Divine Perfections, and Gifts of the Spirit, witness the late Relation of that
abominable Wizzard, Major Thomas Weir in Scotland; and so long as people are
cherished in a false Opinion that these Abilities, however natural or acquired,
are sufficient to entitle them to the Office of the Ministry, they who are
possessed of such Gifts, will think themselves as good and as wise (and it may
be Excelling them in those Talents) more wise and better than their Teachers:
which will also encourage them not only to contemn and despise their Spiritual
Guides, but to invade their Office; which is the prevailing Error of all or
most of our Separatists and Dissenters.

BUT when People shall come to understand that no Man is a Legatus Natus of
Heaven, born a Priest or a Governor in the Church, but that the Priests of the
New Testament, who are Priests for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, must
be called of God, for that no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that
is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. Romans 10.15.
and that no man can preach except he be sent; when they shall know that it is
not these Natural Abilities and Gifts, but the Power of the Keys, of binding
and loosing, of remitting and retaining Sins, which Christ gave his Apostles,
and they to their Successors by lawful Ordination, which qualifies them for
that Sacred Function; then would People learn to distinguish between Pastors of
Gods appointment, and Orators of their own Choosing; and as the Apostle Exhorts
and Commands, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
then would they know those that labor among them, and are over them in the
Lord, and admonish them, and esteem them very highly in Love for their Works
sake, and then would they be at Peace among themselves.

THEN would they repair for help, assistance, and direction, to the Physicians
who are of Gods Institution, and who have Authority, Virtue, and Ability, to
heal their Souls, to bind or loose, to remit or retain their Sins; and no
longer trust to those Mountebanks of Religion, who by Antic Gestures, and
affected Words, draw them to their Stage, pretending Universal Remedies, when
in truth they have no Power, no Virtue, no Authority, but delude them with Hard
Words, and fair Speeches, making Merchandise of them, crying Peace, Peace,
where there is no Peace, and slightly healing the Wounds of the Daughter of our
People; when as they are not able to show any Warrant from Christ, his
Apostles, or their Successors, for their obtruding themselves into the Holy
Function, and important charge of being Spiritual Guides and Governors of the
Church and People of God.

FOR Ordination by the Imposition of the hands of the Bishop and his
Presbyters, has in all Ages of the Church been esteemed the Door by which good
Men enter into the Fold of Christ, 1 Pet. 5.
and take the Charge of the Sheep, not by constraint, but willingly, not for
filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, that when the chief Shepherd shall appear,
they may receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away: And therefore our Lord
the chief Shepherd tells us, He is the Door: By this Door, the Apostles and
their Successors entered, and he that enters not by this Door into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way (of Ambition) is a Thief and a Robber.

THIS high Trust and Power over his Church, thus committed by Christ to his
Apostles, and by them transmitted to their Successors, for the management and
governing of his Flock, was therefore given to all, that so they might preserve
their several Charges in Peace and Unity; and that one might not bind what
another had loosed; that one might not Absolve where another had
Excommunicated; which Rule was strictly observed in all Churches, however they
differed in Circumstantials, not admitting the Outcasts of another Church into
their Communion, till they had purged themselves of the Crimes objected against
them, if false, or reconciled themselves by Repentance, if true; whereby they
constantly maintained the Unity of Faith abroad, and the Unity of Government at
home.

LET us now see how this Power of the Keys becomes impracticable, by admitting
diversity of Government in a National Church? And whether they who set up Altar
against Altar among us are not thereby guilty of that Licentiousness and
Impiety, against which they make such loud Declamations, endeavoring to lay
that which is the spurious Issue of their Separation, at the Door of the
present Governors and Pastors of the Church?

ALL the Power which Christ left with the Governors of his Church, as before
was said, is the Power of Excommunication, whereby Notorius Offenders and
Scandalous Sinners were debarred from the Communion of Saints on Earth, and
without Repentance and Absolution, from all hopes of Pardon here, or Heaven
hereafter; if there be any truth or force in those Words of Christ, Whose sins
ye retain they are retained. But now where there are Distinct Collections of
Men who own no dependence one upon another, but though in the same Nation, yet
live under different, and it may be quite contrary Forms of Government, one
from another; as before was shown there will be a total Cessation of Charity,
as well as Communion: And whilst these Differing Congregations of men make it
their greatest endeavor (perhaps out of mistaken Zeal, perhaps out of some
other Design of Interest or Ambition) to propagate their Way, and increase the
Number of their Proselytes, and with it the Credit and Profit of their
Doctrine, they will refuse none that shall desire to join with them, and enter
into their Communion and Society; And the greater and more notorious Sinners
they have been, if they can but act their Villainies more privately, and put on
the Sanctimonious dress of Reformation, the greater will the Miracle of their
Conversion appear; and the more Powerful and Efficacious will their Preaching
seem, which draws such Sinners to Conversion: By this Means those who for any
Crimes, fall under the Censure of another Church, and are by them rejected from
Communion, shall find a Sanctuary, a Protection, nay and it may be an Esteem,
in that Church to which they fly for Refuge; whilst they will certainly make
their inclination to that Party, the principal occasion of their
Excommunication; and the reason of their Departure from the one, and adherence
to the other; Nor will that Party to which they make their retreat and
Application, only willingly receive them, but be ready to Exclaim upon the
Injustice of the Censures of that Church from whence they came, and their
Tyrannous proceedings; which they will call Persecution, and suffering for
Conscience Sake; then will they pronounce the Nullity of all such Censures
against them, and (notwithstanding their standing Excommunicate) that by
joining with them, they shall certainly be admitted into the favor of God, and
obtain an Interest in Heaven; and it may be more certainly for suffering this
which they will call Persecution for Righteousuess sake Now from this way of
Procedure these inconveniences will necessarily follow.

FIRST, The most Notorious Sinners shall be encouraged in their Impenitence,
and shall be persuaded, that to be reconciled to God Almighty, there is no
necessity of Submission, Repentance, or Absolution, from the Church which they
have offended; but rather they shall be inspired with principles of Hatred and
Revenge against the Church from which they are Excommunicated; and though they
be denied Salvation without Repentance in one Church, yet they can go to
another, where they shall certainly meet with the Promise of it upon cheap and
easy terms, viz. those of Joining with them in their way of Worship.

SECONDLY, Hereby men come to have a mean and contemptible Opinion of this
Power of the Church: And value Excommunication from any Church, no more than
some idle Servants do to be turned out of their Masters Doors, who will
presently tell you, that the World is wide enough, and if one will not, another
will. That there are more Services to be had: So will this sort of People tell
you, there are more Churches; and no question but where in any Nation this
Principle is allowed, there would be almost as many Churches as People; and
when once they are come to slight the Censure and the Church, they will never
so much as think of being released from the Dangerous Bond of Excommunication,
or to have their Sins remitted upon Earth, by the power of that Church which
they have offended.

THIRDLY, Hereby others of the most Loose and Licencious Lives will be
encouraged to continue impious and Irreligious, though owning no Sect or
Faction: And coming by their Example to despise this Power of the true Church,
and to look upon Excommunication as a thing of no Danger, they will value no
Church; but abandon themselves to all manner of Wickedness, Irreligion and
Atheism; and provided they can but escape the danger of Humane Laws, they will
never trouble themselves about the Ecclesiastical.

FOURTHLY, People will in a little time come to believe, that the only Duty of
the Minister consists in their abilities to Preach and Exhort; and that to
Admonish and Correct is no part of their Office; and this being so easy a
thing to be attained, and many times Eloquence (as before was observed) being a
Natural Talent; Hereby Bold, Illiterate, Unexamined, Unqualified, Conceited,
and Pragmatical Opiniatres, will invade the Sacred Function; by which means
Errors will abound, new Heresies will spring up daily, and old ones revive,
flourish, and increase without control or contradiction; the Holy Sacraments of
the Eucharist and Baptism, will be either neglected and laid aside; or
profaned by unhallowed hands: and in short, those great Mischiefs, which are
so much feared, must break in upon us; either Atheism, or superstitious will
Worship, the Commandments and Traditions of Wilful, Ignorant, and Erroneous
Men; and when once the Church is trampled under foot by so many Sects, and
Heresies, Ignorance will daily get ground, and that sets the Door wide open,
either to the dreaded thing called Popery, to Paganism, or the Turkish
Alchoran, which comes with the fairest Pretense, and the finest Dress to win
their Favor.

I do heartily wish all this were spoken like the Prophecy of Jonah against the
Ninivites; what was such occasion of grief and discontent to him, as to oblige
him in a sullen humor to wish to dye, would be to me the greatest Joy of my
Life: But Experience, that fatal Mistress, has taught us the truth of some of
these Effects, and may well give us terrible apprehensions of what we may
expect. For no sooner can an Offender fall under the deserved Censure of
Excommunication, or but in the danger of it, but presently he turns Dissenter,
is received into the bosom of some Sect or Faction, and then he bids Defiance
to all the Power of the Church, and fears nothing but the Secular Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo. Nay, I have my self heard some Persons boast of their
being Excommunicated, and pretend to receive it as a savor, to be prohibited
coming into the Church: from these men's contempt and vilifying of this dreadful
Sentence, others who have no Religion have learned to despise it too; nor is
there any thing in it formidable to them, besides the expense of their Money to
the Lay-Officers of the Ecclesiastical Courts: and when once men come to place
all their Religion in fear of the Secular Power, and have no other bridle upon
their unruly Passions and Desires, besides the Reins of Humane Punishments and
the Laws of the Civil Magistrate, it is not to be admired if they run headlong
into Brutish Impiety and downright Atheism: and they who are taught to believe,
(and easily learn the Lesson both by Example and Precept) that the Priest or
Bishop has no more Power over their Souls, than over their Bodies, will not be
long before they Despise both the Persons and their Office; and when men are
arrived at that, for my part, I look upon their condition to be next to
Desperate: for however they may please and flatter themselves in their Gay and
Jolly humor of despising these contemptible Priests, the affront is really done
to God Almighty, and I cannot see any great security in such Atheistical
Drollery. Hear ye Despisers, and Tremble at what our Great Lord and Savior
says concerning the 70 Disciples whom he sent abroad to Preach the Gospel of
the Kingdom. Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me; and St. Paul is plain, 1 Timothy
4.8.
He that despises, despises not Man, but God.

WHAT can be the End of this, but Misesery here, and Eternal Damnation
hereafter. He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy; Heb. 10.28, 29.
of how much sorer punishment then are they worthy, who despise the Son of God?
which all those do who despise his Servants the Governors of the Church, who
are sent by him; which if I do not prove, let them go on and despise; but if
they are, let them have a care of falling into the hands of a revenging God,
for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 12.28.
for our God is a consuming fire. This is certainly the utmost despite to the
Spirit of Grace, and the most unpardonable affront that can be offered to the
Divine Clemency, and against which there is no remedy. A dismal Example of
which, we have in the Nation of the Jews: That God who proclaims himself
Merciful, slow to anger, of great Compassion, and that repents him of Evil,
after he had born all their Iniquities and Rebellions, could not bear with
this; 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, etc.
For the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them his Messengers, rising up
betimes and sending them, because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place; but they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of God arose against them, and there
was no remedy. Then did the overflowing scourges come rolling upon them, Fire
and Sword, and Captivity, Desolation and utter Subversion. God of his infinite
Mercy have compassion upon his People and his dwelling Place, and turn the
hearts of the Despisers and disobedient, to the Wisdom of the Just, that we may
not despise our selves and Nation into such a Dismal and inevitable Ruin.

CHAP. IX.
THUS have I shown the Necessity that there is in every National Church, of
Unity in point of Government, as well as Faith, upon a Religious account. Let
us now come to Examine what Necessity there is upon a Politic account, as we
are united together into one Community of Men, as well as a Society of
Christians.

WE must consider therefore, that Religion was designed to improve even our
Interest in this World to the best advantage of Living, and that to put on
Christianity, we are not to put off Humanity, or by learning Obedience to God,
to forget what we owe to our Neighbor, or our King. The Eternal Prince of
Peace as well as Truth, came to Preach Peace unto All; not to Embroyl the
World, or unsettle the Thrones of Princes, but to Establish them; for the
Throne is Established by Righteousness. Pro. 16.12.
That glorious Heir of all things, rejected the offer of all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and positively affirms, That his Kingdom is not of this World; and
therefore when he took upon him Humane Nature, he owned himself a Subject of
the Roman Empire, and not only paid the Tribute for himself and Saint Peter,
but Commands all men to do the same; and the great Design of the Gospel which
he came to Preach, was to make all men better in their feveral Estates, and
Capacities of Life; better men, and therefore better Subjects to Princes. This
was the particular Care of the Church, to inspire the Converts to Christianity
with these Principles of Duty and Obedience, so necessary to the Peace and
Happiness of the World. So St. Paul commands, To. 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. Thus St. Peter Teaches and
Commands, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake: whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: for
this is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. This being then one main Design of Christian
Religion, let us see of what Necessity, Unity in point of Government in the
Church, is in order to it, and what influence it has upon the Political
Government of a Christian State.

THE Root of all our Miseries, Divisions, and Disorders is, That men take this
for a Principle, That they may be Disobedient to Lawful Authority without
danger of Damnation: and so far has the mischief of this fretting Gangrene
spread it self, that many People esteem it a part of their Religion to disobey
the Civil Power, and think it is impossible for them to be saved, should they
be obedient to its Commands; which they think are inconsistent with the
Commands of God. This Error must proceed either from Malice, or Mistake; I will
be so charitable as to suppose, not from the first; and therefore looking upon
it as the Child of Ignorance, I will endeavor to state the Case truly, that so
the Understanding of Men being informed by Truth, they may either be reformed,
or left without Excuse.

THE great Design of the infinitely glorious, good and Wise Creator, being the
Happiness of Mankind, he therefore proportioned a Method for the obtaining of
it; and Man being Created with a double Capacity of Enjoying Happiness both
here and hereafter, therefore did that, Excellent Wisdom appoint Religion as
the Way and Means for attaining both; and for the accomplishment of those Noble
and Excellent Ends, it is furnished with Rules and Precepts, which bear a
double Respect to this double Capacity; one part Conducts us to God and future
Happiness in the External fruition of his grorious Presence in Heaven; and the
other Leads us to the Happiness of this Mortal State, by the Politicl Rules of
Living Well, with a mutual respect, not only to our own, but the happiness of
one another, by the lawful and moderate Use and Enjoyment of the inferior
Creation, which God therefore made, that he might show his Glory, his Wisdom,
his Power, and his Goodness to the Sons of Men. So that the sum of all Religion
in order to obtain this Happiness, both here and hereafter, is to believe
aright; and to Live Well: and both these are so Essentially necessary to
Salvation that the one will not obtain it without the other; for the Devils
believe, Jam. 2.19.
though it makes them tremble. To believe aright, we must refer our selves to
those Divine Truths which God has from Heaven revealed to us concerning himself
and our Duty, the short sums of which Faith the Church has collected out of the
Sacred Writings, in the three Famous Creeds of the Apostles, St. Athanasius,
and the Council of Nice. To Live well, it is required, that a man submits to
all those practical Precepts and Rules of Life which God has commanded in his
Will, revealed in his holy Word, by Justice, Temperance, Prudence, Chastity,
Obedience, etc. and for the attainment of Happiness by these Rules, in this
present Life, God has not left Men in a wild parity like Brutes, but has by the
Wisdom of his Providence, divided the World into superior, and inferior Degrees
of Men, Subjects and Sovereigns, intrusting one to Rule and Govern, and
commanding the other to Obey; and for this he has left many Positive Commands,
too well known, and too numerous to be here repeated.

THESE Powers thus Ordained of God, and armed with his Sword, to execute
Vengeance on them that do evil, are vested with Authority to make such Decrees,
Laws, and Sanctions, as in their Wisdom they shall Judge conducive to the
Happiness of the People committed to their Charge; that so they may be a Terror
to evil Works, and encouragers of them that are Good. And to them prosecuting
this great and good Design, and to those Laws which do promote it, all men are
bound to submit not only for wrath, Romans 13.5.
but for Conscience sake. And it is impossible any man should be saved, who
lives in a wilful Disobedience and that Power, and those Commands; and the
Reason is, because all such Disobedience is a sin against God himself, against
his Positive Will and Command; and I think there is no person who will be so
hardy as to maintain in Words, however they may do it in Actions, that
Salvation is to be had or hoped for, by such as live in manifest Disobedience
to any one Command of God: For St. James assures us, that the keeping of the
whole Law, will not countervail the wilful breach of one Point; but that
whoever does so, is guilty of all; and he adds the Reason, Jam. 2.10, 11.
For he that said, Do not commit Adultery; said also, Do not Kill: And he that
said do not Kill, said also, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers.
Now to infer with him, If thou commit no Adultery, If thou do not Kill, yet if
thou art not subject to the Higher Powers, thou art become a Trangressor of the
Law, a Sinner before God, For sin is the transgression of Gods Law; and
therefore as St. John tells us, 1 John 3.15.
No Murderer has Eternal life abiding in him; So neither has any who does not
submit to the Higher POWERS, any Eternal Life abiding in him, because they are
both Transgressors of the Holy Law and Commandment of God.

THUS far, I think, all Men, Good and Bad, will go along with me; but the pinch
of the Question is, How far this Obedience is due, and what are the Limits of
the Authority of Superiors? Whether the Civil or Ecclesiastical Magistrate
ought to be Obeyed in all their Commands which concern Religion, or the Worship
of God?

To this I Answer by distinguishing, according to the Old and True Maxim of
Logicians, Qui been distinguit been docet. The commands therefore of Superiors,
are either concerning Faith and Manners, or Government and Order. As to matters
of Faith, neither the onenor the other havethe least power to alter, abrogate,
impose, or diminish the least Tittle, or Iota of it. For Faith being of Divine
Revelation, and the Law by which God Almighty will have us guided in what
concerns himself, is like him, Immutable, and Unchangeable, and is only subject
to his Authority, who is the Author and the Finisher of our Faith. Now the true
Faith is what is contained in Scripture, either in direct Words or plain
Consequence. This all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors, are bound to
maintain, and ought to be its Defenders, but not to Invade or Usurp a Dominion
over it. And should they make any Law to the prejudice of this Faith, no man
ought to obey them; for here the Rule holds good, That we are to obey God
rather than Men; but neither will this Authorize any Persons who are Subjects
to those Powers, to Rebel against them, or Oppose them, more than by
endeavoring with Meekness and Charity to maintain that Faith. Nay, should they
impose Penalties upon such as were disobedient to their Laws in matters of
Faith, it is the Glory of Christian Religion, to teach men to suffer patiently,
but not to seek Revenge, or to endeavor to free themselves or the Faith from
danger, by flying to unlawful Arms; which would be like Vzzah's Folly, for
which he was Smitten, to lay our hands upon the Ark when the Oxen stumble and
shake it, and to suppose that God either would not, or could not, take any care
to defend that Faith which he himself had planted in the World.

THIS was the Case of the Apostles; Act. 4..3.
The Chief Priest and Counsel commanded them not to speak at all in the Name of
Jesus; had they been so minded, they might have raised a Tumult, for the
Captain and Officers who went to apprehend them, brought them without Violence,
because they went without resisting, fearing as much as their Guards, lest the
enraged People should rescue them by stoning the Officers: And when the High
Priest charges them with Disobedience to his Commands, St. Peter tells them it
was a matter of Faith, what they had seen and heard, and were commanded by the
Son of God to Preach, whom they ought to obey rather than Men. This was the
Case of the Primitive Christians under the Heathen and persecuting Emperors:
Did the Emperor command them to his Wars, they went willingly, Fought
gallantly, sometimes purchased Victories with their Prayers as well as Sword;
Did he exact Tribute from them, they paid it freely; Command to renounce
Christ, or to Blaspheme him, or to offer but a single grain of Incence to the
Idols, or Emperors Statue, though to save their Lives, they refused presently;
Did he take away their Estates, for their Disobedience to his Edicts, they
suffered patiently; Did he expose them to Racks, Tortures, Wild beasts, and
Flames, they went to them joyfully, endured them miraculously, and so obtained
the Glorious Crown of Martyrdom: All this while not a hand lift up against the
Lords Anointed, their Sovereign, unless to Heaven, to pray to God for his
Pardon and Conversion; not a Tongue moves against his Government, to call it
Tyrannical, Unlawful, or Antichristian, though in reality it was such: Not a
Pen is sharpened against him or his Ministers of State; no invectives or
Exhortations to Rebellion, to depose or Murder him; and indeed nothing farther
than to Apologize for their Innocence, and to manifest that they were his most
obedient Subjects, and free from all the Calumnies of being Seditious
Disturbers of the Government or Peace of the Empire.

THE same may be said of Good Manners, as of Faith, for Justice, Temperance,
Innocence, and Purity, being Commands of God, no Earthly power can either
dispense with them, or lawfully command the contrary Vices; or if they do, they
may, nay, ought to be disobeyed.

BUT Secondly, The Commands of our Superiors may concern Order and Government;
and herein they ought Universally to be obeyed, as well in Ecclesiastical as
Civil Laws and Commands, provided they do not herein manifestly or by
consequence Oppose Faith or Good Manners, and that for these Reasons.

FIRST, Because Order is absolutely Necessary as well in the Church as in the
State, and is Positively commanded by God; Let every thing be done Decently and
in Order, 1 Cor. 14.40.
and that for a most solid and weighty Reason; For God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, Verse. 33.
as in all the Churches of the Saints. Confusion is absolutely unlawful, God
disowns it: Peace is absolutely Necessary in all Churches of Saints; without
Order there can be no Peace, nor indeed any thing but Confusion; without
Governors, to appoint, and determine Differences arising about Modes and
Matters of Decency, there can be no Peace, because Differences must be endless,
and without Submission to these Governors, and their final Determinations, both
in Church and State, they are no longer Rulers and Governors; but the Order
which God has appointed in the World, to procure Peace and Happiness, is
utterly Subverted and Overthrown: For Government and Obedience do mutually
suppose each other; and as Logicians say, Pater est filii Pater, a Father is
therefore a Father because he has a Child, so a Governor, a King, a Magistrate
in Church or State, is therefore such, because he has People subject and
obedient to him; and as all the Power of Governors is limited to those things
which are left undetermined by Gods Positive Laws, so all the Obedience of
Subjects is confined to their Determinations, in those particulars which God
has left wholly in the Power of our Superiors: and who ever resists, or refuses
to Obey, shall therefore receive Damnation, because he destroys the very
Essence and End of Government; and in saying, We will not have this man Reign
over us, acts directly contrary to the Will of God, who says he shall, and that
we must Obey him, in order to the Peace and Happiness of the World, the due
Administration of Justice, the Encouragement of Virtue, and Practice of
Religion, by leading quiet Lives under our Superiors, in all Godliness and
Honesty; by which Method we can only hope to arrive at Eternal Happiness in
Heaven.

BUT Secondly, Because all Ecclesiastical Laws which concern the Order and
Government of the Church, are of a mixed Nature, Political as well as Religious;
and so are all Humane and Civil Laws too; and therefore there is the same
reason for Obedience to the one as to the other: and they do both equally bind
the Conscience to Obedience: The same Power makes the one, as makes the other;
the same Reason is the Foundation of the one, as of the other, they are
addressed to the same End; viz. the Peace, Happiness, and Prosperity of the
People, and therefore there is the same obligation to Obedience for the one as
the other; and all Men are bound in Conscience, as Members of a Society, to
promote the Peace, and welfare of that Society; which is not to be obtained any
other Way, but by obeying the Command of God, in being subject to the
Government of that Society of which we are Members. Observe the Command of God
to the Captive Jews at Babylon; Jer. 29.7.
Seek the Peace of the City whither I have caused you to be carried away
Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the Peace thereof ye shall have
Peace. So that if Peace and Happiness be the End of Society, all Men are bound
to Pray for it, and promote it. If the End be Commanded by God, the Means to
obtain that End must be Obeyed; and God having entrusted the Governors of
Church and State with the Means and Way of procuring this Happiness, their
Choice of some, among all the variety of Expedients that may be offered, must
determine their Subjects, and becomes the Rule of their Obedience, as well in
Ecclesiastical as Civil Affairs; for if it were possible to separate these two,
then something might be said; but the Peace of the State depending upon the
Peace of the Church, and vice versa, No man can truly be said to promote the
one by destroying the other. And therefore all men who are obliged to endeavor
to advance one, must do it by advancing both.

To make this clear, I will give an Instance of the Power of the Civil
Magistrate in the Church, in matters of Order and Government. David, a man
after Gods own Heart, in the Worship of God, which was left Undetermined, he
takes upon him to regulate the Church; he Orders the Levites to appoint Singers
on Instruments of Music, 1 Chronicles. 15.16.
and Psalteries, and Harps, Cymbals, and sounding by lifting up the Voice with
joy. They never stood to dispute with him, because God had not commanded it,
that therefore it was Unlawful; but because God had not any where Prohibited
it, and he was their King, and might Command what was for decency and order in
the Service of God, therefore they ought to Obey; and immediately they appoint
Heman, and Asaph, and Ethan, and several others for that Service. David, and,
after his Example, others frame and compose Anthems, Psalms of Praise and
Thanksgiving, in set forms of Words to praise God, Because he is gracious, and
his Mercy endures for ever. Do the Priests and Levites now quarrel, because
they are not permitted to show their Parts, Gifts, and Abilities, in making
Extempore Hymns, or Prayers? No such matter: but presently in Obedience to God
and the King, they make use of those prescribed, which are contained in the
Book of Psalms, the Ancient Liturgy of the Jewish Church. This order was after
continued by Solomon, and approved by God; For it came to pass, 2 Chronicles. 5.13.
as the Trumpeters, and Singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard, in
praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lift up their Voice with the
Trumpets and Cymbals, and Instruments of Music, and praised the Lord, saying,
For he is good, for his Mercy indureth for ever, that the house was filled with
a Cloud, even the House of the Lord.

So that the result of all is this, That the Supreme Power of a Nation, being
of Gods appointment for the Ruling of the People in order to their Happiness,
and commanding nothing contrary to Faith or good Manners, or any thing
Prohibited by God himself, ought to be obeyed by all their Subjects of what
Degrees or Conditions soever, in all their Laws, Ecclesiastical, and Civil, in
order to good Government, Decency, and Order, both in Church and State: and
that since all these Commands of theirs are in Obedience to Gods Commands, and
in prosecution of the great Design of Happiness here, and Eternally, by
promoting Peace, Unity, and Concord, therefore no Person can resist that Power
by Disobedience, but he resists the Ordinance of God, and becomes a
Transgressor to God as well as Man; and runs the hazard of Eternal Damnation,
due to all those who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

LET Dissenters therefore either prove, that the Supreme Powers are not Lawful,
that their Authority does not Extend to the Political part of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, that they have nothing to do to determine Differences, that the things
commanded are contrary to Faith, and a holy Life, are not conducive to Peace,
Unity, and the happiness of the Nation, or that they are any where in direct
Words or evident Consequence prohibited by God in Scripture; or otherways they
will never be able to prove that they are bound in Conscience to disobey
Authority. Let them not think to shelter themselves under the vain refuge, that
God is to be obeyed rather than Men. This is that which proves them
Disobedient, for they do not disobey Men, but God, in disobeying Lawful
Authority, when commanding nothing contrary to the Commands of God. And whoever
does so, is managed not by the Principles of Religion, but the Power of
Interest, Prejudice, or Ambition.

IN short, Is any Form of Government Lawful or Necessary in the Church? that it
is, they affirm, in desiring to Establish their own; is Obedience necessary to
Salvation? they will tell you, it is; Let them therefore be their own Judges.
For if Obedience to their Laws and Government be necessary to Salvation, it
must be because their Authority is Lawful, for that is the Rule of Conscience;
and if the present Authority be Lawful, and theirs Usurped, then is their
Disobedience Damnable, and their Obstinacy inexcusable, by their own Judgment.
And if we do not prove the present Government Lawful, and of Gods appintment,
both the Civil, and Ecclesiastical, Phillida solus habeto. And till they have
proved themselves Lawful Powers, and the present Government Unlawful, let them
be obedient to its Decrees and Determinations, as those Laws respect the good
of the Civil Society, if they will not, as they respect the Religious.

CHAP. X.
HAVING proceeded thus far in showing the Design of the Outward Government of
the Church, to have a Political Respect, as well as Temporal Laws, to the
happiness and well-being of Humane Society, as well as a Religious Respect to
future Felicity, and that therefore upon this double account our Obedience is
due to the Ecclesiastical Laws as well as the Temporal; to which yet no
Dissenters will own Disobedience to be Lawful, because without Laws, no Living;
and for the same reason therefore, Obedience to both, is a necessary part of
Religion; in the next place let us see how necessary therefore this Unity in
point of Government in the Church is upon this Political account, in order to
the happiness of the Society, which is the End of all Laws and all Religion in
this present state of Life.

AND this, I conceive, cannot better be done than by showing the dangerous
influence which Disunion in point of Government in the Church, has upon the
Civil Affairs of any Nation.

As true Religion makes men the best Subjects, steady in their Loyalty, and
Allegiance, Faithful in their Trusts and Services, industrious to promote the
Common Good, obedient to their Superiors, kind to their Equals, and humble to
their Inferiors, and always Religious observers of the Laws of God and Man: So
False Opinions, when entertained for true Religion, ever render Men the Worst.
And if there were nothing more in it, yet would it be the great Interest of
Princes to endeavor to propagate Christian Religion in its greatest Purity;
and to discountenance Errors, Heresies, Sects, and Schisms, as the best
Expedient to secure themselves, and Establish their Thrones upon the immovable
Basis and sure Foundation of the good Conscience of their Subjects: For this
surpasses all the Obligations of Laws, all the Powers of Arms, and all the Arts
of Policy. Laws without Conscience are like Sampsons green Withs, which armed
Interest, and successful Ambition, attended on with Fiery Zeal, Jud. 16.9.
will break to pieces, as a thread of Tow when it touches the Flame. The most
Powerful Arms have no intail of Victory; and though the Sword be a very good
Guard for the Scepter, yet if the Scepter turns into a Sword, a thousand
Instances will show, that it lays a slippery Foundation for a Crown; which
always stands most firm when set upon the Head of Princes by Love and
Affection, and not by the trembling hand of Fear. The deepest Politicians are
sometimes Men, shallow and fordable; subject to be deceived, and their Counsels
like Achitophels may be defeated and turned into Folly. But Religion, were it
Universally practiced, Princes might disband those Auxiliary Succors of the
Crown, together with their Fears that raise them, and might send their
Jealousies, those Envious Tormentors both of Crowns and Cottagers, into
perpetual Banishment. For that teaches to smother Treason in the thought,
Eccles. 10.20.
and prevents the Necessity of Axes and Scaffolds: Curse not the King not in
thy thought, is God's Command, which they will not Transgress, to gain the
Empire of the World, and lose their Souls. Innocence is their Profession,
Peace, their Study, Integrity, the joy of their Lives, the delight of their
Minds, and the pleasure of their Deaths; Not all the storms of Afflictions, not
all the shining Glories of the Universe, can tempt them to throw off the White
Mantle of unstained Innocence, that Ermine of Religion. Not all the tempting
withcrafts of Dominion, Riches, Honor, or Advantage, can prevail with them to
do the least Injury wilfully to their poorest Neighbor, much less then to
those Sacred Persons, who are Gods on Earth; and the true Christian, if it were
put to his choice, had rather sit with Job, clothed with Ashes, Miseries, and
Integrity, upon the Dunghill of Poverty, than be lifted from thence by the hand
of Injustice or Violence, to sit among Princes, and wear the Dreaded Imperial
Purple.

THIS is the happy Temper of Religion, which teaches the Prince that Excellent
Moderation, to be so far from treading upon the Necks of his Subjects, that he
will not tread upon the Heels of their Properties or their Privileges; and in
all his Laws to study their Interest as his own. This teaches Subjects to study
to be Quiet; 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
and in stead of making Seditions, Mutinies, or Rebellions, to make Devout and
continual Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
and giving of Thanks for Kings and all that are in Authority, that so they may
lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty: For this they are
taught is acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Nor will they venture to
cut off the least Skirt of Prerogative, the lawful Inheritance of their Prince,
to enlarge their own; or take one Jewel out of his Crown, to Adorn or Enrich
themselves withal: They will not Deplume the Royal Eagle of his, to Feather
their own Nests. The thirst of Ambition, which cannot be quenched with any
thing but the Illustrious Blood of Sovereigns, is an absolute Stranger to their
very thoughts, and they will rather sacrifice their own Lives and Fortunes,
than see his in Danger. All their Desires are confined to a little here, and
their Ambition aspires lawfully after no other Crown but that of a Glorious
Immortality.

Now to the obtaining of any tolerable Degrees of this Happy State, as there
is one God, one Faith, one Baptism, so it is absolutely Necessary, that in one
Nation there be one Form of Government in the Church as well as State: And that
if it be not possible that all People should be of one Mind, as to matters of
Opinion, yet that they should be of one Mind as to Obedience to Government in
Church and State, which is matter of Faith. And it is but highly Reasonable,
that private Opinion should confine it self to private Breasts, its proper
Sphere, and not be permitted to walk abroad to affront Authority and the
public Peace, Interest and Happiness of a whole Nation, no more than
particular Gain is suffered to undo the Public Stock.

DIFFERENCE in Opinion may well be Tolerated, and indeed cannot be avoided;
but yet were men managed by Modesty, though not Religion, there need be no
Mischief from it; But to publish Private Opinion for Public and necessary
Truth, and to endeavor to impose it upon others, and upon Authority it self,
is a practice of the most pernicious Usurpation and Consequence in any
Government: For this Opposition of Opinions naturally produces a Disunion of
Mind, absolutely Destructive of Government, which is to Unite all the Members
of a Society into one common Body, of which Unity is the Soul; and whatsoever
be the Cause of this Disunion, the Effect is always an Alienation of Affections
among those who differ one from another: Now as there is nothing that makes so
close a Union in the minds of Men, as their concurrence in the same thoughts,
Judgment, and Sentiments about any Matters, especially those of Religion; So
there is nothing that makes so great and Irreconcilable Distances between
People, as their being and owning themselves of differing Judgments and
Opinions. For Religion is like a Common Center, in which all the Lines of
mutual Kindness meet, and are United together in an indivisible Point: And we
do more passionately love those who resemble us in our thoughts, than in our
outward Lineaments and Proportions; and have a natural Aversion for those who
are unlike us in our Thoughts: And the reason is, because this Discord robs us
of the pleasure of Life, which is Society; and where the entertainment consists
in mutual Jarrs, and endless Disputings, continual Contradictions, of which all
men are impatient, the Conversation must needs be disagreeable; for who ever
contradicts another, supposes himself more wise, and the other foolish; and
where the knowledge of these differences is manifest, even in their silent
Interviews, it defeats them of all the pleasure of Converse and Society, and
makes men uneasy in the very Company of those who are neither beloved by them,
nor love them; as all men believe of those who oppose them, and differ from
them in their Judgments. So that it is not to be expected they should be ready
to do those good Offices one for another, in order to the Common Good of the
Society; but rather all the Mischiefs and Injuries which they can, as Enemies;
as all esteem those who are not United to them by Love and Kindness; and how
happy any Society is like to prove, that is thus disjoynted in it self, is not
difficult to conjecture.

BUT these Animosities are extremely heightened, in regard there is always
something more than bare Opinion in the Difference, and that it is impossible
totally to separate Interest from Religion, and that therefore no man can look
upon another as directly invading the one, without obliquely designing against
the other; and what ever Passion men may have for their Religion, they are
inseparably married to their Interest; and the thread of that is twisted with
the Stamina Vitae, being indeed esteemed Essential both to the being and
well-being of the Body: For it is not in Religion as it is in Philosophical
Contests, where how eager soever men may appear to defend a Paradox, yet they
are not Solicitous whether it be true or false; for what matters it between two
hot Combatants, whether there be any Land in the Moon or not? Since though
there be, they have no Manors nor Lordships there; and if there be not, they
are never the poorer of a Farthing.

BUT in the Quarrels of Religion, there is always a Meum and Tuum; and Men
suspect not without good Reason, that the difference of Opinion is but the
Color or Pretext, it is Interest that is the first Mover, and the Ultimate
Design; and this prevents all hope of Reconciliation, till one party do either
voluntarily or by constraint relinquish their pretenses to the others Right;
for he who will invade the Possession of what another enjoys, by endeavoring
to be a Disseisor, becomes an Enemy: And there are few who arrive to that
height of self-denial, to hate themselves, that they may love their Enemies, or
to expose themselves to the Inconveniences of cold Nakedness and Hunger, which
Nature abhors, that they may feed and cloth their Enemies: nor does Charity
command it; for though that Compassionate Grace look abroad for Objects of
Pity, yet she always begins her Work at home; nor is any man obliged to pray
for, or love his Enemies, so as not to provide for his own Family, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and by Charity, to deny the Faith, and be worse than an Infidel. Such Saints
are Martyrs of the Greek Calends. And no person can Esteem such as endeavor to
divest him either of Power, Authority, Estate, or Possession, Honor, or Profit,
but as his particular Enemy, and an Enemy to God and Religion, which commands,
that no man should invade another Right, in that great Command, Thou shall not
Covet.

Now where there are several distinct Churches in the same Nation, there being
both Power, and Maintenance annexed to the Office of the Clergy, they will
necessarily incroach one upon another; and because what the one gains, the
other must loose, the contrariety of Interests will widen the Difference
between them, even to the utmost Extremity of Hatred and Animosity: and whilst
every Church will labor to agrandize it self both in Riches and Power, by
lessening the Esteem, Honor, Power, and Revenues of the other, it will become
a quarrel of Interest as well as Religion: and let any person, if he can,
Justify a Principle, that, by maintaining Domestique Quarrels, must be ruinous
to Society, and all the Peace and Happiness of the present state of Life, under
the fair pretense of Religion.

LET Dissenters tell us what they please; and if their dislike of the
Government in the Church is purely upon the account of Religion; former
Experience has made the World sufficiently sensible, that the Dignity, Power,
and Revenues of the Church were the greatest Crimes of the Government. And that
they who could not approve of those Honors, Titles, and Estates in Bishops, and
the dignified Clergy, could yet very well digest both their Power and Revenues,
when they came by the Sacrilegious hands of Usurping Powers to be conferred on
themselves.

AND as these Quarrels will be most certain, so they will be Endless and
Eternal: for admit once of many Forms of Church Government in the same Nation,
and no sooner shall one be uppermost, but the Envy of the others, and their
fear lest they should be crush't, or overshadowed by it, will make all the
lesser Churches conspire, for their common Security and Interest, to undermine
and overthrow it. And when they have by that joint confederation Effected that,
then will the most Powerful of the Victorious Party, step and Exalt it self
into the Place and Power of the former: which will procure it the Hatred of all
the rest, who will not fail by the same Arts and Methods to dismount that, and
Establish themselves: by which means there will be no end of Factions,
Quarrels, and Ambitions, striving who shall be the Uppermost. All this while
Religion will be the Pretense, but the State shall really suffer; and it being
as impossible to separate them, as to punish the Christian, and not the Man, it
must be under all the most violent Agitations and Tempests, and at last suffer
most certain Shipwreck.

THIS was the true state of our Case in England, during our late Revolutions;
the Church, and Religion were made to lead the Dance, but according to the
Scotch Prophecy, The State of England Paid the Piper; for the Presbyterians, in
pretense Religious, but in reality Envious of the great Power, Honors, and
Estates of Episcopacy, never lest till by Arts and Arms, persuading the
Credulous Vulgar, that it was Popish, and Antichristian, and animating their
Party in their Rebellion, with promises of Heaven, and the Churches Revenue for
a Booty; God Almighty was pleased, for our sins, to permit them to be so
successful as to overthrow that Government, after it had stood above a thousand
years in England. No sooner had Presbytery taken Possession of Naboth's
Vinyard, he being stoned and dead, but they became as Odious to the
Independents, who with more cunning and Address, and less trouble, gently laid
them aside as Babylonish too; and notwithstanding all their Exclamations from
the Pulpit and the Press, both in their Prayers and Sermons, they could not
prevail either with God or Men to hear them, or support their sinking Cause,
but their Companions mocked them as the Priests, of Baal, as Elijah did; and as
they had done those of the Church of England. And had not the God of Mercy and
Compassion pitied us in our Low Estate, when we lay in the Dust, by
miraculously restoring our Sovereign to his Crown, and with him the Church to
her right, no doubt but the Power and Revenue of the Church would have been a
perpetual Prize, and England the Bloody Theater upon which every Church would
have Acted their Part, and endeavored to have their turn of being Uppermost.

AND if we could suppose that the present Dissenters are only influenced by
mistaken Zeal for the Glory of God, the Purity of Religion, and the Salvation
of Men's Souls, and not the Destruction of their Bodies and Estates, with that
of the Government; Yet can they give us no assurances, or if they can, they
will not, that they or their Successors shall continue in the same Undesigning
Innocence. And since these are such specious and taking Pretenses with the
Deceivable and Easy Multitude, who can promise, but that Ambition may put on
the Cloak of Malicionsness, and call it Religious Reformation? that cunningly
Dissembled Pride may shelter it self under the shining habit of pretended Piety
and Purity? and that Covetousness, the root of all Evil, may not appear in the
borrowed Robes of Sanctity? These Impostors may easily furnish a furious Jehu
with Masks and Vizzards of Religion, to impose upon many innocent Jehonadabs,
and take them up with him into the Chariot of Rebellion; whilst with the same
Popular and Insinuating Courtship, he shall salute them kindly, 2 Kings 10.15,
16.
with, Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thine? if it be, give me thy
hand. Which with him they will be ready to do, and to lend their assistance to
the Confederation, especially upon hopes of being advanced, and taken up with
him into the Chariot of Government; and hurried away with the tempting
invitation, Come with me, and see my Zeal for the Lord. Though all this Zeal
was merely Interest, and Ambition, to Establish the Crown to himself, by the
utter Extirpation of the House of Ahab, and not one dram of true Religion, as
the sequel of the story made appear. And how easy is it for Hypocrisy to put
on any shape, and to appear an innocent Lamb, when in reality it is a ravening
Wolf? how easy for Ambitious Spirits to pretend the Glory of God, whilst they
only design their own; to decry all Forms of Prayer, and Godliness, and appear
Zealous promoters of the Power of Religion, only to advance themselves to
Greatness and Power: and under pretense of gaining Souls to God, to make a Gain
of Godliness, and by sacrificing all to their Covetousness, to make Godliness
great Gain? how feasible is it for Men to set up the Standard of King Jesus,
and make a Stale of a fifth Monarchy, and under the Scepter of Christ to invade
the Scepter of his Anointed, and to Usurp his Throne?

THESE are easy Suppositions of what may be the Dangerous Consequences of that
Disunion in a Nation, which proceeds from admitting various Forms of Church
Government in the same Nation: Nor are they bare Suppositions, but real Truths,
and what has been done, and lately done among us, and what may therefore be
done again. If there are any Persons who will own the Lawfulness of such
dangerous Consequences, as drown a Christian Nation in Blood, Misery, and
Confusion, or can but rationally be supposed that they may endanger it; let
them adhere to the Principle of tollerating diverse Forms of Church Government,
which is the ready Way to reduce those Suppositions into these most pernicious
Realities: and if it be so, as no doubt can be made, let all Dissenters either
acknowledge that these Opinions are the Common Pests of Humane Society, as well
as Religion, and therefore abandon them, and reunite with the Government, from
which they are broke loose; or if they will persist in maintaining, defending,
spreading, and increasing these Inhumane Principles and Practice^ (...) the
minds of Men, both by their Doctrine and Example; Let them not think us
uncharitable, if, as all sober and truly Pious and Judicious men must, an
Estimate be made of them, according to the future Consequences, and not their
present Appearances; which, for any thing can be known to the Contrary, may be
only double-guilt Hypocrisy, Simulata Pietas, duplex Iniquitas.
and that is in truth double-di'd Iniquity.

IF they did not foresee these Mischiefs, they are now shown them, and if upon
Notice and Warning given they do not endeavor to avoid them, we cannot remain
Masters of common sense, but we must believe they intend them; and if we do
believe that, we may very lawfully not only Pray against them for the Peace of
Jerusalem, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. (...), from such men as are out of place, disorderly,
and not deserving therefore any place in society. Exodus 21.29.
To be delivered from Unreasonable Men; but the Government may and ought to
take care of it self, and those under its Charge, who are Obedient, and truly
Fear God and the King, to secure them from such wicked Attempts. In the Law of
Moses, which was given by Gods Command, if an Ox were wont to push, and the
Owner had warning, and did not take Care to prevent it, he was to make good the
Damage either with his Life, or his Estate; if a man dug a Pit, and any
thing fell into it, he was to make restitution: let me infer with St. Paul,
Does God take care of Oxen? and shall no care be taken of Christians? 1 Cor.
9.9, 10.
or says he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is
written, that we may plough in hope, and sow in hope, and be made partakers of
our hopes, by reaping the quiet and peaceable fruits of Righteousness. That
these Principles have pusht against Government in times past, is most
notorious; and one may truly say of them, as Rehum the Chancellor of Artaxerxes
said falsely of the City of Jerusalem, Ezr. 4.15.
If search be made in the Book of Records of our Fathers, we shall find and
know, that these Principles are Rebellious Principles, and hurtful unto Kings
and Provinces, and that they have moved Sedition in former times. Tragical
Remembrances are still fresh: how with their Horns of Iron they push't, and
wounded, and murdered the Church and State; and how thousands of innocent souls
fell into the Pit of Division, which they had opened, Nay. Lam. 4.20.
The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their Pits.
And if they will still be pushing, and still make the Pit wider and deeper,
they cannot but know what they deserve, both by the Law of God, by the Law of
Nature, which teaches all Creatures self Preservation; by the Law of Nations,
which designs the common good and happiness of Mankind; and by the Law of our
Land, which is made to secure the Peace, and Prosperity of the Society; of
which all such are unworthy Members, or to speak truth, rather the Diseases,
(...), than parts of the Body Politic, both in Church and State.

BUT supposing the best that we can, in admitting of different Forms of Church
Government in the same Nation, and that they should have no Seditious
Intentions, or Inclinations, yet would it be impossible to Cure the Prince or
the People of those mutual Fears and Jealousies, the uneasy Companions of Men's
minds, which rob the one of the Pleasure of their Crowns, and the other of the
satisfaction of their Lives which must spring from this Fountain; and which
will load the Government with continual Cares, and put it upon such immoderate
Watchings, as will scarce permit it to sleep, and however will not suffer even
the sleep of those who labor in it to be sweet unto them. For we must either
suppose the Supreme Governor to be of Gallio's Faith, Act. 18.17.
and that he cares for none of these things; or (which would be as kind to him)
that he is of the Grand Signiors Religion, whom one may well place, as the
Italian Painter did one of our Kings, between Moses, Mahomet, and Messiah,
Pasquil. Hen. 8.
with a Quo me vertam Nescio in his mouth; or we must suppose him to join with
some one of these Churches. For should he to day go to the Cathedral, and to
morrow to the Conventicle; one while to the Bull and Mouth to a silent Meeting,
another resort to the Anabaptists, and so walk the round of Religions, every
one of these would doubt him not to be of their Church; and by endeavoring to
oblige all Religions, he would be suspected to have no Religion at all: and
should he firmly adhere to any one, he would thereby disoblige all the rest;
who would be Jealous that he did not love them, that he only Tollerates them
pro tempore, for his convenience, or to serve the Interest of his Affairs, and
that if he were settled and secured at home and abroad, he would retrench their
Liberty. And by how much both he believed and they knew, that their Mutual
Safety and Security were inconsistent one with another, by so much more their
Fears and Jealousies of each other would increase; this would necessitate them
to create him troubles and Difficulties in his Government at home and abroad,
that so the fear of greater Inconveniences in opposing or suppressing them,
might make any attempts to secure himself that way, dangerous and
Impracticable; that so by being unsecure for him, they might secure themselves:
These Practices and underhand Artifices and Correspondencies with Foreign
Powers to balance his, or give him Diversions, must of necessity render any
Prince Jealous of them, for no Prince can be free from fears and jealousies,
who does not believe himself secure, and no Prince can think himself so, who
daily finds his Subjects using all Arts imaginable to traverse his Designs, and
asperse his Government, by raising Fears and Jealousies of his Designs against
their Religion or Liberty, and continually perverting all Occurrences of State,
not only to Establish those suspicions in the minds of their own Party, but to
make use of them as Engines, to draw in others to join and side with them; by
persuading them that if they do not, All will be lost; Privilege, Property, and
Religion, will all be swallowed up by Prerogative. And every several Sect
having gained the Opinion among their Followers, that theirs is the only true
Religion, they will believe without any difficulty, that the Government which
would debar them of that, will make no Scruple of taking from them all they
have. And because none of this can be done with their consent, therefore
necessarily an Arbitrary Power must be introduced to effect it, and when men's
minds come to be infected with this Jaundice, it turns every thing into the
Color of their Suspicion: So that the Prince cannot raise any Arms for the
Defense of his Crown against a Foreign Power, but presently that is only a
pretense, and the real Design is to rule by the Sword; he cannot demand any
supplies of Money, for the most pressing Occasions of the Public Affairs, but
it will be denied, or delayed, lest it should be misemploy'd to the erecting an
Arbitrary Tyranny; and thus whilst these Fears and Jealousies play the Tyrants
over both, the Prince is run upon one of these two Rocks, either the necessity
of Supplying and Supporting himself Arbitrarily, with what they would not
afford him Legally, and which they ought to have done voluntarily; or otherways
to expose himself to the Contempt of his Neighbors, and the Danger of their
Arms, and thereby of the Ruin and Subversion of the Government; or else to the
Usurpations of his own Subjects upon his Crown and Dignity.

THEN shall every man who is a true and a Loyal Friend to his Prince, be
esteemed a Traitor to his Country; a wise or faithful Counselor, and
therefore in his Princes favor, shall be adjudged an Enemy to the People, a
Conspirator against their Privileges and Religion: And if these Jealousies
have gained a Party so numerous, as to be Confident, or if they can persuade
the Populace into an Ephesian Tumult for they know not what, then shall the
Lives of the Princes surest Friends be demanded as Sacrifices to Atone the
Popular Frenzy; and their Blood must quench and allay this fire of Jealousy.
It were well if this had only been our Case in the Noble Earl of Strafford, and
Archbishop Lawd, who fell the first Victims to this Idol of the Peoples fears,
which for all that, grew afterward into a Flame so raging, that whole Rivers
of Blood, (and even of that which made the Ax blush, and will England for ever)
were not able to extinguish, till it had burnt the most Glorious Government the
Sun sees in all his travels, into Rubbish and Ashes.

SOME seditious Pamphlets lately thrown abroad in the World, and dispersed at a
common Charge, would induce one to believe the Case were our own, and
particularly one entitled, An account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary
Government, etc. where the Writer does, Greg. Naz. Or. 1.
as Nazianzen says, Arm himself to be Eloquent against the Truth; abusing that,
the better to abuse others, into a belief of the most Notorious Calumnies, and
Sarcasms against the Government, the King, and his Ministers, the Judges, and
who not? As if all conspiring to alter the Established Government, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical. And is as Industrious as Malicious, to set us all into a
Flame: To do this at a Season when we are under the apprehensions of a Foreign
War, for the defense of our selves and all Europe, against the danger of a
Neighbor too near not to be feared, and grown too great to be suffered, looks,
and certainly is a Design of the greatest Mischief; and if the Authors are not
Dissenters either from the Church of England, or from all Religion, as well as
from the Court of England and the Interest of England, the World is strangely
mistaken; the Sibboleth which lisps so demurely in every Page, plainly shows
that it was Penned by the Men of Ephraim, who have a design to Quarrel with our
Royal Jephtha their Deliverer, by the unparalled Amnesty, from the Ammonites
of their former Delinquencies.

THESE are the proper effects of Jealousies, and Misunderstandings between a
Prince and his People; the natural result not only of Diversity of Government
in the Church, Tolerated, but permitted even by Connivence. And what can be
the end of Disunion between these two, whom God has joined together, and no man
ought to put asunder, and who ought to live together in all the happy Caresses
of a Conjugal Affection; what can be expected from such a Divorce, but a
troublesome Reign to the Prince, an uneasy Life to the People; who must always
be under the apprehensions of dismal Revolutions and unhappy Days; and whilst
neither of them esteems themselves secure, they both become Miserable. Whereas
on the contrary, Unity in the Government of the Church, being, as before was
said, Political as well as Religious, will remove all these unnecessary Fears
and Imaginary Dangers; it will beget Love and a mutual Confidence in each
other, between a King and his Subjects, which is the only happiness of the
Crown, as well as of the Nuptial State: Of which one may say as the Poet.

Faelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet Copula,
Nec malis divulsa Querimonijs.
When there is no Murmuring or Complaining, but the one Obeys with Pleasure,
what the other Commands with Love, and love the one as much to be Commanded, as
the other to Command. But alas! this is so far from being hoped for, so long as
there is this Disunion in the Political Government of the Church, as it would
be, if there were so in the Political Laws of the State; it being as impossible
to satisfy all Parties with the one as with the other; and there being
notwithstanding the same reason, that those who are dissatisfied, should yet
yield Obedience as well to the one as to the other, since they are both of the
same Nature, and levelled at the same End.

FROM what has been said, it is evident, that a Disunion in the Political
Government of the Church in the same Nation, Lays the perpetual Foundation of
Dreadful Changes, and Revolutions in the Government of the State: and by sowing
Jealousies, Fears, and Discontents in the Minds of Men, it gives continual
Opportunities to the Ambitious, Covetous, Envious, Proud, and Discontented, to
run the Nation into Civil Broyls, and Intestine Quarrels: for which reason
Solomon gives this necessary Caution to all those who will be the Disciples of
true Wisdom, My Son, fear thou God and the King; and meddle not with those who
are given to change. Which of necessity all Dissenters must be, whilst they
believe themselves the only People who Worship God in Spirit and Truth; and
therefore contrary to the manifest Design of the Gospel, (were they what they
pretend, or believe) endeavor their own Establishment by force and violence,
the confusion and utter subversion of the Government, which does oppose them,
and their pernicious Practices; so dishonorable to Christian Religion, and the
Protestant Cause; so destructive of Peace and Charity; so contrary to the
common good of all Society, and the Happiness of Mankind in General; and in
particular to the safety and security, the Settlement and Establishment of that
Church and Nation of which they are Members, and to which by the Rules of
Religion they owe all Obedience.

CHAP. XI.
NOR will the Mischief of this Disunion in the Political Government in the
Church, confine it self at home, or be contented with making us unhappy among
our selves, but will most certainly Expose any Nation to the Power and Attemps
of Foreign Enemies: for Unity in any Government, is like the state of Health in
the Natural Body, where the Muscles are firm and Robust, the Nerves strong, the
Ligaments compacted, the Joints close, the whole Strength entire and vigorous,
and every Member obedient to the Head, whereas on the contrary, want of Union
renders the Body Politic crazy and infirm, the Head may command the Hands or
the Feet, but they are out of joint, and cannot move; or if they do, it is with
so much Pain or Trouble, with such a Feebleness and Languor, as is next to
Impotence it self: and when any People are in this Condition, they become an
Easy Prey, as well as a great Temptation to any Foreign Power.

FOR first, This render them contemptible to their Foreign Enemies; for Men
always make a Judgment of the strength of any Nation in proportion to their
Unity among themselves: for what does it signify though a Nation be never so
Rich or Populous, if they be not Unanimous? their Enemies must needs thus Argue
with themselves; What though this People abound in Money, and swarm with
Inhabitants, so long as they are like a Rope of Sand? it is a sign of the
goodness of their Country, as well as the Weakness of the Nation: there will be
the better booty, and the cheaper Victory; the Conquest will pay us well for
our Pains, and our Pains cannot be great to subdue a People who are already
half Conquered by their Civil Dissentions; we are not to go to dispute a bloody
Conquest, but a certain Victory: Their mutual Fears have alienated the
Affections of the People from their Prince; and they who have been so Prodigal
to waste all the stock of Loyalty which was left them as a Patrimony from their
Ancestors, will easily be tempted to sell the Reversion of their Allegiance to
a new Sovereign; Nor shall an Invader ever need to fear a Party, who for ready
Money in hand, and large Promises of future Payments and Gratifications in
whatever they demand (which he may Pay he knows as he pleases) will not either
actually join with him, or however retard all the Counsels and necessary
Preparations which shall be made against him, for the defense of the Public.
Nor will they be wanting by fair Pretenses, or by the Golden Key (where that is
permitted to be used) to open themselves a way into the Counsels of their
Prince, places of Trust and Importance; thereby to betray him, and gratify his
Enemies, by opening them a Passage into his Dominions, and an easy Door of
Conquest.

AND therefore Secondly, When by Reason of danger from abroad, there is the
greatest necessity of Unity at home; when they should be mustering Men for the
Common Defense of the Public, they will be most busy in Mustering up whole
Armies of Complaints, Grievances, and Faults in the Government: when they
should be raising Money to defend the Crown and Government, in order to the
Common Safety, they will be raising Fears, Jealousies, and Disturbances in the
Minds of his Subjects, to distract and divide them: then will they be most
busy at the Mint to coin false Reports and counterfeit Rumors, strange
Discoveries and Conspiracies against the Peoples Liberties, and Religion: and
animate all these Disorders, by telling the Credulous, that now is the Time, or
never, in the necessity of Public Affairs, to advance their Private Interest.
For should the Prince return Victorious over his Foreign Enemies, and settle an
honorable Peace abroad, he would be in a Condition to turn his Arms against
them, and endeavor to secure and settle his Peace at home; and should they
lose this Opportunity of his Necessity, possibly they may never meet with the
like again. And should the Prince fail of Success in the Defense of his Crown
and Country, which they will take all the Care they can that he shall, the
assistance they have given his Enemies (though by no other way but secret
Correspondencies, and clogging the wheels of Affairs, to make them move
heavily, and by consequence unsuccessfully,) will entitle them to the Favor of
the Victor, if it prove an entire Conquest; or however if it comes to a
dishonorable Peace, to his Protection. For he must be Master of very little
Policy, who will not endeavor to support and encourage a Party in the
Dominions of his Enemies, who shall be able upon all Occasions to do him such
considerable Services.

BUT Thirdly, This Disunion of any Nation among themselves, does not only
render them Lame and Impotent at home, but Ruins their Hopes of Confederations
for their Assistance and Security abroad. For the Leagues and Amities of
Foreign Princes and States have always their Foundation laid in their own
Interest and Advantage; and who will enter into Leagues Offensive and Defensive
for their Common Security, with a People who by reason of their Intestine
Divisions, are in a condition to need Assistance from others, but not afford
their Allies any considerable help in their Necessity? His late Majesty was a
dreadful Example of this Truth; for did not all Europe stand gazing at our
Flame, without ever so much as offering their Mediation to Extinguish it? which
of all his Confederates or Allies came in to his relief? did they not permit
his Crown to be taken off his Head, and his Head from his Body, without any
concern? although it was the Common Case of all Crowned Heads, and a President
which their Posterity may have cause to repent that ever it was permitted; but
shall never able to raze out of the Records of Time. And though this was a
private and Intestine Quarrel; and therefore not esteemed the concern of our
Allies, yet does it manifestly prove, that since all Alliances are managed by
Interest, if they come to believe, that to assist us against a Foreign Power,
be as little their Advantage, they will be as slow and backward to do it then:
And there is nothing can more forceably persuade them into such a Belief, than
by our own Disunion and Division, to put our selves out of a Capacity of being
serviceable to their Interest, by the ability of mutual help and Assistance in
their time of Need.

So that it must be pure Compassion for their own Affairs, and to keep the
Balance from inclining too much to one side, that must be the Motive to
encourage them to lend us their hand; and since that cannot be expected till
they see us ready to Sink, let any person Judge into what a Miserable Condition
we must be reduced, before we receive that Help, or they come in to our Aid.
Whereas, when any Nation is powerful, by being Unanimous, their Friends and
Allies will upon the first Summons, be ready to assist them, not only for their
own Interest, and because they expect the like Kindness, upon the like
Occasions; but because they will be unwilling and afraid to disoblige a Power,
which but by withdrawing it self from them, may expose them to Dangers and
Hazards: Or resenting it as an Injury and Affront, may at one time or another
remember it with thoughts of Revenge.

So that there is nothing can be more apparent than that Disunion in any
Nation, weakens its Force and strength at Home and Abroad, and exposes it to
the Danger of Foreign Enemies, whilst it gives them all the Invitations and
Assistances they can desire, to accomplish their Conquest and its Ruin.

BUT bedsies all this, there is something more in this Disunion in point of
Church Government in our Nation, which is particularly dangerous to the present
Government: And that is, that it Naturally inclines all the several Parties to
Antimonarchical Principles, and to entertain kind thoughts of Polyarchy in the
State, as well as Anarchy in the Church; and of all others, to Democracy rather
than Optimacy. For where the Government is Elective and Mutable, every several
Party will endeavor to make such an Interest in all such Elections, as to have
a considerable number of the Governors, to be of their Persuasion: By which
Method they entertain a constant Hope that they shall be able, not only to
continue that Liberty to their Way, but also to increase and Augment it. Nor is
it possible by any Arguments to persuade them that Monarchy is the best Form of
Government; and which is strange, the former experience of the Tyranny of the
late Commonwealth, which was Established upon the Ruins of our Peace and
Prosperity, the tossings, and Tumblings, the Uncertainties and Rollings of that
raging Sea of Confusion, is not convincing, but that they will Embarque
themselves in it upon the same Design, although they know it is a Red Sea of
Blood, and leads us all to a Desolate Wilderness. How contrary and repugnant
this Government is to the Fundamental and Established Laws of these Nations, I
need not tell: But what must they be, who pretend for Religion to overthrow all
the Foundations of the Earth, and put them out of Course, unless God hold up
the Pillars of it, as hitherto he has done in despite of the raging of the
People. However, it afords us a clear discovery of the Tempers of those men who
keep up these Principles of Disunion, which have such a desperate influence
upon the Civil Affairs, and endeavor to Ruin the State by setting up
Religion; and whose restless and unwearied Industry leaves no stone unmoved;
Nay, who will move Heaven and Earth, to accomplish their Design. This has been
observed to be the Genius of Dissenters in former Times, and it is to be feared
the Humor has not left them. Esaias 57.20, 21.
For they are like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, but is continually
casting up mire and dirt; Foaming, and Raging, and Raving like that unstable
and unruly Element, to enlarge its floating and turbulent Empire, by
incroaching upon the Terra Firma, the Peaceable Earth; and one may but too
truly add the Words of the Prophet, There is no Peace says my God to the
Wicked. Romans 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
For their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues they use Deceit,
the Poison of Asps is under their Lips. Their mouth is full of Bitterness,
their feet are swift to shed Blood. Destruction and Misery are in their ways:
And the way of Peace have they not known. For their Practices declare it
publicly, what ever they pretend either of Innocence or Sanctity, That there
is no fear of God before their eyes.

THERE being no Differences, as before was observed, which do so absolutely
Alienate the minds of Men, as those about Religion, as they are most
irreconcilable, therefore they are most dangerous; not only to the Essence of
Religion, but to the Civil affairs of State; for if we be divided, and
distracted, what matters it how or by what Means? The effects of these
Dissentions will have the same influence upon the Public Affairs, whether
they come from Religion or Ambition. Either will ruin us, but the former more
certainly and with greater Artifice; Because more insinuating and plausible in
outward appearance. For men who have any sense of Religion, cannot but look
upon it as the great concern of their Lives, and the care of their Posterity,
to whom they desire to transmit it as well as their Estates: And though it is
in Charity to be hoped, that many Dissenters are not aware of this dangerous
Rock which lies under Water, and that they have no such Ill designs, yet they
cannot be ignorant from former Expeence, that there may be such among them now
as have been formerly; and that Popular and Ambitious Spirits have made use of
their Zeal and Credulity, to abuse them and the whole Nation into Misery and
Slavery, under the pretense of Liberty: And that such Men will never want
either Shelter or opportunity under those pretenses of Religion, to embroyl us
among our selves, or betray us to a Foreign Power, so long as this Disunion
continues, and these Differences are encouraged, maintained, and daily
propagated among us.

THIS is a season when these things would be seriously Considered by all
Dissenters; and if it shall appear a real Truth, that this Industry, in stead
of promoting true Religion, must promote our Ruin, they ought voluntarily to
Unite and return to the Obedience of the King and Church: For otherways their
Actions will confess what their Tongues deny, and that this Reformation is in
Reality the Subversion of the Government which they intend.

FOR what is it possible to believe or think of such Persons, as with
treacherous Joab, 2 Samuel 20.29.
call us Brethren, enquire of our Health, and with the right hand salute, that
with the left they may stab us (as he did the incautelous Amasa) with our own
Sword under the fifth Rib. Can they be esteemed Friends to their Country, or
the Protestant Religion, who through their Dissentions discredit the one, and
disable the other from defending it? is this the way to secure us from
Arbitrary Government, to make the Princes Government perpetually unsafe and
uneasy, and almost impracticable without it; by forcing him, for the guard of
the Scepter, to wear a Sword; and then exclaim against him for doing that which
they have necessitated him to do, or to leave his Crown and Life, and that of
his Loyal Subjects, to the mercy of the Sword of Rebellion? Can it be probable
that this should be an Expedient to preserve us from the Roman Religion, to
furnish them with Arguments against us; that we deny the Catholic Faith in
the Communion of Saints; and to give them this advantage against us, to say,
and truly, that we have neither Unity nor Charity? Or can any man in his Wits
believe, that the best way to Establish Peace among our selves, is to maintain
perpetual Principles of Quarrels and Contentions? Or that we are like to defend
our selves from powerful Enemies abroad, (Enemies by a Hereditary Animosity,
and Enemies upon the account of Religion) by worrying one another at Home? No,
no, as soon shall the Plague become an Amulet to preserve us from Contagion; as
soon shall Impotent men be cured by cutting their Nerves in pieces; as soon
shall men see clearly by putting out their Eyes; and all that ever can be
imagined, that is not only improbable but utterly impossible, come to pass, as
that this or any other Nation should be happy without Unity, not only in point
of the Civil, but Ecclesiastical Government; or that Men's minds should be easy
whilst the Spring of Jealousies is kept open among us, and the fountain of
Charity is stopped up; or that we should be safe from Foreign Enemies, when no
man can tell who is his Friend at Home.

NOR in short, can it be hoped that Truth and Peace should flourish in our
Days, when Private Opinion shall be preferred before the Catholic Faith, and
the practice of the Church in all Ages; 1 Timothy 6.4.
when Eternal Wranglings about Words, and Questions, whereof comes Envy,
Strife, Railings, and Evil Surmisings, shall be the great Accomplishment of
Christian Religion; and shall banish all Love and Charity from the minds and
lives of Men. What can be the end of these Mischiefs? So long as Obstinacy in
our private Judgments, shall be accounted a more Essential part of Religion,
than Obedience to Lawful Authority; but what the Apostle long since, by way of
Caution, predicted to the Church of the Galatians, Gal. 5.13, 14, 15.
Brethren ye have been called unto Liberty, only abuse not your Liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh; but by Love, serve one another; for all the Law is
fulfilled in one Word, even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self:
But if they bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another. Which fearful Prophecy, so truly verisied and fulfilled upon that
and the rest of the Asian Churches, God of his infinite Goodness and Mercy
avert from us, by bestowing upon us this Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond
of Peace; and which is certainly the true Spirit of Christian Religion, and the
only way to obtain that peace of God which passes all Understanding, which
will fill the Soul with peace of Conscience here, the World with happiness, and
all those who follow it, with Eternal Joy, unspeakable, and full of Glory in
Heaven.

CHAP. XII.
THUS far I have endeavored to follow Truth, by manifesting that Unity in
Faith, and Unity in Government in a National Church, are absolutely necessary,
both to the salvation of Men's Souls, and to the Happiness, Peace, and Security
of any People in their Politic Capacities.

As there can be nothing in the World more desirable, so there is nothing that
all good Men ought more sincerely to endeavor to promote. Blessed are the
Peacemakers, says the Eternal Prince of Peace, for they shall be called the
Children of God; who is the God of Peace, and the Author of the Gospel of
Peace. Let us therefore, in Order to it, in the next place see what Expedients
have been propounded to restore this Peace to this Church, and Nation.

IT has been already manifested, that Unity in point of Faith, is the Bond of
the Catholic Union among all distinct Churches which are Members of the
Catholic or Universal Church; but this Faith must Work by Love. Gal. 5.6.
It has been also shown, that though this Unity of Faith which works so by
Love, as that though distinct Nations and Churches disagree about Ceremonies
and Circumstances of Religion, yet they may all agree in the substance of
Faith, yet that it is impossible, this should be in the same Nation; and that
therefore Uniformity of Government in the Church is absolutely necessary to
maintain Charity and Unity. And though this might be sufficient to show the
Unreasonableness of Tolleration of different Forms of Divine Worship under the
same Magistrate; yet since there is such a Cry among all Dissenters, both
Papists and others for Tolleration, and Liberty of Conscience, as an Expedient
both Politic, Religious, and Necessary, let me be permitted freely to speak
my impartial sense concerning it.

THOUGH all Parties whose private Opinion makes them Dissent from the
Established Government both in Church and State, must of necessity be desirous
of a Tolleration; yet I find the Papists and the Presbyterians are they who
appear most solicitous for it: and yet of all others they seem least to deserve
it. For no man ought in reason to demand that for himself, which he would not
think it lawful to grant to any other if in his Circumstances: Now Experience
has given us Demonstration of the violent Tempers of both these; and there is
not a Possibility of doubting, but if either the Papist or Presbyter were in
Power, they would not allow any Tolleration, or Indulgence to other Dissenters;
but the one would Establish the Scepter of the Pope, and the other of Christ
(as they call their New Government) with the most unlimited Sovereignty, both
over the Faith and Actions of All; Princes as well as Peasants: and since they
would compel all People by the utmost Severities and Rigours of Penal Laws to
Carry the Yoke which they would Impose upon them, what reason can they have to
Expect for themselves what they would deny all others? for their Practice has
made it evident to the lowest Understanding, that they who have so little
Charity for their Brethren in the Common Christianity, as to damn them without
remedy to the bottomless Abyss of Hell, for dissenting from them in any one
point which they have decreed to be De Fide, will look upon it as an Effect of
Compassion rather than Cruelty, to convert them, and save their Souls, though
with the loss of their Lives, Liberties, and Estates: or if that cannot be
effected, to confound them, to Extirpate and destroy them, lest they should
lead others by their Doctrines or Example to Damnation.

WHEREAS in truth and reality nothing but Blasphemy, Atheism, and such
Immoralities as are destructive of Humane Society, render men obnoxious to
Temporal Punishments: Insidelity, or not believing aright, being Crimes or
Defects rather of the Understanding, fall no further under humane Cognizance,
or Penal Laws, than by their Consequences and Effects they may, or do prejudice
those Laws and the Common End of Society: and therefore they are reserved for
the Punishment of a future state; and the Church can proceed no further, than
to Exclude them from her Communion, but not out of the Possession of their
Lives, or Estates, which God Almighty, as the Common Father of Mankind, thinks
fit to permit them to Enjoy, making his Sun to shine upon the Just and Unjust
with an equal influence and benignity.

BUT since a Papist has undertaken the Common Cause of all Dissenters, The
Advocate of Conscience, Liberty, etc.
and it may be has said as much for them as the subject will bear, and more in
behalf of his own Party than any other Dissenters can pretend to for
themselves, Papists having the specious plea of Prescription, as the Religion
of our Ancestors, the ancient Form of Government in the Church, and the Ancient
Faith, had they permitted it to continue so Entire and Undefiled, unmixed with
their Apochrypha, and Tradiditions; I will endeavor to answer what is most
material in his Discourse, in order to discovering the Weakness of his Plea,
not concerning my self with the sincerity of his Intention, which though
appearing for all, is only Designed for the benefit of his own Party.

IN the first place therefore I desire that Notice may be taken, how he states
the Question in the Prooemium of his Book. Note (says he) by Persecution,
Imposition, and Restraint, we only mean, the strict requiring to believe this
to be true, and that to be false, etc. and upon refusal to Swear, or Conform,
to incur the Penalties Enacted in such Cases; but by these Terms we do not mean
any Coercive Let or Hindrance into public Meetings. By Liberty of Conscience,
we understand only a mere Liberty of Mind in believing or disbelieving this or
that Doctrine, so far as may refer only to religious matters in a private way
of Worship, which are not destructive to the Nature and Grounds of Christian
Faith, nor tending to matters of an External Judicature, in abetting any
Contrivances, or disturbance to common Peace or Civility.

As to the First of these, I would gladly be shown when or where the Government
did ever in this sense persecute in any thing which is purely the subject of
Faith, without relating to Practice, or the Consequences of such Faith? or
where any person for refusing to Believe, or Swear, or Conform to any thing
which did not insluence the Civil Affairs of State, was ever punished? was ever
any man fined, imprisoned, or banished, because he would not swear to believe
any Theological Point, as of Free Will, Merit of Works, etc. which had no
relation to Political Affairs? there cannot be one Precedent found in all the
Records of all our Courts of Judicature, though we can show many out of that
Legend, as he calls Bishop Fox's Martyrology, who were put to death without any
other Crime than that they did not believe the Theological Point of
Transubstantiation; and when nothing else would do, then the killing Question,
What say you to the Sacrament of the Altar? was sure to turn them over to the
Secular Power for Heretics, and it was not long before the Writ de Hereticis
Comburendis brought them to their Funeral Pile. But if any thing which men
pretend to be matter of Faith, be found by Experience dangerous to Society,
destructive of the Fundamentals of our Government, may not we Lawfully
endeavor to oblige those who own that Faith, to give security that they do not
believe it so, as to be prejudicial to the Government? such are the Doctrines
of the Popes Supremacy and Power not only to Excommunicate, but to Depose
Princes, and dispose of their Crowns: that Equivocation even upon a solemn Oath
is lawful; a Position that Ruins all Religion, and Fidelity, and the very
Reputation of Humane Nature. And yet a Treatise I have seen written to this
Purpose, in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and approved by
Blackwell the Archpriest, in these words; Tractatus iste valde doctus, and vere
pius and Catkolicus est, etc. Certissime SS Scripturarum, Patrum, Doctorum,
Scholasticorum, Canonistarum, and optimarum Rationum presidijs, plenissime
firmat aequitatem aequivocationis. Ideoque dignissimus est qui Typis
propagatur, ad consolationem afflictorum Catholicorum, and omnium piorum
Instructionem. This Treatise, says he, is very Learned, and truly Pious, and
Catholic. Certainly therein the Equity of Equivocation is fully proved by the
strongest Reasons out of Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors, Schoolmen, and
Canonists, and therefore is most Worthy to be Printed for the Comfort of
afflicted Catholics, and the Instruction of all good People. Must now the
endeavoring to suppress the Authors of such Doctrine, be Persecution for
Conscience sake? have these Opinions no Influence upon Humane Society?

As to the Second Note, a Liberty of believing or disbelieving this or that
Doctrine, only in order to a private way of Worship, etc. Who ever denied this
Liberty? Is there any Judge of thoughts of the heart besides God? Is any man
denied to enjoy his private Opinion, or can he be, so long as it continues so?
But if People will Transgress these Limits, and impose matters of private
Opinion as matters of Faith, in order to practice, and such Opinions as ruin
Charity, disturb Peace, unsettle Government; must these too be Tolerated? And
such are the Opinions of Rome and Geneva. And it is not a private, but a
public Liberty which is denied them; a Liberty to Poison Men's Loyalty, and
first Murder their Allegiance, that they may with more ease Murder the
Government. A Liberty to banish Charity, Peace, and Unity, out of the Church,
to Establish true Religion without them. So that if he would stick to his
Demands, he could no sooner ask than have such a Tolleration as is not in the
Power of any Mortal Authority to abridge any man of; and it is impossible for
any person to suffer Persecution for his private Opinion; for no man can be
punished but for what is known to be his Opinion by his own Confession; and
when it comes to be so, either by his words or Actions, it ceases to be
Private: For suppose a man were a Mohammedan, but no person knew it besides
himself, who could tax him with it, or punish him for it? but if he will make
his house a Mosque, and endeavor to Convert others to the Alchoran, to make a
Party, and to Erect the Crescents to pull down the Cross and the Crown, would
that be private, or deserve Tolleration?

BUT to trace him, he tells us p. 1. That no man has power over Conscience;
therefore Imposition and Violence are unlawful; A very Logical Consequence; No
Prince has power to Punish, therefore not to Tolerate neither; God has
Exempted the Soul out of his Commission, but not the Body: Why does he then
demand that which is not in their Power to Grant? As for his Examples which he
gives for Tolleration, from Turks and Pagans, they are but ill Presidents for
Christians. And for the Instance of Theodosius and Gratian, if Socrates be to
be credited, it is a great Slander upon those two good Emperors: Gratian
indeed, Secr. Ecc. Hist. li. 5. c. 2. and 10.
at his first coming to the Crown, gave Liberty, that every Sect and Opinion
should freely, without Molestation, frequent their wonted Assemblies, except
the Eunomians, Photinians, and Manichees: But no sooner was he settled in the
Empire, God 1. Tit. 5. lege, Omnes.
and had joined Theodosius to him, but they command that all Heresies should
for ever keep Silence. The same Prohibition Arcadus and Honorius, continue and
Augment; Ibid. lege Cuncti.
Let all Heretics (say they) understand, that all places must be taken from
them, as well Churches, as other places of Meeting, as private Houses, in which
let them be debarred from Service, both by Night and by Day, Ibid. leg. Ariani.
and the Lord Deputy of the Province, was to look to the Execution of this Law,
and if he permitted their Meetings either openly or secretly, he was to fine
for it 100 l. Theodosius the Younger, whom Socrates compares to Moses for his
Meekness and Excellent Nature, yet with Valentinian his Cousin, summing up in a
Catalogue the Heretics of that Time; Commands that no where within the Roman
Empire, their Assemblies or Prayers should be permitted, but that all Laws made
to Prohibit their Meetings, should be revived, and made perpetual. And this
they did, because they thought the Civil Power was obliged to Protect the
Ecclesiastical, and to maintain Peace in the Church of God, and, as our
Advocate quotes the Wise Sir Francis Bacon for another purpose, page 7. Because
the Sword of Dissension ought not be put into the Peoples hands, to nourish
Seditions, Treasons, Conspiracies, etc. which were to dash the first Table
against the second, and to consider Men as Christians, so as to forget they are
Men; which with the Gentleman's favor, is not much to his advantage, since
these are all the Effects, and necessary Consequences of Tolleration.

IT was the great Misfortune of the Poet Claudian, that his Excellent Wit fell
upon dry and barren Subjects; the same ill Luck has this Writer, in falling
upon this Subject of Liberty of Conscience, so contrary to his own, and the
Judgment of his Church; that I shall use no other Arguments than his own Words,
and by turning his own Cannon upon his Castle in the Air, I do not Question,
but to make him quit his Fortifications: The Truth is, I like his Title of
Advocate, for he proves himself one, and acts the Advocate exactly, making the
best he can of a bad Cause; but so great is Truth, that it needs no other
Advocate, nor any better Arguments, than even in speaking against her, he is
compelled to use for her. Page 41. The ancient Original Fundamental Laws, says
he (by which other Laws of Less Extent are to be regulated,) were intended as a
defense, and Protection to all; providing one injure not another, and that
Common Peace and Safety be secured; No other Subsequent inferior Law can
therefore debar any peaceable Christian (that answers the Necessities of Church
and State, Civil, Spiritual, and Political) in equal Justice, and in Foro
Conscientiae, from this Privilege Originally due to all. And this he fortifies
with the Confession of a Presbyterian Divine, without a Name, who never saw any
Argument yet, that could clearly Evince, why any sort of Men who would profess
a peaceable subjection unto the Civil Government, might not in all their Civil
Rights be protected by it. Does not this oblige every Government to an easy
Credulity, to its own Ruin? For the greatest of its Enemies will profess this
Subjection, till they have power to effect their Ends; and by this Rule there
is no care to be taken of Men's Principles or Practices, if they can but speak
Fair, and profess they mean no hurt to the Government; no matter for what may
happen afterward; the Governors may sleep securely, till their throats are cut
by these harmless Professors.

BUT taking this for a Maxim granted, I proceed upon his own Words; That no
Tolleration of different Religion is to be permitted, and that first from the
Apostle St. Paul's Rule (page 49.) Have thou Faith, have it to thy self; And
seeing that Universal Unity among Christians is not to be attained, such a
Tolleration of things tolerable, is not only Lawful, but necessary, where a
Latitude or Liberty is left in such things as are not clearly, and positively
laid down in Scripture, in things of private Practice. Which is just giving
that Liberty which no man can take away, every man being at liberty to believe
and do so, so long as he keeps it to himself, and that it is Tolerable Faith
by being to himself, and his practice is truly private. But why then does the
Church of Rome Command us to believe Supremacy, Purgatory, Transubstantiation,
etc. which are not clearly, nor positively laid downin Scripture; is this Good,
Just, and Equal dealing with us?

BUT Secondly, I Argue from his own Reason, because nothing is more clear than
that this Tolleration must of necessity destroy that Original Fundamental Law
of Protection, due to all from the Government; which will not be able to
Protect it self, since it must Embroyl the Government, and endanger its Ruin,
that being the very thing for which Tolleration is so earnestly desired. For a
Wise Government (page 50, 51.) may tolerate (at least in a private way) with
the Old bounty of giving what they cannot help, different Opinions, when
otherwise the Public may be entangled, or endangered, or rather because the
Conscience cannot be compelled, or Faith forced; and more especially if they be
such Religions, as do not overthrow the Foundations of Truth, nor such as
disturb or impugn the Government Established; or if the Professors thereof be
such as are not Factious, or pertinacious, but Honest, Simple, Tractable,
Obedient to Superiors, having no other End in holding their Opinions in
Religion, than Gods Glory, or satisfaction of their own Conscience; and withal
are willing to submit to better Judgments, when they are convinced to be
Erroneous: (Page 52.) For we ought to have a Latitude of Charity for those who
Dissent, if they be not Impostors, or turbulent Incendiaries. And who are there
that will own themselves to be such? It looks like Oliver Remonstrating; or a
Declaration of 41. and by this Rule, all Sects, Heresies, and Rebels, if they
may be their own Compurgator^ must be Tolerated too, since they will Profess
all that is here desired for Tolleration; but by clear Consequence, if
notwithstanding these Professions, they do entangle and endanger the
Government, then they are not be Tolerated; but the Tolleration of all Sects,
though Charitably supposing them not Heretics, does not only destroy some one
Fundamental of Religion, but Religion in the Main; by making it Morally
impossible for any Man to know where he shall find a true Religion, and plainly
introduces Mahometanism, that a Man may be saved in any; and will confirm the
Atheist and Libertine in their Opinions, that there is no such thing, more than
in Men's melancholy Humors. And it is impossible but the Professors of different
Religions will be Factious, and Disobedient to Superiors, as daily Experience
assures us; and to Tolerate them, is to give them leave to be so, and to hold
their Opinions for the subversion of Government, and not satisfaction of
Conscience; as some who called themselves Papists as well as other Dissenters
have done in former times, and, for ought we know, Design the same again; and
therefore I conclude with the Advocate (p. 55.) That where every one has
Liberty to hold what he pleases; which by this profession cannot be denied him;
so soon as he believes his Party strong enough to grapple with Authority, he
will Publish and Preach what he holds, confined to no Rule or Order, but
contemning Law, will Rule as a Transcendent, and as he quotes the most
incomparable Hooker, ( lib. 3. cap. 107.) Let them tell us of Obeying the Laws
of God as long as they please, we dare not believe them who break the Laws of
those appointed by God to Rule over them. For it is a Distinction without a
Difference, to separate and divide the Laws of God from the Laws of Men; and
unless we observe both, we Obey neither. (page 56.) In these Cases, says our
Advocate, Christian Governors are not to regard such Pleas for private Liberty,
as overthrow Public Order and Peace. Nor to regard those Clamours against
them and the Laws, as Persecuting, when they do but oppose and restrain such
perilous Exorbitancies as strike at the Foundation of Christianity, and open a
gap to Atheism, Profaneness, and Blasphemy; here the Magistrate must interpose
his Coercive Power for remedy: Nor are they in this infringers of the Peoples
Liberty, but preservers of freedom; not Oppressors of others Consciences, but
dischargers of their own, by prohibiting men to vent their raw undigested
Fancies to others; to start Principles distructive to Government, subverting
Order, violating Laws, breaking Oaths, and contemning Authority; publicly
acting according to private Persuasion; not regarding common Order, or public
Peace, but by a Seditious and Factious Liberty, broaching their Opinions to
others. And there is a great deal of Reason why the Magistrate should use this
Power to crush the Cockatrice in the Egg: For (page 58.) if the public Power
shall suffer arrogant Ignorance, excess of Passion, perverseness of Will, to
come to its full Rudeness and Extent: (which it can do no way so readily as by
Tolleration.) Tumultuary Numbers and Brutish Power will soon make good private
Presumptions; and cover the most Impudent Lusts, Passions, and Ambitions of
Men, with the Pleas and Outcrys of Christian Liberty. And those who hold forth
Notions and Conceptions of Reformation, or wholly changing Religion and
Government, and in order to that, to shake even the frame of the Civil
Government, to which they think themselves no longer bound in subjection, than
they want a Party strong for Opposition, will not easily be persuaded that it
is the Sin of Rebellion which carries the face of Reformation, easily
dispensing with Obedience to Men, where they pretend amendment before God.
(page 59.)

WHAT can be said more, or more sharply against Tolleration than our Advocate
here pleads; and to join Issue with him upon this Plea, if we can prove that
these must be the Effects of Tolleration, then to use his own words, (page 62.)
True Christian Tolleration, not extending to matters of an Extern Nature,
Magistrates may use a Coercive hindrance from Public Meetings, without
impeaching of it. (And, by his Favor, from private too, such as he calls
private; that is, in private houses, which are as Capacious and Public as
some Churches.) For (adds he) Seditious Spirits, Cholerique Constitutions, and
Feavourish Complexions, who love to be moving in the troubled Waters of Secular
Affairs, whose Heads are prone to move their Hearts with specious Novelties,
quick Excitations, and zealous Resolutions, which soon after, like Salt
stream^, descend and fall upon the Lungs, provoking them violently to spread
their Opinions to others, these most truly forfeit their Christian private
Liberty to the Public Discretion, and Power, who will not or cannot use it
but to the public Detriment. (page 60.61.)

BUT that such have been the Effects of Difference of Opinions among us, is but
too visible; and if they grew in despite of all the Authority of the
Magistrate, to that prodigious height, as in the times of the late Rebellion,
to overthrow the whole frame of Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical: and
if the Principles and Positions, as well as Practices, of the same persons, or
their Successors, are still the same, derived from Calvin, Knox, Buchanan, etc.
then are they by no means to be tolerated in a Christian Commonwealth: But
what if yet they had never been Criminal, yet if their Principles lead to those
Ends, must they be therefore tolerated, that thereby they may the sooner, and
without opposition, come to those Tragical Conclusions? will not the Government
be Felo de se, and not only so, but betray those under its Charge to ruin;
according to the Maxim, Qui non prohibet, Jubet? and must the Magistrate lay
out all his Care to oblige his Enemies, those who hate both him and his
Government? must he put the Sword of Tolleration into the hands of Division, to
destroy his Friends, the Loyal and Obedient, who best (if not only) deserve his
Protection, and ought to be his chiefest Care?

DIFFERENT Opinions in the Church have always been the occasion of Quarrels,
and have always ended in Blood. Witness the Report of Socrates, of the
skirmishes between the Arrians and the Orthodox at Constantinople; witness the
Outrages of the Donatists in Africa. And so it will be when any Party grows
strong and numerous (and Tolleration is the best way to make them so, and for
that End they desire it) then the Beast which looks like a Lamb, will speak
like a Dragon. Rev. 13.11.
I know our Advocate loves the English Separatists so well and tenderly, by his
pleading for them, that he will easily believe all this of them; I could
heartily wish they had not given occasion for the whole world to believe their
Doctrines guilty of those barbarous Inhumanities, and Unchristian Practices;
which have given a deeper Wound to the Reputation of the Reformed Religion,
than to their Native Country; the Scar of which will be a perpetual Infamy to
all Posterity. I wish they could vindicate their Principles from the just
Reproaches of their former Practices, and from a Jealousy that they may
occasion us the same Miseries and Mischiefs; but alas! it is impossible; all
the pains they can take will but be Aethiopem lateremve lavare. A hope to make
a Negro fair. Which all the salt Water in the Ocean will never be able to
Effect; and indeed nothing can cleanse them from, but the salt streams of
Repentance from their own Eyes, and the blood of the Lamb of God, which takes
away the Sins of the World, joined to Resolutions of future Reformation and
Amendment.

BUT let not our Advocate think that by showing the Guilt of those who call
themselves Protestants, as he does (page 125.) where he tells us, More Princes
have been Deposed by Sectaries in 60 years, than by Papists in 600, and that
History and Experience testifies, that the respective Sects have been most
guilty of all kind of disobedience, both at home and abroad. Let him not think
that hereby he has vindicated his own Innocence, or not forfeited that Right to
Tolleration upon his own Grounds, which, though he pretend to plead for all, he
intends only for his own Party, as the only Meek and Peaceable People of the
Earth. I will Judge as charitably of Catholics (as they love to call
themselves) as they can deserve, and believe the honor and honesty of their
Quality and Education, the humanity of their Natures inclines them to be better
Subjects to the Civil State, than the Doctrines of their Church: but what if
they had never attempted any thing against the Government, or having attempted,
have never been successful, are they therefore innocent, who maintain
Principles destructive of the Government Civil and Ecclesiastical? I would ask
this Gentleman, whether he and all the Romish Catholics in England would not
willingly have the Power of the Papacy restored among us? if he would answer
without Equivocations, I am sure it must be in the Affirmative: then would I
demand, Whether this must not make an Alteration in the Government? since it is
now Established, and as he well observes ( page 201.) ever was, upon a direct
opposition to the Papal Supremacy: I know they will answer; There would be an
Alteration, but it would not be to the prejudice, but to the advantage of the
Church and State: find me any Overturners of Government who will not say the
same, and I will allow the Plea: but then would I further demand, whether he
believes the Canons, Decretals, etc. as certainly he does, and would persuade
us to do ( page 3.) and must be a Heretic if he do not; if he does, what does
he think of the well known Canon of Gregory the Seventh, Nos sanctorum
Predecessorum, etc. We (says that Pope) observing the Statutes of our
Predecessors, do absolve those that are bound by Fealty and Oath to persons
Excommunicated, from their Oath; and do forbid them to observe, or keep their
Fealty toward them, quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem venerint, till they come
to make satisfaction. He knows the Consequence of the Canon upon more Kings and
Emperors than one. I will not trouble him with the Hellish Opinions of
Mariana, Suarez, Bellarmine, Simanca, Philopater, Allen, or Sanders. Some of
which for very shame ( page 215.) he is forced to disown, as the Opinions of
private Doctors; he might have said with Charity, Doctrines of Devils, those
Incendiaries of the World, and perpetual Haters of Humane Nature and Happiness:
but by his favor, what he condemns Mariana and Suarez for teaching, a Pope was
so far from being of his Opinion of condemning, that he commends it in the
Public Consistory. Pius Quintus was his Name, who when Henry the Third of
France was murdered by Jaques Clement the Monk, gave his Applause to the
Tragedy; it was Rarum, insigne, memorabile facinus, facinus non sine Dei Opt.
Max. particulari Providentia, and dispositione; verus Monachus Fictum
occiderat. A rare, famous, and memorable Exploit, and not without the
particular Providence of Almighty God, that the true Monk should murder the
false one. Well might the Painter make St. Peter's Picture blush for the Crimes
of such impious Successors as this.

I need not repeat the Tumults of Rome, nor the Wars of Italy under Pope
Boniface the Eighth, nor the Reign of Julius, John the 12. or 22. nor all the
Disturbances occasioned by the Pride and Ambition of Popes grasping at Temporal
Power and Sovereignty. Here is the Root of the Matter: This Canon which has
stood unrepealed this 600 Years, is the perpetual Foundation of Papal
Usurpations; to which whoever does not Swear, upon Occasion, must be a
Heretic; and whoever does, must, if the Pope pleases, be a Rebel to his
Prince, and against the Lord and his Christ, whose Gospel teaches the quite
contrary Doctrine. And though notwithstanding this, the Catholic Princes, and
even those of Italy, as he says ( page 202.) who live under the Pope's nose,
are not afraid of being Deprived, or Excommunicated, but are Absolute and
Arbitrary in their Dominions. Those last words are a good reason of their
fearlessness for themselves, but an ill one for their Subjects; and the
subsequent words which he adds, a worse for both, though absolutely necessary
to maintain their right: for they are not obliged to the Principles of the
Roman Religion, or their Peoples Fidelity, built upon the Sacred and Solemn
Oaths of Allegiance, but are obliged to make the Sword give a Constant Security
to the Scepter; Whilst they dispute with Sword in hand for their
Temporalities; So that it seems the Pope puts them upon disputing their Right,
and if the Sword of Princes be not longer than St. Peter's, the Pope has the
best Argument for even the Temporalities; and the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, can open a door to the Kingdoms of the Earth: Is not this a rare
Principle of Peace, which obliges Princes to stand continually upon their Guard
against the Encroachments of the Sea of Rome?

AND whereas ( page 215.) to balance the Impious Doctrines of Bellarmine,
Suarez, and Mariana, he throws into the other Scale, Luther, Calvin, Knox, and
Buchanan; and tells us, That their Opinions are at least as dangerous to
Monarchy, the difference between them being only this; That whereas the former
lodge the Deposing Power in the Pope only (whose person is at a safe and
sufficient distance at least from us) the latter bring the danger home to the
door of Princes, and place it in the People, whom they make both Parties and
Judges in the Case. Neither the one therefore, nor the other, who maintain such
Doctrines, fit to be Tolerated by any Prince, who has not a mind to be deposed
either by the Pope or the People. But this distance, this safe distance was a
pretty sweetning Parenthesis to dose a Prince, with the Opium of being out of
Danger: As if Popes might not have as long hands now, and their Bulls as long
Horns as in the days of Henry the 4 th. or Otho, or King John: And as if the
Pope were not in the Case of those Sovereigns, both Judge and Party;
particularly that of Henry, where the Quarrel was, whether the Pope or the
Prince had the Right of Investitures of Bishops to their Temporalities.

BUT what if I show him that Calvin, Luther, etc. are as good Catholics as
he, in this Point of Vesting this deposing Power in the People? Vide, Avent.
Polychron. Viterben. Sabellicus. Nauclerus, in vita Childerici, and all the
Historians of that Age.
Pope Zachary being consulted whether Childerick, being Sine liberis, sine
ingenio, might be deposed, and Pepin, who was Major du palais Substituted in
his room; in his Answer to the Peers of France, wanting a President for such
Power in himself, tells them at first, that it was of that weight, ut non
auderet tam magni momenti cogitationem suscipere, that he dare scarce
entertain a thought of it; but tells them in Conclusion, That since Princes
hold their Crowns and Government of the Peoples Choice, in whom it resides
absolutely Constituere and Destituere (a pretty modest word for Deposing) to
appoint or forsake, therefore they might remove him who was unuseful, and Elect
him who was most Worthy. So said, so done. See here a Lutheran Pope, abandoning
Supremacy, for which now they contend as pro aris, and vesting this Deposing
Power in the People. A Position no less Treasonable than contrary to plain
Scripture in a hundred places; and therefore Damnable, to make Princes, whose
Tenure is in Capite of God Almighty only, become Tenants at will by Copy of
Court Roll of Popular Election and Deposition: If these be good Subjects, good
Christians, who lay an Eternal Foundation for Perpetual Changes and Revolutions
in Government and Governors, by tossing and tumbling Crowns upon the
Tempestuous Ocean of the Mobile vulgus, let them be cherished, let them be
Tolerated.

LET him now, which he ought to have done, if he could, or had meant fairly;
Show in all the Doctrine of the Church of England, the least Sylable that may
any way be construed, even by Prejudice it self, to encourage Sedition,
Rebellion, or deposing of Princes: He nibbles a little at it (page 261.) with,
What if one should say you were Antichristian, Bloody-minded, Seditious, etc?
Why, if he should, he would be guilty of a most notorious Calumny and Falsehood,
because he can never prove it. For our Doctrine and our Practice suites with
our Prayers, which are, Litany of Chapter of Engl.
From all Sedition, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, Good Lord deliver us; And
if the pure Spirit of Primitive Christianity, so Innocent, so Vnambitious, so
Obedient and full of Sincerity, and godly Simplicity, so Pure and Peaceable,
and full of good Works, be only to be found in the Doctrine and Practice of
those who are the true Sons of the Church of England, let them be accounted the
best Subjects, the best Christians: And that therefore they deserve the
Encouragement, the Care and Protection of the Laws and Government, and not to
be given up to be Wasted, Devoured, and Destroyed, trampled down and trodden
underfoot by Tolleration of those whose Principles and Practice are so directly
contrary to the Peace and Prosperity of the Church and Nation.

CHAP. XIII.
THUS it appears from the Advocates own Words, that none can justly plead for a
Tolleration, whose Devilish Principles, and furious Practices, tend to the
Subversion of Government, which both by what has been said, and by Experience,
the surest Demonstration in the World, both Papists, and other Dissenters,
especially Presbyterians, have been proved guilty of. Let us now see how he
manages the Cause of his own Party, for whose sake this Project of a
Tolleration was principally intended, as is plain by his comparing Luther,
Calvin, Buchanan, etc. with Mariana, Suarez, and Bellarmine, Whose Doctrines
are at least (as he says) as Dangerous to Monarchy; and therefore unfit to be
Tolerated, the one or the other.

LET us therefore examine the Plea of Innocence, which he descends to defend in
particular. And as their manner always is, (page 70.) he tells us, That the
Roman Catholic Religion was the first Christian Religion planted in our
Country, from whom we had our very Christianity: Suppose it were, yet Quantum
mutatus ab illo? The present Roman Catholic Religion is not the same which
they planted. But with his good leave, his Assertion is contrary, Pol. Virgil.
Hist. Angl. l. 2.
not only to great Probability, but to the consent of Historians; for Polydore
Virgil tells us, Test is est Gildas, Britannos jam inde ab initio arti
Evangelii, Christianam accepisse Religionem, That our Ancestors received the
Christian Faith, according to the Testimony of Guildas, in the very beginning
of the Gospel. Baronius thinks St. Peter was here; Theodoret, Bar. An. 58. n.
51. Theod. de curand. Graec. affect. l. 9. Niceph. l. 2. cap. 40. Baron. An.
36. n. 5. Bid lib. 1. cap. 25, 26. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Saint Paul; Nicephorus, Simon Zelotes; Some, Joseph of Arimathea; and even
when Austin the Monk came from Gregory to Convert us, as they say, to the
Christian Faith, he found a Church among us, as Beda testifies, Bertha, a
Christian Queen; and at Bangor, a Monastery, or rather a College of many
hundreds; who upon the Question, Whether they should admit of Austin, put it
upon this Issue, Si sit humilis, admittat^^^ But finding him proud and
Imperious, they rejected him, which they durst never have done, had they
believed even the bare Primacy of his Master, or that they were owing for their
Faith and Conversion to the Roman Church.

I will not enter into a long dispute about Merits, Pardons, Purgatory,
Adoration of Images, or Transubstantiation, which were but actum agere, only
methinks the Apothecaries Argument deserves to be put upon the File; who being
pressed to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, told the Zealous
Agressor pleasantly, but truly, Sir, I will make a Wafer, and set a mark upon
it, that it may not be changed, you shall send it to the Pope, let him
Consecrate it, and I will venture you a 100 l. you dare not take it: Oh says
the other, but I dare and would; well, replied the Apothecary, then I will
venture a 1000 l. that you shall be dead before next Morning: which, if it were
really transubstantiated, were impossible, that the poison of the Body should
be the food of the Soul, and Christ be made a Murderer; which demonstrative
Conclusion, so little expected, puts the Romanist a little out of Conceit with
his Doctrine, and struck him as dumb, as the other would have done dead, for
all the Transubstantiation: there are very gross Stories and Slanders abroad,
if some in the Romish Church have ^^^tried the Experiment, and have received
their Death by what was given them as the Body of Christ, and the Bread of Life.

BUT I will observe his Method, ( p. 166.) He tells us confidently, That there
makes for them all that may or can be of any Christian man required; Literal
Text of Holy Scripture, approved Tradition, General Councels, Ancient Fathers,
Ecclesiastical Histories, Christian Laws, Conversion of Nations, Divine
Miracles, Heavenly Visions, Unity, Universality, Antiquity, Succession, all
Monuments, all Substance, all Accidents of Christianity. Here is not a word of
Proof, and therefore I may take the same Liberty in contradicting it, if I
please. But to answer this, There makes against them Literal Text of Holy
Scripture, ^usanus Ep. 2. ad Bohem.
of that Scripture which a Cardinal says is a Nose of Wax, of that Scripture
which the Pope has Power to enlarge at his pleasure, as the Trent Council has
done, making the Apochrypha Canonical. Of that Scripture which speaks not a
single word for the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Masses for
the Dead, Invocation of Saints, Vows of single Life, etc. but in a thousand
places against them; and therefore they are obliged to fly for refuge to their
Approved Traditions, and set them in the Throne above the Scriptures, whose
mouths must be stopped by the vulgar Latin, and the Vulgar confined from
reading them; and even these approved Traditions are most of them such as the
Universal Church never knew, never acknowledged; Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. Dec. 1.
which yet must be received with the same Reverence and Affection as the
Scriptures; for as Baronius affirms, Bar. Ann. 53. Number. 11.
Traditio Scripturarum Fundamentum, and the Traditions of Men are made the
Foundation of Scripture, and of Faith. And the Canon Law of Pope Gregory XIII.
Did. 40. Si Papa in Ann. Margin.
goes higher yet, and sets the Pope above them all. For men rather desire to
know the ancient Institution of Christian Religion from the Popes mouth, than
from the holy Scripture. And yet all of their own Church do not approve these
Approved Traditions, for Basil says, Basil. Reg. contract. p. 502.
It is necessary and agreeable to Reason, that all men learn what is their Duty
out of Scripture, (...): both for the fulfilling all Godliness, and lest they
should be accustomed to Humane Traditions. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
And Irenaeus tells us it was the Custom of Heretics to call in Tradition to
their assistance against Scripture, alleging, that those Truths (as they
called them) which they held, were not delivered by Writing, but by word of
Mouth.

AGAINST his General Counsels we oppose the first four, and have offered a
thousand times to put the Issue upon their Verdict. Against Ecclesiastical
Histories, Ancient Fathers, Christian Laws, we oppose the frequent Forgeries of
all these, detected even by themselves, and the Index Expurgatorius which
Castrates all the Fathers, that they may be fit Eunuchs for the Papal Seraglio,
the Vatican, by being disabled to propagate truth. For Conversion of Nations,
we refer them to the Acts of the Apostles for the first Age, and for these
last, to Acosta the Jesuit, and Bartholomeus Casas a Bishop in the Indies;
Acost. de Ind. salut. procurand.
their Conversion was such, that the miserable People chose to go to Hell with
their Ancestors, rather than to Heaven with such Christians; and if their
Relations are true, gives occasion to the Romanists to blush, rather than boast
of such Conversions as were Confusions and Consumptions of those Populous
Nations.

To Divine Miracles we oppose all those false Fictions, absurd and ridiculous
Fables, and Legends of their Saints, the detection of which has not only now
discredited their Religion, but given occasion to men of Atheistical
Principles, to think it is all but as a Pope said, Fabula Christi: and to call
in question the true Miracles of our Savior, and that Faith which was
confirmed by them. Such as are the Stories of Tursellin in his Lady of
Lauretto, Benedict's Miracles of the Blessed Virgin, and the greatest Miracle
of them all, Lipsius, a man so learned, so rational, to dote in his old Age in
his Romance of the Virgo Hallensis. Vives, Bristow, Canus, Canus lac. l. 11.
cap. 6.
complain too truly of them, That hereby no man is able to put a difference
between the Miracles of Christ, and his Apostles, and those of these Men's
forging. And since the one have been often proved False, why may not the other
be suspected too, especially being at so great a distance? and pull but down
this Foundation, and all Religion becomes a mere Gullery and Imposture.

To his Universality I would gladly know, if, Historically and Literally,
Jerusalem was not the Mother of us all? Luke 24.42.
and that according to the Scriptures, Repentance and Remission of Sins should
be preached unto all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem; as happened out [Acts the
second] to all the known Nations of the World, assembled either for Curiosity
or Religion at the Passover. And why may not Antioch, where the Disciples were
first called Christians, pretend to Antiquity and Universality as well as Rome?
since Christianity it self there first received its Baptism; and she may well
be termed the Godmother of Rome her self, who had then neither received the
Name, nor Faith of Christ? Are not the Grecian, Armenian, Ethiopian Christians,
as well as the Roman, Members of the Catholic Church? and yet they own not
the Pope either as to Primacy, or Supremacy, and thousands of them know not
whether there be such a man in the World. It is hard to damn them all with a
breath: and as hard for Rome to challenge this Universality, where she is
scarcely known, and I am sure not owned.

THE same may be said to his Antiquity: and even Errot can scarcely be called
the younger Brother of Truth, and is so much a Twin with it, as from its very
Birth to have had its hand upon the others heel, in order to supplant it. Is it
therefore true, because it is Ancient? Was not Simon Magus the Founder of the
Gnostics, as ancient as St. Peter and the other Apostles? were not Phygellus
and Hermogenes, Hymeneus and Phyletus and Alexander, 2 Timothy 1.15. 2 Timothy 2.17.
those Christian Saducees, who denied the Resurrection, and overthrew the Faith
of some, as ancient as St. Paul? Was not Diotrephes (in probability the Parent
of the Aerian Heresy) who, to Exalt himself, prated with such malicious words,
endeavoring to degrade an Apostle, contemporary with St. John? Joh. 3.9, 10.
if Antiquity will make men Catholic, these have a fairer Plea than Rome,
who, in probability, received their Errors before she did her Faith.

FOR Succession, we refer him to Baronius in his Annals (if he likes not
Genebrard, Baron. Ann. 985. N. 1.
or Sigonius) who will inform him of a Catalogue of Popes, and their several
Characters, Simonists, Boniface 8. Boys, Benedict 13. John 13. Sergius the 3.
and a many more, about 50. who, as he says, Deserved not to be put into the
Catalogue of Popes; but, as he affirms of Boniface, who murdered Benedict the
6. and John the 15. were fitter company for Sylla and Cataline. And these being
all Monuments, and all the substance of their Religion, it will not be worth
our while to Examine all the Accidents of Christianity, as the Advocate phrases
it.

I come therefore to his particular Vindication of them from the Calumnies,
which, he says, are objected against them; and first to their refusing the Oath
of Supremacy. For if any Oath be lawful among Christians, it is a vain Cavil
which he makes against this: for my own particular, I could heartily wish that
all Oaths could be made more perspicuous, and less frequent; but there being an
absolute impossibility of the one, and necessity of the other, we must submit
to Humane Frailty. For no Oath can be so fromed or worded, but it will be
liable to the same Exceptions, by reason of the ambiguity of all words, and the
variety of men's apprehensions and understandings. And by this Rule no man shall
be obliged to take any Oath. But when any person takes such Oaths, he swears to
the declared intention of the Government, which requires him to swear for their
Security, and those under their Care. And this is designed only as a mark of
Distinction between the Peaceable Friends, and the Enemies, whose contrivances
and intentions are hereby either obviated, or discovered; and it being easy to
be understood, and what all men know by the light of Nature, Reason, and
Scripture, they who will not Swear to be Obedient to the Government in
Veritate, Judicio, and Justitia, let the manner of Expressing this be what it
will, cannot be reputed other than Enemies. Nor is the Controversy of
Supremacy contained in the word Heretical, a speculative point, as he would
persuade us, but a Practical; not whether the Pope has any Authority to
Excommunicate, but whether he has any Authority here to Exercise a Jurisdiction
to the prejudice of the Established Government? and since he seems to confess
that he has not, why should any Christian deny to give the Government all the
Assurances that can be desired? and if such an Authority in the Pope be not
grounded upon the Scripture, or the Practice of the Catholic Church, and no
older than the Nos Sanctorum of Pope Hildebrand, and therefore Impious and
Heretical, as being an Usurpation upon the Temporalities of all Princes, may
not any person (except he designs against the Government) lawfully swear that
he disowns both the Principle, and the Practice. And since the Clause of the
Oath of Supremacy is explicated to intend only Civil and Kingly Government and
Authority in Cases Ecclesiastical, (page 184.) May not any man swear in Truth,
Judgment, and Equity? (if it be true, it ought to be the Judgment of every good
Christian, and it is a great measure of Justice and Equity, that he should
declare himself, and call God to witness, since as before was said, men swear
to the true intention and meaning of the Imposers of the Oath, and not to any
other sense which the words will bear. But the plain truth why they refuse, is
because they do believe the contrary; and it is but reasonable, since they do,
that by this Mark of Distinction, the Government should know who are Friends to
it, and who Enemies; who by this Principle would Subvert and Overthrow it. And
if a Man may ( page 187.) Use such Expressions as to Avouch, we verily think,
and are fully persuaded that the Pope has no power, etc. unless he
equivocates, may he not solemnly Swear it too, that he thinks, and is so
persuaded? for no man is, or can be desired to Swear more; but if the truth
were known, they neither think, nor are persuaded of this, but the direct
contrary.

HAD the Pope contented himself with the Jurisdiction of the Keys, and not
invaded the Temporal Sword, for any thing I know, there had never been occasion
for this Oath; or for Princes to draw out the Temporal Sword to do themselves
and their Subjects Right, according to the Advocates Original and Fundamental
Law of Protection and Defense, from the Unjust Usurpations of the Roman Mitre.
And what he pleads against this Oath ( page 191.) will serve all the Seditious
Rebels of the World. For says he, Public authority and safety rises from
the satisfaction of Men's Judgments, to the Justice of proceedings; Then it
seems, unless men be be satisfied with the proceedings of Authority, it must
fall, if that be the Rise of it: A fine Popular Principle, to ruin all
Authority! But he proceeds, Winning Respect and Love by that Equity in
Government, and Moderation, which according to Gods ancient Laws, is settled
and known, not by Arbitrariness of Will and mere Force; which, as to the
Principle, is Tyrannical, be it never so temperate in the Exercise. If all this
be true, then ought all Public Justice and Coercive Power to be disbanded and
banished as Tyrannical; Princes and Magistrates must learn to be excellent
Logicians and Orators, to persuade and win, or else they will prove but slender
Statesmen, Thieves, Murderers, Traitors, and Rebels, may be persuaded (if they
will) to be Obedient, but must not be Compelled, for fear of Tyranny. Well, let
him go! The Advocate is but an indifferent Lawyer, and a worse Subject, if this
be his Judgment, as it is his Pleading; I believe he will never be of the Kings
Council, or Solicitor General; though he be so for a Tolleration.

To his 3d. Objection, That Papists suffer for Religion, not Disobedience, it
is both False, and Frivolous; for never any Priest suffered qua Priest, but qua
Rebellious, in maintaining a Doctrine contrary to the Scripture, and the Peace
of the Government. And the Proviso of the 25 and 27 of Elizabeth, respects
their Principles and their Practice, and not their Priesthood. And had the
Apostles Preached any Doctrine, tending to the disturbance of the Civil State
of the World, contrary to the Laws of Emperors, for that End, they would have
suffered, as St. Peter says, As evil Doers, 1 Pet. 4.15.
busy Bodies in other men's matters, and not as Martyrs.

To his 4th. Objection, Why Papists come not to our Churches: They did come
even after the Council of Trent, till the Excommunication of Pius Quintus; and
therefore became Recusants, not for Religion or Conscience, but Supremacy. And
for King James his calling the Pope, Patriarch of the West, I cannot tell what
he will advantage the Cause by that; for he may be so, and yet no more our
Patriarch, than of the Indies, before they were discovered, for neither the one
nor the other are in Constantines Donation. Nor indeed is that any where but in
Vtopia: And yet it may be he had never been denied his Primacy, if he could
have been contented with it, as the Archbishop of Canterbury is with a Primacy
over us in purely Spirituals, without advancing it to a Supremacy over All.

HE makes very light. ( page 218.) of the Gunpowder- Treason, and would be
contented to have that buried in Oblivion, which should have buried a whole
Nation, in Blood, Horror, and Confusion. But by his Favor, it will not pass
so; for even that Right Honorable and Noble Lord, Henry Earl of Northampton,
whom ( page 222.) he calls an Eminent Papist; was it seems then Converted by
the Certainty of the belief that he had, that this was the Practice, and not in
Confession, as he insinuates ( page 220.) of Hall, Garnet, Greenwell, and
Gerrard, and not of Salisbury, of whom he says King James was used to call the
5th. of November, Cecil's Holiday. For even this very Eminent Papist, the Earl
of Northampton, who was no Friend to the Statesmen, yet was so great a Friend
of Truth, that being one of the Commissioners for the Trial of Garnet, and his
Accomplices in the Treason; made there a most Excellent Speech, wherein he
Demonstrates fully, clearly, and most Eloquently, the Haynousness and Certainty
of the Crime; and that Garnet, Gerrard, and Greenwell, sent Sir Edward Baynham,
to carry the Message to the Pope, not as Pope, but as a Temporal Prince; and
that Garnet writ Letters to the Pope upon the Subject. He further shows the
Danger of such Doctrines Destructive to all Government and Religion; and that
the severest Punishments were justly due to such (Literally) Incendiaries:
Which Speech Printed 1606, I have now by me, and wonder why the Advocate should
plead him a Papist. Since he makes a Distinction there, telling Garnet, That
some of his Society suffered in the late Queens time, for presuming to Exercise
a Jurisdiction in this Realm, that neither Policy of State can admit, nor
Allegiance justify: He calls Chicheley Chancellor to Henry the 5th. a Prelate
of their own, and stiffly defends by Examples of our Ancestors (who were
neither Lutherans nor Hugonots, as our Country men are called (says he) the
Kings Right against the Roman Usurpation of Supremacy: And if Princes (adds he)
that were absolutely Catholics, were so suspicious of their Prerogative, and
cast such a watchful Eye upon the Popes Encroachments; how much more Jealous
ought true Subjects and Sworn Servants to be, in our days, careful of the
Princes State; who being sustained by another Root directed by the voice of
other Pastors, is as careful to Reform, as his Ancestors to Conform; while they
sailed by another Compass, and upon another Coast? Sure this was not spoke like
an Eminent Papist, an Anti-Cecilian, but an Eminent Protetestant, tender of his
Loyalty, jealous of his Countries Peace, Invaded by the dangerous Principles
and Practices of Romanists, as he calls them in another passage.

IN short, Garnet, at his Execution, declared, that whatsoever he had
acknowledged in his Examination, was true, and there he did Confess that he was
Privy to the Conspiracy, by way of Advice, upon Catesbyes Quere; Whether for
the good of the Church, some Innocents might not perish with the Nocents; and
upon his Affirmative, they proceeded. I am as willing to be Charitable as the
Advocate; and think with King James, that the generality of Catholics did
abhor such a Detestable Conspiracy, no less than himself: But what of all that?
It was not from any want of Industry in the Jesuits, to corrupt their Loyalty
and Allegiance; or prevented by any Principles infused by the Roman Religion:
From any Writings of that Age, which were full of nothing but Treason and
Rebellion; the Lawfulness of the Popes Power of Excommunicating and deposing
Kings, and Murdering them too; Such as those of Sanders, Allen, Cresswels
Philopator, Simanca, Rossoeus, a Book Canonized by the Pope in Consistory.

FOR the Bloody days of Queen Mary, I will allow her as good and mil'd a
Princess, as he pleases; but I cannot think so well of Winchester and London,
two of her Bishops, by whose Fiery Zeal so many, though the Advoate say ( page
238) but a very few, went to the Stake in Smithfield, and other places, for
denying the Sacrament of the Altar, and that they could not believe it. Which
was not only for Religion, but a pure Theological point; the Modus of which,
the Doctors of the Romish Church neither are or ever will be agreed upon; and
it is a little harder measure to dye for such a Point, than to swear to such a
one, as he dare avow, and verily believes, etc.

I might say much more, and take notice of many other passages in his Book, but
I must not be prolix, only the Calumny, as he calls it, which is reassumed by
Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Tillotson, (page 257.) that there are Jesuits among
our Dissenters, troubles him much; but that it is not without Ground, I have
heard, and I presume, so has he, from Authentic hands of one Father Brown a
Jesuit, who boasted on his Deathbed at Ingeston Briggs in Scotland, that he
had Preached as downright Popery in the Field Conventicles, as ever he had
Preached at Rome it self: And truly, by the Conformity of their Principles and
Actious, one with another, one can scarcely tell whether the Jesuits are
Presbyteriz'd, or the Presbyters Jesuited, they are so very like?

BY this time, I hope, it is not to be doubted, by any who have not wholly
devoted themselves with a blind Zeal and Obedience, as well as Implicit Faith
to the Roman Religion; but that however innocent the Generality of Catholics
may be, how Loyal soever, and full of Allegiance, yet the Principles of their
Religion are not so; Nor are they obliged to their Doctors for it; but to the
Native Generosity of their Country, to the Honor of their Families; and it
may be more than all, to the Doctrine of the Church of England in this Point:
which by conversing so frequently with, they cannot be ignorant of; or not
apprehend the horrid Usurpations of the Roman Keys upon the the Temporal Sword,
Crowns and Sceptres of Princes: And the Dangers that must necessarily follow
from thence. Nor shall they need to fear either Punishment or Persecution, but
for the Practices of these Boutfeus and Incendiaries of the World. And whether
such a Religion as openly teaches and Avows an Interest contrary, and above
that of the Prince, and which Authorizes those who profess it, to raise
Seditions, Tumults, and Rebellions, and it may be, has funished other
Dissenters of Contrary Opinions in other Points, with Principles and Arguments
Destructive of the Peace, Happiness, and Quiet of the Public, and of the
Government it self, deserves a Tolleration, Let all impartial men be Judges.

CHAP. XIV.
FROM what has been said, it is Evident not only that Tolleration of different
ways of Worship, under the same National Government, is utterly impolitique,
and dangerous to the Foundation of Government, and the End of Society; but
destructive of Christian Charity, and the Irreconcilable Enemy of Peace and
Unity; being the Spring of Endless and Eternal Quarrels, Divisions, Schisms,
Separations, if not Heresies; and the direct road to wild Enthusiasm,
Heathenish Ignorance, Superstitious Will Worship, Licentious Impiety, and at
last down right Atheism.

Let us therefore in the Spirit of Meekness, and Christian Compassion, try
whether there be no way to cement these breaches among us, by reuniting the
minds of Men, so far as is necessary for Christians to be Unanimous. For it is
morally impossible there should be among all Mankind and absolute Union in
their Judgments; men's Minds will differ as long, and as much or more than their
Faces do: and from this impossibility I argue to the Unnecessariness of such an
Unity. But as several Palates do naturally receive several impressions of
Gratefulness to different Dishes, even to contradiction, so that What is one
Man's Meat, is another Man's Poison; what is the delight of one, is the Aversion
of another, and yet all agree in the Common, Necessary, and Native Principle of
Eating: So may several Men believe several distinct, nay and it may be contrary
Opinions in Theological Questions, and yet agree in the Common Principles of
Christianity, allowed by All, Faith and Charity, so as to continue in Peace,
Unity, and Godly Love. And that this is not impossible, we see by daily
Experience; and that there are in every Society of Christian Men, some who
maintain one Opinion, some who maintain and believe another, yet
notwithstanding they retain Communion one with another. From whence proceed
those Volumes of Polemical Theology, with which not the Schools, but the whole
World is filled, I wish I might not say afflicted? but from men's differing in
Opinion. And if I may be permitted to speak freely, Possibly the Entertaining
the Philosophy of the Schools into too great Authority in Divinity, has not
contributed the least to the Decay of Religion, and the declining of Charity:
for the Endless Distinctions of Schoolmen have minced and crumbled Religion
into a Chaos of Epicurean Atoms, which perpetually justle one another with a
restless Motion, and whilst each strives to be entertained as a Matter of
Faith, they run men into greater perplexities and Confusions; and whilst they
improve in the Theory, they too commonly decrease in the Practice, spending
that time in Curiosity, which ought to be devoted to Charity and Action.

I do not speak this to disparage Humane Learning, or the Use of Philosophy:
but as we say of Fire and Water, They are good Servants, but ill Masters: so we
may say of that, It is a good Attendant of Divinity, while it continues an
humble Companion, but a dangerous Mistress of our Faith. I set as great a value
upon these Accomplishments as they can justly challenge, but I wish they had
kept their proper Sphere and Distance from us: and that these feeble Lights of
Humane Knowledge, had not come to stand in competition with the Sunbeams of
Divine Revelation, which ought always to be esteemed the glorious Lamp of
Christian Religion. I know without the helps of Humane Learning, it is
impossible, except by Miracle, to to Read or Understand the Holy Oracles which
were committed to the Custody of those Languages of Greek and Hebrew. I know it
is impossible without their assistance, to search the Registers of former days,
or to be acquainted with the Doctrine, Practice, and Customs of the Ancient
Catholic Primitive Church: a deficiency in which kind of Learning, in our
Clergy especially, (who do but too commonly make all their Applications to
Popular Oratory, rather than Church History) has been the occasion of many
mistakes in men otherwise learned; and it may be we are owing for that Dislike
and Aversion, if not hatred of Dissenters to Episcopacy, rather to their little
travail in Antiquity, which they despise, because they do not know, than to any
solid Arguments they can bring against it. I am satisfied that it is necessary
for the Discovery of the Rise, Growth, Reason, and occasion of Errors, and
Heresies, which are apt, for want of this, to revive and spring up again: and
to see how they have been condemned by the Catholic Church, and the Reasons
why: all that I have to say, is, That it may be so restrained as not to deserve
St. Paul's Character of vain Philosophy; by committing Outrages and Insolences
upon our Faith. For till such time as men come to quit themselves from these
Usurpations upon their Understanding, 1 Timothy 6.20.
by the Oppositions of Science, falsely so called, and can be persuaded not to
Credit their own Opinions, or those of their Party, with an equal certainty, as
they do those Truths which are Divinely revealed from Heaven, there is little
possibility of Reconciling them one to another in the amicable composure of
Christian Meekness, as it is to Reconcile their Opinions one to another, or to
Truth: and so long as men contend with the same Animosity and Eagerness for
either side of a Theological Question, as they do for that Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, Jude.
they will never entertain any kinder thoughts of one another, than that both
are Heretics: when after all their hot Contention, they cannot arrive at a
higher degree of knowledge than Probability; and that amounts to no more than
this, that though one part of the Opinion may be true, yet it is possible that
both may be false: and why then should this be obtruded upon any other Person
as de Fide.

THERE is nothing that puzzles our Understandings more than the Modes of
things; nor are we more in a Mist than when we come to the Hows? How is this
done; or how comes that to be so? this is indeed the Terra delfuego, the
Intellectualis Incognita; in which the boldest Adventurers are but Coasters,
and can give but a lame account of all those vast Territories, and Inland
Regions of the Understanding. I dare undertake to plunge the most learned
Philosopher in the World, about the meanest Insect, the smallest Plant, how
they are produced, how preserved and increased, and how they return again to
the Common bosom of the first Matter? and though this present Age,
notwithstanding the derision of the Ignorant, has made the greatest Advances in
Experimental Philosophy, and travailed further in the Modes of things than all
that ever were before, yet I am confident their knowledge does but show them
their Ignorance, and teaches them Modestly to confess, that their highest
seize are terminated in Probabilities, and rational Conjectures, and not
in Certainties. What is plainer than that the Sun shines, and that by the light
of it we discover all visible Objects? but how? remains sub judice, and will do
so, till Elias comes, as the Rabbis say: and will be the perpetual puzzle both
of the Peripateticks, and Cartesian Globularians. Since then we are such
strangers to our very senses, and their Natural Objects, which appear plain to
us, with which we converse so constantly and familiarly; how can we expect to
make greater progresses of knowledge in the Understanding? when the Soul it
self would be a great Riddle in despite of all Philosophy, if Faith did not
come in to its reskue: nor can I tell which way, without that assistance, it
would be able to defend its Original, or Duration, its Immortality, or
Distinction from that of Brutes, more then in degrees. And though an Apostle,
who himself was admitted into the Glorious Regions of the third Heavens, 2 Cor.
12.2, 3.
could not tell how, Whether in the Body, or out of the Body, God knows: and
therefore Experimentally assures us, 1 Cor. 13.12.
That we see through a Glass darkly, (...), in the obscurity of a riddle, and
that we know but in part. Yet all this notwithstanding, such is the Opinion
that we have of our Knowledge, and Discoveries, and more commonly in Divinity
than any thing; that Magisterially we pronounce our Opinion for undoubted
truth; our beloved Fancies for Objects of Faith; and our Conjectures for
Certainties; and proud of our imaginary (...), the whole World must know it, to
do us Honor for the Discovery; and must honor us by believing it, or become our
Hatred. There can never be the least hope of Unity, no more than there is
possibility of Unanimity, unless men will agree about some Common Principles,
which may be the Center of Christianity, where though their Opinions in
Circumstantials, which are not contrary to Faith and good Manners, may be
permitted to be drawn at a distance toward the Circumference, yet all their
Actions may be United, and terminate in the Unity of Charity.

I know it is a high and hazardous Attempt, to offer any such thing to the
Consideration, or but View of the World: the hight amazes me, and is ready not
only to turn my Brains, but all the Resolutions I can assure my self withal,
back again from the Enterprise. I tremble, though even with the greatest
Humility, I speak my thoughts in an Affair of that Moment, the very thinking of
which is not excusable from all Presumption; and looks but too like being wise
in my own Eyes, and prudent in my own Conceit: but as I do it with all
submissive Charity, so I hope I shall find Charity from others, and that part
of it which hides a multitude of Faults.

THERE are three things which appear the Foundation of all Dissension. First,
What is Matter of Faith. Secondly, What is the true Form of Government.
Thirdlp, The Judge of Differences and Controversies. For Christians dissent and
separate from one another, either because they imagine of each other, that they
do not believe aright: or because they dislike the Government, or because they
will not submit to any Determinations, being not agreed among themselves of a
Common Judge of Controversies.

WE will begin with the first. Now Faith being the Foundation of Christian
Religion, is, The firm Assent of the mind to the Certainty of such Propositions
as are the Conditions required by God, to be by us believed, in Order to our
living well here; So as that we may obtain Eternal Happiness hereafter in
Heaven. For as the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.6.
says, Without Faith it is impossible to please him, for he that comes unto
God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that seek him.
Faith being therefore the Foundation of Practice, and so absolutely requisite
to Salvation; and the Design of Almighty God, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6.
being, that all men should be saved by coming to the knowledge of the Truth.
For Christ gave himself a Ransom for All. It must be such a Condition in Order
to this End, Psalm. 51.4.
as All may have; That so God may be Justified when he speaks, and clear when
he Judges; and if men be not saved, it may appear it was through their own
Folly, and not from the difficulty of the Condition which God offers. For it
would be infinitely derogatory to the Wisdom and Goodness of the Divine Nature,
to the God of Love, the only Wise God, to give such a Condition of Salvation,
as All were not capable of attaining: For Salvation is not confined to the Wise
and Learned: 1 Cor. 1.26.
nay, St. Paul seems to intimate the Contrary, Not many Wise men are called,
Jude 3.
but it is the Common Salvation, in which all, Rich and Poor, High and Low,
Young and Old, the Learned and Unlearned, the Wise and the Simple, have a
share. The Foundation of this Assent to the Conditional Propositions of
Salvation, is not therefore our Understanding of them to be true, by the Power
of Reason, our comprehending or apprehending the manner of them, but it springs
from the Confidence that we have of the Veracity of him who propounds them to
our Belief: and that we are assured that he will not, because he cannot deceive
us, because he is Truth it self, as whoever believes a Supreme Being, must of
Necessity believe Truth to be of his Essence.

THUS I believe the Glorious Mystery of the Trinity, Three Persons, but one
God, the Incarnation of the Son of God, the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from
the Father and the Son, the Resurrection of the Body, and the rest of the
Articles of the Christian Faith; not because I dare pretend to understand them,
or to give a Satisfactory Reason to my self, how this can be? Or why it should
be? but I rest my self satisfied upon the assurance that he who requires me to
believe it, cannot deceive me, nor require me to believe what is not most
certainly true. But God being in Heaven, in that inaccessable Light of Glory,
and I upon Earth, there must be therefore some Internuncius between us, that so
I may receive these Conditions of Salvation to be believed. This Office was in
former times committed to the Prophets, Romans 3.4. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.
and God spoke by them; For God is only true, and all Men may be Liars, and
therefore all Scripture was given by Inspiration; and came not at any time by
the Will of Men, but Holy Men of God spoak, being moved by the Holy Ghost. Heb.
1.1.
But the great Prerogative of Christian Religion, is, That God, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers, has in
these last days spoken unto us by his Son; whom he has appointed Heir of all
things; by whom also he made the Worlds. Now these Holy Instruments, whom God
employed to declare his Will to Men, that they might obtain Credit to their
Message, were assisted with power of working Miracles, which were the Letters
Testimonial, the Credentials of Heaven, in their behalf, to assure the
incredulous World, that they were Messengers and Ambassadors from God; for it
is a Natural Inference which Nicodemus made, even whilst he was so
Unregenerate, that he thought Regeneration an Impossibility. Jo. 3.2.
Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man can do these
Miracles that thou do, except God be with him. This Revelation of Gods Will,
Confirmed to be so by Miracles, Signs, and Wonders, when it comes to be
considered and attended to, will gain the Assent of the Mind, and that these
must needs be Truths of a Divine Extract and Original; Since All their Precepts
are free from any Design, but the Advantage of those to whom they are proposed,
and to make them partakers of the Divine Nature, by the practice of that Truth,
Innocence, Justice, Temperance, and Purity, which they do so Universally
require as the Way to Happiness, both in this Life, and that of Celestial Glory
and Immortality. And these Commands Collected into a Body, we call the Holy
Canon of Sacred Scriptures. I think, I need not produce Arguments to prove
those Writings to be the Word and Will of God; that being a Principle so
confessed, that without it, no Man can be called a Christian; and I am not now
to deal with Heathens, or Infidels.

FROM this Postulatum granted, these Conclusions will Naturally follow; First,
That Faith does not depend upon Humane Authority, but upon Divine Revelation.
For it came not by the Will of Man, but by the Will of God: And therefore no
Humane Authority has any power to Impose upon the Belief, any thing either
contrary, or more than God has plainly revealed to be his Will, as the
Condition of our Salvation; for to Command what God has not commanded, as such
a Condition, is insufferable Pride and Insolence; an Usurpation upon the
Incommunicable Prerogative of him, Heb. 12.2.
who is the Author and the Finisher of our Faith. How great then is the Impiety
of those, who contrary to the practice of the Universal Church for 1500 years,
have added the Books of Apocrypha, mere Humane Writings, to the Holy Canon, and
under pain of Damnation Impose them upon us as matters of Faith, and Conditions
of Salvation? How Unreasonable is it to make Tradition the Foundation of Faith,
and of Equal value with the Holy Writings? Of which Traditions there being so
great Uncertainty, it is very Improbable our Faith should receive any
Confirmation from them: For what is liable to a doubt it self, is very unlikely
to take away all cause of Doubting. Yet this is the Faith of the Roman Church
in their Unwritten Verities.

SECONDLY, it follows, That nothing ought to be Imposed as De Fide, and the
Necessary Condition of Salvation, but what is clearly Demonstrable to be the
Will of God revealed; and which all Men, because all are capacitated for
Salvation, may easily Understand to be so: And since all men have an Equal
Title to Salvation, upon their performance of the Conditions by God required to
be believed and done, therefore what Faith will Save the Unlearned, will also
save the Learned: For God proposes no different Methods, more for the one than
the other, for he is no respecter of Persons, Act. 10.35.
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted with him. So that he who is Baptized, Repents, Lives Righteously,
Godly and Soberly in this present World, believing the Gospel of our Lord, and
obeying it according to that Belief, shall certainly receive the end of his
Faith, and hope the Salvation of his Soul. For these are Truths so clearly
contained in the Scripture, that the meanest Capacity may understand them, and
perform the Conditions required. Now what is necessary and sufficient for all,
and whatever is proposed more, is Superfluous; since he that believes this and
no more, shall certainly be saved, and he that believes more, shall but be
saved: It is therefore the most unreasonable thing in the World, to Impose the
Modus of any thing which God has not clearly revealed, upon Men as Essential to
Salvation: For most of those Modes are Metaphysical Notions, which do as far
exceed the Capacities of the Greatest part of Mankind, as the Mysteries of the
Incarnation and Trinity, etc. do those of All, and even of the Angels, who
desire to peep or pry into them, 1 Pet. 1.12.
(...), because they do not fully Understand them. Is it not unreasonable to
exact that from me upon the Credit of a Man, or many Men Saying so, which they
are not able to show me one positive Testimony, or clear Consequence for, from
the mouth of God, that it is so? and that though I believe all that he
requires, as the Condition of Salvation, yet I must be Accursed, and Secluded
from Salvation, because I will not Lie, and say, I believe, what in Truth I
cannot, for want of Evidence or Capacity? Must I forfeit all I have on Earth,
and my hopes of Heaven too, because I do not believe this or that Doctrine,
which God has given me a Capacity to believe, nay, which it may be contradicts
all those Capacities of Sense and Reason, which he has given me, that I might
believe them, and which give me occasion to doubt his Truth; for if he deceive
my Senses, he may deceive my Understanding and my Hopes at last? Is not this to
make God an Austere Master, gathering where he has not scattered; and like the
Egyptian Taskmasters, to require Brick where he has not afforded Straw to make
it? Far be it from the Judge of all the Earth to do this Wrong! This is the very
Case of the Sacrament of the Altar in Transubstantion: For it is not enough to
believe that Christ is really present there; but I must give my senses the Lie,
which neither see him nor feel him (a greater degree of Faith than he required
of St. Thomas) I must discard my Reason, which assures me it is impossible that
one Body should be in Infinite Places at the same time, and believe how he is
there Corporally; or be a Heretic: Though neither they who impose it upon me,
are agreed among themselves now it is, nor am I able to Understand what they
mean; as the greatest part of the Vulgar are incapacitated to receive such
Apprehensions; and the most Learned are not able to express them so as to be
Understood. Sure it is very hard measure, that a poor Christian should be made
a Bloody Sacrifice to Cruelty, because he does not, because he cannot believe
that Incruentum Sacrificium of the Mass, and that the Glorified Son of God
should be ravished from the Right hand of the Majesty on high, to become
passible again, to Expiate for the sins of the Quick and the Dead: Which if it
be true, must be the same that he suffered upon the Cross, and a Bloody
Sacrifice, and as great an Impiety as that of the Wicked Jews, who Slew the
Lord of Life, and hanged him upon the Tree; and if it be real, and not a
Commemorative Sacrifice, is for Christians to Crucify the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame: Heh. 6.6.
and if it be not the same Sacrifice which Christ offered, it is not
propitiatory; and in reality only a sacrificing to our own Nets to Ensnare men's
Souls. The same Measure ought to be observed of all other Theological Points,
which admitting of variety of Opinions, are not therefore to be imposed as
Essentially necessary, and the Conditions of Salvation.

WERE this observed, it would put an End to those Intestine Quarrels which
miserably rend the Peace and Unity of the Church, by enlarging Faith to the
Destruction of Charity, which is making broad the Plylacteries, and forgetting
Justice and Mercy. This would give a Supersedeas to those doubtful
Disputations, against which St. Paul gives an Express Command. Romans 14.1.
And if men were permitted to believe or not believe according to the
probability and full persuasion of their own Minds, keeping their Faith to
themselves, in a private way, which is true Christian Liberty; where men do not
impose their Opinions upon others as Essential to Salvation, we should soon see
an End of those Mortal Jarrs, and those Unchristian Doctrines, and their
strange consequences, which have filled the World with Error, Horror, and
Confusion, which Cruelty, Injustice, and Persecution, not inferior to that of
Pilate, mingling the Blood of those Christians with their Sacrifices, for whom
Christ sacrificed his. And were it possible to persuade Men to this Modesty and
Moderation, the Occasion of Quarrels being taken away, they would live in Unity
and Godly Love; and not afflict themselves, disquiet the World, move Heaven and
Earth for the Establishment of a doubtful Opinion as matter of Faith, when, may
be, it is not of Truth; and without the knowledge of which they may attain
Salvation. Thus might Men Enjoy their Private Opinions, without any prejudice
to the Public Peace, and please themselves with their Knowledge, without
being puff't up to the Ruin of that Charity which Edifies, and to the
affronting Authority by disobedience, because it will not permit their Private
Opinions to Ride in the Triumphant Chariot of Conquerors over other men's Faith;
then with St. Augustine might men say, Errare possum, Hereticus esse nolo. They
might be mistaken, and be neither Heretics nor Schismatics; they might differ
from others in their sense, and yet agree in the Common and Essential Faith,
which as it owns, so always maintains the Communion of Saints.

FOR it is not Men's Opinions, but their Actions derived from those Opinions,
which disturb the Peace of the World, and the Unity of the Church: and a man
may be of a contrary Persuasion to another, in many things, and yet Live as
becomes a good Christian, in Humility and Charity with him and all others; it
is a ferocious Pride and hasty Passion which pretends to make the Narrow way to
Heaven wider, by widening Differences, and by opening the Gate to shut out all
besides our selves. The way is not in it self so narrow, but that if men were
lovers of Peace, they might go thither without jostling one another; it is not
the way for us to Enter in at the strait Gate, to do like the Pharisees, shut
others out. They who pretend thus to be the Porters of Paradise, usually are
without the Gates themselves, whilst they brandish the flaming Sword on every
side to frighten others.

THEN would the Doctrines of Supremacy, Satisfaction, Purgatory, etc. which
have rent the seamless Coat in a thousand pieces, cease to make Divisions in
the World. But this we may wish and pray for, but can scarcely hope to see, so
long as the insatiable thirst of Temporal Advantages stops the Mouth of Truth;
and the desire of Sovereignty shall Exalt the Idol of Profitable Opinion, into
the Throne and Sacred Temple of Divinely revealed Faith.

AND whereas for many Ages past men have beaten their Brains, Joel 3.10.
To beat their Plough-shares into Swords, and their Pruning Hooks into Spears,
have Employed those Parts and Abilities (with which they ought to have broken
up the fallow Ground, Hos. 10.12.
to sow in righteousness what we might reap in Peace) to wound one another
sides. Would they follow this Rule of Charity, we might see the Glorious
Prophecy of Micha fulfilled: Mich. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
For in the last Days it shall come to pass that the Mountain of the Lords
house shall be Exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it: and
many Nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his Ways,
and we will walk in his Paths: and they shall beat their Swords into
Plough-shears, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not rise up
against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more: but they shall sit every
man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid.

I know it will be objected, That the Scriptures are full of (...), those
things difficult to be understood. To which I answer with the Apostle, 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17.
The holy Scriptures are able to make any man wise unto Salvation through Faith
which is in Jesus Christ; being given by Inspiration of God, for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, in Righteotsness, that the Man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. All this is contained
in them in plain and easy Language; and who can desire more? what is necessary
to be believed or done, is to be found there without such Difficulty, and that
is all that either is or can properly be our Concern. The Design of Religion is
not to entertain the speculative, or gratify the Curious, but to guide the
Practical Christian in his Duty. And if there be difficult places, there is no
necessity of our Understanding them. For he that inspired the Holy Pens, cannot
without the greatest Impiety be argued of acting negligently, insufficiently,
or without Design, as other careless Writers may: and that they are not more
clear and perspicuous, ought with a becoming reverence, due to the only wise
God, to be believed, that they are therefore wrapped up in Mysterious words,
either because they are not necessary, or not fit for us to know. Nor is there
the least danger in such humble Ignorance; but there is certainly in a
presumptuous Curiosity, and seeking after the Tree of Knowledge which God has
prohibited by planting the Wall of Obscurity about it; and if we will, with the
Bethshemites, be Peeping into the Ark, we may expect to be punished justly by
wresting the Scriptures to our own Damnation: and much more if, being Unlearned
and Private Men, we undertake to give Public Interpretations and
Determinations different from both the Catholic Faith and Church. 2 Pet. 1.20.
For no Scripture is of Private Interpretation.

AND that this is the danger, is as evident as the Punishment of it is certain:
for here is the Spring head of Errors and Heresies; which always took their
Original from the Transgression of this Caution. For when men will leave the
plain and beaten Path, the easy Way to Happiness here, and Heaven hereafter, by
Faith and Obedience, to seek for it in their own Wisdom and Niceties; it is no
wonder, if they wander out of the Way of Truth; when they permit themselves to
be lead by their Private Opinions and Interpretations, it is the blind leading
the blind in the Darkness of Midnight; and no wonder then if at last they
stumble and fall into the blackness of Eternal Darkness. For self-love is a
very blind Guide, and self- Conceit a worse, and they must needs be in darkness
to whom God denies the light of the Spirit, which he does in all obscure places
of Scripture; and if, as he told the Jews, men therefore Err not knowing the
Scripture, they must needs Err, who will know more than he will let them.

To confirm the truth of this Doctrine, and that the Holy Canon is, as the word
Imports, a Rule not only of our Actions, but our Faith; I would desire any
Person to give me a reason why he Believes the three Famous Creeds which
contain the sum and substance of our Christian Faith? there can be but these
three Reasons; First, Because he immediately by Divine Revelation is assured of
his Faith; or Secondly, Because he is persuaded by some Person or Persons to
believe; or Thirdly, Because he finds the Articles there mentioned, either in
plain Words, or evident Consequences, in Scripture, which, for good reason, he
believes to be the Dictates of divinely inspired Penmen.

THE First all sober Men reject, as leading directly to Enthusiasm, and under
pretense of Heavenly Revelations, to introduce Hellish Impieties and Doctrines
of Devils, who having a Power to transform themselves into Angels of Light, may
take that Advantage to Impose upon strong Fancies and weak Judgments.

FOR the Second, a man will thus argue, Why should I believe this or these Men,
since all men are Fallible; and they who may be deceived, may therefore
deceive; and if I believe this Man, why not another; why not Mahomet, who
pretended to the Holy Ghost as much as they?

AND therefore Thirdly, Faith must be resolved into the first Principle of it,
which is Gods Truth, and Infallibility, and that Word which I believe to be
his, and therefore more Credible than the Word of any, or all Men. Thus was
Faith first propagated in the World, and thus it must be increased; for the
Multitudes to whom the Apostles Preached throughout the World, did not believe
St. Peter or St. Paul, that Preached Jesus, and the Resurrection,
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come; but seeing the Miracles which
they did, they believed that this was the Word of God, and that Jesus was the
Son of God, agreeable to the Doctrine of the Prophets in the Old Testament
concerning the Messiah. This Method our Lord made use of with his Disciples.
Luke 24.5.4.
Then opened he their Understanding, that they might Understand the Scriptures;
that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning him: and he said unto them, Thus
it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again the
third day from the Dead: and that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be
Preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. This Doctrine
of Faith the Apostles believed, this they Preached, not as their own, but the
Faith of Christ; this they committed to Writing, and delivered to the
Christians as the Rule of their Faith and Life: Romans 15.4.
For as the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and whatsoever was Written
aforetime, was written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort
of the Scriptures, might have hope; So were the Scriptures of the New Testament
given us a new Rule, and a Royal Law of Liberty; that we might not Glory in
Men, 1 Gor. 3.21, 22. c. 4.1.6.
neither in Paul, nor Cephas; But that we might esteem them Stewards of the
Mysteries of God: And not to think of them above what is Written: Which place,
if thoroughly considered, teaches us not to prefer any Man or Men above the
Scripture.

THIS will appear further, if we consider the Nature of a Rule; for a Rule is
the constant, certain, infallible, unchangeable measure, according to which I
judge of any thing, whether it be true or false. And if I can but suppose what
is offered me for a Rule, to be false, or if I know it is or may be false, it
can be no Rule; because it leaves me in an Uncertainty, whether I am Right or
Wrong. But the Scripture cannot be supposed to be false; for admitting that
supposition, they are no longer Scriptures, or the Word of God; for every word
of God is true. Men have been, are, and will be Fallible; Traditions are
dubious, and uncertain, but the Word of God is tried to the uttermost; and
coming from the Infallible Author of all Truth, is the Touchstone of the Truth
of Men and their Doctrines; and by that we examine, by that we judge of men's
Faith and actions, Isa. 8.20.
If they speak not according to the Law and the Testimony, it is because there
is neither Light nor Truth in them.

THE Mistake seems to be in Confounding the Difference between a Rule and a
Guide: and they who would advance the Authority of the Church above the
Scripture, set the Judge above the Law, and Confound him with it. The Church is
indeed the Guide which instructs us; but if her Instructions are not according
to her Rule of Scripture, when we hope for Bread, she gives us a Stone, and
instead of a Fish, a Scorpion; Mortal Poison for wholesome Nourishment. To
Illustrate this, Suppose I desire to learn the Mathematics: I therefore apply
my self to a Person skilful in that Incomparable Science, and entreat him to
direct me: He shows me Euclid's Elements, as the Foundation of Mathematical
Knowledge, and therefore reads and explains it to me. Pray now who is the Rule,
the Master, or the Book? Certainly all men who have not forfeited their Reason,
will say the Book is the Rule, the Man the Guide; and if he give me any thing
for a Demonstration contrary to the Principles therein contained, I know by
them that he is mistaken, because he he has not instructed me according to the
Rule. The case is the same, only the Infallibility of the Scriptures is more
certain, being founded upon the Infallibility of God: They are the Rule, the
Governors of the Church, the Guides appointed by God for that purpose; to them
therefore men resort for Instruction; but if they teach either what is their
own, or other men's, contrary to the Rule; they are false Guides; and why so?
But because they give a false Rule; betraying that high Trust by God reposed in
them, to be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame; to conduct them to Eternal
Bliss, by the Directions of that Rule of which St. Paul says, Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them and Mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

AND even they who contend so earnestly against the Scriptures being the Rule
of Faith and Life, ought to show some other End and Design of the Scriptures,
and a better Rule; and not Confute themselves, and all their Assertions and
Arguments, by making this the Rule of Believing, whilst they bring Arguments
out of it against it self, which they would have therefore believed, because
they are Scripture; plainly confessing it to be the Ultimate Rule, and that
nothing can properly be matter of Faith, but what is agreeable to it: Which has
made the Romish Doctors sweat and toil so vehemently to Extort Confessions from
the Scripture, Tert. de Praescript. adv. Heretic.
as Tertullian says, Caedem Scripturarum faciunt ad materiam suam, even
Murdering it almost to make it speak to their purpose: And since they could not
prevail with it to Depose against the Truth, they have put it into the
Inquisition; Imprisoning it in the Vulgar Latin, lest if it should get abroad
and speak Truth, as it would do in despite of all Opposition, it would
proclaim their Injustice and Violence, to the meanest Capacities of the Vulgar,
among them who would hereby come to detect the Pious Frauds and profitable
Follies, which are imposed upon them, as matter of Faith.

THE ancient Church believed the Scriptures the Rule of Faith, and therefore
took care to have them Translated into Syrian, Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Joh.
Egyptian, Ethiopian, Persian, and other innumerable Languages; as St.
Chrysostom testifies; and Theodoret says, Theod. de Cur. Graec. affect. lib. 5.
the Bible was Translated into all Languages used in the World, Greek, Latin,
Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Sarmatian. And this seems one, if not the
principal Reason why the Holy Ghost did Miraculously descend in Cloven Tongues
upon the Apostles, inabling them to speak in several Languages; for the
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Dwellers in Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus,
Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, in Lybia, and Cyrene, Crete and Arabia, heard them
speak the wonderful Works of God. If they might have used the Compendious way
of Instructing them to believe as the Church believes, and had made themselves
The rule of Faith, and like the Priests of Memphis, delivered their
Hieroglyphical Faith from one to another, there would have been no need of all
this; or of their Pains, who afterward were so diligent to Translate the
Scriptures into all Languages, to instruct all Nations, and to let them see,
there was no Cheat or Juggle in Religion, by exposing it to the view of the
severest Critics.

CHAP. XV.
I Suppose there are no Dissenters among us, except those of the Roman
Communion, but will willingly accord the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and
Manners. And though there may be differences between us and them in some
Material points of Doctrine, yet the Apple of Strife is about the Government of
the Church: Some contending for a Parity and Equality, as the Presbyterians;
others for an Absolute Independency of any the least Congregation of Men
calling themselves a Church: Others for a Democratick Anarchy, as the
Anabaptists and Quakers, and several other Enthusiasts: But all point blank
against Episcopacy; though hitherto they have not been able to satisfy the
World for what Offense. As for the Independency of Churches, I shall only say
in short, that it opens the way to endless Separations, and innumerable Errors
and Hesies, no man having power to Judge of them, besides themselves: And slies
so far from the Popery of Hierarchy, that it runs into a worse Extreme, and
makes every Pastor Supreme Bishop, Patriarch, and Pope of his Congregation.

BUT these People having no Pretensions to a National Government, appear not so
Dangerous to the State as to themselves; nor so troublesome as those who
contend for Sovereignty, and endeavor to pull down the Pillars of the Church,
to Establish their own Synagogue and Spiritual Sannedrim of Lay-Ecclesiasticks;
and whereas the other will be contented with a Chapel of Ease, these make the
World Uneasy, because they may not have the Cathedral and Mother Church. And
this People, the most Industrious of all Mankind, the most Vigilant and
Indefatigable, who compass Sea and Land, to make Prosylites and a Party, as
they are the most Numerous and most powerful, so are they most Dangerous, both
in their Positions, and in their Actions; and whilst they Clothe Episcopacy
with the Title of Idolatry and Superstition, as the Heathens did Christians
with the skins of Wild Beasts, to make the Lions and Tigers fall upon them; so
do they; Then animate the Populace to Worry them by Tumults, Clamours, and
Outcries against them: And under pretense of Destroying Idolatry, take
Commission from the Law of Moses to break the Commands of the Gospel. For a
late Instance of which I refer the Reader to the Printed Narrative of Mitchel
and his Field Conventiclers, the Whigs of Scotland, and to their former
Practices in England, both against particular Persons, and the Public State;
which fell a Sacrifice to this great Idol of Idolatry, and fear of Popery.

I will therefore endeavor to give a true Account of the Office and
Institution of Episcopal Authority in the Church; being not without Hopes, but
that Men of Calm and sober spirits will submit to Truth, how contrary soever it
may appear to those Prejudices, which for want of better Information, they have
been so long accustomed to.

THAT there ought to be Government in the Church, I presume no Judicious Person
will make the least scruple of; in regard God Almighty took such particular
Care of his Church in the Jewish Nation: And we cannot think, that under the
Gospel, which is a better Covenant, he would leave it to Anarchy and Confusion.
The Controversy is, What manner and Form of Government? Now that it was
Episcopal, is the thing which we maintain, and I hope to prove, and not only
that, but that it is of Divine Institution. And first for the Name of Bishop,
which in the Greek is (...), an Overseer, Christ himself was the first Bishop,
and is so styled by St. Peter, The Bishop of our Souls; 1 Pet. 2.25.
St. Paul makes frequent mention of the Name in his Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, and calls it the Office of a Bishop; and affirms, that if any man desire
it, he desires a good Work: This is a true saying, (...), it is a faithful
saying: And what is by the Mouth of Divine Verity pronounced, not only an
Office (and that implies Power) but a desirable Office and good Work, cannot
without Sacrilegious Blasphemy, be styled Antichristian; and it is no modest
Impiety to Combine against God, and solemny Covenant and Vow the Extirpation of
it, Root and Branch. Romans 2.22.
Thou that aborrest Idols, do thou commit Sacriledg? Our Blessed Lord tells
us, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up;
and one would Judge by that Rule, that Episcopacy in the Government of the
Church, were a plant of Gods own planting; since for 1600 years and upwards,
all the Power and Malice of Men and Devils, have not been able to pluck it up:
But he has graciously been pleased to Protect it; Psalm. 104.16.
so that it has been Like the Cedars of Lebanus which the Lord has planted.
And he has made good his promise to be with them to the End of the World: And
Those that be planted in the House of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13, 14, 15.
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth more fruit in
their Old age, they shall be Fat and flourishing; to show that the Lord is
upright ( just to his Promise) he is their Rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. And what for all this Root and Branch! O vain Men! If
ye have run with footment, Jer. 12.5.
and they have wearied you, how can ye contend with Horses; If you have fought
with Men, and have not been able to prevail, how will you be able to fight with
God? Remember Gamaliel's counsel; For if this work be of God, Act. 5.39.
you cannot overthrow it, (your selves, you may) and will be found to fight
against God. And you will find that Impar Congressus, a very unequal Combat.
The Giants, who thought to Conquer Heaven, Purchased Hell. Heaven is not to be
had by such violence as opposes it, but Hell and Damnation certainly will.

I hope the greatest part of those who do so violently persecute this Name and
Office, are like St. Paul; and may with him find Mercy, though they be
Blasphemers and Persecutors, provided like him they did it ignorantly, and
cease to kick against the Thorns. And this they cannot do, unless they
acknowledge both the Name and Office of a Bishop to be of Divine Institution.

Take heed, says St. Paul, Acts 20.28.
therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over the which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers (the Translating of which Word has occasioned a world
of Mischief and Mistakes, and was certainly a great oversight, having made so
many oversee the Bishop in it) for it is in the Greek, (...), over which the
Holy Ghost has appointed, or placed you Bishops. So that however, the Name of
Bishop is not to be rooted out; nor is it Popish or Antichristian, as the
Credulous Vulgar are made believe. I know what will be the answer: The same
Saint Paul, in the same Chapter, Verse. 17. calls them Presbyters. And this they
think above all the places in Scripture concludes against Episcopacy, and
proves not only the Parity, but Aerian Identity of Bishops and Presbyters. But
stay, my Masters, let not Passionate Opinion outrun Truth and Reason. St. Paul
an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God having Preached the Gospel in
all the Cities of the lesser Asia, being upon his Journey to Jerusalem, he
comes to Miletus; and from thence sends to Ephesus, and calls for the
Presbyters of the Church; upon their coming, he acquaints them with the
sorrowful Message, that he was to leave them for ever, and take his last
farewell of them: And now behold I know, that ye all (says he) among whom I
have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Whilst he
was conversant among them, he was their Spiritual Guide and Ruler, but now that
he was to leave them, and could not discharge that part of the Apostolical
Function of Government, (which he calls elsewhere, 2 Cor. 11.28.
The Care of all the Churches, which came upon him daily) in his own person; he
therefore takes Care that there should be some left behind him who might; and
Ephesus being one of the most Populous Cities of Asia, in regard of the vast
Concourse of People from all Parts to the Famous Temple of Diana: and there
being many Congregations of Christians there, he having by the space of two
years continued there, so that all they who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the
Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks; he therefore sends for the Presbyters who
resided in that City, by virtue of his Apostolical Authority; and there
declares unto them, that for the time to come they were to take that care of
the Churches which he had done: and that they might not do this of their own
heads, or fear to do it for want of a Lawful Calling and Ordination; he
declares the Will of God to them; and that the Holy Ghost had appointed them to
be Bishops. So that they came indeed Presbyters to him, but they went away
Bishops from him; and Bishops not of his own, but the Holy Ghosts appointment.

IT is a Rule among Divines, That where the Literal sense of Scripture is
plain, we are to follow that. And that this is the plain Historical and Literal
meaning of the Words, without the least wresting or violence offered to them,
is most obvious: and that by this Power of Episcopacy, which the Holy Ghost
added to their former of Presbytery, they were to take the Care of the
Government of the Church, as well in Ruling as Instructing, there are these
Reasons:

FIRST, When he sends for them he calls them Presbyters, and not Bishops,
which, if there had been no difference, he might as well have done; and
supposing that the Holy Ghost must foresee that this Controversy would arise
in the Church, we cannot believe he would contribute to it by such an
ambiguity, but the contrary, that they were only Presbyters, as the Holy Ghost
calls them first, and then advanced to be Bishops by his appointment.

SECONDLY, He puts the Government into their hands, by resigning his own, in
regard he was to see them no more.

THIRDLY, He directs them in their Office, which he divides into three
Particulars. First, Verse. 28.
To feed the Church of God, which he had purchased with his own Blood; to
instruct them in the Faith and Doctrine of Christian Religion. Secondly, To
watch against Errors and Heresies: Verse. 29, 30, 31.
For I know this (says he) that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the Flock: also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them; therefore Watch.
Now, what signifies Vigilance without Power? and what Power have the Watchmen,
but to Admonish, and Rebuke, and at last to Excommunicate the Obstinate? And
let them show me this Power ever Exercised in the Church by any, besides a
Bishop, and let them take the Cause. Thirdly, To Exercise Hospitality; to
support the Poor, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give, than to receive. According to another Precept of his,
in which he comprises them all. For a Bishop must be blameless, 1 Timothy 3.2.
the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality; apt to teach. Lastly, Here is no imperfect footstep of their
Solemn Consecration, for when he had ended his Message and Direction, Verse. 36.
When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all.

AND to manifest, that though every Bishop be a Presbyter, yet every Presbyter
is not a Bishop; and that the Difference consists in Power and Rule, which the
Bishops have over the Presbyters as well as the rest of the People, I doubt not
to make most plain from Scripture and Antiquity. For,

FIRST, St. Paul says Expressly, That it is one qualification of a Bishop; 1 Timothy 4, 5.
He must be one that rules well his own house, having his Children in
subjection with all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own house,
how shall he take care of the Church of God? how shall he rule the house of
God? and find me but one Example in Scripture, or ancient Church History, where
any one, who was not a Bishop as well as a Presbyter, ever Exercised this
Jurisdiction of Ruling: the Presbyters had indeed a Rule, but with
subordination to the Bishops. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
Let the Presbyters that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine; (for anciently in the
Church every Priest was not a Preacher, as is plain, not only from this place,
but from the Church History) but that the Presbyters might not be Exalted
beyond their Bounds, to think this Rule equal to that of the Bishops over the
Church; he allays the Tumor in the very next words, and shows the the
difference, the subordination, and subjection which they owed to the Judicature
of the Bishop, as Timothy was there. Against a Presbyter, receive not an
Accusation but before two or three Witnesses, which is not spoken of Private
Adomnition, (...), unless there be two or three Witnesses, and them that sin
Rebuke openly, that others may fear. To receive an Accusation, plainly infers a
superior Jurisdiction, a power to hear Witnesses, and according to their
Depositions, to rebuke openly, is certainly an Effect of Authority. And he
follows the blow close, giving him another Direction about Ordination, Verse.
21, 22.
that he should Lay hands suddenly on no man, preferring one before another by
Partiality. So that here is a distinct Power of a Bishop from a Priest; To lay
on hands, or Ordain, to receive Accusations against Presbyters, to Examine
Witnesses, and according to their Testimony, to proceed to Judgment, to give
Sentence openly; to Rebuke those that Sin: even the Presbyters as well as
others; for if they may be accused and convened, and found guilty of sin, they
also ought and may be rebuked and punished: As to that place of the 5th Chap.
Rebuke not an Elder; it is apparently meant of those who are such by Years, and
not by Office Presbyters, or Priests, and to teach us that there is a respect
due to the Reverend head, Age; as is plain from the words, Rebuke not an Elder,
but entreat him as a Father, and the younger Men as Brethren, the Elder Women
as Mothers, and the younger as Sisters, with all Purity. This he further
Explains in his Epistle to Titus. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in Order the
things that are wanting, (...), appoint, Constitute Presbyters in every City
(making them Bishops) as I have appointed thee. That Saint Paul left Presbyters
there, both in Age and Office, no doubt can be made: but yet something was
wanting still, and because he would not himself lay hands suddenly upon them,
and the Affairs of the Church calling him aaway, he leaves Titus, a Bishop
there, to set in order what was wanting; that was, upon their good demeanor,
to advance them into the Power of Bishops, which was wanting at St. Paul's
departure, and the following words make it plain, that this was the thing
wanting, and which he appointed Titus to do. By the Direction he gives about
them, Verse. 10, 11.
For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God, (a high Office, and a
large Jurisdiction) for there are many unruly (there was the Necessity of
Bishops to Rule) whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole Houses,
teaching things which they ought not, for filthy Lucres sake. So that Titus was
to make Bishops in that Populous Island, that so they might have Authority,
which, as Presbyters, they had not to, stop the mouths of the Seducers. And how
were these unruly Subverters to be Treated and Governed? even by rebuking them
sharply, Verse. 13.
and stopping their Mouths, (...), by silencing them. And how could that be
done, but by the Authority of the Bishop, who was to let them and the People
know, that if they persisted in their disobedience, Verse. 16.
They were abominable, and Reprobates, and therefore to be cast out of the
Church, For though they profess to know God, yet in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good Work Reprobate. Therefore
abominable, because disobedient. Silencing then of Subverters of Houses, unruly
vain Talkers, Deceivers, is no new thing in the Church, nor Bishops Persecutors
for so doing. Nor is there any way of stopping their Mouths in the Church, but
by this Authority of Excommunication; and if they submit not to this, all their
Pretenses to Godliness will not excuse them from denying him, and being
Reprobates because, Disobedient. What must we then think of those who will not
have their Mouths stopped, either by the Power of the Church, or Civil
Magistrate, but in the highest degree of Unruly and Mutinous Disorder are
Disobedience to both: Endeavoring to draw Disciples after them, that they may
first take away from the Bishop the defense of the Magistrates Sword, and then
with Ease Extirpate Episcopacy, Root and Branch, Office and Name, Power and
Authority.

THUS you see, that the Holy Ghost appointed Bishops in the Primitive Church;
you see their Office and Authority; and that Presbyters were their Lawful
Inferiors, that they had Power to Ordain, to Rebuke, to acquit or Condemn, to
stop the Mouths of the Unruly. So that here is both the Name and the Thing, the
Title and the Office, confirmed by clear and evident Testimony of Scripture.
Now let us see what Obedience is due to them. We entreat you, Brethren (says
St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
and his Modest Entreaty ^^^y, I hope, without offense, pass for a Command) to
know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you; And to esteem them very highly in Love for their Works-sake, and be at
Peace among your selves. How know these (...), these Rulers? For they could not
be ignorant of their Persons or Names, but know their Office, know their Power,
that so by submission you may maintain Peace.

BUT the Author to the Hebrews is plain and Positive. Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, (...), which word will carry more than
some Envious People will well like of in Bishops, and will not only entitle
them to Rule, but their Honor too; as will appear to any who is not a stranger
to the Greek Language; For it signifies not only a bare Ruler, or a Guide, but
a Captain and a Prince, and warrants a Bishops being so in the New Testament,
as well as a Priest under the Old: But to avoid Offense, I know there are none
of those Reverend Fathers of the Church, but will be pleased to derive their
Titles from another Fountain of Honor. I speak this to show that God Almighty
by his Spirit in Scripture is pleased to Honor them with the high Character of
Princes and Governors; and that therefore they are not to be Vilified and
Despised, as son^n Wanton, and other Virulent Tongues and Pens too frequently
do. But to proceed; He continues to show what kind of Obedience this must be,
(...), submit your selves, without resisting, be in Subjection. And he adds the
Reason, For they watch, for your Souls, as they that must give an Account, that
they may do it with Joy, and not with Grief. Does God expect an account of
Souls from these spiritual Guides and Rulers? Then certainly he cannot in
Justice leave them Destitute of Power and Authority to Rule and Guide, as means
to enable them to give a good Account of their Charge: And to suppose the
contrary, were to suppose an End without a Way. And since they have such a
Charge, all those who are within their respective Jurisdictions, are bound to
yield Obedience to them, as they will answer before the Bar of Divine Justice,
for the Guilt, not only of Destroying their own Souls, but those of others,
whom they teach to Refuse to Obey those who have the Rule over them, and are
appointed Bishops by the Holy Ghost.

AND whereas St. Peter calls himself a Presbyter, and by ranking himself among
them, seems to intimate they are all one, this does not at all prove that he
was not a Bishop too: 1 Pet. 1.1.
For he calls himself Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and his Humility in
calling himself (...), Chap. 5.1.
their fellow Presbyter, does no more prove that a Bishop and Presbyter are the
same, than that a Presbyter and Apostle are; for though they were his fellow
Presbyters, yet they were not his fellow Apostles; and further, it appears that
these Presbyters, of which he calls himself a Sym-Presbyter, were Bishops as
well as Priests; for Writing to the several Churches scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia, and calling the Governors of those Churches,
Fellow Presbyters, argues as much; but the second Verse puts it out of doubt,
for he says, they must Episcopize (...), feed the Flock of Christ as Bishops;
and therefore this place will never prove that the Authority of a bare
Presbyter, is equal to that of a Bishop, or one who was a Fellow Presbyter of
Saint Peter.

LET us see now what the next Age thought of it. I will not run through the
whole Church History, but content my self with the Testimony of Ignatius, who
was the Scholar of Saint John, the beloved Apostle and Disciple of our Lord,
who leaned on Jesus's Bosom, and one may well suppose therefore, knew his
Breast, and what Government his Lord appointed in the Church, and had
Episcopacy been Antichristian, would not have failed to tell us so; and when he
tells us there are many Antichrists, he would have told us that this was one,
if he had believed it to be so; and have instructed his Scholar to put down and
not Exalt this Antichrist in the Church of God. 1 Jo. 2.18.
This Ignatius, who was afterward in the Eleventh year of Trajan, Crowned with
Martyrdom at Rome, being torn in pieces by Wild Beasts, as Eusebius gives us an
account; Eusebius. Eccl. His. l. 3. c. 19. and 35.
he speaks as plain of the Difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, as Pen
can write, or Heart can wish. In his Epistle to the Magnesians, Ig. Ep. ad
Magnes.
(...). The Bishop (says he) is seated in the first place, as in the place of
God, and the Presbyters as the Senate of the Apostles. And in another place of
the same Epistle; They, says he, who Act without a Bishop (...), to such Christ
will say, Why do ye call me Lord, Lord, and do not the works which I Command
you? Such Persons seem to me not to be of a good Conscience, (...), but to be
Hypocrites and Dissemblers. And in his Epistle to the Trallians, he Commands
them in the Language of the Author to the Hebrews, Ignat. Epist. ad Trall.
To be subject unto this Bishop, as unto the Lord, for he Watches for your
souls. And in another place, he tells them (...). It is absolutely necessary,
(...), That you should do nothing without the Bishop. Thus we see, the Sons of
the Church in the first Century of the Apostles of Christ being yet living,
thought of Bishops as we do. And therefore it is both Undeniable and
Undubitable, that Episcopal Government was of Divine Institution, and that a
Bishop and a Presbyter are two different things in the Primitive Church both as
to Power and as to Name. I might bring a whole Cloud of Witnesses of less
Antiquity, but if these will not convince, if the Testimony of Scripture, and
so Primitive a man and a Bishop, as Ignatius, be of no value, I can have little
hopes of convincing Gainsayers by multitude, who have abandoned Reason.

THUS stood the Affairs of the Church for above 300 Years, no man making the
least Question or Dispute, but that the Government by Episcopacy was of Gods
appointment, one Bishop still succeeding another, as in the Ecclesiastical
Historians my be seen in most of the Principal Cities of the World, Epiphan. l.
3. Tom. 1. Haeres. 25.
till Aerius being Educated with Eustathius, and being his equal in Learning
and Age, took it as a great disparagement that Eustathius was preferred before
him to a Bishopric, for which they were Competitors: upon this discontent he
not only fell foul upon Eustathius, objecting (as our Aerians do) against him.
Pride and Covetousness; but his Resentments for the Mortal displeasure, broak
out against the whole Function, contemning the prescribed Fasts of the Church,
and teaching by the same Arguments with ours, that a Bishop and a Priest were
all one by the Scriptures, of equal Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction, which,
says Epiphanius, is an Assertion stultitiae plena, full of Folly. But this
being but one discontented Priests Opinion, was neither much regarded, nor long
lived; the current belief of the Scripture, and the constant Usage of the
Church, which knew no other Government, run so strong, that he was drowned in
it; nor did the Heresy ever float again till this last Age, of which St.
Clement, who was contemporary to St. Paul, and his fellow Labourer, Phil. 4.3.
as he calls him, seems to prophecy in that Epistle of his to the Corinthians,
which, I think, was never suspected to be spurious; where he tells us, there
would come a time when there should be (...), Clem. Ep. ad Cor.
a contention about the very name of a Bishop.

BY virtue of this Power it was that the Rulers of the Church ordered and
appointed all things which were done, which were of an indifferent Nature in
Government, as about the Observation of Holy Fasts and Festivals, the manner of
Celebrating the Service and Worship of God, the Prayers and Alms of the Church,
the Postures, Gestures, and Habits which were to be made use of, and all other
Rites and Ceremonies; following herein the Scripture as the Rule of Faith and
Manners, and the General Precepts therein contained as Rules of Government,
which were principally these:

FIRST, That nothing imposed should be repugnant or contrary to any Article or
Branch of Faith, or a Holy Life, or to any Customs of the Church recorded in
Holy Writ.

SECONDLY, That all their Commands might have a respect to Decency, Order,
Reverence, and Edification.

THIRDLY, That All might have a tendency to Unity, Peace, and Concord, and that
diversity of Customs and Opinions might not breed Schisms and Contentions; and
I showed before, how when in some of these things there was a difference in
several Churches, yet still they held Communion one with another, maintaining
inviolably the same Faith and Government in all.

THIS was the Condition of the Church both as to Faith and Polity, till such
time as the great Powers of the Earth, the Roman Emperors and other Kings
became Christians, and took up the Cross of Christ as the Glory of their
Crowns. The first of which was Constantine the Great. These Temporal Powers
then took the Church into their Protection, made Temporal Laws for the better
Management of it, and to preserve it from the Injuries of Heathen Idolaters
without, and Heretics within: and having the Sword in their hand, undertook,
as it was their Duty, to punish Evil doers, who dare transgress the Laws of
the Church, with Temporal Punishments, as well as those who broak the Laws of
the Civil Magistrate; and to encourage the Peaceable and Religious. From the
Bounty of these Princes, and that of others of plentiful Fortunes, and and by
their Example, the Church came to be Endowed with Temporalties, and an
Honorable, Constant, and Encouraging Maintenance was provided and settled
upon those who were to serve at the Altar; that so they might be enabled and
furnished with all sorts of Learning, well knowing, that proportionate Rewards
are the spurs to Learning and Virtue, as the Wisdom of God, for our
Encouragement to Pursue and Obtain her, tells us, Prove. 8.18.3.4.
Riches and Honor are with me, yea durable Riches and Righteousness, and that
length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honor.
And that according to the Apostolical Command, 1 Cor 9.11, 14.
They which sow Spiritual things, should also reap Carnal, for so has the Lord
commanded, that they which Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

BY this it appears, That now there was a double Obligation laid upon all
Christians to be Obedient to the Commands of the Church; both because they
derive their Power from God, and because the Temporal Power did now concur to
strengthen the Duty by the Obligations of Humane Laws; nor can any thing, or
any pretense of Conscience authorize their Disobedience to both those Powers,
unless the things commanded be manifestly proved to contradict the Faith, or be
repugnant to good Life; which till Dissenters can do, they will be obstinate
Schismatics before God, and Rebels against their Prince; and in a fair way to
be Traitors. too; whilst they break his Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical;
however they may flatter themselves with the Title of Saints. And so soon as
they can prove their Charge against any of the Ceremonies, and that they are
Unlawful in reality, and not only in supposition, they shall be gratified by
their Abolition, or amendment, if that will do. And if they cannot prove their
Accusations, would they be so unjust, as to have not Justice but Injury done to
the Innocent, by abrogating those Modes of Worship and Customs in the Church,
which the whole Church has allowed? that Government which God appointed, which
he has approved by maintaining, supporting, and defending it to this present
day, against all the Opposition of Infidels and Heretics, those two Gates of
Hell? One would think that Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis were satisfactory to
men of Reason and Sobriety; Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, id
quidem vere est Catholicum. That which every where, always, and by all has been
received, must needs be a Catholic Truth; but such is the Power, Rule,
Authority of Bishops for Guiding the Church, and appointing the Modes of
Worship. And they who will oppose this spring Tide of Universal Testimony, will
but drown themselves in the Odious name of Schismatics and Heriticks, of whom
these have been the Characters. Mos semper fuit Hereticorum, quorum Doctrinam
non possunt confutare, illorum vitam in Odium trahere. It has always been the
Custom of Heretics to asperse the lives of those whose Doctrines they have not
been able to confute. Which has been the constant Practice of late years
against Episcopacy and Episcopal Men, to throw dirt upon the Profession and
Persons, and then proclaim them Odious, when in truth the blackness is in their
own Mouths, and not either in the Persons whom they calumniate, or in the
Office. Treating the Church as some Impudent Villains do the Modest Woman whom
they cannot Debauch, Cry out, A Whore, a Whore, and set the Rabble upon her,
who roll her in the Kennel, and cover her with dirt, till no body can tell what
she is made of, and then believe she is what they have made her, ugly, and what
the other would have made her, but could not, Criminal.

St. Bernard gives us a second Property, Haerent ad singula quae injunguntur,
Exigunt de quibusque rationem, male suspicantur de omni Precepto, nec unquam
libenter acquiescunt, nisi cum audire contigerit quod forte libuerit. They
stick at every thing which is by Authority enjoined, they require a a Reason
(nay and we may add, are not satisfied with Reason) for every thing, they are
Jealously suspicious of every Precept of their Superiors; nor do they ever
willingly acquiess in their determinations, unless it happens that they are
agreeable to their own Judgment; and as St. Augustine says, Nisi quod ipsi
faciunt, nihil rectum Existimant. They think well of nothing, or Judge it
right, but what they do themselves.

LET St. Cyprian give them a third Mark. Initia Haereticorum, etc. Vt
Praepositum Superbo tumore contemnant. Sic de Ecclesia receditur, sic Altar
prophanum For As Collocatur; sic contra pacem Christi, and Ordinationem atque
unitatem Dei rebellatur. The Original of Heretics, is, Contempt of those who
are set over them: So men separate from the Church: So is a profane Altar
erected out of it: So men become Rebels against the Peace of Christ, Order,
and Unity, because, as in another place he says, Episcopus qui unus est and
Ecclesiae praeest, Superba quorundam presumptione contemnitur, The Bishop, who
is one, and set over the Church, is by the proud Presumption of some Men
Contemned, We may write a Probatum est, to these Prophetique Truths.

I might Pyle up Endless Authorities, and swell this Discourse to a Volume; but
if what I have already said, be not sufficient to Convince the greatest Enemies
of Episcopacy, that it is a Government of Gods appointment in the Church, I
think all that can be said will be to no purpose; and if this will, more would
be supersluous; if they will not believe the Scripture, If they will not
believe the Church, Mat. 18.17.
it is our Savior's Rule, Let them be as Heathen men and Publicans.

CHAP. XVI.
HAVING now found a Divine and unerring Rule of Faith and Life, in the
Scripture of Truth; and having also found there, who are by God appointed to be
Governors of the Church, viz. Bishops. There remains only the great Enquiry
after the Judge of Controversies and Differences, which is abslutely Necessary
in the Church of God, to determine Differences which may happen, not only about
Matters of private Opinion, but even the sense of the Scriptures and the
Interpretation of the Holy Rule. And as these Differences may be of several
Kinds and Natures, so there are several Judges appointed by God to hear and
determine them, that so the Church may be preserved in Peace and Charity.

As to what is matter of Faith, Essentially Necessary to Salvation; That, God
is the Sole Judge of himself: And therefore it has by him long since been
determined, and received in the Church; and what ever by all must be believed,
must be easy by all to be known, and is therefore plainly set forth in Holy
Scripture; Nor can any be Judge of this, but what cannot Err, or deceive us,
which is only God. And to say the Church is the Judge of this, and that it
cannot Err, because the Catholic Church does not Err, is to argue
Fallaciously, a non esse ad impossible esse: For that part of the Catholic
Church, whilst on Earth, consisting of Men, of whom some shall be saved, and
some Reprobated; No man having a power to know which of them are those who
shall be kept by the power of God through Faith, unto Salvation, that they
shall not Err, and to distinguish them from those who shall not be so
preserved, and therefore there being a Possibility, that those who may be
Reprobates from the Faith themselves, may yet be of great Authority in the
Outward Visible Church, it is unreasonable to admit them as Judges of Faith,
who Erring themselves, my lead us into Errors too. And therefore God, who
speaks to us in Scripture, is only the Judge of what is matter of Faith, and
what not; and it is to be tried by that Rule, and no Authority has power to
impose any thing as matter of Faith, Essentially necessary to Salvation, but
what is there to be found. The Harmony of the Universal Church, that such
things as are offered as matters of Faith, are agreeable to Scripture, is in
things not clear and evident, the best Method to obtain Assent to them: As the
disagreement of the Church, is to suspend our Belief: But this can only be
about such things as are collaterally of Faith, and by coming under the Notion
of things Dubious, are matter of Opinion, and which if a man never knows, he
may be saved, and therefore if he does not believe, he cannot be Damned, the
Church is the Interpreter, but not the Judge; and indeed every man is a Judge for
himself, by his Eyes, his Ears, his Reason and Understanding, whether that
which the Church Interprets, be according to the Scripture, the Rule of that
Faith by which he is to be saved, and which therefore it is necessary that he
know before he believe it to Salvation.

BUT since doubts are of diverse Natures, Private and Public; let us see how
any Person may be determined in both. First therefore, Where the doubt is only
Private, about things not determined by Public Authority derived from
Scripture, which are of an Indifferent Nature, Every Man's full persuasion is
his Judge, according to the best Evidence the things in doubt admit of from the
light of Nature, Reason, or probability that they are good and Lawful, or Evil
and Unlawful. This full Persuasion St. Paul calls Faith, Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin; that is, what I am not fully persuaded in my own mind of the
Lawfulness of, I cannot lawfully do. This was the Case of the Gentiles, who
having only the Law of Nature, were a Law to themselves, their thoughts either
Accusing or Excusing them, as they acted according to the best of their
knowledge and full Persuasion. But this Judgment is only Private, and has
nothing to do with any other Person. Have thou Faith, have it to thy self; who
art thou that Judge anothe? Happy is he that Condemns not himself in that
which he allows. This is the Error of our Times, men will make their Private
persuasions Judges of all other men, and impose their Private Opinions as
matters of Faith, necessary to Salvation. Against which the whole Scope of that
whole 14th. Chapter to the Romans is designed.

BUT there is also another Private Judge, whom God has appointed, with Reference
to things both of Private and Public Concern, and that is Conscience; the
Rule of Conscience is the Scripture, the measure of Conscience is the certainty
of Knowledge, and the Judgment of Conscience is the determination of the Mind,
and the Direction of our Practice according to it. For thus I and every man
Judges; I therefore believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, that I am to
do good to All men, to be Obedient to God, and my Lawful Superiors, to live
Righteously, soberly, and Godly in this present World; because I certainly know
that these things are by God commanded in Scripture, and whatever is not so in
plain Words or Consequence, is only matter of Opinion and not of Conscience.
Certainty of Knowledge, being of the Essence of Conscience, as Probability is of
the Essence of Opinion.

BUT Secondly, In regard this very Rule is, in things of Public Doubt and
Concern, in some things Dubious, such as is the Controversy about Government:
And since the Holy Oracles may seem to admit of Diverse interpretations, so
that what satisfies one man's Judgment, is quite Opposite and contrary to
another: We must inquire who are to be Judges and Interpreters of the Rule in
these Public Affairs? For that there must be some Judge or Judges, is plain,
because God commands Unity and Obedience, but these cannot be obtained without
men be determined What and Whom to Obey.

St. Peter informs us, 2 Pet. 1.20. 2 Pet. 3.16.
That it is not the Duty of Private men, For no Scripture is of private
Interpretation, and shows us the danger: Notwithstanding which, bold men will
venture at it, as St. Hierom says of his days, Hier. Ep. ad Paulinum.
Scripturarum Ars est, quam passim omnes sibi vendicant, hanc Garrula anus,
hanc delirus Senex, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc universi presumunt, lacerant,
docent antequam discant. It seems in his time, all people read the Scriptures.
For every prating Old Woman, and Doting Old Man, every Wrangling wordy
Sophister, challenges and presumes to tear the Scriptures in pieces, and to
teach others before they have learnt themselves. Whereas these (...), as Saint
Peter calls them, Unlearned, ungrounded People ought first to Learn. But of
whom? There is but this Choice, either this Power is in the People, or in the
Governors of the Church.

IT cannot be in the People, for they are Private Persons, and are
incapacitated by being so, to perform this Public Office, for what no one can
do singly, neither can all do Collectively; what every man wants, all must: For
if every man in the World had but one Eye, all the World must want two. And the
People are to Obey in Learning, and therefore not to Rule in Teaching: Neither
would it be possible to come to any Determination in any thing; it being
impossible to find all the People of one Nation, City, Village, or Family; Nay,
even one Person of the same mind, for any continuance of Time; and by
consequence, all Religion must stagger and totter with continual Changes,
Uncertainties, and Alterations, and at last fall to Ruin and Confusion: Which
Great Truth forced even Calvin himself to drop this Oracle, so contrary to the
Pretenses of his now Followers, who would have the Fences of Government, which
incloses Gods Vineyard, thrown down, and all laid Common by Tolleration and
Liberty of Conscience: Call. Inst. lib. 4. p. 10. Sect. 31.
Quantarum Rixarum (says he) semen futura sit Earum Rerum Confusio; si prout
cuique libitum sit, mutare liceat quae ad communem Statum pertinent? Quando
nunquam futurum est ut omnibus idem placeat, si res velut in medio Positae
singulorum arbitrio relictoe fuerint. Si penes singulos jus and Arbitrium erit
Judicandi, nihil unquam certi constitui Poterit: Quin potius tota vacillabit
Religio. Of how many and great Quarrels would such Confusion be the Nursery; If
it shall be Lawful for every man according to his Pleasure, to change those
things which belong to the Common State of Christianity: Since it can never be
possible that the same thing should please all, so long as indifferent things
are left to be determined according to every man's Arbitrary Pleasure: And if
the Power and Right, the Liberty of Judging Arbitrarily, be left to the
pleasure of All, nothing of certainty can ever be Established; but rather all
Religion will totter and tumble down.

THE Scripture must be Interpreted, and is not of Private Interpretation, what
remains, but that it is of Public. God commands Unity, but in doing so he
would command an Impossibility, if he had not appointed Means to obtain it; to
whom then can this Power be delegated to draw all men's private Opinions into
one Common Rule for Practice, but to the Governors of the Church, which all
shall be bound to observe for the obtaining Peace and Unity. I have already
proved who are those Governors, who by the Appointment of the Holy Ghost are to
Rule, to feed the Flock of Christ, to Watch over men's Souls, as they that must
give an Account, to Rebuke, Exhort, with all long suffering, but not with
suffering always; for if Seducers will persist in subverting houses, and vain
talking, then by proceeding to stopping their Mouths; that so they may study to
approve themselves unto God, Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing
the Word of Truth. And the Temporal Power of the Civil Magistrate may assist
the Spiritual to bring men to Peace, Unity, and Obedience to these their Guides
and Governors, by being a Terror to Evil doers, and Encouragement to those who
do well, which is both the Will and the Word of God.

I know it will be Objected, That these Intepreters of Scripture, and Judges of
Controversies may Err, and be deceived, Bishops may Err, Counsels have Erred,
and therefore this leaves us still in an Uncertainty, since it is possible that
we may be misled by them; and how shall we be certain they do not Err, or we in
following them? and wherein is it Lawful to refuse to Obey them?

To this I answer, That the Qualification of such a Guide and Interpreter of
Scripture as we are to expect, is not such a one as cannot Err, but such a one
as does not Err; for had God left us such a Guide, besides his own Word and
Will, there would have been a state of Perfection attainable in this Life, and
by consequence an Immortality, and no necessity of his Divine assistance to
keep us by his mighty Power from falling through Faith unto Eternal Salvation;
such a Guide must have been a God, Omniscient Omnipotent, and Omnipresent;
which is as unreasonable to believe as to expect from any or all Mortal Men.
And besides, it is a vain and frivolous Objection, for those who are under any
Lawful Government to run into the most dangerous Errors, and manifest breach of
Gods Command, by Schism and Disobedience to the Laws of Men, for fear of
imaginary danger of future Errors; which if they shall really happen, we have a
plain and easy remedy against them, if we know them to be such; and that is in
our own persons to protest against them, and to refuse to Join with those that
hold them; and if we know them not to be so, though we be in Error (as who
lives that does not Err?) they will do us no injury, for it is obstinacy in
Error, and not bare Error of ignorant frailty that is damnable: but we can have
no Plea or Excuse to make to God Almighty for our Error of Separation, breach
of Unity, Peace, Order, Communion, Division from a Church not yet convicted of
any manifest Error either in Doctrine or Practice, which is the Case between
Dissenters and the Church of England. And besides, every Error in
Circumstantials which does not destroy Faith or a good Life, is not a
sufficient and warrantable Cause for any private Man to throw off all
Subjection to his Superiors; for if it were, there could be no such thing as a
Catholic Church, or Communion of Saints, there being no particular Men, or
any Society of Men without Sins, and by consequence not without Errors, both in
Doctrine and Practice.

BUT Secondly, The Governors of the Church neither do nor can Err in point of
Faith and Doctrine, or Discipline and Government, so long as they follow the
Rule of the Scriptures in Cases plain and clear, as before I showed the Matters
of Faith essentially necessary to Salvation are. Nor so long as they Judge of
such as are dubious, according to their Catholiqueness, in the Esteem of all
Ages of the Church, for no Error was ever Universal. And though they may be
mistaken, yet do they not Err, if in Interpretation of the more difficult and
obscure places of Scripture, they endeavor to Expound the meaning of them by
others which are more clear and perspicuous, following the received sense of
them acknowledged so by the Universal Church; so long as in those
Interpretations there can be nothing repugnant to the Common Faith of
Christians, or prejudicial to Peace, Charity and Practical Piety. Neither can
they Err as to the point of Discipline, and the External Polity of the Church,
if in indifferent things in their own Natures, and not Essentially necessary to
Salvation, they do not impose them as such; if they follow the Direction of the
General Rules of the Holy Canon, that every thing be done with respect to
Decency, Order, Edification, for the avoiding Confusion, and obtaining Peace,
Unity, and Christian Love, according to the Examples of the best Christians in
former Ages in the Church; and the Canons of such General Counsels as are not
found manifestly Guilty of Partiality and Corruption in the long Train of
Errors, which the Endeavoring to Erect the Primacy into a Supremacy, and the
Supremacy into a Monarchy, has brought into the Roman Church.

THIRDLY, If the Governors of the Church Impose any thing contrary to
Scripture, Faith, or Holy Life, then do they forsake the Rule, and it is Lawful
and Necessary for every good Christian to forsake them; for so is St. Paul's
Rule, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of God. And praises them for observing the
Commandments delivered to them by God. But if they fall from the Faith, as did
the Gnostics, the Manichees, the Arrians, and many others, we are not then to
be Followers of them, but Followers of God, as Dear Children. But if any
Private man, or many, shall think, because in some things which are contrary to
their apprehension, that therefore the Determinations are against Scripture,
and therefore their Obedience not due, it is a mistake, for they must be
certain, otherwise they are bound to be subject; for if they be not certain,
and from the best Grounds and clear Evidences, it is but their Opinion, which
cannot weigh enough in the Scale of Truth, to warrant their Disobedience
against the Public Opinion of their Superiors, but that such a Disobedience
will be a certain Sin: for if any, or many men's Private Opininion, which is
private Interpretation, may authorize them to renounce their Obedience to their
Superiors, there can never be any such thing as subjection in the World, nor
any Government, and by good consequence, No Union, no Catholic Church, and
then no Faith, and in short, at last no such thing as Religion.

OTHERS will Object, That hereby I seem to introduce Romish Infallibility, and
make our Bishops Lords of our Faith; and that we had better submit to one Pope,
who is as free from Error as other Bishops.

To this I Answer, That there is nothing more contrary to Sense or Truth than
such an Objection. For I do not make, nor believe them Infallible, but the Rule
by which they are to Govern, which is the Word of the Infallible God, who
cannot lie or be deceived; and, I suppose, that they may act contrary to this
Rule, and that presumes they are not Infallible; but if they follow the Rule,
then I say they cannot Err; and should the Pope do so, all Christians over whom
he may Challenge a lawful Jurisdiction as their Patriarch, ought to submit to
him: But it is Evident, that the Roman Church does Err, and has Erred in many
things, forsaking the Rule, setting up the Authority of the Pope to alter and
change that Rule, by introducing new Articles of Faith, new Books of Scripture,
and old Traditions, his own Canons, Decretals, and Councels for a Rule; nay,
his own (...), his Sentence and Determination for an Infallible Rule of Faith
and Life, which is as far from me to believe of our Bishops, as to say or
believe it of him.

NOR does this Jurisdiction of Bishops either take away that subordination
which for convenience of Government is among them, or entrench upon the
Supremacy of the Civil Magistrate: since his Supremacy consists in a Temporal
Sovereignty, and pretends not to any Pastoral Power, but only such Kingly and
Civil Authority in Cases Ecclesiastical, as Constantine and several other
Religious Emperors had and Exercised, to whom even Popes as well as other
Patriarchs yielded subjection; as I can make appear out of the Epistles of
Gregory the Great to Mauritius, and the Ecclesiastical Historians, in a hundred
places. And nothing is more plain, than that Christ himself owned a Subjection,
as well as Commanded one to Caesar.

As for the Civil Magistrate and his Power, I think nothing more Evident than
the Duty all their Subjects, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics, owe them; and
that they have Prescription, the Law of God, Nature, Nations, and those of
their own on their side, for the Defense of their Titles to their Crowns and
Scepters; and that the Church and Faith is and ought to be their Particular
Care, as well as it is their Interest, the quiet of the State ever depending in
a great Measure upon the Peace of the Church; and that they have a Coercive
Power, by virtue of which they may compel men to Obedience to the Laws both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, which in conformity to the Law of God are to promote
the Peace, Happiness, Unity, and Prosperity of their People. Nor was this
Doctrine ever denied till the Papacy growing great, and the Empire declining,
began to think of a Temporal as well as a Spiritual Monarchy, and to Unite St.
Paul's Sword to St. Peter's Keys. And till the Presbyterians reviving the
Heresy of Aerius and his levelling Principle, began to endeavor to set up
their Spiritual Democracy in the Church, in order to their Erecting it also in
the State; as the sad Probatum which they writ to their late deadly of the
Solemn League and Covenant might convince us, without the dangerous necessity
of a second Experiment. Ictus Piscator sapit. The burnt Child dreads the fire.
and we have a great deal more reason to do so, than to kindle it again, and run
our fingers into the Flame, to try whether it will burn as hot now as formerly
it did.

CHAP. XVII. The CONCLUSION.
TO draw to a Conclusion; I think it is evident from all that any person can in
reason desire to give him Satisfaction, That the Powers and Government in this
Church and Nation are Lawful, and of Gods appointment; That Unity in Faith, and
Obedience to their Government, are the only Expedients to secure unto us Peace
and Religion; and that if these be our Desires, the other are our Interest, and
ought to be our diligent endeavors and our constant Practice. It is this
Unity, this Obedience that must make us Happy at home, and Terrible abroad;
which are the only Ways to procure and Establish a lasting Peace both in our
Souls, in our State, in our Church, and with our Foreign Neighbors, who may be
obliged more by our formidable Unity than by our feeble Arms, or other
Alliances.

I would gladly know therefore of Dissenters, (who, and our sins, are the great
Obstructors of our Happiness,) Are you certain that the Government of Bishops
is Unlawful and Antichristian? Can you prove that any of the Commands of the
Church or State, are Unlawful, contrary to plain Scripture and Public
Interpretation? If you can, you may pretend Conscience for your Disobedience;
but if you cannot (and I am assured it is impossible) how do you think you
shall escape the dreadful and Revenging Power of the Judge of all men, when he
shall come in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on those that know not God, and
obey not his Gospel? Flatter not your selves with the vain Opinion of your
Sanctity: Many shall say, Lord have not we Prophesied in thy Name? to whom he
will answer, Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, for I know you not; and
well he may, for he says Positively, He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you despises me, and him that sent me; is not this Disobeying
the Gospel? The Holy Ghost says he has made Bishops, you say they are
Antichristian; he sends them to Instruct you in the way of Righteousness, and
to Watch for your Souls; you Watch for their Ruin, their Lives, Honors and
Estates; he commands you to Esteem them highly; you despise them, contemn and
Vilify them: He commands you to Obey, you not only refuse, but teach that to
Obey is Damnable: He planted them among you to plant the Faith, you vow and
swear to Extirpate Root and Branch. Go on and Prosper, said the False
Zedechiah, with his Horns of Iron; but Ahab fell: Be not deceived, you may Mock
the Messengers of God, but God is not to be Mocked; if you sow the Wind, your
shall reap the Whirlwind, the terrible Tempest of his Wrath and Indignation;
They that lay Snares for the Innocent, shall be Ensnared in the Works of their
own hands: You believe you know God, but in Works you deny him, for as Saint
John says of himself and his fellow Apostles, and of their successors, as all
lawful Bishops are, and will be to the end of the World: 1 John 4.6.
We are of God, he that knows God hears us; he that is not of God hears
us not: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. The Holy
Church of God in all Ages (for God has a Church in all Ages according to his
Promise) acknowledge this to be the sense and Meaning of the Scripture which I
have shown; how then will you avoid this guilt with which St. John charges you,
this spirit of Error, which he assures us is to be known by this Character, of
not hearing those whom God has sent?

ARE you certain that you are in the Right; and that all the Saints and
Martyrs, Bishops and Confessors who believed thus, lived and dyed in
Antichristian Error, Ignorance and Superstition; strangers to these Divine
Truths of Worshipping God, which you pretend to have discovered? If you are
certain, show it us, that we may be so too: Truths of this Nature must be clear
and shining, Error is dark and obscure: If you are not certain, as it is
impossible you should, you are certainly Proud and Presumptuous, to Despise
Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities which God has appointed in both Church
and State: And if it be certain that you are in Error, and fight against God
while you disturb the Peace of the World, destroy Charity, Peace, and Concord,
by Hatred, Strifes, Seditions, do you think that you shall ever see God, to
receive the Blessing of the Peacemakers, who shall be called the Children of
God? If Bishops be the true Shepherds, as is Evident from Scripture, Antiquity,
Ecumenical Councels, and the Testimony of all those Martyrs, the spirits of
Just Men now made Perfect; how will you answer the Chief Shepherd and Great
Bishop of Souls, at his appearing, for climbing over into his Fold, for
Stealing, and Killing, and Destroying both the Sheep and the Shepherds? How
will you answer for all the Blood which has already been shed in the Quarrel,
to maintain your Usurpations upon all things Civil and Sacred? For all those
Injuries, Oppressions, Spoils, Devastations, and that Sacrilege which you
have been the occasion of; whilst you pretended by the Sword of Rebellion, to
Erect your Government? Do you think that when God makes Inquisition for Blood,
Psalm. 9.
that he will not remember the Complaint of the Poor; the souls of so many
Pious Innocents and their blood Cries like Abels, but above all the blood of
the Royal Martyr, with those that St. John saw under the Altar, cry aloud, and
of those who served at his Altar here; Quousque Domine? How long Lord Holy, and
true, do thou not Avenge our blood?

IN short, either you must show that the Government in Church and State are
Unlawful, and that your whole Charge against them is as true as it is Black, or
you are Calumniators: You must prove yours a true Church, or you are False
Accusers of that which is; you must show that the Impositions are Unlawful, or
your Disobedience must be so; and you will appear to be the Devils Factors, and
not Gods Ministers, whilst you preach Religion, to Destroy it; and your
Disobedience to indifferent things will be Damnable sin: You will be
accountable not only for your own Guilt, but for that of all those who,
deceived by your Example and Doctrine, Glory in what is the shame of
Christianity, thinking Reformation consists in Ruin, and true Religion in open
Rebellion; and that to be a Friend of God, it is requisite a man should be an
Enemy to his Church.

IN the Name of God therefore, consider seriously of these things; If this be
true, Receive it, and Repent, if it be False, show it; Where? and in What? for
I profess my self as willing to embrace Truth from you, as desire you should
receive it from me. Let not the vain shame of Revoking your Opinions, the fear
of losing the Esteem, Flatteries, and Benevolences of your Followers, Mislead
you: Truth is an Excellent Companion, though never so Naked: It is better to
Blush here, than Burn Eternally: Let not the hopes of the Churches Revenue
animate you to Kill the Heir, that the Inheritance may be yours: Church Lands
have not been Lucky to their Possessors; Laqueus erit illi qui devorat Sacra,
says Solomon: It is a Snare to devour Holy things. They are Gods Portion; you
will bring a Snare upon your Souls, and it may be upon your Necks, which may
spoil the pleasure of those sweet Morsels. And be assured that God will not
forsake his Church for ever; there are Praying Legions in that Glorious Army,
both in Heaven and Earth; and more are they that are with us, than they that
are against us; our Mountain may be full of Chariots and Horses of Fire, though
you see them not; God will not suffer his Darling always to dwell among Lions,
or to lie under the Saws and Harrows of Iron; She shall come up out of the
Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved: She shall look forth as the Morning, fair
as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners; Tanquam
acies Ordinata, with flying Colors, in good Discipline and Comely Order; take
Heed, lest whilst you think your selves upon Jacobs Ladder, climbing up to
Heaven, that by sighting against this Army, you do not prove your selves the
Gates of Hell, which shall not prevail against it, but will against you. If God
arise for the Meek of the Earth, his Enemies will be scattered, and they that
hate him shall flee before him, but not be able to out fly his Vengeance. Arise
O Lord God, thou and thy Ark, into thy Restingplace; let thy Priests be
clothed with Salvation, and let thy Saints rejoice in thy goodness; And let
all them that wish and pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Prosper, and let all
the People say, Amen.

FINIS.
THe Author's Absence from the Press has occasioned the following Errata's,
which I hope the Candid Reader will Correct with what other Faults he finds.

Errata.

PAge 4. line 6. r. Impostor. p 21. l. 7. for at one r. atone. p. 27. l. 23. r.
Cardinalis. p. 31. l. 24. dele learn to do well. p. 52. l. 9. r. Stratagem. p.
65. l. 7 for there, r. these. p. 94. l. ult. r. Menaces. p. 128. l. 2. for
Honor, r. favor. p. 133. l. 26. r. Imprudent. p. 152. l. 22. for External, r.
Eternal p. 174, l. 31. for if, ^. that. p. 226. l. 18. r. has not. p. 287. l.
12. r. of Age.

A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and Sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the
Three Roses in Ludgate Street.
THe Commentaries of C. Julius Caesar, of his Wars in Gallia, and the Civil
Wars betwixt him and Pompey, Translated into English, with many excellent and
judicious Observations thereupon; as also the Art of our Modern Training, or
Tactick Practice; by Clement Edmonds Esquire, Remembrancer of the City of
London. Whereunto is adjoined the Eighth Commentary of the Wars in Gallia, with
some short Observations upon it. Together with the Life of Caesar, and an
account of his Medals: Revised, Corrected, and Enlarged, in Fol.

The History of the Reigns of Henry the VII. Henry the VIII. Edward the VI. and
Queen Mary; the First Written by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam,
Viscount St. Alban, the other Three, by the Right Honorable and Right Reverend
Father in God, Francis Godwyn, Lord Bishop of Hereford, in Fol.

The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia, written by Sir Philip Sidney Knight, the
Thirteenth Edition, with his Life and Death; a brief Table of the principal
Heads, and some other new Additions, in Fol.

The French way of Excercising their Infantry, as it is now used in the Armies
of his Most Christian Majesty, in Fol. sticht.

Parthenissa, that most Famed Romance, the Six Volumes complete, composed by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Orrory, in Fol.

Fifty one Sermons, Preached by the Reverend Doctor Mark Frank, Master of
Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, Archdeacon of St. Albans, Prebend and Treasurer of
St. Paul's, etc. Being a course of Sermons, beginning at Advent, and so
continued through the Festivals; to which is added a Sermon Preached at Paul's
Cross, in the year 1641. and then commanded to be Printed by King Charles the
First, in Fol.

The Common Prayer Book in Folio, in Welsh, etc.

Two Sermons Preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Lexington, and the Lady Mary his Wife; by Samuel Holden A. M. late of Lincoln
College in Oxford, and Chaplain to his Lordship, Deceased, in Quarto.

Christian Ethics, or Divine Morality, opening the way to Blessedness by the
Rules of Virtue and Reason, by Thomas Trahern, B. D. in Octav.

Roman Forgeries, or a true Account of false Records, Discovering the
Impostures and Counterfeit Antiquities of the Church of Rome, by the same
Author, in Octav.

Daily Devotions, consisting of Thanksgivings, Confessions and Prayers, in Two
Parts, by an humble Penitent, in Twelves.

The Camparison of Plato and Aristotle, with the Opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrines, and some Christian Reflections; together with judgment on
Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch, and Petronius, in Octav.

Observations on the Poems of Homer, and Virgil: A Discourse representing the
Excellencies of those Works; and the Perfections in general of all Heroic
Actions, in Octav.

The Causes and Remedies of the Distempers of the Times, in certain Discourses
of Obedience and Disobedience, in Octav.

Songs and Poems, by Thomas Flatman, the Second Edition, in Octav.

Horological Dialogues in Three Parts, showing the Nature, Use, and right
Managing of Clocks and Watches, with an Appendix, containing Mr. Oughtreds
Method for Calculating of Numbers, in Octav.

The True Liberty and Dominion of Conscience, Vindicated from the Usurpations
and Abuses of Opinion and Persuasion.

The Countermine; or, A short but true Discovery of the Dangerous Principles
and Secret Practices of the Dissenting Party, Especially the Presbyterians:
Showing that Religion is Pretended, but Rebellion is Intended. And in order
thereto, The Foundation of Monarchy in the State, and Episcopacy in the Church
are Undermined.

The Common Interest of King and People: showing the Original, Antiquity, and
Excellency of Monarchy compared with Aristocracy and Democracy, and
particularly of our English Monarchy: and that Absolute Papal and Presbyterian
Popular Supremacy, are utterly inconsistent with Prerogative, Property and
Liberty.

The Project of Peace; or Unity of Faith and Government, the only Expedient to
procure Peace, both Foreign and Domestique; and to Preserve these Nations from
the Danger of Popery, and Arbitrary Tyranny.

A Just and Seasonable Reprehension of Naked Breasts and Shoulders: Written by
a grave and Learned Papist. Translated by Edward Cook Esquire; with a Preface
by Mr. Richard Baxter.

The Monk Unvailed; or, A Facetious Dialogue; Discovering the several
Intrigues, and subtle Practices, together with the Lewd and Scandalous Lives of
Monks, Friars, and other pretended Religious Votaries of the Church of Rome;
Written by an Eminent Papist in French, faithfully Translated by C. V. Gent.

Fons Scarburgensis: sive, Tractatus de Omnis Aquarum generis Origin ac usu.
Particulariter de Font Minerali apud Scarbrough in Comitatu Eboracensi
Angliae. Item Dissertationes variae tam Philosophicae quam Medicinales, quas
cum Sectionum titulis Pagina Librum proxime praecedens exibet. Autore Roberto
Witty, M. D.

C. Julius Caesar Nomismaticus, sive Dissertatio Historica, Dionis Cassii
Scriptoris Graeci Selectiora Commata C. J. Caesaris Ortum Dignitates Connubia
Interitum Rogum and Apotheosin Complexa Nomismatum demonstratione illustrans.
J. Seobaldi Fabrici. S. Theol. D. Academiae Heidelbergensis Professoris,
Comitis Palatini.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and near Reprinted, The Fairy Queen, etc. By Edmond
Spenser.

FINIS.

