A TREATISE OF THE DIFFERENCE BBTWIXT THE TEMPORAL AND ETERNAL: Composed in
Spanish BY Eusebius Nieremberg, S. J. Translated into English By Sir VIVIAN
MULLINEAUX, Knight.

And since Reviewed according to the tenth and last Spanish Edition.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

TO The Most Excellent Majesty OF CATHARINE QUEEN OF GREAT BRITAIN.
MADAM,
THe design of this Treatise is no other, then what all must own to be the
great business, and general concern of mankind, which is, to be well read in
the difference between things temporal and eternal. This is the Subject; this
the Title of the Book. The original (which has already passed, there the test
of ten Editions) we owe to Spain, and to the pious and learned labors of the
late Eusebius Nieremberg, who has often obliged the world by the like fruits
of his zealous Pen. After having been read and approved in diverse other
languages, it has now learned to speak English, having been lately translated
(by a noble and worthy person, Sir Vivian Mullineaux) for the service of the
public; and accordingly resolves (if it may be but so happy as to deserve the
gracious favor of your Majesty's royal Patronage) to adventure abroad for the
benefit of all pious and well-disposed, whether Catholic or Protestant
Readers. All which may be here duly informed, as of the difference between
things temporal and eternal, so of the different and cautionary ways they
ought to pursue in dividing themselves and their hearts between both. Time and
Eternity are points of good and wholesome use to all wise and intelligent
contemplations. Time indeed got the start of Man at the Creation, and is five
days elder then he. Nevertheless Man still lives in hopes, he shall at
long-run overtake, and even outlive Time. And this shall be when the general
Resurrection shall have restored him to his better and glorified self, and all
that is mortal in him shall have put on immortality. 1 Cor. 15.53.
Man then being like to prove the longer liver of the two, Time cannot (nor
indeed any thing that shall perish with Time) be that great end, for which Man
was finally ordained. That only can be Man's end, which has none it self; and
that is Eternity: a happy Eternity; the last article of our Creed, and the last
end of our Creation. Sure then it behooves us to be wary Gamesters, when
Eternity is at stake: and not carelessly to throw away our affections at a
venture, or heedlesly to engage our hearts, here and there, upon every slight
invitation from sense and fancy: but to proceed advisedly in the choice of our
object, and in the difference we make between things Temporal and Eternal; This
very difference being the nice pin, and ticklish point, which shall
unappealably decide the case of all we have to hope or fear in the world to
come, by giving sentence at the last day of our final weal or woe. For we are
to be judged by our affections; and every man shall stand, or fall by the
verdict of his own heart. So that the main point, which shall difference our
dooms, is the different applications we make to things temporal, or eternal,
causing this man's lot to fall to the right hand, the others to the left.
MADAM, this address is far from pretending to the usual Panegyric strain, in
complementing the great name, whose Patronage it implores: or enlarging upon
those truly-Christian, and Princely accomplishments, (your great and eminent
virtues,) which more adorn your Majesty, then Majesty can your Person. These
are a subject for a higher undertaking, then this small Dedicatory dares
pretend to. Only, with your Majesty's permission, thus much I shall make bold
to say, that your heroic and exemplar piety, attended with so many other rich
endowments of grace, clearly speaks you Mistress of a Soul thoroughly acquainted
with the Difference between things temporal and eternal. Hence it is, that none
of the most courting allurements of this life, however great in themselves, can
seem truly such to your greater heart. Your Christian ends and designs take a
nobler flight: they are not limited to the narrow bounds of a visible Sphere;
they act upon motives fetched from another world, and harbor not a thought,
which can sit down, and fix on this side Eternity. Though I love not to be
paradoxical, yet methinks the Prophet Daniel has a word of comfort and
encouragement for your Majesty, even where it might be least expected from the
outward letter, to countenance the application. Dan 12.3.
They that instruct many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. So speaks this great person, and Oracle of Judah. Here is a boundless
promise, and Heaven stands engaged for the performance; not only the single
happiness of shining like the stars for ever: but the double blessing of for
ever, and ever. I humbly conceive, this so highly-rewardable teaching and
instructing others to righteousness, may, without violence to the Text, be
taken in a twofold sense. For, not only the useful and practical Doctrines of
the Divinity-chair, the Preacher, and the Man of elocution, but also the pious,
though silent deeds of the good Liver, are our Teachers and Instructors. For
that person (especially if a public person) instructs well, who lives well:
and the good dumb work has oftentimes more of the persuasive faculty in it,
than either pen or tongue can match. This, Madam, is your Majesty's case: this,
your, nay our happiness, if we understand it aright. Your life is a noble
School of Virtue, and reads us a fair Lecture of a more then ordinary
Christianity, far beyond the cold instructions of Book or Pulpit. They only
utter words; you speak examples. England has heard, and the holy Altars have
often witnessed the fervor of your Majesty's devotions; whilst you spend
whole nights in paying the faithful homage of heart and knee to the greatest of
all Majesty's, Almighty God. So that the severe duties of Prayer, Watching,
Penance, Mortification, frequent Retreats to a more free and undisturbed
converse with Heaven, are now adopted Court-Vertues in the sanctity of your
Majesty's Royal Person. All which makes me say, that such, and so
eminently-instructive a life will (if the Prophet please to lend me his
expression) entitle your Majesty not only to one, but (were it possible) to a
plurality of Eternities. Live then, So the vulgar Edition renders it, in
perputuas aeternitates.
(most pious Princess) live, and be still your great Self; great in Majesty:
greater for for piety: and greatest in the contempt of all temporal greatness,
compared with eternal. May the same sweet Providence, which has led up so
noble a Merit to a Throne, for a Royal Consort to Sovereignty, long preserve
you in your high Orb, there to shine as a leading Pattern of true Virtue and
Piety to our Nation. And when our sins shall envy us the happiness of your
Majesty's longer residence upon earth, and the inexorable Decree shall summon
you to pay the common debt, which all of us (Prince as well as Subject) owe to
the sin of our first Parents, May you then, being translated hence to the
embraces of your Creator, experimentally find the true difference between
things temporal and eternal, in the blisful vision and fruition of our great
All our all-mighty, all-lovely, all-glorious God; who is all wonders at one
sight, all joys and comforts in their sourse, all blessings in their center;
the end of all labors, the reward of all services, the desire of all hearts,
and the accomplishment of all hopes and wishes. May he then be to your Majesty
all this, which is here briefly expressed, and infinitely more, which is beyond
expression; And may he secure all these blessings to you for ever, and crown
them with his glorious Attribute of Eternity. This is the no less hearty, then
dutiful prayer of

MADAM Your Majesty's Most humbly devoted In Christ Jesus J. W.

A Summary of the Chapters in this Book.
LIB. I.
Cap. 1. Our Ignorance of what are the true goods: and not only of things
Eternal but Temporal. pa. 1. Cap. 2. How efficacious is the Consideration of
Eternity for the change of our lives. p. 6. Cap. 3. The memory of Eternity is
of it self more efficacious than that of Death. p. 12. Cap. 4. The estate of
men in this life, and the miserable forgetfulness, which they have of Eternity,
p. 18. Cap. 5. What is Eternity according to St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St.
Dionysius, p. 25. Cap. 6. What Eternity is according to Boethius and Plotinus.
p. 29. Cap. 7. Wherein is declared what Eternity is according to St. Bernard.
p. 33. Cap. 8. What it is in Eternity to have no end. p. 41. Cap. 9. How
Eternity is without change. p. 52. Cap. 10. How Eternity is without comparison.
p. 60. Cap. 11. What is Time according to Aristotle and other Philosophers; and
the little consistence of life. p. 68. Cap. 12. How short life is, for which
respect all things temporal are to be despised. p. 74. Cap. 13. What is Time
according to St. Augustine. p. 82. Cap. 14. Time it the occasion of Eternity:
and how a Christian ought to benefit himself by it. p. 89. Cap. 15. What is
Time according to Plato and Plotinus: and how deceitful is all that which is
temporal. p. 98.
LIB. II.
Cap. 1. Of the End of Temporal Life. p. 104. Cap. 2. Remarkable Conditions of
the end of Temporal Life. p. 121. Cap. 3. Of that moment which is the Medium
betwixt Time and Eternity, which being the end of Life is therefore most
terrible. p. 140. Cap. 4. Wherefore the End of Life is most terrible. p. 147.
Cap. 5. How God even in this Life passes a most rigorous Judgment. p. 174.
Cap. 6. Of the End of all Time. p. 181. Cap. 7. How the Elements and the
Heavens are to change at the end of Time. p. 185. Cap. 8. How the World ought
to conclude with so dreadful an End: in which a general Judgment is to pass
upon all that is in it. p. 205. Cap. 9. Of the last day of Time. p. 213.
LIB. III.
Cap. 1. The mutability of things temporal makes them worthy of contempt. p.
228. Cap. 2. How great and desperate soever our Temporal evils are, yet hope
may make them tolerable. p. 238. Cap. 3. We ought to consider what we may come
to be. p. 243. Cap. 4. The Change of humane things shows clearly their vanity,
and how worthy they are to be contemned. p. 253. Cap. 5. The baseness and
disorder of Temporal things; and how great a Monster men have made the World.
p. 261. Cap. 6. The Littleness of things Temporal. p. 269. Cap. 7. How
miserable a thing is this Temporal Life. p. 285. Cap. 8. How little is Man
whilst he is Temporal. p. 309. Cap. 9. How deceitful are all things Temporal.
p. 319. Cap. 10. The dangers and prejudices of things Temporal. p. 326.
LIB. IV.
Cap. 1. Of the Greatness of things Eternal. p. 337. Cap. 2. The Greatness of
the Eternal honor of the Just. p. 347. Cap. 3. The Riches of the Eternal
Kingdom of Heaven. p. 359. Cap. 4. The Greatness of Eternal Pleasures. p. 368.
Cap. 5. How happy is the Eternal Life of the Just. p. 378. Cap. 6. The
Excellency and Perfection of the Bodies of the Saints in the Life Eternal. p.
389. Cap. 7. How we are to seek after Heaven, and to prefer it before all the
goods of the Earth. p. 399. Cap. 8. Of Evils Eternal: and especially of the
great Poverty, Dishonor, and Ignominy of the Damned. p. 411. Cap. 9. The
Punishment of the Damned from the horribleness of the place, into which they
are banished from Heaven, and made Prisoners in Hell. p. 422. Cap. 10. Of the
Slavery, Chastisement, and Pains Eternal. p. 429. Cap. 11. Of Eternal Death:
and Punishment of Talion in the Damned. p. 450. Cap. 12. The Fruit which may be
drawn from the consideration of Eternal evils. p. 459. Cap. 13. The infinite
guilt of Mortal Sin, by which we lose the felicity of Heaven, and fall into
eternal evils. p. 467.
LIB. V.
Cap. 1. Notable difference betwixt the Temporal and Eternal; the one being the
End, and the other the Means. Wherein also is treated of the End for which Man
was created. p. 487. Cap. 2. By the knowledge of our selves may be known the
use of things Temporal, and the little esteem we are to make of them. p. 506.
Cap. 3. The value of goods Eternal is made apparent unto us by the Incarnation
of the Son of God. p. 515. Cap. 4. The baseness of Temporal goods may likewise
appear by the Passion and Death of Christ Jesus. p. 524. Cap. 5. The importance
of the Eternal, because God has made himself a Means for our obtaining it, and
has left his most holy Body as a Pledge of it in the Blessed Sacrament. p.
540. Cap. 6. Whether Temporal things are to be demanded of God: And that we
only ought to aim in our prayers at goods Eternal. p. 553. Cap. 7. How happy
are those, who renounce Temporal goods for the securing of the Eternal. p. 561.
Cap. 8. Many who have despised and renounced all that is Temporal. p. 569. Cap.
9. The Love, which we owe unto God, ought so to fill our souls, that it leave
no place or power to love the Temporal. p. 581.
Faults escaped in the Print.
P. 8. L. 25. more R. of more P. 46. L. 28. resting R. rosting P. 65. L. 20.
know R. knew p. 139. L. 23. are die R. are to die P. 198. L. 27. Borosus
R. Berosus P. 200. L. 29. hard R. hardness P. 232. L. 24. Persians R. Assyrians
P. 232. L. 26. Assyrians R. Persians P. 338. L. 10. intention R. intension P.
416. L. 35. the depriving R. in the depriving P. 555. L. 38. know R. knew

What else may be faulty the Pen may mend.

Moreover P. 386. L. 35. after those words any thing to maintain it. you may
add, if you please, These representations are to be understood as in order to
us, or as of what the corporal senses are afterward to enjoy.

Other things likewise in several passages may be left to the judicious Reader:
who will not be overhasty in rejecting what a discreet and friendly
interpretation may allow of.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE TEMPORAL and ETERNAL.
CAP. I.
Our Ignorance of what are the true Goods: and not only of things Eternal, but
Temporal.

TO use things aright we ought to know their Value and Estimation; and we
cannot give them their true value, unless we know their nature, and what they
are; which knowledge is in this world so short and imperfect, that it passes
not forth of it, nor enters into the consideration of things Heavenly and
Eternal, for which we were created. And it is no wonder, that in Matters of
Eternity, being so far removed from our senses, we know so little, since we are
ignorant even in Temporal things, which we see and daily touch with our hands.
How can we comprehend the things of the other world, when we know not those of
this wherein we are? and even to that stupidity can humane ignorance arrive,
that we know not what we presume to be best acquainted with, the riches,
commodities, honors, and goods of this world, with which mortal men so much
converse, and which they so much covet; for that they covet them, because they
know them not.

Clem. Roman. in Epit.
Good reason had St. Peter, when he taught St. Clement the Roman, that the world
was like a house filled with smoke, wherein nothing could be seen cither within
or without, the smoke hindering the distinct sight of both. After the same
manner it happens unto those, who live in this world; they neither know what is
without it, nor what within it; they neither know the greatness of what is
eternal, nor the baseness of what is temporal; and being ignorant of both for
want of knowledge mistake their value, giving what is due unto one unto the
other; making that small account of things heavenly and eternal, which they
ought to do of things fading and transitory, judging so contrary unto truth,
Lib. 8. mural. c. 12.
that as St. Gregory notes; they take the banishment of this life for their
home, the darkness of humane wisdom for light, and this wandering peregrination
here for their rest and abode; all which proceeds from ignorance of the truth,
and the small consideration of what is eternal; in such manner as they qualify
what is good with the name of bad, and what is bad with the name of good; by
reason of which confusion in humane judgment David asked of the Lord, that he
would give him a Master who might instruct him, which is the true good, saying,
Who shall teach us what is good?

The world is therefore ignorant of all things, even of its own proper goods,
which it most enjoyes; it faring with us, as it did with the Children of
Israel, who having Manna in their sight, and holding it in their hands, yet
knew it not, but demanded, What is this? but unto us even that curiosity is
wanting: we enquire not so much as what these riches are, for which mortal men
hazard so many dangers of death; what honors are, for which men's hearts burst
with envy and ambition; what pleasures are, for which we endanger our health,
and often lose our lives; what the goods of the earth are, which are only
enjoyed during our pilgrimage, in the exile of this life, and are to vanish at
the entrance of the other, as Manna did at the entrance of the Land of Promise.
With reason did Christ our Redeemer in Apocalypse call it the hidden Manna,
because the Hebrews holding it in their hands, knew not what it was: even so
are the things of this life hidden unto our understandings, which although we
touch, we know not: and so confounding their value, do that for things
temporal, which we only ought to do for the eternal, undervaluing these for
the esteem of those, which for themselves are worthy to be despised and
contemned.

Hence failing in the knowledge of things, we fail in their estimation, and
consequently in their use. That which happens in this, may be likewise seen in
those, who did eat Manna; for unto some it caused a loathing, and procured
vomit; unto others it tasted pleasantly, and like the meat they most desired.
So great difference is there betwixt the good and ill use of things: and the
good use of all depends upon their knowledge.

Let mortal men therefore awake and open their eyes, and let them know the
difference betwixt what is temporal, and eternal, that they may give to every
thing its due estimation, despising that which time makes an end of, and
esteeming that which eternity preserves; the which they ought to seek during
this life, and by these momentary things purchase the eternal, unto which they
cannot attain without the knowledge both of the one and the other; because
aiming at the eternal as that of greatest value, they conserve the temporal,
although of it self of no worth, and that which is corruptible and transitory
they render firm and durable.

The Manna also, which our Lord gave unto the Hebrews whilst they wandered in
the Desert, and was to serve them until their arrival in the Land of Promise,
amongst other mysterious significations which it contained, one was to be a
Symbol of the blessings which we enjoy in the peregrination of this life, until
we come to the promised land of eternal happiness. For this cause it putrified
and corrupted suddenly, lasting but a very short time, as all things of this
world do, only that part of Manna, which was gathered with intention to keep
for the Sabbath, which was a figure of glory, or to preserve in the Ark to be
carried into the Land of Promise, corrupted not, in so much as to gather the
same thing with different respects, made that, which in it self was
corruptible, to be of a condition eternal, Bald. apud Tibra. in Exodus 15
as is well noted by Baldwin an ancient Doctor, and a most learned Interpreter
of the holy Scripture. So much it imports to have our intentions elevated and
placed upon eternity, as by the use of temporal and transitory things we may
gain eternal, converting small things into great, mutable into stable, and
mortal into immortal.

Some Philosophers, who considered better the things of this life, although
without attention unto the eternal, found in them many defects; the which the
most wise Emperor and Philosopher Aurelius Antoninus reduced unto three, In
vita sua.
to wit, that they are little, mutable, and corruptible even until they arrive
unto their end; all which we shall find represented to life in Manna. The
littleness of it was such, says the holy Scripture, that it was small, like
that which is brayed in a Mortar, and reduced into powder; the mutability was
so notable, that carrying it from the field where it was gathered into their
Tents, if they brought a quintal, Vi. Bonfrerium in Exodus 16.
it shrunk and contracted it self into the small measure of a gomer; with some
it diminished, and with others swelled and dilated it self into a greater
proportion. The corruption of it was so sudden, that it lasted not one day
without being wholly putrified and filled with worms; and yet notwithstanding
all these qualities, the enjoying and eating of it cost much toil and labor,
first in gathering, then grinding, then in cooking, and performing many other
duties requisite for the use of it. After the same manner the goods of this
life, notwithstanding all their faults and evil conditions, are not obtained,
nor enjoyed without much travel and vexation. After this all did not enjoy that
quality proper to Manna, which was, to taste like unto that, which he that eat
it most desired; for sinners found this taste limited, and not so full and
savory as others. Even so we with our vices alter and diminish the natural
sweetness of the things of this life, as we shall see hereafter in it is due
place. It is true that the appearance of it was good, Sept. Interp. in cap. 11.
Nume. species illius species chrystalli.
for as the 70 Interpreters say, it was like Crystal, clear and transparent.
The same is the condition of the goods of this life, they have the splendour and
an appearance, but are really more brittle then glass; they are variable,
fading, and inconstant, and subject to a thousand alterations; they are
corruptible, transitory, and mortal, and only by reason of their glittering we
seek after them, as after things great and eternal.

Let us then leave the appearance and painted superficies of things, and look
upon the substance and truth, and we shall find that what is temporal is
small, and what eternal is great; the temporal inconstant, the eternal firm;
the temporal short and temporal, the eternal durable, and in fine eternal: and
this only were enough to make it more esteemed then the temporal, although the
temporal in all other respects did exceed it; but the one being so short and
mutable, and the other great, firm and constant, the difference betwixt them
can be no less, Lib. 7. moral. c. 12.
then as St. Gregory esteemed it, who says; Immense is that which shall follow
and without limit, and little is all that which ends. And the same Saint notes,
that the small knowledge and memory of eternity is the main cause of the
deceiving of Mankind, who have in esteem the false goods of this life, and
undervalue those spiritual and eternal of the other; and therefore speaks in
this manner: Lib. 8. moral ca. 12.
The thoughts of the predestined always have their intentions placed upon
eternity, although they possess great felicity in this life, and although they
be not in danger of death, yet ever look upon it as present: to the contrary do
obstinate souls, who love this temporal life, as a thing permanent, because
they consider not how great is the eternity of that which is to come; and not
considering the solidity of the eternal, they judge this Banishment for their
Country, this Darkness for Light, and this Race for their Station; for those
who know not greater matters, are not able to judge of the smallest. We
therefore will begin to draw the Curtain, and from the consideration of
Eternity, and the loose condition of time discover the distance betwixt the
goods of heaven and those of earth; from whence we shall come to handle the
baseness of the temporal, and greatness of the eternal. Wherefore as a
Philosopher said of light, that there was nothing more clear, nor nothing more
obscure: the same may be said of time and eternity, which being held no less
perspicuous, are ill understood, and are no less obscure and dark then the
other. But we shall endeavor to make them more intelligible, being assisted by
the light of Faith, the doctrine of Saints, and wisdom of the Philosophers.

CAP. II.
How efficacious is the consideration of Eternity for the change of our Lives.

THe thought of Eternity St. Augustine calls a Great thought, Augus. in Psalm.
76. Magna cogit.
because the memory of it is of great joy unto the Saints, and no less horror
unto Sinners, and unto both of much profit and concernment: it causes us to do
great matters, and shows the smalness of the fading and transitory things of
this earth. I will therefore from this light begin to discover the large field
of the poverty, trumpery, and baseness of the temporal, and recommend the
consideration of the eternal, the which we ought still to have in our thoughts,
as David had perpetually in his; in whom whilst he was a Sinner, it caused
horror and confusion, and being a Saint, it comforted and encouraged him to be
yet more holy, drawing from this meditation most spiritual and incomparable
profit unto his soul; and therefore in his Psalms he so often repeats the
memory of it, not only in the body of them, but almost in every passage,
saying, for ever, or eternally, or world without end: there being no
inscription or title which he uses more frequently then this, against the end,
or in the end, because he composed them with the consideration of eternity,
which follows the end of this life; and for more clearness adds in some of
them, against the end: for the Octave; which according to St. Augustine
signifies Eternity, that being the octave after the 7 days of the week, into
which all time is to resolve, which 7 days being past, there are to be no more
weeks, but, as St. Peter says, one only day of perpetual Eternity.

In this Eternity therefore did the Prophet employ his thoughts by day, and his
meditations by night; this forced him to send up his voice unto Heaven, and to
cry out unto God; this made him mute, and took away his speech with men; this
astonished him and made his pulses fail with the consideration of it; this
affrighted him, and mingled wormwood with the pleasures of this life; this made
him know the littleness of all that is temporal, and made him enter within
himself, and examine his conscience: Finally, this brought him to a most
miraculous change of life, beginning to serve the Lord with more fervor; all
which effects proceeding from the thoughts of Eternity are apparent in the 76
Psalm; therefore says he amongst other things, Mine eyes prevented the
watches, I troubled myself and spoke not: immediately after he gives the
reason, saying, I thought upon the days of old, and had in my thoughts the
years of eternity, and meditated on them by night with my heart. This thought
was the occasion of his long watches; on this he meditated before the Sun was
risen, and on this many hours after it was set, and that with so great
astonishment of what Eternity was, that his spirit ^^iled him, and he trembled
with the lively apprehension of what it was, either to perish eternally in
Hell, or to enjoy a blessedness for ever in Heaven. And it is no marvel though
this great thought of Eternity should make so holy a King to tremble, when as
the Prophet Abuc^ch says, the highest hills of the world bow down and quake at
the ways of Eternity. Damas. in vita ejus.
The holy youth Josaphat at the representation of Eternity, Hell being placed
on one side, and Heaven on the other, remained astonished and without strength,
not being able to raise himself in his bed, as if he had been afflicted with
some mortal sickness.

The Philosophers more barbarous, and who had less light, were yet daunted with
the conception of it, and in their Symbols made choice of things of the
greatest of terror to express it: some painted it in the form of a Basilisk, a
Serpent the most terrible of all other, who kills with his only sight; there
being nothing more horror, then that eternity of torments, whereinto we are
subject to fall. Conformable to this St. John Damascen represented eternal
duration under the figure of a fierce Dragon, which from a deep pit lay waiting
with open jaws to swallow men alive. Others figured it by a horrible and
profound Cavern, which at the entrance had four degrees, one of iron, another
of brass, the third of silver, and the last of gold, upon which many little
Children of several sexes and ages stood playing and passing away the time,
without regarding the danger of falling into that bottomless dungeon. This
shadow they framed not only to set forth how worthy Eternity was of their fear
and amazement, but also to express their amazement at the folly of men, who
laugh and entertain themselves with the things of this life, without remembering
that they are to die, and may then fall into the bottomless abyss of Hell.
Those children who were playing at the entrance of that dismal cave, being no
other than men in this life, whose employments are but those of children, and
who being so near their death, and therefore unto Eternity which succeeds it,
have neither fear, nor care to leave the pleasures and vain entertainments of
this world. Truly it is a thing of great amazement, that being in expectation
of two such extremes, as are eternal glory, and torments without end, we live
as if there were neither. The reason is, because men set not themselves
seriously to consider what Eternity is, which is either hell whilst God is
God, or glory without end. For this cause it is, that they remain as settled and
obstinate in their fading pleasures, as if they were immortal: the which was
signified by these degrees of so hard Metals. But in David, who seriously
meditated and framed a lively conception what the eternity of years was, it
caused so great a fear, and so awaked his spirits with care and diligence, that
it produced in him an extraordinary change of life: in so much as he said with
great resolution within himself, Now I begin. This is a change from the right
hand of the most high. Now I begin, Comment. in Psalm. 76.
as Dionisius declares it, to live spiritually, to understand wisely, to know
truly, perceiving the vanity of this present world, and felicity of the future,
reputing as nothing all my life past, nor all the progress I have hitherto made
in perfection. I will henceforth seriously take to heart with a new purpose, a
new fervor, and a a more vehement endeavor the paths of a better life, and
entering the way of spiritual profit begin every day afresh. And because he knew
his heart to be so much changed, he confessed his resolution to be miraculous,
saying, This change is from the hand of the most high; as if he had said,
according to the same Dionisius, to have in this sort changed me out of the
darkness of ignorance into the splendour of wisdom, from vices unto virtues,
from a carnal man unto a spiritual, is only to be attributed to the aid, and
most merciful assistance of God, who by the knowledge of Eternity has given so
notable a conversion unto my heart. This great thought of Eternity does
mightily enlighten the understanding, and gives us a true and perfect knowledge
of things as they are. For this cause in some of the Psalms which David made
with this consideration, as we have already said, he added this word
understanding, Psalm 6.
or for the understanding, that is, to give understanding to those, who
meditate upon the end of this life, and the eternity of the other, and
therefore despise the goods of the world.

By the experience of what happened unto his own soul the Prophet exhorts all
men, that they meditate with quietness and leisure upon the eternity of the two
so opposite conditions which hereafter expect them, that they may not only run,
but fly unto with profit, and suffer with patience all the difficulty, which
attend upon virtue: and therefore with great mystery promises on the part of
God unto those, who shall sleep between the two lots, that is, unto those, who
in the quietness of prayer shall meditate upon the eternity of glory, and of
hell, that there shall be granted unto them the silver wings of the Dove, and
her shoulders of gold, because the spiritual life consists not only in the
actions of our own good works, but also in the patient suffering the evil works
of others; in lifting up our selves from the dirt of this earth, and and flying
toward Heaven, by performance of the Heroical and precious acts of virtue, and
not yielding unto the troubles and afflictions of this life which oppress us.
All which is by a lively conception of Eternity effected with great merit and
perfection; and for this reason did the Prophet express it by the similitude of
those things which men esteem the most precious, as of gold and silver. But
because to suffer is commonly more difficult then to do, and consequently more
meritorious, although both be very precious, for this cause he said that the
shoulders should be of gold, and the wings of silver. This also did the
Patriarch Jacob hold for so singular a good, that he gave it unto his son
Isachar for a blessing, telling him that he should lie down betwixt the two
borders, that is, that he should at leisure meditate upon the two extremes of
happiness or misery eternal. For this reason he calls him a strong beast, as
having the strength of mind to overcome the difficulty of virtue, to support
the troubles and burdens of this life, to suffer the scorns and disgraces of
the world, to undergo great penances and mortifications, by considering the two
eternal extremes which attend us.

And not only amongst Saints, but amongst the Philosophers, did the quiet and
calm consideration of Eternity produce a great love and desire of things
eternal, and as great contempt of all which was temporal, even without looking
upon those two so different extremes, which Christian Religion proposes unto
us. Seneca complained much, that he was interrupted in the meditation of
Eternity, into which he was wholly absorpt, his senses suspended and tied up as
it were in a sweet sleep, by the content which he received from that
consideration. Seneca Epist. 22.
I delighted my self, says he, amongst other things to enquire into the
Eternity of Souls, and believing it as a thing assuredly true, I delivered up
my self wholly over unto so great a hope, and I was now weary of my self, and
despised all that remained of age, though with perfect and entire health, that
I might pass into that immense time, and into the possession of an eternal
world. So much could the consideration of Eternity work in this Philosopher,
that it made him to despise the most precious of temporal things, which is
life. Certainly amongst Christians it ought to produce a greater effect, since
they not only know that they are to live eternally, but that they are either
to joy, or suffer eternally according unto their works and life.

CAP. III.
The Memory of Eternity is of it self more efficacious then that of Death.

ANd therefore it shall much import us to frame a lively conception of
Eternity, and having once framed it, to retain it in continual memory, which of
it self is more efficacious then that of Death; for although both the one and
the other be very profitable, yet that of Eternity is far more generous,
strong, and fruitful of good works: for by it did Virgins preserve their
purity, Anchorits perform their austere penances, and Martyrs suffered their
torments, the which were not comforted and encouraged in their pains by the
fear of death, but by the holy reverence and hope of Eternity, and the love of
God. It is true the Philosophers, who hoped not for the immortality of the
other life as we do, yet with the memory of death retired themselves from the
vanity of the world, despised its greatness, composed their actions, and
ordered their lives according to the rules of reason and virtue. Epict. c. 28.
apud S. Hier. in ca. 10. Math.
Whereupon Epictetus advises us always to have death in our minds; so (says
he) Thou shall never have base and low thoughts, and desire any thing with
trouble and anxiety. And Plato said, that by so much man were to be esteemed
wiser, by how much he more seriously thought of death: and for this reason he
commanded his Disciples, that when they went any journey, they should go
barefoot; signifying thereby, that in the way of this life we should always
have the end of it discovered, which is death, and the end of all things. But
Christians who believe the other life, are to add unto this contemplation of
death the memory of Eternity; the advantages whereof are as far above it, as
things eternal above those which are temporal. The Philosophers were so much
moved with the apprehension of death, because with it all things of this mortal
life were to end, death being the limit whereunto they might enjoy their
riches, honors, and delights, and no further; others desired to die, because
their evils and afflictions were to die with them. If then death amaze some
only because it deprives them of the goods of this life, which by a thousand
other ways use to fail, and which of themselves even before the death of the
owner are corruptible, dangerous, and full of cares: and if others hope for
death only because it frees them from the evils of life, which in themselves
are short and little, as all things temporal are, why should not we be moved by
the thought of Eternity, which secures us goods great and everlasting, and
threatens us with evils excessive and without end? Without doubt then if we
rightly conceive of Eternity, the memory of it is much more powerful, then that
of death: and if of this wise men have had so great an esteem, and advised
others to have the same, much more ought to be had of that of Eternity. Zenon
desirous to know an efficacious means how to compose his life, bridle his
carnal appetites, and observe the laws of virtue, had recourse unto the
Oracle; which remitted him unto the memory of death: saying, Go to the dead;
consult with them, and there thou shall learn what thou demandest: There seeing
the dead possess nothing of what they had, and that with their lives they had
breathed out all their felicity, he might learn not to be puffed up with pride,
nor to value the vanities of the world. For the same cause some Philosophers
did use to drink in the skulls of dead men, that they might keep in continual
memory that they were to die, and were not to enjoy the pleasures of this life,
although necessary, unless alloid by some such sad remembrance. In like manner
many great Monarchs used it as an Antidote against the blandishments of
fortune, that their lives might not be corrupted by their too great prosperity.
Philip King of Macedonia commanded a Page to tell him three times every
morning; Philip thou art a man, putting him in mind that he was to die, and
leave all. The Emperor Maximilian the first, four years before he died,
commanded his Coffin to be made, which he carried along with him whither soever
he went, which with a mute voice might tell him as much; Maximilian thou art to
die, and leave all. The Emperors also of the East, amongst other Ensigns of
Majesty, carried in their left hand a book with leaves of gold, which they
called Innocence, the which was full of earth and dust, in signification of
humane mortality, and to put them in mind hereby of that ancient doom of
Mankind, dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return. And not without much
convenience was this memorial of death in the form of a book, nothing being of
more instruction and learning, then the memory of death, being the only School
of that great truth, where we may best learn to undeceive our selves. With
reason also was the book called Innocence. For who will dare to sin, that knows
he is to die? Neither were the Emperors of the Abissins careless herein; Nicol.
God. lib. 1. de rebus Abiss. ^a. 8.
for at their Coronations amongst many other Ceremonies, there was brought unto
them a vessel filled with earth, and a dead man's skull, advertising them in the
beginning, that their Reign was to have a speedy end. Finally, all Philosophers
agreed in this, that all their Philosophy was the meditation of death.

But without doubt the contemplation of Eternity is far beyond all Philosophy:
it is a greater matter and of far more astonishment for the torments of Hell to
last for ever; then for the greatest Empires suddenly to have an end: more
horrible to suffer eternal evils, then to be deprived of temporal goods:
greater marvel that our souls are immortal, then that our bodies are to die.
Wherefore Christians, especially those who aim to be perfect, are rather to
endeavor in themselves a strong conception of Eternity, then to stir up the
fear of death, whose memory ought not to be needful for the contempt of what is
temporal, since the first step unto Christian perfection (according to the
Counsel of Christ) is to renounce all that we possess of earth, that being so
freed from those impediments of Christian perfection, we may employ our selves
in the consideration and memory of that Eternity which expects us hereafter, as
a reward of our holy works, and exercises of virtue. This horrid voice,
Eternity, Eternity, is to sound often in our hearts; Thou not only art to die,
but being dead, eternity attends thee. Remember there is a Hell without end,
and fix it in thy memory, that there is a Glory for ever. This consideration,
That if thou shall observe the Law of God, thou shall be eternally rewarded,
and if thou break it, thou shall suffer pains without end, will be far more
powerful with thee, then to know that the goods and evils of this life are to
end in death. Be mindful therefore of Eternity, and resound in the inmost part
of thy soul, Eternity, Eternity. For this the Church when it consecrates the
Fathers of it, which are Bishops, puts them in mind of this most powerful and
efficacious memory of Eternity, bidding them think of eternal years, as David
did. And in the assumption and consecration of Popes they burn before their
eyes a small quantity of flax, with these words; Holy Father, so passes away
the glory of the world, that by the sight of that short and transitory blaze,
he may call to mind the flames eternal. And Martin the fifth for his imprese
and devise took a flaming fire, which in short time burnt and consumed a Popes
Tiara, an Imperial Diadem, a Regal Crown, and a Cardinals Hat, to give them to
understand, that if they complied not with the duties of their places, they
were in a short time to burn in the eternal flames of hell; the memory whereof
he would preserve ever present by this most profitable Symbol.

. 2.
The name of Isachar, whose Blessing from his Father was (as we have formerly
said) to lie down and rest betwixt the two limits of Eternity, signifies him
That has a memory, or The man of reward or pay; The Holy Ghost by this
mystery, charging us with the memory of eternal rewards. And the Lord to show
how precious it was in his divine esteem, and how profitable for us, caused
this name of Isachar to be engraven in a precious Amethyst, which was one of
those stones worn by the High Priest in the Rational, and one of those also
rcveal'd unto St. John to be of the foundation of the City of God. By it, says
St. Anselme, is signified the memory of Eternity, which is the most principal
foundation in the building of all perfection. Truly, if we consider the
properties of this stone, they are so many marks, and properties of the memory
of Eternity, and of the benefits which that soul reaps, Albert. Mag. Milius and
Ruiz. v. Cesium de Min. lib. 4. p. 2. cap. 14. sect. 14.
which seriously considers it. The Amethyst cause Vigilance. And what requires
it more, then the passage betwixt the two extremes of eternal glory, and
eternal pains? What thing in the world ought to awake us more, then the danger
of falling into hell fire? How could that man sleep, which were to pass over a
narrow plank of half a foot broad, which served as a bridge betwixt two most
high rocks, the winds impetuously blowing, and he, if his foot slipped, certain
to fall into a most vast abyss? No less is the danger of this life. The way by
which we are to pass unto Heaven is most straight, the winds of temptations
violent, the dangers of occasions frequent, the harms by ill examples
infectious, and the deceits of wicked Counselors very many. How then can a
Christian sleep and be careless in so evident a peril? Without all doubt it is
more difficult to be saved, considering the depravedness of our nature, and the
deceitful ambushes of the Devil, then for a heavy man to pass over a heady and
rapid river upon a small and bruised reed.

They say also of the Amethyst, that besides the making him watchful who
carries it, it frees him from evil thoughts; which how can that man have who
bears Eternity in his mind? how can he think upon the short pleasures of his
senses, who considers the eternal torments due unto his soul, if he shall but
consent to the least mortal sin? The Amethyst also resists drunkenness,
preserving him that wears it in his senses and judgment; and there is nothing
that more preserves a man's judgment in the midst of the wine of delights in
this life, then the memory of the other, and that for the pleasure of one
moment here he is not only to suffer for hours, for days, for months, for
years, but for worlds, and a world of worlds hereafter. The Amethyst besides
this preserves the wearer from the force of poison. And what greater Antidote
against the poison of sin, then to remember Hell, which he deserves, and Heaven,
which he loses by committing it? The Amethyst also quiets a man, and settles
his thoughts. And what can be more efficacious to free us from the disturbance
of this life, to bridle the insolence of covetousness, to repress the aspiring
of ambition, then to consider the blessings of Eternity, which attend the
humble and poor in spirit? Finally, the Amethyst conferrs fruitfulness; and
this great thought of Eternity is fruitful of holy works. For who is he that
considers with a lively faith, that for a thing so slight and momentary he may
enjoy the reward of eternal glory, and will not be animated to work all he is
able, and to endure and suffer what shall happen for God Almighty and his
Cause? O how fruitful of Heroical works is this holy thought, Eternal glory
expects me! the Triumphs of Martyrs, the Victories of Virgins, the
Mortifications of Confessors are the effects of this consideration. O holy
thought! O precious Amethyst, that makes vigilant and attentive the negligent
and careless: that gives wisdom and judgment to the most deceived: that heals
those, who are most ulcerated, and corrupted with the poison of sin; that
quiets and pacifies the motions and troubles of our concupiscences; that makes
the most tepid and barren of virtues fruitful of holy works; who will not
endeavor to obtain and fix thee in his Soul? O that Christians would so grave
thee in their heart, that thou might never be blotted out nor removed from
thence. How differently would they then live to what they now do? how would
they shine in their works? for although the memory of Hell, Heaven, Death, and
Judgment be very efficacious for the reformation of our lives, yet this of
Eternity is like the quintescence of them all, and virtually contains the rest.

CAP. IV.
The Estate of Men in this life, and the miserable forgetfulness which they
have of Eternity.

BEfore we come to declare the conditions of Eternity, whose consideration is
so necessary for the leading of a holy and a virtuous life, let us set before
our eyes the forgetfulness and miserable mistakes of the Sons of Adam in a
matter of so great importance, living as if Eternity were far off, when as the
Philopher says it is not two fingers distant, and every minute threatens them.
What devides the Mariner from his death, but the thickness of a plank? What the
choleric and hasty man from Eternity, but the edge of a sword? what the
Soldier from his end, but the reach of a bullet? what the Thief from the
Gallows, but the distance betwixt that and the Prison? Finally, how far is the
most healthful and vigorous person distant from Eternity, but as much as death
is from life, which often happens suddenly, and ought every moment to be
expected? The life of Man is a dangerous passage, wherein he walks upon the
brink of Eternity, with a certainty at last to fall into it. How lives he then
so wretchedly? He who should walk close unto a great precipice in a path no
broader then the breadth of his foot, and that also full of rubs and stumbling
blocks, how circumspectly would he look about him, and how carefully would he
order his steps? how then is it, that being so near Eternity he is so careless,
and lives as if he were out of danger?

In Histo. Barla. ca. 12. in fine.
St. John Damascen excellently declares the fondness and mistakes of men in a
most ingenious Parable, wherein he naturally sets forth the state of this life.
A certain man, says he, flying from a furious Unicorn, which with his very
roaring made the mountains tremble, and the valleys to resound, not regarding
through fear which way he went, chanced to fall into a molt deep pit; but in
his fall spreading abroad his arms to catch at something, which might relieve
him, happened to light upon the boughs of a tree, which grew out of the side of
that pit, whereon he seized with much joy, hoping he had then both escaped the
fury of the beast, and the danger of his fall: but looking toward the foot of
the tree, he perceived two great Rats, the one white, the other black,
perpetually gnawing the root of it, in so much, that it was now ready to fall;
looking afterward into the bottom of the pit, he beheld a most deformed Dragon
with flaming eyes gazing upon him, and with open mouth awaiting his fall, that
he might devour him; then casting his eyes unto that side of the pit where the
tree grew, there appeared four poisonful Aspicks, shooting forth their heads to
bite him. Yet notwithstanding marking the leaves of the tree he might perceive
some of them to distill certain drops of honey, with which he was so greatly
pleased, that forgetting the dangers, which from so many parts threatened him,
he employed himselt wholly in gathering and tasting drop by drop that small
quantity of honey, without reflecting or making further account either of the
fierceness of the Unicorn above him, of the horribleness of the Dragon beneath
him, of the poison of the Aspicks aside him, or the weakness of the tree which
was ready to fall, and precipitate him into that horrid Dungeon. In this Image
we see represented the Estates of men, who forgetful of the perils of this
transitory life, give themselves wholly over unto vain pleasures. By the
Unicorn is signified death, which even from the hour of Man's birth follows and
pursues him; The Pit is the world full of evils and miseries; The Tree is the
course of this life; The two Rats, the one black, the other white, which gnaw
it at the root, are day and night, which continually seconding one another go
by hours and minutes consuming it; The four Aspicks are the four Elements, or
four Humors, of which we are composed, the which by the excess of any one of
them distemper the whole frame of our bodies, and at last destroy it; That
horrid and fearful Dragon is the eternity of Hell, which enlarges his throat
and jaws to swallow sinners; The small drops of honey are the pleasures and
delights of this life; and so great is the diversion which they cause, that men
for a short and momentary content consider not the many dangers, unto which
they are exposed; and seeing themselves encompassed on all parts by as many
dangers of death, as there are ways and causes of dying, which are infinite,
and are so many mouths and gates of Eternity, yet notwithstanding solace
themselves with the momentary delights of this small drop of honey, which shall
at last cause them to disgorge and cast up their entrals for a world without
end.

Wonderful it is, that so great a forgetfulness possesses us, and a matter full
of amazement, that we are not moved with so great dangers. How comes it about,
that every minute a new day of Eternity dawning upon us we carelessly pass over
so many days and months? Let the most strong and healthful person tell me,
what one year he is assured of, wherein death may not assault him, and push him
headlong into an eternal abyss. But what speak I of a year? what month, what
day, what hour, what instant is he sure of? how then can he eat? how sleep in
safety? If one should enter into a field full of ambushes and secret traps,
whereon if he should chance to set his careless foot, he were in danger to fall
upon the points of Pikes or Halberts, or into the mouth of some terrible
Dragon, and seeing with his own eyes, that they, who entered with him into the
same field, hourly fell into those traps, and appeared no more, should
notwithstanding run leaping and dancing up and down without fear or
apprehension of any thing amiss, who would not say that man were a fool?
Certainly more fool art thou, who seeing thy friends fall daily into the trap
of Death, thy neighbor swallowed up in Eternity, thy brother sink into the pit
of the Grave, do yet notwithstanding remain careless and secure, as if the
same fate did not attend thy self. Although to die were a thing uncertain, yet
for the doubt and danger, that it might happen, thou ought to be vigilant,
and prepared for it. What ought thou then to be, it being so certain, and
that early or late thou art to enter in at the gate of Eternity? A marvelous
thing it is with what care men provide themselves against dangers, although
very uncertain. If they hear that Thieves are in the way to rob and spoil the
passengers, no man passes that way but armed, provided, and many in company: if
they understand that the Plague begins to range, what antidotes and conterpests
are sought for? if they fear a Famine, every man in time provides himself of
corn. How happens it then, that knowing that there is a Death, a Judgment, a
Hell, an Eternity, we stand not upon our guards, nor provide our selves for it?
Let us open our eyes and look into the perils which environ us; let us take
heed where we set our feet, that we perish not; for the paths of this life are
full of dangers. And with reason did Isidorus Clarius compare it to a narrow
Bridge, Isid. Clar. and juxt. S. Greg.
scarce broad enough to receive our feet, under which was a Lake of black and
filthy water, full of serpents, and of ugly and poisonous creatures, which
only sustained themselves by feeding on those unfortunate people, who fell
from the Bridge; on either side were pleasant Gardens, Meadows, Fountains, and
beautiful Buildings: But as it were extreme madness in him, who was to pass so
dangerous a Bridge, to entertain himself with gazing upon those Gardens and
Buildings, without taking care where he set his foot: so is it as great a fully
in him, who is to pass this transitory life, to apply himself to pleasures and
delights without taking care of his ways or works. To this Cesarius
Arelatensis adds, That the greatest danger of of this Bridge consisted toward
the end, where it was narrowest: and this is the most straight passage of
Death. Let us therefore, if we intend to gain Heaven, look how we place our
feet in this life, least we misplace them in death, and perish in that
Eternity, wherein our life is to conclude. O Eternity, Eternity; how few there
are that provide for thee? O Eternity, peril of perils, and (if we miss the
mark, whereat we ought to aim) above all dangers, whence comes it that we
prepare not for thee? whence comes it that we fear thee not, which art to
endure as long as God is God? this present life is but to last a very little
time, our forces will fail us, our senses wax dull, our riches leave us, the
commodities of the world fly from us, the want of breath make an end of us, and
the world at last call us out of it; what then will become of us? we are to be
sent into a strange Country for a long time: why do we not forecast what to do
when we come thither?

But that we may the better see this our condition, and so learn to be more
cautious, I will relate another Parable of the same St. John Damascen. In vita
Josaph.
There was, says he, a City very great and populous, whereof the Inhabitants
had a Custom to elect for their King a stranger, who had no knowledge of that
Kingdom, and Commonwealth: This King for a year they suffered to do what he
list, but that being ended, and he most secure without fear, or apprehension of
any thing amiss, thinking he should reign as long as live, they suddenly came
upon him, despoiled him of his royal apparel, dragging him naked through the
streets, and banishing him into an Island far off, where he came to suffer
extreme poverty, not having wherewith to feed or cloth himself, his fortune
without thinking on it wholly changing into the contrary, his riches into
poverty, his joy into sadness, his dainties into hunger, and his royal purple
into nakedness. But once it happened, that he whom they elected was a prudent
and a subtle man, and having understood from one of his Counselors this evil
and wicked Custom of the Citizens and their notable inconstancy, grew not
proud, and haughty with the Dignity of the Kingdom, which they had conferred
upon him; but became careful in providing for himself, that when he should be
deposed and banished into that Island, which he every moment expected, he might
not as his Predecessors perish with poverty and hunger. The course he took was
during his Reign to transport secretly into that Island all the Treasures of
the City, which were very great. The year being ended, the Citizens, according
to their Custom with his Predecessors, came in an uproar to depose him of his
Office and Royalty, and to send him in exile into the Island; whither he went
without trouble, having beforehand provided wherewith he might live in honor
and plenty, whilst the preceding Kings perished with want and penury. This is
that which passes in this world, and the course which a wise man ought to take.
That City signifies this world, foolish, vain, and most inconstant, wherein
when we think to reign, we are suddenly despoiled of all we have, and sent
naked into our Graves, when we least look for it, and are most busy in
enjoying and entertaining our selves with the fading and transitory pleasures
of this life, as if we were immortal, without so much as thinking on Eternity,
whither we are in a short time to be banished: A Region far off and far removed
from our thoughts, whither we are to go naked, and forsaken of all, where we
are to perish with an eternal death, and shall only live to be tormented: into
a Land of the dead, obscure and dark, where no light enters, but everlasting
horror and eternal sorrow inhabits. He is therefore wise, who foreseeing that
he is to be despoiled of all he has in this world, provides for the next,
making such use of time in this life, that he may find the profit of it in
Eternity, and with the holy works of penance, charity, and alms transports his
Treasures into that Region, where he is to dwell for ever. Let us therefore
think upon the Eternal, and for it despise the Temporal, and we shall gain both
the one, and the other. The consideration of Eternity St. Gregory understood to
be figured by the Storehouse well furnished with precious wine, into which the
Spouse says that the Bridegroom brought her, and in her ordained Charity;
because, says he, he who shall with a profound attention consider in his mind
Eternity, may glory in himself, saying, he has ordained in me charity; by
which thought he shall better preserve the order of love, loving himself the
less, and God and all things for God the more; he shall not make use of the
temporal things of this life, not even of those, which are most necessary, but
in order to the Eternal.

CAP. V.
What is Eternity according to St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Dionysius.

LEt us therefore begin to declare something of what is inexplicable, and to
frame some kind of conception of what is incomprehensible, whereby Christians
knowing, or (to speak more properly) being less ignorant of what is Eternity,
they may have a horror either to commit a sin, or to omit an act of virtue;
trembling in themselves, that for matters of so small value, as are those of
the Earth, they are to lose things so great and precious, as are those of
Heaven. Agrippina perceiving the great lavishness of her Son, who poured out
gold and silver, as if it had been water, desirous to reform his prodigality,
upon a time when the Emperor had commanded about a quarter of a Million to be
bestowed upon some Minion of his, caused that Money, and as much more to be
spread upon a Table, and placed where he was to pass, to the end, that seeing
with his own eyes the mighty mass of Treasure, which he so wastfully misspent,
he might after with more discretion moderate his vast expenses. Truly, the
folly and vanity of Man admits no other cure, than to set before his eyes, that
for the small and momentary pleasure of a sin committed against the Law of God,
he loses and unthriftily casts away that which is to last for ever. For this
cause we ought to consider, what it is to have no end, what it is to last for
ever, what it is to be Eternal. But who is able to declare this, since Eternity
is an immense Ocean, whose bottom cannot be found: a most obscure abyss,
wherein are sunk all the faculties of humane understanding: an intricate
Labyrinth, out of which there is no issue: a perpetual Present, without what
was, or what shall be: a continued Circle, whose Center is in every part, and
Circumference no where: a great Year, which ever begins, and is never ended:
finally, that which never can be comprehended, yet ever ought to be pondered,
and thought upon. But that we may say something, and frame some conception of
it, let us see in what manner the Saints have defined it. St. Gregory Nazianzen
knows not what it is, but only what it is not; and therefore says, Eternity is
not time, nor part of time; because time, and each part of time pass away, but
in Eternity nothing does nor ever shall pass. All the torments, with which a
Soul enters into hell, shall after millions of years past torment him as
lively, and entirely as at the first beginning; neither shall the joys, with
which the just enter into Heaven, ever in the least sort diminish. Time has
this property to draw along with it custom, which at length lessens the sense
of what at first was grievous; but Eternity is ever the same, ever entire, in
it nothing passes, the pains, with which the damned begin, shall after a
thousand ages be the same they were at first; and the glory, which he who is
saved receives in the first instant, shall ever appear fresh and new unto him.
Eternity has no parts; all is of a piece; in it there is no diminution, nor
lessening. And although the pleasures of this life, which go along with time,
are of this condition, that in time they lessen, and that there is no delight
in this world, which by long enjoying becomes not troublesome and tedious: and
that to the contrary, even griefs and and pains with continuance either grow
less, or are absolutely cured; yet far otherwise is the web which Eternity
weaves: it is all uniform; in it there is no joy which wearies us, nor any pain
which by continuance abates, or becomes less sensible; in so much as Eternity,
according to St. Dionysius Areopagita, Cap. 10. de divin. nomin.
is the immutability, immortality, and incorruptibility of a thing wholly and
altogether existent; a space which perishes not, but is always subsistent after
the same manner; and therefore, as the Wise man says, Wheresoever the tree
falls, there it shall for ever remain: if thou shall fall as an infernal
firebrand into the bottom of Hell, there shall thou be for ever burning
whilst God is God; it not being in the power of any to redeem thee thence, nor
in thy own so much as to turn from one side to the other.

Eternity is immutable, because incompatible with change: it is immortal,
because not capable of end: and incorruptible, because it cannot suffer
diminution. The evils of this life, how desperate of remedy soever, yet want
not this comfort, that they are either eased with change, or ended by death, or
lessened by corruption. But all this is wanting in eternal evils. The change of
pains serves for a refreshment, and the infirm man, how afflicted soever, by
turning from side to side receives some ease; but eternal pains shall whilst
God is God remain in the same posture, force, and vigor without change at all.
If the most pleasant and wholesome food of Manna, only because continual,
caused vomiting, and became loathsome; What shall those pains, which shall last
for ever? What torments shall they cause, since they are to remain still after
the same manner? The Sea has his ebbs and flows, the Rivers their increases,
the Planets their various Aspects, the Year his four Seasons, the greatest
Fevers have their relaxations, and the sharpest pain arriving at the height
uses to decrease; only eternal torments shall never suffer declination; nor
shall the eyes of the damned ever see a change. The plain and even way, which
seems most easy, wearies the Traveller, because it wants variety. What
weariness shall then the ways of Eternity cause, and those perpetual pains,
which can neither change, end, nor diminish? The torments, whereunto Cain
entered now five thousand years ago, are after so many ages past still the same
they were at first; and what they now are, shall be so many ages more to come;
they are measured by the Eternity of God, and the duration of his unhappiness
by the duration of the Divine Glory; whilst God lives he shall wrestle with
death, and shall immortally continue dying; that eternal death still living,
and that miserable life still dying, containing the worst of life, and the
worst of death: those wretched Souls living only, that they may suffer
torments, and dying, that they may not enjoy comfort, having neither the
content of life, nor the end of death; but contrariwise for their greater
torment have the pain of death, and duration of life. On the other part behold
the happy lot of them that die in Grace: their glory shall be immortal without
fear of ending; their happiness immutable without capacity of growing old;
their Crown incorruptible without danger of withering: where no day shall pass
without joy, whose content shall be ever new, and whose Glory flourish for
perpetual Eternities, and whose happiness shall ever be the same. And that very
Glory, which St. Michael was six thousand years ago possessed of, the same he
enjoys this very instant, as fresh and new, as the first day, and shall six
millions of years to come as new, as now.

CAP. VI.
What Eternity is according unto Boethius and Plotinus.

LEt us now hear the Opinions of Severinus Boethius and Plotinus two great
Philosophers, and the one of them no less a Divine, what they conceive
concerning this great Mystery and secret of Eternity. Boethius defines Eternity
to be, Lib. 5. de cons. Philosopho.
A total and perfect possession of an indeterminable life: which Definition,
although it principally belongs unto the Eternity of God, yet it may-be also
applied unto the Eternity of reasonable Creatures: since they also enjoy a
total and perfect possession of happiness in an eternal life, never to end.
With reason he calls it a possession, for the fullness it has of joy;
possession being the best way of enjoying, the which implies a full Dominion of
what it possesses: for he who has a thing in loan or trust, may be said to
enjoy it, but not with that liberty, as he who possesses it. He says moreover,
that this possession is total, because it is of all goods and blessings,
without missing of any one, and all of them at once, it not being necessary for
the enjoying of them, to have them one after another, but altogether. The goods
and blessings of this life have not this condition; for although one were
Master of them all, yet he could not enjoy them all at once, but successively;
some passing away, and others succeeding in their place. The Emperor
Heliogabalus, who most desired, and most endeavored to enjoy them, for all the
diligence and haste he used, was hardly possessed of three or four at once: for
whilst he was in his Banquets, he could not attend his Masks and Dances;
whilst he was in these, he enjoyed not the pleasures of the Shows, and
Spectacles of the Amphitheater; whilst he was present at them, he could not
apply himself to Hunting, and Sports of the field; and whilst so employed, he
could not satiate himself in Lust and Sensuality: Finally, to enjoy one, he
must of necessity quit the other; insomuch as he could neither enjoy all
pleasures, those wanting which were enjoyed by others: and of those, which he
might enjoy himself, but few at a time. But unto the just in Heaven no
blessings or contents are missing, no succession needful for their enjoying,
the blessed possessing them all, and all together.

The possession of this happiness is also perfect in respect of the security it
has, nothing being of force to disquiet it, none to go to Law about it, none
to steal it, none to disturb it, and is likewise perfect, because complete; not
like the goods of the earth, which cannot be enjoyed entirely: for either the
distance of place, the imperfection of the sensible Organ, the mixture of some
grief or care, or at least the multitude of Objects, and their own opposition
distract the perfect fruition of them. But eternal happiness is by the blessed
in its full extension perfectly possessed, the joy of it entirely relisht, and
the essence and sweetness of it wholly penetrated, and imbibed into the essence
of the Soul, the which no mixture of pain, no surprise of grief, no incapacity
of the subject, no distance of position, no greatness of the object can hinder:
for grief and care have there no place, the subject is elevated above its
nature, the object accommodated, and the eternal pleasure and delight of it not
proportioned by space and distance. ^^n. 1. ^^b. 7. (...). 1.
Wherefore Plotinus likewise said that Eternity was A Life full and all at
once: because in it all that has life shall be full and complete, the senses
with the whole capacity of the soul shall be replenished with all happiness and
delight, there being no part o^ life in man which shall not be full of
sweetness, joy, and content. The life of the hearing shall be full with the
consort of most harmonious music; the life of the smell shall be full with the
fragrancies of most sweet odours; the life of the eyes shall be full, feeding
themselves with all beauty; the life of the understanding shall be full with
the knowledge of the Creator; and the life of the will shall be full in loving,
rejoicing, and delighting it self in him. Temporal life is not capable of this
fullness and satisfaction even in small matters, the attention of one sense
hinders that of another, and the attention of the body that of the spirit. This
life cannot be here enjoyed but by parts, and that also not completely: but in
that eternal felicity the life shall be full, the possession total, and the joy
perfect, where all is to live which here can die, where neither the
incompossibility of the objects, nor the impediment of the senses, nor the
incapacity of the soul shall hinder us from enjoying all blessings together
with all our senses, and all our powers jointly. Over and above all this
possession, which is so total, so perfect, and so full, is for life without
death, a space without limit, a day eternal, which is equivalent to all days,
and includes all years, embraces all ages, and excels all times, because in it
nothing passes, nor any good of it ever shall pass.

To the contrary it is with those wretched sinners, whose eternal miseries have
the same condition of bad, which the eternity of the blessed has of good: unto
whom their evil shall not be extrinsecal, but in full possession of them, and
they shall remain in their torments with all their soul, body, powers, and
senses. That is called possession, which is acquired by a corporal and real
presence. These then unfortunate sinners are to continue in their torments with
all what they have of being, not as in a thing lent or distant from them, but
as in a thing so proper, as it can by no possibility be parted or separated
from them, nothing being more proper and due, then punishment is to sinners.
Wherefore all evils shall take possession of all what they are, their senses,
their members, the joints of their bodies, the powers of their soul, their most
spiritual faculties shall be possessed by fire, bitterness, grief, rage,
despite, misery, and malediction. This possession of those unfortunate
creatures shall be total, because of all evils: for no evil can be wanting
where there is a concourse and meeting of all torments and unhappiness. In the
taste there shall not want bitterness, in the appetite hunger, in the tongue
thirst, in the sight horror, in the hearing astonishment, in the smell stink,
in the heart pain, in the imagination fear, in every member grief, and in the
very bowels fire.

All evils are therefore to possess the damned, and all totally; their torments
being so many, that if they were to suffer them one after another, many years
would not suffice to finish them. And this only were sufficient to make their
condition most terrible. But above all their unhappiness this is the greatest,
that they are to suffer them all at once. The pain in one part of the body is
not to hope it should cease in another, the grief of the spirit is not to
expect that the fire which burns the flesh should have an end; all evils are to
set upon them at once, and all at one clap are to fall upon the heads of the
damned. The continuance of one little drop hollows a Stone: and to ruin the
world it was enough for God to rain for forty days. What shall then be, when
his divine justice shall rain fire, sulphur, and tempest upon the heads of the
damned, not for forty days, but whilst God is God? Besides all this they shall
not only be possessed by all the the evils, and all jointly at once, but by all
of them fully in their whole force and vigor. The sense of them shall not grow
less by their multitude, nor dull by their greatness, but shall remain as quick
and lively to them all, and shall be as sensible of the rigor of each one of
them, as if they suffered but one only: for the fire shall not only penetrate
their bones, heart, and entrals, but the fury of it shall search into the very
soul, and burn that with immortal flames. The possession of its misery shall be
Whole, it shall be Perfect, it shall be Full; Whole, because it shall suffer
all sort of evils; Perfect, because it shall suffer them wholly; and Full,
because it shall suffer in all the senses, and in all the faculties that are
capable of suffering. This estate and life, where we now are, is not to last,
or, to speak more properly, this death is not to live; but in the damned, their
death shall live as long as God shall have life, and their miseries shall
endure as long as God shall have glory.

CAP. VII.
Wherein is declared what Eternity is according to St. Bernard.

ST. Bernard in another manner describes Eternity, saying, It is that which
embraces all times, past, Sermon. 1. in festo Omn. Sancto.
present, and to come: because no days, no years, no ages are able to fill up
Eternity: it is that which devours all times* possible and imaginable, and yet
remains with a stomach unburthen'd, still greedy of swallowing more: It is said
to embrace all time, because it enjoyes all that in an instant which is to be
enjoyed in all time. Wherefore Marsilius Ficinus called Eternity an eternal
moment: and Lessius said, it was both the longest and shortest of all things.
It was longest, because it exceeded all time, and lasted infinite spaces; it
was shortest, because it contained all that in an instant, which it was capable
of containing in an infinite duration. For as time is a fluid instant, which
flies and passes away, insomuch as there is nothing of time in being but the
present, which is ever running and changing from one moment to another; so
Eternity is a permanent instant, fixed and stable, in which all things remain at
once, and are ever existent in the same manner and estate: Before it all times
pass, the one succeeding the other, whilst it stands present and perseveres
the same unto them all. Time and things temporal are like a Rapid river,
wherein the waves run rolling down, each succeeding other in a perpetual
vicissitude: But Eternity is like a firm rock, or like the bed of that river,
which remains settled and constant in the same place, whilst the waters pass
through it never to appear again. In the like manner things temporal, without
permancy or consistency at all, pass hastily in the presence of Eternity, and
never more return to salute the world. And as the Bed of the river, though
standing still, contains all the waters which run through it, so Eternity
embraces all times which passes by it. Eternity may also be compared unto the
Center in a Circle, which being indivisibly one corresponds unto the whole
circumference, and equally respects each particular point contained in it. In
the same manner Eternity corresponds unto all time, and to each instant of it
after a most marvelous way, containing all that in present, which time contains
successively in a million of ages, and is an instant equivalent unto an
infinity of times, not having one part after another, but the whole extension
amassed in one instant, containing all that together in one moment, which is
extensible unto infinite distances of time. For as the immensity of God
contains in one point all the Divine greatness, which without bound or limit is
dilated over all parts real and imaginable, in so much as it contains in one
point, as much as in a million of leagues: even so Eternity recollects into one
instant all the Divine duration, although extended through an infinite time;
which also the reasonable creatures are to participate in the other life for as
much as concerns their glory or pain, and after such a manner as they are
capable of.

Whence follows one thing very much to be considered, that those goods unto
which Eternity is annexed it makes infinitely better, and that after two
manners, and, as we may say, with two infinities; and contrariwise the bad it
makes infinitely worse, and that also after the same two manners; The first in
respect of the duration which it conferrs, the which is infinite: and every
thing is to be esteemed so much the greater, by how much the duration is
longer. The content of a day is not so great as that of a week, nor is that
equal to the content of a month or year; and as the duration increases, so the
value of the pleasure grows higher, in so much as if it last infinitely, it is
infinitely to be esteemed. In the like manner of pain, the longer it lasts the
worse it is, and if it last infinitely, it becomes an infinite evil, which will
infinitely exceed any temporal evil whatsoever, though more in greatness: and
that in so high a degree, that if it should be left to ones choice, either to
be thrown alive into a burning Furnace, and at the same time to suffer all the
infirmities and griefs which Physic knows, and all the kinds of torments
which Martyrs have endured, and all the cruel punishments which have been
executed upon the most heinous Offender, and all this for the space of 200
millions of years, but then to end and pass no further: or to suffer a Migram,
or a Toothach for a whole eternity, certainly he ought rather to choose all
those torments together for that time limited, then either of these single
pains for ever; because although those exceed this in greatness, yet this would
infinitely exceed those in duration. In sum, if those, although excessive,
were temporal, and this, though less, were eternal, which would infinitely
increase the malice of it, there being hopes that those would at last find an
end, but this were without remedy: I dare be bold to think, that the lively
apprehension of Eternity, which the damned conceive, is such, that if it were
in ones election either to be exempted from all the torments he now endures,
and to remain afflicted only with the Stone for an eternity; or to have added
unto his own particular torments all those which the rest of the damned suffer
in all their senses, but limited for a thousand millions of years, he would
choose this last for the lesser evil; at least in reason he ought to choose it:
for although those pains were greater, yet they were to have an end, and this
of the Stone, though less, was to be eternal.

Let now those levers and esteemers of transitory pleasures come to a reckoning
with themselves. If the torments of hell, though so excessive, were sufferable
if they were only temporal, nay to be chosen rather, then so slight a grief,
as the Stone, that were eternal, how happens it, that they will not suffer with
patience one small grief during the short time of this life in exchange of
being freed from the eternal pains of hell fire during the other? If a Giant in
time (that we may so speak) has no bulk or appearance in the presence of a
Pigmey in eternity, how comes it then that a Dwarf or Pigmey in time affrights
us, and an armed Giant in eternity makes us not tremble? how is it that eternal
hell moves us not, and yet we fear a temporal pain? how is it we do not penance
for our sins? why have we not patience in our afflictions? why suffer we not
all that which can be suffered in this life rather than to suffer one only
torment in eternity? The pains of this valley of tears, being they are to have
an end, are not to be feared in comparison of those which shall never have it:
how contentedly then ought we to suffer here a little, and for a short time,
that we may be freed from suffering much hereafter, and for ever?

What we have considered in evils and afflictions, the same is to be considered
in goods and blessings. If one were to enjoy all the pleasures of the senses
for a thousand miriads of years, but were to pass no further, we ought to
change them all for one only pleasure, that would last for ever. Why then
exchange we not one perishing pleasure of the earth, which is to last but for a
moment, for all those immense joys, which we are to possess in Heaven for a
world without end? All the temporal goods of the world might well be quitted
for the securing of only one that were eternal; how is it then that we secure
not all the eternal by forbearing now and then one which is temporal? It would
infinitely exceed the Dominion of the whole world, so long as the world shall
last, to be Lord but of one little Cottage for eternity: time holds no
comparison with it, all that is temporal how great soever, being to be esteemed
vile and base, and all that is eternal, how small soever, high and precious.
And that we may exaggerate this consideration as much as possible, the very
being of God himself if it were but for a time, might be quitted for some other
infinitely less excellent, which were eternal. And shall then the covetous man
satisfy himself with those poor treasures, which death may quit him of to
morrow, and perhaps the Thief to day, despising for them the eternal treasure
of Heaven? For certain if God should promise as to enjoy the pleasure of one
only sense for ever in the next life, we ought for it to part with all the
pleasures we have in this: how huge a folly is it then, that promising all
those immense joys of Heaven, we will not for all them together part with some
of those poor ones on earth?

The second way, by which Eternity, unto whatsoever it is joined, makes the
good infinitely better, and the bad infinitely worse, is because it collects it
self wholly into every instant, so that in every instant it makes us sensible
of all that, which it is to contain in its whole duration: and being to endure
for an infinity, it amasses as it were into every instant a whole infinity of
pleasure or pain, every instant being sensible both of what it contains at
present, what is past, and what it shall contain in future; So, as a Doctor
says, Les. de perfec. divi. lib. 4. c. 3.
In Eternity all the good a thing can contain successively in an infinite time,
is recollected into one instant, and made perceptible and enjoyable all at
once. As if all the pleasures a most delicious Banquet could afford
successively by parts, and that in an infinite time, should be resumed all at
once, and all that delight should be conferred jointly and together for
eternity, certainly this would make it infinitely better, and of more esteem.
The same thing Eternity causes in evils and pains, recollecting them in a
certain manner into one, and making them sensible all at once; and although
they be not all really and actually together, yet it causes them to be
apprehended altogether, and so produces in the Soul a grief infinite and
without limit. Those then are truly evils, which are totally and every way
evils, both in extension, their duration having no end, and in intension, their
being and essence having no limit or measure. What afflicted person who
considers this can be impatient, since all the griefs of this life have both an
end and limit? The greatest temporal evils are but as biting of gnats in
respect of the least of those which are eternal: and therefore that we may
escape all the eternal, it is not much to suffer one temporal. Let us tremble
at the consideration of those two lances of Eternity, those two infinities,
whose wounds are mortal, and pierce the damned from side to side: those two
unsupportable rocks, which overwhelm and crush whom they fall upon into pieces.
All that we suffer here is to be laughed at, a fillip with a finger, a trifle
in respect of the eternal, which embraces all times, and with the evils of them
all falls every instant upon the head of the damned.

. 2.
Besides what has been already said, Goods and Evils eternal have this
condition, that they are not only qualified and augmented by the future, but
also by what is past, although temporal; so as the blessed Souls in Heaven not
only enjoy the glory, which they have in present, and that which is to come,
but also what is past even unto those real and true goods of this life, to wit
their virtues and good works, with the memory of which they recreate, and
congratulate themselves for all eternity: in so much as all goods past,
present, and to come concur in one to fill up the measure of their joy, and the
goods of all times even of those of this life are amassed, and heaped up in
their felicity. How different from this are temporal goods, since even those,
which we possess in present, suffer not themselves to be entirely enjoyed? here
is no good which is not alloyed by some want, danger, or imperfection. And if
for the present they afford so little content, much less do they for the
future, since the security of what we possess is so uncertain, that the fear of
losing it often disseasons the present gust. The same fear also robbs our
remembrance of the comfort of what is past, since we fear to lose that most,
which we have formerly taken most pleasure in enjoying.

On all sides then the eternal goods are much more excellent, unto which we
ought to aspire, and strive to purchase them even at the cost of all which is
temporal, and in this life as much as may be to imitate the same eternity; the
which is to be done by the practice of those three Virtues, which St. Bernard
recommends unto us in these words. Sermon. 1. in Festo Om. Sact.
With Poverty of spirit, with Meekness, and Contrition of heart is renewed in
the Soul a similitude and image of that Eternity which embraces all times. For
with poverty of spirit we merit the future; with meekness we possess the
present, and with the tears of repentance recover what is past. And truly he,
who esteems Eternity, has no more than to exercise himself in the practice of
those three Virtues: The first by quitting with spiritual poverty all that is
temporal, and changing it for the eternal, not setting his heart upon any thing
in this life, that he may find it bettered in the other. For as Eternity does
infinitely augment that good or evil, unto which it is annexed, so time
diminishes and draws violently after it all that is in it. Things therefore
which are to finish, require not much to leave them, and those that are to end
in nothing, are to be reputed for nothing. For the second Virtue, a Christian
ought with patience and meekness to persist in doing well, and in overcoming
the difficulties of virtue, since the slight troubles of this life are to be
rewarded with eternal happiness in the other. And who seeing hell open, and the
abyss of its evils without bottom, would not bear with patience the rigor of
penance, and with meekness suffer the impertinency of an injury, not troubling
at all the interior peace of his Soul, but attending wholly even through fire
and water to live virtuously and please his Redeemer? who looking upon Heaven,
which awaits him, will not be animated to do what is good cheerfully, and to
suffer all crosses for God Almighty's sake with fervor and courage? Ruffi. nu.
107. and Pelag. libel. 7. n. 28.
Ruffinus relates that a certain Monk coming unto the Abbot Aquilius,
complained unto him that he found much trouble and tediousness in keeping of
his Cell; To whom the discreet Abbot answered, My son, this proceeds from not
meditating on the perpetual torments we are to suffer, nor upon the eternal joy
and repose, which we hope for. If thou should seriously but think on that,
though thy Cell were filled and swarmed with worms and vermin, and thou stoodst
up to the throat in the middle of them, yet would thou persevere in thy
recollection without weariness, or trouble. The third Virtue is with tears and
grief of Soul to endeavor a recommpence for our sins past, and to satisfy for
them with a dolorous contrition, and bitterness of heart, that so the eternity
of happiness, which by them was lost, may with repentance be regained:
contrition being a virtue so potent, that it repairs what is ruined; and
although it is said that what is done has no remedy, and that there is no
power over what is past, yet this most powerful Virtue is able to undo what is
done, and to prevail upon what is past, since it takes away our sins, and makes
them as if they had never been committed.

CAP. VIII.
What it is in Eternity to have no end.

But all these definitions and declarations of Eternity are not yet sufficient
to express and truly set forth the greatness of it; neither is it well
understood, as Plotinus notes, what the Authors, who define it, thought of it.
That may be rather said, which was said by Simonides the Philosopher, Cic. l.
2. de naturae deorum.
who when Hieron King of Sicily entreated him to declare what thing God was,
demanded a days space to think before he gave his answer; the which past, he
said he had need of more time to consider it, and required other two days; at
the end of those he asked four: which also ended, his answer was, that the more
he thought upon it, the more he found he had to think, and knew less how to
express it, and that the further he entered into the consideration of it, the
more it hid and obscured it self from him. The same may be said of Eternity,
the which is an Abyss so profound, that humane understanding finds no footing,
but has still more to consider, the more it ponders. De Mist. Theo.
St. Dionysius Areapagita speakiug of God, confesses that it cannot be said
what he is, but only what he is not, and beside what he is. In like manner
Eternity cannot better be declared then by what it is not, and beside what it
is. Eternity is not time, it is not space, it is not an age, it is not a
million of ages, but it is more then time, space, or millions of ages. The life
wherein thou now art, and which must shortly have an end, is not Eternity: the
health which thou at present enjoyest is not Eternal: thy pleasures and
entertainments are not Eternal: thy possessions, treasures, revenues are not
Eternal: that wherein thou trustest is not Eternal: the goods of this world, in
which thou so much delightest, are not Eternal, Thou must leave them all. A far
greater thing is Eternity: above Kingdoms, above Empires, and above all
felicities. Whereupon Lactantius and other Authors, Lact. de falsa rel. lib. 1.
c. 2.
not being able to declare it by what it is, declare it by what it is not; some
saying it is that, which has no end: others that, which endures no change:
others that, which holds no comparison: which is as much to say, it is that,
which is unlimited, immutable, and not proportionable with any thing besides it
self. It shall suffice therefore to declare, and as it were Anatomize these
three conditions of Eternity, if not to give a perfect knowledge of what it is,
yet at least to beget a fear and reverence of that which most concerns us, and
withal to create in us a contempt and scorn of all which is Temporal, as being
little, limited, and mutable.

2.
For the first Condition, Ces. dialog. 3.
which is to have no end; Cesarius says, that Eternity is a Day, which wants an
evening, because it shall never see the Sun of its brightness set, which is to
be understood of the Eternity of Saints; that of sinners being a Night which
wants a morning, upon whom the Sun of Glory never shall arise: wherein the
damned shall remain in perpetual sadness and obscurity, eternally tormented
both in Soul and Body. If he who is sick of a Calenture, though laid upon a
soft and downy Bed, thinks each hour of night an Age, and every minute expects
and with impatience wishes for the day, how shall it fare with those, who,
because in this life they slept when they were to watch, shall in the next lie
awake for an eternal night in a Bed of burning fire, without ever hoping for a
morning? And certainly if there were in Hell no other pain, than to live in
that eternal night and sadness, it were enough to astonish and confound all
humane understanding. This very condition of wanting end the Ancients
deciphered by the figure of a Ring, which, because a Circle, is endless. But
with greater Mystery David calls it a Crown, whose roundness also admits no
end; thereby signifying according to Dionysius Carthusianus, that an Eternity
without end is either to be the reward of our good works, or the punishment of
our bad. We ought to tremble at the sound of this voice, without end, for them,
who do ill; and to rejoice at this, without end, for them, who do well. It
falls not under our capacity, what it is to he without end. We cannot amplify
it or exaggerate it so much, but that whatsoever we say we still fall short.
Bonav. de inf. c. 49.
Wherefore St. Bonaventure pondering with himself in his meditations upon Hell,
that if a damned person should every hundred years let fall but only one small
tear, and those all to be preserved until that after innumerable Centuries of
years they came to equal a Sea, perhaps so many hundred millions of years may
be thought to finish Eternity; No: it would but then begin. Let them turn again
and keep the same slow tears of that unfortunate sinner, until they have filled
another Ocean. Would Eternity then end? No; but then begin, as fresh and new,
as the first day. Let them repeat the same, ten, twenty, an hundred times,
until an hundred thousand Seas shall fill and overflow. Shall we then find the
bottom of Eternity? No; we have not past the Superficies of it, and it shall
still remain as deep, and unsoundable as at first. There are no Numbers, no
Arithmetic, that can comprehend the years of Eternity. If the whole Heavens
were parchment, and filled on both sides with Numbers, they could not sum up
the least part of that, which has no parts at all, but is in it self whole,
entire, and indivisible. No Sea has so many drops, no Mountain so many grains
of sand, as will serve to reckon up the years of Eternity.

To declare this more amply, I shall relate what happened unto Archimedes.
There were some Philosophers of his time, who affirmed that the number of the
sands of the Sea were infinite; others that although they were in themselves
finite, yet they could not be comprehended under any Number. Archimedes, that
he might confute both opinions, composed a most learned and ingenious Book,
which he dedicated unto King Gelon; wherein he proved, that although the world
were all filled with sand, and that it were bigger than what it is, yet that
the multitude of those grains of sands were limited, and might also be reduced
under Numbers; and he himself gave the account, to what Number they would
arise. Since this Philosopher, Father Clavius did the like; computing how many
grains of sand would fill the whole space betwixt the Firmament of the fixed
Stars and the Earth, making every grain of sand so little and indivisible, that
he allows 10000 of them unto the bigness of a poppie, or mustard seed, and
notwithstanding sums up this vast Number within the short space of one line,
all not surpassing one Unite, and 51 Ciphers. If then so many millions of
millions may be contained in the length of one line, what shall we say of the
years in Eternity: since that not only one line, nor one book, nor all the
paper in the world, nor all the world from the Firmament downwards filled with
the Figures of Arithmetic were sufficient to contain one little particle of
it, notwithstanding the multiplication which is made by the adding of every
figure? Every Cipher which is added, makes the number ten times more than it
was, because a Cipher put after one Unit makes it ten, the second Cipher makes
it one hundred, the third one thousand, and in this manner the Numbers go
multiplying to an immense Number in a few Figures. Whereby one may conceive
that adding one hundred Ciphers it makes the Numbers rise to such a pitch, that
it far exceeds the capacity of Man's imagination to conceive it. What then
would it be, adding so many Ciphers as could be contained in a parchment as big
as the whole Heaven? Yet all this innumerable Number does not equal the least
particle of Eternity; which after so many numberless years past, which at
length after how long a time soever must meet an end, would yet remain as if it
did but then begin. Let us seriously think how long were that life to be
esteemed, which should contain an hundred thousand years; yet we have thought
of nothing in respect of Eternity. Let us think of ten times, an hundred, a
thousand times as much: still nothing to Eternity; neither have we quitted the
least part of it, which is but then beginning. Wherefore Lactantius says, With
what years shall we satiate Eternity, Lib. 1. de falsae relig. c. 12.
since it has no end? It is still beginning, and nothing but a beginning, and
therefore may not unsignificantly be thus defined: Eternity is a perpetual
beginning, which still continues without end or diminution. Let us abstract
from Eternity as many years as there are drops in the Sea, atoms in the Air,
leaves in the Fields, grains of sand in the Earth, or Stars in the Heavens, it
will yet continue whole and entire. Add as many years unto it, it becomes no
greater, nor is further distant from its end; since it admits none, but in each
point and instant receives a beginning. Never, never shall it have an end,
ever, ever in beginning. Let one imagine, that there were a Mountain of sand
which should reach from the Earth to Heaven, and that an Angel after every
thousand years should take from it one only grain; how many thousands of
thousands of years, and millions of millions would pass before that Mountain
became so little, that it would no longer remain perceptible? Let the best
Arithmetician, that is, cast up the account, how many years would pass, before
that Angel had taken away half of the aforesaid Mountain. This seems a thing
endless; but our understanding is beguiled; for it would have an end, and time
would come when one half, and even the whole Mountain would be taken away.
Finally, there would be a time, when there would be one only little grain
remaining: and this also would be removed. But never shall we come to the end
of Eternity: and after the consuming of that whole Mountain of sand, nothing
would be diminished from Eternity: but the Mountain of Eternity would remain as
entire, after millions of millions of Ages were past, as in the beginning. This
seems to have been signified by that of Abacuch, when he said, The mountains of
Ages are torn in pieces: and the hills of the world shall be humbled by the
ways of Eternity; Because one thousand hills and mountains as big as the whole
world, may be consumed a thousand times over, whilst the Eternity of the
punishment of sinners pass over them: which Eternity can never make an end of
passing; so that those miserable Souls, who suffer in that devouring fire,
shall suffer a thousand, and a thousand, and millions of millions of years
without coming nearer to the end, than they were the first day.

2.
What man would endure to lie upon one side resting before a scorching fire for
the space of a whole year? But what speak I of lying burning? Who could endure
to be laid in a soft bed upon one side without being permitted to rise or turn
unto the other side for the same space? This indeed was a rigorous penance
performed by Ezechiel the Prophet at the Commandment of God, who appointed him
that he should continue laid upon one side without rising for the space of 390
days. This was a most rigorous penance, but by Divine Grace accomplished by
the holy Prophet. If it be then so difficult to lie immovable upon one side
for so short a time as the space of one year, what shall it be for a condemned
sinner to lie stretched upon a bed of sire in that eternal night, and sadness
of hell, all sorts of evils raining down upon him for a time without end or
limit? What Christian is there, who should consider and frame a liveconceit of
this, but would become another man? who could take delight in a momentary
pleasure of this life, running the danger of those eternal pains in the next?
who would dare to sin at the hazard of so great a punishment? O how powerful a
remedy were it against the disordered customs of sinners, if they would but
settle themselves seriously to think that Eternity has no end. O that they
would think upon this one half hour in a day, or but so much in a week, how
quickly would they amend their lives. But this is a thought not to be past over
in haste, but leasurely pondered with attention and profound consideration,
meditating within our selves what Eternity is: that it is that which shall
never have an end, never, never. For as that meat which is not chewed, nor
concocted in the stomach benefits nothing, so the thought of Eternity without
being well ruminated and digested will little advantage us.

The force of this consideration appears by an accident related by Benedictus
Renatus of a certain man vain and vicious, named Fulk; the which, Benedict.
Renat. lib. 5.
as he was given to all sorts of pleasure and delicacy, would be sure not to
want a soft bed, and a large repose. But one night his sleep failing him,
tossing and turning from side to side, desiring every moment that day would
break, whilst he lay thus awake, this thought came into his consideration,
What would thou take to lie in this manner for the space of two or three
years in continual darkness, without conversation of friends, or entertainment
of thy pleasures? certainly although thou should lie at thy ease, and upon a
soft Bed, as thou now do, yet the trouble would be intolerable. But know
that thou art not to depart so cheap out of this life; thou art not to escape
hence at thy own choice; at the best that can happen, thou art to lie
languishing in thy Deathbed, where thou art to pass many evil and tedious
nights, unless perchance thou dye suddenly, which will be more; and when thou
leavest that Bed and dyest, do thou know what Bed shall then expect thee?
what Couch death has provided for thee? Thy body certainly shall lie upon the
hard and cold earth, and be devoured by worms; but concerning the soul, what
shall become of it? know thou whither it shall go? assuredly according to
thy present life it shall go to hell, where a terrible Bed of fire awaits
thee, not for a year or two, but for a whole Eternity. There thou art to
continue in perpetual darkness, and torments, where a thousand thousand
millions of years are not sufficient to satisfy for one of thy unlawful
pleasures. There thou shall never see nor Sun, nor Heaven, nor God. Ay me, Ay
miserable me, if this poor want of sleep be so ill to be endured, how shall I
suffer the eternal torments of hell? that which now imports me, is to change my
course of life; for in this way I now go I am lost for ever. These
considerations imprinted so deep a character in his mind of Eternity, that he
could not quit the thought of it, until he had resolved to become a Religious
man, but would often say with himself, What do thou here miserable man? thou
live in the world, and the world affords thee no comfort: thou suffer many
things, which thou would willingly avoid, and want others, which thou
would as willingly enjoy. Thou molestest thy self with the cares of this
life, and what reward attends thee for all thy trouble? thou enjoyest no
complete pleasure, and if thou did, it would not last. See thou not daily
those who dye, and enter into Eternity? O Eternity, Eternity, if thou be not
in Heaven, wheresoever thou art, even in this soft Bed thou art grievous. I
will therefore endeavor to assure Heaven, and for a little will not lose much,
nor for what is temporal the eternal: and so putting in execution what he had
resolved upon, he entered a Religious person into the order of the Cistercians.

. 4.
All our actions are still to be accompanied with this thought, For ever. For
ever shall be rewarded that which I do well; and that for ever punished,
wherein I grievously offend. With this consideration shall a Christian not
only animate himself to do good works, but to do them well. Aelianus writes of
Ismenias, Lib. 1. Var. Hist. ca. 21.
Ambassador from the Thebans unto the King of Persia, that being about to
deliver his Embassage, and advertised that before he spoke a word, he was to
adore the King, Ismenias thinking this honor too much to be bestowed upon a
barbarous Prince, yet seeing no ways to avoid it, fell upon this devise. He
took his Ring, which anciently was of great esteem, as signifying the quality,
and authority of him that wore it, and pulling it from his finger, let it
secretly fall at the Kings feet whilst he lay prostrate before them, saying
within himself, Not unto thee, but to this Ring. If we in like manner should in
all our actions propose unto our selves Eternity, and wholly respect it, we
should find little difficulty in any good work, we went about. Let us
therefore fix our eyes and thoughts upon it, which is to be given us for that
which may be done in a moment. Blessed be God, who bestows upon us a reward
without and for troubles so short, that they scarcely have a beginning.
Euripides, a famous Poet amongst the Greeks, complained upon a time, that in
three whole days he had made but three Verses, and those not without trouble.
Alcestides, another Poet present, answered, For me one day is sufficient to
make an hundred Verses, and that with ease. Euripides then replied, It is no
marvel, since thy Verses are but for three days, and mine are for ever. In the
same manner Zeuxis a most excellent Painter, but above all measure slow, being
demanded why he was so tedious in his work, answered, I paint leasurely,
because I paint for ever. But certainly he deceived himself; for at this day
there is no Picture of his to be seen: and for Euripides many of his works are
lost. But no good work of the just shall perish. Neither have we need so much
as of a day to gain Eternity. One act of Contrition which is made in a moment
does it, and in a moment we gain those joys which shall endure without end.
Yet ought we to make use of this consideration of Euripides and Zeuxis, and not
only to do good works, but to do them seriously and perfectly well, since we
work not for this life, but for Eternity, which ought ever to be in our memory.

The benefit which David reaped by this consideraration, was a firm resolution
to mend his life, and change into a new man, animating himself to a greater
observance, and a more high perfection. And so in that Psalm, wherein he says,
That he thought upon the days of old, and the years of Eternity, he adds
immediately the effect of his Meditation, saying, That he was to begin a new,
because the change which he found in his heart, he perceived was from the most
powerful hand of God. Wherefore considering that Eternity never ends, but still
begins, and that it is wholly a beginning, he determined with such new fervor
to give a beginning to a more perfect life, that he would never flagg or be
dismayed in the prosecution of it; willing in this to imitate Eternity, the
which as it is ever beginning, so he would ever begin to deserve it. And what
great matter is it, if that, which we are to enjoy or suffer, be ever in
beginning, that we should likewise be ever beginning either to deserve the one,
or fly the other? Our reward is not to fail us: and therefore there is no
reason why we should fail, and grow weary in our service and endeavors. Our
joy is ever to begin: Why should not then our endeavors be ever in beginning?
The repose we hope for shall never have an end: Why should then our deservings
ever cease? With this considederation St. Arsenius much profited himself,
making account that although he had served God many years in a most holy life,
yet that he did but then begin, repeating often that Speech of David, Now I
begin, Now I begin. We ought never to look back upon our labors past, but
still to animate our selves to labor anew for God and his Service: as did the
Apostle St. Paul, who says of himself, Philip. 3. Vide Masuet. in vita St.
Pauli.
That he did forget what was past, that he did enlarge his heart and mind,
extending it for that which was to come; the which the Apostle spoke in a time
when he had suffered much, and done such services unto God in the good of
Souls, as he had already labored more than all the Apostles. After he had
entered into the Synagogues of Damasous, and publicly preached Jesus Christ
with so evident danger of his life, that if he had not escaped over the walls
of the City, he had been cut in a thousand pieces: After that in Arabia he had
converted many people, many in Tarsua and in Antioch: After he had been rapt up
into the third Heaven: After that he had been elected by the Holy Ghost to be
an Apostle, and wrought great and prodigious Miracles: After that he had past
over Asia Minor, all Greece, and the better part of Europe, converting
innumerable Souls: After he had distributed great Alms, gathering them with
much labor, made long journeys, and brought them unto the poor in Jerusalem:
After the suffering of innumerable persecutions: After having been thrice
stoned and once left for dead: After having been often whipped, and often
apprehended: After infinite services performed for the Church: Alter all these
it seemed unto him, that he had suffered nothing, done nothing for Christ, and
he forgot it all, as if it had been the first day of his conversion,
determining still to do more, to suffer more, to labor more, to begin anew,
esteeming himself after so many labors and services to be an useless and an
unprofitable servant, following the counsel of our Savior when he says, Luke
17.
After ye have done all what I have commanded you to do, say, ye are
unprofitable servants, and that ye have done what ye ought have done. Let a man
compare his labors, his zeal, his preaching, his charity with that of the
Apostle, and he will find that he has not yet begun. If then the Apostle, who
at that time exceeded the merits of diverse Saints who have dyed in great
holiness, and yet forgot all, judging he had done nothing, but turned to begin
afresh, we who have not yet begun, wherefore shall we be weary before we begin?
let us ever begin anew, since Eternity which we hope for is ever to be new, and
ever to begin. Let us not glory, says Dionysius Carthusianus, in the merits of
our life past: neither let us esteem our selves for any thing we have already
done, but let us bestir our selves as freshly, and with as much fervor, as if
we did but that day begin, and were that day also to dye.

CAP. IX.
How Eternity is without change.

THe second condition of Eternity is to be immutable, and to persevere without
change: which the Ancients gave us to understand by many most mysterious
Symbols. Some figured it by painting of a Chair; Isaiah. 6.
conformable unto which the Prophet Isaiah says, That he saw the Lord sitting
on high upon a Throne, setting forth in this settled posture the immutability
and greatness of his Eternity. And St. John in his Apocalypse often celebrates
the Seat of God, as representing his eternal duration. More clearly the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 7.
unto whom God vouchsafed to appear as he was eternal; whereupon he calls him
the Ancient of days, and says he beheld him with his hair all white, and
seated upon a Throne. From the same consideration the Nasam^nes, a certain
People of Afric; when any amongst them was about to die, caused him to sit,
and in that posture to expire; signifying thereby the estate wherein his Soul
was prefently to enter. And for the same cause they interred their dead
sitting; giving us thereby to understand, that rest and repose were not to be
sought for until death, when we were to enter the gates of Eternity. This life
is no place to sit in; we are not here to stay; the misery which we find in it
sufficiently declares, that God made it not for that purpose. This life is but
lent us, we are not to abide in it, but to walk apace unto the Mountain of
Eternity. It is so miserable, that even it self informs us of another life,
wherein we shall find rest, since here we cannot meet it. In Heaven all our
unhappiness, all our miseries are to cease; there the tears of this valley are
to be wiped from our eyes; there our troubles are to find ease; there the
unquietness of our hearts is to have repose. In this world no manner of life,
no sort of estate, no condition of man, no greatness of dignity, no abundance
of riches, no felicity of fortune can ever give rest unto the possessor. For
this reason the Romans in the Statues, which they erected to their deceased
Emperors, made them still sitting; whereby they would signify, that all the
felicity of this world could not bestow true rest, and even upon him, who was
the Master of it, until the end of life. Man is born, as Job says, to labor.
Until death there is no rest. Let us not then seek it here, but let us place
the chair of our joys where it may be firm and stable, and not in the
unquietness and turmoyles of things temporal, where death at least will
certainly overthrow it.

Others painted Eternity in the form of a Snake; to note the condition of a
perpetual continuance not subject unto change, but remaining still in the same
estate and vigor. For as this Serpent wants wings, feet, and hands, which are
the extremities of other creatures: so Eternity wants an end, which is the
extremity of things temporal. Apud Eusebius. l. 1. de praepar. Evang. c. 7.
Moreover as Serpents, although without feet, wings, or any extrinsecal organ
of motion, yet by their great liveliness of spirit move more swiftly then those
creatures which have them: so Eternity without days, or nights, or changes,
which are the feet and wings of time, out-strips and over-go's all things that
are temporal. Besides, Serpents enjoy such a vivacity and length of life, that
Philon Biblius says, they die not, unless they be killed, and that they hardly
know a natural death, being not subject to those changes of other creatures,
from youth to age, and from health to sickness, but preserve themselves still
fresh and young by the often renewing and casting of their old skins; neither
have they like other creatures any determinate size of their greatness, but so
long as they live increase in bigness after the manner of Eternity, which has
no limit, change, or declination; a condition of all others most to be feared
by the wicked, who are for ever to continue in those eternal torments without
the least refreshment, and without so much as the comfort of changing one
torment for another. St. Paulinus said of St. Martin, that his rest was to
change his labors: and certainly to change one pain for another, although not
in it self much less, is yet some ease. But even this shall be wanting unto the
damned, who shall never be permitted so much change, as to turn from one side
to another. A fearful thing, that being now five thousand years past, since the
first damned Soul was plunged into hell, that during all this time no change
should afford him the least ease. How many alterations have since happened in
this world? yet none in his most bitter torments. The world has once been
destroyed by an universal deluge, eight only persons remaining alive. After
which all men enjoying an equal liberty, the Assyrians became Tyrants over the
rest, and raised the first Monarchy, which endured 1240 years, and then not
without the general uproar and turmoyl of all Asia passed unto the Medes, under
whom it continued 300 years. Which ended, it came unto the Persians; and from
them unto the Grecians, from whom, not without greater alteration then any of
the former, it passed unto the Romans; under whom also it has since failed.
Amongst all which changes and revolutions of the world, none has yet passed
over that miserable and unfortunate creature. Besides these alterations in
government, what alterations has nature it self suffered? what Islands has
the Sea swallowed up? one of which, as Plato reports, was bigger than all
Europe and Africa: And what others has it cast up of new. What buildings, or
to say better, what Mountains has the Earthquakes left secure? many Hills have
been overwhelmed, or turned topsie turvie; others have appeared and sprung up
never known before. What Cities have been sunk? what Rivers dried up: and
others vomited forth through new Channels? what Towers have not fallen? what
Walls not been ruined? what Monuments not defaced? how often has the face of
things changed? how many revolutions have the greatest Kingdoms suffered? and
this miserable sinner has in all this time not given one turn. How many times
has the year renewed it self? how many Springs: how many Autumns past? and yet
he remains in that obscure night, as in his first entrance into that place of
torments, The Sun has compassed this elemental World a Million, and 700000
times; and yet this wretched Soul could never once change his posture, or
remove one pace since his first falling into hell. Besides this, what troubles,
what labors have been passed by those innumerable people, who have lived from
the beginning of the world until this present, and are now all vanished? what
sicknesses have been suffered? what torments, what griefs endured, and are now
all forgotten? but no grief, nor torment of that unfortunate Sinner has in
these 5000 years passed away, or shall ever become less. Ptolomy roared out
with the pain of his Gout; Aristarcus was grieved with his Dropsy, Cambyses
was afflicted with his Falling Sickness; Theopompus afflicted with his Ptisick;
Tobias with his blindness, and holy Job with his Leprosy: yet those griefs had
their end. But all those evils which jointly possess this miserable creature
have not, or ever shall have change or period. They of Rabatha were sawed in
the midst: others thrashed to death with Flails: others burnt alive in
Furnaces: others torn in pieces by wild Beasts: Anaxarcus was pounded in a
Mortar, Perillus burnt in a brazen Bull. But all those pains passed away, and
are now no more: but that damned person has not yet made an end; or to say
better, has not yet begun to pass any one of his torments, which 100000 years
hence shall be as new and sensible unto him, as they were in the beginning.
What desperation must then seize upon him, when he sees a change in all things,
and in his pains and torments none? for if even the pleasures of this life, if
continued the same, convert into griefs, how shall those pains, which never
change, be suffered? what spite and madness shall possess him, when he shall
behold the Flames of St. Lawrence, the Stripes of St. Clement of Aneira, the
Cross of St. Andrew, the Fasts of St. Hilarion, the Haircloth of Simeon
Stylites, the Disciplines of St. Dominick, all the Torments of Martyrs, and
Penances of Confessors now passed, and turned into eternal joys: but his own
pains neither to pass nor change, neither any hopes left either of ending his
torments or himself? These are evils to be feared, and not those transitory
ones of the world, which either change, grow less or end, or at least make an
end of him, who suffers them. Let not therefore the sick person be grieved and
vexed with his infirmities, nor the poor man with his wants, nor the afflicted
with his crosses, since the evils of this life are either changed with time,
eased by counsel and consolations, or at least ended by death. But this
miserable wretch in Hell cannot so much as comfort himself with the hope of
dying, because in that multitude of torments, if there were the least hope of
end, it would be some ease, some refreshment, which must not there happen, the
Gates on all parts being shut to comfort. Hope beguiles us in our evils, and in
some sort frees us from the sense of suffering. There is no labor or toil so
great, which hope makes not tolerable. The most afflicted and wretched persons
live and subsist with expectation, that one day their miseries will change or
end. But that ease and comfort is denied the damned, whose unhappiness is never
to have an end, nor their torments alteration. They would esteem it for a
comfort, if a thousand years hence they might be sure of that little drop of
water begged by the rich glutton: But what speak I of a thousand years? it
after an hundred thousand, after a thousand times so many, so that some certain
time were prefixed, and the door but of some small hope set open unto them. If
all the space, which is taken up by the Earth, covered by the Water, filled
with the Air, and encompassed by the Heavens, were full of grains of Wheat: And
a damned Soul were told, that after all that Wheat were eaten by some small
Bird, which after every hundred thousand years should come to take one grain,
and when it should have taken away the last, they would give it that drop of
water which was demanded by the assistance of Lazarus, it would be comforted to
see this only change, and so small an ease in the midst of his pains. Yet it
shall not have this; and after so many millions of millions of years the
miserable wretch shall be in the same torments, raging in the same manner, and
as much void of all comfort as ever. This is it shall burst the hearts of the
damned, when they shall perceive all remedies to be then impossible, which in
this life were so easy to be obtained. With the crumbs of bread, which fell
from his table, the rich Glutton might have purchased eternal happiness; and
now the refreshment of one drop of water is denied him. What rancour shall they
have against themselves, when they shall remember that by the forbearance of
one momentary pleasure they might have escaped eternal torments? How raging
will their very entrails be to consider, that that is now past help, which was
heretofore so easily to be avoided.

Let therefore a Christian open his eyes, and, whilst he may, remedy that,
which hereafter, when he would, will be impossible. Now is the time acceptable,
now is the time of Salvation, now is the time of pardon and indulgence, now
that may be gained in a moment, which all Eternity cannot hereafter redeem.
What other thing was signified unto us by the flames of the Babylonian furnace,
Dan. 3.
which, as the Scripture says, mounted unto the height of forty nine Cubits?
It does not say, fifty, as is usual in other places to give the complete
number, although some be wanting. And who, I pray you, approached so near unto
that flame, which flew and moved up and down in the air, that could so
punctually measure the height of it to arise just unto forty nine Cubits, and
not to reach fifty? But herein was the Mystery, which we are about to speak
off. The Number of fifty was the Number of the Jubilee, and signified
Indulgence and Pardon, and by the flames of that Furnace were figured the
flames of Hell: which how far soever they shall exceed the torments of this
life, yet shall never attain unto a Jubilee, and remission of their pains. Now,
it is true they may: Now every year, every month, every day, every hour, and
every moment is a time of Pardon and Jubilee. What would a damned Soul give for
one only quarter of an hour of those whole days and weeks, which men mispend
in this life, for to be able to do penance in? Let us not therefore be prodigal
of a thing so precious; let us not lose time, and and with it Eternal Glory.
The time of this life is so precious, that St. Bernardin dares give it this
exaggeration, saying, That time is worth as much as God; because by it God is
gained. Let us not therefore fling away a thing of that value, but let us make
use of this cheap bargain, purchasing with time Eternity, and God himself the
Lord of Eternity: fulfilling that which was said by Ecclesiasticus: Eccl. 20.
Is there any who for a small price will redeem many things? Upon which words
Galfridus says, Galfrid. in Cant.
If there be due unto thee eternal bitterness, and thou may escape it by
suffering what is temporal, certainly thou have redeemed great matters for a
small price. In blessings eternal it is likewise a great comfort to have them
free from change, so as they can neither end nor diminish; and that temporal
Goods changing and consuming themselves, they remain in the same firm and
stable condition for all Eternity. Let a Christian compare the brevity, and
inconstancy of the things of this life with the immutability, and eternal
duration of those of the other. Let him seriously observe the difference
betwixt those two words, Now, and Ever. The fools of this world say, Let us now
rejoice; The wise and virtuous say, it is better that we forbear our pleasures
now, that we may hereafter enjoy eternal happiness. The worldlings say, Let us
now live daintily and fare deliciously: The Servants of Christ say, Let us dye
in the flesh that we may live ever without change. The Sinners say, Let us now
enjoy the world: They who fear God say, Let us fly from this unstable world,
that we may for ever enjoy the Celestial. Compare these two, and see who are
the wiser; those who aim only at which endures but this momentary instant Now,
or those who look after Eternity, which lasts for ever; those who shall suffer
eternally without any profit at all, or those who are content to suffer a
little in this world for so great a gain, as is the Kingdom of Heaven. O most
miserable and disconsolate life of the damned! who are neither to have end in
their torments, change in their griefs, nor to reap profit by the pains which
they suffer. Three things only afford us comfort in the troubles of this life,
that either they may end, or become more supportable by change, or at least
that we shall be recompensed by some benefit for our sufferance; all which will
fail in eternal pains, in which there is no hope either of end, change, or
profit. A fearful mistake to suffer for a whole Eternity without benefit
hereafter, for not suffering a moment now, with so great a reward as is the
eternal Glory of God, and Kingdom of Heaven.

CAP. X.
How Eternity is without comparison.

FRom what is already spoken may be collected the third Quality of Eternity,
which is to be without comparison. For as there is no comparison betwixt what
is infinite and what is finite, so there can be none betwixt what is Eternal,
and what is Temporal. And as the Mountain Olympus (or if any greater in the
world) is as far distant from the immensity of God, as the smallest grain of
sand, so a thousand years are as far short of Eternity as the twinkling of an
eye. Wherefore Boethius says, that there is more similitude betwixt a moment of
time and ten thousand years, than betwixt ten thousand years and Eternity.
There is no expression which can sufficiently set forth the greatness of what
is Eternal, nor which can explicate the brevity of time, and littleness of what
is Temporal. Wherefore David, Psalm. 76.
when he considered what had passed since God created the world until his time,
calls all those Ages, which were already past, by the name of days, saying, I
thought upon the days of old. And it is not much that he should call Ages
days, when in another place he says a thousand years in the presence of God
are but as yesterday. 1. Joan. 2.
And St. John expresses it yet more fully, when he calls all those years, which
were to pass betwixt his time and the end of the world, whereof 1600 are
already run, but an hour. But David, when he set himself seriously to think
upon Eternity, which in it self is but one, and, as the Saints speak, one day,
he calls it Eternal years, augmenting as much as he could the conception of
Eternity, and diminishing that of time. For the same reason the Prophet Daniel,
setting forth the Glory of Apostolical persons, speaks in the plural number,
That they shall shine like Stars for perpetual Eternities; it seeming unto him,
that the ordinary Number did not suffice to declare what Eternity was: and
therefore explicates it by the number of many Eternities, adding for more
amplification the Epithete of perpetual. Dan. 12.
But endeavor we never so much, we declare nothing of it. Let the Prophets
turn themselves wholly into tongues, let them call it perpetual Eternities; let
them call it Eternity of Eternities; let them call it many days; let them call
it Ages of Ages; all falls short to explicate the infinite duration which it
has. Wherefore Eliu speaking of God, Job. 36.
says his years were inestimable, because no years imaginable could compare
with his Eternity. Betwixt a minute and 100000 years there is proportion: but
betwixt 100000 years, and Eternity none at all. Well may a quarter of an hour
be compared unto a million of years, but a million of years with Eternity holds
no comparison, in respect of which all time vanishes and disappears: neither is
a million of years more than a moment, since neither have proportion with
Eternity, but in respect of it are both equal, or (to say better) are both
nothing. Eccl. 11.
Wherefore the Wise man said, That if a man had lived many years, and those all
in pleasure, yet ought he to remember the time of darkness, and the many days,
(for so he calls Eternity) the which when they shall come, all that is past
will be found to be vanity. If Cain had lived and enjoyed all the felicities of
the Earth even until this day, and at this instant died, what should he now
possess of all his delights? What would remain unto him of all his days past?
Certainly no more than remained unto his brother Abel, whom he murdered more
than 5500 years ago; equally had both their days disappeared, and Cain had no
more left of his sports and pleasures, so fully and for so long a time enjoyed,
than Abel of his short life, but more to suffer in that time of darkness, and
the many days of Eternity. Eccl. 11.
For if, as Ecclesiasticus says, The evils of one hour make many pleasures to
be forgotten, and the moment wherein a man dies bereaves him of all he did in
life either for delight or appetite, why shall not then the torments of Hell
make him forget all the pleasures of the earth, and the Eternity of evils strip
him of a few and momentary pastimes? If with the grief of one hour the
pleasures of many years are forgotten, why shall not the pleasure of one
moment, for which thou fallest into Hell, be forgotten with the malice of many
years? And if the instant of thy bodily death deprive thee of all thy vain
contents and entertainments past, what shall be done by the eternal death of
thy Soul? In that instant, wherein Heliogabolus dyed, what continued with him
of all his sports and delights? Nothing. At this present, after so many years
measured in the Eternity of Hell, what now remains with him but torments upon
torments, griefs upon griefs, pains upon pains, evils upon evils, and a
perpetual Woe is me, which shall last as long as God is God? The moment wherein
we dye (as touching the things of this life) makes all men equal. He who lived
long, and he who died shortly: he who enjoyed much, and he who had but little:
he who was glutted with all sorts of delights, and he who was fed with the
bread of sorrow, and vexed with all sorts of griefs and misfortunes, all are
now the same, all are ended in death; the one is not sensible of his pleasure,
nor the other grieved with his labors. After the expiration of an hundred
years in a most rigid life what felt St. Romualdus of all his austerities? What
the most penitent Simeon Stylites, after fourscore years of a prodigious
penance, wherein he quitted not his hair-shirt by day or night? What felt he at
his death of his continual fasts and long prayers? Certainly of pain no more,
than if he had spent all that long time in the wanton pleasures of
Sardanapalus. Of griefs he found nothing, but of joy and glory he now does, and
ever shall in abundance. What felt St. Clement of Ancira of his twenty eight
years torments suffered by the furious rage and madness of Tyrants? Certainly
of Pain no more, then if during that time he had enjoyed all the delights of
the world, but of Glory an Eternity. For if the malice of one hour make the
contents of an hundred years to be forgotten: much more will the happiness of
an Eternity blot out the remembrance of 28 years sufferance. O prodigious
moment of death, which gives an end unto all that is Temporal; which transmits
and changes all things; which concludes the gusts and pleasures of sinners, and
begins their torments; which ends the labors and austerities of Saints, and
begins their Glory and joys Eternal.

Let therefore a Christian seriously consider, that the pleasures, by which he
sins, and the mortifications; by which he satisfies, are equally to have an
end: and that the torments which he deserves by the one, and the joys which he
merits by the other, are equally never to have an end: and let him then make
election of that which shall be best for him. Let him see if it be not better
to work himself an eternal Crown of glory out of the slight and momentary
sufferings of this life; And let not the length of life affright him: for there
is nothing long in respect of Eternity. It was therefore well laid of St.
Augustine, In Ps. 45.
That all which has an end is short. A hundred years of penance have an end,
and are therefore short: a thousand years, a hundred thousand Millions have
their end, and are therefore in the appearance of what is immense but little,
and in respect of Eternity no more then an instant. In the same manner we are
to look upon a thousand years as upon an hour; and for it self a long life is
no more to he desired then a short, since both in respect of Eternity bear the
same bulk. And as in respect of a solid body a thousand superficies's bear no
more proportion then one, all of them together being as incapable of making up
the least particle of solidity, as one only: so in respect of Eternity one
year is not less then a thousand, nor a thousand more than one. And upon all
time, although it were a Million of ages, we are to look as upon an instant,
and upon all, which is temporal, as upon a superficies, which has only an
appearance, but nothing of substance; neither can all time, and all temporal
goods together make up one only good of Eternity. If the whole earth be but a
point in respect of the Heavens, which are notwithstanding of a finite and
limited greatness, what great matter is it, if all time be but as an instant in
respect of Eternity, which is infinite and without limit? Betwixt the Earth,
nay betwixt the least grain of sand, and the highest Heaven there is a
proportion: both have quantity; but betwixt a thousand years and Eternity none
at all, and are therefore less then a point. O blindness of men, who are so
besotted with time, that in life they desire pleasure, and in death a memorial,
and both in death and life a fame and renown; for what? even for a moment, for
an instant. Wherefore desire thou pleasure in life, which to morrow is to
end? Wherefore desire thou a vain memory after death, which can endure no
longer than the world, whose end will not be long deferred? And although it
should yet last for a million of ages, it were but short, since those also must
conclude, and all were but as a moment in resped of Eternity. As the Immensity
of God is in respect of place, so is Eternity in respect of time; and as in
respect of the immensity of God the whole Sea is no greater than a drop of
water, nor an atome in the air less than the whole world; so in respect of
Eternity a hundred thousand years, and half a quarter of an hour are the same.
If God then should bestow upon thee this life only for a quarter of an hour,
and that thou know likewise that the world within an hour after thy death
were to end also, would thou spend that short time in ostentation and
setting forth thy self, whereby to raise a fame, that might endure that short
time after thy life? no certainly: thou would busy thy self with other
thoughts, thou would think of providing to die well, and not trouble thy
self in leaving a vain fame and memory, which were so small a time to over-last
thee. Know then that thou ought to do the same, although thou were certain
to live a hundred years, and the world to endure a hundred thousand after thee.
For all which has an end, is short, and all time in respect of Eternity is but
a day, an hour, a moment. Remember therefore the saying of St. John, who said
his time was in the last hour of the world, although there then wanted many
years: all which in respect of Eternity were but as one hour. So then if thou
would not be sollicitous of leaving a Name behind thee, if the world were to
continue but an hour, no more ought thou to be now, although it were to
endure for many ages.

If thou knew for certain that thou had to live a hundred years, and that
during that time thou should have nothing to eat, or sustain thy self, but
what thou drewest from the store and treasure of some great King, and that too
in the small space of an hour, would thou spend that hour in walking abroad,
in vain conversation and entertainments? certainly no: thou would not cease
from laboring and making haste to load thy self with those treasures. How art
thou then so careless, knowing that thy Soul is to live for an eternity, and
that thou have nothing to sustain it with hereafter, but what thou gainest by
thy merits within the space of this short life? look how short a time is
allowed thee to provide for Eternity: How art thou then so negligent, as to
pass it in vain pleasures? how come thou then to laugh, and not to weep
rather, and tear thy flesh with rigid penance and mortifications? More is an
hour in respect of a hundred years, than a hundred thousand are in respect of
Eternity: And therefore if in that hour, because the time appeared but short,
thou would not be sloathful in furnishing thy self for a hundred years, much
less ought thou to be slow in those hundred years of life to provide for
Eternity. Consider also what a hundred years are in respect of a million; and a
million of years in respect of Eternity. If for a hundred years spent in
torments thou were to enjoy a million of years in pleasure and content,
certainly thou had a most advantageous bargain, since thou receivest ten
thousand times more than thou gave. What a purchase have thou then, if not
for a hundred years of pain, but for a short hour spent in the mortification of
some one vain pleasure thou receivest an Eternity of glory, in respect of which
a million of years are but as air instant? See then how short is the space of
this life to gain the eternal; see how short is all time to merit Eternity.
Well did St. Augustine say, August. in Psalm. 39.
For an eternal rest thou were in reason to undergo an eternal labor, and for
an eternal felicity to endure eternal pains. How then can the short labors of
this life seem tedious unto thee? questionless there is no just Soul in Heaven,
nor damned in Hell, that so often as he casts his eyes upon Eternity, is not
astonished, that so short a thing, as this life, should be the Key of so long a
happiness in the one, or misery in the other. See then how cheap thou have an
Eternity of glory, the which is an infinite for a finite. Weigh a thousand
years, weigh a thousand millions in counterpoise with Eternity; they weigh
nothing: all is bat smoke and straw; there is no comparison betwixt infinite
and finite; betwixt what is real, and what is painted. Well did Plotinus say,
that Time wat the Image of Eternity; conformable unto which David said, That
man passes away in an Image; as if he should have said he passes away in time.
The same which is said of Time, may be said of Goods and Evils temporal, which
pass along in time, which are all but counterfeited and painted stuff in
respect of those, which are eternal. See then how cheap thou have a glory
without end even for a short and transitory toil, a true and real happiness
for a painted labor. Certainly thou ought not only to eschew the pleasures
of this life, but even to abhor them, and to seek Eternity through troubles,
fire and swords. For as Eternity holds no comparison with Time, so it ought
during Time to be sought with fervor, diligence and incomparable follicitude.
Solomon said of Wisdom, Prove. 3.
that in her right hand she held Eternity, or length of days, and in her left
riches and glory; to signify with what earnestness we ought to seek the
eternal, and to prefer virtue before wealth and honors. For as the right
hand is possessed of more force and vigor than the left, so we ought to hold
fast and preserve the eternal with all our strength, but not the temporal:
which, how glorious soever they appear, we are but slightly to lay hold on,
since they profit nothing. Things, which have an end, sink as it were into the
abyss of nothing, and are as if they had not been at all. Neither speak I only
of the pleasures of life, but even of life it self, which is nothing but a
shadow of a being in the midst of an Eternity. Consider that thy pleasures,
before thou had them, had for an Eternity no being, and once past shall for
another Eternity never be again. What are they then more than if they had not
been at all? all of them begin, and end in the middle of Eternity, which
neither has beginning nor ending: and are now sunk and drunk up in that vast
abyss, as if they had never been. And therefore little shall, what is temporal
and passes away, profit thee, unless thou draw from it some fruit, which is
permanent and eternal.

CAP. XI.
What is Time according unto Aristotle and other Philosophers; And the little
consistence of life.

ALthough it may be collected out of that which is spoken what Time is, and
what temporal life, and those things, which pass along in Time, are: let us
notwithstanding, having already treated of Eternity, consider it now more
particularly, that we may from thence frame a more lively conception of the
baseness of things Temporal, and greatness of Eternal. Aristotle defines Time
to be the Measure of Motion; because where there is no change or succession,
there is no time. This Speusippus declares more fully, saying Time is the
measure of the swift and speedy course of the Sun; and Proclus will have it to
be The number of the courses and revolutions of the Celestial Bodies; The
Pythagoreans of the motion of the highest Sphere, which turns the rest of the
inferior Orbs. Conformable unto which Albertus Magnus said it was The measure
of the motion of the Primum Mobile; Albert. Mag. in 3. phys. tract. 2. c. 3.
Avicen. suffi* lib. 2. c. 13.
in so much as all agree in this, that Time is but an accident of a thing so
unconstant, as is motion. Wherefore Avicenna not without reason affirmed, that
Time was more invalid, vain, and inconsiderable than Motion. See then what it
is to trust unto humane life; since it is a member of that which is so
unconstant and rapid as Time, which runs and passes away according to the
course of the Sun, and revolutions of Stars in the Firmament, whose swiftness
not only exceeds the flight of birds, but even surpasses the wind it self.
Know then that death follows thee not with leaden feet: it has wings and comes
flying in pursuit of thee with such swiftness, as greater cannot be imagined:
it exceeds not only the birds of the air, but a discharged Canon moves not with
that fury, as it runs after thee, and will at last not fail to overtake thee.
Call to remembrance the swiftest things within thy apprehension, and they all
move but the pace of a Tortoise in comparison of Death. A Falcon moves with
great swiftness after a Heron; but all her speed is phlegm in respect of that of
Time, and Death, which runs like an armed horseman to lay hold on thee. More
swift than the motion of the bird is that of the Fowlers arrow, since it hits
and kills her flying; but dull and slow is the swiftest arrow in respect of
that which Death aims at thee, even from the first moment of thy birth. What
can be imagined more swift than a flash of lightning? yet that moves leasurely
in respect of Death, which runs after thee with a motion equal to that of the
Stars in the Firmament, whose swiftness is so prodigious, that, according to
the more moderate account of Clavius, they run in one day more than a thousand
seventeen millions and a half of leagues, and in one hour more than forty two
millions. After this rate does death pursue thee. How is it, that thou
tremblest not? how comes it that thou fear it not? now is the bow drawn, now
the arrow let loose, and already in the way to hit thee. Why do thou strive
to shun it, and do not rather humble and prepare thy self to receive it? If
one should tell thee that a whole tire of Artillery were immediately to be
discharged against thee, and no way left to avoid the strokes, how would
thou be amazed? but if thou perceived that fire were already given, the very
noise perhaps would kill thee. Know then that the Artillery of death with much
more fury is already shot, and there is no quarter of an hour wherein it flies
not more than ten millions of leagues to overtake thee: and yet from whence it
parted, and where it now is, thou know not. Were thou certain it were far
hence, yet it runs with so precipitate a course, that it will not fail in a
short time to reach thee; and therefore thou being ignorant of what distance it
is, thou ought every moment to expect it, since every moment it may be with
thee.

Besides this of swiftness, we are to consider that other condition of time
noted by Aristotle, that it is The measure of motion acc^rding to the
precedent, and subsequent; which is the same, as it he should have said, Time
is the measure of motion, in as much as it contains parts after parts in a
continual succession; the which, as Averroes notes, is essentially included in
the definition of time, as not having capacity to present things at once and
together, but successively and by parts: some leaving to be, that others may
succced, the first parts every moment dying, that the second may possess their
places. Those goods of life, which accompany our infancy, leave us in our
youth: and those of our youth, when we become old. The candor, sincerity, and
innocence of children is lost when they leave their coats; and the strength and
vigor of youth consists not with the wisdom and judgment of age. It is not in
the power of Time to give us altogether, but the goods of life being limited,
it bestows them with a limited and restrained hand: Even life it self it gives
us but by pieces, and mingles as many parts of death, as it gives of life. The
age of Infancy dies, when we enter into that of Childhood; that of Childhood,
when we become Youths; that of youth, when we come to the age of Manhood; that,
when we are old, and even old age it self expires, when we become decrepit: so
that during the same life we find many deaths, and yet can hardly persuade our
selves that we shall die one. Let us cast our eyes upon our life past, let us
consider what is become of our Infancy, Childhood, and Youth; they are now dead
in us. In the same manner shall those ages of our life, which are to come, die
also. Neither do we only die in the principal times of life, but every hour,
every moment includes a kind of death in the succession and change of things.
What content is there in life, which quickly dies not by some succeeding
sorrow? what affliction of pain, which is not followed by some equal or greater
grief then it self? why are we grieved for what is absent, since it offends us
being present? what we desire with impatience, being possessed, brings care and
solicitude, loss, grief, and affliction. The short time which any pleasure
stays with us, it is not to be enjoyed wholly, and all at once, but tasted by
parts; so as when the second part comes, we feel not the pleasure of the first,
lessening it self every moment: and we our selves still dying with it, there
being no instant of life, wherein death gains not ground of us. The motion of
the Heavens is but the swift turn of the spindle, which rol's up the thread of
our lives: and a most fleet horse, upon which death runs post after us. There
is no moment of life, wherein death has not equal jurisdiction; and, as a
Philosopher says, there is no point of life, which we divide not with death:
so as, if well considered, we live but one only point, and have not life, but
for this present instant. Our years past are now vanished, and we enjoy no more
of them, than if we were already dead; the years to come we yet live not, and
possess no more of them, than if we were not yet born. Yesterday is gone, to
morrow we know not what shall be: of to day many hours are past, and we live
them not, others are to come, and whether we shall live them or no, is
uncertain; so that, all counts cast up, we live but this present moment, and in
this also we are dying; so that we cannot say that life is any thing, but the
half of an instant, and an indivisible point divided betwixt it and death. With
reason, as Zacharias said, may this temporal life be called The shadow of
death, since under the. shadow of life death steals upon us; and as at every
step the body takes, the shadow takes another, so at every pace our life moves
forward, death equally advances with it. And as Eternity has this proportion,
that it is ever in beginning, and is therefore a perpetual beginning, so life
is ever ending and concluding: and may therefore be called a perpetual end, and
a continual death. There is no pleasure in life, which, although it should last
twenty continued years, that can be present with us longer than an instant, and
that with such a counterpoise, that in it death no less approaches, than life
is enjoyed. Time is of so small a being and substance, and consequently our
life, Phys. 4. trac. 7. c. 4.
that, as Albertus Magnus says, it has no essence permanent and stable, but
only violent and successive, with which (not being able to detain it self in
its Careere) it precipitates into Eternity; and like an ill mouthed horse runs
headlong on, and tramples under toot all it meets with, and without stopping
ruins what it finds before it. And as we cannot perfectly enjoy the sight of
some gallant Cavalier decked with jewels, and adorned with glitterring bravery,
who with bridle on the neck passed in a full Careere before us: so are we not
able perfectly to enjoy the things of this life, which are still in motion, and
never rest one moment, but run headlong on, until they dash themselves in
pieces upon the rock of death, and perish in their end. The name which the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius gave unto Time, Mar. Aurel. Anton. lib. 4.
when he said, that it was a furious and a raging wave, did not a little
express this condition of it: for as such a wave sinks and overwhelms the
Vessel, not permitting the Merchant to enjoy the treasures with which she was
laden: so Time with his violence and fury ruins and drowns all that runs along
in it. This Philosopher considering the brevity and fleeting of Time, judged a
long and a short life to be the same; whole opinion for our further
understanding I shall here relate. If some of the Gods, says he, should tell
thee that thou were to die to morrow, or the day after, thou would not
(except thou were of a base and abject spirit) make any account whether, since
the difference and distance betwixt the two days were so small. In the same
manner thou art to judge of the difference of dying to morrow and a thousand
years hence. Consider seriously how many Physicians, who with knit brows have
handled the pulses of their sick Patients, are now themselves dead; how many
Mathematicians, who gloried in foretelling the death of others; how many
Philosophers, who have disputed subtly of death and mortality; how many
famous Captains, who have killed and destroyed a multitude of poor people; how
many Kings and Tyrants, who with insolency have used their power over their
oppressed Vassals; how many Cities (If I may so say) have dyed, as Helice,
Pompeios, Herculanum, and innumerable others? Add unto these how many thou thy
self have known to die, and assisted at their Exequies, and that which
yesterday was fish, and fresh, is to day laid in pickle, or dust. Momentary
then is all time. All this from this most-wise Prince.

CAP. XII.
How short Life is, for which respect all things temporal are to be despised.

BEhold then what is Time, and what thy Life, and see if there can be any thing
imagined more swift, and more inconstant than it. Compare Eternity, which
continues ever in the same state, with Time, which runs violently on, and is
ever changing; and cousider that as Eternity gives a value and estimation un^^
those things, which it preserves, so Time disparages and takes away the value
of those that end in it. The least joy of Heaven is to be esteemed as infinite,
because it is infinite in duration; and the greatest content of the earth is to
be valued as nothing, because it ends and concludes in nothing. The least
torment in hell ought to cause an immense fear, because it is to last without
end, and the greatest pains of this world are not to affright us, since they
are to cease and determine. By how much Eternity enobles and adds unto the
greatness of those things which are eternal, by so much does Time vilify, and
debase those things, which are temporal: and therefore as all which is eternal,
although it were little in it self ought to be esteemed as infinite, so all
which is temporal, although it were infinite, yet is to be esteemed as nothing,
because it is to end in nothing. If a man were Lord of infinite worlds, and
possessed infinite riches, if they were at last to end, and he to leave them,
they were to be valued as nothing; and if all things temporal have this evil
property to sail and perish, they ought to have no more esteem, then if they
were not. with good reason then is life it self to be valued as nothing, since
nothing is more frail, nothing more perishing, and in conclusion is little more
than if it had no being at all. Possessions, Inheritances, Riches, Titles, and
other goods of fortune remain when man is gone, but not his Life. A little
excess of cold or heat makes and end of that; a sharp wind, the infectious
breath of a sick person, a drop of poison makes it vanish; in so much as no
glass is so frail as it. Glass without violence may last long, but the life of
man ends of it self; glass may with care be preserved for many ages, but
nothing can preserve the life of man, it consumes it self.

All this was well understood by King David, who was the most powerful and
happy Prince the Hebrews ever had, as ruling over both the Kingdoms of Judah
and Israel with all which was promised by God unto the Israelites, but not
until his time possessed; his Dominions besides extending over many other
Provinces, See 1. Paralip. 29. what he left him toward the building of the
Temple only.
so as gold rowld up and down his House and Court, and he left at his death
mighty treasures unto his Son Solomon. Yet this so fortunate a Prince
considering that his greatness was to have an end, valued it as nothing, and
not only esteemed his Kingdoms and treasures as a vanity, but even his life it
self Wherefore he says, Thou have put, O Lord, a measure unto my days, and my
substance is as nothing; all my Rents, all my Kingdoms, all my Trophies, all my
Treasures, all which I possess, although so powerful a King, all is nothing:
And presently adds, Doubtless all is vanity all what living man is, Psalm. 38.
all his whole* life is vanity, and nothing that belongs to him so frail as
himself. Of so mean value are the things of this world although we were to
enjoy them for many ages: but being to end so quickly, and perhaps more
suddenly than we can imagine, what account is to be made of them? O if we could
but frame a true conception of the shortness of this life, how should we
despise the pleasures of it? This is a matter of such importance, that God
commanded the principal his Prophets, that he should go into the Streets and
Marketplaces, and proclaim aloud, How frail and short was the life of man. For
the Prophet Isaiah being about to prophecy of the most high and hidden
mystery, which ever God revealed unto man, which is the incarnation of the
eternal Word, was suddenly commanded by the Lord to lift up his voice and to
cry aloud: unto whom the Prophet replied, What is it O Lord that I must cry
aloud? The Lord said, That all flesh is grass, and all the glory of it, at the
flowers of the field. For as the grass, which is cut in the morning, withers
before night, and as the flower is quickly faded, so is the life of all flesh,
the beauty and splendor of it passing and withering in a day. Upon which place
says St. Hierome, Hieronin Comment.
He who shall look upon the frailty of our flesh, and that every moment of an
hour we increase and decrease without ever remaining in the same state, and
that even what we now speak, dictate, or write, flies away with some part of
our life, will not doubt to say, his flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the
flower of the field. And presently after; He that was yesterday an Infant is
now a Boy, and will suddenly be a Youth, and even until old age runs changing
through uncertain conditions of lite, and perceaves himself first to be an old
man, before he begins to admire that he is not still a Boy. In another place
the same Saint meditating upon the death of Nepotianus, who died in the flower
of his age, breaks out into these complaints. In Epitaph. Nepot.
O miserable condition of humane nature; Vain is all that we live without
Christ: all flesh is hay, and all the glory of it as the flower of the field.
Where is now, that comely visage? where is now the dignity of the whole body,
with which as with a fair garment the beauty of the Soul was once clothed? Ay
pity* the Lilly is withered by a Southern blast, and the purple of the Violet
turned into paleness. And immediately adds, Why do we not therefore consider
what in time must become of us, and what, will we or will not, cannot be far
off? for should our life exceed the term of 900 years, and that the days
Mathusalam were bestowed upon us, yet all this length of life once past (and
pass it must) were nothing: and betwixt him who lives but ten years, and him
who lives a thousand, the end of life and the unavoidable necessity of death
once come, all is the same, save only he who lives longer, departs heavier
laden with his sins. This frailty therefore and brevity of humane life being
so certain and evident, yet our Lord would have his Prophet publish it together
with the most hidden and unknown mystery of his incarnation, and the manner of
the worlds redemption, which even the most high Scraphins did not conceive
possible; and all because men will not suffer themselves to be persuaded of
this truth, nor practically apprehend the shortness of their life: Nay seeing
death seiseth upon others, yet they will not believe that it shall happen unto
themselves; and although they hear of it hourly, yet it appears unto them as a
hidden mystery, which they cannot understand. God therefore commanded the
Prophet Isaiah, that he should proclaim and publish it with a loud voice, as a
thing new and of great importance, that it might so penetrate and link into the
hearts of men. Let us therefore receive this truth from God himself: All flesh
is grass, All age is short, All time flies, All life vanishes, and a great
multitude of years are but a great nothing.

Let us also hear how true this is from those who lived the longest, Jux. Isi.
l. de vita and mor. Pat. c. 24.
and have had the greatest experience of what it is to live. Perhaps thou may
promise thy self to live a hundred years, as though this were a long life:
Hearken then unto holy Job, who lived 240 years, who knew best what it was to
live, both in respect of his prosperity, and of his great troubles and
afflictions, the which make life appear longer than it is. What says he of all
his years? My days, says he, are nothing. Nothing he calls them, although
they lasted almost three ages. In other places speaking of the shortness of
life, and declaring it with many Comparisons and Metaphors, sometimes he says,
His days were more speedy than a Messenger, and that they passed as a Ship
under sail, or as an Eagle which stoops furiously upon his prey; sometimes,
that They were more swift than a Weavers Shuttle; in one place he compares his
life unto a withered leaf, born up and down by the wind, or unto dry stubble;
in another he says, That the life of man is like the flower, which springs up
to day, and to morrow is trodden under foot: and that it flies like a shadow,
without ever remaining in the same state. How poor a thing then is life, since
holy Job calls it but a shadow, though then three or four times longer, than at
present? And it is no marvel, since those whose life exceeded nine hundred
years, who lived before the deluge, and are now most of them in hell, complain
as the Wise man relates it in this manner. Sap. 5.
What has our pride profited us, or the pomp of our riches availed us? all
those things are passed as a shadow, or as a messenger, who runs post, or as a
ship, which breaks the unquiet waves, and leaves no track or path behind it,
or like the bird, which flies through the air, and leaves no sign after her,
but with the noise of her wings beats the light wind, and forces her self a
passage without leaving any knowledge which way she made her flight, or like
the arrow shot at the mark, which has scarce divided the subtle Element, when
it closes and joins again in such manner as it cannot be perceived which way it
went: Even so we were hardly born when upon a sudden we ceased to be. These
were the words even of those who were damned, who lived more than 800 years:
and if they esteemed so long a life but as a shadow, and in the instant when
they died judged they were scarce born; how can thou think to live long in a
time, wherein it is much to reach the age of 60? A life then of 800 years being
no more than the flirting up and down of a little Sparrow, the flight of an
arrow, or, to say better, the passage of a shadow; what then are fifty years,
unto which perhaps thou may attain? certainly the longest term, whereunto
humane life extends, was compared by Homer but unto the leaves of a tree, which
at most endure but a Summers season. Euripides judged that too much, and said
that humane felicity was to be valued but as the length of a day. And Demetrius
Phalareus allowed it hut a moments space. Plato thought it too much to give it
any being at all, and therefore calls it but the dream of a waking man. And St.
John Chrysostom yet lessens that, calling it but a dream of those who sleep.
It seems the Saints and Philosophers could find no Symbol, no comparison
sufficient to express the shortness of man's life, since neither a Curriere by
land, nor a Ship by sea, nor a Bird in the air passes with that speed. All
these things which we have now mentionled, and others though esteemed swift,
yet have not such equality of motion, but that they sometimes slacken their
pace, and sometimes stand still. But the impetuous course of our life, by which
it hastens unto death, stops not so much as whilst we sleep; and therefore
appeared unto Philemius so swift and rapid, that he said this life was no more
but to be borne and die, and that at our birth we issued forth of a dark
Prison, and at our death entered into a more sad and dreadful Sepulcher. Quit
from this short life the time of sleep, and thou quittest from it the third
part: Take from it Infancy, and other accidents which hinder the seuse and
fruit of living, and there hardly remains the half of that nothing, which thou
esteemest so much. That which Averroes affirmed of Time, when he said, Aver. 4.
Phy. tex. 13.
that Time was a being diminished in it self, may be well verified of Life,
which is in it self so little, as it is but a point in respect of Eternity; and
yet so many parts are taken from that point. Besides all this, do thou think
that this piece of life, which thou now enjoyest, is certain? thou deceivest
thy self. For as the Wise man says, Man does not know the day of his end; and
therefore as fishes, when they are most secure, are then taken with the angle,
and birds with the snare, so death assails us in the evil time, when we least
think of it.

Confider then how vile are all things temporal, and how frail is all the glory
of the world, being grounded upon so feeble a foundation: The goods of the
earth can be no greater than is life, which gives them their value; and if that
be so poor and short, what shall they be?. what can the delights of man be,
since his life is but a dream, a shadow, and as the twinkling of an eye? If the
most long lite be so short, what can be the pleasure of that moment, by which
is lost eternal happiness? what good can be of value which is sustained by a
life so contemptible and full of misery? A figure of this was the Statue of
Nebuchodonosor, which although made of rich metal, as of gold and silver, yet
was founded upon feet of clay, so as a little stone falling upon it overthrew
it unto the earth. All the greatness and riches of the world have for
foundation the life of him who enjoyes them, which is so frail and slippery,
that not a little stone, but even the grain of a grape has been able to ruin
and overthrow it. With reason did David say, that all which is living man is
universal vanity: since the brevity of his lite suffices to vilifies and make
vain all the goods which he is capable of enjoying. Vain are the honors, vain
are the applauses, the riches and pleasures of life, which being it self so
short and frail, makes all things vain which depend upon it, and so becomes it
self a vanity of vanities, and an universal vanity. What account would thou
make of a Tower founded upon a quick-sand? or what safety would thou hope
for in a Ship bored with holes? certainly thou ought to give no more esteem
unto the things of this world, since they are founded upon a thing so unstable
as this life. What can all humane glory be, since life, which sustains it, has
(according to David) no more consistence than smoke, or (according to St.
Thomas) then a little vapor, which in a moment vanishes? And although it
should endure a thousand years, yet coming to an end, it were equal unto that
which lasted but a day: For as well the felicity of a long as a short life is
but smoke and vanity, since they both pass away and conclude in death.
Guerricus the Dominican, a great Philosopher and Physician, and afterward a
most famous Divine, hearing them read the sift Chapter of Genesis, wherein are
recounted the Sons and Descendants of Adam in these terms, The whole life of
Adam was 930 years, and he died; The life of his Son Seth was 912 years, and he
died, and so of the rest, began to think with himself, that if such and so
great men after so long a life ended in death, it was not sat to lose more
time in this world, but so to secure his life, that losing it here, he might
find it hereafter; and with this thought entered into the Order of St. Dominick,
and became of a most religious life.

O what fools are men, who seeing life so short, endeavor to live long, and
not to live well, Epis. 22.
since it is a thing most certain (as Seneca observes) that every man may live
well, but no man, what age soever he attains unto, can live long. This folly
appears more plainly by that which is said by Lactantius, Laae. lib. 6. divin.
Instit.
that this life being so short, the goods and evils of it must be likewise
short, as the goods and evils of the other must be eternal; and that God being
pleased to make an equal distribution of both, ordained that unto the short and
transitory goods, which we enjoy unlawfully in this life, should succeed
eternal evils in the next: and unto those short evils, which we suffer here for
Gods sake, eternal goods and happiness should follow in the other, Wherefore
Almighty God setting before us this disserence betwixt good and evil, and
leaving us in liberty of choosing which we please, how great a folly were it
for the not suffering of a few evils, and those so short, to lose goods so
great and eternal, and for the enjoying of goods so short and transitory, to
endure evils without end?

CAP. XIII.
What is Time according to St. Augustine.

LEt us also see what the great Doctor of the Church Saint Augustine thought of
the nature of Time: Lib. 11. Confess. ca. 25.
the which in that great wit and understanding of his sound so little
estimation and being, that after he had with much subtilty disputed what it
was, at length comes to conclude that he knows not what it is, nay that he
knows not so much, as what it is not to know it. The most that he can reach
unto is, that no time is long, and that that only may be called time, which is
present, the which is but a moment. The same is the opinion of Antoninus in his
Philosophy, Aur. Anton. l. 2.
who speaks in this mauner. If thou were to live 3000 years and 30000 more
above those, yet ought thou to remember that no man lives any other life,
than what he lives at present: and therefore the most long and the most short
space of life is the same, that which is present being the same unto all,
although not that which is already past. So as it seems there is but one only
point of time; and that no man can lose either that which is past, or that
which is to come: since no man can lose what he has not. wherefore these two
things ought to be preserved in memory: The one, that from the beginning all
things keep the same form, and return as it were in a circle to the same
estate; so as there is no difference betwixt the beholding of them for a 100,
for 200 years, or much more incomparable. The other is, that he who lives long,
and he who dies shortly lose the same thing, being both deprived of the
present, of which they only are possessed, and and no man loses what he has
not. So much from this wise Prince: why found no other substance in time, but
only this present moment. Cap. 14.
And St. Augustine informs us further of the being of this present moment, of
which it cannot be affirmed so much as that it is at all. These are his words.
If the present that it may be called time, is because it is to pass into the
praeterit, how can it be said to be, since the only cause, why it is, is
because it shall not be? so as we cannot affirm it to have a being, but in as
much as it is a way into a not being.

Behold then whereunto thou trusts thy felicity. See upon what pillar of brass
thou placest thy hopes; even on so slight a thing, that its whole existence is
in leaving to be, and receives its being (if it have any) from its passing into
nothing. For what can that have, which is, and is not, ever leaving to be with
that impetuous fury, that thou art not able to detain it for one small moment,
since even during that moment it is in a perpetual motion? Let him, who is in
the flower of his age, tell me by what power he is able to detain the years of
his life but for one day: or whether he can keep the pleasure, which he now
enjoyes, but one hour from leaving him. Let him endeavor to lay hold on time:
But it is in vain; He knows not where to fasten: Time has no substance, and
yet runs with that violence, that it will sooner hale thee after it, than thou
shall be able to keep it back. Wherefore the same holy Doctor speaking of life,
says, That the time of life is a Careere unto death, the which is so swift and
mixed with so many deaths, that he began to doubt, whether the life of mortals
were to be called a life or death; and therefore thus discourses. From the
instant that we begin to be in this body, Lib. 13. de Civ. ca. 10.
which is to die, there is nothing operated in it, but what brings on death.
This is effected by the mutability of lite, if that may be called a lite, which
only works to bring on death: For there is none who is not nearer his death
this year than the last, to day than yesterday, now than a little while ago:
and all the time we live is subtracted from the time of living, and every day
that which remains becomes less and less; in so much as the time of this lite
is nothing else, but a Careere unto death, in which no man is permitted to make
stay or to march with more leisure, but all are driven on with equal speed.
Presently after he adds: For what else is daily and hourly done, until death
which was still a working be consummated, and that time, which follows death,
begin to be, which time was then in death whilst there was a continual decay
of lite? From hence it follows that man was never in lite whilst he was in
this body, which rather dies than lives: if perhaps he be not at the same time
both in life and death jointly: that is, in life which he lives until that be
ended, and in death which he dies, who is every moment deprived of some part of
life. For the same reason Quintilian said: That we died every moment before the
time of death was come. And Seneca; We err when we look upon death, as upon a
thing to succeed, since it has both preceded, and is also to follow; for all
what has been before us is death. And what imports it, whether thou begin not
at all, or end, since the effect of both is not to be? Every day we die, and
every day we lose some part of life, and in our very growth our life decreases
and grows less, and this very day, wherein we live, we divide with death. Our
lite in the book of wisdom is compared unto the passing of a shadow, which, as
it may be said to be a kind of night, so our life may be called a kind of
death. For as the shadow has some part of light, some of darkness, so our life
has some part of death, and some of life, until it come to end in a pure and
solid death. And since it is to end in a not being, it is very little to be
regarded, especially compared with eternity, which has a being constant and
for ever.

. 2
All (as has been said) which has an end is little, since it is to end in
nothing. Why therefore will thou lose much for that which is so little, that
which is true for what is false, and a substance for a dream? Hear what St.
John Chrysostom says; Hom. 20. ad Pop.
If for having a pleasant dream only for one night a man were to be tormented
a hundred years when he were awake, who would desire such a dream? Far greater
is the difference betwixt the truth of eternity and the dream of this life,
betwixt the eternal years of the either world, and the transitory ones of this.
Less is this life in respect of the eternal, than an hours dream in respect of
a hundred years awake; less than a drop in respect of the whole sea. Forbear
then some small pleasure now, that thou may not be deprived of all pleasures
hereafter; suffer rather some slight trouble at present, than be tormented
hereafter tor all eternity. For, as St. Augustine says, better is a little
bitterness in the throat, than an eternal torment in the bowels.

All which passes in time Christ our Redeemer calls a very little. A very
little did he call the time of his passion, and all those bitter pains which he
suffered in it; a very little that of the Martyrdom of his Apostles, endured
with so many sorts of torments: a little, a very little is all which in this
life can be suffered in respect of eternal years. Tract. 10. in Jo.
Although, as St. Augustine says, this little, because we are yet in it,
appears great, but when it shall be ended, then we shall perceive how small and
contemptible it is. Let us place our selves in the end of life: from that
prospect we shall discern how small are all things which now seem great unto
us. Unto a most observant and religious Father of the Company of Jesus, called
Christopher Caro, our Lord was pleased to give this lesson, that he should
often consider these two things, O how much, and O how little; That is, how
much is eternity without end, how little is the time of this life; how much is
God enjoyed for ever, how little the contents of this earth, which we are to
leave behind us; how much it is to reign with Christ, how little to serve our
own appetite; how much is eternal glory, and how little to live long in this
valley of tears. Wherefore Eccksiasticus said, The number of the days of man,
when many, are an hundred years, and are reputed as a drep of water, and as a
grain of sand. So sew are our years in the day of eternity. Little will all
time whatsoever appear to merit that which is eternal. With reason did St.
Bernard often inculcate unto his Monks that saying of St. Hierome: No labor
ought to appear hard, no torments long, by which is gained the glory of
eternity. Unto Jacob the seven years, which he served Laban, seemed short for
the love he bare unto Rachel; why should then the service of God for a small
time seem long unto us? consider whom thou servest, and wherefore: and mark
whom Jacob served, and for what. Thou servest the true God, and for eternal
glory; he served a deceitful Idolater for a frail and fading beauty. Compare
thy services with those of Jacob; see if thou have served God, as he served
Laban; Genesis 31.
see if thou can say; By day I was scorched with heat, and by night benumbed
with cold; sleep fled from mine eyes, and in this manner I served thee twenty
years. It with such fidelity this Servant of God served a Pagan, how ought
thou to serve God himself? If thou be truly his servant, all ought to seem
little unto thee, since thou servest so good a Master, and for so great a
reward.

Look how thou imployest thy years, which, being but few for the meriting of so
great a thing as Eternity, thou suffer to pass through thy fingers without
any profit at all. Well, says St. Augustine, Lib. 10. contra Faust. c. 6.
was the time of this life signified by the spinning of the Parcae or fatal
Sisters, who were feigned by the wife Ancients to spin out the thread of life.
Time past was that which was wound up, and roled upon the spindle: Time to come
the Flax which remained to spin upon the Distaffe: and the present that which
passed betwixt the fingers; for truly we know not to employ our time in
filling our hands with holy works, but suffer it without reflecting to pass
through our fingers in matters of no substance or profit. But better did David
declare this ill employment of time when he said, Psalm. 89.
Our years did meditate, or as another lection has it, Did exercis as the
spiders; because Spiders spin not wool, or flax, but the excrements of their
own entrails, consuming and dissembowelling themselves to weave a webb, which
they work with their feet of so slight a substance, that in a moment it is
rent in pieces; and so little profit, that it serves for no other use, than to
catch flies. The life of man is full of vain labors, vexations of various
thoughts, plots, suspicions, fears and cares, in which it is wholly exercised
and employed, linking and weaving one care into another, still troubling it
self with more, being scarcely freed from one employment, when it entangles it
self in another; and all so ill ordered and composed, as if they had been
managed by feet instead of hands; still adding labor unto labor, and toil
unto toil, as the Spider does one thread unto another; first thinking how to
obtain what we desire, then how to keep it, after how to advance and increase
it, then how to defend it, and lastly how to enjoy it: and yet in conclusion
all falls to pieces in the handling, and becomes nothing. What labor does it
cost the poor Spider to weave his webb, passing incessantly from one part unto
another, and often returning unto the same place where he began, consuming
himself with threads drawn from his proper entrails for the forming of his
Pavilion, which with many journeys having placed on high, and at last finished
this goodly artifice, one touch of a broom defaces and brings to ground all his
labor. Just such are the employments of humane life, of much toil, and of
little profit, robbing us of sleep, and filling us with cares and anxieties,
spending the most part of our time in useless projects and vain imaginations,
which of themselves fall to nothing, and in the end vanish without effect. For
which reason David said, Our lives meditated as the Spiders, who labor and
toil all day in making of Cobwebs; so the life of man passes in the continual
cares and thoughts of what he is to be, what to endeavor, what to obtain, and
all (as the Wiseman says) is vanity of vanities, and affliction of spirit;
and for those things, which concern the service of God, we only sometimes
afford them our thoughts, but seldom our works. With much reason did Aristotle
say, that the hope of our life yet to come was like the dream of one who
watches. And Plato in the same manner calls the life past a dream of people
awake. For in this both humane hope and life resemble a dream, that neither of
them have either being or subsistence; and there is no man who after a
discourse within himself of his life past will not say, that dreams and truths
are the same thing, since he possesses no more of what he once enjoyed, than of
what he dreamed, all his delights and pleasures appearing so short unto him, t
hat their beginning and ending seem to be joined together without a Medium.

CAP. XIV.
Time is the occasion of Eternity: and how a Christian ought to benefit himself
by it.

TIme, although short, frail and slippery, yet has one condition most
precious, which is to be the occasion of Eternity; since by it we gain that in
a small time, which we are to enjoy for ever. For this reason when st. John
said, that Time is at hand, the Gerek renders it, Occasion is at hand, because
the time of this life is the occasion of gaining Eternity, and that once past
and overslipt, there will be no remedy or hope left of obtaining the other. Let
us therefore endeavor to employ our time well, and not lose the opportunity of
so great a good, whose loss is irrepairable, and will be lamented with eternal,
but unprofitable complaints. Let us consider how great is the good which
occasion brings along with it, and how the resentment which is usually caused
by the loss of it, that we may from thence know how to profit our selves by
temporal occasions in order unto eternal happiness, and that we may be freed
from that inconsolable and fruitless repentance of the damned, who have made no
use of it. It is a great business this of our salvation, and depends wholly
upon the swift time of this life, which once past is irrevocable, and the end
of it most uncertain: and therefore we ought with a hundred eyes to watch
occasion that it overpass us not, and with a hundred hands to lay hold on it.
The Ancients knowing the importance of it, feigned it to be a Goddess, thereby
to declare the great good (when timely apprehended) which it brought unto
mankind, In Epig. Graec.
whose Image they adored in this mysterious figure. They placed it upon a
Wheel, which continually moved about: it had wings at the feet: to note the
swiftness with which it passed: the face was not seen, but covered with long
hair, which on the forehead grew thick and bushie, whereby was signified that
it was hard to know when occasion happened, but being present easy to lay hold
on it: the hinderpart of the head was bald, because once past, it had nothing
whereby to retain it. Auson. in Epig.
Ausonius, to signify the effect which it leaves with those who suffer it to
slip from them, adds that it drew behind it Metanaea, that is Repentance, which
only remains with those who know not how to use it. Vide Joan. David in lib.
de occasion arrepta. In Aph.
Others represented Occasion with hands busied in distributing riches and
precious gifts, but accompanied with time in the habit of a Traveller, which
not with two, but with four wings conducted it along, to signify the great
haste with which it passed. Wherefore Hippocrates with much reason calls
Occasion precipitate, because it runs with as great violence, as he falls, who
throws himself headlong from a high rock. Let us place in the midst of
Eternity the longest time of humane life; let it be a hundred, two hundred, or
nine hundred years, as long as the lite of man before the Deluge; yet it will
then appear but as an instant, and he who shall cast his eyes upon the
immensity of eternal duration, will remain astonished that a thing so short, so
small, so precipitate should be the occasion of that, which is so long, so
great and so stable. Since therefore the whole time of this life is so short
for the gaining of Eternity, let us resolve not to lose it, especially since we
have no assurance how long it will last: and although we were certain to live
yet a hundred years longer, we ought not to spare one moment from the gaining
of Eternity. But being uncertain how long we are to live, and perhaps shall die
to morrow, how can we be so careless, as to let the occasion of securing our
glory pass, which hereafter will never be offered? If a skilful Workman were
commanded by some great Prince, that upon pain of death he should have in
readiness some excellent piece of his work against such a time as it should be
called for, and that although a years time were requisite to perfect it, yet it
might perhaps be called for sooner, certainly that Artist would with all speed
finish the piece, the neglect being no less than the forfeit of his life. Since
then our life eternal consists in being furnished with the grace of God, and in
preserving his divine Image engraven in our souls, how can we be so careless to
let pass the occasion of our salvation?

Theophrastus and Democritus called Time a most precious expense. Terence The
first and most principal of all things. Zenon said that There was nothing which
men wanted more, nor whereof they stood in greater necessity than time. Pliny
made that account of it, that he would not so much as one moment of it should
be lost: and therefore reprehended his Nephew for spending a short time in
walking for his recreation, telling him that those hours might be better
employed; and being present when the same Nephew caused one which in reading
pronounced a word with an ill* accent to repeat it again, admonisht him that
too much time was lost in that useless repetition. Seneca esteemed time above
all price and value, and in this manner says, Redeem thy self unto thy self;
recover and preserve that time, which hitherto has been taken, surprised, or
slipped from thee. For whom will thou give me, that shall set a price upon time,
or give a value unto a day, who understands himselt daily to die? If therefore
the Gentiles, who had no hope by time to purchase Eternity, made so great
account of it, what shall we Christians, unto whom it is an occasion of eternal
happiness? Let us therefore hear St. Bernard. Sermon ad. Scho.
There is nothing (says he) more precious than time. But out alas! nothing at
this day is more vilified. A day of salvation is past, and no man reflects on
it, no man thinks, no man complains that he has lost a day, which shall never
r^^rn. But as a hair from the head, so a moment of time shall not perish. The
same Saint also grieving to see a thing so precious so much misspent, speaks in
this manner. Let no man make a small esteem of the time which is spent in idle
words. Say some, We may yet chat and talk until this hour be past. O wretched
speech, Until this hour be past! This being the hour, which the goodness of thy
Creator has bestowed upon thee, that in it thou may do penance for thy
sins, obtain pardon, acquire grace, and merit glory. O lamentable speech,
Whilst this hour passes! this being the hour wherein thou may gain divine
mercy and commiseration. In another part he speaks much to the same purpose,
exhorting us to benefit our selves by the time.of this life. His words are
these. Sermon. 75. in Cant.
Whilst we have time let us do good unto all, especially since our Lord said
plainly, that the night would come when no man could work. Art thou perhaps to
find some other time in the world to come, wherein thou may seek God, and
wherein thou may do good: This being the time wherein he has promised to
remember thee, and is therefore the day of mercy, because here our God and King
has long ago wrought thy salvation in the midst of the earth? go then and
expect thy salvation in the midst of hell. What possibility do thou dream
of obtaining pardon in the midst of eternal flames, when the time of mercy is
already past? No sacrifice tor sin remains tor thee being dead in sin; no more
shall the Son of God be crucified for thee. Once he died, and shall now die no
more. That blood which he spilt upon the earth, shall not descend into hell.
The sinners of the earth have drunk it up. There is no part left for the
devils, or for sinners, which are the companions of devils, wherewith to quench
their flames. Once descended thither not the blood but the soul of Christ; This
only visit made by the presence of the soul when the body hung without life
upon the Cross, was the portion of them who were in prison. The blood watered
the dry land, the blood was poured upon the thirsty earth, and did as it were
inebriate it. The blood wrought peace for those who were upon earth, and those
who are in heaven: but not for those which were in hell beneath the earth. Once
only, as we have said, the soul went thither, and made in part redemption,
(speaking of the souls of the Holy Fathers, who were in Limbo) that even for
that moment the works of charity might not be wanting; but it passed no
farther. Now is the time acceptable, now is the time fit wherein to seek God:
And certainly he that seeks him shall find him; if so be he seek him, when,
and where he ought to do. All this from St. Bernard.

2.
Consider what an eternal repentance will follow thee, if thou make not use
of this occasion of time for the purchasing of the Kingdom of Heaven;
especially when thou shall see that with so little ado thou might have
gained that everlasting glory, which to satisfy a short pleasure thou have
lost tor ever. In what to fury and madness was Esau, Genesis 19.
when he reflected that his younger brother had gotten the Blessing of the
first born by his own base selling his Birthright for a dish of Lentils? he
cried out and tore himself for spite and anger. Behold thy self in this
mirror, who for one vile and short pleasure have sold the Kingdom of Heaven.
If God had then thrown thee into hell, what would thou have done but
lamented that with eternal tears which in so short a time was lost? Cain when
he perceived that he and his posterity were cursed and made infamous for not
knowing how to benefit himself by that occasion, Genesis 9.
which was first offered unto him, and made use of by his Brother, what
resentment had he then, or ought to have had? Measure by this the sense of a
damned person, who for not making use of the time of this lite shall see
himself cursed by God for an Eternity, and others far less than himself made
blessed and rewarded in heaven. The Sons-in-law of Loath when they saw they
might have escaped the fire, and that being invited they had rejected and
laughed at the counsel of their Father-inlaw, when afterward they perceived it
to rain fire and sulphur upon them and their Cities, what grief and vexation
had they for refusing the benefit of so fair an occasion offered at their own
doors? O what sorrow, what pain, what madness, what desperation shall seize
upon a damned creature, when he shall call to mind how often he has been
invited by Christ to salvation, and shall now feel a tempest of fire and
sulphur pouring down upon him for ever in hell? King Hannon who had so good an
occasion to preserve that peace whereunto he was entreated and invited by
David, when after he saw his Cities ruined, the Inhabitants burnt like bricks
in a furnace, some thrasht to death, others torn in pieces, what would he have
given to have made use in time of so fair an offer, or of holding friendship
with so great a King? but what is this in respect of what a sinner shall feel,
when he shall see himself burnt in hell fire, become an eternal enemy of the
King of Heaven, and deprived tor ever of reigning with his blessed Saints? what
despite, what grief of heart shall he then have? The evil Thief who was
crucified with the Savior of the world, what does he now endure for refusing
that good occasion which his companion embraced? what a repentance has now the
rich Glutton for not laying hold of so great an opportunity offered him at his
own home, as Lazarus his demanding an alms from him, by giving of which he
might have redeemed his fins? but he let it pass, being more inhumane than his
dogs, who suffered not the poor Leper to depart without first licking of his
sores, usiug mercy with him, with whom their Master used none. What will he now
say when all things have failed him, even one drop of cold water to cool his
scorched and inflamed tongue, and all for denying so poor an alms as the crumbs
which fell from his Table? What madness, what spite, what despair do now
torment him for refusing, when time was, so easy a means to gain his salvation.

wherefore although it be true that the whole time of our life is an occasion
of obtaining eternal glory, yet in the passage of life there are some
particular actions and successes, upon which our salvation does more especially
depend, by which we do either disoblige God Almighty by rejecting them, or by
embracing them oblige him (if I may so say) to favor us. Such a one was that
of holy Joseph, who rather than he would offend his Creator, fled from his
wanton Mistress, and left his Garment in her hands. This was an excellent act,
by which he much obliged God Almighty, and deserved to receive those favors
which were after bestowed upon him. In the same manner Susanna laid hold on a
great occasion for the saving of her soul, when she chose rather to die, than
to consent to the filthy pleasure, whereunto she was invited by those wicked
Elders. No opportunity ought to pass us without showing our selves quick and
active in laying hold of it, greedy of pleasing God Almighty, obliging him by
some brave and heroical act, with which occasion shall present us. Wherefore
the Wiseman said, Be not defrauded of thy good day, Eccl. 14.
and let no portion of a good gift overslip thee. Tully defined occaon to be a
part of time fitted for the doing of something. Mithridates said it was the
Mother of all things which were to be done. And Polibius that which ruled all
humane affairs. And there is no doubt but some conjunctures of times happen,
which present us with great occasions of merit by working excellent virtues,
and performing most heroical actions, which if made good use of, do much assure
our salvation. Wherefore it is by some placed amongst the signs of
predestination to have performed some great and noble action of virtue. Let us
see what benefit some have made of occasion in temporal businesses, that we may
not be less careful and sollicitous in matters eternal. Rachel with what
diligence did she run to hide and cover the Idols which she had stolen from her
Father? with what diligence did Abigail go forth to meet David, omiting
nothing whereby she might appease his fury? and certainly it she had protracted
never so little time, she had run into evident danger of losing the lives of
her Self, her Husband, and Family. With what solicitude did Abrahan pursue the
five Kings which carried away Captive his Nephew Loath? With what speed did Saul
gather together his Army for the relief of Jabes Galaad? It behooves us no less
to gain Heaven. Let us not be more dull and slow in gaining that, then they
were in getting and procuring things of the earth. Let us hear with what
diligence and haste the Wiseman advises us to accomplish the promise we have
made unto a mortal man. Prove. 6.
My Son if thou shall be surety for a friend, and have struck hands with a
stranger, thou have ensnared thy self in the words of thy mouth, and art taken
in thy own speeches. Do therefore, my son, what I say unto thee, and deliver
thy self, because thou art fallen into the hands of thy neighbor. Run, make
haste, awake thy friend, give no sleep unto thy eyes, nor let, thy eyelids
slumber: rid thy self from his hands, as the mountain-goat, or the bird from
the hand of the hunter. Those who are engaged unto the Devil by their sins, let
them mark with what diligence they ought to free themselves, without losing
time or occasion; and those who are obliged unto God for his infinite benefits,
and have passed unto him their promises of amendment, let them mark how they
ought to satisfy them by making use of all means possible of being reconciled
unto him: let them make haste, as the Wiseman says, let them not be tepid and
slow, let them not give sleep unto their eyes, or close their eyelids, that
they may without losing the least occasion escape from hell, and the slavery of
Satan. Pity it is that any occasion should slip from us without benefit; a
lamentable misery that our lives should pass away in the things of the earth
without seeking after those of heaven, man's life being so short and narrow for
the meriting of a thing so long and infinite as are the joys of eternity. With
reason did the Apostle admonish us: This I say unto you brethren, Time is
short; that which remains is, that those who have wives be as if they had them
not, and those who weep as if they did not weep, and those who rejoice as if
they rejoiced not, and those who buy as if they possessed not, and those which
use this world as if they used it not, because the figure of this world passes.
The Apostle considering the great shortness of time wills us so to settle our
selves in the matters of our salvation and of the other life, that we remain in
those of this as strangers, using them as if we used them not.

Let us consider then that if we suffer occasion in the short time of this life
to over-slip us, that all hope of remedy will fail us in the next. It is not
void of instruction which is feigned by the Ancients, That Jupiter bestowed
upon a certain person a Vessel filled with all sorts of goods and blessings:
who overjoyed with the greatness of the gift, which contained all that was to
be wished for, and impatient of enjoying them one by one, and every good in his
proper time and season, would needs have them all at once. Whereupon he hastily
and undiscreetly opened the Vessel; but they were no sooner discovercel, but
all flew into the air and vanished, and for all the diligence and haste he was
able to use in shutting it, he could retain none but Hope, which only remained
behind. But far otherwise is it with the occasion of our salvation: which
although it contains all happiness and blessings, yet being suffercd to pass,
there remains not behind so much as hope, but in the place of it repentance,
despair, and eternal sorrow, and so much the more in that it happens by our own
faults. when King Joas smote the ground thrice, and was told by the Prophet
Elizeus, that if he had smitten it six or seven times, he had ruined and
utterly made an end of the Syrians, what grief and affliction did he conceive
in his mind, that having had an occasion of so much happiness, he had not made
use of it, although the misfortune chanced without his fault? But the miserable
damned in hell, when they shall perceive that by their own fault they have lost
the occasion of so great blessings as are those of heaven, it is incredible
what grief and resentment shall possess them.

CAP. XV.
What is Time according to Plato and Plotinus, and how deceitful is all that
which is temporal.

THat we may yet better understand the smalness and baseness of all which is
temporal, I will not pass in silence the description of Time made by Platinus,
a famous Philosopher amongst the Platonicks, who says that Time is an Image,
or Shadow of Eternity. The which is conformable unto holy Scripture; not only
unto that of David, when he says, that Man passes in a figure, that is, in
time: but unto that of the Wiseman, Sap. 2.
who defines Time in these words, Our Time is the passing of a Shadow: The
which is no other than the imperfect, moveable, and vain Image of a thing
consistent and solid. Job. 8.
Job also says, As a shadow are our days upon the earth. And the Prophet
David elsewhere, My days have slided away as a shadow. And in many other
places of Scripture the same comparison is used, to signify the swiftness of
Time and the vanity of our life. Neither is it without mystery, that the same
comparison is so often used in those sacred Writings. For truly few comparisons
can be found more apt and proportionable for the expressing of what is Time and
Eternity, than that of a Statue and the Swadow of it. For as a Statue remains
for many years and Ages firm, stable, and immovable, without increase or
diminution, whilst the Shadow is in continual motion, now greater, now lesser:
So is it with Time and Eternity. Eternity is firm, fixed, and immovable,
without receiving less or more. Time is ever moving and changing as the Shadow,
which is great in the morning, less at midday, and toward night returns to
its former greatness, every moment changing and moving from one side unto
another. In the same manner the life of man has no instant fixed, but still
goes on in perpetual changes, and in the greatest prosperity is for the most
part shortest. Aman the same day he thought to sit at the Table of King
Assuerus, Esth. 3. and 7.
by whom he had been exalted above all the Princes of his Kingdom, was
ignominiously hanged. Jud. 13.
Holofernes when he hoped to enjoy the best day of his life, was miserably
beheaded by a woman. King Baltassar in the most solemn and celebrated day of
his whole reign, Dan. 5.
wherein he made ostentation of his great riches and royal entertainment, was
slain by the Persians. Act. 12.
Herod when he most desired to show his Majesty, being clothed in a rich habit
of Tissue embroidered with gold, and by the acclamations of the people saluted
as a God, was mortally struck from heaven. There is nothing constant in this
life. The Moon has every Month her changes: but the life of man has them
every day, every hour. Now he is sick, now in health, now sorrowful, now merry,
now choleric, Sinesius him. 6.
now fearful: in so much as Sinesius not without reason compared his life unto
Euripus, a Straight of the Sea, which ebbs and flows seven times in a day, as
the most constant (which is the most just man) in the world falls every day
seven times. The shadow wheresoever it passes leaves no track behind it: and
of the greatest personages in the world, when they are once dead, there remains
no more than if they had never lived. How many preceding Emperors in the
Assyrian Monarchy were Lords of the world, as well as Alexander: and now we
remain not only ignorant of their Monuments, but know not so much as their
names? And of the same great Alexander what have we at this day, except the
vain noise of his fame? Venus Als^rsus and Kik^^ius de noviss. art. 4.
Let that Company of Philosophers inform us, who the day following assembled at
his dead Corpse. One of them said, Yesterday the whole circumference of the
world sufficed not Alexander; this day two yards of ground serve his turn.
Another in admiration cried out, Yesterday Alexander was able to redeem
innumerable people from the hands of death; this day he cannot free himself. A
third exclaims, Yesterday Alexander oppressed the whole earth; and this day the
earth oppresses him, and there is no footstep in it left by which he passed.

Moreover how great is the difference betwixt a Statua of Gold or Marble, and
the Shadow? That is solid, and of a precious substance: and this has no being
or body. In the same manner the life eternal is most precious and of great
concernment, the temporal vain and miserable without substance. The Shadow has
no other being but to be a privation of the most excellent quality in nature,
and of the most beautiful thing the world produces, which is the light of the
Sun. In the same manner this life without substance or being is a privation of
our greatest happiness. Wherefore Job said, Job. 9.
His days fled away, and his eyes saw not what was good. This said he, who was
a Prince, and possessed great riches, and many Servants, and a numerous Family:
and yet he says that in his life he saw not what was good; which he might say
with much truth: because the goods of this life are not to be called such, and
if they were, yet the pleasure of them endures so short a space, as they are
done before we are sensible of them; and if they should continue some time, yet
being subject to end they are to be esteemed as if they were not. The which was
confessed by a certain Cavalier called Rowland, Hist. de. S. Dom.
who having been present at a Feast celebrated with great cost and bravery to
the high content and satisfaction of the invited Guests, at night when he
returned home, cried out with much bitterness of spirit, Where is the Feast we
had to day? where is the glory of it? how is this day past without leaving any
tract behind it? even so shall the rest of this life pass, without leaving any
thing to suceed it, but eternal sorrow. This consideration sufficed to make him
change his life, and the next day to enter into Religion. And as in a shadow
all is obscurity, so this life is full of darkness and deceit. Whereupon
Zacharias said, That men sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Much are
we deceived whilst we live in this body of death, since this life, although
short, appears long unto us, and being miserable, yet we are pleased and
content with it: and being nothing, yet it seems as if it were all things; and
there is not any danger which men undergo not for the love they bear it, even
unto the hazard of Eternity. Doubtless this is the most prejudicial quality of
temporal life, that having in it self no truth or reality, yet it paints and
sets forth that false ware, which it has, with much beauty and luster to our
perdition. Wherefore Aeschylus said, That it was not only a shadow of life,
but also a shadow of smoke, which blindes and smuts, and is a thing so
inconstant and vain; which is also suitable to that of David, when he said,
That his days vanished like smoke and grew toward an end like a shadow;
joining together the shadow and smoke, two things the most vain of any in the
world. Even Pindarus exaggerates it yet more, saying, That it was no shadow,
but the dream of a shadow; and what is it else but to dream, to persuade ones
self that this life is long, and hope for prosperity in it? This certainly is
the greatest deceit which is put upon man, and the chief cause of all his
evils, that he suffers not himself to be persuaded what life is, and the
shortness of it. For as the Shadow is nothing less than the Statua whole Shadow
it is, yet appears like it, and is the figure of it: so although this life be
most short, and nothing less than eternity, yet it looks like it, and unto us
it seems as if it were eternal. This is a most hurtful and costly cosenage. For
if life should appear what it is, and not lie unto us, we should not put our
trust in it, nor make such esteem of those goods and blessings, which it
promises, which in themselves are so deceitful and uncertain; but being as it
is an image and a shadow, all which it proposes unto us, is but feigned and
dissembled, promising great happiness, when it is only full of misery and
calamity, although disguised in such manner as we know them not. How contented
goes the Bride unto her Marriage Bed, and yet within a short time laments her
unfortunate choice? with what gust does the ambitious man enter upon his
office, which is but a Seminary of future sorrow and vexation? what joy do
those riches bring along with them, which in the end are to be the death of the
possessor? All is deceit, dissimulation, falsehood and prejudice: and yet we
like frantic people are not sensible of our mischiefs. Unto how many
infirmities is the body of a man exposed? with what imaginations is he
afflicted and deceived? with how many labors and toyls does he daily wrestle?
with what thoughts and apprehensions does he torment himself? what dangers of
soul and body does he run into? what fopperies is he forced to behold? what
injuries to suffer? what necessities and afflictions? Nay such is our whole
life, that it seemed unto St. Bernard little less evil than that of hell, Sermo
de ascen. Domini.
but only for the hope we have of heaven. Our Infancy is full of ignorance and
fears, our Youth of sins, our Age of sorrow, and our whole life of dangers.
There is none content with his condition, but he who will die whilst he lives:
in so much as life cannot be good, unless it must resemble death. Finally, as
the Shadow is in such manner an image, as it represents all things to the
contrary, so as he who shall place himself betwixt the Statua and the Shadow,
shall perceive that that which is upon the right hand of the Statua, the Shadow
represents upon the left, and what it has upon the left, the Shadow has upon
the right: so Time is in such manner the Image of Eternity, as it has all its
properties to the contrary. Eternity has no end: but Life and Time have a
speedy one. Eternity has no change: but nothing is more mutable than Time.
Eternity suffers no comparison by reason of its infinite greatness: but Life
and all the goods of it are short and little, and derived from the earth, which
is but a point.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE TEMPORAL and ETERNAL.
CAP. I.
Of the End of Temporal Life.

LEt us now consider how contrary unto the conditions of Eternity are those
which accompany this our miserable life. Let us begin with the first; Which is
to be limited and subject to an end. In the which two things are to be
considered, The End, and the Manner of it, which perhaps is of more misery than
the end it self. And truly although the end of life should fall under humane
election, and that it were in the power of Man to make choice how many years he
would continue in life, and after what manner he would then leave it, and that
it might conclude some other way than by death or sickness, yet the
consideration, that it, and all things temporal were to perish, and at last to
have an end, were sufficient to make us despise it, and that very thought would
drown all the pleasures and contents which it could afford us. For as all
things are of greater or lesser esteem according to the length and shortness of
their duration, so life being to end, be it in what manner soever, is much to
be disvalued. A fair Vessel of Crystal, if it were as consistent and durable
as Gold, were more precious than Gold it self: but being frail and subject to
break, it loses its estimation; and although of it self it might last long, yet
being capable by some careless mischance of being broken, it becomes of much
less value. In the same manner our life which is much more frail than glass,
being subject to perish by a thousand accidents, and though none of them should
happen, could not long continue, since it consumes it self, must needs together
with those temporal goods which attend it, be most contemptible. But
considering that the ending of it is by the way of death, infirmities, and
misfortunes, which are the Harbingers, and prepare the way for death, it is to
be admired that Man, who knows he is to die, makes account of temporal
felicity, seeing the misery, in which the prosperity of this world, and the
Majesty of the greatest Monarchs are at last to finish. Wherein ended King
Antiochus, Lord of so many Provinces, 1 Machab. 6. 2 Machab. 9.
but in a disconsolate and mortal Melancholy: in a perpetual waking, which with
want of sleep bereft him of his judgment; in a grievous torture in his belly,
which forced him to void his very entrails; in a perpetual pain in his bones,
that he was not able to move? And he who seemed to command the waves of the
Sea, and that the highest mountains of the Earth hung upon his finger ends,
whose Majesty was once lifted up above all humane power, could not then
preserve himself in his own Kingdom, nor move one pace from the place where
they laid him: he, who clothed himself in soft Silks, and pure Linnens, he
whose Garments were more fragrant than the most precious spices, cast now such
a smell from his putrified members, that none could endure his presence; and
being yet alive, his whole body swarmed with loathsome vermin, his flesh
dropped away by pieces, and he above all remained distracted in his wits,
raging with despite and madness. Let us now consider Antiochus in all his pomp
and glory, glittering in Gold and dazzling the eyes of the beholders with the
splendour of his Diamonds and precious Jewels, mounted upon a stately Courser,
commanding over numerous Armies, and making the very earth tremble under him.
Let us then behold him in his Bed pale and wan, his strength and spirits spent,
his loathsome body flowing with worms and corruption, forsaken by his own
people by reason of his pestilential and poisonous stink, which infected his
whole Camp, and finally dying mad and in a rage. Who seeing such a death would
with the felicity of his life? who with the condition of his misery would
desire his fortune? See then wherein the goods of this life conclude. And as
the clear and sweet waters of Jordan end in the filthy mud of the dead Sea, and
are swallowed up in that noisome Bitumen: so the greatest splendour of this life
concludes in death, and those loathsome diseases which usually accompany it.
Act. 12. Vide Josephum.
Behold in what a sink of filth ended the two Herod's, most potent Princes,
Ascalonita and Agrippa. This, who clothed himself in Tissue, and boasted a
Majesty above humane, dyed devoured by worms, which whilst he yet lived fed
upon his corrupted and apostumated flesh, flowing with horrible filth and
matter. Neither came the other Ascalonita to finish his days more happily
being consumed by lice: that nasty vermin by little and little bereaving him
both of his life and Kingdom. 3 Reg. 20.
King Achab, Conqueror of the King of Syria and 32 other Princes, dyed wounded
by a chance-arrow, which pierced his body, and stained his Royal Chariot with
his black gore, which was after licked up by hungry Dogs, as it he had been
some savage beast. 3 Reg. 22.
Neither dyed his Son Joram a more fortunate death, run through the heart with
a sword, his body left upon the field to be devoured by birds and beasts of
prey, wanting in his death seven foot of earth to cover him, who in life
commanded a Kingdom. Who could have known Caesar, who had first seen him
triumph over the Conquered world, and then beheld him gasping for a little
breath, and weltring in his own blood, which flowed from three and twenty
wounds opened by so many stabs? Who could believe it were the same Cyrus, he
who subdued the Medes, conquered the Assyrian and Chaldaean Empire, he who
amazed the world with thirty years success of continued Victories, now taken
prisoner and put to an ignominious death by the Command of a Woman? Who could
think it were the same Alexander, Plut. in ejus vita.
who in so short time subjugated the Persians, Indians, and the best part of
the known world, and should after behold him conquered by a Calenture, feeble,
exhausted in body, dejected in spirit, dried up and parched with thirst,
without taste in his mouth, or content in his life, his eyes sunk, his nose
sharp, his tongue cleaving to his pallat, not being able to pronounce one word?
What an amazement is it that the heat of a poor Fever should consume the
mightiest power and fortune of the world: and that the greatest of temporal and
humane prosperities should be drowned by the overflowing of one irregular and
inordinate humor?

How great a Monster is Humane Life since it consists of so disproportionable
parts, the uncertain felicity of our whose life ending in a most certain
misery? How prodigious were that Monster which should have one arm of a Man,
and the other of an Elephant, one foot of a Horse, and the other of a Bear?
Truly the parts of this life are not much more suitable. Who would marry a woman
though of a comely and well proportioned body, who had the head of an ugly
Dragon? certainly although she had a great Dowry, none would covet such a
Bedfellow. Wherefore then do we wed our selves unto this life, which although
it seems to carry along with it much content and happiness, yet is in effect no
less a Monster: since although the body appear unto us beautiful and pleasant,
yet the end of it is horrible and full of misery? And therefore a Philosopher
said well, that the end of things was their head: and as men were to be known
and distinguished by their faces, so things by their ends; and therefore who
will know what life is, let him look upon the end. And what end of life is not
full of misery? Let no man flatter himself with the vigor of his health, with
the abundance of his riches, with the splendour of his authority, with the
greatness of his fortune: for by how much he is more fortunate, by so much
shall he be more miserable; since his whole life is to end in misery. Wherefore
Agesilaus hearing the King of Persia cried up for a most fortunate and happy
Prince, reprehended those who extolled him, saying, Have patience; Plutar. in
ejus vita.
for even King Priamus, whose end was so lamentable, was not unfortunate at the
age of the King of Persia; Giving us to understand that the most happy were not
to be envied, whilst they lived, by reason of the uncertainty of that end
whereunto they are subject. How many as yet appear most happy, whose death will
shortly discover the infelicity of their lives? Plutar. in Apoph. Graecis.
Epaminondas, when they asked him who was the greatest Captain, Cabrias,
Iphicrates, or himself, Answered, that whilst they lived no man could judge,
but that the last day of their lives would deliver the Sentence, and give each
one their due. Let no man be deceived in beholding the prosperity of a rich
man; let him not measure his felicity by what he sees at present, but by the
end, wherein he shall conclude: not by the sumptuousness of his Palaces, not by
the multitude of his Servants, not by the bravery of his Apparel, not by the
luster of his Dignity; but let him expect the end of that which he so much
admires, and he shall then perceive him at best to die in his Bed, dejected,
dismayed, and struggling with the pangs and anxieties of death; and if so he
comes off, Well; otherwise wise the daggers of his enemy, the teeth of some
wild beast, or a tyle thrown upon his head by some violent wind may serve to
make an end of him, when he least thinks of it. This reason tells us, although
we had no experience of it. But we see it daily confirmed by the testimony of
those, who are already in the gates of death: and no man can better judge of
life than he who stands with his back toward it. Mago, Dionysius Carth. de
noviss. Art. 5.
a famous Captain amongst the Carthaginians, and Brother to the great Hannibal,
being mortally wounded, confessed this truth unto his Brother, saying, O how
great a madness is it to glory in an Eminent Command! The estate of the most
powerful is subject to most impetuous storms, whose end is to be sunk and
overthrown. O how wavering and uncertain is the height of the greatest honors!
false is the hope of man, and vain is all his glory, affected with feigned and
fawning flatteries. O uncertain life due unto perpetual toil and labor! what
does it now profit me to have fired so many stately and lofty buildings, to
have destroyed so many Cities and their people? What does it now profit me (O
Brother) to have raised so many costly Palaces of Marble, when I now die in the
open field, and in the sight of heaven? O how many things do thou now think
of doing, not knowing the bitterness of their end? Thou beholdest me now dying,
and know that thou also shall quickly follow me.

2.
But let us forbear to look upon those several kinds of death, which are
incident to humane nature. Let us only consider that, which is esteemed the
most happy, when we die not suddenly or by violence, but by some infirmity,
which leasurely makes an end of us, or by a pure resolution which naturally
brings death along with it. What greater misery of man's life than this, that
that death should be accounted happy: not that it is so, but because it is less
miserable than others? for what grief and sorrow does not he pass, who dies in
this manner? how do the accidents of his infirmities afflict him? The heat of
his Fever which scorches his entrails, The thirst of his mouth which suffers
him not to speak, The pain of his head which hinders his attention, The sadness
and melancholy of his heart proceeding from the apprehension that he is to die,
besides other grievous accidents, which are usually more in number than a
humane body has members to suffer, together with remedies which are commonly
no less painful than the evils themselves. To this add the grief of leaving
those he loves best: and above all, the uncertainty whither he is to go, to
heaven or hell. And if only the memory of death be said to be bitter, what
shall be the experience? Saul, who was a man of great courage, oncly because it
was told him that the next day he was to die, fell half dead upon the ground
with fear. For what news can be more terrible unto a sinner, than that he is to
die, to leave all his pleasure in death, and to give an account unto God for
his life past? If lots were to be cast, whether one should have his flesh
plucked off with burning pincers, or be made a King, with what fear and anxiety
of mind would that man expect the issue? how then shall he look who in the
agony of his death wrastles with Eternity, and within two hours space looks for
glory or torments without end? What life can be counted happy, if that be happy
which ends with so much misery? If we will not believe this, let us ask him who
is now passing the traunces of death, what his opinion is of life. Let us now
enquire of him when he lies with his breast sticking forth, his eyes sunk, his
feet dead, his knees cold, his visage pale, his pulses without motion, his
breath short, a Crucifix in one hand, and a Taper in the other, those who
assist at his death bidding him say, Jesus, Jesus, and advising him to make an
Act of Contrition, what will this man say his life was, but by how much more
prosperous, by so much more vain, and that all his felicity was false and
deceitful, since it came to conclude in such a period? what would he now take
for all the honors of this world? Certainly I believe he would part with them
at an easy rate. Nay, if they have been offensive to God Almighty, he would
give all in his power he had never enjoyed them, and would willingly change
them all for one Confession well made. Philip the third was of this mind, and
would at that time have exchanged his being Monarch of all Spain, and Lord of
so many Kingdoms in the four parts of the world for the Porters Keys of some
poor Monastery. Death is a great discoverer of truth. What thou would then
wish to have been, be now, whilst it is in thy power. A fool thou art, if thou
neglect it now when thou may, and then wish it when it is too late. He who
unto the hour of his death has enjoyed all the delights the world can give
him, at that hour what remains with him? Nothing; or, if any thing, a greater
grief. And what of all his penances and labors suffered for Christ? Certainly,
if he had endured more than all the Martyrs, he shall then feel no pain or
grief of them all, but much comfort. Judge then if it shall not be better for
thee to do that now, which thou shall then know to have been the better.
Consider of how little substance all temporal things will appear, when thou
shall be in the light of eternal. The honors, which they have given thee,
shall be no more thine: the pleasures, wherein thou have delighted, can be no
more thine: thy riches are to be another. See then whether the happiness of
this life, which is not so long as life it self, be of that value, that for it
we should part with eternal felicity.

I beseech thee ponder what is life, and what is death. Life is the passing of
a shadow, short, troublesome, and dangerous; a place, which God has given us
in time for the deserving of Eternity. Consider with thy self why God leads us
about in the Circuit of this life, when he might at the first instant have
placed us in heaven. Was it perhaps that we should here mispend our time like
beasts, and wallow in the base pleasures of our senses, and daily invent new
Chimera's of vain and frivolous honors? No certainly, it was not: but that by
virtuous actions we might gain heaven, show what we owe unto our Creator, and
in the midst of the troubles and afflictions of this life discover how loyal
and faithful we are unto our God. For this he placed us in the Lists, that we
should take his part, and defend his honor; for this he entered us into this
Militia and Warfare, (for, as Job says, the life of man is a warfare upon
earth,) that here we might fight for him, and in the midst of his and our
Enemies show how true and faithful we are unto him. Were it fit that a Soldier
in the time of Battle should stand disarmed, passing away his time at Dice
upon a Drum-head? and what laughter would that Roman Gladiator cause, who
entering into the place of Combat should set him down upon the Arena and throw
away his Arms? This does he who seeks his ease in this life, and sets his
affections upon the things of the earth, not endeavoring those of heaven, nor
thinking upon death, where he is to end. A Peregrination is this life; and what
passenger is so besotted with the pleasures of the way, that he forgets the
place whither he is to go? How come thou then to forget death, whither thou
travellest with speed, and can not, though thou desire, rest one small
minute by the way? For time, although against thy will, will draw thee along
with it. The way of this life is not voluntary like that of Travelers, but
necessary like that of condemned persons from the prison unto the place of
execution. To death thou stand condemned, whither thou art now going: how
can thou laugh? A Malefactor after sentence past is so surprised with the
apprehension of death, that he thinks of nothing but dying. We are all
condemned to die; how come we then to rejoice in those things which we are to
leave so suddenly? Who being led to the Gallows could please himself in some
little flower that was given him by the way, or play with the Halter which was
shortly to strangle him? Since then all of us, even from the instant we issue
out of our Mothers wombs, walk condemned unto death, and know not whether we
shall from thence pass into hell, (at least we may,) how come we to please our
selves with the flower, or, to say better, with the hay, of some short gust of
our appetites; since, according to the Prophet, all the glory of the flesh is
no more than a little hay, which quickly withers? How come we to delight in
riches, which oftentimes hasten our deaths? Why consider we not this, when we
are certain that all that we do in this life is vanity, except our preparation
for death? In death, when as there is no time nor remedy left us, we shall too
late perceive this truth, when as all the goods of this life shall leave us by
necessity, which we will not now leave with merit.

Death is a general privation of all goods, temporal: an universal Pillager of
all things, which even despoils the body of the soul. For this it is compared
unto a Thief, who not only robs us of our treasure and substance, but bereaves
us of our lives. Since therefore thou art to leave all, Why do thou load thy
self in vain? What Merchant, knowing, that so soon as he arrived unto the
Ports, his Ship and Goods should both be sunk, would charge his Vessel with
much Merchandise? Arriving at death thou, and all thou have, are to sink and
perish: why do thou then burden thy self with that which is not needful,
but rather a hinderance to thy salvation? How many, forbearing to throw their
Goods overboard in some great Tempest, have therefore both themselves and Goods
been swallowed by the raging Sea? How many who out of a wicked love to these
Temporal riches have lost themselves in the hour of death, and will not then
leave their wealth when their wealth leaves them, but even at that time busy
their thoughts more about it than their Salvation? Whereupon St. Gregory says,
That is never lost without grief, which is possessed with love. Humbert. in tract
de Septemp. timore.
Vmbertus writes of a certain man of great wealth, who falling desperately
sick, and Plate of gold and silver to be brought before him: and in this manner
spoke unto his Soul; My Soul all this I promise thee, and thou shall enjoy it
all, if thou will not now leave my Body; and greater things I will bestow upon
thee, rich Possessions and sumptuous Houses, upon condition thou will yet stay
with me. But finding his infirmity still to increase, and no hope left of life,
in a great rage and fury he fell into these desperate speeches: But since thou will not do what I desire thee, nor abide with me, I recommend thee unto the
Devil: and immediately with these words miserably expired. In this story may be
seen the vanity of Temporal things, and the hurt he receives by them, who
possesses them with too much affection. What greater vanity then not to profit
us in a passage of the greatest necessity and importance? and what greater hurt
then, when they cannot avail our bodies, to prejudice our souls? That they put
an impediment to our salvation when our affections are too much set upon them,
were a sufficient motive not only to contemn them, but also to detest them.
Robertus de Licio writes, that whilst he advised a sick person to make his
Confession, and take care of his Soul, his Servants and other Domestics went
up and down the house, laying hold every one of what they could; the sick man
taking notice of it, and attending more to what They stole from him, than to
what He spoke to him about the salvation of his Soul, made deep sighs, and
cried out, saying: Woe be to me, Woe be to me, who have taken so much pains to
gather riches, and now am compelled to leave them, and they snatch them from me
violently before my eyes. O my Riches! O my Moneys! O my Jewels! into whose
possession are you to fall? and in these cries he gave up the ghost, making no
more account of his Soul, than if he had been a Turk. Vincentius Veluacensis
relates also of one, Vincen. in spec. moral.
who having lent four pounds of money, upon condition, that at four years end
they should pay him twelve: he being in state of death a Priest went to him,
and exhorted him to confess his sins, but could get no other words from the
sick person than these: Such a one is to pay me twelve pounds for four, and
having said this died immediately. Much what to this purpose is a Story related
by St. Bernardin of a certain Confessarius, who earnestly persuading a rich man
at the time of his death to a confession, could get no other words from him,
but How sells Wool? What price bears it at present? and as the Priest spoke
unto him, Sir for Gods sake leave off this discourse, and have a care of your
Soul, the Sick man still persevered to inform himself of such things he might
hope to gain by, asking him, Father, when will the Ships come? are they yet
arrived? for his thoughts were so wholly taken up with matters of gain and this
world, that he could neither speak nor think of any thing but what tended to
his profit. But die Priest still urging him to look to his Soul and confess,
all he could get from him was, I cannot: and in this manner died without
confession.

This is the Salary which the goods of the earth bestow on those who serve
them, that if they do not leave or ruin them before their death, they are then
certain at least to leave them, and often hazard the salvation of those that
dote upon them. O foolish Sons of Adam! this short life Is bestowed upon us for
gaining the goods of heaven, which are to last eternally, and we spend it in
seeking those of the earth, which are to perish instantly. Wherefore do we not
employ this short time for the purchasing eternal glory, since we are to
possess no more hereafter than what we provide for here? Wherefore do we not
consider this? Wherefore busy we our selves about Temporal things and the
affairs of this life, which we are instantly to leave, and enter into a Region
of Eternity? Less are a thousand years in respect of Eternity, than a quarter
of an hour in respect of threescore years. Why are we then negligent in that
short time we are to live in acquiring that which is to endure for a world of
worlds? Death is a moment placed betwixt this life and the next, in which we
are to traffic for eternity. Let us not therefore be careless, but let us
remember how much it imports us to die well, and to that end let us endeavor
to live well.

. 3.
Besides all this, although one should die the most happy death that can be
imagined, yet it suffices to behold the dead Body, when the Soul has left it,
how ugly and noisome the miserable Carcass remains, that even friends fly from
it, and scarce dare stay one night alone with it. The nearest and most obliged
Kindred procure it in all haste to be carried forth a doors, and having wrapped
it in some course Sheet throw it into the Grave, and within two days forget
it: and he who in life could not be contained in great and sumptuous Palaces,
is now content with the narrow lodging of seven foot of earth; he who used to
rest in rich and dainty Beds, has for his Couch the hard ground, and, as
Isaias says, for his Mattress moths, and for his Covering Worms, his Pillows,
at best, the bones of other dead persons; then heaping upon him a little earth,
and perhaps a Gravestone, they leave his flesh to be feasted on by the worms,
whilst his heirs triumph in his riches. He who gloried in the exercise of
Arms, and was used to revel at Balls and Festivals, is now stiff and could,
his hands and feet without motion, and all his senses without life. He who with
his power and pride trampled upon all, is now trod under foot by all. Consider
him eight days dead drawn forth of his Grave, how ghastly and horrible a
spectacle he will appear; and wherein differ from a dead Dog thrown upon a
Dunghill? Behold then what thou pamperst; a Body, which shall perhaps within
four days be eaten by loathsome vermin. Whereupon do thou found thy vain
pretensions, which are but Castles in the air, founded upon a little earth,
which turning into dust the whole Fabric falls to ground? See wherein all
humane greatness concludes, and that the end of man is no less loathsome and
miserable than his beginning. Let this Consideration serve thee, as it has
done many Servants of Christ, to despise all things of this life. Alex. Faya
to. 2. Joh. Major verbo Mors. Ex. 21.
Alexander Faya writes, that having opened the Vault, wherein lay interred the
Body of a principal Count, they who were present perceived upon the face of the
dead person a Toad of an extraordinary greatness, which accompanied with many
other filthy and loathsome worms and vermin, was feeding upon his flesh: which
caused so great a horror and amazement, that they all fled; The which so soon
as it came unto the knowledge of the Son of that Count, who was then in the
flower of his age, he would needs go and behold the spectacle: and looking
seriously upon it he broke into these speeches; These are the friends, which we
breed and provide for with our delicacies; for these we rest upon soft Beds,
and lodge in gilt Chambers adorned with Tapestries, and make them grow and
increase with the vanity of our dainties. Were it not better to prevent them by
Fasts, and Penances, and Austerities in our life, that they may not thus insult
upon us after death? With this conderation quitting his fair Possessions, and
flying privately away, accompanied only with a lively desire of being poor for
Christ, which he accounted for the greatest riches, he came to Rome, where
chastising the body with much rigor, and living in the holy fear of the Lord,
he at last became a Collier, and by his labor sustained his poor life.
Finally, coming one day unto the City to sell his coals, he fell into a
grievous sickness, which having endured with marvelous patience, he at last
delivered his most happy Soul into the hands of his Redeemer: and that very
instant of his death all the Bells of the City rung themselves; with which
Miracle the Pope and the Roman Court being marvelously astonished, his
Confessor related unto them all that happened, and informed them both of the
condition, and sanctity of the dead person; and there being at the same time in
Rome some Gentlemen and Soldiers belonging to the same Prince, who came in
search of their Master, and finding him deceased, carried home his holy Body
with much joy and reverence unto his Country.

The Sight of the dead Body of the Empress Donna Isabella, Wife unto the
Emperor Charles the fifth, wrought no less effect in the heart of Blessed
Francesc^ de Borgia, then Marquess of Lombay, who being appointed to wait upon
the Coarse unto Granada, where it was to be interred, and being to deliver it
barefaced according to custom, to the end it might appear to be the same
Body, he caused the sheet of Lead, wherein it was wrapped, to be opened, which
immediately cast forth so horrible a stench, that those who were present, not
able to endure it, were forced to retire; and withal the face appeared so foul
and deformed, that not any of the attendants durst take their oath that that
was the Empress's Body. Who sees not here the vanity of the world? what is of
more respect and esteem than the Bodies of great Kings and Princes whilst they
live, and now dead the Guards and Gentlemen which are to wait upon them fly
from them? Who are accounted more happy than they who have the fortune to be
near their persons? They are spoken unto upon the knee as if they were Gods,
but being dead all forsake them, and even Toads, Worms, and Dogs dare approach
and eat them. A good testimony of this was Queen Jezabell, whose pamperd Body
adored, whilst she lived, was being dead ignominiously torn in pieces by Dogs.
But to return to our Story; The Marquess remaining alone behind the rest, began
to consider what the Empress once was, and what he now beheld her. Where was
the beauty of that face, but become worms and putrefaction: where that Majesty
and gravity of countenance, which made all reverence her, and those people
happy who beheld her, but now grown so hideous, that her most obliged Servants
leave and abandon her? Where is now the Royal Scepter, but resolved into filth
and corruption? This consideration so changed his heart, that despising what
was temporal, and now wholly seeking what was eternal, he determined never
after to serve that Lord who was mortal.

The very memory of the loathsomness of a dead Body may serve to make us
despise the beauty of that which is living, as St. Peter Damian advises us,
Petrus Damianus in Gomor. c. 23.
saying, If the subtle Enemy shall set before thee the frail beauty of the
flesh, send thy thoughts presently unto she Sepulcher of the Dead: and let them
there see what they can find agreeable to the touch, or pleasing to the sight.
Consider that poison which now stinks intollerably, that corruption which
engenders and feeds worms. That dust and dry ashes was once soft and lively
flesh, and in its youth was subject to the like passions as thou art. Consider
those rigid nerves, those naked teeth, the disjoynted disposition of the bones
and articles, and that horrible dissipation of the whole Body: and by this
means the Monster of this deformed and confused figure will pluck from thy
heart all deceits and illusions. This from St. Peter Damian.

All this is certainly to happen unto thy self. Wherefore do thou not amend
thy evil conditions? this is to be thy end; unto this therefore direct thy life
and actions. From hence spring all the errors of men, that they forget the end
of their lives, which they ought to have still before their eyes, and by it to
order themselves for the compliance with their obligations. With reason had the
Brachmans their Sepulchers placed still open before their doors, that by the
memory of death they might learn to live. In this sense is that Axiom of Plato
most true, when he says, That Wisdom is the Meditation of Death: because this
wholesome thought of Death undeceives us in the vanities of the world, and
gives us force and vigor to better our lives. Johannes Brom. in Sum. verb.
Poenit. number. 12.
Some Authors write of a certain Confessarius, who when all his persuasions
could not prevail with his penitent to do penance for his sins, contented
himself with this promise, that he would suffer one of his Servants every
night, when he went to bed, to sound these words in his ear, Think that thou
art to dye; who having often heard this admonition, and and profoundly
considered it with himself, he at last returned unto his Confessor, well
disposed to admit of such penance as should be enjoined him. The same thing
happened to another, who having confessed to to the Pope very heinous crimes,
said, that he could not fast, nor wear hair-shirts, nor admit of any other
kinds of austerity. His Holiness having commended the matter to God, gave him a
Ring with this Poesy: Memento m^ri; Remember thou art to dye: charging him,
that as often as he looked upon the Ring, he should read those words, and call
death to mind. Few hours after the memory hereof caused such a change in his
heart, that he offered to fulfill what ever penance his Holiness should please
to impose upon him. For this reason it seems God commanded the Prophet Jeremias
that he should go into the house of the Potter, and that he should there hear
his words. Well might the Lord have sent his Prophet into some place more
decent to receive his sacred words, then where so many men were daily employed
in dirt and clay; but here was the particular mystery, whereby we are given to
understand, that the presence of Sepulchers, wherein is preserved as in the
house of a Potter the clay of humane nature, it was a place most proper for God
to speak unto us, that the memory of death might more deeply imprint his words
in our hearts. For this very reason the Devil strives with all his power and
cunning to obstruct in us the memory of death. For what other cause can be
assigned why the mere suspicion of some loss or notable damage should bereave
us of our sleep, and that the certainty of death, which of things terrible is
most terrible, should never trouble us?

CAP. II.
Remarkable Conditions of the end of Temporal Life.

BEsides the misery wherein all the felicity of this world is to determine, the
end of our life has other most remarkable conditions very worthy to be
considered, and by which we may perceive the goods of it to be most
contemptible. We will now principally speak of three. First, that death is most
infallible, certain, and no way to be avoided. The second, that the time is
most uncertain, because we know neithe^ when, nor how it will happen. The
third, that it is bu^ only one, and but once to be experienced, so that w^
cannot by a second death correct the errors of the first Concerning the
certainty and infallibility of death, it imports us much to persuade our selves
of it; for as it is infallible that the other life shall be without end; so it
is as certain that this shall have it; And as the Damned are in despair to find
an end in their torments, so are we practically to despair that the pleasures
and contents of this world are to endure for ever. God has not made a Law more
inviolable than that of death. For having often dispensed in other Laws, and by
his omnipotent power and pleasure violated, as I may say, diverse times the
rights of Nature, he neither has nor will dispense with the Law of death, but
has rather dispensed with other Laws, that this should stand in force; and
therefore has not only executed the sentence of death upon those, who in
rigor ought to dye, but upon those, unto whom it was no wise due. In the
conception of Christ our Savior those established Laws of Nature, that men
were not to be born but by propagation from men, and breach of the Mothers
integrity, were dispensed with. God, that his Laws should have no force in
Christ, working two most stupendous Miracles, and infringing the Laws of
Nature, that his Son might be born of a Virgin Mother, was so far from
exempting him from the Law of death, that death not belonging to him, as being
Lord of the Law, and wanting all sin, even original, by which was contracted
death, nay immortality, and the four gifts of glory, being due unto his most
Holy Body, as resulting from the clear vision of the Divine essence, which his
Soul ever enjoyed, yet all this notwithstanding God would not comply with this
right of Nature, but rather miraculously suspended by his omnipotent Arm those
gifts of glory from his Body, that he might become subject unto death; in so
much as God observes this Law of Death with such rigor, that doing Miracles
that the Law of Nature should not be kept in other things, he works Miracles,
that the Law of Death should be observed even by his own Son who deserved it
not, and unto whom it was in no sort due. And now that the Son of God had taken
upon him the redemption of Mankind, for whom out of his most infinite charity
it was convenient for him to dye the death of the Cross, which reason failing
in his most holy Mother, unto whom death was not likewise due from Original
sin, she being privileged, according to the opinion of most Universities, as
well in that as many other things by her blessed Son, yet would he not exempt
her from that inviolable Law of Death. What enchantment than is this, that,
Death being so certain, we will not suffer our selves to understand it, nor be
persuaded that it is so? Thou art to dye: assure thy self of that. An
irrevocable Law is this, and without remedy: Thou must dye. The time will come,
when those eyes, with which thou read this, shall be burst and lose their
sight: those hands, which thou now imployest, be without sense or motion: that
body, which thou movest from place to place with such agility, shall be stiff
and cold: this mouth, which now discourses, shall be mute without breath or
spirit: and this flesh, which thou now pamperest, shall be consumed and eaten
by loathsome worms and vermin. An infallible thing it is that the time will
come, when thou shall be covered with earth, thy body stink and rot, and appear
more noisome and more horrible unto the senses than a dead Dog putrified upon a
Dunghill. The time will come when thou shall be forgotten as if thou had never
been, and those that pass shall walk over thee without remembering that such a
man was born. Consider this and persuade thy self that thou must dye as well as
others; that which has happened to so many must happen also unto thee; thou
which art now afraid of the dead, must dye thy self; thou which loathest to
behold an open Sepulcher where lie the half putrified bones and flesh of
others, must putrify and rot thy self. Think upon this seriously, and reflect
with thy self soberly how thou shall look, when thou art dead; and this
consideration will give thee a great knowledge what thy life is, and make thee
despise the pleasures of it.

Truly such is the condition of death, that although to dye were only
contingent and no wise certain, yet, because it might happen, it ought to make
us very careful and sollicitous. If God had at first created the world
replenished with people, and some one, before it was known what death was, had
fallen sick of a pestilential Fever, and should have suffered in the sight of
the rest the accidents of that infirmity, those violent fits of heat, that
scorching thirst, that restless unquietness of mind and body tossing and
tumbling from side to side, that raging frenzy which bereaves him of his
judgment, and at last they should behold him pale and wan, wholly disfigured,
struggling with death, and giving the last gasp, the Body after to remain
stiff, cold, and immovable, how would they remain astonished with the sight of
that misery? which would appear much greater, when after three or four days
the Body begun to smell and corrupt, to be full of worms and filth. Without
doubt a mortal sadness would seize upon them all, and every one would fear lest
some such miserable condition might happen unto himself. And although God
should say, I will not that all shall dye; I will content my self with the
death of some few, but should leave those uncertain, whom, this would suffice
to make all to tremble: each one would fear lest he were one of those designed
for that misfortune. If then in this case, death being uncertain, all would
quake; because all might dye, why remain we so supinely careless, since it is
sure all must dye? If death being doubtful cause such a terror, why do we not
fear it being certain? Nay though God should further say, that only one of all
those in the world should dye, but did not declare who that one were, yet all
would fear. Why then do thou not now fear, when all men must infallibly dye,
and perhaps thou the first? But if God should yet further proceed to reveal
that one appointed to dye, and he should notwithstanding live in that loose and
careless manner as thou now do, how would the rest of the world admire his
negligence, and vain temerity? what would they say? certainly they would cry
out unto him, Man, thou that art to turn into dust, why live thou in that
loose man^er? Man, that art to be eaten by worms, why do thou pamper thy
self? Man, which art to appear before the Tribunal of God, why do thou not
think upon the account that shall be demanded from thee? Man, which art to end,
and all things with thee, why do thou make such esteem of vanity? We who are
to live ever, well may we build houses and provide riches, because we look for
no other life than this, which is never to end; but thou who art but in this
life as a Passenger, and art to leave it to morrow, what have thou to do to
build houses? what have thou to do with the cares and business's of this
world? Wherefore do thou take thought for those temporal things whereof thou
have no need? Care for those of the other life wherein thou art to remain for
ever. Thou, thou art he whom God has designed to dye, why do thou not
believe it? or if thou do, why do thou laugh? why do thou rejoice? why
do thou live so much at ease in a place where thou art a Pilgrim and not to
rest? leave off the thoughts of the earth, and consider whither thou art to
go. It is not fitting for thee to live here in mirth and jollity, but to
retire into some solitary wilderness, and there dispose thy self for that
terrible trance which expects thee.

Let every man therefore say within himself, It is I who am to dye and resolve
unto dust; I have nothing to do with this world; the other was made for me: and
I am only to care for that; in this I am only a Passenger, and am therefore
to look upon the eternal, whither I am going, and am there to make my abode for
ever. Certain it is, that death will come and hurry me along with him. All the
business therefore I have now, is to dispose my self for so hard an encounter;
and since it is not in the power of man to free me from it, I will only serve
that Lord who is able to save me in so certain and imminent a danger. Much to
this purpose for our undeceiving is that Story set forth by John Major. Johan.
Major, and Alex. Faya. tom. 2.
(...) certain Soldier had served a Marquess for many years with great
fidelity, for which he was favored by his Lord with a singular respect and
affection. The Soldier chanced to fall into his last infirmity, which no
sooner came unto the knowledge of the Marquess, but he instantly came to visit
him, accompanied with diverse expert Physicians, and having enquired of his
health, and spoken many things unto him of much comfort and dearness, offered
himself to assist him in all things which might conduce to his health or
content, and wished him boldly to demand what might be useful or available for
him assuring him it should be granted without spare of cost or trouble. The
sick Soldier after much importunity at last entreated the favor of three
things, Either* that he would afford him some means to escape from death, which
he perceived was now ready to seize upon him: Or that he would mitigate those
great pains, which he then suffered, but for the space of one short hour: Or
that after he was departed this life he would procure him a good lodging though
but for one night and no longer. The Marquess answered, that those were only
in the power of God, and wished him to demand things feasible here upon earth,
and he would not fail to serve him. Unto whom the sick Soldier replied, I now
too late perceive all my labor and travail to be lost, and all the services
which I have done you in the whole course of my life to be vain and fruitless;
and turning himself unto those who were present, spoke unto them with much
feeling and tears in his eyes. My Brethren behold how vainly I have spent my
time being so precious a jewel in the serving of this Master, obeying his
Commands with much care and great danger of my Soul, which at this instant is
the grief I am most sensible of: See how small is his power, since in all these
pains, which afflict me, he is not able to give me ease for one hours space.
Wherefore I admonish you that you open your eyes in time, and let my error be a
warning unto you, that you preserve your selves from so notable a danger, and
that you endeavor in this world to serve such a Lord, as may not only free
you from these present perplexities, and preserve you from future evils, but
may be able to crown you with glory in another life. And if the Lord by the
intercession of your prayers shall be pleased to restore my health, I promise
hereafter not to employ my self in the service of so poor and impotent a
Master, who is not able to reward me, but my whole endeavor shall be to serve
him, who has power to protect me, and the whole world by his Divine virtue.
With this great repentance he dyed, leaving us an example to benefit our selves
by that time which God bestows upon us here for the obtaining of eternal reward.

2.
Let us now come unto the second condition, which is the Uncertainty of time in
the Circumstances. For as it is most certain that we are to dye, so it is most
uncertain How we are to dye: and as there is nothing more known than that death
is to seize upon all, so there is nothing less understood than When, and in
What manner. Who knows whether he is to dye in his old age, or in his youth? if
by sickness, or struck by a Thunderbolt? if by grief, or stabbed by Poniards?
if suddenly, or slowly? if in a City, or in a Wilderness? if a year hence, or
to day? the doors of death are ever open, and the enemy continually lies in
ambush, and when we least think of him will assault us. How can a man be
careless to provide for a danger which ever threatens him? Let us see with what
art men keep their temporal things, even at such time as they run no hazard.
The Shepherds guard their Flocks with watchful Dogs, although they believe the
Wolf to be far off, only because he may come: And walled Towers are kept by
Garrisons in time of peace, because an enemy either has or may approach them.
But when are we secure of death? when can we say that now it will not come? why
do we not then provide our selves against so apparent danger? In frontier Towns
the Sentinels watch day and night, although no Enemy appears, nor any assault
is feared; why do we not always watch since we are never secure from the
assaults of death? He who suspected that Thieves were to enter his house, would
wake all night, because they should at no hour find him unprovided. It being
then not a suspicion, but an apparent certainty that death will come, and we
know not when, why do we not always watch? We are in a continual danger, and
therefore ought to be continually prepared. It is good ever to have our
Accounts made with God, since we know not but he may call us in such haste as
we shall have no time to perfect them. It is good to play a sure game, and be
ever in the grace of God. Who would not tremble to hang over some vast
precipice, wherein if he fell he were certain to be dashed in a thousand
pieces, and that by so weak a supporter as a thread? This, or in truth much
greater is the danger of him, who is in mortal sin, who hangs over hell by the
thread of life, a twist so delicate, that not a knife, but the wind and the
least fit of sickness breaks it. Wonderful is the danger wherein he stands, who
continues to the space of one Ave Maria in mortal sin. Death has time enough
to shoot his arrow in the speaking a word, the twinkling of an eye suffices.
Who can laugh and be pleased whilst he stands naked and disarmed in the
midst of his Enemies? Amongst as many Enemies is man, as there are ways to
death, which are innumerable. The breaking of a vein in the body, The bursting
of an Imposthume in the entrails, A vapor which flies up to the head, A
passion which oppresses the heart, A tyle which falls from a house, A piercing
air which enters by some narrow cranny, Un yerro de cuenta, A hundred thousand
other occasions open the doors unto death, and are his Ministers. It is not
then safe for man to be disarmed and naked of the grace of God in the midst
of so many adversaries and dangers of death, which hourly threaten him. We
issue from the wombs of our Mothers as condemned persons out of prison, and
walk toward execution for the guilt which we have contracted by Original sin.
Who being led to execution would entertain himself by the way with vain
conceits and frivolous jests? we are all condemned persons who go to the
Gallows though by different ways, which we our selves know not: Some the
straight way, and some-by bypath, but are all sure to meet in death. Who
knows whether he go the direct way, or winds about by turns? whether he shall
arrive there soon or stay later? all that we know, is, that we are upon the
way, and are not far from thence. We ought therefore still to be prepared and
free from the distracting pleasures of this life for fear we fall suddenly and
at unawares upon it. This danger of sudden death is sufficient to make us
distaste all the delights of the earth. Dionysius King of Sicily, that he might
undeceive a young Philosopher, who therefore held him to enjoy the chief
felicity, because he wanted nothing of his pleasure, caused him one day to be
placed at a Royal Table, and served with all variety of splendid
entertainments, but over the place, where he was seated, caused secretly a
sharp-pointed Sword to be hung directly over his head, sustained only by a
horses hair. This danger was sufficient to make the poor Philosopher to forbear
his dinner, and not to relish one morsel of the Feast with pleasure. Thou then
who art no more secure of thy life than he, how can thou delight in the
pleasures of the world? he who every moment expects death, ought no moment to
delight in life. This only consideration of death according to Ricardus was
sufficient to make us distaste all the pleasures of the earth. A great danger
or fear suffices to take away the sense of lesser joys; and what greater
danger then that of Eternity?

Death is therefore uncertain, that thou should be ever certain to despise
this life, and dispose thy self for the other. Thou art every hour in danger of
death to the end that thou should be every hour prepared to leave life. What
is death but the way unto eternity? A great journey thou have to make;
wherefore do thou not provide in time, and the rather because thou know
not how soon thou may be forced to depart? The People of God, because they
knew not when they were to march, were for forty years which they remained in
the Wilderness ever in a readiness. Be thou then ever in a readiness, since
thou may perhaps; depart to day. Consider there is much to do in dying;
prepare thy self whilst thou have time, and do it well. For this many years
were necessary; wherefore since thou know not whether thou shall have one
day allowed thee, why do thou not this day begin to dispose thy self? If
when thou make a short journey, and have furnished and provided thy self of
all things fitting, yet thou commonly find something to be forgotten, how
comes it to pass that for so long a journey, as is the Region of Eternity, thou
think thy self sufficiently provided, when thou have scarce begun to think
of it? Who is there who does not desire to have served God faithfully two years
before death should take him? if then thou art not secure of one, why do
thou not begin? Trust not in thy health or youth, for death steals
treacherously upon us when we least look for it; for according to the saying of
Christ our Redeemer it will come in an hour when it is not thought on. And the
Apostle said, the day of the Lord would come like a thief in the night when
none were aware of it, and when the Master of the house was in a profound
sleep. Promise not thy self to morrow, for thou know not whether death will
come to night. The day before the Children of Israel went forth of Egypt, how
many of that Kingdom, young Lords and Princes of Families, promised themselves
to do great matters the next day, or perhaps within a year after? yet none of
them lived to see the morning. Wisely did Messodamus, who, as Guido
Bituricensis writes, when one invited him forth the next day to dinner,
answered, My friend, why do thou summon me for to morrow, since it is many
years that I durst not promise any thing for the day following? every hour I
look for death; there is no trust to be given to strength of Body, youthful
years, much riches, or humane hopes. Hear what God says to the Prophet Amos;
Amos 8.
In that day the Sun shall set at midday, and I will over-cast the earth with
darkness in the day of light. What is the setting of the Sun at midday, but
when men think they are in the midst of their life, in the flower of their
age, when they hope to live many years to possess great wealth, to marry rich
wives, to shine in the world? then death comes and over-shadows the brightness
of their day with a cloud of sorrow; as it happened in the Story related by
Alexander Faya. Alex. Faya To. 2.
Ladislaus King of Hungary and Bohemia sent a most solemn Embassage unto
Charles King of France, for the conducting home of that Kings Daughter, who was
espoused unto the Prince his Son. The chief Ambassador elected for this journey
was Vdabricas Bishop of Passaw, for whose Attendants were selected 200
principal men of Hungary, 200 of Bohemia, and other 200 of Austria, all persons
of eminent Birth and Nobility, so richly clad and in so brave an Equipage, that
they appeared as so many Princes; To these the Bishop added an hundred
Gentlemen chosen out of his own Subjects; so that they passed through France
700 Gentlemen in company, most richly accoutred; and for the greater Pomp and
Magnificence of the Embassage there went along with them 400 beautiful Ladies
in sumptuous habits, and adorned with most costly jewels; the Coaches which
carried them were studded with gold, and enchased with stones of value; Besides
all this were many Gifts and rich Garments of inestimable price, which they
brought along with them for Presents. But the very day that this glorious
Embassage entered Paris, before they came at the place appointed for their
entertainment, a Curriere arrived with the news of the death of the espoused
Prince. Such was the grief that struck the heart of the French King with so
unexpected a news, as he could neither give an answer to the Embassage, nor
speak with the Ambassador or those who accompanied him; and so they departed
most sorrowful from Paris, and every one returned unto his own home. In this
manner God knows by the means of death to fill the earth with darkness and
sorrow in the day of greatest brightness, as he spoke by his Prophet.

Since then thou know not when thou art to dye, think thou must dye to day,
and be ever prepared for that which may ever happen. Trust in the mercies of
God, and employ them incessantly, but presume not to defer thy conversion for
a moment. For who knows whether thou shall ever from hence forward have time to
invoke him, and having invoked him, whether thou shall deserve to be heard?
Know that the mercy of God is not promised to those, who therefore trust in him
that they may sin with hope of pardon, but unto those who fearing his Divine
Justice cease to offend him. wherefore St. Cregory says; The mercies of
Almighty God forget him, Greg. in moral.
who forgets his Justice; nor shall he find him merciful, who does not fear him
just. For this it is so often repeated in Scripture, That the mercy of God is
for those who fear him. And in one part it is said, The mercy of the Lord from
eternity unto eternity is upon those who fear him. And in anoth^r, As the
Father has mercy on his Son, so the Lord has mercy on these who fear him. In
another, According to the height from earth unto heaven* he has corroborated
his mercy upon those that fear him. Finally the very Mother of mercy says in
her Divine Canticle, That the mercy of the Lord is from generation to
generation upon those who fear him. Thou see then that the Divine mercy is
not promised unto all: and that thou shall remain excluded from it whilst thou
presumest and do not fear his justice. And where, I beseech thee, is the
fear of his justice, when knowing that thou may dye to day thou deferrest
thy conversion for so many years, so as thy vices may be rather said to leave
thee, than thou them? Mark what St. Augustine says; Repentance in death is very
dangerous; for in the holy Scripture there is but one only found, to wit the
good Thief, who had true repentance in his end. There is one found, that none
should despair, and but one, that none should presume. For in a sound man
repentance is sound, in an infirm man infirm, and in a dead man dead. Many deal
with God, as King Dionysius did with the Statue of Apollo, from which when he
took his Cloak of massy gold, he said, This Cloak is good neither for Summer
nor Winter; for Summer it is too heavy, for Winter too cold. So some can find
no time for the service of God Almighty; In youth they say, It is too early,
and that we ought to allow that age its time of freedom and pleasure: that when
they are old they will seriously think of virtue and amendment of life: that
the vigor of youth is not to he enfeebled with the austerities of penance,
which renders us infirm and useless the rest of our succeeding lives; But
arriving at old age, if by chance they attain it, they have then many excuses,
and pretend that they want health and strength to perform their penances. After
this manner they would deceive God Almighty, but they remain deceived
themselves. To the Apostle St. James this manner of speech seemed not well; To
morrow we will go to such a City; and there we will stay a year, because we
know not what shall be to morrow. If then in temporal things it be not good to
say, I will do this to morrow, what shall it be in procuring the salvation of
our Souls, to say, Ten or twenty years hence, when I am old, (which who knows
whether ever shall be?) I will then serve God and repent? to what purpose
defer we that until tomorrow, which imports so much to be done to day,
especially since it absolutely imports, and perhaps will not be to morrow, if
not to day? Aug. Confess.
In this error was St. Augustine, as he himself confesses. I felt my self
(says he) detained; and I often repeated these words, Miserable man, Until
when? until when? To morrow, and to morrow. And why is there not to day an end
of' my lewd life? This I said and wept with most bitter contrition of my heart.

3.
To this Uncertainty of death is to be added the Third Condition of being only
one, and only once to be tried; so as the error of dying ill cannot be amended
by dying well another time. God gave unto Man his senses and other parts of his
body doubled; he gave him two eyes, that if one failed, he might serve himself
of the other: he gave him two ears, that if one grew deaf, he might supply the
defect by the other: he gave him two hands, that if one were lost, yet he might
not wholly be disabled; but of deaths he gave but one, and if that one
miscarry, all is ruined. A terrible case, that the thing which most imports us,
which is to dye, has neither trial, experience, or remedy: it is but only
once to be acted, and that in an instant, and upon that instant all Eternity
depends, in which if we fail, the error is never to be amended. Plutarch writes
of Lamachus the Centurion, that reprehending a Soldier for some error
committed in war, the Soldier promised him he would do so no more; Unto whom
the discreet Centurion replied, Thou say well, for in war the mischief
which follows the first error is so great, that thou can not err twice. And
if in war you cannot err twice, in death you ought not to err once, the
error being wholly irrepairable. If an ignorant Peasant, who had never drawn a
Bow, should be commanded to shoot at at a mark far distant, upon condition that
if he hit it, he should be highly rewarded with many brave and rich gifts, but
if he mist it, and that at the first shoot, he should be burnt alive, in what
streights would this poor man find himself? how perplexed, that he should be
forced upon a thing of that difficulty, wherein he had no skill, and that the
failing should cost him so dear as his life, but especially that it was only
once to be essayed, without possibility of repairing the first fault by a
second trial? This is our case. I know not how we are so jocund; We have never
dyed, we have no experience or skill in a thing of so great difficulty, we are
only once to dye, and in that all is at stake, either eternity of torments in
hell, or of happiness in heaven; how live we then so careless and forgetful of
dying well, since for it we were born, and are but once to try it? This action
is the most important of all our life, the which is to pass in the presence of
God and Angels; upon it depends all eternity, and if mist, without repair or
amendment, Those human actions which may be repeated, if one miss, the other
may hit, and that which is lost in one may be regained in another. If a rich
Merchant has this year a Ship sunk in the Ocean, another may arrive the next
laden with such riches as may recompense the loss of the former. And if a
great Orator miscarry in his declamation and lose his credit, he may with
another recover it: but if we once fail in death, the loss is never to be
restored. That which is but only one is worthy of more care and esteem,
because the loss of it is irrepairable. Let us then value the time of this
life, since there is no other given us wherein to gain Eternity: Let us esteem
that time wherein we may practice a precious death, or, to say better, both a
precious life and death, learning in life how to dye. It was well said by a
pious Doctor, If those who are to execute some office, or perform some matter
of importance, or if it be but of pleasure, as to dance or play at Tennis, yet
study first before they come to do it: why should we not then study the art of
dying, which to do well is an action more dfficult and important than all
others? If a man were obliged to leap some great and desperate leap, upon
condition, that if he performed it well he should be made Master of a wealthy
Kingdom, but if ill, he should be chained to an Oar and made a perpetual
Galley-slave, Without all doubt this man would use much diligence in preparing
himself for so hazardous an undertaking, and would often practice before an
action of so great consequence, from which he expected so different fortunes.
How far more different are those which we expect from so great a leap as is
that from life to death, since the Kingdoms of Earth compared with that of
Heaven are trash and rubbish, and the tugging at an Oar in the Galleys,
compared with Hell, a Glory? When the leap is great and dangerous, he who is to
leap it uses to fetch his Careere backwards, that he may leap further and with
greater force. We therefore knowing the danger of the leap from life to death,
that we may perform it better, ought to fetch our Careere far back even from
the beginning of our short life, and from our first use of reason, from which
we shall know, that the life we live is mortal, that at the end of it we have a
great debt to pay, and that we are to discharge both use and principal when we
least think of it. St. John Eleemosynarius relates, that anciently when they
crowned an Emperor, the principal Architects presented him with some pieces of
several sorts of Marble, wishing him to make choice of such as best pleased him
for his Sepulcher, giving him thereby to understand, that his Reign was to last
so short a time, that it was convenient for him immediately to begin his Tomb,
that it might be finished before his life were ended: and that withal he could
not govern well his Vassals, unless he first governed himself by the memory of
death. The others present were also admonished by this mystery, that so soon as
reason began to command and have Dominion in us, that it was then time to
provide for death, and that in the preparation for our end consisted the good
government and perfection of life. A perfect life, says St. Gregory, is the
meditation of death: Greg. moral. 12.
and he enjoyes a perfect life, who imployes it in the study of death; he lives
well who learns how to dye well; and he that knows not that, knows nothing: all
Sciences besides profit him but little. What did all that he had studied, and
all which he knew profit the great Aristotle? nothing; which he himself confessed
being near his death: For when his Disciples besought him, that having in his
life time bestowed upon them so many fair Lessons and wise Sentences, he would
leave them one at his death, This was his answer: I entered this life in
poverty, I lived in misery, and dye in ignorance of that which most imports me
to know. He said well, for he had never studied how to dye. Many Disciples has
Aristotle in those Sciences which he knew, and many which follow his opinions,
but many more who imitate him in the ignorance he had of death.

Let us husband Time, in which we may gain Eternity; which being once lost, we
shall lose both the Time of this life, and the Eternity of the other. How many
millions are now in Hell, who whilst they were in this world despised time,
and would now be content to suffer thousands of years all the torments of the
damned for the redemption but of one instant, in which they might by repentance
recover the eternal life of glory, which is now lost without remedy? and yet
thou casts away not only instants, but hours, days, and years. Consider what
a damned person would give for some part of that time, which thou losest; and
take heed that thou hereafter, when there shall be no repair of that time which
thou now so lavishly mispendest, be not thy self in the same grief and
bitterness. O fools, as many as seek vain etertainments to pass away the time,
as though time would stand still, if they found not divertisements to make it
pass. The time of this life flies and over-runs thee, and thou layest not up
for the other. Consider how thou may by Time gain Eternity; look not then
upon the loss of it as upon the loss of Time, but of Etenity. Time, as says
Nazienzen, is the Market or Fair of Eternity. Endeavor then, whilst it lasts,
to get a good bargain: for this life once past there is no more occasion of
traffic; the time appointed for storing up is but short, and the gain and
profit is eternal. Hear what a Heathen teaches thee, who knew not this great
good, that by Time might be purchased Eternity, and yet he says in this
manner, Nature did not bestow Time upon us with such liberality, Seneca Epist.
118.
as that the least particle of it might be cast away. Consider how much Time is
lost even to the most diligent; some part the care of our health takes from us,
some that of our friends, some our necessary occasions; some our public
affairs employ, sleep divides life with us. Of this then so short and rapid
time which remains, what does it profit us to spend the greater part in vain?
Lib. de brevitate vitae.
The same Author advises us also that we strive to overcome the swiftness of
time with our diligence in well using and employing it. If this be Seneca's
counsel who had not the help of faith, and was ignorant that in an instant of
time might be gained an eternity of Glory, what ought we to do, who have the
light of heaven, the knowledge of eternal happiness, and the threats of eternal
torments? Let us live ever dying, and let us think every instant to be our
last: so shall we not lose this time which is so precious, and by which we may
gain what is eternal. Let us call to mind what is said by St. John Climacus.
Climac. gra. 6.
The present day is not well past, unless we esteem it to be the last of our
life. He is a good man, who every hour expects death: but he is a Saint, that
every hour desires it.

At least let us behave our selves as mortals, and let us believe we are so,
showing by our works that we know we are to dye. Let us ask that of God which
was prayed for by David. Lord let me know the fewness of my days. It is
apparent that we are to dye; it is apparent that we know not when; it is
apparent that we are dye but once; but it is much more available, as St.
Ambrose notes, when God says it, and we discourse it in our selves. Let us
therefore practically persuade our selves of this truth, and let not that time
slip from betwixt our hands, which once past will never return. Let us blush at
the counsel of a Heathen, Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, who advises us to
proceed always constantly in virtuous actions. Anton. lib. 2. in princip.
Reflect, says he, upon the end of that time which is assigned thee, the which
if thou shall not spend in procuring the peace of thy mind whilst thou live,
it will pass away and never return unto thee being dead; every hour apply thy
mind to mark seriously what thou take in hand, and do it accurately with
fortitude as becomes a Roman, with an unfeigned gravity, humanity, liberality,
justice, and in the mean time withdraw thy mind from all other thoughts; which
thou shall easily do, if thou shall so perform each action without the mixture
of vain glory, as if it were the last of thy life. This is admirable counsel,
that since thou know thou art to dye, and know not when, that thou
perform each action as if it were thy last, and as if in ending it thou were to
expire thy self. Above all let us endeavor to leave sin and evil inclinations:
to leave the cares of the earth, and to elevate our whole heart and affections
unto heaven, and there to place our thoughts, which are to be upright and
settled in God Almighty. A crooked tree when they cut it down, falls that way it
was inclined when it grew. If one do not bend toward heaven whilst he lives,
which way can he fall in death? it is much to be feared into Hell.

CAP. III.
Of that moment which is the medium betwixt Time and Eternity, which being the
end of Life is therefore most terrible.

WE ought then seriously to consider (which is certainly a matter of great
amazement) all which is to pass in that moment of death, for which the time of
this life was only bestowed upon us, and upon which depends the eternity of
the other. O most dreadful point, which art the end of Time and beginning of
Eternity! O most fearful instant, which shuttest up the prefixed term of this
life, and determines the business of our Salvation! O moment, upon which
depends Eternity, how ought thou to be placed in our thoughts with profit,
that we may not hereafter (when it is too late) remember thee with repentance!
How many things are to pass in thee? In the same instant life is to finish, all
our works to be examined, and that sentence given, which is to be executed for
all eternity. O last moment of Life, O first of Eternity, how terrible is the
thought of thee, since in thee not only life is to be lost, but to be
accounted for, and we then to enter into a Region which we know not! In that
moment I shall cease to live, in that moment I shall behold my Judge, who shall
lay all my sins open before me with all their weight, number, and enormity. In
it I shall receive a strict charge of all the Divine benefits bestowed upon me:
and in it a judgment shall pass upon me either for my salvation or damnation
eternal. How wonderful is it that for so many matters, and of so great
importance, there is no more time allotted than the space of an instant, no
place left for reply, intercession of friends, or appeal. O fearful moment,
upon which so much depends! O most important instant of Time and Eternity!
Admirable is the high wisdom of God, which has placed a point in the midst
betwixt Time and Eternity, unto which all the time of this life is to relate,
and upon which the whole Eternity of the other is to depend. O moment, which
art neither Time nor Eternity, but art the Horizon of both, and dividest things
Temporal from Eternal! O narrow moment! O most dilated point, wherein so many
things are to be concluded, so strict an account is to be given, and where so
rigorous a Sentence, as is to be pronounced, is ever to stand in force! A
strange case that a business of eternity is to be resolved in a moment, and no
place allowed for the intercession of friends, or our own diligence. It will be
then in vain to repair unto the Saints in Heaven, or the Priests upon Earth;
those will not intercede for thee, nor can these give thee absolution: because
the rigor of the Judge in that instant wherein thou expirest allows no further
mercy. Apoc. 20.
St. John says that Heaven and Earth shall fly from the presence of the
Judge. Whither will thou then go, to what place can thou repair, being the
person against whom the Process is commenced? It is therefore said that Heaven
and Earth shall fly away, because neither the Saints of Heaven shall there
favor thee with their intercession, neither can the Priests of the Earth
assist thee with the Sacraments of the Church. There shall be place for nothing
that may help thee. What would then a sinner give for leave to make one poor
Confession when it is too late? that which would now serve thy turn, and thou
despisest, thou would then have done and can not. Provide thy self
therefore in time whilst it may avail thee, and defer it not until that
instant, wherein nothing can do thee good. Now thou may help thy self; now
the Saints will favor thee; expect not that moment wherein thy own endeavors
will be useless, and wherein the Saints will not assist thee. To the end we may
frame a more lively conceit of what has been said, Lib. 1. Epist. 10.
I will relate a Story, which St. Peter Damian rehearses in an Epistle of his
to Pope Alexander the second of that name: whereof the Saint says, it caused
dread in him as often as it came to his mind. Thus it was, That two men going
to fell wood in a Forest, there issued forth a Serpent, ugly and of a huge
size, with two heads, and mouths of both open, thrusting out their tongues with
three points or small darts in each of them, and seeming to cast out fire at
his eyes set upon them. One of the two men of more spirit and courage, at the
first assault of the Serpent, struck it with his hatchet, and cut off one of
his heads: but unfortunately let fall his hatchet. The Serpent feeling himself
wounded, full of fury and rage, took him at the disadvantage without his
weapon, and roled his train round about his body. The miserable man cried out
to his Companion for help, or at least that he would give him his hatchet to
defend himself, or do some execution upon his enemy, that was now dragging him
toward his Den. But his Companion was so cowardly, that he durst not any ways
succor him, but affrighted and astonished fled away, leaving that wretched man
in the power of the Serpent, which with great rage carried him to his Den
without resistance, or any succor at all, notwithstanding the hideous
outcries and lamentations the poor Captive made. This History is but a slight
draught of what a Sinner will experience in the instant of the departure of his
Soul out of this life, when without any aid at all, or hope of it, he shall
find himself at the mercy of the infernal Dragon, who will use him with all
violence imaginable. St. Peter Damianus says, he could not express the horror
this sad accident caused in him, insomuch that it made him tremble many times
to consider what passed betwixt the Serpent and the man in that Den: there
being no body to afford any help to the poor fellow in that distress, where
neither his strength, nor cries could any ways avail him to decline the fury
of that ugly Monster now ready to tear him in pieces. Wherefore if to be void
of all hopes of temporal life, and to be in the power of a Serpent is a thing
so dreadful, what fright and astonishment will it cause, when a Sinner in the
instant of Gods judgment shall see himself delivered over into the power of the
infernal Dragon without all hopes of ever escaping from him, who will seize
upon a Soul, and carry her to the abyss of hell? Let us call to mind with dread
that which the holy Prophet feared and said of the Devil: God grant he lay not
hold on my soul like a Lion, when there will be none that will set me at
liberty, or relieve me. O what a lamentable thing will it be for one to see
himself in the power of Lucifer, not only abandoned by Men, but also by the
Angels, and by the Queen of Men and Angels, and even of God himself Father of
all mercies! Let us provide our selves in time for that which is to be done in
a moment, on which depends our Eternity. O moment, in which all time is lost,
if a Soul does lose it self in it, and remains lost for ever, how much do
thou avail us! Thou give an assurance to all the good works of this life, and
causest an oblivion of all the pleasures and delights thereof, to the end that
Man may not wholly give himself over to them, since they will then be of no
benefit to him: and persevere in virtue, since it will not secure him, unless
he persevere in it to the last.

. 2.
How can men be careless seeing so important a business, as is the salvation of
their Souls, to depend upon an instant, wherein no new diligence nor
preparations will avail them? Since therefore we know not when that moment will
be, let us not be any moment unprovided; this is a business not to be one point
of time neglected, since that point may be our damnation. What will a hundred
years spent with great penance and austerity in the service of God profit us,
if in the end of all those years we shall commit some grievous sin, and death
shall seize upon us before repentance? Let no man secure himself in his past
virtues, but continue them until the end; since if he die not in grace all is
lost, and if he do, what matters it to have lived a thousand years in the
greatest troubles and afflictions this world could lay upon him? O moment, in
which the just shall forget all his labors, and shall rest assured of all his
virtues! O moment, in which the pains of a Sinner begin, and all his pleasures
end! O moment, which art certain to be, uncertain when to be, and most certain
never to be again; for thou art only once, and what is in thee determined, can
never be revoked in another moment! O moment, how worthy art thou to be now
fixed in our memory, In vit. PP. l. 5. p. 565. apud Rot,
that we may not hereafter meet thee to our eternal mine and perdition! Let us
imitate the Abbot Elias, who was accustomed to say, That three things
especially made him tremble; The first, when his Soul was to be plucked out of
his Body; the second, when it was to appear before God to receive judgment; and
the third, when sentence was to be pronounced. How terrible then is this
moment, wherein all these three things so terrible are to pass? Let a Christian
often whilst he lives place himself in that instant; from whence let him
behold on one part the time of his life which he is to leave, and on the other
the eternity whereunto he enters: and let him consider what remains unto him of
that, and what he hopes for in this. How short in that point of death did those
near-hand a thousand years, which Mathusala lived, appear unto him, and how
long one day in Eternity? In that instant a thousand years of life shall appear
unto the Sinner no more than one hour, and one hour of torments shall appear a
thousand years. Behold thy life from this Watchtower, from this Horizon, and
measure it with the eternal, and thou shall find it to be of no bulk, nor
extension. Sec how little of it remains in thy hands, and that there is no
escaping from the hands of Eternity. O dreadful moment which cuts off the
thread of Time, and begins the web of Eternity! let us in time provide for this
moment, that we may not lose Eternity. This is that precious pearl for which we
ought to give all that we have or are. Let it ever be in our memory, let us
ever be sollicitous of it, since it may every day come upon us. Eternity
depends upon death, death upon life, and life upon a thread, which may either
be broken, cut, or burnt, and that even when we most hope and most endeavor to
prolong it. A good testimony of this is that which Paulus Aemilius recounts of
Charles King of Navarre, Paulus Aemilius l. 9. A^cidita anno 1387.
who having much decayed and weakened his bodily forces by excess of lust, unto
which he was without measure addicted, the Physicians for his cure commanded
Linnens steeped in Aqua vitae to be wrapped close about his naked body. He who
sewed them, having nothing in readiness to cut the thread, made use of a
candle, which was at hand, to burn it: but the thread being wet in those
spirits, took fire with such speed, as it fired the Linen, and before it could
be prevented, burnt the body of the King in that manner as he immediately dyed.
Upon a natural thread depended the life of this Prince, which concluded in so
disastrous a death; and no doubt but the thread of life is as easily cut as
that of flax; time is required for the one, but the other is broken in an
instant; and there are more causes of ending our life, than are of breaking the
smallest twist. Our life is never secure, and therefore we ought ever to fear
that instant, which gives an end to Time, and beginning unto Eternity.

Wonderful are the ways which death finds out, and most poor and contemptible
those things upon which life depends. It hangs not only upon a thread, but
sometime upon so small a thing as a hair. So Fabius. a Roman Senator was
choked with a hair which he swallowed in a draught of milk. No door is shut to
death, it enters where air cannot enter, and encounters us in the very actions
of life. Small things are able to deprive us of so great a good. Valor. Max.
lib. 6.
A little grain of a grape took away the life of Anacreon: and a Pear, which
Drusus Pompeius was playing with, fell into his mouth and choked him. The
affections also of the Soul, and the pleasures of the Body become the high way
unto death. Homer dyed of grief, and Sophocles of an excess of joy. Dionysius
was killed with the good news of a victory which he obtained. Aurelianus dyed
dancing when he married the Daughter of Domi^ian the Emperor. Thales Milesius
beholding the sports in the Theater dyed of thirst: Vid. Andream Eborensem de
morte non vulgari.
and Cornelius Gallus. and Titus Etherius dyed in the act of lust. Giachetto
Saluciano and his Mistress dyed in the same venerial action, and their bodies
were both found conjoined in death, as their souls went jointly to hell. Upon
small matters and unexpected accidents depends the success of that moment, upon
which depends Eternity. Let every one open his eyes and assure not himself of
that life which has so many entrances for death; let no man say, I shall not
dye to day, for many have thought so, and yet suddenly dyed that very hour. By
so inconsiderable things, as we have spoken of, many have dyed, and thou may
dye without any of them. For a sudden death there is no need of a hair, or fish
bone to strangle thee, nor affliction of melancholy to oppress, or excess of
sudden joy to surprise thee; it may happen without all these exterior causes.
A corrupt humor in the entrails, which flies unto the heart without any body
perceiving it, is sufficient to make an end of thee; and it is to be admired
that no more dye suddenly, considering the disorders of our lives and frailties
of our bodies; we are not of iron or brass, but of soft and delicate flesh. A
Clock though of hard Metal in time wears our, and has every hour need of
mending, and the breaking of one wheel stops the motion of all the rest. There
is more artifice in a humane body than in a Clock, and it is much more subtle
and delicate. The nerves are not of steel, nor the veins of brass, nor the
entrails of iron. How many have had their livers or spleen corcupted or
displaced, and have dyed suddenly? no man sees what he has within his body,
and such may his infirmity be, that although he thinks and feels himself well,
yet he may dye within an hour. Let us all tremble at what may happen.

CAP. IV.
Why the end of Temporal Life is terrible.

DEath because it is the end of life is by Aristotle said to be the most
terrible of all things terrible. What would he have said, if he had known it to
be the beginning of Eternity, and the gate through which we enter into that
vast Abyss, no man knowing upon what side he shall fall into that profound and
bottomless depth? If death be terrible for ending the business and affairs of
life, what is it for ushering in that instant, wherein we are to give an
account of life before that terrible and most just Judge, who therefore dyed
that we might use it well? It is not the most terrible part of death to leave
the life of this world, but to give an account of it unto the Creator of the
world; especially in such a time wherein he is to use no mercy. This is a thing
so terrible that it made holy Job to tremble, notwithstanding he had so good an
account to make, who was so just, that God himself gloried in having such a
Servant. The Holy Ghost testifies that he sinned not in all what he had spoken
in his troubles and calamities, which were sent him not as a punishment for his
sins, but as a trial of his patience, proposing him unto us an example of
virtue and constancy; and he himself protests that his Conscience did not
accuse him; yet for all this was so fearful of the strict judgment which God
passes in the end of the world, that amazed at the severity of his Divine
Justice, he cries out in his discourse with the Lord, Who will give me, that
thou protect and hide me in hell, Dionys. Rikel. artic. 16. de noviss.
whilst thy fury passes? Whereupon Dionysius Rikellius affirms, that that
instant, wherein the Judgment of God is to be given, is not only more
terrible than death, but more terrible than to suffer the pains of hell for
some certain time, and this not only unto those who are to be damned, but even
unto those who are elected for heaven. Since therefore Job, being so just and
holy, quaked at the apprehensions of that Divine Judgment, when it was yet far
from him, and when we use not to be so sensible as of things at hand, without
doubt when a Sinner shall in that instant perceive himself to have displeased
his Redeemer and Creator, although but in small faults, yet it will afflict
him more than the suffering of most great pains; for which St. Basil judged
that it was less to suffer eternal torments, Basil. hom. contra divites avaros.
than the confusion of that day: and therefore pondering that reprehension
given unto the rich man in the Gospel, Fool this night thy Soul shall be taken
from thee. Whose then shall be the riches which thou have gotten? the Saint
avers that this mock, this taunt did exceed an eternal punishment.

Death is terrible for many weighty reasons, and every one sufficient to cause
in us a mortal fear, whereof not the least is the sight of the offended Judge,
who is not only Judge but Party, and a most irrefragable Witness, in whose
visage shall then appear such a severity against the wicked, that St. Austin
says, he had rather suffer all manner of torments, than to behold the face of
his angry Judge. And St. Chrysostom says. Chrysostom. homi. 24. in Math.
It were better to be struck with a thousand Thunderbolts, than to behold that
countenance so meek and full of sweetness estranged from us, and those eyes of
peace and mildness not enduring to behold us. The only sight of an Image of
Christ crucified, Rad. in opusc. and in annuis Societ.
which appeared with wrathful and incensed eyes, although in this life when the
field of mercy is open, was sufficient so to astonish three hundred persons who
beheld it, that they fell unto the ground senseless and without motion, and so
continued for the space of some hours. How will it then amaze us, when we shall
behold not a dead Image, but Jesus Christ himself alive, not in the humility of
the Cross, but upon a Throne of Majesty and Seat of Justice; not in a time of
mercy, but in the hour of vengeance; not naked with pierced hands, but armed
against Sinners with the Sword of Justice, when he shall come to judge and
revenge the injuries which they have done him? God is as righteous in his
justice, as in his mercy; and as he has allotted a time for mercy, so he will
for justice; and as in this life the rigor of his justice is as it were
repressed and suspended, so in that point of death, when the Sinner shall
receive judgment, it shall be let loose, and overwhelm him. A great and rapid
river, which should for 30 or 40 years together have its current violently
stopped, what a mass of waters would it collect in so long a space; and if it
should then be let loose, with what fury would it overrun, and bear down all
before it, and what resistance could withstand it? Since then the Divine
justice, Dan. 7.
which the Prophet Daniel compares not to an ordinary River, but to a River of
fire for the greatness and severity of the rigor, shall be repressed for 30 or
40 years during the life of a man, what an infinity of wrath will it amass
together, and with what fury will it burst out upon the miserable Sinners in
the point of death? All this rigor and severity shall the wretched Caytif
behold in the face of the offended Judge. And therefore the Prophet Daniel
says that a River of fire issued from his Countenance, and that his Throne was
of flames, and the wheels of it burning fire, because all shall then be fire,
rigor and justice. He sets forth unto us his Tribunal and Throne with wheels,
to signify thereby the force and violence of his omnipotency in executing the
severity of his justice: all which shall appear in that moment, when Sinners
shall be brought into judgment, when the Lord (as David says) shall speak unto
them in his wrath and confound them in his fury.

The which is also declared by other Prophets in most terrible and threatening
words. Isai. 56.
Isaias says, The Lord will come clothed in garments of vengeance, and
covered with a robe of zeal; and will give unto his adversaries his
indignation, and his enemies shall have their turn. And the Wiseman to declare
it more fully says, His zeal, that is, his indignation, shall take up arms,
and shall arm the creatures to revenge him of his enemies: he shall put on
justice as a breast plate: be shall take the bead-piece of righteous judgment,
and embrace the inexpugnable shield of equity, and shall sharpen his wrath as a
lance. Osee 13.
The Prophet Osee declares the same, proposing the Judge unto us, not only as
an enraged and armed man, but a fierce and cruel Beast; and therefore speaking
in the person of God, says, I will appear unto them in that instant at a Bear
that has been robbed of her whelps; I will tear their entrails in pieces, and
will devour them as a Lion. There is no beast more fierce of nature than a
Lion, or Bear which has lost her young ones, the which will furiously assault
him she first meets with: and yet God, whose nature is infinite goodness, would
compare himself unto so savage and cruel beasts to express the terror of his
justice and rigor, with which he is in that day to show himself against
Sinners. The consideration of this wrought so much with Abbot Agathon, when he
was at the point of dying, In vitis Pat.
that he continued three days in admiration, his eyes for fear and dread
continually broad open without moving from one side to the other. Certainly all
comparisons and exaggerations fall short of what it shall be, since that day is
The day of wrath and calamity. That is the day when the Lord shall speak aloud
in lieu of the many days wherein he has been silent. That is the day of which
he spoke by his Prophet, I held my peace and was mute, but I will then cry out
as a woman in labor. That day shall take up all his justice, and shall
recompense for all his years of sufferance. That day shall be purely of justice
without mixture of mercy, hope of compassion, help, favor, or any other
patronage but of our works. This is signified in that which Daniel says, that
the Throne and Tribunal of God was of flames, and that there shall proceed from
his face a river of fire; because fire, besides that it is the most active,
nimble, and vehement of all the Elements, is also the most pure, not admitting
the mixture of any thing. The earth contains Mines of Metals, and Quarries of
Stone: the water suffers in her bosom variety of Fishes: the Air multitudes of
vapors, and exhalations and other bodies; but Fire endures nothing, it melts
the hardest, metals, reduces stones into cinders, consumes living creatures,
converts trees into it self, in so much as it is not only impatient of a
companion, but infuses its own qualities into what it meets withal, and turns
even what is contrary unto it into its own substance and nature; it does not
only melt snow, but makes it boil, and makes cold iron burn. So shall it be in
that day: all shall be rigor and justice without mixture of mercy; nay the
very mercies, which God has used toward a Sinner, shall then be an argument
and food for his justice.

O man, which have now time, consider in what condition thou shall see thy self
in that instant, when neither the blood of Christ shed for thee, nor the Son of
God crucified, nor the intercession of the most blessed Virgin, nor the Prayers
of Saints, nor the Divine mercy it self shall avail thee, but shall only
behold an incensed and revenging God, whose mercies shall then only serve to
augment his justice. Thou shall then perceive that none will take thy part, but
all will be against thee. The most holy Virgin who is the Mother of mercy, the
mercy of God himself, and the blood of thy Redeemer will all be against thee;
and only thy good works shall stand for thee. This life once past thou art to
expect no Patron, no Protector, but thy virtuous actions, only they shall
accompany thee, and when thy Angel Guardian, Theophan. an. 20. Herac. Imper. ut
habetur in tom. 2. p. 2. Council. in notis ad vitam Theodori Papae.
and all the Saints thy Advocates shall leave thee, they only shall not
forsake thee. See that thou provide thy self for that day, take care thou now
benefit thy self by the blood of Christ for thy salvation; if not, it will
only serve for thy greater damnation. The whole world was amazed at the manner
of the condemnation of Pyrrhus the Heretic by Pope Theod^rus, who calling a
Council at Rome, and placing himself close by the body of St. Peter, in the
presence of the whole Assembly took the consecrated Chalice, and pouring the
blood of Christ into the Ink, did with his own hand write the Sentence of
excommunion and Anathema, by which he separated Pyrrhus from the Church of
Christ. This dreadful manner of proceeding brought a fear upon all those who
heard it. Do thou then tremble, unto whom it may happen, that the blood of thy
Redeemer shall only serve as a Sentence of thy eternal death. For so severe
will the Divine justice be in that day against a Sinner, that if it were
needful for his condemnation to confirm the Sentence with the blood of Christ,
it should (although once shed upon the Cross for his salvation) then only
serve to his damnation and eternal reprobation. If this be true, (as nothing
can be more certain,) how come we to be so careless? how come we to laugh and
rejoice? In vitis Pat. lib. 5.
With great reason an old Hermit in the Desert, beholding another laugh,
reprehended him for it, saying, We are to give a strict account before the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, the most inflexible Judge, and dare thou be merry? How
dare that Sinner laugh, since that instant will come, wherein it will not
profit him to weep? why does he not now with tears ask pardon for his sins,
when after death he cannot obtain it? There shall be then no mercy, no remedy,
no protection from God or man, no defense but what each man has from his own
works. Let us then endeavor they may be good ones, since we have nothing in
the other life to trust to but them. The rich man shall not then have
multitudes of Servants to set forth his greatness and authority, nor well-feed
Lawyers to defend his process: only his good works shall bestead him, and they
only shall defend him; and in that instant, when even the mercy of God shall
fail him, and the blood of Christ shall not appease the Divine justice, only
his good works shall not fail him; then, when their treasures, which have been
heaped up in this world, and guarded with so much care, shall fail their
Masters, their alms bestowed on the poor shall not fail them; there, when their
Children, Kindred, Friends and Servants shall all fail them, the Strangers
which they have lodged, the Sick which they have visited in the Hospitals, and
the needy which they have succored shall not fail them. The rich man is to
leave his wealth behind him without knowing who shall possess it (...) his good
works shall go along with him, and they only, when nothing else can, shall
avail him; neither shall Christ, who is the Judge of the living and the dead,
at that time admit of other Patrons or Advocates. Let us then take heed we turn
not those against us, which are only at that dreadful time to bestead us.

It is to be admired how many dare do ill in the presence of that Judge, with
whom nothing can prevail but doing well; and the wonder is much the greater
that we dare with our evil works offend him, who is to judge them. The Thief is
not so impudent as to rob his neighbor, if the Magistrate look on, but would
be held a fool, if he should rob or offend the Magistrate himself in his own
house: How dares then this poor thing of man injure the very person of his most
upright and just Judge (before whom it is most certain he shall appear) to his
face, in his own house, in so high a manner as to prefer the Devil, his and
our greatest enemy, before him? How great was the malice of the Jews, when they
judged it fitter that Barabbas should live, than the Son of God? Let the Sinner
then consider his own insolence, who judges it better to please the Devil, than
Christ his Redeemer. Every one who sins makes as it were a Judgment, and passes
a Sentence in favor of Satan against Jesus Christ. Of this unjust Judgment of
man the Son of God, who is most unjustly sentenced by a Sinner, will at the
last day take a most strict and severe account. Let him expect from his own
injustice how great is to be the Divine justice against him. Let a Christian
therefore consider that he has not now his own but the cause of Christ in
hand. Let him take heed how he works, since all his actions are to be viewed
and reviewed by his Redeemer. An Artist who knew his work was to appear before
some King, or to be examined by some great Master in the same art, would strive
to give it the greatest perfection of his skill. Since therefore all our works
are to appear before the King of Heaven, and the chief Master of virtues Jesus
Christ, let us endeavor that they may be perfect and complete, and the rather
because he is not to examine them for curiosity, but to pass upon us a
Sentence, either of condemnation or eternal happiness. Let us then call to mind
that we are to give an account unto God Almighty, and let us therefore take
heed what we do; let us weep for what is amiss; let us forsake our sins, and
strive to do virtuous actions; let us look upon our selves as guilty offenders:
and let us stand in perpetual fear of the Judge, as Abbot Amno advises us; of
whom it is reported in the Book of the lives of Fathers translated by Pelagius
the Cardinal, In vitis Pat. lib. 5.
That being demanded by a young Monk, what he should do that might most profit
him, answered, Entertain the same thoughts with the Malefactors in prison, who
are still enquiring, Where is the Judge? When will he come? every hour
expecting their punishment, and weeping for their misdemeanors. In this manner
ought the Christian ever to be in fear and anxietie, still reprehending
himself, and saying, Ay me! wretch that I am, how shall I appear before the
Tribunal of Christ? how shall I be able to give an account of all my actions?
If thou shall always have these thoughts, thou may be saved, and shall not
fail of obtaining what thou demandest toward thy salvation: and all will be
little enough. Climac. gra. 6.
St. John Climacus writes of a certain Monk who had lived long with small
fervor and edification, who falling into a grievous infirmity, wherein he
remained some space without sense or feeling, was during that time brought
before the Tribunal of God, and from thence returned unto life, wherein he
continued ever after in that fear and astonishment, that he caused the door of
his little Cell, which was so small and narrow, that he had scarce room to move
in it, to be stopped up, there remained as it were enclosed in prison the space
of twelve years, during which time he never spoke with any, nor fed upon other
than bread and water, but sat ever meditating upon what he had seen in that
rapture: wherein his thoughts were so intent, as he never moved his eyes from
the place where they were fixed, but persevering still in his silence and
astonishment could not contain the tears from abundantly flowing down his aged
face. At last (says the Saint) his death now drawing near, we broke open the
door, and entered into his Cell, and having asked him in all humility, that he
would say something unto us of instruction, all we could obtain from him was
this: Pardon me Fathers, He who knew what it were truly and with his whole
heart to think upon death, would never have the boldness to sin. The rigor of
Divine Judgment which is to pass after death occasioned in this Monk so great
change and penitence of life.

2.
The second cause of the terribleness of death, which is the laying open of all
wherein we have offended in this life.

ANother thing of great horror is to happen in the end of life, which shall
make that hour, wherein the Soul expires, most horrible unto sinners, and That
is the sight of their own sins; whose deformity and multitude shall then
clearly and distinctly appear unto them; and although now we remain in
ignorance of many, and see the guilt of none, they shall then, when we leave
this life, fully discover themselves as they are both in number and quality.
This is also signified unto us by the Prophet Daniel, when he says, That the
Throne of the Tribunal of God was of flaming fire: whose nature is not only to
burn, but to enlighten; and therefore in that Divine Judgment shall not only
be executed the rigor of his justice, but the ugliness likewise of humane
malice shall be discovered. The Judge himself shall not only appear severe and
implacable, but our sins shall be laid open before us, and the sight of them
shall make us quake and tremble with fear and astonishment; especially when we
shall perceive them to be manifest unto him who is both Judge and Party.
Wherefore it is said in one of the Psalms, We are dismayed, O Lord, with thy
wrath, Psalm. 89.
and troubled with thy fury: and immediately giving the reason of that trouble,
he says, because thou have set our wickedness before thee, and placed them in
thy sight. The monstrousness of sin is now covered, and we perceive it not, and
are not therefore much troubled; but in that instant of death, when the
ugliness of it shall appear, the very sight of it will wholly confound us. Our
sins now seem unto us but light and trivial, and we see not half of them: but
in our leaving of this life we shall find them heavy, grievous and
unsupportable. A great Beam, whilst it floats upon the river, a child may move
and draw it from place to place, and the half of it remains hidden and covered
below the waters: but draw it to land, many men will not suffice to remove it,
and the whole bulk of it will be then clearly discovered; so in the waters of
this tempestuous and unstable life our faults appear not heavy, and the half of
them are concealed from us: but this life once ended, we shall then feel their
weight, discover their bulk, and shall groan under so heavy and grievous a
burden.

These doubtless are the two swords which then shall mortally wound the
conscience of a sinner: First when he shall perceive the innumerable multitude
of his sins, and Then their monstrous deformity. And to begin with their
multitude, how shall he remain amazed, when he shall see a number of his
actions to be sins, which he never thought to be such: and which is more, when
he shall find that to be a fault, which he thought to be a laudable work? For
this it is said in one of the Psalms, when I shall take time, I will judge
righteousness; for many actions which in the eyes of men seem virtues, will
then be found vices in the sight of God. If in humane judgments there be so
great a difference, that young men, and those that follow the world, often
esteem that for a virtue, which the wise and ancient repute as an error, how
different shall be the divine judgment from that of men, since the holy Ghost
says by his Prophet, that the Judgments of God are a great Abyss, and that his
thoughts are as far distant from the thoughts of men, as heaven is from earth?
And if spiritual men are so clear sighted, that they condemn with truth what
worldlings praise, what shall be those Divine eyes, which are able to perceive
a stain in what appears Angelical purity? And if, as the Scripture says, he
found wickedness in the Angels, what vice can remain hid in the Sons of men?
Our Lord himself says by one of his Prophets, I will search Jerusalem with a
candle. If so strict enquiry be to be made in the holy City of Jerusalem, what
shall be in Babylon? If God shall use such rigor with the just, how shall he
dissemble with his enemies? Then shall be brought to light the works which we
have done, and those which we have left undone: the evil of that action which
we have committed, and the good of that which we have omitted. Neither is there
account to be taken only of the evils which we do, but of the good also which
we do not well; all will be strictly searched and narrowly looked into, and must
pass by many eyes. The Devil, as our accuser, shall frame the Process of our
whole life, and shall accuse us of all he knows; and if any thing shall escape
his knowledge, it shall not therefore be concealed; for our own Conscience
shall cry out and accuse us of it; and least out Conscience might flatter us,
or be ignorant of some faults, our Angel-Guardian, who is now our Governor and
Tutor, shall then be the Fiscal and Accuser, calling for Divine justice against
us, and shall discover what our own Souls are ignorant of. And if the Devil,
our Conscience, and Angel-Guardian shall fail in any thing as not knowing all,
the Judge himself, who is both Party and Witness, and whose Divine knowledge
penetrates into the bottom of our wills, shall there declare many things for
vices, which were here esteemed for virtues. O strange way of Judgment, where
none denies, and all accuse, even the offender accuses himself; and where all
are Witnesses, even the Judge and Party! O dreadful Judgment where there is no
Advocate, and four Accusers, the Devil, thy Conscience, thy Angel-Guardian, and
thy very. Judge, who will accuse thee of many things which thou thoughtest to
have alleged for thy defense!

O how great shall then be the confusion, when that shall be found a sin which
was thought a service! who would have imagined but that Oza, when he upheld the
Ark in danger of falling, had rather done a laudable action, than an offense?
yet the Lord chastized it as a great sin with the punishment of a most
disastrous death: showing thereby how different the Divine Judgments are from
those of men. Who would not have thought David's numbering of his people to have
been an act of policy and discretion? yet God judged it an offense, and
punished it with an unexampled Pestilence, which in so short a time destroyed
threescore and ten thousand persons? When Saul urged by his approaching
enemies, and the long delays of Samuel offered sacrifice, he thought he had
done an act of the greatest virtue, which is religion: but God called it by the
name of a grievous sin, and for doing it reproved him, and cast him off from
being King. Who would not have judged it for an act of magnanimity and
clemency, when Achab, having conquered Benhadad King of Syria, 3. Reg. c. 20.
pardoned him his life, and took him up to sit by him in his Royal Chariot? But
this which was so much esteemed and praised by men, was so disagreeable unto
God, that he sent him word by his Prophet, that he should dye for it, and that
he and his people should bear the punishment, which was designed unto the
Syrians and their King. If then the Judgment of God in this life be so far
different from that of man, what shall it be in that most dreadful hour, which
God has reserved for the executing of his Divine justice? Then all shall be
laid open, and confusion shall cover the sinner with the multitude of his
offenses. How shall he blush to see himself in the presence of the King of
Heaven in so foul and squalid garments? A man is said to remain confounded,
when either the issue of things fall out contrary to what he hoped and looked
for, or when he comes off with indignity or disparagement, where he expected
honor and reward; how confounded then shall a sinner be, when those works of
his, which he thought virtues, shall be found vices, imagining he has done
service shall perceive he has offended, and hoping for a reward shall meet
with punishment? If a man when he is to speak with some great Prince desire to
be decently and well clad, how will he be out of countenance to appear before
him dirty and half naked? How shall then a sinner be ashamed to see himself
before the Lord of all naked of good works, be dirtied and defiled with
abominable and horrid crimes? for besides the Multitude of sins, whereof his
whole life shall be full, the Hainousness of them shall be also laid open
before him, and he shall tremble at the sight of that which he now thinks but a
trivial fault. For then shall he see clearly the ugliness of sin, the
dissonancy of it unto reason, the deformity it causes in the Soul, the injury
it does unto the Lord of the world, his ingratitude to the blood of Christ, the
prejudice it brings unto himself, hell into which he falls, and eternal glory
which he loses. The least of these were sufficient to cover his heart with
sadness and inconsolable grief: but altogether what amazement and confusion
shall they cause? especially when he shall perceive, that not only mortal, but
even venial sins produce an ugliness in the Soul beyond all the corporal
deformities which can be imagined. If the sight of only one Devil be so
horrible, that many Servants of God have said, that they would rather suffer
all the torments of this life, than behold him for one moment, all his
deformity proceeding but from one only mortal sin which he committed, for
before the Devils were by nature most excellent and beautiful: in what
condition shall a sinner be, who shall not only behold all Devils in all their
ugliness, but shall see himself perhaps more ugly than many of them, having as
many deformities, as he has committed mortal and venial sins? Let him
therefore avoid them now; for all are to come to light, and he must account for
all even until the last farthing.

Neither is this account to be made in gross only for the greatest and most
apparent sins, but even for the least and smallest. What Lord is so strict with
his Steward, that he demands an account for trifles, for the tagg of a point,
nor suffers him to pass a halfpenny without informing him, how it was spent?
In humane Tribunals the Judge takes no notice of small matters but in the
Courts of Divine Judicature nothing passes: the least things are as diligently
looked into as the greater. A confirmation of this is a story written by diverse
Authors; Joh. Major. Judic. exem. 8. ex collec.
That there were two Religious persons of holy and laudable conversation, who
did mutually love one another with great affection; one of them chanced to die,
and after death appeared unto the other (being then in prayer) in poor and torn
garments, and with a most sorrowful and dejected countenance; he who was alive
demanded of him, what was the cause of his appearing in that sad manner; to
whom he answered, repeating it three times, No man will believe; No man will
believe; No man will believe. Being urged to declare further what he would say,
he proceeded thus, No man can imagine how strict God is in taking his accounts,
and with what rigor he chastises sinners. In saying this he vanished. By that
which has happened to many Servants of God, even before their departure out of
this life, may be seen the rigor, with which this account shall be taken after
death. Climac. gr. 7.
St. John Climacus writes of a certain Monk, who being very desirous to live in
solitude and quiet, after he had exercised himself many years in the labors of
a Monastical life, and obtained the grace of tears and fasting, with many other
privileges of virtue, he built a Cell at the foot of that Mountain, where
Elias in time past saw that sacred and divine Vision. This reverend Father
being of so great austerity desired yet to live a more strict and penitent
life, and therefore passed from thence into a place called Sides, which
belonged to the Anchorite Monks, who live in great perfection and retirement;
and having lived a long time with much rigor in that place, which was far
remote from all humane consolation, and distant 70 miles from any dwelling or
habitation of men, at last he came to have a desire to return to his first Cell
in that sacred Mountain, where remained in his absence for the keeping of it
two most religious Disciples of his of the land of Palestine. Some short time
after his return he fell into an infirmity and died. The day before his death
suddenly he became much astonished and amazed, and keeping still his eyes open,
he looked ghastly about him, sometime on the one side of the Bed, and then on the
other, as if he saw some, who demanded an account from him of something which
was past; unto whom he answered in the hearing of all who were present, saying
sometime, So it is truly, but for this I have fasted so many years.
Other-whiles he said, Certainly it is not so; thou lie, I never did it. At
other times, It is true; I did so, but wept for it, and so many times ministered
for it unto the necessity of my neighbor, Other times, Thou accusest me truly,
I have nothing to say; but God is merciful. And certainly that invisible and
strict inquisition was fearful and horrible unto those who were present. Ay
miserable me, says the Saint, What will become of me sinner, since so great a
follower of a solitary and retired life knew not what to answer? He who had
lived forty years a Monk, and obtained the grace of tears, and, as some
affirmed unto me, had in the Desert fed a hungry Leopard, which meekly repaired
unto him for food, yet for all this sanctity at his departure out of this life
so strict an account was demanded of him, as he left us uncertain what was his
judgment, and what the sentence and determination of his cause. We read in the
Chronicles of the Minorites, Chronic. S. Franc. 2. p. lib. 4. c. 35.
that a Novice of the Order of St. Francis, being now almost out of himself
struggling with death, cried out with a terrible voice, saying: Woe is me: O
that I never had been born. A little after he said: I am heartily sorry. And
not long after he replied: Put something of the merits of the Passion of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Then he said, Now it is well. The Religious much
admired, that a young man so innocent should speak things so dreadful, and with
such a strange noise. When the young man was returned to his senses, they
demanded of him to declare unto them the meaning of those words, and great
cries. He answered them: I saw that in the Judgment of Almighty God so strict
an account was taken even of idle words, and other things that seemed very
little, and they weighed them so exactly, that the merits in respect of the
demerits were almost nothing at all; And for this reason I gave that first
terrible, and sad outcry. Afterward I saw, that the demerits were weighed with
great attention, and that little regard was made of the merits; For this
reason. I spoke the second words. And seeing that the merits were so few and
inconsiderable for to be justified, I spoke the third: And in regard that with
the merits of the Passion of Christ our Savior the balance, wherein my good
works were, weighed more than the other, immediately a favorable sentence was
given in my behalf; For this reason I said now it is well. And having said this
he gave up his ghost.

3.
The third cause of the terribleness of the end of Temporal Life, which is the
charge, which shall be given of divine benefits received.

THere is also in the end of life another cause of much terror unto Sinners,
which is the lively knowledge, which they shall have of the divine benefits
received, and the Charge which shall be laid against them for their great
ingratitude and abuse of them. This is also signified by what the Prophet
Daniel spoke of the Throne and Tribunal of God. For he not only said it was of
flames of fire, by which was given us to understand the rigor of divine
justice against Sinners signified by the violence, heat, and activity of fire,
and the discovery and manifestation of sins, signified by the light and
brightness of the flames: but he also adds, that from the face of the Judge
there proceeded a heady and rapid river, which was also of fire, signifying by
the swiftness of the course, and the issuing of it from God the multitude of
his graces and benefits, which flowing from the divine goodness are
communicated and poured down upon his Creatures. His saying that this so great
river shall in that day be of fire, is to make us understand the rigor of that
Charge against us for our abuse of those infinite benefits bestowed, together
with the light and clearness, wherewith we shall know them, and the horror and
confusion which shall then seize upon us for our great ingratitude, and the
small account we have made of them: in so much as Sinners in that instant are
not only to stand in fear of their own bad works, but of the grace and
benefits of God Almighty conferred upon them. Another mourning Weed and
confusion shall cover them, when they shall see what God has done to oblige
and assist them toward their salvation, and what they to the contrary have done
to draw upon them their own damnation. They shall tremble to see what God did
for their good, and that he did so much as he could do no more: all which has
been mis-imployed and abused by themselves. This is so clear and evident on the
part of God Almighty, that he calls men themselves as witnesses and Judges of
the truth; and therefore speaking under the Metaphor of a Vineyard by his
Prophet Isay, Isai. 5.
he says in this manner; Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge
betwixt me and my Vineyard; what ought I to have done more unto my Vineyard,
and have not done it? And after the incarnation of the Son of God the Lord
turns again to upbraid men with the same resentment, and signifies more fully
the multitude of his benefits under the same Metaphor of a Vineyard, Mat. 21.
which a man planted, and so much cherished and esteemed it, that he sent
thither his only Son, who was slain in the demand of it. Let therefore men
enter into judgment against themselves, and let them be judges, whether God
could have done more for them, and has not done it: they being still so
ungrateful toward their Creator, as if he had been their enemy, and done them
some notorious injury.

Coming therefore to consider every one of these benefits by its self, The
first which occurs is that of the Creation, which was signified by our Savior
Jesus Christ, when he said, that He planted a Vineyard; and what could God do
more for thee, since in this one benefit of thy Creation he gave thee all what
thou art both in soul and body? If wanting an arm thou would esteem thy self
much obliged and be very thankful unto him, who should bestow one upon thee,
which were sound, strong and useful, why art thou not so to God, who has given
thee arms, heart, soul, body and all? Consider what thou were before he gave
thee a being: Nothing; and now thou enjoyest not only a being, but the best
being of the Elemental world. Philosophers say, that betwixt being and not
being there is an infinite distance. See then what thou owe unto thy
Creator, and thou shall find thy debt to be no less than infinite, since he
has not only given thee a being, but a noble being, and that not by
necessity, but out of an infinite love and by election, making choice of thee
amongst an infinity of men possible, whom he might have created. If lots were
to be cast amongst a hundred persons for some honorable charge, how fortunate
would he be esteemed, who should draw the lot from so many Competitors? behold
then thy own happiness, who from an absolute nothing have light upon a being
amongst an infinity of creatures possible. And whence proceeds this singular
favor, but from God, who out of those numberless millions has picked out thee,
leaving many others, who, if he had created them, would have served him better
than thy self? See then what God could have done for thee and has not, having
chosen thee without any desert of thine from amongst so many, and preferred
thee before those, whom he foresaw would have been more thankful. Besides this
he not only created thee by election, and gave thee a noble being, but
supernatural happiness, being no way due unto thy nature, he created thee for
it, and gave thee for thy end the most high and eminent, that could be
imagined, to wit, the eternal possession of thy Creator. It was enough for God
to create thee for a natural happiness conformable to what thou were, but he,
not to leave any thing undone which he could do, created thee for a
supernatural blessedness, in so much as there is no creature, which has a
higher end then thy self. See then if God could do more for thee, and has not;
and see what thou ought to do for him; see whereunto thou art obliged. For
this only benefit thou ought not to move hand nor foot, but for the service
of so good and gracious a God. A labourer who plants a tree has right unto the
fruit: and God, who created thee, has right unto thy works, which are the
fruits of man. For this reason at the Garment of the High Priest, which
represented the benefit of our Creation, were hung many Pomgranates, which are
the noblest fruit of trees, and bears a Crown, to signify that the good fruits
of holy works, which we ought to produce, are to be crowned with a perfect and
pure intention. See then if thou can do more for God; for God could do no
more for thee, than to create thee for so high and eminent an end, as is the
possession of himself, being no ways due unto thy feeble and frail nature.

It being then so great a benefit to have created thee, it is yet a greater to
have preserved and suffered thee until this instant without casting thee into
a thousand hells for thy sins and offenses. This grace of conservation our
Savior noted, when he said that he compassed and enclosed his Vineyard, which
was for the preservation of it. See then what thy Creator in this matter of
conservation could have done more than he has done for thee, since being his
enemy he has preserved thee as his friend. From how many for one only fault
committed has he withdrawn his preservation, and suffered them to die in that
sin, for which they are now in hell: and some of them, if they had been
pardoned, would have proved more grateful than thou? Behold how many Angels for
their first offense he threw headlong down from heaven, and expected them no
longer; and yet still expects thee. See if he could do more for thee, and see
what thou art to do for him. Consider that thou owe him for preserving thee
as much as for creating thee, preservation being a continued creation, and more
for preserving and suffering thee although his enemy. In thy creation, although
thou did not deserve a being, yet thou demerited it not; but in thy
preservation thou have deserved the contrary, which is to be forsaken and
abandoned.

But above all what is said is the benefit which thou receivest by the
Incarnation of the Son of God: which Christ signified when he said, that the
Lord of the Vineyard sent his Son. See if God could have done more for his own
salvation than he did for thine, sending into the world his only begotten Son
to be incarnated for thee. A greater work than this could not be done by the
omnipotent arm of God. Consider that he did not this for the Angels, and yet
did it for thee; see if then thou can comply with the love thou owe him
with being less than a Seraphin in thy affection. Consider likewise that it
being in his power to redeem thee by making himself an Angel, and only
interceding for thee, yet he would not deprive thy nature of this honor, but
made himself a Man; see if he could do more for thy good. By making himself an
Angel he might have honored the Angelical nature, and have likewise benefited
thee; but he would not: but making himself a Man, conferred both the honor and
profit upon thee. And if it be true which some Doctors say, that God having
proposed unto the Angels, that they were to adore a Man, who was also to be
God, and to be exalted above all their Hierarchies, and that because they would
not subject themselves unto an inferior nature, they therefore fell and became
disobedient: see what thou owe unto God for this so singular a favor, who
would make himself a Man, that thou should not be lost, although with the
loss of so many Angels better than thee. Behold from whence he drew thee by
this benefit, which was from sin and hell: and at such a time, when thy
miserable condition was desperate of all other remedy; behold unto what he
exalted thee: to his grace and ^he inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven. Behold
in what manner, and with what singular love and affection he did it, even to
his own loss and prejudice, and, as the Apostle says, by annihilating as it
were himself, that he might exalt thee, taking upon him thy nature when it was
not needful, only that he might confer an honor upon thee, which he would
not upon the Angels. See what God could do more for thee: and see that thou
may do much more for him and do not.

Of the benefit of our redemption by the death and passion of Christ the Lord
himself was not forgetful, but signified it unto us, even before he died,
saying That the Son, whom the Lord of the Vineyard sent, was slain in the
pretense. What could the Son of God do more for thee than die and shed his
blood for thy benefit, especially when it was not needful for thy redemption?
In the rigor of justice it was necessary that God should be incarnate, or make
himself an Angel to redeem thee; but to suffer and die, not at all. But such
was his infinite love, as he would needs suffer, and not with an ordinary
death, but would die so ignominiously, as it seems he could not suffer more.
Set before thy eyes Christ crucified upon Mount Calvarie; see if a Man more
infamous be possible or imaginable, executed publicly between two Thieves as a
Traitor, and an Heretic for broaching false Doctrine, and making himself King,
as a Traitor unto Caesar; Two crimes so infamous, as they not only defame the
person who commits them, but stain and infect his whole Stock and Lineage.
Behold in what poverty he died, if greater can be thought on, to the end thou
may see, if it were possible he should do more for thee than what he did.
Whilst he lived he had not whereon to repose his head, but yet had clothes,
wherewith to cover decently his nakedness; but when he died, even his garments
failed him: neither found he one drop of water to refresh his sacred lips; even
the earth refused him, wanting whereon to rest his reverend feet. Behold with
what grief and pains he expired, since from head to foot he was but one
continued wound; his feet and hands were pierced with nails, and his head with
thorns. All was a high expression of an excessive love, and to do for thee what
he could: see then what thou ought to do and suffer for him, who died and
suffered for thee what he could, and could do what he would.

After all these benefits consider his giving himself unto thee for food and
sustenance in the most holy Sacrament: the which was noted by Christ, when he
said, That the Lord of the Vineyard built a Press for the Wine, in which he
gave his most precious blood. It seems that the persons of the most holy
Trinity were in competition, and strove amongst themselves, who should most
oblige Man with their benefits and favors. Let us express it in this manner:
for to conceive it, as it is in it self, the understanding of Angels were not
sufficient. Here may be applied that which antiquity admired in two great and
famous Painters. Apelles went to Rhodes to see Protogenes, and not finding him
at home took a Pensil, and drew a most subtle line, charging the Servants that
they should tell their Master, that he who drew that line was there to seek
him. When Protogenes returned, they told him what had happened: who took the
Pensil, and drew a stroke of another color through the middle of that which
Apelles had drawn, and going about his business commanded his Servants, that,
if he came again, they should tell him, that he whom he sought for had drawn
that line through the middle of his. It seemed there could not be imagined a
higher favor and Courtship, than that of the Eternal Father to have given his
only Son, and have delivered him up to death for man; but through the middle
of this favor the Son drew another of most excessive fineness and subtilty,
which is the institution of the most blessed Sacrament, the which some call an
Extension of the Incarnation, and is a Representation of the Passion, and a
Character and Memorial of the Wonders of God. Here truly did the Son of God
draw the stroke of his infinite love, and consummated all the Divine benefits:
not only giving himself for our benefit and behoof, but entering into our very
breasts to solicit our love and affection. Anacreon writes, That standing at
defiance with the God of love, and having resisted all his arrows, the God at
last, when he had no more to shoot, shot himself, and penetrating his heart and
entrails compelled him to yield. What other are the benefits of our Lord God,
than so many arrows of love which Man resists? and not rendering himself neither
at the benefit of Creation, Conservation, Incarnation, or Passion, let him at
last render himself at this, when God shoots himself into him, and enters into
his very breast and bowels to solicit his love. If he resist this also, what
judgments expect him? Whereupon St. Paul says, that he who presumes to
communicate unworthily, eats and drinks the judgment of God, that is, swallows
down the whole weight of Divine justice.

Consider then how dreadful it shall be unto a Sinner, when he shall receive a
charge not only of his own being, and his own life, but also of the being and
life or God, of the Incarnation, Passion, Life and Death of Christ our
Redeemer, who has so often given himself unto him in the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood. The Murderer who stands charged with the life of a man, although it
be of some wicked person, yet fears to be apprehended and brought to judgment;
how is it then that he, who is charged with the life of God, trembles not? O
how fearful a thing is it, when a vile creature shall enter into judgment with
his Creator, and shall be demanded an account of the blood of Christ, whose
value is infinite? What account can he give of such a benefit, and of all the
rest, which he has received, even from the greatest unto the least? when
Christ shall say unto him those words of St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. hom. 24. in
Math.
I, when thou had no being, gave thee one, inspired thee with a Soul, and
placed thee above all things that are upon the Earth. I for thee created
Heaven, Air, Sea, Earth, and all things, and yet am dishonored by thee, and
held more vile and base than the Devil himself: and yet for all this have not
ceased to do thee good, and bestowed upon thee innumerable benefits. For thy
sake, being God, I was content to make my self a Servant, was buffetted, spit
upon, and condemned to a punishment of Slaves: and to redeem thee from death
suffered the death of the Cross. In Heaven I interceded for thee, and from
thence sent thee the Holy Ghost; I invited thee unto the Kingdom of Heaven,
offered my self to be thy Head, thy Spouse, thy Garment, thy House, thy Root,
thy Food, thy Drink, thy Shepherd, thy Brother, I chose thee for the Heir of
Heaven, and drew thee out of darkness unto light. To such excesses of love what
have we to answer, but to stand astonished and confounded, that we have been so
ungrateful, and given occasion to the Devil of one of the greatest scorns and
injuries, which could be put upon our Redeemer, when he shall say unto him:
Thou createdst man; for him wast born in poverty, livedst in labors, and
diedst in pain and torments. I have done nothing for him, but would have drunk
his blood, and sought to damn him into a thousand hells; and yet for all this
it is I whom he strives to please, and not thee. Thou do prepare for him a
Crown of eternal glory, I desire to torment him in hell: and yet he had rather
serve me without interest, than thee for thy promise of so great a reward. I
should have been ashamed to have created and redeemed a wretch so ungrateful
unto him, from whom he has received so great benefits; but since he loves me
better than thee, let him be mine, unto whom he has so often given up himself.

We are not only to give an account of these general benefits, but of those
which are more particular: of the good examples which we have seen, of the
instructions which we have heard, of the inspirations which have been sent us,
and the Sacraments which we have received; we have much to do to correspond
with all these. Let us therefore tremble at that strict judgment; let us
tremble at our selves, who are so careless of that, for which all the care in
the world is not sufficient; And if it were not for the blood of Christ what
would become of us? but the time of benefitting our selves by that will be then
past; now is the time: and if we shall now despise and outrage it, in what case
shall we be? Let us not mispend the time of this life, since so severe an
account will be demanded of all the benefits which we have received, one of
which is the Time of this temporal life, and the blessings of it. Let us take
heed what use we make of it; let us not lose it, since we are to answer for
every part of it. Sopronin Prato spirituali ca. 59. de Beato Thalilaeo.
This made holy Thalileus tremble and weep bitterly, who being asked the cause
of his tears answered: This time is bestowed upon us wherein to do penance, and
a most strict account will be demanded of us, if we despise it. It is not ours,
for which we are to answer: we are not the Lords of time; let us not therefore
dispose of it for our own pleasure, but for the service of God, whose it is.
This consideration were sufficient to withdraw our affection from the goods of
this life, and to settle it upon those which are eternal, since we are not
Masters of time and the things which are in it, but are as Stewards to account
for it and them. Being therefore to give a reason how we have employed them for
the service of God Almighty, let us not without reason abuse them for our own
vain gust and pleasure.

CAP. V.
How God even in this life passes a most rigorous Judgment.

ALl that we have hitherto spoken concerning the rigor of the Divine Tribunal,
before which the Soul is at the end of life to appear, and to give an account
unto his Redeemer, is far short of what really is to be. To the end therefore
that we may conceive it something better, I shall here propose the severity
wherewith God executes his Judgments even in this life, wherein he makes use
of mercy, that from thence we may collect the rigor of the other, where he is
only to use his Justice. Ezeck. 7.
By the Prophet Ezekiel he speaks unto his people thus. I will pour out all my
rage upon thee, and will accomplish my fury in thee; I will judge thee
according to thy ways, and will lay forth all thy wickedness against thee; my
eyes shall not pardon thee, neither will I have mercy. I will charge thee with
all thy misdeeds, and thy abominations shall be in the middle of thee: and thou
shall know that I am the Lord which smites. And presently he adds, My wrath
shall be upon all the people, the sword without, and pestilence and famine
within; he who is in the field shall die by the sword, and they who are in the
City shall be devoured by pestilence and famine: and they who fly, shall save
themselves, and shall all remain in the Mountains, as the Doves of the Valleys,
trembling in their iniquity: their hands shall be disjoynted, and their knees
shall resolve into water, for the great fear and amazement which God in his
wrath shall send upon them. But it is not much that the Lord should deal thus
with sinners, who have forsaken their God, since even against those, who are
desirous to do all for his honor, he proceeds with much rigor. Zach. 3.
Let us see how the Prophet Zacharit sets forth unto us the High Priest who
then lived, the Son of Josedeck, as a lively representation of the Divine
Judgment, whom he makes to appear before an Angel who there exercised the
Office of a Judge; clothed in foul and polluted Garments, in so much as the
Lord calls him a Brand taken out of the fire, and Satan standing by his side to
accuse him. If then this great Priest, zealous of the glory of God, stood so
dejected and confused in the presence of an Angel, as he appeared as a black
and burnt coal of hell in unclean and sooty Garments, how shall a grievous
Sinner and despiser of the Divine service appear before God himself? But this
is more fully signified in the Apocalypse, where our Savior himself pronounced
judgment against the seven Bishops of Asia, who were then all alive, and most
of them esteemed great Servants of God, and so holy, as was St. Timothy the
beloved Disciple of Paul, St. Polycarp, St. Quadratus, St. Carpus, St. Sagaris,
all in great opinion for sanctity and holiness of life. Let us first behold in
what manner our Savior Christ appeared when he came to judge them, and after
let us consider the rigorous charge which he laid against them. For the first,
to signify that nothing could be hid or concealed from him, he stood in the
midst of seven Candlesticks, or of seven Lamps like the Golden Candlestick
in the Temple, in each of which was a lighted Candle; in his hand he held
seven Stars, whose beams and splendor enlightened all about him: and above all
his face was as the Sun at midday in his greatest force, which leaves not the
least atome undiscovered. In such a brightness of Candles, Stars, and Sun there
was no shadow; to give us to understand that nothing how little soever can be
hidden from the all-seeing eyes of our most just Judge, unto whom all things
will appear clearly and distinctly as they are in themselves; but not content
with so many arguments of the evidence; which he shall have of all offenses, he
adds That the eyes of the Judge were as flaming fire, more penetrating than the
eyes of Lynceus, to see and search into all things, and to note also the rigor
and severity wherewith he looks upon offenses, when he comes to judge them.
This certainly were sufficient of it self to set forth the rigor of his
justice, but to make it appear yet more terrible he declares it by another
figure of a two-edged Sword, which he held in his mouth, to denote that the
rigor of his works shall be greater than those of his words, although his
words themselves were as cutting swords. In conclusion all was so full of
terror and threatening, as, although it nothing concerned St. John as being
none of those who were to be judged, yet it caused so great a fear and
amazement in him, that he fell as dead upon the ground. If then St. John only
beholding the wrathful countenance of our Lord, not against himself, but
others, with whom also he intended to use mercy, it made his feet to fail, and
his pulses to remain without motion, how shall it fare with that sinner who
shall behold him all incensed against him, and that at such a time when he is
only to use his justice? I believe that if the Souls of Sinners were capable
of death, the terror of that fight would bereave them of a thousand lives.

Let us now see what was found by those eyes of fire, with which Christ so
narrowly examined the works of those seven Bishops, who were such as he
himself vouchsafes to call them Angels. Truly he found much to reprehend in
them, that it might be verified which was spoken in Job, that he found iniquity
in his Angels. Who would have thought, that St. Timothy, of whom the Apostle
was so confident, and of whom he made so great esteem, should deserve that God
should take away his Chair, and deprive him of his Church of Ephesus? yet
Christ found him worthy of so great a chastisement, and threatens to do it, if
he did not amend: and complains that he was fallen from his former zeal,
exhorting him to do penance, which certainly he performed, as perceiving it
very necessary for him. Greater faults he found in the Bishop of Pergamus, as
also in him of Thiatira, who was St. Carpus: and in like manner exhorts them
both to do penance. And that it may appear how different are the judgments of
God from those of men, although the Bishop of Sardis was held by all for a most
holy man, that he had gained a great opinion of virtue, and that he did many
good works, yet Jesus Christ found he was so far from being a Saint, that he
remained in mortal sin. O holy good God, who would not tremble, that he who
passed amongst men for an Angel, should by thee be reputed as a Devil? but no
less dreadful is that which passed with the Bishop of Laodicia, whose
Conscience did not accuse him of any thing, who thought he had complied with
his obligations, that he exercised great virtues, had no remorse of any
grievous fault or matter of importance, and yet for all this he was so contrary
in the Divine sight, that the Lord says he was a miser and miserable, poor,
blind and naked of all virtue. Well said the Wiseman, That man knows not
whether he be worthy of love or hate. And David had reason to demand of God
that he would cleanse him from the sins he knew not. O most holy Lord and most
righteous Judge, how happens it that men fear thee not, since for what they
themselves know they ought to tremble; and although they hold themselves for
just, and are not conscious of any enormous fault, yet that which thou know
only is sufficient to condemn them? Let us quake that God is to demand an
account of those sins, which we our selves are ignorant of, as he did of this
Bishop of Laodicia, and also of sins committed by others, as he did of him of
Thiatira. The divine eyes of Christ pierce not only into our secret sins, and
the sins of others, but also discover those of Omission; and therefore he
reprehended the omission of the Bishop of Pergamus, although he was very
faithful unto God in all good works, and sought his glory, and the exaltation
of his holy name; and likewise searches into all our evil works as well known
as hid, as well our own as others, and also into our good works, when they are
not done with fervor and perfection. Let us tremble that in St. Timothy he
found his works not fervent: but much more that in the holy Bishop of
Philadelphia, who was irreprehensible, and had not slackned nor fallen off from
his first zeal, yet he found wherein to reprehend him, not for commission of
what was bad, not for omission of what was good, not for remission of his
former fervor, but only because he had little virtue, whereas in truth this
most holy Bishop had great merits, for which he was much favored and beloved
of God. But as our obligations are infinite, so there is no virtue, no
sancticty, which in his fight appears not little. So precise, so exact is the
Divine judgment, that of seven Bishops, which were reputed Angels, he found
in six wherewith to judge and reprehend them; in one negligence, in another
inconstancy and dismaidness, in another slackness and remissness of zeal, in
another weariness and want of perseverance, in another fear, in another
tepidness and indiscretion, and in two at least that they were in mortal sin.
And if in such Angels his divine eyes found wherewith to be offended, what will
they find in us sinners?

The knowledge, that Christ had judged them, was of great profit unto those
Bishops, causing them ever after to comply with their duties with great
fervor; and for those, who are known who they were, it is certain that they
died Saints, and for such are celebrated by the holy Church. It may also be
profitable unto us, to know that we are likewise to be judged with equal
rigor, that we may not offend him, unto whom we owe so much; that we may not
be tepid in his service, but perform our works fully, perfectly and completely.
Let the tepid fear those words which our Savior said unto one of those
Bishops, Apoc. 3.
I would thou were either hot or cold; but because thou art lukewarm, I shall
begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. Of this Menace an Interpreter notes, that
it is more dreadful, Alcazar.
than if it had been of condemnation, as intimating something more in
particular, than is to be found in the common sort of Reprobates, which is
signified by that Metaphor of Vomit, which denotes an irreconcilable
detestation on Gods part, a casting off from his paternal providence, a denying
of his efficacious helps, and a great hardness of heart in the offender. Let us
tremble at this threat; be Careful also, that so we may not hear from the mouth
of Christ, that which he said unto the Bishop of Sardis, I find not thy works
full before my God. Let us therefore see how our Charity stands, whether it be
full or not. For it is not full, if we love this man, and not that; if we wish
well unto our benefactor, and abhor him who does us injury; if we work only
and not also suffer; let us see if we bear the burdens of our neighbor as if
they were our own; if we prefer the convenience of others before our own; if
we embrace with a desire of pleasing God Almighty things hard and painful; and
if we love him not with words but deeds. Let us see if our Humility be full, if
we do not only hate honors, but desire to be despised; if we do not only not
prefer our selves before any, but abase our selves below all. Let us see if
our Patience be full; if we had not rather suffer this than that; if we do not
only suffer, but not complain. Let us see whether our Obedience be full; if we
obey in things easy, and not in difficult and troublesome; if our equal, and
not inferior; if we look upon God, and not upon Man; if we do it with
repugnancy, and not with delight. See if the rest of thy virtues be full: thou
art to give an account of all; endeavor to give a good one; see if thou be not
found in that day with vain and empty works; for thou shall not only be
demanded, if thou have done them good ones, but if thou have done them well. If
even in this life God will chastize our carelessness, what will he do in the
other?

Let us draw strength out of weakness, that we may with all our power and all
our forces serve him who has done so much for us. Let us see what we have
received, that we may know what we are to return; let us look upon the
greatness of those benefits which have been conferred upon us, that we may know
how to measure our gratitude accordingly: and as the benefits of God have been
full and plentifully heaped upon us, let not our thanks and services be short
and nigardly. Our Lord forgot not to put the seven Prelates in mind of their
obligation for his benefits; and therefore said unto the Bishop of Sardis,
Apoc. 3.
Keep in thy mind in what manner thou have received; because in divine benefits
we are not only to be thankful for the substance, but for the manner and
circumstances of them, that our gratitude may not only consist in the
substance of good works, but in the manner and circumstance of doing them,
performing them fully, perfectly, and completely; and seeing God has bestowed
his benefits out of his infinite love upon us, let us also serve him with a
perfect and unfeigned affection: and since he has employed his omnipotency for
our good and profit, let us employ our forces and faculties for his glory and
service.

CAP. VI.
Of the End of all Time.

BEsides the end of the particular time of this life, the universal end of all
time is much to be considered; that, since humane ambition passes the limits of
this life, and desires honor and a famous memory after it, Man may know that
after this death, there is another death to follow, in which his memory shall
also die and vanish away as smoke. After that we have finished the time of this
life, the end of all time is to succeed, which is to give a period unto all
which we leave behind us. Let man therefore know that those things, which he
leaves behind for his memory after death, are as vain as those which he enjoyed
in life. Let him raise proud Mausoleums, Let him erect Statues of Marble, Let
him build populous Cities, Let him leave a numerous Kindred, Let him write
learned Books, Let him stamp his Name in brass, and fix his Memory with a
thousand nails, All must have an end; his Cities shall sink, his Statues fall,
his Family and Lineage perish, his Books be burned, his Memory be defaced, and
all shall end, because all time must end. It much imports us to persuade our
selves of this truth, that we may not be deceived in the things of this world,
That not only our pleasures and delights are to end in death, but our memories
at the farthest are to end with Time; And since all are to conclude, all are to
be despised as vain and perishing. Cicero, although immoderately desirous of
fame and honor, Cieer. in Ep. ad Luc.
as appears by a large Epistle of his written unto a friend, wherein he
earnestly entreats him to write the conspiracy of Cataline, which was
discovered by himself, in a Volume apart, and that he would allow something in
it unto their ancient friendships, and Publish it in his life time, that he
might enjoy the glory of it whilst he lived: yet when he came to consider that
the world was to end in Time, he perceived that no glory could be immortal, and
therefore says, By reason of deluges and burnings of the earth, In Somn. Scip.
which mu^^ of necessity happen within a certain time, we cannot attain glory
not so much as durable for any long time, much less eternal. In this world no
memory can be immortal, since Time and the World it self are mortal; and the
time will come, when time shall be no more. But this truth is like the memory
of death, which by how much it is more important, by so much men think lest of
it, and practically do not believe it. But God, that his divine providence and
care might not be wanting, has also in this taken order, that a matter of so
great concernment should be published with all solemnity, first by his Son,
after by his Apostles, and then by Angels. Apoc. 10.
And therefore St. John writes in his Apocalypse, that he saw an Angel of great
might and power, who descended from heaven, having a Cloud for his Garment, and
his head covered with a Rainbow, his face shining as the Sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire, with the right foot treading upon the Sea, and with the left
upon the Earth, sending forth a great and terrible voice as the roaring of a
Lion, which was answered by seven thunders with other most dreadful noises;
and presently this prodigious Angel lifts up his hand toward Heaven. But
wherefore all this Ceremony? wherefore this strange equipage? wherefore this
horrid voice and thunder? all was to proclaim the death of Time, and to
persuade us more of the infallibility of it, he continued it with a solemn Oath
conceived in a Set form of most authentic words, listing up his hand toward
Heaven, and swearing by him that lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven
and Earth, and all which is in it, There shall be mo more time. With what could
this truth be more confirmed, than by the Oath of so great and powerful and an
Angel?

The greatness and solemnity of the Oath gives us to understand the weight and
gravity of the thing affirmed both in respect of it self, and the importance of
us to know it. If the death of a Monarch or Prince of some corner of the world,
prognosticated by an Eclipse or Comet, cause a fear and amazement in the
beholders, what shall the death of the whole World, and with it all things
temporal, and of Time it self foretold by an Angel with so prodigious an
apparition, and so dreadful a noise produce in them, who seriously consider it?
For us also this thought is most convenient, whereby to cause in us a contempt
of all things temporal. Let us therefore be practically persuaded, that not
only this life shall end, but that there shall be also an end of Time. Time
shall bereave Man of this life, and Time shall bereave the World of his, whose
end shall be no less horrible than that of Man; but how much the whole World
and the whole Race of mankind exceeds one particular person, by so much shall
the universal end surpass in terror the particular end of this life. For this
cause the Prophecies, which foretell the end of the World, are so dreadful,
that if they were not dictated by the holy Spirit of God, they would be thought
incredible. Christ therefore our Savior having uttered some of them unto his
Disciples, because they seemed to exceed all that could be imagined, in the
conclusion confirmed them with that manner of Oath or Asseveration, which he
commonly used in matters of greatest importance: Math. 13. Luc. 21.
Amen (which is, By my verity, or verily) I say unto you, that the world shall
not end before all these things are fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall fail, but
my words shall not fail. Let us believe then that Time shall end, and that the
World shall die, and that, if we may so say, a most horrible and disastrous
death; let us believe it, since the Angels and the Lord of Angels have sworn
it. If it be so then, that those memorials of men, which seemed immortal, must
at last end, since the whole Race of man is to end, let us only strive to be
preserved in the eternal memory of him, who has no end; and let us no less
despise to remain in the fading memory of men who are to die, than to enjoy the
pleasures of our senses which are to perish. As the hoarding up of riches upon
earth is but a deceit of Avarice, so the desire of eternizing our memory is an
error of Ambition. The covetous man must then leave his wealth when he leaves
his life, if the Thief in the mean time do not take it from him: and fame and
renown must end with the World, if envy or oblivion deface it not before. All,
that is to end, is vain; this World therefore and all which is esteemed in it
is vain, all is vanity of vanities, Let us only aim and aspire unto the
eternal, because the just only, as the Prophet says, shall remain in the
eternal memory of God. The memory of man is (as men themselves) frail and
perishing. What man ambitious of a perpetual memory would not rather choose to
be esteemed by ten men, who were to live a hundred years, than, by a thousand,
who were to die immediately after him? Let us therefore desire to be in the
memory of God, whose life is eternity. Our memory amongst men can last no
longer than men themselves, which shall all die like us; and there can be no
memory immortal amongst those who are mortal. It is therefore very expedient,
that the end of the World should be accompanied by the universal Judgment of
all men, wherein shall be revealed their most secret and hidden thoughts and
anions: That the murderer who has slain his neighbor, lest he should
discover his wickedness, may not hope that therefore it shall remain concealed:
and That no, man should be bold to sin for want of witnesses, since the whole
World shall then know that, which, if any but himself had known here, would
have burst his heart with shame and sorrow.

CAP. VII.
How the Elements and the Heavens are to change at the end of Time.

LEt us now look upon the strange manner of the end of the World, which being
so terrible, gives us to understand the vanity and deceit of all things in it,
and the great abuse of them by man; for questionless were it not for the great
malice and wickedness, which raigns in the World, the period of it would not be
so horrible and disastrous. Lib. recognit.
S. Clement the Roman writes that he learned of St. Peter the Apostle, that God
had appointed a day from all eternity, wherein the Army of Vengeance should
with all its forces, and, as we may say, in ranged battle fight with the Army
of Sin; which day is usually called in the holy Scripture The day of the Lord:
in which battle the Army of Vengeance shall prevail, and shall at once
extirpate and make an end both of Sin and the World, wherein it has so long
reigned. And certainly if the terror of that day shall equal the multitude and
hainousness of sins, we need not wonder at what the sacred Scripture and holy
Fathers have foretold of it. But as it is usual in war res to skirmish and make
inrodes before the day of battle, so before that dreadful day, wherein all
punishments are to encounter with all offenses, the Lord shall from diverse
parts send forth several calamities, which shall be forerunners of that great
day of battle, and shall like light Horsemen scour the Campania: which St.
John in the Apocalypse signified by those Horsemen, which he saw sally forth
upon divers-coloured horses, one red, another black, and the third pale: so the
Lord shall before that day send Plagues, Famine, Wars, Earthquakes, Droughts,
Inundations, Deluges; and if those miseries do now so much afflict us, what
shall they then do, when God shall add unto them his utmost force and power,
when all Creatures shall arm against Sinners, and the Zeal of divine justice
shall be their Captain General? which the Wiseman declares in these words;
Sap. 5.
His zeal shall take up arms, and shall arm the creatures to revenge him of his
enemies; he shall put on Justice as a breast plate, and righteous Judgment as
a helmet, and he shall take Equity as a buckler, and shall sharpen his Wrath as
a lance, and the circuit of the earth shall fight for him. Thunderbolts shall
be sent from the clouds as from a well-shooting how, and shall nit fail to hit
the mark, and Hail shall be sent full of stormy wrath. The Waters of the sea
shall threaten them, the Rivers shall combat furiously, a most strong Wind
shall rise against them, and shall divide them as a whirlwind. Very dreadful
are those words, although they contain but the War, which three of the
Elements are to make against Sinners; but not only Fire, Air and Water, but
Earth also and Heaven (as it appears in other places of Scripture) shall fall
upon them and confound them; for all creatures shall express their fury in that
day, and shall rise against man: and if the clouds shall discharge thunderbolts
and stones upon their heads, the Heavens shall shoot no less balls than Stars,
which, as Christ says, shall fall from thence. If Hail no bigger than little
stones falling but from the clouds destroy the fields, and sometimes kills the
lesser sort of cattle, what shall pieces of Stars do falling from the Firmament
or some upper Region?

It is no amplification which the Gospel uses, when it says, That men shall
wither with fear of what shall fall upon the whole frame of nature: for as in
Man, which is called the Lesser world, when he is to die, the humors, which
are as the Elements, are troubled and out of order, his eyes, which are as the
Sun and Moon, are darkened, his other senses, which are as the lesser stars,
fall away, his reason, which is as the celestial virtues, is off the hinges: so
in the death of the greater World, before it dissolve and expire, the Sun shall
be turned into darkness, the Moon into blood, the Stars shall fall, and the
whole World shall tremble with a horrid noise. If the Sun, Moon, and other
celestial bodies, which are held incorruptible, shall suffer such changes, what
shall be done with those frail and corruptible Elements of Earth, Air, and
Water? If this inferior World do, as the Philosophers say, depend upon the
Heavens, those celestial bodies being altered and broken in pieces, in what
estate must the lower Elements remain, when the Virtues of Heaven shall
faulter, and the wandering Stars shall lose their way, and fail to observe their
order? How shall the Air be troubled with violent and sudden Whirle-winds, dark
Tempests, horrible Thunders, and furious flashes of Lightning? and how shall
the Earth tremble with dreadful Earthquakes, opening her self with a thousand
mouths, and casting forth as it were whole Volcanies of fire and sulphur, and
not content to overthrow the loftiest Towers, shall swallow up high Mountains,
and bury whole Cities in her entrails? How shall the Sea then rage, mounting
his proud waves above the clouds, as if they meant to overwhelm the whole
Earth, and shall certainly drown a great part of it? The roaring of the Ocean
shall astonish those who are far distant from the Sea, and inhabit in the
midst of the firm land; wherefore Christ our Savior said, Luc. 21.
that there should be in the Earth afflictions of Nations for the confusion of
the noise of the Sea.

What shall men do in this general perturbation of Nature? they shall remain
amazed and pale as death. What comfort shall they have? they shall stand gazing
one upon another, and every one shall conceive a new fear by beholding in, his
neighbors face the image of his own death. What fear and horror shall then
possess them, when they shall hourly expect the success and dire effects
portended by these monstrous prodigies? All Commerce shall then cease, the
Marketplaces shall be unpeopled, and the Tribunals remain solitary and silent;
none shall be then ambitious of honors, none shall seek after pastimes and new
invented pleasures; nor shall the covetous wretch then busy himself with the
care of his treasures; none shall frequent the Palaces of Kings and Princes,
but through fear shall forget even to eat and drink; all their care shall be
employed how to escape those Deluges, Earthquake and lightnings, seeking for
places of security which they shall not meet with. Who will then value his own
Descent and Lineage? who the nobleness of his Arms and achievements? who his
Wisdom and Talents? who will remember the Beauty he has once doted upon? who
the sumptuous Buildings he has reared? who his acute and well-composed
Writings? who his Discretion and Gravity in his discourse? And if we shall
forget what we our selves most valued and gloried in, how shall we remember
that of others? what remembrance shall there then be of the acts of that great
Alexander? Of the Learning of Aristotle? and the Endowments of the most
renowned men of the world? Their Fame shall remain from thence forward for ever
buried, and shall die with the World for a whole Eternity. The Mariners, when
in some furious Tempest they are upon the point of sinking, how are they amazed
at the rage of the watery Element? how grieved and afflicted with the ruin
which threatens them? what prayers and vows do they send up to Heaven? how
disinteressed are they of all worldly matters, since they fling their wealth
and riches into the Sea, for which they have run such hazard? In what condition
shall be then the Inhabitants of the Earth, when not only the Sea with his
raging, but Heaven and Earth with a thousand prodigies shall affright them?
when the Sun shall put on a Robe of mourning, and amaze them with the horror
of his darkness: when the Moon shall look like blood, the Stars fall, and the
Earth shake them with its unquiet trembling: when the Whirlwinds shall throw
them off their legs, and frequent and thick flashes of Lightning dazzle their
sight, and confound their understanding: what shall Sinners then do, for whose
sake all these fearful wonders shall happen?

2.
The fear and astonishment which shall fall upon mankind, when the whole power
and concourse of Nature shall be armed against Sinners, may be perceived by the
fear which has been caused by some particular of those changes, which are
foretold to happen in the end of the World altogether, and every one in great
excess. Let us therefore by the consideration of the particular judge how
dreadful shall be the conjunction of so many and so great calamities. And to
begin with the Earth the most dull and heavy of all the Elements, Cardinal
Jacobus Papiensis, Jacob. Papiens. In Epist.
writing what happened in his own time, reports that in the year 1456, upon the
5th of December, three hours before day, the whole Kingdom of Naples trembled
with that violence, that some entire Towns were buried in the earth, and a
great part of many others were overthrown, in which perished 60000 persons,
part swallowed by the earth, and part oppressed by the ruins of buildings. what
security can men look for in this life, when they are not secure of the earth
they tread upon? What firmness can there be in the World, when the only firm
thing in it is unstable? From whence may not death assault us, if it springs
from under our feet? Evarg. l. 6. c. 8. Vide Niceph. lib. 18.3 c. 13.
But it is not much that the Earthquake of a whole Kingdom should cause so
great a ruin, since it has done as much in one City. Evagrius writes, that
the night in which Mauritius the Emperor was married, three hours within night
the City of Antioch quaked in that manner, that most of the Buildings were
overthrown, and 60000 persons remained buried in her ruins. If the Earth was so
cruel in those particular Earthquakes, what was it in the time of Tiberius,
Plin. l. 2. c. 84.
when according to Pliny twelve of the most principal Cities of Asia were
overthrown and sunk into the earth? Sen. not. q. l. 6.
And yet more cruel was that related by Nicephorus, which happened in the time
of the Emperor Theodosius, which lasted for 6 months without intermission,
Niceph. l. 4. c. 46.
and was so universal, that almost the whole circuit of the Earth trembled, as
extending to the Chersonesus, Alexandria, Bithinia, Antioch, Hellespont, the
two Phrygia's, the greatest part of the East, and many Nations of the West.

And that we may also say something of the fury of the Sea, even against those
who were far distant from the rage of his waves, and thought themselves secure
in their own houses: Most horrible was that Earthquake related by S. Jerome,
St. Hier in vita St. Hilarion.
and Ammianus Marcellinus, who was an eyewitness of it, which happened not
long after the death of the Emperor Julian, wherein not only the Earth
trembled, but the Sea out-past his limits as in another Deluge, and turned
again to involve the Earth as in the first Chaos. Ships floated in Alexandria
above the loftiest buildings, and in other places above high hills; and after
that the Sea was calmed and returned into his channel, many Vessels in that
City (as Nicephorus writes) remained upon the top of-houses, Niceph. l. 10. c.
35.
and in other parts upon high rocks, as witnesses St. Jerome. But let us hear
it related by Ammianus Marcellinus,, Am. Marcel. l. 20.
whose words are these which follow, Procopius the Tyrant being yet alive, the
2^. of July, the year wherein Valentinian was first time Consul with his
Brother, the Elements throughout the whole compass of the Earth suddenly fell
unto such distempers and disorders, as neither true stories have ever
mentioned, nor false feigned. A little before morning the Heavens being first
over-cast with a dark Tempest, intermixed with frequent thunders, and horrid
flashes of lightning, the whole body of the Earth moved, and the Sea being
violently driven back retired in such manner as the most hidden bottom of it
was discovered; so as many unknown sorts of Fishes were seen stretched out upon
the mud. Those vast profoundities beholding then the Sun, whom Nature from the
beginning of the world had hid under so immense a mass of waters, many Ships
remained upon the Oase or floating in small gullets: and Fishes were taken up
with men's hands gasping upon the dry sands; but in short time the waves of the
Sea, enraged to see themselves banished from their natural seats, lifted
themselves up with great fury against the Islands, and far extended Coasts of
the Continent; and what Cities or Buildings they encountered were violently
overthrown and evened with the ground; in so much as the face of the World
changed by the furious discord of the Elements produced many unheard of
Prodigies. For the vast body of the waters suddenly and unexpectedly returning
and entering far into the land, many thousands of people were drowned, whose
dead bodies, after the swellings of the waves were assuaged and retired unto
their natural and usual bed, were found, some with their faces downward
grovling upon the Earth, some upwards looking upon the Heavens; and some great
Ships the waters left upon the tops of houses, as it happened in Alexandria:
others far from the Seashore, and as we our selves are witness, who saw one,
as we passed by Methion, then old and worm-eaten. All this lamentable story is
from Ammianus Marcellinus.

No less fearful is that which is related by Nauclerus and Trithemius, that the
year 1218. Naucler. Genesis 41. sub fin. Trit. Chron.
The enraged Sea entering into Frisia, there were drowned in the Fields and in
their own houses more than a hundred thousand persons. Langus adds; that
afterward in the year 1287. the Ocean again reentring the same Province,
retired not till it had left 80000 persons drowned behind it. This mortality is
not much in a whole Province in respect of what the Sea has done in one only
City. Surius in his Commentaries of the year 1509. writes, that the day of the
Exaltation of the Cross in September the Sea betwixt Constantinople and Pera
swelled with that rage and fury, that it passed over the walls of both Cities,
and that there were drowned only of Turks in Coustantinople above 13000. Unto
these so certain examples we shall not need to aad what Plato writes, Tertul.
Apolog. Cap. 39.
although Tertullian and many Authors of these times approve it, That the
Atlantic Island, which was seated in that spacious Ocean betwixt Spain and the
West Indies, and which was a greater part of the World then Asia and Afric
both together, replenished with innumerable people, was by an Earthquake, and
the rain of one only day and night, (in which the Heavens as it were melted
themselves into water) and the Sea over-past his bounds, buried in the Ocean
with all the Inhabitants, and never since appeared. But I will not make use of
this History to exaggerate the force of the Elements enraged against man. The
modern Stories, which we have related with more certainty, are sufficient, and
by that, which happened in Frisia, may be seen with what fury the Ocean
imprisoned within his proper limits issues forth, when God permits it to fight
against Sinners. What shall be then when the Lord of all shall arm all the
Elements against them, and shall give the Alarm to all creatures to revenge him
upon men so ungrateful for his infinite benefits?

The Air also, which is an Element so sweet and gentle, in which we live, and
by which we breath, when God slacking the bridle draws force out of weakness,
with no less fury ruins and overthrows all it meets. It has been seen to tear
up whole woods by the roots, and transport the trees to places far distant.
Ovied. In Hist. Indic. l. 6. ca. 3. Surius in Comment. Conrad. Argen. in Chron.
Surius writes that the 28 of June in the year 1507 at midnight there arose
such a Tempest in Germany, that it made the strongest Buildings shake,
uncovered Houses, rooted up Trees, and threw them a great distance off.
Conradus Argentinas writes, That Henry the sixth being Emperor, he himself saw
great Beams of Timber blown from the roof of the chief Church in Ments, as big
as the Beams of a Wine Press, and that of heavy wood as Oak, flying in the air
above a miles distance. Above all who is not amazed at what Josephus writes in
his Antiquities, and Eusebius in Praepar. Evangel. that the Tower of Babylon,
which was the most strong and prodigious Building of the World, was by God
overthrown with a Tempest? What shall I speak of those fearful Tempests of hail
and lightning, flying through the air from place to place to chastize Sinners:
one of which slew all the Flocks and Herds of the Egyptians: And in Palestine
of another Hail of a strange greatness, that slew innumerable Amorites? Of
latter times in these parts in the year 1524. Clavitellus writes that near
Cremona there fell Hail as big as Hens eggs; Clav. Fol. 260. Corn. A lap. in
cap. 9. Exodus Olaus Mag. l. 1. c. 22. Conimb. In Meteor. c. de grandine. Hist.
Tripart. l. 7. c. 22. Ezekiel. 38. Apoc. 16.
and in the Campania of Bolognia in the year 1537. there fell stones or 28
pound weight. Olaus Magnus writes that in the North Hail has fallen as big as
the head of a man. And the Tripartite cap History, that the year 369. there
happened such a Tempest in Constantinople, that the Hail was as rocks.
Certainly it is not then much what the Prophet Ezekiel says, that in the end
of the World shall fall huge stones: and what St. John writes, that they shall
be of the weight of a talent, which is 125 pounds of Roman weight. With what
horrible thunder shall that Tempest resound, which shall throw a stone of that
greatness? In Seythia they write that diverse persons have fallen dead with the
terrible noise of the thunders in those parts. What noise then shall those last
Tempests make, which God shall send in the end of the World?

All those alterations past of the Elements are no more than skirmishes. What
shall then be the battle which they are to give unto Sinners, when the Heavens
shall shoot it is arrows, and give the Alarm with prodigious thunders, and shall
declare their wrath with horrible apparitions? Greg, lib. 4. dialog. Cap. 36.
Joan. in Vit. Greg l. 1. c. 37. Zonar. in Iren. Plin. l. 1. c. 13.
St. Gregory the Great writes as an eyewitness, that in a great Pestilence at
Rome he saw arrows visibly fall from Heaven, and strike many men. John the
Deacon says it rained arrows. How shall it the be, when the Heavens and Air
rain pieces of stars? The world was amazed when ill the time of Irene and
Constantine the Sun was darkened for 17 days together, and in the time of
Vespasian the Sun and Moon appeared not during the space of 12 days. What
shall it be in the last days, when the Sun shall hide his beams under a
mourning Garment, and the Moon shall cloth her self with blood, to signify
the wanes which all the creatures are to make with fire and blood against those
who have despised their Creator? When on one side the Earth shall rouse it self
up against them, and shall shake them off her back, as unwilling to endure
their burden any longer? When the Sea shall pursue and assault them within
their own houses, and the Air shall not permit them to be safe in the fields?
Certainly it shall be then no wonder, if they shall desire the mountains to
cover them, and the hills to hide them within their Caverns. But all this is
rather to be imagined, then expressed; and the very thought of it is enough to
make us tremble. The creatures now groan to see themselves abused by man in
contempt of his and their Creator; but they shall then shake off their yoaks,
and shall revenge themselves of the agrievances which they suffer under him,
and the injuries he has done unto the Creator of all. The violences of the
Elements, and disturbances of Nature, which have and may happen hereafter, are
nothing in respect of those, which shall be in the last days; the which St.
Augustine says shall be much more horrible and dreadful than those which are
past. And if those single and alone were so terrible, (as we have already
seen,) what shall they be when they come all together and from all parts; when
the whole world shall rebel against man; when all shall be confusion; when
Summer shall be changed into Winter, and Winter into Summer, and no creature
shall keep the prefixed law with them, who have not observed the Law of their
Creator, that so they may revenge both God and themselves?

. 3.
But that this most fearful alteration of the creatures, which shall happen,
may be yet more apparent, we will specify. some of them out of the Apocalypse
of St. John. Very dreadful is that which he mentions in the eighth Chapter of
hail, and fire, with a rain of blood, so general, and in such abundance, that
it shall destroy the third part of the Earth, of trees and green herbs. How
horrible an amazement shall so general a rain cause amongst men? But it is not
so to end. For immediately shall appear in the Air a huge mountain of fire,
which shall fall all at once into the Sea, and dividing it self into several
bodies shall burn the third part of the Fishes, the third part of Ships, and of
what else shall be in the Ocean. The like effect shall proceed from a flame or
prodigious Comet, which falling into the Rivers and Fountains, and there
dividing it self into several parts, shall turn the waters bitter as wormwood,
and make them so pestilential, as they shall infect those who drink them, and
many shall die with their taste. An Angel shall then smite the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Apoc. 9.
and deprive them of a third part of their light. But mote horrible than all,
is that which follows; that after so many calamities the bottomless pit, which
is hell, shall burst open, and out of his profound throat belch forth so thick
a smoke, as shall wholly darken the Sun and Air: from which smoke shall sally
forth a multitude of deformed Locusts, which in great swarms shall disperse
themselves over the face of the whole earth, and leaving the fields, herbs, and
what is sown, fall upon such men as have been unfaithful unto God, and shall
for five months torment them with greater rage than Scorpions. Some Doctors
understanding those Locusts according unto the Letter, Lessius de Perf. div. l.
13. c. 18. Cornel. in Apoc.
that they shall be a certain kind of true Locusts, but of a strange figure and
fierceness; others that they shall be Devils of hell in the shape of Locusts;
and it is no marvel, that in the destruction of the world Devils shall appear
in visible forms, since in the destruction of Babylon they appeared in diverse
figures of beasts, as was prophesied by Isaias. But after what manner soever,
St. John says that this Plague shall be so cruel, Isa. c. 34. and 13.
that men shall seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and
death shall fly from them.

Many other plagues shall happen in those last days. For as before that God
drowned the Egyptians, and delivered his people, he sent such plagues upon
Egypt as are recorded in Exodus: so before the general destruction of Sinners
in that universal Deluge, and Sea of fire, which shall cover the whole Earth,
and out of which the Saints are to escape free, so much greater plagues shall
proceed, as the whole World is greater than Egypt. For not only the Rivers
and Fountains shall then ce turned into blood, but the whole Sea shall be
converted into a most black gore. The Lord shall also in those days send
horrible botches and sores upon men; and the Sun shall scorch them in that
manner, as they shall lose their senses, and some of the wicked shall turn
against God, and blaspheme as if they were already in hell. The Earth also
shall tremble; and that not being the greatest which is recounted in the sixth
Chapter of the Apocalypse, yet the Apostle relates such things of it, as are
able to strike a fear and amazement into those who hear it. His words are
these. There was a great Earthquake; Apoc. 6.
and the Sun became as sackcloth, and the Moon at blood; the Stars fell from
Heaven as a Fig Tree cast off its green siggs, when it it shaken by a violent
wind. The Heavens were folded up as a book, or as a roll of parchment: and all
Mountains and Islands moved from their places. I leave unto the consideration
of every one, what shall then become of those who remain alive in that
conflict. St. John says that Kings and Princes, the Rich and Strong, Slaves
and Freemen shall hide themselves in Caves, and Rocks, and shall say unto the
Mountains and Hills, Fall upon us and cover us. And the same S. John says
further, that there shall be yet a greater Earthquake, which shall be the
greatest that ever happened since the foundation of the World was laid, in
which the Islands shall sink, and the Mountains shall be made even with the
Plains. Horrible lightnings and thunders shall affright the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and hailstones shall fall of the weight of a Talent, which is of 5
Arrobas, an Hebrew Talent weighing 125 Roman pounds. This Plague joined with so
strange an Earthquake, how shall it astonish those who are then alive?

4.
But how shall it then fare with Sinners, when after all shall come that
general fire so often foretold in holy Scripture, which shall either fall from
Heaven, Vide P. Grana. De novissi. Alb. Mag. in comp.
or asseend out of Hell, or (according to Albertus Magnus) proceed from both,
and shall devour and consume all it meets with? Whither shall the miserable
fly, when that River of flames, or (to say better) that Innundation and Deluge
of fire shall so encompass them, as no place of surety shall be left, where
nothing can avail but a holy life, when all besides shall perish in that
universal ruin of the whole World? What shall it then profit the wordlings to
have rich Vessels of gold and silver, curious Embroideries, precious
Tapestries, pleasant Gardens, sumptuous Palaces, and all what the world now
esteems, when they shall with their own eyes behold their costly Movables
burnt, their rich and curious pieces of Gold melted, and their flourishing and
pleasant Orchards consumed without power either to preserve them or themselves?
All shall burn, and with it the World, and all the fame and memory of it shall
die; and that which mortals thought to be immortal shall then end and perish.
No more shall Aristotle be cited in the Schools, nor Vlpian alleged in the
Tribunals; no more shall Plato be read amongst the Learned, nor Cicero imitated
by the Orators; no more shall Seneca be admired by the understanding, nor
Alexander extolled amongst Captains; all fame shall then die, and all memory be
forgotten. O vanity of men, whose memorials are as vain as themselves; which in
few years perish, and that which lasts longest can endure no longer than the
World! What became of that Statue of maslie gold, which Gorgias the Leontin
placed in Delphos to eternize his Name; and that of Gabrion in Rome; and that
of Borosus with the golden tongue in Athens, and innumerable others erected to
great Captains in brass or hardest marble? certainly many years since they are
perished, or, if not yet, they shall perish in this great and general
Conflagration. Only virtue no fire can burn.

Three hundred sixty Statues were erected by the Athenians unto Demetrius
Phalareus, for having governed their Commonwealth ten years with great virtue
and prudence; but of so little continuance were these Trophies, that those very
Emblems, which were raised by gratitude, were soon after destroyed by envy: and
he himself who saw his Statues set up in so great a number, saw them also
pulled down; but he still retained this comfort, which Christians may learn
from him, that beholding how they threw his Images unto the ground, he could
say at least, They cannot overthrow those Virtues, for which they were erected.
If they were true Virtues, he said well; for those neither envy can demolish,
nor humane power destroy: and which is more, the divine power will not in this
general destruction of the World consume them, but will preserve in his eternal
memory as many as shall persevere in goodness and die in his holy grace; for
only Charity and Christan Virtues shall not end, when the World ends. The
sight of those Triumphs exhibited by Roman Captains, when they conquered some
mighty and powerful Kings, lasted but a while, and the memories of the
Triumphers not much longer: and now there are few who know that Metellus
triumphed over King Jugurtha, Aquilius over King Aristonicus, Atilius over King
Antiochus, Marcus Antonius over the King of Armenia, Pompey over King
Mithridates, Aristobulus and Hiarbas Emilius over King Perseus, and the
Emperor Aurelius over Cen^bia the Queen of the Palmirens. If few know this but
dumb Books and dead Paper, when those shall end, what shall then become of
their memories? How many Histories has fire consumed, and are now no more
known then if they had never been Written? neither to do nor write can make
the memory of man immortal. Aristarchus wrote more than a thousand Commentaries
of several Subjects, of which not one line remains at present. Chrysippus wrote
seven hundred Volumes, and now not one leaf is extant. Theophrastus wrote three
hundred, and sarce three or four remain. Above all is that which is reported of
Dionysius Grammaticus, that he wrote three thousand five hundred works, and now
not one sheet appears. But yet more is that which Jamlicus testifies of the
great Trimegistus, that he composed thirty six thousand five hundred twenty
five books, and all those are as if he had not written a letter; for 4 or 5
little and imperfect Treatises, which pass under his name, are none of his.
Time even before the end of time leaves no Books nor Libraries. By the
assistance of Demetrius Phalareus King Ptolomy collected a great Library in
Alexandria, in which were stored all the Books he could gather from Caldee,
Greece, and Egypt, which amounted to seventy thousand bodies; but in the Civil
Wars of the Romans it perished by that burning which was caused by Julius
Caesar. Another famous Library amongst the Greeks of Policrates and
Phisistratus was spoiled by Xerxes, The Library of Bizantium, which contained a
hundred and twenty thousand Books, was burnt in the time of Basiliscus. That of
the Roman Capitol was in the time of Comm^dus turned into ashes by lightning;
and what have we now of the great Library of Pergamus, wherein were two hundred
thousand Books? Even before the end of the World, the most constant things of
the World die. And what great matter is it if those memorials in paper be
burnt, since those in brass melt, and those of marble perish? That prodigious
Amphitheater, Vide Lips. In Amph.
which Stability Taurus raised of stone, was burnt in the time of Nero: the
hard marble not being able to defend it self from the soft flames. The great
riches of Corinth in gold and silver were melted when the Town was fired; those
precious metals could neither with their hard-resist, nor with their value
hire a friend to defend them from those furious flames. If this particular
burning in the most flourishing time of the World caused so great a ruin, what
shall that general one, which shall make an end of the World and all things
with it?

5.
Let us now consider (as we have already in Earthquakes and Deluges) what great
astonishment and destruction has sometime happened by some particular
burnings, that by them we may conceive the greatness of the horror and ruin,
which will accompany that general one of the whole world. What lamentations
were in Rome, when it burnt for seven days together? What shrieks were heard
in Troy, when it was wholly consumed with flames? What howling and astonishment
in Pentapolis, when those Cities were destroyed with fire from heaven? Some say
they were ten Cities, Strabo thirteen, Josephus and Lira five, that which of
faith is, that there were four at least, who with all their Inhabitants were
consumed. What weeping was therein Jerusalem, when they beheld the House of
God, the Glory of their Kingdom, the Wonder of the World involved in fire and
smoke? And that we may draw nearer unto our own times, when lightning from
Heaven fell upon Stockholme, the capital City of Sweden, and burnt to death
above 1600 persons, besides an innumerable multitude of Women and Children, who
hoping to escape the fire at land fled into the ships at Sea, but overcharging
them were all drowned: Imagine what that people felt, when they saw their houses
and goods on fire, and no possibility of saving them: when the Husband heard
the shrieks and cries of his dying Wife: the Father of his little Children, and
unawares perceived himself so encompassed with flames, that he could neither
relieve them, nor free himself. What grief, Albert. Krant. Suec. l. 5. c. 3.
what anguish possessed the hearts of those unfortunate creatures, when to avoid
the fury of the fire, they were forced to trust themselves to the no less cruel
waves, when by their own overhasty crowdings and indiscretion they saw their
Ships overwhelmed, and themselves compelled to escape the burning of their
Country, to struggle with the water, and that which way soever they turned,
they perceived death still to follow them, and were certain to perish? What
shall be then the streights and exigences of that general burning, when those
who shall escape Earthquakes, Inundations of the Sea, the fury of whirlwindes
and lightning from Heaven, shall fall into that universal Fire, that Deluge of
flames, which shall consume all, and make an end both of men and their
memories? Of those who lived before the Flood, and were Masters of the World
for so long a time, except it be of some few, which the Scripture mention, we
know nothing. Those heroical actions, which certainly some of them performed,
and gained by them incomparable fame, lie buried in the waters, and there
remains no more memory of those who did them, than if they had never been born.
No more permanent shall be the fame of those, which now resounds in the ears of
the whole World, Cyrus, Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, Caesar, Augustus, Plato,
Aristotle, Hippocrates, Euclid, and the rest: no more World, no more Fame. This
Fire shall end all that smoke.

Nor is the World without convenient proportion to end in fire, which is now so
full of smoke. There are few comparisons (as has been said in the beginning of
this work) which express better what the World is, than that which St. Clement
the Roman learned of St. Peter the Apostle, who said the World was like a house
full of smoke, which in such manner blinds the eyes, as it differs not those
within it to see things as they are; and so the World with its deceits so
disguises the nature of humane things, as we perceive not what they are.
Ambition and humane honor (which the World so much dotes after) are no more
than smoke without substance, which so blinds our understandings, that we know
not the truth of that we so much covet. It is no marvail that so much smoke
comes at last to end in flames. The smoke of the Mountains Vesuvius and Aetna,
when it ends in fire, and bursts forth into those innumerous flames, has
amazed the World, and rivers of fire have been seen to issue from their bowels.
Zon. In Tito. Proc. l. 2.
Vesuvius is near unto Naples, and the fire has sometimes sallyed forth with
that impetuous violence, that, as grave Authors affirm, the ashes have been
seen in Constantinople and Alexandria. And St. Augustine writes, St. Aug. l. 3.
de Civit. c. 31.
that the ashes of Mount Aetna overwhelmed the City of Catanea: and in our
time, when Vesuvius burst out, the very flame of it terrified places far
distant and secure. And now lately in the year 1638. the third of July near the
Island of St. Michael one of the Terceras, the fire bursting out from the
bottom of the Sea 150 fathomes deep, and overcoming the weight of so huge a
mass of water sent up his flames unto the clouds, and made many places
(although far distant) to tremble. With what fury shen shall the general
Conflagration of the World burst forth? that part, which shall issue forth of
Hell, and from beneath the Earth, shall fill the World with ashes before it be
involved in flames; and when a crack of thunder or a flash of lightning amazes
us so much, that fire which falls from heaven what violence and noise shall it
bring along with it? Lot the Nephew of Abraham, being secure in conscience, and
promised by the Angel of God, that for his sake the City of Segor should not be
burnt, but that he might rest safe in it, was notwithstanding so affrighted
with the fire which fell upon other Cities in that Valley of Pentapolis, that
notwithstanding he saw it not, yet he held himself not late, but retired unto
the Mountains. What counsel shall sinners take in that extremity, when their
own Conscience shall be their accusors, and when they shall behold the World
all on fire about them? whither shall they fly for safety, when no place will
afford it? Shall they climb unto the Mountains? thither the flames will follow
them. Shall they descend into the Valleys? thither the fire will pursue them.
Shall they shut themselves up in strong Castles and Towns? but there the wrath
of God will assault them, and that fire will pass their Fosses, consume the
Bulwarks, and make an end both of them and their fortunes.

Besides the contempt of all things, which the world esteems, which we may draw
from this general destruction of it by fire, we may also perceive the
abomination of sin: since God to purify the World from that uncleanness,
wherewith our offenses have polluted it, is resolved to cleanse it with fire,
as he anciently washed it with the waters of the Deluge. Such are our sins, that
for being only committed in the World, the World it self is condemned to die;
what shall then become of those who sinned? Less. de perf. div. l. 13. c. 10.
But from this so terrible a fire the Saints then alive shall be free, that it
may appear it was only prepared for Sinners, and that nothing can then avail
but virtue and holiness. The rich man shall not be delivered by his wealth, nor
the mighty by his power, nor the crafty by his wiles; only the just shall be
freed by his virtues; none shall escape the terror of that day by fast sailing
ships or speed of horses: the Sea it self shall burn, and the fire shall
overtake the swiftest Post; only holiness and charity shall defend the
Servants of Christ: unto whom the tribulations of those times shall serve to
purify their Souls by suffering that in this life with reward, which they
should otherwise have done for a time in the other without it. Albertus Magnus
observes the convenience of the two Elements, by which God resolved twice to
destroy the World: The first by water against the fire of the flesh and heat of
concupiscence, which so inordinately tytannized over all virtue before the
general Flood: The second he has appointed to be by fire against the coldness
of charity, which in those last days shall reign in the aged and decrepit
World. And as in the Deluge of waters only the chaste Noah and his Wife, who
were most continent in Matrimony, and his Sons and Daughters, who observed
chastity all the time they continued in the Ark, escaped drowning: so in that
general fire of the World only the Just, who shall be replenished with
charity, shall be free from burning. The Deluge of waters overwhelmed not him,
who was not burnt with the heat of carnal love: neither shall the Deluge of
fire destroy them, who are enflamed with divine charity.

CAP. VIII.
How the World ought to conclude with so dreadful an end, in which a general
Judgment is to pass of all that is in it.

TO be subject to an end (as has been said) were sufficient to breed in us a
contempt of all things temporal; for what is to conclude in a not being, is
already not much distant from it, and so differing little from nothing; ought
not to be valued much more than if it were nothing. But unto this necessity of
ending is annexed that so notable circumstance of ending after so dreadful and
terrible a manner, as we have already seen. I have therefore been so full in
expressing of it, that we may perceive by this so strange a manner of
conclusion, what our exorbitant malice in the abuse of the Creatures has added
unto their proper vanity; for it is we, who by our vices have made them of much
less value, than they are by their own nature: so as in the condition they now
stand they are much to be despised. Natural delights are in themselves more
pure, and less hurtful than humane malice has made them, which has rendered
them more costly dangerous and difficult, and therefore less pleasant; for what
is subject to care and danger must of necessity be mixed with trouble. Honey
loses its sweetness if mixed with Gall, and the most generous Wine is corrupted
with a little Vinegar; by which may appear the error of our appetites, which
striving to augment our pleasures has lessened them, and by adding inordinate
relishes to what nature had simply and regularly provided, has rather invented
new afflictions than contents. Our gluttony is not pleased with savoury food,
but what we eat must be rare and costly: it contents not it self with the bare
taste of meat, which is its proper object, but seeks after smell and color; it
is not Cooked, if not disguised, neither will that serve, if not accommodated
with several sorts of Spices. Salt and Sugar seasons not what we eat, but Musk
and Amber. Neither is our feeling content with the warmth of our Apparel, but
looks after color, fashion, and expense; and we are more sollicitous that it
may appear neat and curious unto others, than that it may decently cover and
cherish our necessitated members, taking occasion by the necessity of nature to
nourish our vices, Apparel serving rather the ambition and pride of our minds,
than the nakedness of our bodies.

But it is not much that we content not our selves with the natural use of
things, since we are not pleased with nature it self, but adulterate it with
art; not only women, but men dye their hair, and counterfeit their faces and
statures, and the Creature to the injury of the Creator presumes to form
himself after another manner, than God thought fit to make him. In like manner
riches are not measured out for humane necessity and convenience, but for pomp
and arrogance: in the acquisition and use whereof we look not so much what
suffices for life, and the lawful pleasures of it, as what serves for pride and
ostentation, wherein consuming our wealth and fortunes we lose the use of them,
and what was only ordained as a remedy of our necessities, by our abuse
augment and make them greater: Whereupon it commonly happens that rich men are
most in want, and great personages are more indebted and engaged than meaner
people. Honor and Fame are so adulterated, that they are not only desired as
a reward of virtues, but of vices. All these abuses are the faults of the
World, which has made humane life more troublesome and full of danger, than it
is by necessity and condition; and therefore it was convenient that the World
should end with trouble and confusion, since the abuse of it has been with so
much shame and impudence: and that it self also should be judged, which has
sustained and fed the vanity and folly of man with things so base and
despicable. The ancient Philosophers placed virtue and the felicity of man in
living according unto nature; but what content and happiness can there be, when
all the pleasures of life are so sophisticated with art, as they are wholly
different from that which nature requires? and what virtue can be expected from
them, who live according to so much malice? But Christians, who ought not only
to live conformable to nature, but unto grace and the example of Christ, make
it apparent how just it is, that the wicked should give an account of those
things, which they have used so contrary unto his divine pleasure.

. 2.
And so not only those things, which are spoken of in the precedent Chapter,
are to be of terror and fear in the end of the World, but more especially that
strict account which God shall then exact from the whole Lineage of man. For as
in the death of particular persons there is to be a particular judgment, so in
the death of the World a general Judgment is to pass upon all; and as the most
terrible thing of death is that particular reckoning, so in the end of the
World is that universal reckoning, when God shall demand an account of his
divine benefits, and shall judge the abuses of them and all the sins of men:
making it to appear to the whole World how good and gracious he has been
toward them, and how rebellious and ungrateful they have been toward him. The
manifestation of which truth will be of more terror unto the wicked than all
the plagues and prodigies of Earthquakes, Inundations, Tempests, Locusts,
Pestilences, Famines, Wars, Lightnings and Fire, which have gone before.
Guigo Carth. in med.
Therefore Guigo Carthusianus said well, that the most terrible thing of that
day was the truth, that should then appear against Sinners. And without doubt
neither those stupendous Thunders, nor that furious roaring of the Sea, nor
any other wonder of those last times shall bring that confusion upon Sinners,
as to see the great reason, which God had to be served, and the none at all,
which they then had to displease him. It was therefore most convenient that
after the particular Judgment of each man apart there should be an universal
Judgment of all together, in which God should make appear the righteousness of
his proceedings, and give a general satisfaction of his justice even to the
damned and Divils. And because in the death of Man (as St. Thomas notes) all,
3. p. 2. d. q. 59. art. 5.
what was his, dies not, for there remains his memory, his Children, his Works,
his Example, his Body, and many of those things in which he placed his
affection: it is therefore reason that all those should enter into that general
Judgment with him, that he may know that he is not only to give an account of
his life, but of those things also which he leaves behind him. The fame and
memory of Man after death does not oftentimes correspond unto the deserts of
his life, and it is just that this deceit should be taken off; and that the
virtuous, whom the World made no account of, should then be acknowledged for
such, and he who had fame and glory without merit, should then change it into
shame and confusion.

O how deceived shall the ambitious then find themselves, who to the end they
might leave a name behind them neither observed justice with others, nor virtue
in themselves; how shall they change their glory into ignominy? Let us by the
way look upon some of them, who have filled the world with their vain fame, who
shall in that day by so much suffer the greater disgrace, by how much the world
has bestowed more undeserved honors upon them. Who more glorious than
Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar, whom the world has ever esteemed as
the most great and valorous Captains that it ever produced, and their glory
still continues fresh after so many ages past? What was all they did but acts
of rapine without right or title, unjustly tyrannizing over what was none of
theirs, and shedding much innocent blood to make themselves Lords of the Earth?
All these actions were vicious, and therefore unworthy of honor, fame, or
memory; and since they have for so many hundreds of years remained in the
applause and admiration of men, there shall in that day fall upon them so much
ignominy, shame and confusion, as shall recompense that past honor, which they
have unworthily received, and viciously desired. This ambition was so
exorbitant in Alexander, that hearing Anaxartes* the Philosopher affirm that
there were many worlds, he sighed with great resentment, and cried out,
Miserable me, that am not yet Lord of one. This devilish and vain pride was
extolled by many for greatness of spirit, but was in truth the height of vanity
and arrogant ambition, which could not be contained in one World, but with one
desire tyrannized over many: and shall then be punished with the public
ignominy of all men, not only in respect of the fame which he has so unjustly
enjoyed, but of the ill example which he has given to others, and principally
unto, Caesar, who as he followed his example in tyranny, did likewise imitate
him in ambition, and the desire of rule and vain honor; De Alex.. Vide Val.
Max. l. 8. De Julio Caes. Vid. Fulg. l. 8.
and therefore beholding his Statue in Cadiz at such time as he was Questor in
Spain, complained of his own fortune, that at the age, wherein Alexander had
subjugated all Asia, he had yet done nothing of importance; counting it for a
matter of importance to tyrannize over the world, and to the end he might make
himself Lord of it, to Captivate his Country. In like manner Aristotle so
celebrated for his Writings, in which he consumed many sleepless nights only
to purchase Glory, and to make it greater in his confuting of other
Philosophers, used little ingenuity, taking their words in a far other sense
than they meant or spoke them: This labor of his, since it proceeded not from
Virtue, but was performed with so little candor and sincerity merely to obtain
a vain reputation, deserved no Glory; and therefore a confusion equal unto the
Honor, they unduly now give him, shall then fall upon him. And since he put
his Disciple Theodectus to so much shame, his own ambition will be to him
occasion of greater confusion. Vide Val. Max. l. 8.
Aristotle gave to this his Disciple Theodectus certain Books of the Art of
Oratory, to the end he should divulge them: But afterward resenting much that
another should carry all the praise, he owned the said Books publicly. And for
this reason in other Books which he wrote, he cites himself, saying, As he had
said in the Books of Theodectus. Wherein is clearly seen Aristotle's ambition
or desire of Glory, and therefore was unworthy of it, and with just ignominy
shall pay the unjust Glory, he now possesses. In so much then as not only Fame
and Memory are vain in respect they are to end and finish, as all things with
the world are, but also because their undeserved and pretended Glory is then to
be satisfied with equal shame and confusion, the affront they shall receive in
that one day being equivalent unto the fame and honor of thousands of years;
Neither can the most famous men amongst the Gentiles, be admired by so many in
ten ages, as shall then scorn and contemn them. How many are ignorant that
there ever was an Alexander? And how many in all their lives never heard of
Aristotle? And yet shall in that day know them, not for their honor, but
confusion. The name of the Great and admired Alexander is unknown unto more
Nations, than known. The Japonlans, Chinese, Cafres, Angolans, other people
and most extended and spacious Kingdoms never heard who he was, and shall then
know him only for a public Thief, a Robber, an Oppressor of the World, and
for a great and an ambitious Drunkard.

The same, which is to pass in Fame and Memory, is also to pass in Children, in
whom, as St. Thomas says, St. Thom. supra.
the Fathers live: and as from many good Parents spring evil Children, so
contrariwise from evil Parents come those that are good, which shall be in that
day a confusion to those who begat them, and by so much the greater, by how
much worse was the example which they gave them. Neither shall the Judge only
enquire into the example they have given their Children, but also unto
strangers, and principally the works which they have left behind them. And
therefore as from the deceit of Arius (says the Angelical Doctor) and other
Heretics have and shall spring diverse Errors and Heresies until the end of
the World: so it is fit that in that last day of time should appear the evil
which has been occasioned by them, that we may in this life not only take a
care for our selves but others; so as it is a terrible thing (as Cajetan notes
upon that Article before mentioned of the Angelical Doctor,) that the Divine
judgment shall extend even to those things which are by accident, which is, as
the Divines speak, unto those which are besides our will and intention.

St. Thomas also informs us, That by reason of the body, which remains after
death, it was convenient that the sentence of each one in particular should be
again repeated in that general Judgment of the whole World: Because many
Bodies of just men are now buried in the mawes of wild Beasts, or otherwise
remain without interrement; and to the contrary great sinners have had
sumptuous Burials and magnificent Sepulchers, all which are to be recompensed
in that day of the Lord; and the sinner, whose Body reposed in a rich
Mausoleum, shall then see himself not only without Ornaments and Beauty, but
tormented with intolerable pains; and the just, who died and had no Sepulchers,
but were devoured by ravenous Birds, shall appear with the brightness of the
Heavens, and with a Body glorious as the Sun. Let those consider this, who
consume vast sums in preparing for themselves stately Sepulchers, and beautiful
Urns, engraving their Names, Actions, and Dignities in rich Marbles, and let
them know that all this, if they shall be damned, shall serve them in that day
but for their greater shame and reproach. Out of this life we can carry nothing
but our good works, and let us not add unto our evil ones that of vainglory in
seeking to leave behind us a vain Fame and Renown. Plin. l. 56. c. 13.
What remains unto King Porsenna of that heavy burden, wherewith he grieved
and afflicted his whole Kingdom, in rearing him a Sepulcher of that rare and
sumptuous workmanship, but a testimony of his pride and folly? In like manner
the Monument of the Emperor Adrian, which was the Beauty and Glory of Rome,
shall be then changed into a scorn. Lastly St. Thomas teaches us, that Temporal
things, on which we place our affections, because some last a longer, and some
a shorter time, after death shall all enter with us into Divine judgment. Let
us take heed therefore whereon we set our hearts, since the accomplishing of
what we wish may be a punishment of our desires. Those things of the Earth,
which we most love, and desire should continue, if they be taken from us, it is
a chastisement of our earthly affection: and if we be permitted to enjoy them,
let us fear that they be not the temporal Reward of some good Work, which may
either diminish or deprive us of the Eternal. Besides this because not only
the Soul of man has offended, but the whole man both in Soul and Body, it was
fit that both Soul and Body should be judged and appear before the Tribunal of
Christ, and that in public, because none should presume to sin in secret,
since his sins are to be revealed and made known to all, past, present, and to
come. A terrible case it is, that this passage of Divine judgment, which
(according as we have said out of holy Job) appears unto the Saints more
terrible than to suffer all the pains of Hell, is twice to be acted, and this
so bitter trance to be again repeated the second time, being unto sinners of
greater horror and confusion than the first.

CAP. IX.
Of the last day of Time.

THat we may now come to handle the manner of this universal Judgment, which
is to pass upon time and men, we are to suppose that this fire, which is to
precede the coming of Christ, is at his descent to continue in assistance of
his Divine justice, and after his return unto Heaven attended by all the just,
to remain until it has purged and purified these inferior Elements; the which
is noted by Albertus Magnus, Albert. Magn. in comp. Theol. lib. 7. c. 15. Less.
de perf. div. lib. 13. c. 30. and 23.
and collected from diverse places of the Divine Scriptures. We are also to
suppose that this coming of Christ is to be with greater terror and Majesty,
than has been yet manifested by any of the Divine persons, either in himself
or any of his Creatures. If an Angel which represented God, and was only to
promulgate the Law, came with that terror and Majesty unto Mount Sinay, as
made the Hebrew people, though purified and prepared for his coming, to quake
and tremble; what shall the Lord of the Law do, when he himself comes to take
an account of the Law, and to revenge the breach of it? With what terror and
Majesty shall he appear unto men plunged in sin, and unprepared for his
reception, who are then to be all present, and judged in that last day of time?

The day in which the Law was given was very memorable unto the Hebrews: And
this day, where an account of the Law is to be given, will be horrible, and
ought perpetually to remain in the memory of all mankind. But before we declare
what shall pass in this, let us say something of what has already passed in
that, that from the horror of the first appearance we may gather something of
what shall happen in the second, and from the Majesty, wherewith an Angel
appeared when he gave the Law, collect something of the Majesty of the Lord of
Angels when he judges the Law. Fifty days after the departure of the Sons of
Israel out of Egypt, after so many plagues and punishments poured upon that
Kingdom, after the burying of the unbelieving Egyptians, who pursued them, in
the bottom of the Red Sea, and that the Hebrews having escaped their enemies
were lodged round about Mount Sinay, Deuteronomy. 33. Vid. Barrad. l. 6. itin. c. 5.
Ps. 65. Deuteronomy. 33.
There was seen to come in the Air from far, that is, from Mount Seir in
Idumea, a Lord of great power, attended with an infinite multitude of Angels:
In so much as David sings, that ten thousand compassed about his Chariot. And
Moses speaking of many thousands which attended him, says also, that he carried
in his right hand the Law of God all of flaming fire; and yet he who came in
this height of Majesty, waited on with those Celestial Spirits, was not God,
Act. 7.
but, as we learn from St. Stephen, only an Angel, and believed to be St.
Michael, who because he came in the Name of God, the holy Scriptures calls the
Lord. This Angel thus accompanied came seated on a dark condensed Cloud, which
cast forth frequent flashes of Lightning and resounded with dreadful cracks of
Thunder, Deuteronomy. 33.
from Mount Seir unto Mount Haran in the Land of the Ishmaelites, and from
thence with the same Majesty passed through the Air unto Mount Sinay, where the
Children of Israel lay encamped: who at the dawning of the day astonished with
that fearful noise, stood quaking and trembling in their Tents. No sooner was
the Angel arrived unto Mount Sinay, which, as the Apostle says, Heb. 42.
was covered with rain, whirlwinds, storms and tempests, but he descended in
flames, which raught betwixt Heaven and Earth, from whence issued forth a smoke
black and thick as from a furnace; during which time a Trumpet was heard to
sound with that piercing vehemence, that as it increased in loudness, so fear
increased in the amazed Israelites, who now stood quaking at the foot of the
Mountain, but were by the Angel (so much would he be respected) commanded by
the mouth of M^ses not to approach it, lest they died. After which the Angel
began with a dreadful voice to proclaim the Law: which was pronounced with so
much life and vigor, that not withstanding the horrid noise of Thunder, the
flashes of lightning, and the shrill and penetrating sound of the Trumpet still
continued, yet all the Hebrews, who with their Tents overspread those vast
deserts, and many thousands of Egyptians, who were converted and followed them,
heard, conceived, and understood it clearly and distinctly; Nay, so piercing
was the voice, that it entered and imprinted it self in their very bowels,
speaking unto every one of them as if it had spoken to him only, which caused
so great a fear and reverence in the people, that they thought they could not
live, if the Angel continued speaking; and therefore besought it as a grace
that he would speak unto them by the way of Moses, lest they should die. Nay,
Moses himself accustomed to see and work stupendous wonders, and being of a
great and generous spirit, confessed his fear, saying, as we have it from St.
Paul, Heb. 12.
That he was terrified and trembled.

Let a man now consider how memorable was that day unto the Hebrew Nation,
wherein they saw such Visions, heard such Thunders, and felt such Earthquakes,
as it is no wonder that the great fear, which fell upon them in that day of
Prodigies, made them think they could not live: Yet was all this nothing in
respect of the terror of that great day, wherein the Lord of Angels is to
demand an account of the violation of the Law. For after the sending far
greater plagues than those of Egypt, after burning in that Deluge of fire the
Sinners of the world, the Saints remaining still alive, that that Article of
our Faith may be literally fulfilled, From thence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, The Heavens shall open, and over the Valley of Josaphat the
Redeemer of the World, attended by all the Angels of Heaven in visible forms of
admirable splendor shall with a Divine Majesty descend to judge it. Before the
Judge shall be born his Standard, Chrysostom. Tom. 3. Sermon. de Cruce.
which St. Chrysostom and diverse other Doctors affirm shall be the very Cross
on which he suffered. Then shall the just (such being the force and vigor of
their spirits, as will elevate their terrene and heavy bodies) meet (as the
Apostle says) their Redeemer in the Air, who at his issuing forth of the
Heavens shall with a voice, that may be heard of all the world, pronounce this
his Commandment: Arise ye dead, and come unto Judgment: Which shall be
proclaimed by four Angels in the four Quarters of the World with such
vehemence, that the sound shall pierce unto the infernal Region, from whence
the Souls of the damned shall issue forth, and re-enter their bodies, which
shall from thenceforward suffer the terrible torments of Hell. The Souls also
of those, who died only in Original sin, shall come and possess again their
bodies free from pain or torment; and the Souls of the blessed filling their
bodies with the four gifts of Glory, shall make them more resplendent than the
Sun: and with the gift of agility shall join themselves with those just who
remain alive in the Air in their passible bodies, which being yet mortal, and
therefore not able to endure those vehement affections of the heart, of joy,
desire, reverence, love and admiration of Christ, shall then die, and in that
instant behold the Divine Essence; after which their Souls shall be again
immediately united to their bodies, before they can be corrupted, or so much as
fall unto the ground, and thence forward continue glorious; for in the moment
wherein they die they shall be purified from those noxious humors and
qualities, wherewith our bodies are now infected. And therefore it was
convenient they should first die, that being so cleansed from all filth, they
might by the restitution of their blessed Souls receive the gifts of Glory.
Considering then the so different. conditions of the Souls of men, who can
express the joy of those happy Souls, when they shall take possession of their
now glorious and beautiful bodies, which were long since eaten by worms or wild
beasts, some four, some five thousand years ago turned into dust and ashes?
What thanks shall they give to God, who after so long a separation has
restored them to their ancient Companions? What gratulations shall the Souls of
them, who lived in austerity and penance, give unto their own bodies for the
mortifications and rigours which they have suffered, for the hair-shirts,
disciplines, and fasts which they have observed? To the contrary, the Souls of
the damned how shall they rage and curse their own flesh, since to please and
pamper it has been the occasion of their torments, and eternal unhappiness?
Which miserable wretches, wanting the gift of agility, and so not able of
themselves to go unto the place of Justice, shall be hurried against their
wills by Devils, all trembling and full of fear.

2.
The Reprobates being then in the Valley of Josaphat, and the Predestinate in
the Air, the Judge shall appear above Mount Olivet, Zach. 1.
unto whom the clouds shall serve as a Chariot, and his most glorious body
shall cast forth rays of such incomparable splendor, as the Sun shall appear
but as a coal; for even the Predestinate shall shine as the Sun, but the light
and brightness of Christ shall as far exceed them, as the Sun does the least
Star. The which most admirable sight shall be yet more glorious by those
thousand millions of excellent and heavenly spirits which shall attend him, who
having formed themselves acreal bodies of more or less splendor, according to
their Hierarchy and Order, shall fill the whole space betwixt Heaven and Earth
with unspeakable beauty and variety. The Savior of the World shall sit upon a
Throne of great Majesty made of a clear and beautiful Cloud, his countenance
shall be most mild and peaceable toward the good, and, though the same, most
terrible unto the bad. In the like manner out of his sacred wounds shall issue
beams of light toward the just full of love and sweetness, but unto sinners
full of fire and wrath, who shall weep bitterly for the evils which issue from
them. Psa. 109. 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 2.
So great shall be the Majesty of Christ, that the miserable Damned, and the
Devils themselves, notwithstanding all the hate they bear him, shall yet
prostrate themselves and adore him, and to their greater confusion acknowledge
him for their Lord and God: And those who have most blasphemed and outraged
him, shall then bow before him, fulfilling the promises of the eternal Father,
That all things should be subject unto him, That he would make his enemies his
footstool, and That all knees should bend before him. Here shall the Jews to
their greater confusion behold him, whom they have crucified: and here shall
the evil Christians see him, whom they have again crucified with their sins;
here also shall the Sinners behold him in glory, whom they have despised for
the base trifles of the earth. What an amazement will it be to see him King of
so great Majesty, who suffered so much ignominy upon the Cross, and even from
those whom he redeemed with his most precious blood? What will they then say,
who in scorn crowned the sacred temples of the Lord with thorns, put a Reed in
his hand for a Scepter, clothed him in some old and broken Garment of purple,
buffeted and spit upon his blessed face? And what will they then say, unto
whose consciences Christ has so often proposed himself in all his bitter
passion and painful death, and has wrought nothing upon them but a continuance
of greater sins, valuing his precious blood shed for their salvation no more
than if it were the blood of a Tiger, or their greatest enemy? I know not how
the memory of this does not burst our hearts with compunction. In vit. PP.
Let us take the counsel of a holy Father in the Desert, who when one asked
him, What he should do to soften and mollify his stony heart, answered, That
he should remember that he was to appear before the Lord who was to judge him;
whose sight, as another holy Monk said, would be so terrible unto the wicked,
that if it were possible that Souls could die, the whole world at the coming of
the Son of God would be struck dead with fear and terror.

At the side of the Throne of Christ shall be placed another Throne of great
glory for his most holy Mother, not then to intercede for sinners, but for the
greater confusion of those, who, when time served, have not addressed
themselves unto her, nor reaped the benefit of her Protection: that she may be
honored in the sight of the whole World. There shall be also other Thrones for
the Apostles and those Saints, who poor in spirit have left all for Christ; who
sitting now as Judges with their Redeemer, and condemning by their good example
the scandalous lives of sinners, shall approve the Sentence of the Supreme
Judge, and declare his great Justice before the world, with which the wicked
shall remain confounded and amazed: and it shall then be fulfilled which so
many years since was prophesied by the Wiseman, Sap. 5.
The wicked beholding the just, who were despised in this life, to be so much
honored, shall be troubled with horrible fear, and shall wonder at their
unexpected salvation, saying amongst themselves with great resentment and much
grief and anguish of Spirit: These are they who sometime were unto us matter of
scorn and laughter. We fools imagined their life to be madness, and that their
end would be without honor; but behold they are counted amongst the Children
of God, and their lot is amongst the Saints. We erred and wandered from the ways
of truth, and the light of Justice was not with us, nor the Sun of wisdom did
shine upon us. We wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness and perdition,
and walked in paths of difficulty, and knew not the way of the Lord. What has
our pride profited us? and what has the pomp of our riches availed us? all
those things have passed like a shadow, or like a messenger who passes in
haste, or like a ship which cuts the instable waves, and leaves no track where
it went, and are now consumed in our wickedness. The Tyrants who have afflicted
and put to death the holy Martyrs, what will they now say, when they shall see
them in this Glory? Those who trampled under foot the justice and right of the
poor of Christ, what will they do, when they shall behold them their Judges?
And what will the wicked Judges do or say, when they shall see themselves
condemned for their unjust Sentences, Eccl. 3. and 10.
fulfilling that which was said by Solomon; I saw a great evil beneath the Sun,
that in the Throne of Judgment was seated impiety, and wickedness in the place
of Justice: and I said in my heart God shall judge the good and evil, and then
shall be seen who every one is? Here in this life the just and sinner have not
always the place which they deserve; many times the wicked takes the right
hand, and the holy the left. Christ shall then rectify all those grievances,
and shall separate the wheat from the tares: The good he shall place upon his
right hand, elevated in the Air, that all the world may honor them as holy:
And the wicked shall stand far at his left, remaining upon the Earth to their
own confusion and the scorn of all. How shall the sinners envy the just, when
they shall see them so much honored, and themselves so much despised? How
confounded shall be the Kings of the earth, when they shall behold their
Vassals in Glory, and Lords when they shall see their slaves amongst the
Angels, and themselves in equal rank with Devils? For it seems the Devils then
shall assume bodies of Air, that they may be sensibly seen by the wicked, and
shall stand amongst them for their greater affront and torment.

3.
Immediately the Books of all men's Consciences shall be opened, and their sins
published to the whole world; The most secret sins of their hearts, and those
filthy acts which were committed in private; Those sins which through shame and
bashfulness were concealed in Confession, or covered with excuses, crooked and
sinister intentions, hidden and unknown treacheries, counterfeit and
dissembling virtues, all shall then be manifested; feigned friends, adulterous
wives, unfaithful servants, false witnesses, shall all to their great shame and
confusion be then discovered. If we are now so sensible when people murmr at
us, or that some infamous act of ours is known to one or two persons, how shall
we be then troubled when all our faults together are made known unto all, both
men and Angels? How many are there now, who if they imagined that their father
or brother knew what they had committed in secret, would die with grief? And
yet in that day not only fathers and brothers, but friends and enemies, and
all the world shall to their confusion know it. The virtuous actions of the
just how secretly soever performed, their holy thoughts, their pious desires,
their pure intentions, their good works, which the world now either disesteems,
or calumniates as madness, shall then be manifested, and they for them shall be
honored by the whole world; virtue shall then appear admirable in all her
beauty, and vice horrible in all her deformity. It shall then be seen how
decent and beautiful it is for the great to humble themselves, for the offended
to be silent, and pardon injuries: on the other side, how insolent and horrid a
thing it is to trample upon the poor, to wrong the humble, to desire revenge,
and Lord it over others. Then shall be also discovered the good works of the
wicked, but for their greater affront, in that they have not persevered in
doing well: and that calling to remembrance the good counsel and advice which
they have given unto others, which has been a means of their salvation, they
may be now confounded to have neglected it themselves to their own damnation.
The sins also of the just shall be published, but with all their repentance,
and the good which they have drawn from their faults, in such sort as it shall
no ways redound to their shame, but be an argument of rendering thanks and
divine praises to the Lord, who was pleased to pardon them. But nothing shall
be of greater despite and confusion unto sinners, than to behold those, who
have committed equal and greater sins than themselves, to be then in Glory,
because they made use of the time of repentance, which they despised and
neglected. This confusion shall be augmented by that inward charge which God
shall lay against them of his divine benefits, unto which their Angel guardians
shall assist by giving testimony how often they have dissuaded them from their
evil courses, and how rebellious and refractory they have still been to their
holy inspirations. The Saints also shall accuse them that they have laughed at
their good counsels, and shall set forth the dangers, whereunto they
themthemselves have been subject by their ill example.

The just Judge shall then immediately pronounce Sentence in favor of the good
in these words of love and mercy, Come you blessed of my Father, possess the
Kingdom which was prepared for you from the creation of the world. O what joy
shall then fill the Saints, Abul. in Mat. Jansen. Sot. Les. l. 13. c. 22. and
alii. Isai. 30.
and what spite and envy shall burst the hearts of Sinners! but more when they
shall hear the contrary Sentence pronounced against themselves: Christ speaking
unto them with that severity, which was signified by the Prophet Isaiah, when
he said, His lips were filled with indignation, and his tongue was a devouring
fire. More terrible than fire shall be those words of the Son of God unto those
miserable wretches, when they shall hear him say, Depart from me ye cursed into
eternal fire prepared for Satan and his Angels. With this Sentence they shall
remain for ever overthrown, and covered with eternal sorrow and confusion.
Ananias and Saphira were struck dead only with the hearing the angry voice of
St. Peter; What shall the Reprobate be in hearing the incensed voice of Christ?
This may appear by what happened unto St. Catharine of Sienna, who being
reprehended by St. Paul, In vita ejus c. 24.
who appeared unto her, only because she did not better employ some little
parcel of time, said, that she had rather be disgraced before the whole World,
than once more to suffer what she did by that reprehension. But what is this in
respect of that reprehension of the Son of God in the day of vengeance? for if
when he was led himself to be judged, he with two only words, I am, overthrew
the astonished multitude of Soldiers to the ground, how shall he speak when he
comes to judge? In vita PP. l. 5. apud Rosul.
(In the book of the lives of the Fathers, composed by Severus Sulpitius and
Cassianus, it is written of a certain young man desirous to become a Monk, whom
his Mother by many reasons, which she alleged, pretended to dissuade, but all
in vain; for he would by no means alter his intention, defending himself still
from her importunity with this answer, I will save my soul, I will assure my
salvation; it is that which most imports nic. She perceiving that her modest
requests prevailed nothing, gave him leave to do as he pleased: and he
according to his resolution entered into Religion; but soon began to flag and
fall from his fervor, and to live with much carelessness and negligence. Not
long after his Mother died, and he himself fell into a grievous infirmity, and
being one day in a Trance was rapt in spirit before the Judgment Seat of God.
He there found his Mother, and diverse others expecting his condemnation; She
turning her eyes, and seeing her Son amongst those who were to be damned,
seemed to remain astonished, and spoke unto him in this manner; Why, how now
Son; is all come to end in this? where are those words thou saidest unto me; I
will save nay soul? was it for this thou did enter into Religion? The poor
man being confounded and amazed knew not what to answer; but soon after when he
returned unto himself, and the Lord was pleased that he recovered and escaped
his infirmity, and considering that this was a divine admonition, he gave so
great a turn, that the rest of his life was wholly tears and repentance; and
when many wished him that he would moderate and remit something of that rigor,
which might be prejudicial unto his health, he would not admit of their
advices, but still answered, I who could not endure the reprehension of my
Mother, how shall I in the day of judgment endure that of Christ and his
Angels? Let us often think of this, and let not only the angry voice of our
Savior make us tremble, Raph. Columb. Ser. 2. Domin. in Quadr.
but that terrible Sentence, which shall separate the wicked from his presence.
Raphael Columba writes of Philip the second King of Spain, that being at Mass
he heard two of his Grandees, who were near him, in discourse about some
worldly business, which he then took no notice of, but Mass being ended, he
called them with great gravity, and said unto them only these few words, You
two appear no more in my presence: which were of that weight, that the one of
them died of grief, and the other ever after remained stupefied and amazed.
What shall it then be to hear the King of Heaven and Earth say; Depart ye
cursed? and if the words of the Son of God be so much to be feared, what shall
be his works of justice?

At that instant the fire of that general burning shall invest those miserable
creatures; Less. l. 13. c. 23.
the Earth shall open and Hell shall enlarge his throat to swallow them for all
eternity, accomplishing the malediction of Christ, and of the Psalm which
says, Psalm. 54.
Let death come upon them, and let them sink alive into hell. And in another
place; Coals of fire shall fall upon them, Ps. 139.
and thou shall cast them into the fire, and they shall not subsist in their
miseries. And in another Psalm; Psalm. 10.
Snares, fire, and sulphur shall rain upon sinners. Finally, that shall be
executed which was spoken by St. John, That the Devil, Death, and Hell, and
all, Apcc. 20.
who were not written in the Book of life, were cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where they shall be eternally tormented with Antichrist and his
false Prophets. And this is the second death, bitter, and eternal, which
comprehends both the Souls and the Bodies of them who have died the spiritual
death of sin, and the corporal death which is the effect of it. The Just shall
then rejoice, according to David, Psalm. 57.
beholding the vengeance which the Divine Justice shall take upon sinners, and
sing another song like that of Moses, Exodus 15.
when the Egyptians were drowned in the red sea, and that Song of the Lamb,
related by St. John, Apoc. 15.
Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God omnipotent, just and righteous
are thy ways, King of all Eternity; who will not fear thee O Lord, and
magnify thy name? With those and thousand other Songs of joy and jubilee they
shall ascend above the Stars in a most glorious triumph, until they arrive in
the Empyrial Heaven; where they shall be placed in thrones of glory, which they
shall enjoy for an eternity of eternities. In the mean time the earth, which
was polluted for having sustained the Bodies of the damned, shall be purified
in that general burning: and then shall be renewed the Earth, the Heavens, the
Stars, and the Sun, which shall shine seven times more than before; and the
creatures, which have here been violated and oppressed by the abuse of man,
(whereof some had taken arms against him to revenge the injuries of their
Creator, and others groaned under their burden with grief and sorrow) shall
then rejoice to see themselves freed from the tyranny of sin and sinners, and
joyful of the triumph of Christ shall put on mirth and gladness.

This is the end wherein all time is to determine, and this the Catastrophe so
fearful unto the wicked, where all things temporal are to conclude. Let us
therefore take heed how we use them; and that we may use them well, let us be
mindful of this last day, this day of justice and calamity, this day of terror
and amazement; the memory whereof will serve much for the reformation of our
lives. Let us think of it, and fear it, for it is the most terrible of all
things terrible, and the consideration of it most profitable and available to
cause in us a holy fear of God, and to convert us unto him. Joh. Curopol. in
hist. apud Rad. in opusc. and in vitis PP. Occidentis.
John. Curopolata writes of Bogoris King of the Bulgarians a Pagan, who was so
much addicted to the hunting of wild beasts, that he desired to have them
painted in his Palace in all their fury and fierceness: and to that end
commanded Methodius the Monk a skilful Painter to paint them in so horrible a
manner, as the very sight might make the beholders tremble. The discreet Monk
did it not, but in place of it painted the Day of Judgment, and presented it
unto the King, who beholding that terrible act of Justice, and the coming of
the Son of God to judge the World, crowning and rewarding the just, and
punishing the wicked, was much astonished at it; and being after instructed
left his bad life, and was converted to the faith of Christ. If only then the
Day of Judgment painted was so terrible, what shall it be executed? Almost the
same happened unto St. Dositheus, Anon. in Elog. Dorothei and Dosithei.
who being a young man, cokored and brought up in pleasures, had not in his
whole life so much as heard of the Day of Judgment; until by chance he beheld
a Picture, in which were represented the pains of the damned, at which he was
much amazed, and not knowing what it was, was informed of it by a Matron
present, which he apprehended so deeply, that he fell half dead upon the
ground, not being able to breath for fear and terror: after coming to himself,
he demanded what he should do to avoid that miserable condition; it was
answered him by the same Matron, that he should fast, pray, and abstain from
flesh, which he immediately put in execution; And though many of his house and
kindred endeavored to divert and dissuade him, yet the holy fear of God, and
the dread of eternal condemnation, which he might incur, remained so fixed in
his memory, that nothing could withdraw him from his rigorous penance and holy
resolution, until becoming a Monk he continued with much fruit and profit. Let
us therefore whiles we live ever preserve in our memory this day of terror,
that we may hereafter enjoy security for the whole eternity of God.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE TEMPORAL and ETERNAL.
CAP. I.
The mutability of things temporal makes them worthy of contempt.

HItherto we have spoken of the shortness of time, and consequently of all
things temporal, and of the end wherein they are to conclude. Nothing is
exempted from death, and therefore not only humane life, but all things which
follow time, and even time it self at last must die. Wherefore Hesichius,
Damas. in Par. l. 1.
as he is translated by St. John Damascen, says, That the splendor of this
world is but as withered leaves, bubles of water, smoke, stubble, a shadow, and
dust driven by the wind: all things that are of earth being to end in earth.
But this is not all; for besides the certainty of end, they are infected with
another mischief, which renders them much more contemptible than that, which is
their instability, and continual changes, whereunto they are subject even
whilst they are. For as time it self is in a perpetual succession and
mutation, as being the brother and inseparable companion of Motion, so it fixes
this ill condition unto most of those things which pass along in it, the which
not only have an end, and that a short one, but even during that shortness of
time, which they last, have a thousand changes, and before their end many ends,
and before their death many deaths, each particular change, which our life
suffers, being the death of some estate or part of if. For as death is the
total change of life, so every change is the death of Come part. Sickness is
the death of health, sleeping of waking, sorrow of joy, impatience of quiet,
youth of infancy, and age of youth. The same condition has the universal world
and all things in it; for which cause they deserve so much contempt, that
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor wondered that there could be found a man so
senseless, Aur. Anton. l. 6. de vita sua.
as to value them; and therefore speaks in this manner. Of that very thing,
which is now in doing, some part is already vanished: changes and alterations
continually innovate the world, as that immense space of time by a perpetual
flux renews it self. Who therefore shall esteem those things which never
subsist, but pass along in this headlong and precipitate river of time, is as
he who sets his affection upon some little bird, which passes along in the air,
and is no more seen. Thus much from this Philosopher. This very cause of the
little value of things temporal proceeding from their perpetual changes,
together with the end whereunto they are subject, is, as St. Gregory notes,
signified unto us by that Woman in the Apocalypse, Greg. l. 34. moral.
who had the Moon under her feet, and her head adorned with twelve Stars.
Certainly the Moon, as well as the Stars, might have been placed in her Diadem:
but it was trod under foot by reason of the continual changes and alterations
which it suffers, whereby it becomes a figure of things temporal, which change
not only every Month, but every day; the same day being, as Euripides says,
now a Mother, then a Stepmother. The same was also signified by the Angel,
Apoc. 10.
who crowned with a Rainbow descended from heaven to proclaim that all time was
to end; with his right foot, which presses and treads more firmly, he stood
upon the Sea, which by reason of its great unquietness is also a figure of the
instability of this World. And therefore with much reason did the Angel, who
had taught us by his voice, that all time and temporal things were to have an
end, show us also by this sign, that for their instability and inconstancy
they were even before their end to be trodden under foot and despised. But more
lively is the same expressed by the same St. John, Apoc. 15. Ribera and Cornel.
when he beheld the Saints standing upon the Sea, to note that whilst they
lived they contemned and trampled under foot the transitory and fading things
of this World; and to declare it more fully he says, the Sea was of glass,
then which nothing is more frail, and although hard yet brittle.

Needs must the instability of things temporal be very great, and therefore
most despicable, because it proceeeds from so many causes. For as the Sea has
two several kinds of motion, the first natural, by which it rises and falls
daily with continual ebbs and flows, so as the waves, when they are most quiet,
are yet still moving and inconstant: the other violent, when the waters are
raised and incensed by some furious tempest; in the same manner the things of
this World are naturally of themselves fading and transitory, and without any
exterior violence suffer a continual change; and run rolling on toward their
end; but besides are also subject to other unthought of accidents, and
extraordinary violences, which force nature out of her course, and raise huge
storms in the Sea of this life, by which those things, which we most esteem,
suffer shipwreck. For as the fairest flower withers of it self, yet is
oftentimes before born away by the wind, or perishes by some storm of hail, The
most exact beauties lose their luster by age, but are often before blasted by
some violent Fever, The most costly Garments wear out in time, if before not
taken from us by the Thief, The strongest and most sumptuous Palaces decay with
continuance, if before not ruined by Fire or Earthquakes: In like manner both
their own nature and extrinsecal violences deprive temporal things even of time
it self, and trail them along in perpetual changes, leaving nothing stable. Let
us cast our eyes upon those things which men judge most worthy to endure,
Nazian. in Monod. Pli. l. 36. c. 8.
and made them to the end they should be eternal. How many changes and deaths
have they suffered? St. Gregory Nazienzen places the City of Thebes in Egypt,
as the chiefest of those wonders, which the world admired. Pomp^n Mela l. 1. c.
9.
Most of the houses were of Alabaster Marble spotted with drops of gold, which
made them appear most splendid and magnificent: Upon the walls were many
pleasant Gardens, Sur. in Comm. an. 1517 Evag. l. 2. c. 1.
which they called Horti pensiles, or hanging Gardens; and the Gates were no
less than a hundred, out of which the Prince could draw forth numerous Armies
without noise or knowledge of the people. Pomponius Mela writes, that out of
every Port there issued 10000 armed men, Eusebius. de praepar. Hieron. in Dan. c.
1. Polusl. 2. rerum Indic. c. 68.
which in the whole came to be an Army of a million. Yet all this huge
multitude could not secure it from a small Army conducted by a Youth, who, as
St. Jerome writes, took and destroyed it. Marcus Polus writes that he passed by
the City of Quinsay, which contained fourscore millions of souls; and Nicholas
de Conti passing not many years after by the same way found the City wholly
destroyed, Nicol. de Com. in itin. apud Ram. tom. 1.
and begun to be newly built after another form. But yet in greater than this
was the City of Ninive, which according to the holy Scripture was of three
days journey; and it is now many ages since that we know not where it stood.
Plin. l. 6. c. 26. Sol. c. 3.
No less stately, but perhaps better fortified was the City of Babylon: and
that, which was the Imperial City of the World, became a Desert, and a
Habitation of Harpies, Onocentaurs, Satyrs, Monsters, and Devils, as was
foretold by the Prophets: and the walls which were 200 foot in height, and 50
in breadth could not defend it from time. And yet the holy Scripture describes
Ecbatana the chief City of Media to be more strong than that. It was built by
Arphaxad, King of the Medes, of square stone: the Walls contained seventy
cubits in breadth, thirty cubits in height, and the Towers, which encompassed
it, were each in height a hundred cubits; and yet for all this could not the
Median Empire, having such a head, escape from rendering it self unto the
Assyrians. And the same Monarch, who built it, and made the World to tremble
under him, came to lose it and himself, and having conquered many Nations,
became at last conquered and a Slave unto his enemies.

It is not much that Cities have suffered so many changes, since Monarchies and
Empires have done the same: and so often has the World changed her face, as
she has changed her Monarch and Master. He who had seen the World as it was in
the time of the Persians, would not have known it as it was in the time of the
Assyrians; and he who knew it in the time of the Persians, would not have
judged it for the same when the Greeks were Masters. After in the time of the
Romans it appeared with a face not known before: and he who knew it then would
not know it now; and some years hence it will put on another form, being in
nothing more like it self than in its perpetual changes and alterations; for
which cause it has been ever worthy of scorn and contempt, and more now than
ever, Cyp. in Epist. ad Demet.
since it becomes every day worse, and grows old, and decays with age, as St,
Cyprian notes in those words: Thou art to know that the World is already grown
old, and does not remain in that strength and vigor which it had at first.
This the World it self tells us, and the daily declining of it into worse needs
no other testimony. The Winter wants the usual rains to fertilize the earth;
the Summer the accustomed heat to ripen the corn; the Autumn is not laden as
heretofore with fruits, nor the Spring glads us with the delight and pleasure
of its sweet temperature; out of the hollowed Mountains are drawn less pieces
of marble; and the exhausted Mines yield less quantities of gold and silver.
The Labourer is wanting in the Fields, the Mariners in the Seas, the Soldier
in the Tents, Innocence in the Marketplaces, Justice in the Tribunals,
Sincerity in Friendship, Skill in Arts, and Discipline in Manners. Necessary it
is, that that should decay, which thus daily sinks into it self, and approaches
toward an end. Immediately he adds; This is the doom of the World, This the
ordinance of God; all that is born must die; all that increases must grow old,
the strong become feeble, the great diminish, and when diminished perish.
Anciently our lives extended beyond 800 or 900 years: now few arrive unto an
hundred. We see boys grown gray, and our age ends not in decrepit years, but
then begins: and in our very birth we draw near our ends, and he who is now
born, with the age of the World degenerates. Let no man therefore marvel that
the parts of the World decay, since the whole goes to ruin. Neither is the
World only grown worse in the natural frame of it, but is also much defaced in
the moral; the manners of men have altered it more, than the violences and
encounters of the Elements. The Empire of the Assyrians much corrupted the
primitive simplicity and innocence of it; and what they wanted was effected by
the Persians; and wherein they failed, by the Greeks; and wherein they, by the
Romans; and wherein they, is abundantly made up by us; For the pride of
Monarchs is the ruin and destruction of good manners. And therefore unto the
four Monarchies may be fitly applied that which was foretold by the Prophet
Joel, Joel. 1.
What was left by the Eruke was eaten by the Locust, what was lest by the
Locust was eaten by the Bruke, and what was left by the Bruke was devoured by
the Blast.

. 2.
More are the causes of alterations in the World than in the Ocean. For besides
the condition of humane things, which as well intrinsecally and of their own
nature, as by the external violences which they suffer, are subject to perish,
the very spirit and humor of man being fickle and inconstant is the occasion
of great changes. Not without great proportion did the Holy Ghost say, That the
fool changed like the Moon, which is not ouely mutable in figure but in color.
The natural Philosophers observe three colors in the Moon, pale, red, and
white; the first foreshews rain, the second wind, and the third chears up with
hopes of fair weather. In the same, manner is the heart of man changed by three
most violent affections represented by those three colors. That of pale the
color of gold, coveting riches more frail and slippery than waters; That of
red the color of purple, gaping after the wind of vain honors; The last of
white the color of mirth and jollity, running after the gusts and pleasures of
this life. With these three affections Man is in perpetual change and motion;
and as there are some Plants which follow the course of the Moon, still turning
and moving according to her course, so these alterations in humane affections
draw after them, and are the cause of these great changes and revolutions,
which happen in the World. How many Kingdoms were overthrown by the
covetousness of Cyrus? The ambition of Alexander did not only destroy a great
part of the World, but made it put on a clear other face than it had before.
What part of Troy was left standing by the lascivious love of Paris, who was
not only the ruin of Greece, but set on fire his own Country? That which
time spares is often snatched away by the covetousness of the Thief: and how
many lives are cut off by revenge, before they arrive unto old age? There is no
doubt but humane affections are those fierce winds which trouble the Sea of
this World: and as the Ocean ebbs and flows according to the course of the
Moon, so the things of this life conform their motions unto humane passions.
There is no stability in any thing, and least in man, who is not only
changeable in himself, but changes all things besides.

So unstable and variable is man, that David unto some of his Psalms gives
these words for a Title; Psalm. 68.
For those who shall change; and St. Basil explicating the same Title, says,
It was meant of man, whose life is a perpetual change; unto which is
conformable the translation of Aquila, who instead of those words renders it,
Pro foliis, For the leaves: because man is moved by every wind as the leaves of
a tree. This mutability is very apparent in the Passion of Christ our Redeemer,
which is the subject of the 78. Psalm, which bears this Title. They of
Jerusalem having received him with greater honor than they ever gave to man,
within four days after treated, him with the greatest infamy and villainy that
was possible to be expressed by Devils. There is no trust in the heart of man;
now it loves, now it abhors, now it desires, now fears, now esteems, now
despises. Who is not amazed at the change of St. Peter, who after so many
promises and resolutions to die for his Master, within a few hours swore as
many false oaths, that he knew him not? What shall become of the Reed and
Bulrush, when the Oak and Ceder totters. Neither is the change of Amnon a
little to be wonderd at, who loving Thamar with that violence of passion, that
he fell sick for her, immediately mediatly after abhorred her so much, that he
barbarously turned her out of his chamber. But I know nothing that can more
evidently set forth the mutabilitie of humane affections, than that memorable
accident which happened in Ephesus. Petron. Arbit. tract. de leg. conmib. leg.
non. number. 97.
There lived in that City a Matron of an honest repute and conversation, whose
Husband dying left her the most disconsolate and sad Widow that ever was heard
of; all was lamentations, tearing and disfiguring her face and breasts with her
nails: and not content with the usual Ceremonies of Widows of those times, she
enclosed her self with his dead Body in the Sepulcher, which anciently was a
Vault in the fields, capacious and prepared for that use; there she resolved to
famish her self, and follow him into the next world: and had already for four
days abstained from all manner of sustenance. It happened that near that place
a certain Malefactor was executed, and lest his kindred should by night steal
away his Body and give it burial, a Soldier was appointed to watch it, who
being weary, and remembering that not far off the Widow was enclosed in the
Sepulcher, resolved for a time to quit his charge, and try what entertainment
he could find with her. Whereupon carrying his supper along with him he entered
the Vault, and at first had much ado to persuade the grieved Widow to take
part with him, to forsake her desperate resolution of famishing, and be content
to live; but a while after having prevailed in this, and passing further with
the same oratory he persuaded her, who had not denied to share with him in his
supper, to afford him the fruition of her person, which she likewise did. In
the mean time whilst the Soldier transported with his pleasure forgot his
duty, the friends of the executed Malefactor stole away the Body: which being
perceived by the Soldier, who now satiate with his dalliance was returned unto
his guard, and knowing his offense to be no less than capital, he repairs with
great fear and amazement unto his Widow, and acquaints her with the mischance,
who was not slow in providing a remedy: but taking the dead body of her
Husband, which had cost her so many tears, advised him to hang it upon the
Gallows to supply the room of the Malefactor. Such is the inconstancy of humane
hearts, more variable than seems possible, which changing in themselves draw
within their compass the rest of the hings of this World.

Philo considering and admiring so great vanity and change, Philo. l. de Jos.
speaks after this manner. Perhaps those things which concern the Body are they
not dreams? perhaps this momentary beauty does it not wither even before it
flourish? our health is uncertain, exposed to so many infirmities: a thousand
griefs happening by diverse occasions abate our strength and forces: the
quickness and vigor of our senses are corrupted by vicious humors. Who then
can be ignorant of the baseness of exterior things? One day often makes an end
of great riches: many Personages of great honor and esteem changing their
fortune become infamous: great Empires and Kingdoms have in a short time been
ruined. Of this Dionysius is a sufficient witness, who thrust from his Throne
from a King of Sicily became a Schoolmaster in Gorinth, and taught boys. The
like happened unto Craesus the most rich King of Lydia, who being in hope to
overthrow the Persians, not only lost his own Kingdom, but fell into the power
of his enemies, and failed little of being burnt alive. Particular persons are
not only witnesses that all humane things are dreams, but Cities, Nations,
Kingdoms, Greeks and Barbarians, the Isles, and those who inhabit the Continent
of Europe, Asia, the East, and West, nothing remains like unto it self.
Certainly, as Philo says, the instability of humane things makes them appear
not only a dream, but as a dream of a shadow rather than of any thing solid
and consistent. Hom. de poenit.
Let us hear also what St. Chrysostom says, and counsels us concerning the
same matter. All things present (says he) are more frail and weak than the
webs of spiders, and more deceitful than dreams: for as well the goods as evils
have their end. Since therefore we esteem things present but as a dream, and we
our selves to be but as in a Inn, from whence we are suddenly to depart, let us
take care for our journey, and furnish our selves with provision, and a
Viaticum for eternity; let us cloth our selves with such garments, as we may
carry along with us. For as no man can lay hold on his Shadow, so no man
retains things humane, which partly in death, and partly before death fly from
us, and run more swiftly than a rapid river. To the contrary are those things
which are to come, which neither suffer age, nor change, nor are subject to
revolutions, but perpetually flourish and persevere in a continued felicity.
Take heed then of admiring those riches which remain not with their Masters,
but change in every instant, and leap from one to another, and from this to
that. It behooves thee to despise all those things, and to esteem them as
nothing. Let it suffice to hear what the Apostle says; The things that are
seen are temporal, but those which are not seen are eternal. Things humane
disappear more suddenly than a shadow.

CAP. II.
How great and desperate soever our Temporal evils are, yet hope may make them
tolerable.

FRom this inconstancy of humane things we may extract a constancy for our
selves: First by despising things so frail and transitory, which, as we have
already said, is a sufficient ground for their contempt; Secondly by a resolute
hope and expectation of an end or change in our adversity and afflictions,
since nothing here below is constant, but all mutable and unstable: and as
things sometimes change from good to evil, so they may also from evil unto
good. And as great prosperity has often been the occasion of greater misery,
so we may hope our greatest misfortunes may produce a greater happiness.
Wherefore as in eternal evils, because immutable, we want the hope of a happy
condition, so in temporal evils, how great soever, we ought not to despair,
which we daily see confirmed with most unexpected successes. Let us therefore
only fear eternal evils, which are not capable of remedy, and let us not
despair and afflict our selves for the temporal, which has it, and imports
little whether it have it or no. This is not ill expressed by that which happened
unto the Roman Appius, Fulgos. l. 6.
who being proscribed and condemned to banishment, became by the treachery of
his Slaves and Servants in danger of his life, who out of covetousness to
possess themselves of the goods and treasure, which he carried along with him,
cast him forth into a small Shallop, and sailed away with the Ship. But from
this misfortune sprung his deliverance: For not long after the Ship sunk, in
which his Slaves were drowned, and he himself (who had perished if he had been
with them) escaped with this little loss, and came safe into Sicily.
Aristomenes being taken by his enemies, and cast into an obscure Dungeon, was
there at least by famine and unwholesomness of the place to end his days; but
in the midst of despair an unexpected accident gave him hope of delivery. A
Fox by chance passing through a little hole under ground entered into the
Dungeon, where he had made his Den, which being espied by Aristomenes, he laid
fast hold on him with one hand, and with the other enlarged the passage, and
voiding the loose earth as he went, followed his guide, who at last safely
conducted him into the open field, from whence he escaped in safety, when his
enemies thought he had been dead. There is no condition of life so miserable
wherein we ought to despair, nay wherein we may not hope of bettering our
fortunes. To how many has a seeming unlucky accident been the occasion of
great preferment, and a disgrace of honors? Diogenes his being condemned for
false money, and held for an infamous person, was the occasion of his receiving
respect and honor from Princes, Plin. l. 7. c. 50.
' Alexander the Master of the World coming to visit him. Phalareus being
wounded in his breast by his enemies was cured of an Imposthume held desperate
by the Physicians. Gal. l. de Sim. ca. 11.
Galen writes of a Leper, who was cured by drinking a little wine, wherein a
Viper was by chance drowned, which the Reapers not being willing to drink
themselves, gave him out of compassion thinking to kill him quickly, and rid
him out of those grievous pains which he endured; but that which they thought
would be his death, became his life: for the drinking of the wine caused the
scales and scurf of his flesh to fall, and restored him to his health. Benive.
c. 15.
Benivenius testifies, that he knew a Boy that was lame of both feet, in such
sort that he could not go without Crutches; but being struck with the plague,
and recovering his health he remained sound of his feet, and without lameness.
The same Author writes of a certain Architect, who had one leg shorter than the
other, but falling from an high Tower he remained one leg as long as the other.
Alexander Benedictus rehearses, Alexan. Benedi. lib. 3.
That he knew a blind man, who being wounded grievously in the head, recovered
his sight. Rondelejus certifies, that a mad woman, having her head broken
returned to her wits. Plutarch writes of one Promeheus, who had an ugly humor
and swelling in his face, who having spent much money upon Surgeons and
Physicians to little purpose, was by a wound, which his Enemy by chance gave
him in the same place, perfectly cured, the hurt leaving no blemish or
deformity behind it. The injuries done to Joseph by his brothers promoted him
to the greatest honors of the Egyptian Empire. The heap of miseries, wherein
holy Job was involved, concluded in a double fortune and felicity. Jacob flying
from his Country with no more wealth than a walking staff returned rich and
prosperous with a numerous Family.

There is no drooping for unfortunate successes, since they often prove the
beginning of great felicities; and oftentimes we may rejoice for those evils,
for which we have shed tears. But that we may more clearly perceive the
mutability of things, and the hope we may entertain (even in the depth of our
calamities) of a better condition, I shall here recount the Story of Marcus and
Barbula two Roman Gentlemen. Fulgosius l. 6.
Marcus who was Praetor followed the Party of Brutus, and being overthrown with
his General in the Philippian fields, and taken Prisoner feigned himself to be
of base condition, and so was bought by Barbula for a Slave; who perceiving in
him, notwithstanding his outward appearance, a deep judgment, great
discretion, and a noble spirit, began to suspect him to be something else than
what hs seemed; and calling him aside persuaded him to reveal who he was,
assuring him that although he were one of the Rebels, he would not fail to
procure his pardon. Marcus smiling assured him he was no such man: and Barbula
to let him see how bootless it was to conceal who he was, told him he was
resolved to carry him along with him to Rome, where he was certain to be
discovered. Marcus answered, With all his heart: not doubting but the great
change of his habit and condition would free him from the knowledge of any; but
he found himself deceived; for he was no sooner arrived at Rome, but waiting
upon his Master at the door of one of the Cousuls, he was known by a Roman
Citizen, who immediately discovered him in secret to his Patron. Barbul^t
handled the matter so discreetly, that without acquainting his counterseit
Slave he went to Agrippa, by whose means he obtained a pardon from Augusts, who
in short time became so well satisfied of Marcus, that he received him amongst
his most private friends. Not long after Barbula, following the side of Mark
Anthony, was taken in the Actiacan War, and unknown was likewise bought by
Marcus amongst other Slaves. But so soon as it came to his knowledge that he
was his ancient Master, he repaired unto Augustus, begged his pardon, and
restored him unto his liberty: returning in the same manner the favor which he
had received. Who sees not here those secret pipes by which blessings are
derived, and fortune changed? Marcus enjoyed the dignity of a Praetor, was
suddenly after a Slave, than a Friend of Caesar's, and a redeemer of his
redeemer, arriving at higher preferments by his slavery and captivity, than by
his birth and former dignity. Whilst life lasts there is no mishap without
hope: and affliction, although we look upon things within their own limits and
natural disposition, come often home laden with prosperities. But if we look
upon them with that divine hope, which we ought to have, there is no evil from
whence we may not derive a good. To what greater streights can one be brought
than to be drawn forth to execution, and held guilty by the consent of all, as
Susanna was? but in the very way to justice God raised her up a salvation both
of life and honor, converting her unjust infamy into a great esteem and
admiration of her virtue. What remedy for Daniel, when he was thrown into a
Cave amongst hungry Lions? but where he expected to be devoured by wild beasts,
he found comfort. The three Children, who were cast into the fiery Furnace in
Babylon, where there was nothing to be hoped for but death, found refreshment,
life, and content. David, when he was compassed in by the Soldiers of Saul,
despaired of safety, yet escaped the danger. There is no evil in this life,
which even with the hopes of this life may not be assuaged: but with the hopes
of the other who will not be comforted? Let us therefore only fear eternal
evils, which have neither comfort, hope, nor possibility of amendment.

CAP. III.
We ought to consider what we may come to be.

BUt that we may as little presume upon things favorable and succesful, as
despair when they are averse and contrary, this excellent instruction may be
drawn from their inconstancy, which is, Not to confide at all in humane:
prosperity: For neither Kingdom, Empire, Papacy, nor any greatness whatsoever
can secure their Owners from ruin and misfortunes; and everyone ought with
holy Job to confider What he may come to be. There is no fortune so high, unto
which may not succeed a condition as low and disastrous. Let the great and rich
man consider that all his wealth and power may fail, and he be driven to beg an
alms. Let the King consider he may become a Mechanic Tradesman. Let the
Emperor consider that even in his own Court he may be dragged forth to justice,
and have dirt flung in his face, and be publicly executed. Let the Popes
confider that some of them have been forced to kiss the feet of other Popes.
These things seem incredible, and mortals are hardly drawn to believe them. But
let no man wonder at the success of any, since not only Kings, Emperors, and
Popes have been condemned, but Saints, and such, who by their holiness have
wrought miracles, have fallen and been danmed in hell fire! Let us all
therefore preserve our selves in humility* let us not confide in prosperity,
nor presume upon our virtues though never so perfect, since every man is
subject to fall into those misfortunes he little thinks of.

Who would imagine that so opprobrious affronts could befall a Roman Emperor as
happened to Andronicus? whose history I shall here relate to confirm that,
which, if grave Authors had not reported, would seem incredible. An. 1285.
Nicetas Chroniat. in annal. lib. 2.
Nicetas writes, and others bear him witness, That this Emperor in the third
year of his reign was laid hold upon by his own Vassals; a strong chain and
collar of iron, as if he had been some Mastive dog, fastened about his neck: his
hands manacled, and his feet fettered with heavy shackles: the most ordinary
sort of people taunting him with bitter scoffs buffetted him upon the face,
punched him upon the body, plucked his beard from his chin, drew him up and down
by the hair of his head, knocked out his teeth, and for his greater affront
scourged him on those parts, where they use to whip children. After which they
brought him into the public Marketplace, that all that would might abuse him:
and even women buffetted him; which done they cut off hs right hand, hurried
him into prison, and flung him into the common-hole, where the most notorious
Thieves and Murderers were lodged, leaving him nothing to feed on, or so much
as any to give him a jarre of water. From thence some few days after they drew
him forth, plucked out one of his eyes, mounted him naked (saving a little short
cloak which covered nothing almost of his body) upon a lean scabbed Camel, his
face backward, holding the tail in his hand instead of a Scepter, and a halter
in place of a Diadem. In this equipage they brought him again into the
Marketplace, where the injuries, scorns, and ignominies put upon him by the
rascal multitude are not imaginable. Some cast onions and rotten fruit at him,
others pricked him in the sides with spits, others stufft his nostrils with
filth and dung, others squeezed upon his head and face sponges filled with urin
and excrements; some flung stones and dirt at him, and called him by most
opprobrious names; and there wanted not an impudent baggage, who running into
the Kitchen fetched a pot of scalding water and threw in his face. There was no
Tapster, Cobbler, Tinker, or base Tradesman, which found not out some way or
other to affront him. At last they hung him by the heels betwixt two pillars,
and there left him to die. But then did not his own Courtiers and household
Servants pardon him; one thrust his sword up to the hilts in his bowels: two
others, to prove which had the sharpest sword, tried them in his flesh. At last
the miserable Emperor (although most happy if he were saved) brought with much
ado that arm, which had lost the hand and yet ran with blood, to moisten his
dry mouth, and so expired. In this manner ended the Monarch of the East: but
not yet his ignominy; for during three days after they suffered his dead body
to hang upon the Gibbet, which was at last taken down more to free the living
from horror, than for compassion to the dead, whom they buried like a mad dog.
Let every one in this glass behold and consider what the things of this life
are. Let him compare Andronicus with Andronicus, Andronicus Emperor and
Augustus with Andronicus a Prisoner and publicly executed; behold him first
clothed in Purple, adored by Nations, commanding the East, his temples
encircled with a Royal Diadem, the Imperial Scepter in his hands, and his very
shoes studdied with Oriental Unions; Then look upon him insulted over by the
basest of his people, buffetted by women, and pelted with dirt and stones in
his Imperial City. Who would believe that he, whom the people thronged to look
upon as upon some God when he passed through the Streets of Constantinople in
his Royal Chariot, covered with plates of burnisht gold, guarded with excellent
Captains, and waited on by the Princes of his Empire, should by those very same
persons, who so lately had taken their oaths of loyalty, and sworn to defend
him, be so traitorously and barbarously handled? Finally, he who had commanded
justice to pass upon so many, should himself come to be justized with greater
infamy than any of them? who could imagine that one subject should be so
suddenly capable of such different extremes, and that so great glory should
conclude in so much ignominy? This is enough to make us contemn all temporal
goods and humane felicity, which not only passes away with time, but often
changes into greater misfortunes. What esteem can that merit which stands
exposed to so much misery: which is by so much more sensible to the sufferer,
by how much it was less expected? To this may be added another consideration of
no small profit, That if this Emperor passed to his salvation through so many
affronts and cruel torments, what hurt did they do him? what imports it that he
was so unhappy in this life, if he were happy in the other? certainly he gave
sufficient hopes of his contrition; for in all that lamentable and never to be
paralelled Tragedy no sign of impatience ever appeared in him, neither spoke he
other words than these, Lord have mercy on me; and when they abused and wounded
him with so much cruelty, all he said was this, Why do ye break this bruised
Reed? Certainly, if he knew how to benefit himself (as it seems he did) by his
misery, he was more happy in it, than in his Empire. The eternal is that which
imports. As for the glory of his Empire, and the misery of his ignominy, they
are now past.

A greater Emperor was Vitellius than he, Fulgos. l. 6.
since not only the East, but West acknowledged him for the Lord and Monarch of
the whole World. The riches he enjoyed were beyond estimation, and gold
abounded with him, as stones of the Streets with others. In Rome he was
acknowledged Augustus, and saluted with so glorious titles, that he seemed to
be all he could desire less than a God. But wherein ended all this Majesty, but
in the greatest infamy that can be imagined? for having tied a rope about his
neck, and his hands behind him, torn his garments from his back, and stuck a
dagger under his chin, they haled him ignominiously up and down the Streets of
Rome, cast filth in his face, and reviled him with a thousand injurious
speeches, and at last killed him in the Marketplace, and threw him down the
Gemonies, where they used to fling the bodies of such offenders as were not
lawfully to be buried. A strange case, to what end some men are born, such
care, trouble and circumspection in bringing on a life to conclude in so
disastrous a death. He who should know the ends of Andronicus and Vitellius,
and should behold their birth, breeding, studies, pretenses, and recreations,
should see them clad in silk and gold, and acknowledged Emperors, Would he say
in his heart, that so much ado was necessary for such an end? Folly is all
humane greatness, since at last it must end, and perhaps in so disastrous a
conclusion. With reason did Pachimeras say; It was safer to trust to a shadow,
than to humane happiness. Who could imagine that the Emperor Valerianus, Vide
Platinam. Baro. Fulgos.
whom the King of Persia taking prisoner kept enclosed in a Cage like some
wild beast, used him as a footstool when he got on horseback, and after flead
his Soldiers and salted them, as if they had been bacon, could possibly come
to such an end? Compare here the different conditions that may happen to a
Roman Emperor: Behold Valerianus mounted upon a brave Courser, trapped with
Gold, clad in Purple, crowned with the Imperial Diadem, adored by Nations, and
commanding over Kingdoms: and after see the same man enclosed like a beast, and
trodden under the foot of a barbarous King. Such contrary fortunes happen in
humane life. Let us not therefore trust in it.

2.
Yet less imaginable seems that which happened unto Pope John the XXIII. when
after four years possession of the Papacy, many Princes of Europe having during
that time in token of obedience kissed his feet, he himself came to kiss the
feet of another Pope; and having in his Pontificat created many Cardinals, took
it at last as a singular favor to be made one himself. This seems incredible;
but it is a most true history. The mutability of humane things produces so
strange effects, that our imagination dares not feign them. Who would think
that the chief Bishop should be made a Captive, as this was in the Council of
Constance assembled for the pacification of the Schism then reigning in the
Church? There he was deprived of his dignity, and himself confirmed his own
deposition, and suffered in person great misery, want, and affliction; from
whence he made an eseape, and fled from place to place, until at length he
became so well advised as to put himself into the hands of Martin the Fifth,
elected after his deposition, who had many Cardinals then about him created by
this John, who beheld him, that had made them, deprived of all dignities,
humbly asking pardon of the new Pope, whom he acknowledged for such., and
esteemed it a great favor to receive his Hat anew. Thus far can the
instability of Temporal goods arrive. Who could imagine that which happened
unto the Emperor Zeno, who after he had possessed the Empire many years,
cockered in all the blandishments of so high a fortune, was at last constrained
through famine to eat his clothes, and feed upon the flesh of his own arms?
This Emperor being in a trance was given out to be dead, and so buried in a
Vault, but returning afterward unto himself he cried out aloud; named those of
his Guard and his other Servants, who, though they heard him, would not help
him. There he remained interred alive, eating his own flesh, as witnesses
Cedrenus. Cedren in Com.
Who could believe such a misfortune? but the misery, wherein humane happiness
often terminates, is not to be conceived.

The glory and riches of Belisarius were greater than of many Kings. Vid. Petr.
Mex. in vita Justini. Crinit. et Volater.
The World was amazed at his valor and courage: he overcame the Goths in many
battails, and took their King prisoner: he made an end of the Vandals, and
triumphed over there captive King Gilismer: he triumphed also in the East over
the Persians. His wealth was so great, that in one hours space he gained all
that the Vandals had scrapt together in fourscore years. Who could imagine that
this so rich and glorious Captain should become a blind Beggar, and beg an alms
in the Church of St. Sophia, and other public places? Dionysius the second
possessed a wealthy Kingdom in Sicily. Egn. l. 6. c. 10. Portan. l. 2. c. 8. de
Fort. domest.
Who would thing that from a King he should be necessitated to become a
Schoolmaster? who would not wonder at the cozenage of the World, that should
first see him in his Royal Palace with a Scepter in his hand, compassed about
with his Servants, and the Great ones of his Kingdom, and should after behold
him in his School managing a Rod in the midst of a number of boys? What
shall I say of King Adonibezee, Jud. 1.
who after the conquest of seaventy Kings died a Slave, and for his greater
infamy, had the extremities of his hands and feet cut off? Spain afforded Queen
Goswinda, Max. an. 589.
beloved and esteemed by King Leovigildus her Husband, afterward publicly
executed and tormented in the Marketplace of Toledo. Of no less marvail is
that which happened unto the Empress Maria, Wife unto Otho the third, burnt by
order of justice; which being a story of memory, I shall relate it out of
Godfridus Viterbiensis. Vid. Chr. Coriol. an. 668,
These two Princes passing by Modena, the Empress became desperately enamoured
of a young Count, much a Gentleman, and excellently accomplished in the
lineaments of his body, but much more in the perfections of his mind, in so
much as he neglected and slighted the violent addresses and solicitations of
this fond Princess; who perceiving her self mocked, full of choler and madness
did, as Joseph's Mistress, cry out a Rape, and accused the innocent Count to the
too credulous Emperor, that he would have forced her: who without much search
into the business belived it, and caused him to be beheaded; which as soon as
it came to the knowledge of his Countess, a Lady of an heroic and confident
spirit, and fully satisfied of the goodness and innocence of her Husband, at
such time as the Emperor gave audience, she entered into the presence, and
flinging down the head of her Husband before him accused him as an unjust
Judge, and demanded justice of him against himself; and for proof of what she
said, offered her self to the then usual trial of burning iron: which being
accepted, and the heated Iron put into her hands, she handled it as if it had
been a Nosegay of flowers: which being seen by the Emperor, he confessed
himself guilty; but the Countess not so satisfied cried out, that since he was
faulty he ought to die, for that he had caused to be executed an innocent
person; neither could she be contented, until the sentence was pronounced
against the Empress (who was the Author of that mischief) to be burnt: which
was accordingly executed upon this great princess, Wife to so potent an
Emperor, and Daughter of the King of Arragon; for neither Crowns nor Scepters
secure us from the inconstancy of humane changes. Well was it said by St.
Gregory Nazianzen, that we may better trust unto the wind, or to letters
written upon water, than unto humane felicity,

3.
What we have hitherto recounted are changes, not falls. That which we are to
fear is a fall from sanctity and virtue, and this is properly to fall, when we
descend from the state of grace to that of sin. The mutations of fortune are
but exchanges of one condition for another. No man can fall when he is at
lowest; and the lowest and basest of all things is humane felicity, which when
it quits us, we fall not, but change it, and perhaps for the better. The true
falls are those which are spiritual; and it may with reason amaze us, to see
that on this part also we are exposed to uncertainties. But this may be our
comfort, that temporal changes are not in our hands, but spiritual are. Our
wealth, whether we will or no, may be taken from us, but grace unless by our
own fault cannot. We may be bereaved of honors against our will, but not of
virtue except we consent. Corporal goods may perish, be stolen, and lost a
thousand manner of ways: but spiritual goods can only be forsaken, and are
then only lost, when we leave them by sin. This may make us tremble, that they
are lost because we will lose them, and not being mutable in themselves they
change because we are mutable. That which has happened in this kind is most
lamentable. St. Peter Damian writes that he knew a Monk in the City of
Benevento, named Madelmo, Petr. Dami. l. 1. c. 10.
who arrived at so great sanctity of life, that being upon a holy Saturday to
fill a dozen of Lamps, and oil failing for the lust, he with great faith filled
it with water, and lighting it, it burned as the rest. Many other miracles he
wrought in our Lord, for which he was in great esteem both of the Prince and
Citizens. But wherein ended this miraculous and venerable man? a strange
change. God withdrawing his holy hand from him, he fell into such dishonesty of
life, that he was taken and publicly whipped, and his head for his greater
ignominy shaved like a Slave. A lamentable tragedy is the life of man, wherein
we behold so contrary extremes. Ibidem.
The same St. Peter Damian writes, that he knew in the same City a Priest of so
great sanctity, that every day, when he celebrated Mass, the Prince of
Benevento beheld an Angel descend from heaven, who took the Divine Mysteries
from his hands to offer them unto the Lord. Yet this man so favored from above
fell into the like vice, that all might fear, and none be assured in any state
whatsoever.

S. John Climacus relates the story of that young man, Clim. gr. 15.
of whom we read in the Lives of the Fathers, who mounted unto so high a degree
of virtue, that he commanded the wild Asses, and compelled them to serve the
Monks of the Monastery; whom blessed St. Anthony compared to a Ship laden with
rich Merchandise, sailing in the midst of the Ocean, whose end was uncertain.
Afterward this so fervent youth fell most miserably, and bewailing his sin,
said unto some of the Monks who passed by, Speak unto the old man (that is St.
Anthony) that he pray unto God, that he would grant me yet ten days of
repentance. The holy man hearing this toar the hair from his head, and said, A
great Pillar of the Church if fallen: and five days after the Monk died, in so
much as he who heretofore commanded the wild beasts of the Wilderness, became a
scorn to the Devils, and he who preserved himself by bread from heaven, was
afterward deprived of his spiritual sustenance. Heracl. in Parad.
Lamentable also is the accident related by Heraclides of Hieron Alexandrinus,
who having flourished many years in great virtue and fame of sanctity, Andr.
Ebor. Ex. mem. t. 2. de mor. and for. mut.
left off all, and became a haunter of public Stews. In the same manner
Ptolomee the Egyptian having passed fifteen years in the Desert in continual
prayer, sustaining himself only with bread, and the dew which fell from heaven,
came to leave all, and lead a most scandalous life. If we look into the holy
Scriptures, we shall find greater changes, and more lamentable falls. Who would
think that Saul chosen of God for very good, of an humble and patient spirit,
should end in a Luciferian pride, and in a mortal hatred against the best man
in Israel? Who would think that a man so wise, and so religious, as Solomon,
should in his latter times be seduced by women, and erect Temples unto false
Gods? Finally, who would imagine that an Apostle of Christ should die in
despair and hang himself? What man can then presume so much of himself, that he
needs not stand in fear of what he may be?

CAP. IV.
The change of humane things shows clearly their vanity, and how worthy they
are to be contemned.

THis inconstancy and change of things serve as a testimony of their vanity.
Witness those who have had the largest experience of humane greatness and
felicity. Gilimer King of the Vandals was of great power, wealth and valor,
but overcome by Belisarius, and deprived of his Kingdom, was led in triumph
through the Streets of Constantinople. When he approached the place, where
Justinian the Emperor was seated in a Throne of incomparable Majesty, clothed
in his Imperial Robes, and compassed with the great Princes of his Empire, the
Captive King beholding him in so great glory, and himself a Slave, abandoned of
the whole world, neither wept nor complained, nor showed the least sign of
sorrow or resentment, Procop. li. 2. de bello Vandalorum.
but only uttered that most true sentence of the Wiseman, Vanity of vanities,
and all is vanity. He who knew this, no marvail though in so great a misfortune
he had dry eyes. For if he knew that all humane greatness was vanity,
wherefore should he grieve for that which was nothing? That is not worthy of
grief, which deserves not love. Things so mutable are those below, that as they
merit not our affections when we enjoy them, so they ought not to vex and
afflict us when we lose them. This apprehension was the cause of the great
equality of mind, which this Prince expressed in all his actions, who was so far
from showing any grief in the loss of his Kingdom and fortunes, that he rather
seemed to laugh and rejoice; and therefore when he was overthrown in battle,
and forced to fly into Numidia, where he fortified himself in one of the
Mountains, the Enemy besieging and streightning him with want of victuals, he
sent to the Captain, who commanded in chief, to demand of him Bread, a Sponge,
and a Cittern; Bread to sustain his life, which was now like to perish for want
of food: a Sponge, to dry his eyes, for that having now entered into the
consideration of the vanity of humane things, and ashamed at his grief for the
loss of them, he was resolved to change his passions, and rather laugh than
weep: for what being possessed afforded no security, the same being lost brought
no prejudice; and to this end demanded a Cittern; for that having wiped his
eyes from their fruitless tears, he was now resolved to change his complaints
into songs, and his grief into content, which consists not so much in the
abundance of a great fortune, as in the sufficiency of a moderate. And with
reason might he take the Cittern; for if he well considered, he might rejoice
even in his mishap, since his loss made him understand that deceit of the
World, which his most ample Kingdom never could, and freed him not only from
cares and troubles, but from sins, which in the prosperity of this life have a
larger field, than in an adverse fortune. Possessed of this truth they took him
prisoner, and brought him to the conquering Belisarius. The Captive King came
with those expressions of joy and mirth, that the General seeing him laugh,
whom he judged to have so great a cause of tears, thought his grief had
distracted him, and that lie had lost his wits; but he never had them
perfecter, since he laughed at human greatness, and now perceived how ridiculous
a thing is that which we call felicity, and in his heart rightly esteemed it,
as it is, a vanity of vanities.

I believe the same judgment, which this King gave of the vanity of temporal
things, would, if it had been asked, been given by the Emperor Andronicus when
naked, and his head shaved like a Slave, he was infamously dragged through the
Streets of Constantinople. What was then his Imperial Diadem? what his Throne
and Majesty? what his Ornaments of gold and silver? All was vanity, and a
vanity of vanities. Neither would this have been denied by Vitellius, when they
threw dirt in his face, and haled him into the Marketplace to be executed.
What were then the Spectacles of the Amphitheater, and Games of the Circus, the
Signiory of the World, but vanity of vanities, and universal vanity? The same
would Craesus have preached from the flames, the Tyrant Bajazet from his Cage,
King Bolislaus from his Kitchen, and Dionysius from his School. If alive they
would have said this upon the sight only of the instability of this life, what
would they now say upon the experience of eternity, whereinto they are entered?
Let us take the opinion of those Princes which are damned, what they now think
of the Majesty, which they enjoyed in this life; Vanity they will say it was, a
smoke, a dream, a shadow. And without doubt those Kings, which are now in
heaven in possession of those eternal joys, will say the same, That all
felicity here below, is poor, scarce and short, and vanity of vanities, and
worse, if it have been an occasion of sin. But it is not needful to call
witnesses from the other life, since the vanity of this is so evident, that he
who shall set himself to consider the greatness of this World, shall perceive
that by how much it is more glorious, by so much it is more vain. What greater
Majesty than that of the Roman Empire? Let us call to mind what happened in
that. Scarce was the election of a Roman Emperor known before they, who chose
him, or some more subtle or powerful than they, had murdered him. An although
they studied nothing more than to preserve themselves in the Imperial dignity,
yet few there were that could effect it. Amongst nineteen or twenty Emperors,
which passed betwixt Antoninus the Philosopher, and Claudius the second, not
one escaped a violent death, besides many other Tyrants, who took the names of
Emperors; as in Galienus his time thirty usurped that title, and murdered one
another: in so much as he who called himself an Emperor, was almost certain to
die a violent death; so as the greatest felicity of the world was tied to the
greatest mishap. And it is to be wondered, that any (though almost forced)
would accept the Diadem. But such is the folly of men, that having before their
eyes so many lamentable examples they gape after those glories, which hardly
last from morning until night. Some of them had scarce been saluted Emperors,
when they were cut in pieces. Aurelianus was one of those who exhibited the
most glorious triumph that ever Rome beheld, where were showed An infinite
number of Captives from the three parts of the World, Many rare beasts, as
Tigers, Lions, Ounces, Elephants, Dromidaries, A mighty quantity of Arms taken
from the conquered Enemies, Three most sumptuous Chariots, one of the King of
Palmerins, another of the Persians, and a third of the Goths, Two who called
themselves Emperors, and the great Queen Cenobia adorned with most precious
jewels, and rich pearls, and fettered in chains of gold. He himself entered in a
triumphal Chariot taken from the King of Goths, drawn by Stags, immediately
followed by the conquering Army richly armed, crowned with Laurel, and carrying
Palms in their hands. Never Emperor arrived at such a height of glory. But how
long lasted it? A short time after he was stabbed with poniards, having hardly
time to take notice of his greatness, much less to enjoy it. By how many steps
and strange ways did Aelias Pertinax in his old age climb unto the Imperial
Throne, and lost it before it was known in the Empire that he commanded it? He
was the Son of a Slave, and first a Merchant, by which he became a good
accomptant; then he studied Grammar, and became a Schoolmaster; after that a
Lawyer, and having learned to defend causes, was made an Advocate; but not
prospering by these courses he listed himself a Soldier. Neither seemed he in
that to thrive much better: for being arrived to the dignity of a Centurion he
was cashiered with infamy. But he quitted it not so; for returning unto the
same trade in process of time he became a Senator: shortly after Consul, then
President of Syria: at last when he expected the Hangman to take away his life,
he was saluted Emperor by those Soldiers, who then came fresh from the
slaughter of Commodus. They entering his house by night, he told them, he was
the man whom the Tyrant had sent them to murder: but they presented him the
Scepter and Diadem, which he accepted although then 70 years of age; and after
had scarce warmed the Imperial Seat, having only reigned three Months, when
he was cut in pieces in a time he least suspected it, being so beloved,
esteemed, and praised by the Romans, that every one would have spent a thousand
lives to have saved his; yet notwithstanding a few Soldiers passed publicly
through the midst of the City, and in the sight of all stabbed an Emperor so
beloved and honored of the people, and returned back without any so much as
questioning them, when those of one street (so few were the murderers) had
been sufficient to have killed them with stones. Who sees not here the
inconstancy and vanity of humane things, as well in the life as unexpected
death of this Prince? by how many changes and windings did he climb unto the
top of the Imperial greatness, and how suddenly without any stop or turn at all
was he tumbled headlong down? how long was his fortune in growing, and how
quickly cut? seaventy years of a prosperous life ended in the counterfeit
felicity of three Months, and the unhappy death of an hour. Then all is vanity
of vanities, since that which costs so much, lasts so little, and death in less
than one hour overthrows the fortune of seaventy years.

. 2.
If the felicity of this life did only end when life ends, yet that were
sufficient to undervalue it, but it often ends before it, and sometimes changes
into disgraces and mishaps, so as with our own eyes we often behold an end of
our greatest fortunes. Let us not therefore trust in life, because it may fail
whilst the goods of it remain, and let us as little trust in them, because
they may likewise fail whilst it continues. Let this instability of things
undeceive us, and let us seriously consider their vanity in their manner of
leaving us; which is excellently represented by St. John Chrysostom in the
Eunuch Eutropius Patrician of Constantinople, Hom. in Eutrop. tom. 5.
Consul and great Chamberlain to the Emperor Arcadius, who withdrawing his
privacy and favor from him committed him to prison; which the holy Doctor
admirably ponders in this manner. If in any time, now more than ever may be
said, Vanity of vanities; all is vanity. Where is now the splendor of the
Consulat? where the Lictors and their Fasces? where the Applauses, Dances,
Banquets, and Revels? where the Crowns and Tapestry? where the noise of the
City, and the flattering acclamations of the Circus? all those things are
perished; a boisterous wind has blown away the leaves, and left the naked tree
tottering, and almost plucked up by the roots. Such was the violence of the
storm, that when it had shaken all the nerves, it threatened utterly to
overthrow the stock. Where are now those masking friends, those healths and
suppers? where that swarm of Parasites, and that flood of wine poured out from
morning till evening? where that exquisite and various artifice of Cooks, those
Servants accustomed to say and do all that pleased? All these were no more than
a Nights dream, which disappeared with the day, Flowers which withered when the
Spring was ended; a Shadow they were, and so they passed: a Smoke, and so they
vanished: Bubbles in the water, and so they burst: Spiders webs, and so were
torn in sunder. Wherefore let us ever repeat this sentence, Vanity of vanities;
all is vanity. This saying ought to be written upon our Walls, Marketplaces,
Houses, Streets, Windows, Gates, but principally in the Conscience of every
one, since the deceitful employments of this life, and the enemies of truth
have gained too much power and authority with many. This is it which one man
ought to say unto another; this is it we ought to say at dinner, at supper, and
in all our conversation, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Did I not daily
tell thee that riches were flitting and deceitful? but thou would not endure
me. Did not I tell thee, they had the condition of a fugitive Slave? but thou
would not believe me. See how experience has taught thee, that they are not
only fugitive, but ungrateful and murdering, since they have cast thee into
this exigent. But because this Eunuch would neither be advised by the counsel
of his Domestics, nor Strangers, do thou at least, who art puffed up with
wealth and honors, make use of this calamity, and turn it to thy own profit.
There is nothing more infirm than humane things. By what name soever thou shall
express their baseness, thou shall still fall short. Call them hay, smoke, a
dream, flowers which wither: all is too little: they are so frail, that they
are more nothing, than nothing it self. They are not only nothing, but are
still in precipitation. Who was more exalted than this man? was he not famous
for his wealth through the world? was he not mounted up to the height of all
humane honor? Did not all fear and reverence him? But behold him now more
miserable than Slaves and Bondmen, more indigent, than those who beg their
bread from door to door. There is no day, wherein are not set before his eyes
Swords drawn and sharpened to cut his throat; Precipices, Hangmen, and the
Street, which lead to the Gallows. Neither does he enjoy the memory of his pad
pleasures, nor the common light, but is at midday as in a dark night, penned up
betwixt four walls, deprived of the use of his eyes. But wherefore do I
remember those things, since no words are able to express the fear of his mind,
who every hour expects his punishment? to what end are my speeches, when the
image of his calamity appears so evidently before thine eyes? Not long ago the
Emperor having sent some Soldiers to draw him out of the Church, whither he
was fled for sanctuary, he became as pale as box, and at this instant has no
better color than one who were dead. To this add that his teeth gnash against
one another, his body quakes, his voice is broken with sobbs, his tongue
stammers; in conclusion he stands like one, whose soul were frozen for fear
within him. All this is from St. John Chrysostom. It is not needful to attend
the end of life to see the imposture of it. It is enough to see the alterations
whilst it lasts.

CAP. V.
The baseness and disorder of Temporal things: and how great a Monster men have
made the World.

LEt us now come to consider the baseness of all that which passes in time; the
which appeared so mean and poor unto Marcus Aurelius, that he said, Lib. 2.
Those things which fall under sense, which either allure us with delight, or
deject us with grief, or glitter with outward pomp and appearance, how vile are
they all? how worthy of contempt? how sordid and filthy? how subject to perish,
and how dead? This said that great Emperor and Monarch of the World, when the
Roman Empire was in its greatest power and luster, and in the greatest
experience of the goods of the earth, being more powerful, and having more
command of them, than Solomon: and yet he not only says they were vain, but
vile, filthy, contemptible and dead. That we may understand this better, let us
look into the substance and being, which temporal things have of themselves,
without respect either to the shortness of their duration, or to the variety of
their changes, for which alone, although in themselves most precious, yet were
they most despicable; but being so little, so vile, so disorderly, and for the
most part so hurtful and prejudicial unto us, although they were eternal, yet
ought they to be contemned. We are not therefore only to look upon that
littleness and poorness, which they have by nature, and from themselves, but
upon the evil, which they have acquired by our abuse; For the World, which of
it self were tolerable, is by us made such, that it is not to be endured even
by those who best love it. And to those natural goods, which it affords, our
unstable appetite has added such artificial fopperies of our own inventions,
that of both together we have composed a Monster, no less horrible, than that
described by St. John in the Apocalypse. Apoc. 13.
And therefore he that will see what worldly felicity is, let him cast his eyes
upon that Beast, which for his unquietness and unconstancy is said to rise out
of the sea. He had the head and face of a Lion, the body of a Leopard a Beast
various and spotted, and the feet of a Bear: and for his more deformity he had
seven heads and ten horns. This the lively Image of that which passes in the
World. For as this Monster is composed of three savage Beasts, of a Bear, which
is carnal and luxurious, of a Leopard, whose skin is full of eyes, and of a
Lion the proudest of all other Beasts: so in the World there is no other thing,
as St. John says, Ep. 1 c. 2.
but the Concupiscence of the flesh, the Concupiscence of the eyes, and the
Pride of life, that is, Lust and exorbitancy in pleasures, Covetousness and
gaping after riches, Ambition and desire of honors. Of those three Monsters is
composed the Monster of Monsters, which we call the World: the which has also
his seven heads and ten horns, to wit, the Seven deadly Sins, by which are
impugned the ten Commandments, and the observation of the whole Law of God.

Let us also consider the mysterious disposition of the parts of this Beast.
The feet are said to be of a Bear, the body of a Leopard, and the head of a
Lion, because all the inventions, additions, stratagems, and designs of the
World are founded upon the pleasure and delights of the appetite, which are
natural: and upon this foundation our malice has builded riches, and honors
which are not natural, but humane inventions. Riches are the body of the World,
and upon them is raised Pride as the head of that body. Besides Riches are most
conveniently placed in the middle between Pleasure and Honors, as being
necessary for the supportation of both, without which neither can be
maintained. Avarice therefore forms the body of this Beast, that it may equally
nourish Pleasure and Ambition. Let us then propose unto our selves the Image of
this World under the form of this Monster and Chimaera, as well to demonstrate
the confusion and turmoyl of it, as to signify unto us, that the whole
substance and being of it consists merely in the imagination and appearance. For
such a Monster composed of the several parts of diverse Beasts, which has no
being or foundation in reason, but is only framed by the fancy, the
Philosophers call a Chimaera; and such truly are the things of this World,
inconstant, confused and troubled, and have no substance or being in
themselves, but are only deceit and appearance. Some seem great, and are but
little: others cozen us more, appear to be goods, and are really evils. To
understand this better and know the vanity of the World, we are to suppose that
humane malice has corrupted and poisoned it by inventing new gusts and
pleasures: unto which we have added by our imagination what they wanted of
being and reality: and by diverting things from those proper ends, for which
they were ordained, have made them all vain, and the World a Monster of many
heads; for the head of things is, as Philo calls it, the end, and the things of
the World having left their utmost and true end, which is one God, and
disordered themselves by the many ends of particular vices, have made that
Beast, which is said not to have one but many heads, which makes it so
monstrous and deformed. Men follow not in the use of things their proper end,
which is to please and serve God, but aim at the serving of their passions, and
satisfy their appetites: which as they are diverse, so they have diverse ends
and respects; from whence results the monstrosity of so many heads, and faces.
From the multitude then of ends follows this deformity, which includes and is
always accompanied with vanity. For the world following this vanity of
adulterate ends, contrary to reason and nature, leaves the true and lawful end,
which is the service of God; and that which leaves its proper end becomes
useless and vain. If you should blind the eyes of some excellent Marksman, his
art and skill were lost, and his Bow would become unprofitable, because he
remained deprived of that, by which he was to attain his end. So all things
being created to this end, that man by them might serve God, this end wanting,
they became vain and useless. By this example may be clearly seen how vain is
the World, since it does not direct those things it enjoyes for the service of
the universal Creator, but for other vain and imaginary ends, by which it
becomes wholly it self a vanity? The multitude of Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels,
precious Furniture, and other Ornaments which we glory in, are they perhaps for
the service of God? Let St. Alexius tell us, whether he chose them as means to
that end; and if they be not for the service of the Lord of all, what are they
all but vanity? Abundance of Delights, Masks, Dances, Feasts, Entertainments,
are they perhaps to please God? Let St. Bruno tell us; and if they be not for
that purpose, what are they all but vanity? Majesty, ostentation of Titles and
Honors, are they perhaps for the service of God? Let St. Josaphat tell us; who
fled from his Temporal Kingdom, that he might better apply himself unto the
service of the King of Heaven. Vain is all the greatness of the Earth, if that
of Heaven be not gained by it. The most precious thing failing, which is the
right end, all besides becomes vain, frivolous, and of no esteem.

. 2.
This deviation and wandering of worldly things from their proper and due end
is sufficient to declare their vanity and disorder. But there is yet another
error in them, which makes them appear much more vain, which is, that they not
only go astray from their first and great end, which is the service of God,
but also fail, and hold no proportion with that second end, which humane vices
propose unto them here. That which our appetite pretends in Riches, Pomp and
Honors, which it has invented, is the felicity of this life: and to that they
are so little proper, as they have rather disposed things for our misery and
torment; and therefore vain are all our fancies and inventions. To maintain and
uphold our honor, what Laws, Rights, and irregular Customs has the World
invented to the great danger of our lives, and the hinderance of our pleasures?
It has made honor so brittle, that with one word whosoever list may take it
from us, which is the occasion, that many live dishonored; and if they will
recover it, it must cost their lives, fortunes, or quiet. What greater madness
than that the thing, which they have made of the greatest esteem in the World,
should be subject to such an inconvenience; and of so cursed a condition, that
it is very easy to lose, and most difficult to regain: that any one may
bereave us of it, and he which has taken it from us, cannot restore it: that
it is in another man's hand to destroy it, and not in our own to repair it? What
law in the World more unjust, that if an infamous person give thee the lie,
thou remainest dishonored, although he lied, that gave it: and that honor
which he by one word has taken from thee, thou can not recover by another?
What greater folly than to fight for honor, and maintain truth by quarrelling,
as if he were the most honorable person and spoke the truest, which were the
strongest, especially being so prejudicial to the most virtuous? for it
commonly happens that those who have the clearest, wits, the noblest souls, and
the most constant and sound judgments, have the weakest bodies. Finally in
this matter of honor men have invented such laws, such punctilioes, such
impertinent formalities, that if they were all truly and really mad, they
could not have done more absurdly. For what is madness, but to do things
without proportion, order, or reason? which since the World does, we must
conclude it vain, senseless, and foolish.

Coming then to Riches, which were invented for the ease and commodity of life,
humane malice has made them such, as they serve for our greater trouble and
vexation. For he that is rich, will not only be rich himself, but must have
all he has so too. He is not content with having a good Garment, unless his
walls be with curious Pictures, rich Tapestries, precious Cabinets, and other
rarities better clad than himself, which serve not for warmth or use, but only
for show and appearance. From whence it happens that he, who has most wealth,
has most want, because he not only needs for himself, but for all which he
possesses: so that he, who has a great house, has the same necessities that
his house, which are many: for a great house requires much furniture, and a
large Family, and so charges the Master with multitudes of Servants, great
quantities of Plate, Hangings and other Ornaments superfluous to use and humane
commodity; in so much as none are more poor than the rich: because they want
not only for themselves, but for all that is theirs. At least riches want not
this incommodity, that although they were invented for humane use and ease, yet
he that has them in the greatest abundance has the greatest cares, troubles,
envies, dangers, and ever the greatest losses.

The same disorder and abuse happens in diverse other particulars, which at
first were invented for a comfort, and remedy of our wants, but are now become
a burden and trouble unto us. Our Garments, which were for necessity, are now
worn for ornament, and using them for other ends than they were designed, they
become our vexations. A girdle or a shoe too much straightened afflicts the
body and hinders us in diverse actions: bravery, gold-chains, and other needless
ornaments burden us. Ambros. l. 1. de Virgin.
Wherefore St. Ambrose says, A weighty Chain of gold about the neck, or
stumbling Chapines upon the feet, serve as a punishment unto women, as if they
were some great offenders; for in respect of the pain and weight, with which
they grieve those who wear them, what matters it, whether they be of gold or
iron? both equally oppress their necks, and hinder their going. The price and
value of the gold eases nothing: nay rather adds to their trouble in respect of
the fear they live in, lest they should loose them, or that some should against
their wills free them of their pain and trouble. According to this it little
imports whether the pain be inflicted by our own sentence, (as the women in
this case pass it against themselves) or by the award of others, as against
offenders. Only women are in this in the more miserable condition, since
others desire to be freed and eased of their fetters and imprisonment, and they
to the contrary desire still to be subject and tied unto theirs. This from St.
Ambrose. Our food also, which is given by nature for the sustentation of our
lives, humane malice has by the invention of new dainties and various ways of
Cookery to please the pallat, made destructive both to the life and taste:
Those new infirmities and sharp griefs, whereof the World is full, being
occasioned, as the Physicians affirm, by our disorderly diet and multiplicity
of new devised dishes. Hector Boethius in his second Book of the History of the
Scots, says, Our Ancestors knew not those several sorts of infirmities, which
we see in our age; anciently scarce any fell sick but of the stone, abundance
of phlegm, or some other infirmity proceeding from cold or moisture; They lived
well, and their spare diet preserved their bodies from diseases, and enlarged
their lives for many years. But now of late, since we have forsaken our Country
food, and given our selves to the curious seeding of other Nations, strange
diseases have entered with strange dishes. And in his ninth Book he says, that
they knew not plagues, nor sharp and violent Fevers so long as they preserved
their ancient diet.

This separation and wandering of worldly things from their principal and chief
end, which is God, causes such a distance betwixt them and reason, that
therefore they become a Monster; and so St. John very fitly paints the World in
the figure of this Monster with seven heads of a beast, and none of a man. For
if that man were monstrous, which had no humane head, but seven of brutish
creatures, no less Monster is the World, which wants the natural end, and head,
which is God, whom it ought to seek according to reason, and not pursue those
false and adulterate ends which are contrary to it. The World wants the head of
a man, because it does not order it self according to the end of reason; and it
retains the heads of beasts, because it is guided by passion, appetite, and the
like, which are the ends of beasts. If we shall then behold the great vanity of
things together with the multitude of vices, wherein men have involved them,
and daily make them worse, to whom can this beast irritated with so many sharp
goads, as are our sins, be tolerable? What injustice is not committed? what
flattery not insinuated? what cozenage not attempted? And what revenge not
executed? Avarice disquiets all, Luxury corrupts it, and Ambition treads it
under foot.

From what is said it follows, that the things of this World, represented unto
us by St. John under the figure of those three fierce and cruel beasts, are
according to our disorderly manner of using them much prejudicial and hurtful
both to our souls and bodies. And if we should behold them as they lie hidden
under that appearance of pleasure, which they feign and counterfeit, we should
be affrighted, as if we had seen Lions, or Tigers, which would tear us in
pieces, or Serpents, which would sting and poison us; And the like unto that,
which was done by the Servant of God, Volcon, would happen unto us. Zon. To.
13. ex Othone.
This man was a holy Priest, and very zealous and desirous to draw a certain
rich man to the service of God. He took his occasion by coming one day to
dinner unto him, and entering the house he said, Sir, what have we to eat? The
rich man replied, Trouble not your self, you shall eat the best the Town
affords. The holy man went straight to the Kitchen accompanied with many others
who followed him, and calling the Cook, commanded him to bring forth those
dishes which were provided. An admirable thing. No sooner were they brought in
and uncovered, but the Capons, Pheasants, Peacocks, and other dainties turned
into Toads and Serpents, with which the rich man remained amazed, and was
taught, that to give himself over to gluttony, and the immoderate pleasure of
his taste, was no less hurtful for him, than to feed on poisonful creatures, or
to have to do with Lions, Serpents, and Tigers. And it is certain, that Lions
and the most furious beasts have not killed so many, as have died by surfeits
and pleasing too much their pallats.

CAP. VI.
Of the littleness of things Temporal.

SEtting aside how vain the things of this World are, let us particularly
consider how little they are, and we shall perceive that though their vanity,
which swells and blows them up, seems to extend them, yet they are in
themselves poor, short and little, especially if we compare them with things
eternal. Beginning therefore with that temporal good, which seems to have the
greatest bulk; and makes the greatest noise, to wit Honor, Fame and Renown, we
shall see how narrow it is. Men desire that their fame should ring through the
whole World, and that all should know their names; and if they did, what are
all in respect of those in the other World, since the whole Earth in respect of
the Heavens is but a point? But who is he that can be known of all who live?
Millions of men, there are in the World, who know not whether there be an
Emperor of Germany, or a King of Spain. Let no man then afflict himself for
this vain honor; for even in his own Country all shall not know him. Many
thousand years are past, and no man knew thee, and of those, who shall be born
hereafter, few shall remember thee: and although thou remainest in the memory
of those, yet they also in the end must die, and with them thine and their own
memory must perish, and thou shall, as before thou were, continue a whole
eternity without being known or celebrated by any. And even now, whilst thou
live, there are not many who know thee, and of those most of them so bad,
that thou ought to be ashamed, that such mouths should praise thee, who
speak ill even of one another. Wherefore then do thou torment thy self for a
thing so short, so vile, and so vain? All these things are so certain, that
even the Gentiles acknowledged them. Hear only one, who was placed in the
highest degree of glory and dignity in the whole World, Marc. Anton. l. 3. p.
200.
since he was Lord of it, the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, who speaks in this
manner. Perhaps thou art sollicitous of honor. Behold how quickly oblivion
blots out all things. Behold a Chaos of eternity both before and after. How
vain is the noise of fame? how great inconstancy, and uncertainty of humane
judgments and opinions? in how narrow a compass are all things enclosed? The
World is but a point: and of it how small a corner is inhabited, and who and
how many are those in it who are to praise thee? And a little after he adds: He
who desires fame and honor after death, thinks not that he, who is to remember
him, shall shortly die also, and in the same manner he who is to succeed after
him, until that all memory, which is to be propagated by mortal men, be
blotted out. But suppose that those, who are to remember thee, were immortal,
what could it import thee being dead? nay even alive what could it profit thee
to be praised? all that is fair, is fair of it self, and is perfected within it
self, and to be praised is no part of the beauty. He therefore who is
celebrated is for that reason neither better nor worse. These Antidotes are
drawn by the Pagan Prince against the poison of ambition. Why therefore should
we Christians esteem any honor but that of God?

What shall I say of the vanity of those titles, which many have assumed
against all reason and justice, only to make themselves known in the World?
Let us judge how it will fare with us of Europe by those, who have taken titles
upon them in Asia. For if the fame of those in Asia arrive not to the knowledge
of us in Europe, no more shall ours in Europe to theirs in Asia. The name of
Echebar was thought by his Subjects to be eternal, and that all the World did
not only know, Jarricus in Thesau. Indic.
but fear him. But ask here in Europe, who he was, and no man has heard of
him; and demand now of the most learned, and few shall resolve you, unless
perchance he find here in my writing, that he reigned in Mogor. How few have
heard of the name of Vencatapadino Ragiu? he imagined that there was no man in
the World, who knew him not. The same thought had his Servants, and called him,
The Lord of Kings, and supreme Emperor. The titles which he arrogated to
himself, and put in his Edicts were these: The Spouse of good fortune, King of
great Provinces, King of the greatest Kings, and God of Kings, Lord of all the
Horsemen, Master of those who cannot speak, Emperor of three Emperors,
Conqueror of all he sees, and Preserver of all he conquers, Formidable unto
the eight Regions of the World, Lord of the Provinces which he overcomes,
Destroyer of the Mohammedan Armies, Disposer of the riches of Zeilan, He who cut
off the head of the invincible Viravalano, Lord of the East, South, North, and
West, and of the Sea, Hunter of Elephants, He that lives and glories in his
military valor. These titles of honor are enjoyed by the most excellent in
warlike forces Vencatapadino Ragiu, which rules and governs this World. How
many can tell me, before I declare it here, that he was the King of Narsinga?
If then these warlike and potent Princes are not known in Europe, No more shall
Charles the Fifth, and the Grand Captain, and many other Excellent men in arms
and litterature, which have flourished in these parts, be known in Asia and
Africa.

If we shall reflect upon the truth of those titles, which many arrogate unto
themselves, we shall perceive them all to be vain. How many are called Highness
and Excellence, who are of a base and abject spirit, and continue in mortal
sin, which is the meanest and lowest thing in the World? How many are called
Screnissimi, who have their understanding darkened, and their will perverted?
Others call themselves most Magnificent, with as much reason as Nero might be
called most Clement. This vanity has proceeded so far, that men have not
feared to usurp those titles, which only belong to God, and have thereupon
raised, great wars, and slain innumerable people. Wherefore St. John said,
that the Beast which rose out of the Sea, had upon his head names of Blasphemy;
and afterward that the purple Beast was full of names of Blasphemy in regard
of the blood that has been spilt in the World for those vain titles, and some
of them contrary unto the essence of God, as the calling of Rome Eternal, and
deifying her Emperors, which was no better than blasphemy. The things wherein
we have placed honor makes it most ridiculous. Some think they should be
valued and esteemed because they are strong: not remembering that a Bear, a
Bull, or a Sumpter-mule is stronger than they. Some because they are richly
clad become mighty proud and puffed up, not being ashamed to be more esteemed for
the work of a Mechanic Tailor, than for their virtuous actions. Others think
to be honored for their dishonours, bragging of their vices, murders, and
adulteries. Others boast of the nobility of their blood, without looking upon
virtue, and so make that a vice, which was to oblige them to noble actions,
converting that which was to be their honor into infamy, valuing themselves
more for being noble, than being Christians. A man is no greater than what he
is in the eyes of God; and the estimation which God has of us is not for being
born in a Palace, but for being reborn in the water of Baptism. What comparison
is there betwixt being born of noble lineage, and being born from the side of
Christ Jesus? The penitent Virgin Donna Sancha Carillo so often as she assisted
at Baptisms beheld Christ upon the Cross, To. in ejus vita lib. 2. c. 1.
with his side open, and the Child issuing forth: giving us to understand the
new birth we receive from the blood of Christ in our Christianity, for which
God esteems men more than for being born of sinful blood. This birth is of
dishonor, that of honor; this of sin, that of holiness; this of the flesh
which kills, that of the spirit which quickneth; by this we are the sons of
men, by that of God; by the birth of the flesh we are heirs of our fathers
fortunes, but much more of their miseries, for we are born sinners; by the
birth of Baptism we are the heirs of heaven, and for the present we receive
grace, and for the future glory. What an error is it then to value our selves
more for our humane birth, by which we are made sinners, than for our divine
birth, by which we are made just? How foolish were he, who being the Son of a
King and a Bondwoman should esteem himself more for being the Son of a Slave
than of a Monarch? More fool is he who values more the nobility of his blood in
being a Gentleman, than the nobility of his soul in being a Christian. Finally
all honors of the earth are but such, as Matathias told his Sons, dung and
corruption. St. Anselme compares those who seek after honors, to boys who
hunt after butter-flies: Isaias unto spiders, which disimbowel themselves in
framing a web, which is broken by the flies. Yet for all this poorness and
baseness of honors many souls have perished by them. If David cursed the
mountains of Gelboe because Saul and Jonathan died upon them, with much more
reason may we curse the high mountains of honor, upon which so many Souls have
been seen to perish?

2.
Let us now consider what Riches are, unto whom St. Gregory Nazianzen did much
honor, when he called them a precious dung. Truly in themselves they are not
much better. Gold and Silver, said Antoninus the Philosopher, In vita sua c. 9.
were nothing else than excrements and dregs of the Earth: that precious
Marbles were as corns and seggs in the feet; and generally he says of the
matter of all these things, that they are nothing but dust and corruption.
Plotinus said that Gold was nothing else but a viscuous water: others that it
was yellow earth. What are Precious stones, but shining pibles, some red, some
green, etc? Silk, but the slaverings of worms? the finest Hollands and purest
Linnens, but threads of certain plants? Other webbs of esteem are made of hair
of beasts: whereof if we should meet one in our meat, would make us loath it:
and many in their clothes are proud of them. Curious Furs what are they, but
the skins of contemptible vermin? Civet, but the sweat of a Cat near his most
noisome parts? Amber, but the uncleanness of a Whale, or something which the Sea
purges from it as not worthy to be preserved? Musk, but the putrified and
congealed blood of a poor Beast? What are Possessions, Palaces, Cities,
Provinces and spacious Kingdoms? They are indeed only toys of men, who,
though old, are but Children in esteeming so much of them; and this I say not
comparing them with things eternal. Lucian beholding them not from the Empyrial
Heaven, Lucian in Icaromenip.
but from the Sphere of the Moon, said, All Greece possessed not above four
fingers: and that Peloponesus was not bigger than a Lentil seed. To Seneca the
whole compass of the Earth seemed but a Point; and all the greatness there
only matter of sport. Hom. 24. in Mat.
St. Chrysostom more seriously looking upon the so much esteemed greatness of
this World, the brave Palaces, renowned Cities, large Kingdoms, compares them
to those little houses of sand or dirt made by Children for their
entertainment; which men stand by and laugh at, and oftentimes, if their
Parents or Masters find that it hinders them from learning of their lessons,
they strike them down with their feet, and destroy that in a moment, which has
cost the boys much time and labor. So God uses to deal with those, who
neglecting his service employ themselves in scraping together riches, enlarging
their possessions, building of Palaces, strong Forts, and walled Towns, which
he destroys with that ease, as if they were those little houses of sand made by
Children. And certainly more Children are they who set their hearts upon the
greatness of this short life, than those who busy themselves in walls of dirt.
This is of St. John Chrysostom; Hom. 14. de Avaritia.
Who in another place says, That if looking upon a Table, where we behold
painted a rich and powerful man, and a poor and contemptible Beggar, we neither
envy the one nor despise the other, because we know them to be shadows and no
truth: The same judgment we ought to make of the things themselves: for all
according to Scripture are little more than nothing. And as in a Comedy or
Farse it imports little who plays Alexander, and who the Beggar, since all are
equal when the Play is done: So are all after death. If Herod offered to a
dancing Girl, because she pleased him, the half of his Kingdom, what was the
whole worth? And Aman, who possessed great wealth, confessed he valued them as
nothing so long as Mardocchus did not reverence him.

The pleasures of our Pallat (if we consider them) what more vile, and nasty? A
Capon, a Hen, or a Duck, which is the ordinary food of rich men, if we but
observe their feeding, nothing would be more loathsome. If in your Cooking you
should fling into the pot worms, grubs, horse-dung, and other such stuff, no
body I believe would eat of it; and what is a Hen but a vessel filled with such
uncleanness? Other meats which are most coveted by our sensual Belly-gods, if
they should behold by what they are nourished would cause a loathing. The
Lamprey, which was the delicacy of the Romans, feeds but upon mud and sluch.
There is no meat more neat and clean, than bread, herbs, and water, the food
of Penitents.

How narrow is the Sphere of all our pleasures, which, besides the short time
that they endure, are mingled with wormwood of many pains and griefs, which
accompany, precede, and follow them? The Adulterer how many troubles and
dangers does he usually pass before he compass his desire? in the enjoying what
fears and suspicions assault him? and when it is past, (if he think seriously
of the sin) what remorse and repentance afflict him? and oftentimes how many
long diseases and sharp pains succeed that which lasted but a moment? Let us
compare our pleasures with the griefs which follow them, and we shall find
those far to surpass the other. The several sorts of gusts, whereof the touch
is capable, exceed not two or three; but the dictinct sorts of pains, which
afflict it, are without number: The pain of the Sciatica, the Stone, the Gout,
the Toothache, the Headache, besides innumerable other griefs and violences
most intense and horrible, which follow the tortures invented by Tyrants. The
greatest pleasure of the sense holds no comparison with the grief endured by
the separation of a member, or the pain suffered by him, who has the Stone,
Sciatica, or some violent disease in extremity.

3.
Well may be seen the poverty and insufficiency of the pleasures of this life,
in that our appetite still strives to enlarge them by inventing new and
artificial entertainments, which by their multitude may supply the defects of
those which are natural. Well may appear the irksome weariness of this life by
all our endeavors, which aim at nothing more, than to give it some ease and
relief. How many kinds of curious Stuffs have been woven to please us in our
Garments? what diversity of easy Beds and Couches have been found out? what
close Chairs, Litters, and Coaches have with excessive cost and charges been
invented? and the invention of them is no sooner known, but we pursue it with
that pride and haste, that they esteem themselves unhappy, who enjoy them last,
although their use be no ways necessary. Fra. Pruden. de Sandoval. Hist. De
Car. 5. P. 2. l. 28. See. 36.
The Bishop of Pampelona, Historiographer to Charles the Fifth, writes that in
the year 1546 there were no Coaches in Spain: and that much about the same time
one being brought thither for the Emperors own person, whole Cities ran out to
see it, and admired it as if it had been a Centaure or some Monster. And now
what more frequent? The invention, because easy, was so pleasing, that in few
years people of very ordinary condition began to use them: in so much as it was
thought fit within a very short time after to prohibit them; which is more to
be admired in respect of the simple and homely way which a little before was
used by the most eminent persons. They write of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who
for wealth and nobility is one of the greatest in Spain, that when he and the
Duchess went to visit our Ladies de Regla, a Church of great devotion in
Andalusia, they went in a Cart drawn with Oxen, the which was in the year 1540.
Shortly after within five or six years came the Coach into Spain whereof we
have spoken, and within nine or ten years there was such a multitude of them,
that by a public Edict in the year 1577 all Coaches with two horses were
forbidden, because many of inferior condition used them both to the
destruction of many serviceable horses, and to the prejudice of their own
wealth and modesty. With such haste does our humane appetite run after what it
conceives commodious, piecing out with art that which seemed short in nature.
The same happened, as Dio Cassius reports, with Litters, which were brought
into Rome in the time of Julius Caesar: but quickly, as Suetonius reports, it
was necessary for the same Julius Caesar to forbid them.

The same has and does pass in costly Apparel, which is so equal a disorder,
that Tully doubts, whether is more indecent for the nature of man, The use of
Coaches, or the curiosity of Garments, and calls them both impudent and
shameless; And truly, as they are used by many, they are no less. The same
Cicero said, that the Roman Soldiers counted their Arms as the members of
their bodies, because they were no less troubled with the loss of the one than
the other. The same account many make of their neat and curious garments: and
are no less sensible if their clothes chance to be disordered, than if they
had a member broken or out of joint. Macrobius writes of Quintus Hortensius a
Roman Senator, that he was so curious in ordering his Garments by a large
Looking-glass made on purpose, and disposing the plates of his Gown, which he
gathered after into a quaint knot after the Roman fashion, that being Consul,
and going into the Forum in all this nice formality, accompanied with his
Colleague, it happened that in a great press and crowd of people his fellow
Consul chanced to disorder a little the plates of his Gown: which he took so
hainously, that he commenced an action of offense against him, which the Romans
called de Injuria, as if he had broken his arm or some other member. What shall
I say of Ornaments so costly and so foolish, that even the World it self seems
to condemn them, in regard that being now glutted with the Garnitures of silk
and gold, it falls to make Embroideries of straw: as if it had already learnt
and understood, that for the use of Garments it is one and the same thing to
adorn them with straw, as with gold and silver; and for this reason Laces and
Points made of straw are made use of in lieu of gold and silver?

But after the diverse Inventions of Apparel, who can reckon the several ways
invented to please our senses? The mixture of several Meats for the taste? the
confection of Sweet-pasts and Persumes for the smell? the melodious Music of
diver; Instruments for the hearing? the Games, Pictures, and Shows for the
sight, which Entertainments have been exhibited even with the spilling of
humane blood? Witness the Gladiators of Rome, and the Bulls of Spain. All this
variety of pleasures, which the appetite has invented, are an evident sign of
the poverty and insufficiency of nature, since all this multitude of artificial
contents does not satisfy it, nor in any sort equal our natural griefs.

For so slight a matter is lost a thing so great, as is Eternity. For these we
abolish the Law of God from our hearts, and displease our Redeemer, who would
reward the contempt of those poor and transitory pleasures of the earth with
great and special favors from heaven. If we will not therefore despise them
for what they are in themselves, let us at least mortify our affections for
what is promised us hereafter, and because it is most agreeable to God, and
profitable for our selves, as may appear by this story related by Glycas.
Glycas and ex eo Rad. in Aula Sancta cap. 12.
A certain Anchorite had lived forty years in the desert, retired wholly from
the world, and applying himself with great observance of his profession to the
salvation of his Soul. A desire at last entered into his mind to know who in
the world was equal to himself in mortification. Whereupon he besought God to
reveal it unto him; and it pleased his Divine Majesty to grant his request, and
it was answered him from heaven, that the Emperor Theod^sius, notwithstanding
that he was Master of the greatest glory of the World, yet was neither
inferior unto him in humility, nor in overcoming himself. The Hermit with
this answer moved by God repaired unto the Court, where he found easy access
unto the courteous and religious Emperor, unto whom the Servants of God, and
such as were famous for sanctity of life were always welcome. Not long after
he found means to speak unto him, and know his holy exercises. At first he
only acquainted him with common virtues, That he gave large Alms, That he wore
hair-cloth, That he fasted often, That he observed conjugal chastity, and That
he caused justice to be exactly observed. These virtues seemed well unto the
Hermit, especially in such a person: but yet judged all this to be short of
himself, who had done those things with greater perfection; For he had
renounced all, and given all he possessed for Christ, which was more than to
give alms; he never knew woman in his life, which was more than to observe
conjugal chastity, he never did injury or injustice unto any, which was more
than to cause it to be kept to others; his hair-cloth and fasts from all sorts
of dainties were continual, which was more than to abstain some days from
flesh. Wherefore altogether unsatisfied he further importuned the Emperor,
beseeching him to conceal nothing from him; That it was the Divine will that he
should acquaint him with what he did, and that therefore he was sent unto him
from God. The Emperor thus urged said unto him, Know then that when I assist
at the horse-courses, and spectacles in the Circus, where my presence is
required, I so withdraw my mind from those vanities, that though my eyes be
open I see them not. The Hermit remained astonished at so particular a
mortification in so great an Emperor, and perceived that Scepters and Purple
could not hinder a devout Prince from mortification of his affections, and
meriting much with God Almighty. Theodosius further added; Know also that I
sustain my self by my labor; for I transcribe certain parchments into a fair
hand, which being sold, the price pays for my food. With this example of
poverty amongst so much riches, and temperance in the midst of so great
dainties, the Hermit was wholly amazed, and learned that abstinence from ease
and pleasures of this life, was that which made this religious Prince so
gracious and acceptable unto our Lord. Finally so perverse are the delights of
the World, that, though lawful, yet they hinder much our spiritual proficiency,
and if unlawful, are the total ruin of our Souls.

4.
What shall we then say of the Royal and Imperial dignity, which seems in
humane judgment to embrace all the happiness of the World? Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, all are contained in it. But how small is a Kingdom, since the whole
Earth in respect of the Heavens is no bigger than a point? and certainly
neither Honors, Riches, or Pleasures are greater or more secure than we have
described them. Let us hear St. Chrysostom speak of the Emperors of his time.
Hom. 66. ad pop.
Look not upon the Crown, says he, but upon that tempest of cares which
accompany it. Fix not thy eyes upon the purple, but upon the mind of the King
more sad and dark than the purple it self. The Diadem does not more encompass
his head, than cares and suspicions his soul. Look not at the Squadions of his
Guard, but at the Armies of molestations which attend him; for nothing can be
so full of cares as the Palaces of Kings. Every day they expect not one death,
but many; nor can it be said how often in the night their hearts tremble with
some sudden fright, and their souls almost seem to forsake their bodies, and
this in the time of peace. But when a war is kindled, what life so miserable
as theirs? how many dangers happen unto them, even from their Friends and
Subjects? The floor of the Royal Palace is drowned in the blood of their
Kindred. If I shall mention those which have happened heretofore and now of
late, thou will easily know them. This suspecting his Wife tied her naked in
the mountains, and left her to be devoured by wild beasts, after she had been a
Mother of diverse Kings. What a life had that man; it being impossible he should
execute such a revenge, unless his sick heart had been eaten and consumed with
jealousy? This put to death his only Son. This killed himself being taken by
the Tyrant. This murdered his Nephew after he had made him his companion in
the Empire. This his Brother, who died by poison; and his innocent Son ended
his life only for what he might have been. Of those Princes which followed,
one of them was with his Slaves and Chariots miserably burnt alive; and it is
not possible for words to express the calamities which he was forced to endure.
And he, which now raigns, has he not since he was crowned suffered many
troubles, dangers, griefs and treasons? but in Heaven it is not so. After this
manner St. Chrysostom paints forth the greatest fortune of the World, the
Imperial Majesty, which must needs be little, since it is so unhappy, that it
suffers not to enjoy those frail goods of the earth in security, but makes the
possessors oftentimes perish before them. But it is far otherwise in Heaven,
the Palace and House of God; where the just without mixture or counterpoise of
misery are to enjoy those goods eternal, as we shall see in its proper place.

Lastly, let us learn from hence not to admire the greatness of this World, nor
to desire the benefit of it; Which lesson was well taught by St. Spiridion unto
his Disciple, who accompanying him one time unto the Court of the Emperor,
suffered himself to be transported with those things which he beheld. The
greatness and luster of the Court, The rich Garments, Jewels, Pearls, and
precious Stones dazzled the eyes of the raw and unexperienced youth: but above
all the sight of the Emperor, seated in his Imperial Throne with so much
splendor and greatness, almost drew him besides himself. St. Spiridion willing
one day to correct his error, asked him, (as if he had not known it,) Which of
those were the Emperor. His Disciple not reaching his intention, pointing with
his finger, simply told him, That was he. And wherefore replied the Saint, is
this man more to be esteemed than the rest? is it perhaps because he is more
virtuous? or is it because he is adorned with more exterior luster and bravery?
is not he likewise to die as well as the most poor and unknown beggar? is he
not to be buried? is he not as well as the rest of men to appear before the
just Judge? Wherefore then do thou value those things which are to pass, as
if they were to last for ever? Wherefore do thou admire that which has no
consistence? It were fitter for thee to place thy eyes and heart upon things
eternal and incorruptible, and to be enamoured of those, which are not subject
to change and death.

The same Disciple of Spiridion, being now Bishop, traveled one time with his
Master, who was then also Archbishop of Trimitunte; and as they came to a
certain place, where the fields were very fertile and pleasant, the Disciple
being much taken with them, began to cast within himself, how he might compass
an Inheritance in that good Country, and lay it to his Church. The Saint, who
understood his thoughts, gave him this sweet and gentle reprehension. To what
purpose, dear Brother, do thou trouble thy thoughts with things so vain and
of so little substance? Wherefore do thou desire Land and Vineyards to
labor and cultivate? do thou not know that these things are only of an
outward appearance, and within are nothing, or at least are worth nothing? We
have an Inheritance in Heaven, which none can take from us; There we have a
house not made by the hands of men. Look after those goods, and begin now even
before the time by the virtue of hope to enjoy them. Those goods are of that
condition, that if you once possess them, and make your self Lord of them, you
shall be then their eternal heir, and your Inheritance shall never pass to
others. Let one place himself in the point of death, and let him from thence,
on the one part behold the littleness of all things temporal, which are now
past, and on the other the greatness of Eternity, whereinto he enters, which
shall never pass, and he shall easily discover, how all the greatness, and
commodities of this life are for their littleness and short endurance rather
worthy of laughter than admiration.

CAP. VII.
How miserable a thing is this Temporal Life.

LEt us also consider more particularly the substance and bulk of humane life,
which we so much esteem, and we shall not a little wonder, how so many and so
great misfortunes can happen in so short a space. Whereupon Phalaris the
Agregentin was used to say, That if a man before he was born, knew what he was
to suffer in life, he would not be born at all. For this reason some
Philosophers repenting that they lived, would blaspheme Nature, railing at it
with a thousand complaints and injuries, because to the best of living things
it had given so bad and wretched a life: not reaching so high as to know that
this was an effect of the fault of man, and not a fault of Nature or Divine
Providence. Pliny would say, That Nature was but a Stepmother to mankind; and
Silenus being demanded, what was the greatest happiness man was capable of,
said, Not to be born, or die quickly. The great Philosopher and Emperor Marcus
Aurelius considering humane misery spoke in this discreet manner. Aurel. Anton.
in sua Philosoph.
The war of this life is dangerous, and the end and issue of it so terrible
and dreadful, that I am certain, that if any of the ancient should rise again,
and recount unto us faithfully, and give us a view of his life past from the
time he came out of his Mothers womb unto his last gasp, the body relating at
large the pains and griefs it has suffered, and the heart the alarms it has
received from fortune, that all men would be amazed at a body, that had endured
so much, and at a heart, that had gained so great a victory, and dissembled it.
I here confess freely, and although to my shame, yet for the profit, that may
redound to future ages, that in the space of fifty years, which I have lived, I
have desired to prove the utmost of all the vices and excesses of this life, to
see if the malice of man had any bounds and limits; and I find after long and
serious inquisition, that the more I eat, the more is my hunger: and the more I
drink, the greater is my thirst: if I sleep much, the more is my desire to
sleep: the more I rest, the more weary and indisposed I find my self: the more
I have, the more I covet, and the more I grasp the less I hold. Finally, I
attain to nothing, which does not surfeit and cloy me, and then presently I
abhor it, and desire something else. This is the judgment of Philosophers
concerning the miseries of man's life. The same is that of the Wiseman, Eccl. 3.
when he says, All the days of man are full of grief and misery; neither do
his thoughts rest at night. Stob. ser. 96.
With reason did Democritus say, That the life of man was most miserable, since
those who seek for Good, hardly find it, and Evil comes of it self, and enters
our gates unsought for; insomuch as our life is always exposed unto
innumerable dangers, injuries, losses, and so many infirmities, that, according
to Pliny, and many Physicians Greeks and Arabians, there were more than thirty
several sorts of new diseases discovered in the space of a few years; and now
every day they find out others, and some so cruel, as they are not to be named
without horror. Neither speak I only of the infirmities, but of their
remedies. For even griefs known and common are cured by cauterizing with fire,
by sawing off a member, by tripanizing the scull, or drawing bones from it.
Some have been cured with the opening the belly, and drawing forth the guts.
Others by reason of the great malice of the disease are cured with so strange
diets, that the sick persons (as Cornelius Celsus writes) have for very thirst
drunk their Urine, and eaten their Plasters for raging hunger. Others are
prescribed to eat Snakes, Mice, Worms, and other loathsome Vermin. But above
all the cure of Palaeologus the Second, Emperor of Constantinople, was most
cruel and extravagant: whose infirmity after a years continuance found no other
remedy but to be continually vexed and displeased, his Wife and Servants, who
most desired his health, having no ways to restore it, but by disobedience,
still crossing and opposing him in what he most desired; a harsh cure for a
Prince. If remedies be so great evils, what are the infirmities? The sickness
of Angelus Politianus was so vehement, that he knocked his head against the
walls: That of Mecoenas so strange, that he slept not, nor closed his eyes in
three whole years: That of Antiochus so pestilential, that his loathsome smell
infected his whole Army, and his body (as has been said) flowed with lice and
vermin. Consider here the end of Majesty, when the greatest power of the Earth
cannot defend it self against so noisome and so contemptible an enemy. In the
same manner Feretrina, Queen of the Barcaeans, all the flesh of her body turned
into maggots and grubbs, that swarming every where at last consumed her. Some
have had serpents bred in their arms and thighs, which have devoured their
flesh even whilst they lived. With reason then does man enter into the World
with tears, as divining the many miseries, which he shall have time enough to
suffer, but not to lament, and therefore begins to weep so early.

. 2.
Strange Pestilences.

Vide Pet. Bon. l. 3. Theatr. mundi.
WHat shall I say of those strange pestilential infirmities, which have
destroyed whole Cities, and Provinces? Many Authors write that in
Constantinople there happened so strange a Plague, that those, who were
infected with it, thought they were killed by their next neighbors, and
falling into this frenzy died raging with fear and imagination that they were
murdered by their friends. In the time of Heraclius there was so mortal a
Pestilence in Romania, that in a few days many thousands died, and the greater
part of those, who were struck, flung themselves into the River to assuage that
excessive heat, which like a fire burnt their entrails. Thucidides a Greek
Author writes, that in his time there was such a corruption of the air, that an
infinite of people died, and no remedy could be found to mitigate that
disaster; and which was most strange, if any by good hap recovered, they
remained without memory at all of what was past: in so much as the Fathers
forgot their Sons, and Husbands their Wives. Marcus Aurelius, an Author worthy
of credit, speaks of a Plague in his time so great in Italy, that it was easier
to number the quick than the dead. The Soldiers of Avidius Cassius being in
Seleucia, a City within the Territories of Babylon, entered into the Temple of
Apollo, and finding there a Coffer, which they imagined might contain some
treasure, opened it, from whence issued so pestilential and corrupted an air,
that it infected the whole Region of Babylon, and from thence passed into
Greece, and so to Rome, still corrupting the air as it went, in so much as the
third part of mankind remained not alive.

The calamities of the times nearer ours have been no less. For as our sins
decrease not, so the justice of God in punishing us slakes not. A year after
Francis King of France was married to Donna Leonora of Austria, there reigned
in Germany strange infirmity; Those, who were infected with it, sweating forth
a pestilential humor died within four and twenty hours. It began in the West,
but passing afterward into Germany it raged with such fury, as if it meant to
extirpate all mankind; for before any remedy could be found, there died so
many thousands of people, that many Towns and Provinces remained desert. Such
was the putrefaction of the air, that it left almost nothing alive; and those
few, that remained, in sign of penance, and to avert the wrath of God, went
signed with red Crosses. They write that it was so violent in England, that not
only men died, but birds left their nests, their eggs, and young ones, the
wild beasts quitted their Dens, and snakes and moles were seen to go in
companies and troops, not being able to endure the poison enclosed in the
bowels of the earth; and many creatures were found in heaps dead under trees,
their bodies broken out into blanes and botches. The year 1546. the last of
May began in Stix (a City of Provence) a most mortal pestilence, which lasted
nine months; in which died an infinite number of people of all ages; in so
much as the Churchyards were so full of dead bodies, as there was no room left
to bury others. The greatest part of those, who were infected, the second day
became frantic and flung themselves out of windows, or into wells; others
fell into a flux of blood at the nose, which if they stanched they instantly
died. Married women became abortive, or at four months end they, and what they
went with died, whom they found covered over with spots something bluish on
one side, which seemed like blood sprinkled over their body. The evil was so
great, that Fathers forsook their Children, and Women their Husbands; Riches
did not preserve them from dying of hunger, a pot of water being not sometimes
to be had for money. If they found by chance what to eat, the fury of the
sickness was such, as they often died with the morsel in their mouths. The
contagion became so great, that many took it by being only looked upon; and
the air of the City was so corrupted by the grievous heat of this pestilential
evil, that wheresoever the steam of it came, it raised great blisters, mortal
sores and carbuncles. O how monstrous and horrible a thing it is, to hear the
relation of the Physician, who was appointed for the cure and government of the
sick? This infirmity, says he, was so sharp and perverse, that neither
Bleeding, Purging, Treacles, nor other Cordials could stay it; it killed and
bore down all before it, in so much as the only remedy, which the infected
persons hoped for, was death, of which being certain, so soon as they found
themselves ill, they began to make their Winding-sheets; and there were ten
thousand who wore them whilst they yet lived, knowing certainly that the
remedy and end of their evil was to die: and in this manner stood expecting the
departure of the soul, and the fearful separation of the two so dear friends
and companions: which he affirms to have seen in many persons; especially in
one woman, who calling him at her window to appoint something for her
infirmity, he saw sewing her Winding Sheet; and not long after those who were
appointed to interre the dead, entering the house found her stretched out upon
the floor, her Winding Sheet not yet finished. To all this is humane life
subject. Let those therefore who are in health and jollity fear what may befall
them.

3.
Notable Famines.

FAmine is no less a misery of man's life than Pestilence, which not only
particular persons, but whole Provinces have often suffered. Such was that
which afflicted the Romans, when Alaricus that arch-Enemy of Mankind after the
destruction of all Italy besieged Rome. The Romans came to that poverty,
famine, and want of all things, that having nothing left of that which men
commonly use to eat, they began to feed on Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Dormice,
and other vermin, where they could lay hold on them; and when those failed,
they eat one another. A horrible condition of humane nature, that when God
suffers us to fall into those straights, our necessity forces us to feed upon
our own kind. Nay, Fathers spare not their Sons, nor Women those, whom they
have brought forth. The same happened in the Siege of Jerusalem, as Eusebius
recounts in his Ecclesiastical History. At the Siege of Numantia, when Scipio
had cut off all provisions from entering the Town, the Inhabitants fell into
that mortal and dog-like famine, that every day they sallied forth to catch
Romans, as if they had hunted after wild beasts. Those whom they took they fed
upon their flesh, and drunk their blood, as if they had drunk fountain water or
fed upon Kid. They pardoned none; but such as fell into their hands were cut in
quarters, and sold by pieces publicly in the Butchery; in so much as the flesh
of a dead Roman was of greater value than the ransom of a live one. In the
fourth book of Kings there is mention made of a Famine in Samaria, in the time
of Elizeus the Prophet, which much exceeds this. The want of food was so great,
that the head of an Ass was sold for 80 pieces of silver, and the fourth part
of a small measure of Pigeons dung for 5 pieces. The most lamentable and
inhumane was, that having spent all their provision, Women eat their own
Children; and one Woman complained to the King of Israel, that her neighbor
had broken an Agreement made betwixt them, which was, That they should first
eat her Child, and, that done, the others. I, says she, have complied with my
obligation, and we have already eaten mine, and now she has hid hers, and
denies me my part. Which the King hearing rent his garments, and was struck
with unspeakable sorrow. Josephus in the seventh Book of the Wars of the Jews
relates a story much like unto this, Joseph. l. 7. de bell. Jud. c. 2.
but executed with more fury, and after a more strange manner. There was, says
he, in Jerusalem, when it was besieged, a Lady rich and noble, who had hid in a
house of the City the most part of her wealth, and of the rest lived sparingly
and with great moderation. But she was not suffered to do so long; for the
Soldiers of the Garrison discovering her stock in a short time bereaved her
both of what she had within doors and without; and if she chanced at any time
to be relieved by friends, or beg some little thing to assuage her hunger, they
would take it from her, and tear the morsel out of her mouth. Seeing her self
therefore destitute of all hope or counsel, and certain to die of hunger, and
no possible remedy left for her necessities, she began to arm her self against
the laws of Nature, and beholding the Infant which hung at her breast, she
cried out in this manner; O unhappy Son of a more unhappy Mother! how shall I
now dispose of thee? where shall I preserve thee? things are driven to that
exigent, that though I save thy life from famine, thou art certain to be a
Slave to the Romans. Better it is, my Son, that thou now sustain thy Mother who
gave thee being, and strike a terror into those cursed Soldiers, who have
left me no other way of subsisting; better that thou become an argument of pity
unto future ages, and raise sorrow in hearts not yet born. At these words she
cut the throat of her tender Infant, divided it in the middle, roasted one half
and eat it, and laid aside the rest for another meal. She had no sooner ended
this lamentable Tragedy, but the Soldiers entered; who smelling the roasted
flesh began to threaten the Woman with death if she discovered not her store.
But she distracted with rage and horror of her act, and desiring nothing more
than to accompany her dead Infant, without fear or being abashed at all replied
in this manner; Peace friends, we will share like brothers: and saying this,
she fetched the half Child, and placed it upon the Table before them. At which
hideous sight the Soldiers being amazed and confounded conceived so great
horror and compassion in their hearts, that they were not able to utter one
word; but she to the contrary staring upon them with a wild countenance full
of fury and distraction, with a hoarse and broken voice, spoke in this manner;
Why, how now Masters, how comes this to pass? is not this my Son, the fruit of
my own body? is not this my act? why do ye not then eat, since I have begun
unto you? are you perhaps more nice than a Woman? are you more scrupulous than
the Mother which bore it? for shame fall too; It is I who have eaten of it
first, and it is I will bear you company in eating of the rest. But they not
being able to behold so horrible a spectacle fled out of doors, and left the
miserable Mother with that little which remained of her Son and all her wealth.

Unto these stories I shall add one more lamentable, in which will clearly
appear unto what calamity humane life stands exposed. It is written by William
Paradin, a man of great learning and diligence, in a Treatise of things
memorable in his time. He relates it thus. In the year 1528 men were grown so
dissolute in their lives, and so given over to all sorts of wickedness, that
notwithstanding those cruel and bloody wars which then reigned in most parts
of Europe, they humbled not themselves, nor converted unto their Lord God, but
became every day worse, and fell into that extremity of vice and mischief, that
God being offended let loose the sharp arrows of his wrath and vengeance
against the Realm of France with such fury, that all men thought the final
destruction of that Kingdom was then come. The want of corn, wine, and other
fruits of the earth, and the miseries and calamities of those times were such,
as no Records ever mention the like. For five continued years, beginning at the
year 1528, the four Seasons of the year never kept their due and natural
course, but were in that confusion and disorder, that sometimes Autumn came in
Spring, and Spring in Autumn, Summer in Winter, and Winter in Summer; only the
unnatural Summer seemed to overcome the rest of the parts of the year, and the
heat doubled his forces against his enemy the cold: insomuch as in December,
January, and February, when the cold ought to season and mellow the earth with
frost and snow, the heat was so excessive, that the ground was parched and
burnt up; which was a most prodigious thing to behold. In all those five years
there was no two days together of hard weather: neither those so intense, as
to glase the waters with the least show of ice, by which excessive heat were
bred in the bowels of the earth an infinite number of Vermin, Snails, Grubs,
Worms, Lizards, and other creatures, which eat up the young and tender corn in
the herb, and much of it was devoured and consumed in the husk before it
sprung up: which was the reason, that Wheat, which uses to sprout up diverse
sterns from one grain, hardly put forth one or two, and those so abortive, weak
and dry, that in reaping time they gathered not half so much as they sowed, and
sometimes nothing at all. This Famine lasted without cease or intermission five
whole years; a thing so lamentable, that it is impossible for them to imagine
who have not seen it. The people were so oppressed and afflicted with this
mortal hunger, and many other evils which accompanied it, that it was pitiful
to behold. For many who were rented men, and reasonable well to pass, left
their Houses and Granges, and went from door to door like wanderers, begging an
alms for Gods sake. Every day the number of the poor increased, in such a
manner as it was fearful to behold them, going up and down in troops impossible
to remedy, and dangerous to suffer. For besides the fear and hazard of being
robbed, to which necessity might without sin enforce them, the air was filled
with stench and corruption from their breaths and bodies. To assuage their
hunger, they filled themselves with all sorts of herbs good and bad, wholesome
and poisonous; they ransackt all Gardens and Orchards, not sparing so much as
the roots and stalks of Cabbages, and of them found not enough to satisfy
their ravenous appetites; and failing of Pot-hearbs in the Gardens, they fell
upon those which grew wild in the Fields. Many of them boiled great caldrons
full of Mallows and Thistles, mingling with them a little Bran if they could
get it; and with this stuffed their bellies like Porks. It was a wonderful
thing to see their many exquisite inventions of making bread of seeds of
Herbs, of Roots, of Fearn, of Acorns, of Hay-seeds, forced and taught by
hunger, the Mistress of the sloathful: verifying that, which is commonly said,
Want and Necessity makes men seek out remedies not thought on, as it made those
miserable people, seeing Hogs feed upon the roots of Fearn, to try whether
they could make bread of it, robbing the food even from Swine to sustain
themselves; Which evidently demonstrates the wrath of God against the impurity
and filthiness of our sins, since he permits men to fall into that necessity,
as to feed and feast with those unclean creatures. From hence were engendered
many sorts of infirmities: great companies of Men, Women, Boys and Girls,
young and old, of all ages, went up and down the streets naked, pale, shivering
with cold, some swollen like Drums with Dropsies, others stretched upon the ground
half dead, and ready to draw the last gasp, and of such the Stables and
Dunghils were full; others trembled as if they were infected with quicksilver,
so as they appeared more like unto Ghosts and Fantoms than living men. But
above all the greatest pity was to behold thousands of Women, feeble, pale, and
hunger-starved, charged with an infinite number of their poor languishing
Infants, which dried up with hunger, could not so much as weep or demand
succor from their sorrowful and afflicted Mothers, who could only help them
with their pitiful and compassionate looks, of which rivers of tears which ran
from their eyes were a sufficient witness; and this certainly was the most
lamentable Scene of this miserable Tragedy. The same William Paradin writes,
that in Lonhans, a Town of Burgundy, he beheld a poor woman, who with all the
diligence, she could use, had gotten a little morsel of black bread, which when
she was about to have eaten, her Infant unto whom she gave suck, a boy of about
a year old, who had never until then eaten bit, snatched it out of her hand: at
which the sorrowful Mother admiring, beheld with what greediness he devoured
that little piece of dry bread, as savourly as if it had been a March-pane;
which when he had eaten, the Mother picked up the crumbs that fell from his
mouth, intending to eat them her self, but the Infant fell into so great
unquietness, and so violent a fit of crying, that she was forced to leave them;
and truly it seemed the Child knew the scarcity of that kind of food, and was
therefore unwilling of a companion. What heart so hard and inhumane, that would
not burst at the sight of so rueful a spectacle? The same Author further
writes, That in another Village near unto this, two women not finding any thing
wherewith to assuage their hunger, filled themselves with Sea Onions, not
knowing the property of that venomous herb, which in such a manner poisoned
them, that the extremities of their hands and feet became green as the skin of
a Lizard, and a corrupt matter flowed from betwixt their nails and flesh, for
which not receiving help so soon as was requisite, they both died. There was no
creature which became not an executioner of the wrath of God. The poor
laborers left their Lands and Inheritances in hope to be relieved by the Rich,
who had long since heaped up great quantities of corn in their Granaries: from
whom at the first they bought bread at excessive rates; afterward, money
failing, they sold and pawned their Lands and Inheritances for vile and low
prices: for that which was worth an hundred crowns was sold for ten. Such was
the abominable and greedy avarice of the Usurers, as if it were not enough for
the poor to be scourged by the wrath of God, and to have the Elements and
Creatures declared their enemies, but Men themselves must become their Hangmen,
and persecute and afflict their own kind. The Extortioners perceiving the
desired occasion, which the perverseness of the time offered them, lost it not,
but had Brokers and Factors in the Villages to buy the Inheritances of the poor
at what price they pleased; which the afflicted willingly parted with, that
they might have wherewith to eat; and together with it sold their Cattle and
Housholdstuffe, and the very necessaries of their persons: and would with all
their hearts have pawned their bowels to have had wherewith to feed them.
Besides this, many of them saw not their Wheat measured, and were forced to
take it as the Sellers pleased, who were no juster in their measure than the
price. There were some Usurers, that bought a piece of Land for less money than
the Notaries would take for drawing the Writings. After all this the poor
Peasants saw themselves, their Wives and Children cast out of their Houses, and
to die in Hospitals. All those miseries, which fall not under imagination, are
found in the life of man.

. 4.
Evils of War.

GReater than all these calamities, is that of War, which of the three
Scourges of God, wherewith he uses to chastise Kingdoms, is the most terrible,
as well because it is commonly followed by the other two, as for that it brings
along with it greater punishments, and, which is worse, greater sins, whereof
plagues are free, in which all endeavor to be reconciled with God, and even
those who are in health dispose themselves for death. The Pestilence is sent by
God, who is all goodness and mercy, not passing through the hands of men, as
wars do. Wherefore David held it for a mercy that his people suffered
pestilence and not war, because he judged it better to fall into the hands of
God then men. Famine also, although it brings with it some sins, yet it lessens
others; though it be accompanied with many thefts, yet it suits not so much
with pride and vanity; neither does it permit so many sorts of vices as are
occasioned by War. To represent the calamities of War, it shall be
sufficient to instance in some of those which have been inflicted upon Germany
in our own times in these late Wars. A book whereof was set forth in another
Country: whose Argument or Title I repeat not, (it is known) but it could not
give an account of all. I shall only pick out some few of them, setting apart
those places, which were dispeopled and burnt, whereof there were 2000 Towns
only in the Dukedom of Bavaria. The cruelties, which the conquering Soldiers
inflicted upon the poor people, only to discover where their wealth lay, are
such as were never heard of. One of their torments was, to tie a piece of match
about their foreheads, and with a stick so to straighten and screw their
temples, that the blood would often burst forth, and sometimes the very eyes
and brains would start forth of their broken sculls. Others they left upon the
floors of their houses, or stretched out upon a table bound hand and foot, and
so exposed them to be eaten by hungry Dogs and Cats; and it often happened that
the starved Cats would tear their bellies, and feed upon their tripes and
entrails. Others they hung up by the hands some distance from the ground, and
kindled a fire under them: Unto others they chopped off their noses and ears with
Chisels, and wore them in their hatbands, holding it for a great gallantry, and
him for the bravest man, who was the cruellest beast. Unto others they poured
water into their mouths by a Tunnel, until they had filled their bodies like a
Tun, and then sat or stamped upon their bellies, until they made the water gush
out at their mouths and nostrils: Others they tied unto a post, and flead them
alive like a St. Bartholmew. From some they plucked out gobbets of flesh with
pincers; others they quartered and tore in pieces alive. They forced diverse
women, and after cut off their arms. Many were so barbarous as to eat
Children; and one was known to take a small Infant, and holding it by one leg
with his left hand to tear it in sunder with his right, and so to eat and suck
the blood of it. The Prisoners which they took they bound not their hands, but
made holes through their arms, and putting cords through them, dragged them
after their horses. The bodies of men, after that they had drawn out their guts
and entrails, served as Mangers wherein to feed their horses. They robbed all,
killed and burned men in their houses; and some grave Magistrates, whose lives
they spared, were made to serve and wait bare-headed at Table upon the meanest
Soldiers. Many, that they might not see and suffer those miseries, poisoned
themselves; and diverse Maids, flying from the Soldiers lust, cast themselves
headlong into rivers and were drowned. To these miseries of War were added
Pestilence and Famine. Those who fled from the Enemy died of the Plague or
hunger in the open fields: and there was none to bury them, but dogs and
ravenous birds which eat them. Neither had those who died in houses a more
honorable Sepulcher, but were likewise devoured by rats and vermin, who were
grown so bold, as sometime, if they were but one or two in a house, to eat them
whilst they lived, their weakness being such as they were not able to defend
themselves. But the men in many places, were revenged of this affront, and eat
the rats, of which there were public Shambles, where they were sold at high
prices. Those Cities were esteemed happy which had such dainties to sell; in
other places nothing was to be had, but what every one provided by his own
diligence. They often went together by the ears about a Rat, and cut one
another in pieces in the quarrel: and happy was he that got a quarter of such
loathsome vermin. Horseflesh was a great dainty, and they esteemed themselves
very fortunate, who knew where to light on a dead Pack-horse. Certain women
found a dead Wolf all putrified and full of worms, and fed upon it as savourly,
as if it had been a Kid. The bodies of Malefactors who hung upon Gibbets were
not secure, nor did the dead escape that were buried in their Graves; both were
stolen in the night to sustain the living. Neither were they free from this
danger who were alive; for two women were known to kill a third and eat her.
After such fresh examples it will not need to call to memory the calamities of
former Wars. What is said is sufficient to express the miseries, which are
incident to humane life.

. 5.
Miseries occasioned by humane Passions.

ABove all, the greatest calamities of Man's life are not Pestilence, Famine,
or War, but humane Passions not subordinate to reason. Wherefore St. John
Chrysostom says; Chrysostom. in Mat.
Amongst all evils, Man is the most evil. Every Beast has an evil, which is
proper and peculiar unto it, but Man is all Evils. The Devil dares not approach
a just man: but Man dares despise him. And in another place to the same
purpose. Man is compared to the beasts of the field. Hom. in Ascen.
It is worse to be compared to a beast, than to be one; for it is no fault to
be born an unreasonable creature, but to be endued with reason, and to be
compared to a beast is a fault of the will; so as our untamed passions make us
worse than beasts. It is not credible what one man suffers from the passions of
another. What did David suffer from the envy of Saul? Exile, hunger, dangers
and war. Naboth sooner lost his life by the covetousness of Achab, than he
could have done by a plague. Elias was more afflicted with the desire of
revenge in Jezabel, than if he had had the pestilence; for that made him weary
of his life, and this would but have made him weary of his disease. What
Plagues, or Wars, or Tortures were like the Ambition of Herod, which
destroyed so many thousand Children? What contagion was more mortal than the
cruelty of Nero and other Tyrants, who took away the lives of so many innocent
people to satisfy their fears or fancies? Wherefore Tully says; Our desires
are unsatiable, Cicero de finibus.
and do not only destroy particular Persons, but entire Families, and ruin
the whole Commonwealth. From desires spring hatred, dissentions, discords,
seditions and wars. What sorts of death and torments have not hatred and
humane cruelty found out? What sorts of poison has not the passion of Man
invented? Orpheus, Orus, Medesius, Heliodorus, and other Authors have found
five hundred several ways of giving poison hiddenly: which have since been
increased by others. But in respect of what is this day known and practiced
they were ignorant. Nothing is now secure, since poison has been given even in
the shaking of hands, when men were to be reconciled and made friends. Only in
the sense of hearing it has not yet found a door to enter: all the rest of the
senses it has mastered; with the smell of a Rose, with the sight of a Letter,
with the touch of a Thread, with the taste of a Grape death has found an
entrance.

There is nothing brings more misery upon man than his passions, with which he
pardons not himself. The proud man grieves and consumes for the felicity of
another: The envious dies to see a happy man live: The covetous man loses his
sleep for what he has no need of: The impatient man tears his bowels for that
which imports not: and The choleric man ruins himself for what no way concerns
him. How many for not conquering one passion have lost their fortunes, their
quiet, and their lives, both temporal and eternal? Witness Aman, who desirng
more reverence than was due to him lost his honor, wealth and life, and ended
on a Gibbet. The ambition of Absolon rested not until it left him hanged in a
tree by the hair of his head. In the same manner the disordinate love of Amnon,
which made him first sick and pale, and distempered him more than a burning
fever, at last cost him his life. Unto many their unmortified passions have
been like cruel Hangmen, which have suddenly bereaved them of their lives.
Dubravius l. 2. hist. Bohem. an. 1418.
Dubravius writes that Wenceslaus King of Bohemia entered into so great fury
against a Courtier of his, for not giving him timely advice of an Uproar raised
by Lisca in Prague, that he was like to have killed him with his own hands; but
being witheld from defiling his Royal Majesty with the blood of his Vassal, he
fell into an Apoplexy, and died immediately. Aurel. Vict. in. Epitome vitae
Nervae.
The death of Nerva was likewise upon a sudden anger. And Pliny writes of
Diodorus Cromus, that he suddenly died of shame, for that he was not able to
answer a question proposed by Estibon. Through Fear, Grief, Joy, and Love many
have died. I will only relate here a lamentable story written by Paulus
Jovius. Jovius l. 39. hist. sui temporis.
A certain married man had lived long in adultery with so great scandal, that
the Bishop of the City excommunicated both him and his Paramour, if they
accompanied any more together. The man was so besotted with his passion, that
contemning the Command of the Bishop, he went secretly one day to see his
Mistress, who having repented of what was past, entertained him with harsh
language, reprehended his impudency, and commanded him to depart her presence,
and never more to see her; But he still continuing in his madness began to call
her ungrateful and unworthy, and in a rage clasping his hands together and
lifting up his eyes toward heaven, as if it were to complain of her
unkindness, fell down stark dead, and in a moment lost both his life temporal
and eternal: and his body was not suffered to be interred in hallowed earth. If
then our disordered passions be so hurtful unto our own lives, how dangerous
and prejudicial are they unto the lives of others? Certainly if all other
misfortunes were wanting, those were sufficient, which are caused by
humane-passions. There is much to be suffered from the conditions of men, ill
language, displeasing correspondencies, wilful injuries, and perverse
dispositions. All man is misery and cause of miseries. Who is so happy to
content all, and be envied of none? who is so general a welldoer, that no body
complains of him? who so liberal, that finds not some ungrateful? who so
esteemed, that some murmurers do not despise him? The Athenians found fault
with their Simonides, because he talked too loud: The Thebans accused
Panniculus, that he spit too much: The Lacedaemonians noted in Lycurgus, that
he went hanging down his head: The Romans thought Scipio slept too much, and
that he snorted too high: The Vticans were scandalized at Cato's eating too
fast on both sides at once: They held Pompey for rude and ill-bred, because he
scratched his head with one finger: The Carthaginians spoke ill of Hannibal,
because he went open-breasted with his stomach bare: Others laughed at Julius
Caesar, because he was ill girt. There is none so upright, in whom envy or
extravagant conditions will not find something to reprehend.

The greatest miseries are those, which men by their unbridled affections bring
upon themselves. Whence proceeded that notable saying of Ecclesiastes, Eccl. c.
4.
which far exceeded all that has been spoken by Philosophers concerning humane
misery. I praised (says he) the dead before the living; I judged him more
happy than either, who was not born, nor had seen the evils which are done
under the Sun. For there is nothing which offends humane nature more, than the
follies and impertinencies of men, and the hatreds, injustices, violences, and
inhumanities caused by their irregular passions. Whereupon some Philosophers
seeing humane nature governed by passion and not by reason, wholly abhorred it.
Amongst whom Timon of Athens was the principal beginner, and most earnest
Professor of that Sect; for he did not only call himself the capital Enemy of
Mankind, but confirmed his words by his actions; for he neither conversed nor
dwelt with men, but lived in the Desert amongst wild beasts, remote from
Neighborhood or Towns; neither would he be visited by any, nor discourse with
any but an Athenian Captain called Alcibiades, and that not for friendship or
affection, but because he hoped and foresaw (as indeed it happened afterward)
that he would one day be the ruin of his Country, and the destruction of a
multitude of men. Neither was he only content with this aversion from men, but
studied and invented all ways possible to destroy them. He caused Gallowses to
be made in his Gardens, wherein such as were desperate and weary of life might
conveniently hang themselves; and having occasion some years after to make use
of his Garden for the enlarging of his House, he would not pull down his
Gallowses, until he had called the people together to hear his Oration,
assuring them, that he had something new and of importance to speak unto them.
The people, who having been long acquainted with his humor, expecting
something that was extraordinary, willingly assembled to hear him: to whom he
spoke in this manner. O Athenians, you are not ignorant, that many have made
themselves away in my Gardens. I have now occasion to dispose of them
otherwise: and therefore fore thought good to tell you, that if any of you have
a mind to hang your selves, that you do it quickly; And so without more words,
with this loving offer concluded his Speech, and returned to his own house,
where he ended his life in the same opinion, ever philosophying of the misery
of man. And when the pangs of death came upon him, abhorring mankind even unto
the last gasp, he commanded that his body should not be interred in the earth,
as in the common Element, wherein usually were buried the bodies of others,
afraid lest his bones should lie near or be touched by men though dead: but
that they should make his Sepulcher upon the brink of the Sea, that tho fury of
the waves might hinder the approach of all others: and that they should grave
upon it this Epitaph, which is related by Plutarch; After my miserable life
they buried me in this deep water. Reader, desire not to know my name. The Gods
confound thee. This Philosopher wanted faith and charity, not distinguishing
betwixt the Malice of man, and his Nature: having reason to abhor that, and
to love this. Yet by these extravagant demonstrations he gave us to understand
how monstrous are our passions, and how worthy of hate, when they are not
ordered and governed by reason. And certainly all Christians ought to desire
the destruction of the pomp and pride of men, as Timon did of their persons,
their superfluous gallantry, their unlawful pleasures, their ostentation of
riches, their vain titles of honor, their raging envy, their disordered
choler, their unjust revenges, their unbridled passions. Those ought to die and
be destroyed, that the men may live.

6.
So many are the miseries of life that they cannot all be numbered. Death,
which is called by Aristotle The greatest of evils, is by many esteemed a
lesser evil than life: the many evils in this surpassing the greatness of the
evil in that; and therefore many have thought it better to suffer the greatest,
which is death, than to suffer so many though lesser, which are in life. For
this reason one calls Death, The last and greatest Physician, because though in
it self it be the greatest evil, yet it cures all others, and therefore
prescribes the hopes of it, as an efficacious remedy and comfort in the
afflictions of life. But because this comfort is not relished by all, the fear
of death being so natural, and the dangers and many waves unto it accounted
amongst the many miseries of life, therefore some prime Philosophers could find
out no other remedy for evils than to despair of their remedy. Wherefore
Seneca, when a great Earthquake happened in his time in Campania, wherein
Pompeios a famous City, and diverse other Towns were sunk and many people lost,
and the rest of the Inhabitants distracted with fear and and grief fled from
their Country, as if they had been banished, he advised them to return home, and
assured them that there was no remedy for the evils of this life, and that the
dangers of death were unavoidable. And truly, if well considered, what security
can there be in life, when the Earth, which is the Mother of the living, is
unfaithful to them, and sprouts out miseries and deaths even of whole Cities?
what can be secure in the World, if the World it self be not, and the most
solid parts of it shake? If that, which is only immovable and fixed for to
sustain the living, tremble with Earthquakes, if what is proper to the Earth,
which is to be firm, be unstable and betray us, where shall our fears find a
refuge? When the roof of the house shakes we may fly into the fields, but when
the world shakes, whither shall we go? What comfort can we have, when fear
cannot find a gate to fly out at? Cities resist Enemies with the strength of
their walls: Tempests find a sheltet in the Haven: The covering of Houses
defend us from rains and snows: In the time of plague we may change places; but
from the whole Earth who can fly, and therefore from dangers? For this reason
Seneca said, Not to have a remedy may serve us as a comfort in our evils; for
Fear is foolish without Hope. Reason banishes fear in those who are wise; and
in those, who are not, despair of remedy gives a kind of security, at least
takes away fear. He that will fear nothing, let him think that all things are
to be feared. See what slight things endanger us; even those which sustain
life, lay ambushes for us. Meat and drink, without which we cannot live, take
away our lives. It is not wisdom therefore to fear swallowing by an Earthquake,
and not to fear the falling of a tile. In death all sorts of dyings are equal.
What imports it whether one single stone kills thee, or a whole Mountain
oppress thee? death consists in the souls leaving of the bodies, which often
happens by slight accidents,

But Christians in all the dangers and miseries of humane life, have other
comforts to lay hold on, which are a good conscience, hope of glory, conformity
unto the Divine will, and the imitation and example of Jesus Christ. From these
four he shall in life have merit, in death security, in both comfort, and in
eternity a reward. Justus Lipsius being much oppressed with his last infirmity
whereof he died, some who were present endeavored to comfort him with some
philosophical reasons and sentences of the Stoics, wherein that most learned
man was much studied, as appears in his Book of the Introduction to Stoical
learning; unto whom he answered in this most Christian manner. Vain are all
those consolations; and pointing unto an Image of Christ crucified, said, This
is the true comfort and true patience. And presently with a sigh, which rose
from the bottom of his heart, said; My Lord and Savior Jesus Christ give me
Christian patience. This comfort we ought to have, who were redeemed by so
loving a Lord, That, considering our sins are greater than the pains of this
life, and that the Son of God has suffered far greater, who wanted all sin,
he has deserved to convert the miseries of this life, which are occasioned by
sin, into instruments of satisfaction for our sins, drawing health out of
infirmity, and an antidote out of poison.

We may also draw from what is said, how unjust was the complaint of
Theophrastus, that nature had given a longer life unto many birds and beasts,
than unto man. If our life were less troublesome, he had some reason; but it
being so fraught with miseries, he might rather think that life the happiest
which was shortest. Wherefore, as St. Jerome said to Heliodorus, it is better
to die young and die well, than to die old and die ill. This voyage being of
necessity, the felicity of it consists not in being long, but being prosperous,
and that we at last arrive in the desired Port. St. Austin says, August. in
Johan.
that to die is to be eased of those heavy burdens, which we bear in this
life: and that the happiness is not to leave it late in the evening of our age,
but that when we die they charge us not with a greater load. Let a man live ten
years, or let him live a thousand, death (as St. Jerome says) gives him the
title of happy or unfortunate. If he live a thousand years in sorrow, it is a
great unhappiness: but greater, if he live them ill, though with content; and
therefore, supposing so many miseries, we cannot complain of God for having
given us a short life, but of our selves for having made it a bad one. Ambr.
Ser. quadrages.
Finally, as St. Ambrose says, Our life being compassed with so many miseries,
as that death seems rather a shelter for evils than a punishment, God was
pleased that it should be short, that the vexations and misfortunes of it,
which cannot be counterpoised with any joys of the earth, might be more
supportable. At least if this life with so many miseries do not displease us,
yet let the eternal with all her felicities content us better; and let us not
endeavor less for the immortal life of heaven, than we do for this mortal one
of earth. And therefore, as St. Austin says, Augus. trac. 5. in Johan. hom. 57.
If thou run a hundred miles for this life, how many ought thou to run for
the eternal: and if thou make such speed to obtain a few days and uncertain,
how ought thou to run for life eternal?

CAP. VIII.
How little is man whilst he is temporal.

IF we consider the greatest thing in nature, which is Man, we shall see how
little he is whilst he is temporal. What is man says Seneca? a frail vessel,
broken with the least motion, a most weak body, naked by nature and unarmed,
necessitous of Mothers help, subject to the injuries of fortune, impatient of
cold and labor, composed of things infirm and fluid; and those very things,
without which we cannot live, as smell, taste, watching, meat and drink, are
mortal unto us. The wise Solon did not answer more favorably, when they
demanded of him, Anton. in Mel. Stob. Ser. 96.
what was Man. He is (says he) a corruption in his birth, a beast in his life,
and food for worms when he is dead. Aristotle being asked the same question
answered, That Man was an Idea of weakness, Dionys. Rikel. de noviss. arti. 15.
a spoil of time, a game of fortune, an image of inconstancy, a balance of
envy and calamity: and the rest is of phlegm and choler. Secundus the
Philosopher, being also demanded the same by Adrian the Emperor, answered,
That Man was an incorporated understanding, a phantasm of time, a looker upon
life, a slave of death, a traveling passenger, a guest of place, a toyling
soul, a habitation for a short time. And St. Bernard says, That Man in this
time of mortality is but a beast of carriage. And the same Saint in another
place says, What is Man but a vessel of dung? and in his meditations he adds;
If thou markest what he voids at his mouth and nose, and at the other sinks of
his body, thou have not in all thy life beheld a more noisome dunghill. In the
same part he says, Man is no other thing but unclean seed, a sack of dung, a
food for worms. Innocen. de Contempla. mundi, lib. 1. c. 1.
More fully Innocent the Pope. I have considered, says he, with tears what Man
was made of, what he is, and what he shall be. He was made of earth, and
conceived in sin, and born for punishment. He does things evil, which are not
lawful, things filthy, which are not decent, and things vain, which are not
expedient. He shall be the food of fire, meat for worms, and a mass of
corruption. O vile indignity of humane condition! O unworthy condition of
humane baseness! Behold the plants and trees. They produce flowers, and leaves,
and fruit, and thou nothing but nits, lice and worms. They furnish us with oil,
wine, and balsom, thou affords nothing but phlegm, dung, and urine. Those send
forth a fragrant odor, and thou abominable stink. Such as is the tree, such is
the fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit; and what is man but a tree
reverst? This is the saying of this holy Pope. And such is man even in his
youth and best time. But if he reach old age, which is esteemed as a felicity,
the same Innocentius adds, His heart is afflicted, his head shakes, his spirits
languish, his breath smells, his face wrinkles, his stature bends, his eyes wax
dim, his joints quake, his nose runs, his hands tremble, his hair falls, his
teeth rot, his ears grow deaf. Neither is he more changed in body than in mind.
An old man is easily displeased, hardly pacified, believes quickly, long before
disabused, is greedy, covetous, peevish, froward, still complaining, quick in
talking, slow in hearing, admires what is past, contemns what is present, sighs,
grieves, languishes, and is always infirm.

It may also appear what Man is by the stuff whereof he is made. The first man
God made of Clay, mixing together the vilest and grossest Elements. The rest of
men, who have succeeded, have been made of a matter more loathsome and unclean;
and worse is that wherewith they are nourisht in their Mothers wombs; and their
birth is accompanied with shame, grief, and pollution; which Pliny considering
speaks in this manner. It is a compassion, nay a shame to think of the original
of the proudest of living creatures, which is man; who often is abortive by the
smell of a newly extinguished candle. From such beginnings sprung our Tyrants;
from hence the butcherly mind of those cruel Hangmen. Thou which gloriest in
the strength of body, thou which embracest the gifts of fortune, and think
not thy self her Servant, but her Son and Darling, thou who set thy mind
wholly upon victories, thou who pufft up with success hold thy self a God,
see how thou might have perished even before thou were, with so little a
thing as a snuff of a candle, and may yet with a smaller matter, pricked with
the little tooth of an Adder, or, like Anacreon the Poet, choked with the stone
of a grape; or, like Fabius the Roman Senator, suffocated with a hair in a
draught of milk. Thus far Pliny, who not only admired the baseness of the
nature of man, but the easiness of his end.

Consider also wherein Man ends. Man whilst he lives, (says Pope Innocent)
engenders lice and vermin; Lib. 3. c. 1.
when he is dead, grubs and worms; whilst he lives, affords nothing but dung,
and vomits; when he is dead, stink and rottenness; alive he feeds but one man,
but dead a multitude of worms. What thing more noisome than a humane Carcass?
what more horrible than a dead Man? he whose embraces were most acceptable when
he was alive, even his sight is troublesome when he is dead. What do riches,
banquets, or delights profit us? they shall not free us from death, they shall
not defend us from the worms, they shall not take away our stink and ill
savor. He who even now was seated in a glorious Throne, is now flung into an
obscure Tomb: he who lately feasted in a sumptuous Sala, is now feasted upon by
worms in a dark Sepulcher. All this is from this contemplative Pope. Bernard.
c. 3. Meditat.
St. Bernard also considering this miserable end of Man, says, Man is
converted into no man; why therefore art thou proud? know that thou were in the
womb unclean seed, and curdled blood, exposed afterward to sin, and the many
miseries of this life, and after death shall be the food of worms. Wherefore
do thou wax proud, Dust and ashes, whose conception was in sin, whose birth
in misery, whole life in pain, and whose death necessity? wherefore do thou
swell and adorn thy flesh with precious things, which in few days is to be
devoured by worms; and do not rather adorn thy soul with good works, which
is to be presented in heaven before God and his Angels? All this is spoken by
St. Bernard, which every man ought to take as spoken unto himself.

. 2.
Besides that man is a thing so poor and little, and composed of so base and
vile materials, this littleness, this vileness has no firmness nor
consistence, but is a river of changes, a perpetual corruption, and, as
Secundus the Philosopher says, Lib. 11. de Praepa. Evan. c. 7.
A fantasme of time; whose instability is thus declared by Eusebius of
Caesarea. Our nature from our birth until our death is unstable, and as it were
fantastical, which if you strive to comprehend, is like water gathered in the
palm of the hand; the more you grasp it, the more you spill it. In the same
manner those mutable and transitory things, the more you consider them with
reason, the more they fly from you. Things sensible being in a perpetual flux,
are still doing and undoing; still generating and corrupting, and never remain
the same. For, as Heraclitus says, as it is impossible to enter twice into the
same river, because the same water remains not, but new succeeds still as the
first passes, so if you consider twice this mortal substance, you shall not
both times find it the same, but with an admirable swiftness of change it is
now extended, now contracted; but it is not well said to say Now and Now; for
in the same time it loses in one part, and gains in another, and is another
thing than what it is, in so much as it never rests. The Embrion, which is
framed from seed, quickly becomes an Infant, from thence a Boy, from thence a
Young Man, from thence an Old, and then decrepit; and so the first ages being
past and corrupted by new ones which succeed, it comes at last to die. How
ridiculous then are men to fear one death, who have already died so many, and
are yet to die more. Not only, as Heraclitus said, The corruption of fire is
the generation of air, but this appears more plainly in our selves; for from
youth corrupted is engendered man, and from him the old man; from the boy
corrupted is engendered the youth, and from the infant the boy, and from who
was not yesterday, he who is to day; and of him, who is to day, he who shall be
to morrow: so as he never remains the same, but in every moment we change, as
it were, with various phantasms in one common matter. For if we be still the
same, how come we to delight in things we did not before? we now love and
abhor after another manner than formerly: we now praise and dispraise other
things than we did before: we use other words, and are moved with other
affections; we do not hold the same form, nor pass the same judgment we did;
and how is it possible, that without change in our selves, we should thus
change in our motions and affections? certainly he who still changes is not the
same, and he who is not the same cannot be said to be, but in a continual
mutation slides away like water. The sense is deceived with the ignorance of
what is, and thinks that to be which is not. Where shall we then find true
being, but in that only which is eternal, and knows no beginning, which is
incorruptible, which is not changed with time? Time is moveable, and joined
with movable matter; glides away like a current, and like a vessel of
generation and corruption retains nothing: in so much as the first and the
last, that which was, and that which shall be are nothing, and that which seems
present, passes like lightning. Wherefore as time is defined to be the measure
of the motion of things sensible, and as time never is, nor can be, so we may
with the like reason say, that things sensible do not remain, nor are, nor have
any being. All this is from Eusebius; which David declared more briefly and
significantly when he said, That man whilst he lived in this life, was an
Universal vanity. Wherefore St. Gregory Nazianzen said, In laud. Caes.
that we are a dream, unstable, like a Spectre or Apparition, which could not
be laid hold on.

Let man therefore reflect upon all which has been said; let him behold
himself in this glass: let him see wherefore he presumes, wherefore he afflicts
himself for things of the earth, which are so small in themselves, and so
prejudicial unto him. With reason did the Prophet say, In vain does man trouble
himself; Upon which St. Chrysostom with great admiration speaks in this
manner. Chrysostom. in Ps. 36.
Man troubles himself and loses his end; he troubles himself, consumes and
melts to nothing, as if he had never been born; he troubles himself, and before
he attains rest is overwhelmed; he is inflamed like fire, and is reduced to
ashes like flax; he mounts on high like a tempest, and like dust is scattered
and disappears; he is kindled like a flame, and vanishes like smoke; he glories
in his beauty like a flower, and withers like hay; he spreads himself as a
cloud, and is contracted as a drop; he swells like a bubble of water, and and
goes out like a spark; he is troubled, and carries nothing about him but the
filth of riches; he is troubled only to gain dirt; he is troubled and dies
without fruit of his vexations. His are the troubles, others the joys; his are
the cares, others the contents; his are the afflictions, others the fruit; his
are the heart-burstings, others the delights; his are the curses, others have
the respect and reverence; against him the sighs and exclamations of the
persecuted are sent up to Heaven, and against him the tears of the poor are
poured out, and the riches and abundance remains with others; he shall howl and
be tormented in hell, whilst others sing, triumph, and vainly consume his
estate. In vain do living men trouble themselves. Man is he who enjoyes a life
but lent him, and that but for a short time; Man is but a debt of death, which
is to be paid without delay; a living Creature, who is in his will and appetite
untamed, a mischief taught without a Master, a voluntary ambush, subtle in
wickedness, witty in iniquity, prone to covetousness, insatiable in the desire
of what is another, of a boasting spirit, and full of insolent temerity; in
his words fierce, but easily quailed; bold, but quickly mastered; an arrogant
clay, an insolent dust, and a sparkle which in a moment is extinguished; a
flame which quickly dies, a light which vanishes into air, a dead leaf,
withered hay, faded grass, a nature which consumes it self, to day threatens,
and to morrow dies; to day abounds in wealth, and is to morrow in his grave; to
day has his brows circled with a diadem, and to morrow is with worms; he is to
day, and to morrow ceases to be; triumphs and rejoices to day, and to morrow is
lamented; immeasurably insolent in prosperity, and in adversity admits no
comfort; who knows not himself, yet is curious in searching what is above him;
is ignorant of what is present, and scoffs at what is to come; he who is mortal
by nature, and out of pride thinks himself eternal; he who is an open house of
perturbations, a game of diverse infirmities, a concourse of daily calamities,
and a receptacle of all sorrow. O how great is the Tragedy of our baseness! and
how many things have I said? But it cannot better be declared than by the voice
of the Prophet: In vain does man who lives trouble himself. For truly the
things of this life, which shine and glister most, are of less profit than a
putrified Carcass. This is of St. John Chrysostom, in which he clearly sets
forth the misery of Man, the shortness of his life, and the vanity of things
temporal.

3.
And that the perfect knowledge of our selves may not be wanting unto us, Man
is not only thus vile and base, whilst he lives, and much more being dead,
but even his Soul, whilst it remains in his Body, is not of much greater
esteem. For although the Soul be of it self of a most noble substance, yet our
vices do so much vilify it, that they make it more abominable than the Body.
And without doubt the Soul, when it is dead in mortal sin, is more corrupt and
stinking in the sight of the Angels, than a Body dead eight days ago; for if
that Body be full of worms, this is full of devils and vices. And even whilst
the Soul lives, and is free from any mortal sin, yet by committing those, which
are but venial, it becomes full of imperfections; and although it be not dead,
yet it is more weak, feeble, and languishing than a sick Body; and if a man
knew himself well, he would be more affrighted at the misery of his Soul, than
at that of his Flesh. The devout Father Alfonso Roderiguez, a most excellent
Master in matters of spirit, writes of a holy Woman, who desired light from God
to know in what condition she was: and saw in her self such ugliness and
deformity, that she was not able to suffer it, and therefore besought God
again, saying, Not so much, O Lord, for I shall faint and be dismayed. Father
Master John d'Avila says, that he knew a person who often had importuned God
to discover unto him, what he was. It pleased God to open his eyes but a very
little, and yet that little had like to have cost him dear: for he beheld
himself so ugly and abominable, that he cried out aloud, Lord of thy mercy take
from before mine eyes this mirror; I desire not any more to behold my figure.
Donna Sancha Carillo, that most fervent servant of Christ, after she had led a
most perfect and admirable life, besought our Lord to give her a sight of her
Soul, that seeing the filthiness of her sins, she might be further moved to
abhor them. Our Lord was pleased to grant her request, and showed it her in
this form. One night, as she sat alone in her Sala the door open, there passed
before her an ancient Hermit, his hair all gray, and in his hand a staff to
support him. She amazed at the sight of such a man, in such a habit, at so
unseasonable an hour, was a little surprised with fear; yet recollecting her
self, said unto him, Father, what seek ye for here? to whom he answered, Lift
up my Cloak, and you shall see. She did so, and beheld a little Girl sickly,
pale, and weak, with the face all covered over with flies. She took it in her
arms, and demanded of him, Father, what is this? Do thou not remember,
replied the Hermit, when thou earnestly desired'st of our Lord, that he would
give thee a view of thy Soul? Behold the figure of it; after this manner it is.
This said, the Apparition vanished, and she remained so confused and
affrighted, that it seemed unto her (accordingly as she after confessed) that
all her bones were displaced with such grief and pain, as, had it not been for
the great favor and mercy of God, it had been impossible for her to endure it.
She passed that night almost overwhelmed with the waves of her sad and troubled
thoughts. The manner of that Girl so feeble and discolored afflicted her
extremely, contemplating it as the image of her Soul; especially when she
reflected on the face covered with those impertinent and troublesome little
creatures, her grief was doubled: and it seemed unto her as if it had smelt
like something that was dead, or some old sore: which made her send up a
thousand sighs unto heaven, and to desire a remedy and mercy from our Lord. No
sooner did the day so much desired by her appear, but she repaired instantly
unto her Confessor, a person of great virtue and learning, and desired him with
many tears to explicate unto her the meaning of that Vision, and to tell her
whether those little creatures did signify any grievous and hidden sins, which
her soul knew not of. The Confessor took some short time to recommend his
answer unto our Savior: which done, he returned and said unto her, Madam,
trouble not your self, but render hearty thanks unto God for the favor which
he has done you; and know that the feebleness, which appeared in the Image of
your Soul, was an effect of venial sins, which weaken, but kill not; cool, but
extinguish not the charity in our Souls; for if they had been mortal sins, the
Girl would have been dead: for those deprive the Soul wholly of life; those
which be venial only take away our fervor and promptness in the service of
God, and the perfect accomplishing of his holy Law. If then the Souls of so
great Servants of God are so full of miseries, wherein can miserable man boast,
since he is so both in soul and body?

CAP. IX.
How deceitful are all things Temporal.

FRom what has hitherto been said may be collected how great a lie and
cozenage is all that which passes in time, and that the things of the earth,
besides that they are base, inconstant and transitory, are also deceitful and
full of danger. This is signified unto us in the Apocalypse by the Harlot, by
which was denoted humane prosperity, who sat upon that monstrous Beast, which
is the World. And amongst other Ornaments, as the Scripture says, she was
adorned with gilded gold; which gives us to understand her falsehood: Since it
was not true and fine gold which she wore, but false and counterfeited; for
although it seemed gold, it was but alchimy; and yet being gilt she sold it for
true gold. So the Prosperity of the World comes decked with the goods of the
earth, which she fells for true goods, setting them forth as great, secure and
lasting, when they are nothing less. All is but deceit and cozenage; which is
well expressed by Seneca, when he says: That is only good which is honest;
other goods are false and adulterate. What greater falsehood and deceit, than to
make those things, which are most vile and base, to appear so precious, and of
such esteem, that men pretend nothing greater, and being more changeable than
the Moon, to appear constant and secure, in so much as we remain so satisfied
with them, as if they were never to change, and being fading and corruptible we
seek after them as if they were eternal and immortal, remembering nothing less
than their end and ours, forgetting wholly that they are to perish and we to
die? It is evident they are false, since they promise of themselves what they
neither have nor are. Those who work in prospective will so paint a room, that
the light entering only through some little hole, you shall perceive beautiful
and perfect figures and shapes; but if you open the windows and let in a full
light, at most you shall see but some imperfect lines and shadows. So the
things of this World seem great and beautiful unto those, who are in darkness
and have but little light of heaven, but those, who enjoy the perfect light of
truth and faith, find nothing in them of substance. The felicity of this life
is but a fiction, and a shadow of true happiness, and by that name is often
qualified in holy Scripture, which excellently expresses the nature of it. For
the shadow is not a body, but a resemblance of a body, and seeming to be
something, is nothing. The inconstancy also and speedy change of humane things
deserves this name: because the shadow is always altering, and ends on a
sudden. And as the shadow when it is at length, and can increase no further, is
nearest the end: so temporal goods and humane fortunes, when they are mounted
up as high as the stars, are then nearest to vanish, and disappear suddenly.
And therefore one of the friends of Job faid, Job. 5.
I saw the fool that he had taken deep rooting, and instantly I cursed his
beauty; for the more firm he appeared to stand, the more near he was unto his
fall. And David said, he saw the Sinner exalted as a Cedar, but he endured no
longer than he turned his eyes.

What is to deceive, but to publish that for truth which is not, and to promise
that which shall never be accomplished? I leave to the witness of every one,
how often the issue of their hopes have proved vain, not finding in what they
desired that content which they expected. In riches they hope for peace and
repose, but meet with nothing but unquietness and cares, and many times with
dangers and losses. For this Christ our Redeemer called riches deceits, saying,
that the Divine Word was choked with the falsehood and deceit of riches. He is
not content with calling them false and deceitful, but calls them falsehoods and
deceits; for what can be more false and perfidious, then promising one thing to
perform just the contrary? The prosperity of this world promises us goods, and
gives us evils; promises us ease, and gives us cares; promises security, and
gives us danger; promises us great contents, and gives us great vexations;
promises us a sweet life, and gives us a bitter. With reason it is said in the
Book of Job, that the bread, Job 21.
which the worldly man eats, shall be converted into the gall of Aspes; because
that in those things, which seem necessary for his life as the bread of its
mouth, he shall meet his death, and when he hopes for pleasure, he shall find
gall, and no morsel, which shall not leave some bitterness behind it. There is
no felicity upon earth, which carries not its counterpoise of misfortunes: no
happiness, which mounts so high, which is not depressed by some calamity. For
as they anciently painted humane Fancy in the form of a young man with one arm
lifted up with wings, as if it meant to fly toward heaven, and the other
weighed down by some great weight, which hindered it from rising; so humane
felicity, how high soever it soars, has still something to depress it.

. 2.
If we will evidently see how deceitful are the things of this world, this is
a convincing argument, that no man, after he has enjoyed what he most desires,
is content with his condition, which apparently shows their deceit; neither
does any man cease to desire more, though he possess the greatest and most
ample fortune in the world; which also argues their falsehood, since they,
satisfy not those who possess them. No man but envyes the life of some other,
and grievs and complains of his own, though far more happy. Constantine the
Great, who was arrived at the height of humane felicity, Eusebius. in Orat. de
laudibus Constan.
said, his life was something more honorable than that of Neat-heards and
Shepherds, but much more painful and troublesome. Alfonsus King of Naples said
the life of Kings was the life of Asses, for the great burdens which they
bear. So as in the book of Job it is said, Job. 22.
that the Giants groan under the waters. In which place (as Albertus Magnus
explicates it) by the Giants are understood the mighty ones of the earth, upon
whom it sends troubles and vexations, (for so the name of Waters signify in
that place of holy Scripture) which makes them groan under the intolerable
weight of them. They are like the Giants, which in great Cities are showed at
their solemn Feasts; that which appears, is some great and stately bulk covered
with Gold and Silks: but that which appears not, is the little poor man, which
carries it upon his shoulders, sweating, groaning, tired and half dead with the
weight. The Sumpter-mules of the Grandees of Spain, at their first coming to
Court are laden with great wealth of Silver, Vessel, Tissue-Beds, and rich
Hangings, their Sumpter-clothes imbroidered, their Winding-staves of silver,
their Cords of silk, with their great Plumes, their Bells, Bosses, and other
Furniture. But although their load be rich and sumptuous, yet in fine it is a
load and oppresses them, and they are ready to faint and sink under the weight
of it. So is Honor, Empire, and Command. Even King David confessed as much,
and says, That his loins were (as it were) disjoynted, and he was bruised and
wearied with the burden. Some Kings have said that, which is particularly
related by Stobaeus of Antigonus, Stob. Ser. 3.
who, when he was crowned King of Macedonia, said, O Crown more noble than
happy! if men knew how full thou art of cares and dangers, no man would take
thee up, though he should find thee in the Streets. And Dionysius, to express
the anxieties of the life of Kings, said, it was like that of condemned
persons, which every hour expect death. This is signified by the Cup of Gold,
which the Woman (that is Prosperity) who sat upon the Monster with seven
heads, (that is the World) held in her hand; which although it made a fair
show, yet was full of abomination: because there is none, who speaks not ill of
his own condition, and many who seem most fortunate, abhor their own lot,
although it appear glorious unto others. Solomon was the King who most enjoyed
the goods of this life; for he resolved to satiate himself with delights, even
until he surfeited. He had a thousand Wives, whereof 700 Queens, and 300
Concubins; he had sumptuous Buildings and Palaces, Gardens, Orchards, Houses of
Pleasure, Woods, Groves, Fish Ponds, excellent Music, Men and Women Singers,
the greatest and best ordered Court in the World, his Service and Vessels of
gold and silver so sumptuous, as it caused admiration in the Queen of Saba: His
Cavalry consisted of 40000 horse, with furniture suitable, in perpetual pay. The
Treasure, which his Father David left him, was according to Budaeus ten times
greater than that of Darius King of Persia. Finally, he arrived unto that point
of happiness and felicity in all kinds, that he himself admired it, and
acknowledged himself for the most fortunate Prince in the world, and said,
Eccl. 2.
Who shall feed like me? and who shall abound in all delights and pleasures as
I do? Yet in all this prosperity, than which greater cannot be imagined by
man, when he seriously cast his eyes upon it, he said, All was vanity and
affliction of spirit; and was so discontented with his life, that he confessed
it was tedious unto him, and that he detested the care he had taken about it:
and envying the poor Laborer, judged it was better for one to eat of what he
got by the sweat of his brows. If then such exccess of fortune, felicity,
wealth, honor and pleasure deceived so wise a King as Solomon, who will not he
deceived? what shall we expect from some little part of felicity, when this
flood of fortune could not bestow a contented and quiet life? What greater
argument of the scarcity and littleness of temporal goods, when all are not
sufficient to fill a humane heart? But as they are not the things which they
seem, so they afford not what we expect, and therefore no man is content with
what he has, that still appearing better which is another.

And this proceeds from the deceit of humane things, that obtaining what we
desire, and not finding that satisfaction which we expected, we envy the
condition of others, thinking we should there meet with that content which is
not to be had at home, which seeking with much trouble, we at last come to know
our error, and find their condition worse than our own. This is well expressed
by Antiquity in a fiction it made full of doctrine, wherein it feigned that the
Cretans presented a Petition to Jupiter, that since he was born in their
Country, he would be pleased to exempt them from the trouble and labors
endured by others. Jupiter answered, that this was a Privilege of those who
were in heaven, and could not be granted to them who lived upon earth.
Whereupon they framed a second Supplication, that it might be lawful for them
to change and truck their labors and cares one with another. This was granted.
Whereupon the next Fair-day every one trussing up his own troubles in a Fardel,
and loading himself, brought them to the Marketplace: but began, before they
bargained, to search and look into those of others, and finding them more heavy
and grievous than their own, every one returned to his house as wise as he
came. The remedy of afflictions is not to fly from them, but to turn unto God,
since they happen unto us for our forsaking of him. And it was a most high
counsel of the Divine Providence, that no man should want afflictions, that so
he might know his sins: and hoping only for ease and comfort in the next life
and in God, he might acknowledge and only serve him. Wherefore the Prophet
Osee says, that God deals with us, Osee 2.
as a Husband with a Wife, who had forsaken him, and sought after strange
Lovers, who sowed thorns in her paths, that being wounded she might say, I will
return unto my first Spouse; so God sows Gall and Wormwood in the goods of this
life, that the Soul being afflicted may repent and turn unto him.

Another argument of the great deceit of temporal things is this, that the more
we possess them, the more we covet them, and alter the experience of their
little substance and power to satisfy our hearts, yet still we desire and gape
after them. It is evident that this is a great cozenage, and a certain kind of
witchcraft, by which they snatch away humane affections at such a time as they
should most avoid them. Nothing satisfies, and yet we desire that which does
not satisfy. How vain then are they, since when we possess them, they content
us* not, yet we still desire more? All the power and felicity of his Kingdom,
nor the greatness of his Palaces, nor being Lord of so many Cities and Fields
could content Achab, unless he enjoyed the little Vineyard of his poor
neighbor; which being denied, he fell sick with grief and melancholy, flung
himself upon his bed, and for mere rage and madness forbore to eat. O goods of
the earth, where is your greatness, since the wealth of a rich Kingdom could
not fill the heart of one man, but left it empty to desire more; and the want
of one only thing had more power to afflict him, than so many goods joined
together to content him? All things are as vain as this, since they cannot give
us that for which we seek them; Eccl. 5.
and therefore Ecclesiastes said; The Covetous man shall not be filled with
coin, and he who loves riches shall not enjoy the fruit of them. And this is
vanity.

Finally, from ail which is spoken either in this or the former Books, may be
drawn that consolation of in the Emperor Marous Aurclius in his Philosophy,
Lib. 2. in fine p. 185.
where he says, The time of humane life is a moment, the nature slippery, the
senses darkened, the temperature of the whole body easily corrupted, the Soul
wandering, the fortune, what it shall be, hard to conjecture, the fame
uncertain, and, to be short, those things, which belong unto the body, have the
nature of a river, and those, which belong unto the mind, are as smoke or a
dream. Life is a war and a peregrination, fame after death is forgotten. What
is there then that can guide unto security. There is nothing but Philosophy,
which consists in this, that thou conserve a mind without wound or stain,
entire and undefiled, superior to all grief and pleasure, that thou do nothing
without a good end, nothing feignedly or falsely, and that thou regard not what
another man does or has to do: Besides, that all things, which happen, thou
receive as sent from thence, from whence thou thy self art derived; Finally,
that thou attend death with a quiet and temperate mind. This is from that
great Philosopher.

CAP. X.
The dangers and prejudices of things Temporal.

THe least evil, which we receive from the goods of this world, is to deceive
and frustrate our hopes: and he comes well off, whom they forsake only with a
mock. For there are many who not only fail of what they desire, but meet with
what they abhor, and in place of ease and content meet with trouble and
vexation, and instead of life find death, and that which they most affect
turns often to their destruction. Absolon being very beautiful, gloried in
nothing more than his hair; but even those became the instrument of his death,
and those which he daily combed, as if they had been threads of gold, served as
a halter to hang him upon an Oak. To how many have riches, which they loved as
their life, been an occasion of death? This is the calamity of the goods of the
earth: which the Wiseman noted when he said, Eccle. 5.
Another dangerous evil I beheld under the Sun, riches preserved for the
destruction of their owner. This is the general and incurable infirmity of
riches, that when they are possessed with affection, they turn into the ruin
of their possessors either in soul or body, and oftentimes in both: in so much
as we are not to look upon temporal goods as vain and deceitful, but as
Parricides and our betrayers. With much reason the two great Prophets Isaias
and Ezechiel compare Egypt, (by which is signified the world and humane
prosperity) unto a reed, which if you lean upon, it breaks, and the splinters
wound your hands. No less brittle than a reed are temporal goods, but more
dangerous. Besides the other faults, wherewith they may be charged, a very
great one is the hurts they do to life it self, for whose good they are
desired; and are commonly not only hurtful unto the life eternal, but
prejudicial even unto the temporal. How many for their desire to obtain them
have lost the happiness of heaven, and the quiet felicity of the earth,
enduring before death a life of death, and by their cares, griefs, fears,
troubles, labors and afflictions, which are caused even by the greatest
abundance and felicity, before they enter into the hell of the, other world,
suffer a hell in this? And therefore St. John writes in his Apocalypse, Apoc. 20.
that Death and Hell were cast into a lake of fire, because the life of
sinners, of whom he speaks, according to the letter, is a death and hell; and
he says, that this Life and this Hell shall be cast into the other hell: and
he who places his felicity in the goods of the earth, shall pass from one death
unto another, and from one hell unto another. Let us look upon the condition,
whereunto Aman was brought by his abundance of temporal fortunes, into so
excessive a pride, that because he was denied a respect which was no ways due
unto him, he lived a life of death, smothering in his breast a hell of rage,
madness, and hatred: nothing in this life, as he himself confessed, giving him
ease or content. What condition more like unto death and hell than this? for as
in hell there is a privation of all joys and delights, so oftentimes it
happens in the greatest felicities upon earth. The same which Aman confessed
Dionysius felt when he was King of Sicily: to wit that he took no content at
all in the greatest delights of his Kingdom. Tull. in Tuscul. q. Boet. l. de
consol.
And therefore Boethius says, that if we could take away the veil from those
who sit in Thrones, are clad in Purple, and compassed about with Guards of
Soldiers, we should see the chains in which their Souls are enthralled;
conformable unto which is that of Plutarch, that in name only they are
Princes, but in every thing else Slaves. A marvelous thing it is, that a man
compassed about with delights, pastimes, and pleasures, should joy in nothing,
and in the midst of dancing, drinking, feasting, and dainty fair should find
a hell in his heart. That in hell amongst so many torments sinners should not
find comfort, is no marvail at all; but that in this life in the midst of
felicity and affluence of all delights he should find no satisfaction is a
great mystery. A great mischief than is humane prosperity, that amongst all its
contents it affords no room for one true one. But this is Divine providence,
that as the Saints, who despised what was temporal, had in their souls in the
very midst of torments a heaven of joy and pleasure, as St. Lawrence, who in
the midst of flames found a Paradise in his heart: so the Sinner, who neither
esteems nor loves any thing besides those of the world, should also in the
midst of his regalo's and delights find a life of hell and torments,
anticipating that, whereunto after death he is to enter and be confined. So
great are the cares and griefs occasioned by the goods of the earth, that they
oppress those who most enjoy them, and shut up the door to all mirth, leaving
them in a sad night of sorrow. This is that which was represented unto the
Prophet Zacharias, Zach. 5.
when before that the Devils came to fetch away the Vessel, wherein the woman
was enclosed, to be carried into a strange Region in the Land of Sanaar, there
to dwell for ever, the mouth of it was stopped up with a talent of Lead, and she
imprisoned in darkness and obscurity; signifying thereby, that before a
worldling is snatched away by the Devils to be carried into the mournful land of
hell, even in this life he is hood-winked and placed in so great a darkness, as
he sees not one beam of the light of truth; so that no content or complete joy
can ever enter into his heart.

2.
The reason why the goods of this life are troublesome and incommodious even to
life it self, is for the many dangers they draw along with them, the
obligations wherein they engage us, the cares which they require, the fears
which they cause, the affronts which they occasion, the straights whereunto
they put us, the troubles which they bring along with them, the disordinate
desires which accompany them, and finally the evil conscience which they
commonly have, who most esteem them. With reason did Christ our Redeemer call
riches thorns, because they ensnare and wound us with danger, losses,
unquietness, and fears. Wherefore Job said of the rich man, Job. 20. Greg. l.
15. Mor. c. 12.
When he shall be filled, he shall be straightned, he shall burn, and all
manner of grief shall fall upon him; The which St. Gregory explicates in these
words. He is first troubled with a weariness in seeking how to compass
(sometimes by flattery, sometimes by terrors) what his covetousness desires:
and having obtained it, the solicitude of keeping it is no less vexatious. He
fears Thieves, and is afrighted with the power of great ones, lest they should
by violence take his wealth from him; and if he meet one in want, presently
suspects he may rob him; and those very things which he has gathered together,
he fears lest their own nature may consume them. Since then the fear of all
these things is a trouble and vexation, the miserable wretch suffers in as many
things as he fears. St. Chrysostom also says, that the rich man must needs
want many things, because he is content with nothing, and is a slave of his
avarice, still full of fears and suspicion, hated, envied, murmured at, and
made the enemy of all men: whilst the poor life, which walks the Kings
highway, secured and guarded from Thieves and Enemies, is a Port free from
storms, a School of wisdom, and a life of peace and quietness. Hom. 47. in Mat.
And in another place he says thus. If thou shall well consider the heart of
an avaritious and covetous man, thou shall find it like a Garment spoiled and
consumed with moths, and ten thousand worms, so corrupted and overcome with
cares, that it seems not the heart of a man. Such is not the heart of the poor,
which shines like gold, is firm as a rock of diamonds, pleasant as a rose, and
free from fear, thieves, cares and sollicitudes, lives a an Angel of heaven,
present only to God and his service, whose conversation is more with Angels
than Men, whose treasure is God, not needing of any to serve him, since he
only serves his Creator, whose slaves are his own thoughts and desires, over
which he absolutely commands. What more precious than this, what more
beautiful? But the little help, which humane life receives from temporal
riches, cannot be better expressed than by that which David says, Psalm. 33.
The rich have wanted and were a hungered: but those who seek the Lord, shall
not be defrauded of all good. If then the abundance of wealth cannot free us
from the necessities of the body, how shall they rescue us in the griefs and
cares of the mind?

Neither are honors more favorable unto humane life. What anguish of heart
does the fear of losing them cost us, and what shifts are we put to to preserve
them? great are the inconveniences which many suffer to sustain them, even to
the want of necessary food. Exodus 5.
For as Pharao exacted things impossible from the Children of Israel,
commanding that no straw should be allowed them for the burning of their
bricks, and yet that the same Tax and number should be imposed as before: The
same tyranny is exercised over many by the World, which takes away the stock
and substance, which they formerly had to sustain themselves, and yet commands
them still to maintain the same pomp and equipage, which they did when they
enjoyed it; so that many are forced by their honor (as they term it) to
maintain a Coach and Lackies, which they need not, when they have scarcely
wherewith to feed their hungry bellies. In others what melancholy and sadness
is sometimes caused by a vain suspicion, that some have thought or spoken ill
of them? so many are the mischiefs and vexations, which this counterfeit good
draws along with it, that many have given thanks to God, that he has taken
this burden of honor from them, that so they might live in greater quiet and
repose. Plutarch says, That if a man were offered two ways, whereof the one
led to Honor, and the other to Death, he should choose the latter. Lucian
desiring to express it more fully, feigns that one of the Gods refused his
Deity, because he would not be troubled with being always honored. He invents
this lie to make us believe the truth, which we have spoken.

The excess also of pleasures what miseries does it heap upon us? what
infirmities does it engender in our bodies? what torments and resentments in
our consciences? for as he, who wanders out of his way without reflecting on
it, is by the briers, bushes, pits, and unevenness of the ground put in mind
that he has lost himself, which, although he be otherwise well accommodated,
yet troubles and afflicts him: So the ways and paths of a delicious man cry
out unto him, that he goes astray, and must therefore cause a melancholy and a
sadness in his heart. Hom. 10. in Ezechiel.
Well said St. Gregory, that he was a fool, who looked for joy and peace in the
delights of the world; for those are the effects of the Holy Ghost and
companions of righteousness, which are far removed from the cares and
vanities of the earth. Besides all our pleasures are so intermixed with trouble
and importunities, that it is the greatest pleasure to want them. Epicurus, who
was a great studier of pleasures, Hieron. contra Jovinian.
did, as St. Jerome writes, enrich all his books with sentences of temperance
and sobriety; and he has scarce a leaf which is not filled with pot herbs,
fruits, roots, and other mean food of small trouble: the solicitude in setting
forth of banquets being greater than the delight we receive in their abuse.
Diogenes in the same manner, and other Philosophers, despised pleasures as
prejudicial to the commodities of life, passing for that cause their lives in
great poverty. Crates flung all his goods into the Sea: and Zeno was glad his
were drowned with a Tempest. Aristides would not admit the bounty of Calicias;
and Epaminondas was content with one Coat, living in poverty and temperance, to
the end he might live with content and honor, and free from necessities, which
are often greater amongst the rich than the poor. Riches make not their Masters
rich, who live in perpetual covetousness, and are never satisfied with their
Coffers. Wherefore the Holy Ghost speaking of those who are called Rich, and of
the Poor of the Gospel, says, those are as it were rich, and enjoy nothing,
and these are as it were poor, and possess all things. For which reason St.
Gregory noted, that our Savior Christ called not the Riches of the world
absolutely Riches, but false and deceitful Riches. False, in regard they cannot
continue long with us; Deceitful, because they cannot satisfy the necessities
of life.

3.
It is more to be feared when the goods of this life cause the evils of the
other, and that they not only rob us of the content of the present, but
occasion the torments of the future, and after one hell in this life throw us
down into another after death. Well said St. Jerome in one of his Epistles,
that it was a difficult thing to enjoy both the goods present and to come, to
pass from temporal pleasures to eternal, and to be great both here and there;
for he who places his whole felicity in pamparing himself here, will be
tormented hereafter: and he who is unjustly flattered and honored here, shall
be justly scornd and despised there. This was well declared by St. Vincent
Ferrer in a comparison of the Faulcon and the Hen. The Hen whilst she lives
seeks her food in the dirt and dunghils, and at best feeds now and then upon
some bran or light corn; The Faulcon to the contrary is cherished, carried upon
his Masters fist, and fed with the brains of Birds and Partridges: but after
death they change their conditions; for the Faulcon is flung upon the dunghill,
and the Hen served to the table of Kings. As Jacob changed his hands, placing
his right hand upon his Grandchild who stood upon his left side, and his left
hand upon him who stood upon the right, preferring the younger before the
elder; so God uses to change his hands after death, and prefer the younger,
who are the poor and despised in this life. For this Christ our Redeemer
pronounces so many Woes against the rich of this world. Woe be unto you rich,
who rejoice in this world: ye shall weep in the next; Woe be unto you who are
now filled: you shall hunger hereafter; Woe be unto them, who have their heaven
here; it is to be feared a hell will succeed it. Let us tremble at what was
spoken unto the rich glutton; Thou did receive pleasure in this life: and for
this eternal evils succeeded thee after death, changing hands with poor
Lazarus, who received evils in this life, and after death enjoyed the pleasures
of the other. The rich man, who wanted not abundance of precious wines in this
life, wanted a drop of water to cool his tongue in the next; And Lazarus, who
here wanted the crumbs of bread that fell from his table, was feasted with the
Supper of eternal happiness. The Prophet Jeremias writes that Nabuzardan
carried a way* the rich Captives unto Babylon, Jer. 39.
and left the poor in Jerusalem; because the Devil carries away the slayes and
lovers of riches unto Babylon, which is the confusion of hell, and leaves the
poor in spirit in Jerusalem, which is the vision of peace, that they may there
enjoy the clear sight of God.

The felicity of temporal goods blots out of our memories the greatness of the
eternal; it makes us forget God, and the happiness of the other life; it
blindes those who possess them, busies them wholly in things of the Earth, and
gives them that means and opportunities for vices, which the poor have not, who
either work or serve their Masters, or pray. Wherefore the enjoying of temporal
goods is so dangerous, 1 Ti. 6.
that St. Paul calls Riches the Snare of the Devil. And if in ail Snares there
be falsehood, and danger, how false and dangerous must be the Snares of Satan.
Laer. l. 9. c. 4.
Even Diogenes was aware of this truth, and therefore calls them a Vail of
malice and perdition. St. Hieron. in Algas. Ep. 84.
St. Jerome says, that anciently there were too notable Proverbs in prejudice
of the Rich: The first, That he, who was very rich, could not be a good man;
The second, That he, who was rich, had either been a bad man, or was the heir
of a bad man; and admonishes us that the name of Rich in the holy Scripture is
most commonly taken in an ill sense, and to the contrary in a favorable that
of the poor. The truth is, that the holy Scripture is full of Contumelies
against the rich of this world, and above all the Son of God, who uttered most
notable and fearful expressions against those who abound in temporal goods;
and therefore when he taught the Beatitudes, he gave the first of them unto the
Poor: and in preaching the Woes he gave the first unto the Rich. And upon
another occasion said, it was impossible for the Rich to enter into the Kingdom
of heaven. And although he was willing to mitigate so hard a Sentence, yet he
said, it was difficult, and so difficult, as might make the rich of the world
to tremble; for he assure, us it is easier for a Camel to pass through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. But with
God nothing is impossible. From all that which has been said may be gathered,
how worthy of contempt and hatred are all temporal goods, since they deceive us
not only of our content in this life, but of our felicity in the other, and
even of God himself. What implacable hatred would a faithful and honest Spouse
conceive against that Traitor, who counterfeiting the shape and habit of her
Husband should violate her Chastity? how would she abhor him, when she knew
the injury he had done her in a matter of that importance? In the same manner
are we betrayed by temporal felicity, who appearing unto its in the likeness of
the true happiness, makes our hearts to adulterate with it, and leave our
lawful Spouse and true good indeed, which is God. For certainly there is no
perfect felicity but in his service, and compliance with his holy will in this
life, that we may enjoy him eternally in the next; and therefore temporal
goods, which by their deceit cozen us, and make us lose the eternal, ought not
to be loved and followed, but hated as a thousand deaths.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE TEMPORAL and ETERNAL.
CAP. I.
Of the greatness of things Eternal.

ALthough the littleness and baseness of things temporal be in themselves such
as we have already seen, yet unto him who shall consider the greatness and
Majesty of the eternal, whereof we now begin to treat, they will appear much
less and more contemptible. For such is the greatness of that glory, that St.
Austin falls into these speeches; Augus. in Man.
If it were requisite every day to suffer torments, or to remain in hell it
self for some long time, to the end we might behold Christ in his glory, and
enjoy the company of Saints, were it much to suffer what is grievous and
painful upon earth, that we might be partakers of so great a happiness? which
speech of St. Austin is not to be taken as an exaggeration; as neither that,
which is attributed to St. Jerome: That it is a wonder that the stones under
the feet of those, who shall be damned, convert not into roses, as an
anticipated solace of those evils which they are to suffer: And that to the
contrary those under the feet of them, who are to be saved, turn not into
thorns to wound and chastise them for their sins, since for so short troubles
they are to receive unspeakable joys. This greatness of eternal goodness
consists not only in the eternity of their duration, but in their intention
also, as being supreme and without limit in their excellency. And therefore we
ought not to think much at the suffering of a thousand years torments, if for
them we might obtain those blessings but for one day. Whereupon St. Austin
says; Such is the beauty of righteousness, Augus. de libero arb. 3.
such the joy of that eternal light of that immutable truth and wisdom, that
although we were not to continue in it above one day, yet for so short a time a
thousand years in this life, replenished with delights and abundance of all
goods temporal, were justly to be despised. For it was not spoken amiss, that
Better is one day in thy Courts above a thousand. So that whereas it is
commonly said, that for eternal joys we ought to leave the temporal and frail
goods of the earth, which are short and transitory, St. Austin says, that if
those of heaven were short, and these of earth Eternal, yet we ought to forsake
these for those.

This is confirmed by that which is written by Thomas de Cantiprato, and
others; Lib. 2. c. 57. N. 67.
That the Devil being demanded by an Exorcist what he would suffer to see God,
answered, That he would suffer all that the damned in hell Men and Devils were
to suffer until the day of Judgment, only that he might enjoy the sight of
him but for some short time. How can we then complain of the short troubles of
this life, which are to be recompensed with the clear vision of God for ever,
when his professed Enemy would suffer so much only to enjoy it for an insant?
Cato having only read that discourse of Socrates concerning immortality,
thought it nothing to part with this life, and tear his bowels in pieces, that
he might enjoy that eternal liberty of the Soul, freed from the encumbrances
and oppressions of the Body. Jo. Herol. in Promp. Exem.
Heroldus writes that Friar Jordan, General of the holy Order of the preaching
Friars, exorcizing a possessed person, the Devil amongst other answers to his
demands, told him, That he had never seen the face of God but only during the
twinkling of an eye; and that to see it so much longer he would willingly
suffer all the pains of his companions until the day of Judgment. Friar Jordan
remained astonished at this answer, and recalling himself a little, he said
unto him: Thou have said well; But declare me his beauty by some similitude or
representation. Thou have moved a foolish question, replied the Spirit; for
there is no expressing of it. But to give some satisfaction to thy desire, I
say, that if the beauties of all Creatures, Heavens, Earth, Flowers, Pearls,
and all other things that can give any delight to the sight, were all comprised
in one only thing; if every one of the Stars yielded as much light as the Sun,
and the Sun shined as bright as all they together, all this united so together
would be in respect of the beauty of God Almighty, as a dark pitchy night in
respect of the clearest and brightest day. Where by the way it is to be
observed, that the Devils never saw God clearly, as the Angels in glory now
behold him, but only by the excellency of their nature attained to some
particular and advantageous knowledge of his beauty and divine perfections, and
joy, which resulted from that knowledge. And if to enjoy that once again for so
short a time they would endure those torments for so long a space, what shall
it be to behold him clearly in his glory? Certainly to be roasted, plucked in
pieces with pincers, to be burnt alive for a thousand years, were well employed
to enjoy that felicity but for a day. What shall it be to possess it for an
eternity, when the joy also of each day shall be equivalent to many years? Joh.
Major. Ex. 14. Ex Coll. Psalm. 89.
Wherefore Johannes Major reports that a certain Monk being at Mattins with the
other Religious of his Monastery, and coming to that verse of the Psalm, where
it is said; A thousand years in the presence of God are but as yesterday, which
is already past, began to imagine with himself, how it might be possible: and
remaining in the Quire (as his manner was) after the end of Mattins to perfect
his devotions, he humbly besought the Lord to grant him the true understanding
of that place; which he had no sooner done, but he perceived a little Bird in
the Quire, that with flying up and down before him, by little and little with
her most melodious singing insensibly drew him forth of the Church into a Wood
not far off, where pearching her self upon a bough, she for some short time,
as it seemed to him, continued her music to the unspeakable delight of the
Monk, and then flew away, leaving him by her absence no less sad and pensive.
But seeing she came no more, he returned back, thinking he had left his
Monastery the same morning immediately after Mattins, and that it was now about
the third hour: but coming to the Convent, which was near the Wood, he found
the Gate, by which he was accustomed to enter, to be mured up, and another
opened in some other part, where calling upon the Porter, he was demanded Who
he was, From whence he came, and What was his business: He answered, that he
was the Sacristan of the Church, and that having that morning gone abroad after
Mattins, he found all things at his return changed. The Porter demanded of him
the name of the Abbot, the Prior, the Procurator. He named them all, and
wondered he was neither understood nor permitted to enter, and why they feigned
not to know those Religious whom he mentioned, and desired to be brought to the
Abbot; but coming into his presence, neither the Abbot knew him, nor he the
Abbot: whereat the good Monk being much astonished knew not what to say or do.
The Abbot asked him his name, and that of his Abbot; and turning the Annals of
the Monastery, found it was more than three hundred years since the death of
those persons which he named. Whereupon the Monk making a relation of what had
happened unto him concerning the Psalm, they acknowledged him, and admitted him
as a Brother into their profession, where having received the Sacraments of the
Church he with much peace ended his days in our Lord.

If the pleasure of one sense did so ravish the Soul of this Servant of God,
what shall it be, when not only the hearing, but the light, smell, taste, the
whole body and soul shall be drowned in joys proportionable to the senses of
the one, and power of the other? If the music of a little Bird did so
transport him, what shall the music of Angels? what shall the clear vision of
God? what shall God himself do, when he makes oftentation, if so may say, of
his omnipotency? For as Assuerus, who reigned from India to Aethiopia, over 170
Provinces, made a great Feast for all his Princes, which lasted 181 days: So
shall this King of Heaven and Earth make his great Supper of glory, which shall
last for all eternity, for the setting forth of his Majesty, and for the honor
and entertainment of his Servants: where the joys shall be such, as neither
the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of
man. O baseness of temporal goods, what proportion do they hold with this
greatness, since they are so poor, that even time, from whence they have their
being, makes them tedious and not to be endured? Who could continue a whole
month without other diversion in hearing the choicest music? nay, who could
pass a day free from weariness without some change of pleasures? But such is
the greatness of those joys, which God has prepared for them who love and
fear him, as we shall still desire them afresh, and they will not cloy us in a
whole Eternity.

. 2.
St. Anselme observes this difference betwixt the goods and evils of this life
and the other, Anselm. lib. de simil.
that in this life neither of them are pure, but mixed and confused. The goods
are imperfect, and mingled with many evils; and the evils short, and mingled
with some good. But in the other life, as the goods are most perfect and pure
without the least touch of any ill, and so can never weary us, (for that were
an evil:) so to the contrary those evils of hell, in which there is no good at
all, are horrible and above all sufferance.

Eternal glory therefore is great, both in respect of its purity, being free
from any ill, and in respect of its perfection, being highly and excellently
good. David said, Ps. 102.
That God had removed our sins from us, as far as the East is distant from the
West; which he has not only verified in the guilt of sin, but in the
punishment, which is as tar removed from the blessed, as Heaven is from Earth.
And although the spiritual distance betwixt them be greater than the corporeal,
yet that we may from hence form some conception of that also, we will say as
much as our weakness is able to attain unto of this. Clavius in Sphae. (...). 1.
Our famous Mathematician Christopher Clavius says, that from the Sphere of
the Moon, which is the lowest Heaven, unto the Earth are one hundred and twenty
thousand six hundred and thirty miles: and from the Heaven of the Sun four
millions thirty thousand nine hundred and twenty three miles: and from the
Firmament or eighth Heaven one hundred sixty one millions eight hundred
fourscore and four thousand nine hundred and forty three miles. Here Plato
wills the Mathematicians to cease their enquiry; for from hence there is no
rule of measuring further; but without all doubt it is much farther from thence
to the Empyrial Heaven. For the only thickness of the Starry Sphere is said to
contain as much as the whole space betwixt that and the Earth: In so much as if
a Millstone were thrown from the highest of the Firmament, and should every hour
fall two hundred miles, it would be 90 years before it arrived at the Earth.
The Mathematicians also and some learned Interpreters of the holy Scripture
affirm that the distance from the Earth unto the highest of the Firmament is
less than that from thence to the lowest of the Empyrial Heaven; and therefore
conclude, if one should live two thousand years, and every day should travel a
hundred miles, he should not in all that time reach the lowest of the
Firmament; and if after that he should also travel other two thousand years, he
should not reach the highest of it; and from thence four thousand years before
he arrived at the lowest of the Empyrial Heaven. O power of the grace of Jesus
Christ, which makes us in a moment dispatch so great a journey! That noble
Matron who was tormented, and put to death in England, said unto those with
grief and honor that beheld her martyrdom, So short is the way which brings
us to heaven, that within six hours I shall mount above the Sun and Moon, tread
the Stars under my feet, and enter into the Heaven of the Blessed. But there
was no need of six hours; one little instant brings the souls of the blessed
thither; which being purified from their sins and pains, remain further distant
from the one and the other, than Heaven is from Earth. Proportionable unto this
distance of place is the advantage, which the greatness of Heaven has above
that of Earth: and the same holds in their blessings. Let us mount then with
this consideration thither, and from that height let us disspise all this
mutable World, Ptolom. in Praefa. Almages.
since even the Gentiles did it. Wherefore Ptolome said; He is higher than the
world, who cares not in whose hands the world is. And Cicero; What humane thing
can seem great unto him, Tull. in Some. Scip.
unto whom eternity and the greatness of the other world are known. All the
earth seems so little unto me, that I am sorry and ashamed of our Empire, with
which we have only touched some little part of it. All the Kingdoms of the
Earth are but as a point, and unto Boctius seemed but as a point of a point.
Bar. 3.
But of Heaven Baruch could say, How great is the house of God, how large is
the place of his possession! it is great and has no end, high and
immeasurable. So great is the advantage of things eternal above temporal,
although they were not eternal. O what fools then are they, who for one point
of Earth lose so many leagues of Heaven: who for one short pleasure lose things
so immense and durable! O the greatness of the omnipotency and goodness of the
divine liberality, which has prepared such things for the humble and little
ones who serve him. St. Austin, whose thoughts were so sublime, and whose
understanding was one of the greatest in the world, found himself unable to
express them, nay even to think of them. For being desirous to write of Eternal
Glory, and taking pen in hand, he beheld in his Chamber a great light, and felt
a sweetness so fragrant, as almost transported him; and withal heard a voice
which said, Austin, what do thou mean? do thou think it possible to
number the drops in the Sea, or to grasp the whole compass of the Earth, or to
make the Celestial bodies suspend their motion? that which no eyes have seen,
would thou behold? that which no ear has heard, would thou conceive?
that which no heart has attained, nor humane understanding imagined, do
thou think that thou only can comprehend? What end can that have which is
infinite? how can that be measured which is immense? Sooner shall all those
impossibilities be possible, than thou understand the least part of that glory,
which is enjoyed by the blessed in Heaven. If one, who had been ever bred in an
obscure dungeon, and never had seen other light than that of some dim Lamp,
were told that above the Earth there was a Sun, which enlightened the whole
world, and cast his beams far above a hundred thousand leagues in
Circumference, all the discourses which could be made unto such a one, would
hardly make him conceive the brightness and beauty of the Sun; much less can
the glory of those things of the other world be made to appear unto us, though
exemplified by comparisons of the greatest beauty the world affords. So
ineffable blessings are contemned by a Sinner, and all to make himself
despicable and accursed..

3.
After the same manner the evils and pains of this World are nothing comparable
unto those which are eternal; and therefore as the three hundred years enjoying
of one heavenly pleasure seemed unto that Servant of God no longer than three
hours; so to the contrary three hours of eternal pains will appear unto the
damned as three hundred years, and much more: since even of the temporal pains
in Purgatory this notable accident is written by St. Antoninus. St. Anto. 4.
p.. 4.
A man of an evil life was visited by our Lord with a long infirmity, to the
end he might repent and reflect upon his sins; which took effect. But his
sickness by continuance grew so grievous and tedious unto him, as he often with
great earnestness recommended himself unto God, and besought him to deliver him
from the prison of his body. Whereupon an Angel appeared unto him with this
choice, either to continue two years sick in that manner he was, and then to
go straight to Heaven, or to die instantly, and remain three days in
Purgatory. He was not long in his election, but presently chose the latter: and
immediately died; but had not been an hour in those pains, when the same Angel
appeared unto him again, and after some encouragement and consolation demanded
if he knew him; he answered, No. I am, said he, the Angel who brought thee that
choice from Heaven, either to come hither, or to remain in thy infirmity for
two years: To whom the afflicted soul replied; It is impossible thou should
be the Angel of the Lord: for good Angels cannot lie; and that Angel told me, I
should remain in this place but three days; and it is now so many years, that
I have suffered those most bitter torments, and can yet see no end of my
misery. Know then, said the Angel, that it is not yet an hour, since thou left
thy body, and the rest of the three days yet remain for thee to suffer; To
whom the Soul replied, Pray unto the Lord for me, that he look not upon my
ignorance in making so foolish a choice, but that out of his Divine mercy he
will give me leave to return once more unto life, and I will not only
patiently suffer those two years, but as many as it shall please him to impose
upon me. His Petition was granted, and being restored unto life, his experience
of Purgatory made all the pains of his infirmity seem light unto him; in so
much as he endured them not only with patience but joy. Much like unto this
(as appears in the Chronicles of the Minorits) happened unto a religious person
of the Order of St. Francis, Chron. S. Fran. 2. p. l. 4. c. 8.
who demanded the same of God Almighty in regard of the much trouble he put his
religious brebren unto, as also for what he suffered himself. An Angel appeared
unto him, and gave him his choice either of suffering one day in Purgatory, or
remaining a whole year longer sick as he was. He made choice to die presently;
and had scarce been one hour in Purgatory; when he began to complain of the
Angel, for having cozened him. The Angel appeared unto him again, certifying
him, that his body was not yet buried because there was one only hour past
since his death. He gave him his choice the second time. His Soul was presently
reunited to the body, and he rose out of his Bed to the great astonishment of
all. If this then pass in Purgatory, it will not be less in hell; and if an
hour seem a year, which contains above eleven thousand hours, an eternity in
hell will appear eleven thousand eternities. O how dearly bought are the short
pleasures of the senses, which are paid for with so long and so innumerable
torments! For if pain should last no longer than the pleasure that deserved it,
it would seem to those, who are to feel it, ten thousand times longer. What
will it do being eternal? O pains of this World, infirmities, griefs and
troubles, how ridiculous are ye compared with those which are eternal: since
the time which you endure is but short, and it is not much that you can afflict
us; nay, if by temporal punishments we may escape the eternal, you are most
happy unto us, and ought to be received with a thousand welcoms.

CAP. II.
The greatness of the eternal honor of the Just.

LEt us now in particular consider the greatness of those goods of the other
life, in which are contained Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and all the blessings
both of soul and body; of each whereof we shall say something apart, and will
begin with that of Honor. Certainly the reward of honor, which shall be
conferred upon the Just in the other life, is to be wonderful great; First, in
respect, that amongst all the appetites of a reasonable creature, that of
honor is the most potent and prevalent. Secondly, because our Savior exhorts
us unto humility as the way by which we are to enter into glory, and promises
honors and exaltations unto the humble; and there is no question but in that
place of satiety, remuneration, and accomplishment of all, that can be desired,
the honor of the Servants of Christ, and followers of his humility, shall be
inexpressible, of which there are many promises in holy Scripture. He himself
says, That his Father will honor them in Heaven; and David sings; Thou have
crowned him with glory and honor; and Ecclesiasticus (as it is applied by the
Church) A Crown of Gold upon his head graven with the seal of holiness, and the
glory of honor. Besides, all the tribute, which those who serve God are able
to pay him, is only to laud and honor him. His eternal joy, happiness, and
all his intrinsecal perfections are so excellent, that they can receive no
addition; only this glory and honor, as they are an exterior good, are
capable of augmentation. And this is that which he receives from the Saints who
serve him: With which God is so pleased, that he pays them again in the same
money, and honors those who honored him; and this honor arrives at that
height, that Christ himself expresses it in these words; Apoc. 3.
He who shall overcome, I will give him to sit with me in my Throne, even at I
have overcome, and have sitten with the Father in his Throne. At the greatness
of which promise a Doctor being amazed, cries out; Bell. l. 1. de aterna
felici. c. 4. infine.
How great shall be that glory, when a just Soul shall in the presence of an
infinite number of Angels sit in the same Throne with Christ, and shall by the
just Sentence of God be praised for a Conqueror over the World, and the
invisible Powers of Hell! and how shall that Soul rejoice, when it shall see it
self, being freed from all danger and troubles; to triumph over all its
enemies! What can it desire more than to be partaker of all those divine goods,
and even to accompany Christ in the same Throne? O how cheerfully do they
combat upon Earth: O how easily do they bear all afflictions for Christ, who
with a lively faith and certain hope apprehend so sublime honors! Certainly
with much reason may the happiness of Saints be called by the name of Glory,
since the honor which they receive is so transcendent. What an honor shall
that be, when the Just in the other lise shall receive no less a recompense of
his holiness than God himself? The nature of honor is to be a reward of
virtue: and by how much greater the reward is, which a powerful King bestows
upon some valorous Captain, by so much greater is the honor which he confers
upon him. What honor shall it then be, when God shall give unto those who have
served him, not only to tread upon the Stars, to inhabit the Palaces of
Heaven, to be Lords of the World, but transcending all that is created, and
finding amongst his whole riches nothing sufficient to reward them, shall give
them his own infinite essence to enjoy, not for a day, but to all eternity? The
highest honor which the Romans bestowed upon their greatest Captains, was to
grant them a day of triumph, and in that permission to wear a Crown of grass or
leaves, which withered the day following. O most honored virtue of Christians,
whole triumph shall be eternal, and whose never fading Crown is God himself! O
most happy Diadem of the Just, O most precious Garland of the Saints, which is
of as great worth and value, as is God! Sapores King of the Persians was most
ambitious of honor, and would therefore be called the Brother of the Sun and
Moon, and Friend to the Planets. This vain Prince erected a most glorious
Throne, which he placed on high, and thereon fat in great Majesty, having under
his feet a certain Globe of glass, whereon were artificially represented the
motions of the Sun, the Moon and Stars: and to sit crowned above this
fantastical Heaven he esteemed as a great honor. What shall be then the
honor of the just, who truly and really shall sit above the Sun, the Moon, and
Firmament, crowned by the hand of God himself? If the applause of men and the
good opinion which they have from others be esteemed an honor, what shall be
the applause of Heaven, and the good opinion not only of Saints and Angels,
but of God himself, whose judgments cannot err? David took it for a great
honor, that the Daughter of his King was judged as a reward of his valor. God
surpasses this; and honors so much the services of his Elect, that he pays
their merits with no less a reward than himself. O happy labor of the
victorious, and glorious combat of the just against the vices and temptations
of the World, whose victory deserves so inestimable a Crown! Clemens
Alexandrinus reports that there were in Persia three Mountains; He, who came to
the first, heard as it were a far off the noise and voice of them who were
fighting; he who attained at the second, heard perfectly the cries and clamours
of Soldiers engaged in the fury of a Battle; but he who attained unto the
third heard nothing but the joyful acclamations of a victory. This happens
really with the just, who are likewise to pass three mystical Mountains, which
are Reason, Grace, and Glory. He who arrives at the knowledge of Reason, gives
an alarm unto Vice, which he combats and overcomes by Grace, and in Glory
celebrates his victory with the joy and applause of all the Inhabitants of
heaven, and is crowned as a Conqueror with such a Crown, as we have already
spoken of.

. 2.
Besides this, he who is most known, and is praised and celebrated for good and
virtuous by the greatest multitude, is esteemed the most glorious and
honorable person. But all this World is a solitude in respect of the Citizens
of Heaven, where innumerable Angels approve and praise the virtuous actions of
the Saints; and they likewise are nothing, and all creatures, Men and Angels,
but as a solitary Wilderness in respect of the Creator. What comparison betwixt
that honor which may be given by some particular Kingdom, or by all Europe,
and that which shall be heaped upon the just by all the blessed Men and Angels:
nay even by the damned and Devils in the Day of Judgment? What is the
approbation of a created understanding in respect of the Divine? What man so
glorious upon earth, whose worth and valor has been known to all? Those who
were born before him could not know him; no more shall many of those who are to
follow him. But the Predestinate in heaven shall be known by all past and to
come, by all the Angels and by the King of Men and Angels. Humane fame is
founded upon the applause of mortal men, who besides being less than Angels,
may be deceived, may lie, and are most part of them sinners and wicked. How
far then must that honor exceed it, which is conferred upon the Just by the
holy Angels, and by those blessed and pure Souls, who cannot be deceived
themselves, nor will deceive us? If we esteem it more to be honored by the
Kings of the Earth, by the Great men of the World, and by the Learned in
Universities, than by the barbarous and ignorant Peasants of some poor Village,
how ought we then to value the honou, rwhich shall be bestowed upon us by the
Saints in Heaven, who are the Kings and Grandees of the Court of God, and are
all replenished with most perfect and divine wisdom? All the honor of men is
ridiculous, and his ambition no wiser who seeks it, then, as St. Anselme says,
if one worm should desire to be honored by another. Lib. de Sim. c. 65.
All the Earth is but as a Village, or rather as some poor Cottage in respect
of Heaven. Let us not therefore strive for a name upon Earth, but that our
names may be written in Heaven; in comparison whereof it is too much to say,
that the Earth is a point, as Seneca called it: Lib. 2. de Consol.
and therefore Bottius proves, that it is less, and says; If from this little
particle of Earth you shall take what Seas, Lakes; and uninhabited places full
of wild beasts take up, you shall leave unto men but a narrow dwelling. Being
therefore penned up in so small a point of a point, how can thou think to
extend thy renown and publish thy name? Compare the honor of Heaven with that
of Earth, and thou shall find the difference betwixt them to be as great as is
their distance. Of this incomparable honor in Heaven, have been some
revelations of great comfort. It was revealed to St. Gertrude, that, as often
as St. Joseph was named here upon Earth, all the blessed in Heaven made a low
bow. What greater honor can be expected? what comparison can all the
expressions of respect, and adorations of all the men in this World have with
one only inclination, and reverence expressed by one Saint of Heaven? What
then shall be a reverence exhibited by them altogether? The Church says of St.
Martin, that at his entrance into Heaven he was received with Celestial hymns,
that is, with songs, which the blessed sung in praise of his prowess and
victory. If Saul thought the honor too much, which was given to David by the
Damsels, when they celebrated his Victory in their songs, What shall it be to
be celebrated by all the Saints and Angels in Celestial responsories? Bellar.
de aeter. felic. lib. 4. c. 2.
Cardinal Bellarmine conceives that when a Servant of God enters into Heaven,
he shall be received with such music, all the blessed in Heaven often
repeating those words in the Gospel; Well done good servant and true; because
thou have been faithful in a few things, thou shall be placed over much; Enter
into thy Lords joy; which words they shall repeat in Quires. This shall be a
Song of Victory, an honor above all the honors of the Earth, conferred by so
great, so wise, so holy, and so authentic persons. Whereupon St. Austin said,
Lib. 22. de Civit. c. 30.
There shall be the true glory, where none shall be praised by the error or
flattery of the praiser; and there the true honor, which shall neither be
denied to the worthy, nor granted unto the unworthy.

3.
Although the honor and applause, which the Just receive in Heaven from the
Citizens of that holy City, be incomparable, yet that honor and respect, with
which God himself shall treat them, is far above it. Christ our Redeemer to
express it uses no meaner a similitude, than that of the honor done by the
Servant unto his Lord: and therefore says, that God himself shall, as it were,
serve the Blessed in Heaven at their Table. It is much amongst men to be seated
at the Table of a Prince; but for a King to serve his Vassal, as if he himself
were his Servant, who ever heard it? Certainly with much reason David said unto
God, That his Servants were too much honored. And the same David, when he
caused Miphiboseth (although the Grandchild of a King, and the Son of an
excellent Prince, unto whom David ought his life) to sit at his Table, he
thought he did him a singular honor: but this favor never extended to wait on
him. Aman, Esther 6.
who was the most proud and ambitious man in the world could not think of a
greater honor from King Assuerus than to ride through the Streets mounted upon
the Kings own horse, and that the greatest man in the Kingdom should lead him
by the bridle; but that the King himself should perform that service, never
entered into his imagination; The honor which God bestows upon the Just exceeds
all humane imagination, who not satisfied with crowning all the Blessed with
his own divinity, giving himself to be possessed and enjoyed by them for all
eternity, does also honor their victories and heroic actions with new Crowns:
Lib. 10. Apum.
Thomas de Cantiprato writes of Alexander, brother to St. Matilde, and Son to
the King of Scots, that he appeared unto a certain Monk with two Crowns, and
being demanded why he had them doubled; he answered, This which I wear upon my
head is common unto me with all the blessed, but that which I carry in my hand
is given me for renouncing my Kingdom upon Earth. But above all, the Martyrs,
Virgins, and Doctors shall appear most glorious, whom God shall honor with
certain particular marks of honor, by which they shall be known and
distinguished from the rest of the Blessed: which seals and marks shall be
imprinted in their Souls, like the indelible characters of Baptism,
Confirmation and Priesthood, which are to endure for all eternity. Of the
Doctors the Prophet Daniel says, They shall shine like the Stars in the
Firmament: giving us to understand, that as the Stars excel the other parts of
the Firmament by the advantage of their light, so the Doctors shall be known in
Heaven by a more glorious splendour, which they shall cast from them. And if the
least Saint in Heaven shall shine seven times more than the Sun, what shall
that light be, which shall outshine so many Suns? Apoc. 21.
Of the Martyrs St. John says, That they went clothed in white, carrying
palms in their hands in sign of victory. For as Kings are honored by wearing
Purple, and holding Scepters, so Conquerors by their candid Garments and Palms.
Apoc. 21.
The same St. John also says of Virgins, That the name of Christ and his
Father shall be imprinted in their foreheads: which shall be as a token to
distinguish them from the rest of Saints, conformable unto that of the Prophet
Isaias, who says that a more noble and excellent name shall be given to
Virgins, than unto the rest of the Sons of God: by which name St. Augustine
says is meant some particular Devise, which shall distinguish them from the
rest, as the more eminent men are distinguished from others by their several
Titles of honor. Besides this, those members of the Blessed, by which they
have more specially served God or suffered for him, Aug. 22. de Civit. Dei.
shall (as St. Austin notes) cast forth some particular light and splendor: so
as every wound, which St. Stephen received from his stoning, shall cast forth a
particular beam of light. And with what a Garment of glory shall St. Bartholmew
be clad, who was flead from head to foot? In the like manner St. James
Intercisus, who was hacked in pieces member by member for the faith of Christ.
Even the Confessors in those Senses, which they have mortified for Christ,
shall have a particular Enamel of light. St. John the Evangelist was showed to
St. Matilde, with a particular splendor and glory in his eyes, for not daring
to lift them up to look upon our Blessed Lady, when he lived with her, for the
great esteem and reverence he bore unto her. There is no kind of honor, which
shall not then be given to the heroical acts of virtue performed by the Saints
in this life, which shall be to be read in the particular persons of the
predestinate; so as there shall be no necessity of Histories, Annals, or
Statues, to make known or eternize their memories, as here in worldly honors,
which being short, transitory, and of small endurance have need of something to
preserve them in the memory of men. For this the Romans erected Statues unto
those, whom they intended to honor, because being mortal there should
something remain after death to make their persons and services, which they had
done to the Commonwealth, known to posterity. But in Heaven there is no need
of this artifice; because those who are there honored are immortal, and shall
have in themselves some character engraved as an evident and clear testimony of
their noble Victories and Achievements. The honor of the Just in Heaven
depends not, like that of the Earth, upon accidents and reports, nor is exposed
to dangers, or measured by the discourse of others, but in it self contains its
own glory and dignity. Cuiac. ad tit. de dignit.
The dignities in the Roma Empire, as may be gathered from the Civil Law, were
four, expressed by these four Titles, Perfectissimus, Clariffimus, Spectabilis,
and Illustris, most Perfect, most Clear, Specious, and Illustrious. These
Honors were only in name and reputation, not in substance and truth. For He
was often called most perfect, who was indiscreet, foolish, passionate, and
imperfect: He most clear, who had neither clearness nor serenitity of
understanding, but was infected with dark and obscure vices. Those specious and
beautiful, from whom a man would fly twenty leagues rather than behold them;
and those illustrious, who were enveloped in the darkness of vice and ignorance
without the least light of virtue. That we may therefore see the difference
betwixt the honors of Heaven, and those of the Earth, which are as far
distant from one another, as truth from falsehood, we must know that in Heaven
the Blessed are not only called most Perfect, but really are so both in soul
and body without the least imperfection or defect: are not only called most
Clear, but are so, each one being adorned with that gift of brightness, that
they shall cast out beams more clear than the Sun; and if the Sun be the most
bright thing in nature, what shall they be, who seaventimes outshine it? Nor
shall they be only said to be spectabilis or specious, and worthy to be looked
upon, but their beauty and comeliness shall be such, as shall not only draw
the eyes of all to behold them, but shall stir up their affections to love
and admire them. In the like manner they shall not be titularly, but really
Illustrious: for every one with his own light shall be sufficient to illustrate
and enlighten many Worlds. If one only false title of those, which are truly
enjoyed by the Blessed, were capable of making the Roman Empire to respect and
honor the possessor, what shall the truth and substance of them all do in
Heaven? 1 Mac. 2.
With reason did Mathathias call the glory of this World dung and filth;
because all honors and dignities of the Earth in respect of those in Heaven
are base, vile, and despicable. What greater honor, than to be Friends of God,
Sons, Heirs, and Kings in the Realm of Heaven? Apoc. 4.
St. John in his Apocalypse sets forth this honor of the blessed in the 24
Elders, who were placed about the Throne of God, and in that Honor and
Majesty, as every one was seared in his presence, and that upon a Throne,
clothed in white and lucid Garments, in sign of their perpetual joy, and
crowned with a crown of Gold in respect of their dignities. To be covered in
the presence of Kings is the greatest honor they confer upon the chiefest
Grandees; but God causes his Servants to be crowned and seated upon Thrones
before him: and our Savior in the Day of Judgment makes his Disciples his
fellow Judges.

. 4.
Certainly greater honor cannot be imagined than that of the Predestinate. For
if we look upon him, who honors, It is God; If with what: With no less joy
than his own Divinity, and other most sublime gifts; If before whom: Before the
whole Theater of Heaven now, and in the Day of Judgment before Heaven, Earth,
Angels, Men and Devils; If the continuance: For all eternity; If the titles,
which he gives them, it is the truth and substance of the things, not the empty
word and vain name. By all this may appear the cause, why eternal happiness,
being a mass and an assembly of all goods imaginable, yet is called (by way of
excellence) by the name of Glory; because that although it contain all
pleasures, contents, joys, riches, and what can be defired, yet it seems the
Glory and honor, which God bestows upon the Just, exceeds all the other. The
honor which God gives in Heaven to glorious Souls, may be seen by that which
he gives to their worm-eaten bones upon Earth, whereof St. Chrysostom speaks
these words. Where is now the Sepulcher of the great Alexander? In 2. ad
Corinth. Hom. 26.
show it me I beseech thee, and tell me the day whereon he died. The Sepulchers
of the Servants of Christ are so famous that they possess the most Royal and
Imperial City of the World, and the day, whereon they died, is known and
observed as festival by all. The Sepulcher of Alexander is unknown even to his
own Countrymen; but that of these is known to the very Barbarians. Besides the
Sepulchers of the Servants of Christ excel in splendour and magnificence the
Palaces of Kings, not only in respect of the beauty and sumptuousness of their
buildings, wherein they also exceed, but, which is much more, in the reverence
and joy of those who repair unto them. For even he, who is clothed in Purple,
frequents their Tombs, and humbly kisses them, and laying aside his Majesty and
Pomp supplicates their prayers and assistance with God Almighty, he who wears
the Diadem taking a Fisherman and a Maker of Tents for his Patrons and
Protectors. What miracles has not God wrought by the Relics of his Servants,
and what prodigies have not been effected by their bodies? St. Chrysostom
writes of St. Juventius, Chrysostom. in Sermon. de Juven. and Max. Sever. in Ep. ad
Socrum.
and St. Maximus, that their bodies after death cast forth such beams of light,
that the eyes of those, who were present, were not able to suffer them.
Sulpicius Severus writes of St. Martin, that his dead body remained in a manner
glorified, that his flesh was pure as Crystal, and white as milk. What wonders
did God work by the bodies of St. Edward the King, and St. Francis Xavier,
preserving them incorrupted for so many years? and if he do those great things
with their Bodies, who are under the Earth, what will he do with their Souls,
which are above the Heavens, and what with them both, when their glorious
Bodies shall arise, and after the Day of Judgment, united to their Souls,
enter in triumph into the holy and eternal City of God?

CAP. III.
Of the Riches of the eternal Kingdom of Heaven.

THe Riches in Heaven are no less than the Honors, though those, as has been
said, are inestimable. There can be no greater riches than to want nothing
which is good, nor to need any thing which can be desired; and in that blessed
life no good shall fall, nor no desire be unsatisfied. And if, as the
Philosophers say, he is not rich who possesses much, but he who desires
nothing, There being in Heaven no desire unaccomplished, there must needs be
great riches. It was also a position of the Stoics, That he was not poor who
wanted, but he who was necessitated. Since then in the Celestial Kingdom there
is necessity of nothing, most rich is he who enters into it. By reason of these
Divine Riches Christ our Savior when he speaks in his Parables of the Kingdom
of Heaven, does often express it under Names and Enigma's of things that are
rich; sometimes calling it the Hidden Treasure, and sometimes the Precious
Pearl, and other times the Lost Dram. For if Divine happiness consist in the
eternal possession of God, what riches may be compared with his who enjoyes
him, and what inheritance to that of the Kingdom of Heaven? What Jewel more
precious than the Divinity, and what Gold more pure than the Creator of Gold
and all things precious, who gives himself for a Possession and Riches unto the
Saints, to the end they should abhor those Riches which are temporal, if by
them the eternal are endangered? Let not therefore those who are to die to
morrow afflict themselves for that which may perish sooner than they. Let them
not toil to enjoy that which they are shortly to leave; nor let them with more
fervor pray for those things which are transitory, than those which are
eternal, preferring the Creature before the Creator, not seeking God for what
he is, but for what he gives. Wherefore St. Austin says, Aug. in Psalm. 52.
God will be served gratis, will be beloved without interest, that is, purely
for himself, and not for any thing without himself; and therefore he who in
invokes God to make him rich, does not invoke God, but that which he desires
should come unto him; for what is invocation but calling something unto him?
wherefore when thou shall say; My God give me riches, thou do not desire that
God but riches should come unto thee; for if thou had invoked God, he would
have come unto thee, and been thy riches; but thou desiredst to have thy
Coffers full, and thy heart empty, and God fills not Chests but breasts.

2.
Besides the possession of God, it imports us much to frame a conception of
this Kingdom of Heaven, which is that of the Just, where they shall reign with
Christ eternally, whose riches must needs be immense, since they are to be
Kings of so great and ample a Kingdom. The place then which the Blessed are to
inhabit is called she Kingdom of Heaven, because it is a most large Region, and
much greater than can perhaps fall under the capacity of our understanding. And
if the Earth compared with Heaven be but a point, and yet contain so many
Kingdoms, what shall that be which is but one Kingdom, and yet extended over
the whole Heavens? How poor and narrow a heart must that Christian have, who
confines his love to things present, sweating and toyling for a small part of
the goods of this World, which it self is so little? why does he content
himself with some poor patch of the Earth, when he may be Lord of the whole
Heavens? Although this Kingdom of God be so great and spacious, yet it is not
dispeopled, but as full of Inhabitants of all Nations and conditions, as if it
were a City or some particular House. There (as the Apostle said) are many
thousands of Angels, an infinite number of the Just, even as many as have died
since Abel: and thither also shall repair all who are to die unto the end of
the World, and after judgment shall there remain for ever invested in their
glorious bodies. There shall inhabit the Angelical Spirits distinguished with
great decency into their Nine Orders, unto whom shall correspond Nine others of
the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Pastors and
Doctors, Priests and Levites, Monks and Hermits, Virgins and other holy Women.
This populous City shall not be inhabited with mean and base People, but with
Citizens so noble, rich, just, and discreet, that all of them shall be most
holy and wise Kings. How happy shall it be to live with such persons? The Queen
of Saba only to see Solomon came from the end of the Earth; and to see Titus
Livius Nations and Provinces far distant came to Rome. To behold a King issue
out of his Palace all the People flock together. What shall it then be not
only to see, but to live and reign with so many Angels, and converse with so
many eminent and holy Men? If only to see St. Anthony in the Desert men left
their Houses and Countries, what joy shall it be to discourse and converse with
so many Saints in Heaven? If there should now descend from thence one of the
Prophets or Apostles, with what earnestness and admiration would every one
strive to see and hear him? In the other World we shall hear and see them all.
St. Roman at the sight of one Angel when he was a Gentile left the world and
his life to become a Christian. How admirable shall it then be to see thousand
of thousands in all their beauty and greatness, and so many glorious bodies of
Saints in all their luster? If one Sun be sufficient to clear up the whole
World here below, what joy shall it be to behold those innumerable Sum in that
Region of light?

From this multitude of Inhabitants, the place of glory is not only called the
Kingdom of Heaven, but the City of God. It is called a Kingdom for its immense
greatness, and a City for its great beauty and population. It is not like other
Kingdoms and Provinces which contain huge Deserts, inaccessible Mountains, and
thick Woods: nor is it divided into many Cities and Villages distant one from
another; but this Kingdom of God, although a most spacious Region, is all one
beautiful City. Who would not wonder if all Spain or Italy were but one City,
and that as beautiful as Rome in the time of Augustus Caesar, who found it of
Brick, and left it of Marble? What a sight were that of Chaldaea, if it were
all a Babylon; or that of Syria, if all a Jerusalem? What shall then be the
Celestial City of Saints, whose greatness possesses the whole Heavens: and is
as the holy Scripture describes it (to exaggerate the riches of the Saints) all
of Gold and precious Stones? The Gates pf this City were, as St. John says,
one entire Pearl, and the foundations of the Walls Jasper, Sapphire, Calcedon,
Emerald, Topaz, Jacinth, Amethist, and other most precious Stones; The Streets
of fine Gold, so pure, as it seemed Crystal, joining in one substance the
firmness of Gold and transparency of Chryftal, and the beauty both of one and
the other.

If all Rome were of Sapphire, how would it amaze the world? how marvelous then
will the holy City be, which though extended over so many millions of leagues,
is all of Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, or, to say better, of a matter of
far more value, and peopled with such a multitude of beautiful Citizens, as
are as far above any imaginable number, as the capacity of the City is above
any imaginable measure? Some famous Mathematicians say of die Empyrial Heaven,
that it is so great, that if God should allow unto every one of the blessed a
greater space than the whole Earth, yet there would remain as much more to give
unto others; and that the capaciousness of this Heaven is so great, that it
contains more than ten thousand and fourteen millions of miles. What wonder
will it be to see a City so great of so precious matter? The Divines confess
the capaciousness of this Heaven to be immense, but are more willing to admire
it, than bold to measure it. Joan. Gailer in suo Peregrino.
Howsoever there wants not one, who says, that if God should make each grain
of sand upon the Seashore as big as the whole Earth, they would not fill the
Concave of the Empyrial Heaven;) and yet this Holy City possesses all that
space, and is all composed of matter far more beautiful and precious, than
Gold, Pearl, and Diamonds. For certain our thoughts cannot conceive so great
riches and wonders; for which we ought to undergo all the pains and
necessities of this World. St. Francis of Assisium being afflicted with a
grievous pain of his eyes, in so much as he could neither sleep, Chron. Frat.
Min. p. 1. c. 60.
nor take any rest, and at the same time molested by the Devil, who filled his
Cell with Rats, which with their Careers and noise added much unto his pain,
with great patience gave thanks unto the Lord that he had so gently chastized
him, saying, My Lord Jesus Christ I deserve greater punishment; but thou like a
good Shepherd suffer me not to stray from thee. Being in this meditation he
heard a voice, which said unto him: Francis, if all the Earth were of Gold, and
all the Rivers of Balsame, and all the Rocks of precious Stones, would thou
not say that this were a great treasure? Know that a treasure, which exceeds
Gold as far as Gold does Dirt, Balsam Water, or Preciousstones Pibbles,
remains as a reward for thy infirmity, if thou be content and bear it with
patience. Rejoice Francis; for this treasure is Celestial glory, which is
gained by tribulations. Certainly we have reason to suffer here all pains and
poverty whatsoever, since we are to receive in glory so much the greater
riches. Wherefore we ought to lift up our souls, and weaning our hearts from
the frail felicity of these temporal goods of the Earth, to say with David,
Glorious things are said of thee City of God. So did Fulgentius, who entering
Rome when it was yet in its luster, and beholding the greatness, beauty, and
marvelous Architecture of it, said with admiration; O Celestial Jerusalem, how
beautiful must thou be, if Terrestrial Rome be such! A shadow of this was
showed unto St. Josaphat, whose History is written by St. John Damascen. In
vita Josaph. and Barl.
St: Josaphat being in profound prayer prostrate upon the earth was overtaken
with a sweet sleep, in which he saw two men of grave demeanor, who carried him
through many unknown Countries unto a Field full of flowers and plants of rare
beauty, laden with fruit never before seen. The leaves of the trees moved with
a soft and gentle wind yielded a pleasant sound, and breathed forth a most
sweet odor; there were placed many Seats of Gold and precious Stones, which
shined with a new kind of brightness; and a little Brook of Crystal water
refreshed the air, and pleased the sight with a most agreeable variety. From
thence he was brought into a most beautiful City, whose Walls were of
transparent Gold, the Towers and Battlements were of Stones of inestimable
value, the Streets and places shone with Celestial beams of light: And there
passed up and down bright Armies of Angels and Seraphins, chanting such songs
as were never heard by mortal ears. Amongst other he heard a voice, which said,
This is the repose of the Just, this the joy of those who have given a good
account of their lives unto God. But all this is no more than a dream and a
shadow in comparison of the truth, greatness, and riches of that Celestial
Court. In regard that all the Blessed together with Christ are to reign in this
most rich City and, Kingdom, how great shall the riches be? who was ever so
rich as to have at the entrance of his House a massy large piece of Gold two
or three yards long? What riches will those be of Heaven? because all the
Kingdom of Heaven is to be of pure Gold, all the Streets, and all the Houses of
that Holy City; and not only Gold, but more than Gold. The holy Scripture to
make us on one part understand the riches of this Kingdom of God, and on the
other part to know that they are of a higher and more excellent nature than
those of the Earth, expresses them with the similitude of the riches of this
World, as Gold, Pearl and precious Stones, because by these names we understand
things of great wealth and value: but withal sets them forth for such as are
not to be found upon earth; so as when it speaks of Pearls, it says, they were
so great as they served for the Gates of a City: when it speaks of Emeralds and
Topaz's, it makes them to suffice for the foundatian of high Walls and Turrets;
when of Gold, it makes it transparent as (Glass or Crystal. All this is to
signify that in Heaven there are not only greater riches, but of a more
sublime and high quality than ours upon Earth. And with reason is that Holy
City called the Kingdom of Heaven, to let us know, that the same advantage,
that Heaven has above Earth, the same have Celestial honors, riches, and
joys above those which are here below. If the whole Earth is no more than a
point in respect of the Heavens, what can those short and corruptible riches be
in respect of the eternal?

3.
Of those incomparable riches the Blessed are not only to be Lords but Kings,
as appears in many places of holy Scripture. Neither is the Celestial Treasure
^or this Kingdom of Heaven less or poorer by having so many Lords and Kings. It
is not like the Kingdoms on Earthy; which permit but one King at once, and if
divided become of less power and Majesty; but is of such condition, that it is
wholly possessed by all in general, and by each one in particular, like the Sun
which warms all and every one, and not one less, because it warms many. The
effects of riches are much greater and more noble in Heaven, than they can be
upon Earth. Wealth may serve us here to maintain our power, honors, and
delights: but all the Gold in the world cannot free us from weakness, infamy,
and pain. The power of a rich King can reach no further than to Command his
Vassals; and those who disobey him he may either chastise with imprisonment or
death, and is therefore feared and respected by them. But all this power is
invalid without the assistance of his Subjects. For what will it avail a Prince
to command such a City to be defended, if the Soldiers within have a mind to
deliver it? And therefore a certain Jester of Philip the Second King of Spain
demanded of him, If all should say No unto what your Majesty commands, what was
to be done? giving him to understand that his power depends upon others. The
power of a Monarch depends not only upon the will of his Subjects, but the
Walls of his Fortresses, Arms, Instruments of War, and many other things; so
as the people depend only upon one man, which is the Prince: but the Prince
upon many men and matters, in so much as many rich Kings have been seen without
power, as Craesus, Andronicus, and others, who were not able to defend
themselves with all their riches from their own Vassals. Witness Domitian,
Commodus, Heliogabolus and Julius Caesar. But the power of the Blessed depends
of no other power nor man; Ansel de Simil. c. 52.
which, as St. Anselm says, shall be so great, as no force or resistance shall
withstand it. It a Saint have a mind to remove a Mountain from one place to
another, he shall do it with as much ease, as we remove our eyes from one part
unto another. Neither is this a wonder. For even the faithful in this life
according to the promise of Christ have done it, as is written of St. Gregorius
Thaumaturgus, and some others. And if Angels, nay Devils have this power, the
Blessed shall not be denied it. Concerning honor, the richest Princes can
only make their Vassals to adore them upon the knee, and do them other outward
reverence, but cannot hinder them from murmuring in their absence, or from
observing their actions, and interpreting them as they please. They have many
flatterers, which praise them with their tongues, and scorn them in their
hearts; and for the most part they are far fewer, who praise, than despise
them; for there are but few, who discourse with them, but many who discourse of
them; and therefore few who praise them in presence, and many who censure them
in absence. Concerning pleasures, it is true that Princes are not content with
ordinary delights, and therefore provide themselves of magnificent Shows,
costly Recreations, exquisite Comedies, pleasant Gardens, Woods for hunting,
and are all clothed splendidly. But none of those can make a Calenture not to
afflict them, or that the pains of the head, stomach, or gout do not molest
them, or that cares and fears do not break their sleep.

No gold or money can secure the goods of this World, or free them from
imperfections. This only is to be had in Heaven, where their power is so free
from weakness, that one only Angel without Army, Guns, Swords, 4 Reg. 19.
or Lance could destroy at once 180000 men. with what speed and facility do
Saints succor their devotes, who invoke them, without impediment either from
the distance of place, or hinderance from the violence of Tyrants? How complete
then shall be the honor of the Blessed, since even the Devils shall reverence
them? Nay even now many who despised them living, seeing the many miracles,
which God has wrought by their intercession, have honored them after death.
The pleasures also are pure and true, without mixture of pain or grief, as we
shall see in the proper places. Besides, it is to be considered that the great
riches of the Saints are not like those of the Kings of the Earth, drawn from
the tributes imposed upon their Vassals, which though just, yet are not free
from this ill condition, that what enricheth the Prince impoverisheth the
Subject. The riches in Heaven have no such blemishes; they are burdensome to
none; and what is given to the Servants of Christ who raigns in Heaven, is not
taken from any.

CAP. IV.
Of the greatness of Eternal Pleasures.

Honor, Profit, and Pleasures are distinct goods upon Earth, and are rarely
found together. Honor is seldom a companion of profit, and profit of pleasure;
And so the sick man drinks his Purge, because it is profitable how bitter
soever. Besides, the pleasures or the world are for the most part mixed with
some shame, and oftentimes with infamy. They are costly and expensive; we
cannot entertain our pleasures without diminishing our wealth. It is not so in
eternal goods, in which to be honest is to be profitable, and to be profitable
delectable. Eternal honors are accompanied with immense riches, and they are
both attended by pleasures without end. All this is signified by the Lord, when
he received the faithful Servant into glory, when he says, Well done good
servant and true: because thou have been faithful in a few things, I will place
thee over many; Enter into the joy of thy Lord. In these words he first honors
him, commending him for a good and faithful Servant; then enriches him,
delivering many things into his hands: and so admits him into the joy and
pleasure of his Lord; signifying by this manner of expression the greatness of
this joy, not saying, that this joy should enter in to him, but that he should
enter into joy, and into no other but that of his Lord. So great is the joy of
that Celestial Paradise, that it wholly fills and embraces the blessed Souls,
which enter into Heaven, as into an immense Sea of pleasure and delight. The
joys of the Earth enter into the hearts of those who possess them, but fill
them not, because the capacity of man's heart is greater than they can satisfy.
But the joys of Heaven receive the Blessed into themselves, and fill and
overflow them in all parts. Their glory is like an Ocean of delights, into
which the Saints enter as a Sponge into the Sea, which filling its whole
capacity, the water surrounds and compasses it all about. Whereupon St. Anselme
says; Ansel. ca. 71. de Simil.
Joy shall be within and without, Joy above and below, Joy round about on every
side, and all parts full of joy. The same immensity of joy the Lord signified
when he said by Isaias, Behold I create Jerusalem an exultation, Isai. 65.
and her people a joy. It is much to be noted that he says not, I create a
rejoicing for Jerusalem, or in Jerusalem, nor a joy in or for its people, but
by a particular mystery I make Jerusalem that it shall be all an exultation,
and its people all a joy. He speaks in this manner to set forth the greatness
of his copious joy, with which that holy City, and her Inhabitants shall be as
it were encompassed and overwhelmed. For as a plate of iron in the middle of a
Furnace is so wholly inkindled and penetrated by fire, that it seems fire it
self, and contains the full heat of the Furnace: So a blessed Soul in Heaven is
so replenished with that Celestial joy, that it may not only be said to be
joyful, but joy it self.

The multitude of joys in Heaven is joined with their greatness: and so great
they are, that the very least of them sufficient to make us forget the greatest
contents of the Earth; and so many they are, as that, though a thousand times
shorter, yet they would exceed all temporal pleasures though a thousand times
longer; but joining the abundance of those eternal joys with their immense
greatness, that eternal B iss becoms ineffable. Wherefore St. Bernard says;
The reward of Saints is so great, that it cannot be measured, so numerous, that
it cannot be counted, so copious, that it cannot be ended, and so precious,
that it cannot be valued. Albert. Mag. in Comp. Theol. l. 7. c. 8. 1 Cor. 2.
Isai. 64.
And Albertus Magnus to the same purpose; So great are the joys of Heaven,
that all the Arithmaticians of the Earth cannot number them: The Geometricians
cannot measure them: nor the most learned men in the world explicate them:
because neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, what God has prepared for those who love him. The Saints
shall rejoice in what is above them, which is the vision of God; in what is
below them, which is the beauty of Heaven and other corporal Creatures; in what
is within them, which is the glorification of their bodies; in what is without
them, which is the company of Angels and men. God shall feast all their
spiritual senses with an unspeakable delight; for he shall be their object, and
shall also be a mirror to the sight, music to the ear, sweetness to the
taste, balsam to the smell, flowers to the touch. There shall be the clear
light of Summer, the pleasantness of the Spring, the abundance of Autumn, and
the repose of Winter.

. 2.
The principal joy of the Blessed is in the possession of God, whom they behold
clearly as he is in himself. For as Honorable, Profitable, and Delectable
(according to what we have already said) are not divided in Heaven, so the
blessed Souls have three gifts essential and inseparable from that happy state,
which correspond to those three kinds of blessings, which the Divines call
Vision, Comprehension, and Fruition. The first consists in the clear and
distinct sight of God, which is given to the Just as a reward of his merits, by
which he receives an incomparable honor, since his works and virtues are
rewarded in the presence of all the Angels with no less a Crown and recompense
than is God himself. The second is the possession which the Soul has of God,
as of his riches and inheritance. And the third is the ineffable joy which
accompanies this sight and possession. The greatness of this joy no tongue can
tell; and I believe that neither the Blessed themselves, who have experience of
it, nor the Angels of Heaven are able to declare it. Yet it will not be amiss,
if we (as much as our ignorance and rudeness is able to attain unto) consider
and admire it. This joy has two singular qualities, by which we may in some
sort conceive the immensity of it. The first, that it is so vigorous and
powerful, that it excludes all evil, pain, and grief. This only is so great a
good, that many of the Philosophers held it for the chief felicity of man.
Cicero de Fin. and 5. Tuscul.
And therefore Cicero writes, that Jeronymus Rhodius, a famous Philosopher and
a great Master, to whom may be joined Diodorus the Peripatetick, speaking of
the chief happiness of man, taught that it consisted in being free from grief;
It being the opinion of those Philosophers, that not to suffer pain or evil was
the greatest and most supreme good. But herein was their error, that they
judged that to be the good it self, which was but an effect and consequent of
it: For so powerful is that love and joy, which springs from the clear vision
of God, that it is sufficient to convert hell into glory; in so much as if to
the most tormented Soul in hell were added all the torments of the rest of the
Damned both Men and Devils, and that God should vouchsafe him but one glympse
of his knowledge, that only clear vision, though in the lowest degree, were
sufficient to free him from all those evils both of sin and pain: So that his
Soul being rapt by that ineffable beauty which he beheld, would not be sensible
of any grief at all. O how potent a joy is that, which cast into such an abyss
of torments, converts them all into consolations! How mighty were that fire,
whereof one spark would consume the whole Ocean? There is no joy in this World
so intense, which can suspend the grief we suffer from a finger, that is in
sawing off. Griefs do more easily bereave us of the sense of pleasure, than
pleasures do of pains. Yet such is the greatness of that sovereign joy in
Heaven, that it alone is sufficient to drown all the griefs and torments both
in Earth and Hell; and there is no pain in the World able to diminish the least
part of it.

The other stupendous wonder, which proceeds from the greatness of this joy,
is the multitude of those pleasures, which as from a most fruitful root spring
from it. Who would not be astonished, that the happiness of the Soul should
cause so many, and so marvelous effects in the bodies of the Blessed? So
excellent is that beatifical vision, which with ineffable joy possesses the
spirit, that it bursts forth into the body with all the evident demonstrations
of beauty, luster, and the other gifts of glory. We see here that the heart is
not able so far to dissemble a great joy conceived, as that it appears not by
some sign in the body; but that joy is so weak and feeble, that it extends no
further than to express some little cheerfulness and mirth in the countenance.
But the beatifical Vision is so immense a joy, that it wholly changes the body,
making it beautiful as an Angel, resplendent as the Sun, immortal as a Spirit,
and impassible as God himself, working great miracles and prodigies in the
body, by the redundancie of that unspeakable comfort, which the spirit feels. O
if one could place before the eyes of the World the body of some blessed Saint,
enendowed with the four gifts of glory, full of clearness, splendour, and
beauty, casting forth a fragrancy infinitely more sweet unto the senses than
that of Musk and Amber, that men might see by this shadow, how immense is that
light and joy, which thus illustrates and beautifies the flesh. O mortals, why
do ye covet other pleasures with loss of Soul and Body, and do not rather seek
after these with the profit and glory of both? O how different are temporal
delights from eternal! those (especially if they be unlawful) blemish and
destroy the Soul, and weaken and corrupt the body; but these beautify and
embellish them both, conferring perfect happiness upon the Soul, and beauty and
immortality upon the Body.

3.
Finally all those joys of the Blessed both in Soul and Body, which are
innumerable, have their sourse and original from that unspeakable joy of the
clear vision of God. And how can the joy be less, which proceeds from such a
cause, who gives himself, being the sweetness and beauty of the world, to be
possessed by man, that joy being the very same which God enjoyes, and which
suffices to make God himself blessed with a blessedness equal to himself?
Wherefore not without great mystery in those words, by which our Savior admits
the faithful into Heaven, it is said; Enter into the joy of thy Lord. he said
not simply into joy, but to determine the greatness of it, says, it was his
own joy, that joy, by which he himself becomes happy; and truly the immensity
of this joy could not better be declared. We are therefore to consider, that
there is nothing in this World, which has not for his end some manner of
perfection, and that those things, which are capable of reason and knowledge,
have in that perfection a particular joy and complacencie; which joy is greater
or lesser according as that end is more or less perfect. Since therefore the
Divine perfection is infinitely greater than that of all the Creatures, the joy
of God, which is in himself, (for he has no end not perfection distinct from
himself) is infinitely greater than that of all things besides. This joy out of
his infinite goodness and liberality he has been pleased to make the holy
Angels and blessed Souls partakers of, communicating unto the Just (although no
ways due unto their nature) his own proper and special felicity. And therefore
the joy of Saints, which is that of the beatifical vision, wherein consists the
joy and happiness of God, must needs be infinite and unutterable, and all
contents of this World in respect of it are bitter as alloes, gall, and
wormwood.

Besides, by how much a delectable object is more nearly and straightly united
to the faculty, by so much greater is the joy and delight which it produces.
Therefore God, who is the most excellent and delightful object, being in the
beatifical vision united to the Soul with the most intimate union that can be
in a pure creature, must necessarily cause a most inexplicable joy,
incomparably greater than all the joys real or imaginable, which can be
produced either by the Creatures now existent or possible. For as the Divine
perfection incloseth within it self all the perfections of things created,
possible, and imaginable, so the joy, which it causes in the Souls of the
Blessed, must be infinitely greater than all other joys, which either have, or
can be caused by the Creature. If the Greeks warred ten years and lost so much
blood for the beauty of Helen, And if it seemed a small thing unto Jacob to
serve fourteen years a Slave for that of Rachel, what trouble can seem great
unto us to enjoy God, in comparison of whose beauty all which the World affords
is but deformity? Absolon and Adonis were most beautiful, and with their very
sight drew love and admiration from their beholders. But it looking upon
Absolon, another ten times more lovely should appear, we should quickly leave
to gaze upon Absolon, and fix our eyes upon the other: and if a third should
come a hundred times more graceful than the second, we should serve the second
in the same manner, and our eyes and delight would still follow him, who was
the most agreeable. God being then infinitely more beautiful than we can either
see or think, and although he should create some other Creature ten hundred
thousand times more beautiful than these we know, yet that, and one, another
million of times exceeding it, would both fall infinitely short of God himself,
especially that beauty not being alone, but accompanied with perfections
without limit, with an infinite wisdom, omnipotence, holiness, liberality,
bounty, and all that can be imagined good, beautiful, and perfect, which must
necessarily force the hearts of those who see him (although before his enemies)
to love and adore him. Which is an other proof of the joy which springs from
the beatifical vision, in regard it works so powerfully upon the will of him
that enjoyes it, that it compels it by an absolute necessity to a most intense
love, although it had before detested it; because the joy must equalize the
love which it caused. It there were in the World a Man as wise as an Angel, we
should all desire to see him, as the Queen of Saba did Salmon; but if to this
wisdom were joined the strength of Hercules or Sampson, the victories of
Machabeus or Alexander, the affability and courtesy of David, the friedliness
of Jonathan, the liberality of the Emperor Titus, and to all this the beauty
and comeliness of Absolon, who would not love and desire to live and converse
with this admirable person? Why then do we not love and desire the sight of
God, in whom all those perfections and graces infinitely above these are
united: which also we our selves, if we serve him, are to enjoy as if they were
our own?

O how great and delightful a Theater shall it be to see God, as he is, with
all his infinite perfections, and the perfections of all Creatures, which are
eminently contained in the Deity! How admirable were that spectacle, where were
represented all that are or have been pleasant or admirable in the World! If
one were placed where he might behold the seven Wonders of the World, the
sumptuous Banquets made by Assuerus and other Persian Kings, the rare Shows and
Feasts exhibited by the Romans, the pleasant Trees and savoury Fruits of
Paradise, the Wealth of Craesus, David, and the Assyrian and Roman Monarchs,
and all those jointly together, who would not be transported with joy and
wonder at so admirable a sight? but more happy were he, upon whom all these
were bestowed, together with the assurance of a thousand years of life, wherein
to enjoy them. Yet all this were nothing in respect of the eternal sight of
God, in whom those and all the perfections, that either are or have been, or
possibly can be, are contained. What ever else is great and delightful in the
World, together with all the pleasures and perfections, that all the men in the
World have obtained, or shall obtain to the World's end, all the wisdom of
Solomon, all the sciences of Plato and Aristotle, all the strength of
Aristomenes and Milo, all the beauty of Paris and Adonis, if they should give
all these things to one person, it would have no comparison, and would seem to
be a loathsome thing, being compared only to the delight, which will be
enjoyed in seeing God for all eternity; because in him only will be seen a
Theater of Bliss and Greatness, wherein are comprised as in one the greatness
of all creatures. In him will be found all the richness of Gold, the
delightfulness of the Meadows, the brightness of the Sun, the sweet taste of
Honey, the pleasantness of Music, the beauty of the Heavens, the comfortable
smell of Amber, the contentfulness of all the senses, and all that can be
either admired or enjoyed.

To this may be added, that this inestimable joy of the vision of God is to be
multiplied into innumerable other joys; into as many, as there are blessed
Spirits and Souls which shall enjoy the sight of God, in regard every one is to
have a particular contentment of the bliss of every one. And because the
blessed Spirits and Souls are innumerable, the joys likewise of every one
shall be innumerable. Ansel. de Simil. cap. 71.
This St. Anselme notes in these words. With how great a joy shall the Just br
replenished, to accomplish whose blessedness, the joy of each other Saint shall
concur? for as every Saint shall love another equally as himself, so he shall
receive equal joy from his happiness to that of his own. And if he shall
rejoice in the happiness of those, whom he loves equally unto himself, how much
shall he rejoice in the happiness of God, whom he loves better than himself?
Finally the blessed Soul shall be surrounded with a Sea of joys, which shall
fill all his powers and senses with pleasure and delight, no otherwise than if
a Sponge, that had as many senses of pleasures as it has pores and eyes, were
steeped in a Sea of milk and honey, sucking in that sweetness with a thousand
mouths. God is unto the Blessed a Sea of sweetness, an Ocean of unspeakable
joys. Let us therefore rejoice who are Christians, unto whom so great
blessings are promised: let us rejoice that Heaven was made for us, and let
this hope banish all sadness from our hearts. Pallad. Hist. ca. 52.
Palladius writes, that the Abbot Apollo, if he saw any of his Monks sad, would
reprehend him, saying, Brother, why do we afflict our selves with vain sorrow?
let those grieve and be melancholy, who have no hope of Heaven, and not we,
unto whom Christ has promised the blessedness of his glory. Let this hope
comfort us, this joy refresh us; and let us now begin to enjoy that here, which
we are ever hereafter to possess; for hope, as Philo says, is an anticipation
of joy. Upon this we ought to place all our thoughts, turning our eyes from all
the goods and delights of the Earth.

The Prophet Elias, when he had tasted but one little drop of that Celestial
sweetness, presently locked up the windows of his senses, covering his eyes,
ears, and face with his mantle. And the Abbot Sylvanus, when he had finished
his prayers, shut his eyes, the things of the Earth seeming unto him unworthy
to be looked upon after the contemplation of the heavenly, in the hope whereof
we only are to rejoice.

CAP. V.
How happy is the eternal life of the Just.

BY that which has been said may sufficiently appear how happy and blessed is
the life of the Just. But so many are their joys, and so abundant that eternal
happiness, that we are forced to insist further upon this Subject. When the
Hebrews would express ablessed person, they did not call him blessed in the
singular, but blessings in the abstract, and plural; and so in the first Psalm
in place of Beatus, the Hebrews say Beatitudines, and certainly with much
reason: since the Blessed enjoy as many blessings as they have powers, or
senses: Blessings in their understanding, will, and memory; blessings in their
sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. Nay, their blessings exceed the number
of their senses, and the very pores of their bodies; so as that life is truly a
life entire, total, and most perfect, wherein all, that is man, lives in joy
and happiness. The Understanding shall live there with a clear and supreme
wisdom, the Will with an inflamed love, the Memory with an eternal
representation of the good which is past, the Senses with a continual
delectation in their objects. Finally, all that is man shall live in a
perpetual joy, comfort, and blessedness.

And to begin with the life and joy of the Understanding, the Blessed besides
that supreme and clear knowledge of the Creator, whereof we have already
spoken, shall know the Divine mysteries, and the profound sense of the holy
Scriptures; they, shall know the number of Saints and Angels as if they were
but one; they shall know the secrets of the Divine providence, how many are
damned, and for what; they shall understand the frame and making of the World,
the whole artifice of Nature, the motions of the Stars and Planets, the
proprieties of Plants, Stones, Birds, and Beasts, and shall not only know all
things created, but many of those things which God might have created; all
which they shall not only know jointly and in mass, but clearly and distinctly
without confusion. This shall be the life of the Understanding, which shall
feast it self with so high and certain truths. The knowledge of the greatest
Wisemen and Philosophers of the World even in things natural is full of
ignorance, deceit and appearance, because they know not the substance of things
but through the shell and bark of accidents, so as the most rude and simple
Peasant arriving at the height of glory shall be replenished with a knowledge,
in respect of which the wisdom of Solomon and Aristotle were but ignorance and
barbarism. Blos. de Mon. Spirit. c. 14.
Ludovicus Blosius reports that a certain simple and silly Maid appeared after
death unto St. Gertrude, and began to instruct her in many high and sublime
matters. The Saint admiring such great and profound knowledge in so ignorant a
person, asked her from whence she had it: to whom the Virgin answered; Since I
came to see God I know all things. Wherefore St. Cregory said well, It is not
to be believed that the Saints, who behold within themselves the light of God,
are ignorant of any thing without them.

What a content were it to behold all the Wisemen of the World, and the
principal Inventers and Masters of Sciences and Faculties met together in one
Room, Adam; Abraham, Mayses, Solomon, Isay, Zoroastes, Plato, Socrates,
Aristotle, Pythagoras, H^mer, Trismegistus, Solon, Lycurgus, Hipocrates,
Euclides, Archimedes, Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and all the Doctors of the
Church? How venerable were this Juncto, how admirable this Assembly, and what
journies would men make to behold them? If then to see such imperfect scraps of
knowledge, divided amongst so many men, would cause so great admiration, what
shall be the joy of the Blessed: when each particular person shall see his own
understanding furnished with that true and perfect wisdom; whereof all theirs
is but a shadow? Who can express the joy they shall receive by the knowledge of
so many truths? What contentment would it be to one, if at once they should
show unto him what ever there is, and what is done in the whole Earth: the fair
Buildings so sumptuous, all the Fruit Trees of so great diversity, all living
Creatures of so great variety, all the Birds so curiously painted, the Fishes
so monstrous, the Metals so rich, all People and Nations farthest remote?
certainly it would be a sight of wonderful satisfaction. But what will it be to
see all this, whatever there is in the Earth, together with all that there is
in Heaven and above Heaven? Some Philosophers in the discovery of a natural
truth, or the invention of some rare curiosity have been transported with a
greater joy and content than their senses were capable of. For this Aristotle
spent so many sleepless nights; for this Pythagoras traveled into so many
strange Nations; for this Crates deprived himself of all his wealth; and
Archimedes, as Vitruvius writes, never removed his thoughts night nor day from
the inquisition of some Mathematical demonstration. Such content he took in
finding out some truth, that, when he eat, his mind was busy in making lines
and angles. If he bathed and anointed himself, as was the custom of those
times, his two fingers served him in the room of a compass to make circles in
the oil, which was upon his skin. He spent many days in finding out by his
Mathematical rules how much gold would serve to gild a crown of silver, that
the Goldsmith might not deceive him: and having found it, as he was bathing in
a Vessel of brass, not able to contain his joy, he fetched diverse skips, and
cried out, I have found it, I have found it. If then the finding out of so mean
a truth could so transport this great Artist, what joy shall the Saints
receive, when the Creator shall discover unto them those high secrets, and
above all that sublime mystery of the Trinity of persons in the unity of
essence? This with the rest of those Divine knowledges, wherewith the most
simple of the Just shall be endued, shall satiate their Souls with unspeakable
joys. O ye wise of the World, and ignorant before God, why do you weary your
selves in vain curiosities, busy to understand, and forgetful to love, intent
to know, and slow to work? Dry and barren speculation is not the way to
knowledge, but devout affection, ardent love, mortification of the senses, and
holy works in the service of God. Labor therefore and deserve, and you shall
receive more knowledge in one instant, than the wise of the world have obtained
with all their watchings, travails and experiences. Aristotle, for the great
love he bore to knowledge, held that the chief felicity of man consisted in
contemplation. If he found so great joy in natural speculations, what shall we
find in divine, and the clear vision of God?

There shall the Memory also live, representing unto us the Divine benefits,
and rendering eternal thanks unto the Author of all; the Soul rejoicing in its
own happiness to have received so great mercies for so small merits, and
remembering the dangers, from which it has been freed by Divine favor, it
shall sing the verse in the Psalm, The snare is broken and we are delivered.
The remembrance likewise (as St. Thomas teaches) of the acts of virtue and good
works, by which Heaven was gained, shall be a particular joy unto the Blessed,
both in respect they were a means of our happiness, as also of pleasing so
gracious and good a Lord. This joy, which results from the memory of things
past, is so great, as Epicurus, prescribing a way to be ever joyful and
pleasant, advises us to preserve in memory, and to think often of contents
past. But in Heaven we shall not only joy in the memory of those things,
wherein we have pleased God in complying with his holy will, and in ordering
and disposing our life in his service, but in the troubles also and dangers we
have past. The memory of a good lost without remedy causes great regret and
torment, and to the contrary, the memory of some great evil avoided and danger
escaped is most sweet and delectable. The Wiseman said the memory of death was
bitter, as indeed it is to those, who are to die, but unto the Saints, who have
already past it, and are secure in Heaven, nothing can be more pleasant: who
now to their unspeakable joy know themselves to be free from death, infirmity,
and danger.

There also shall live the Will in that true and vital life, rejoicing to see
all its desires accomplished with the abundance and sweet satiety of so many
felicities; being necessitated to love so admirable a beauty as the Soul
enjoyes and possesses in God Almighty. Love makes all things sweet, and as it
is a torment to be separated from what one loves, so it is a great joy and
felicity to remain with the beloved; And therefore the Blessed loving God more
than themselves, how unspeakable a comfort must it be to enjoy God, and the
society of those, whom they so much affect? The love of the Mother makes her
delight more in the sight of her own Son, though foul and of worse conditions,
than in that of her neighbors. The love then of Saints one toward another,
being greater than that of Mothers to their Children, and every one of them
being so perfect and worthy to be beloved, and every one enjoying the sight of
the same God, how comfortable must be their conversation? Sen. Ep. 6.
Seneca said, That the possession of what good soever was not pleasing without
a Partner. The possession then of the chief good mus be much more delightful
with the society of such excellent companions. If a man were to remain alone
for many years in some beautiful Palace, it would not please him so well as a
Desert with company; but the City of God is full of most noble Citizens, who
are all sharers of the same blessedness. This conversation also being with
wise, holy and discreet personages shall much increase their joy. For if one of
the greatest troubles of humane life be to suffer the ill conditions, follies,
and impertinencies of rude and ill-bred people, and the greatest content to
converse with sweet, pious, and learned friends, what shall that Divine
conversation be in Heaven, where there is none ill conditioned, none impious,
none froward, but all peace, piety, love, and sweetness? in so much as Saint
Austin says, Aug. lib. de Spirittu and anima.
Every one shall there rejoice as much in the felicity of another, as in his
own ineffable joy, and shall possess as many joys, as he shall find
companions. There are all things, which are either requisite or delightful, all
riches, ease, and comfort. Where God is, nothing is wanting. All there know God
without error, behold him without end, praise him without weariness, love him
without tediousness, and in this love repose full of God. Besides all this the
Security, which the will shall have in the eternal possession of this felicity,
is an unspeakable joy. The fear that the good things, which we enjoy, are to
end, or at least may end, mingles wormwood with our joys; and pleasures do not
relish, where there is danger. But this Celestial happiness being eternal,
neither shall nor can end, diminish, or be endangered, but with this security
adds a new joy unto those others of the Saints.

. 2.
Besides the Powers of the Soul, the Senses also shall live nourished with the
food of most proportionable and delightful objects. The eyes shall ever be
recreated with the sight of the most glorious and beautiful Bodies of the
Saints. One Sun suffices to cheer up the whole World. What joy then shall one
of the Blessed conceive in beholding as many Suns as there are Saints, and in
seeing himself one of them, when his hands, feet, and the rest of his members
shall all forth beams clearer than the Sun at midday? how shall he be
transported in beholding the Body of the holy Virgin our most blessed Lady,
more beautiful and resplendent than the light of all the Saints together? When
Saint Dionysius Arcopagita beheld her in a mortal Body, she seemed unto him as
if she had been in glory. With what joy then and gladness shall we look upon
her in Heaven clad with immortality? Hester. 2.
Of Hester the holy Scripture tells us, that she was incomparably beautiful,
and of most rare features, ravishing the eyes of all, and exceedingly amiable.
With how fat greater excellency will the Queen of Heaven appear full of all
graces and privileges of beauty in the happy state of glory? But above all,
with what content and admiration shall we behold the glorious Body of Christ
our Redeemer, in comparison of whose splendour, that of all the Saints shall be
as darkness from whose wounds shall issue forth rays of a particular
brightness? The tormented members also of the Martyrs, and the mortified parts
of the Confessors shall flourish with a singular beauty and splendor. Besides
all this, the glory and greatness of the Empyrial Heaven, and the luster of
that Celestial City shall infinitely delight the blessed Citizens.

The ears shall be filled with most harmonious songs and music, as may be
gathered from many places of the Apocalypse; and if the Harp of David delighted
Saul so much as it assuaged the fury of his passions, cast forth the Devils,
and treed him of that melancholy, whereof the wicked spirit made use: and that
the Lyre of Orpheus wrought such wonders both with men and beasts, what shall
the harmony of Heaven do? The devout Virgin Donna Sancha Carillo being sick and
ready to die with excessive pain, Roa. l. 1. c. 10. in ejus vita.
with the hearing of music from Heaven was freed from her grief, and remained
sound and healthy. St. Bonaventure writes of St. Francis, that whilst an Angel
touched his Instrument, it seemed unto him that he was already in glory. What
delight then will it be, not only to hear the voice of one Instrument played
upon by an Angel, but also the voices of thousands of Angels together with the
admirable melody of musical Instruments? The singing of one little Bird only
ravished an holy Monk, for the space of three hundred years, when as he
persuaded himself, they being past, that there were no more than three hours
past. What sweetness will it be to heat so many heavenly Musicians, those
millions of Angels, so many men, which will be sounding forth their Alleluja's,
which holy Tobie mentioned, and those Virgins singing a new song, which none
but they could sing? Surius writes in the life of St. Nichalas Tolentine, that
for fix months before his death he heard every night a little before Mattins
most melodious music of Angels, in which he had a taste of that sweetness
which God had prepared for him in his glory; and such joy and comfort he
received by hearing it, that he was wholly transported, desiring nothing more
than to be freed from his Body to enjoy it. The same desired St. Austin, when
he said, Aug. c. 25. med.
that all the employments, all the entertainments of the Courtiers in Heaven
consisted in praises of the Divine Majesty without end, without weariness or
trouble. Happy were I, and for ever happy, if after death I might deserve to
hear the melody of those songs, which the Citizens of that Celestial
habitation, and the squadrons of those blessed spirits sing in praise of the
eternal King. This is that sweet music, which St. John heard in the Apocalypse,
when the Inhabitants of Heaven sang: Let all the world bless thee, O Lord; To
thee be given all honor, and dominion for a world of worlds. Amen.

The smell shall be feasted with the odor, which issues from those beautiful
Bodies, more sweet than Musk or Amber, and from the whole Heaven more fragrant
than Jesemins or Roses. Greg. l. 4. dialog. c. 16. and Hom. 38. in Evang.
Turonen. li. 7. histo. Fran.
St. Gregory the Great writes that Christ our Redeemer, appearing unto Tarsilla
his Sister, cast forth so delicious a smell and fragrancy, that it well
appeared it could not proceed but from the Author of all sweetness. St. Gregory
of Tours writing of the holy Abbot St. Sylvius, says, that when he was dead
there was so great sadness in the Monastery for the loss of him, that our Lord
was pleased to command that he should be restored to life again. The Saint
obeyed though with great resentment of what he left, and whither he returned.
He bewailed his banishment with a fresh and lively memory of that Celestial
Country, where he had seen himself a little before with so great advantage. The
Monks pressed him very hard to declare unto them something of of what he had
seen. He told them: I, my dear Brethren, mounted up to the land of the living,
where I had the Sun, Moon, and Stars for my footstool, with greater splendor
and beauty than if it had been paved with silver and gold, being placed in the
seat deputed for me, I was replenished with an odor of so singular sweetness,
that it alone has been sufficient to banish all appetites or desires of the
things of this life; in so much that I neither desired to eat, nor drink any
thing to maintain it. Baron. To. 9. an. 716
Baronius reports of one, who raised from death, amongst other things
recounted, That he had seen a most delightful place, where an infinite number
of most beautiful persons did recreate themselves, and that there issued from
them a most fragrant and miraculous sweetness: and this the Angels told him was
the Paradise of the Sons of God. Greg. l. 4. Dial.
The like is reported also by St. Gregory of a certain Soldier. Neither is it
much that glorious Bodies should breath out so sweet a smell, since even in
this valley of misery the Bodies of Saints without life or soul have sent forth
a most admirable fragrancy. St. Gregory the Great writes that at the instant,
Greg. 4. Dial. c. 14.
when Sr. Servius died, all who were present were filled with a most
incomparable sweetness. St. Jerome reports the like of St. Hilarion, that ten
months after his death his Body cast forth a most fragrant perfume. If this be
in corruptible flesh, what shall be in the immortal Bodies of the Saints?

The taste also in that blessed Country shall not want the delight of its
proper object. For although the Saints shall not there feed, which were to
necessitate that happy state unto something besides it self, yet the tongue and
pallat shall be satiated with most pleasant and savoury relishes; so as with
great decency and cleanliness they shall have the delight of meat without the
trouble of eating, by reason of the great delicacy of this Celestial taste. The
glory of the Saints is often signified in holy Scripture, under the names of a
Supper, Banquet, Manna. Aug. lib. de spiritu and vita. Laur. Justin. de Dis.
Mon. ca. 23.
St. Austin says it cannot be explicated how great shall be the delight and
sweetness of the taste, which shall eternally be found in Heaven. And St.
Laurentius Justinianus affirms that an admirable sweetness of all that can be
delightful to the taste shall satisfy the pallat with a most agreeable
satiety. If Esau sold his Birthright for a dish of Lentil pottage, well may we
mortify our taste here upon earth, that we may enjoy that perfect and
incomparable one in Heaven.

The touch also shall there receive a most delightful entertainment. All they
tread upon shall seem unto the Just to be flowers, and the whole disposition of
their Bodies shall be ordered with a most sweet and exquisite temperature. For
as the greatest penances of the Saints were exercised in this sense by the
afflictions endured in their Bodies, so it is reason that this sense should
then receive a particular reward. And as the torments of the damned in hell are
most expressed in that sense, so the Bodies of the Blessed in Heaven are in
that sense to receive a special joy and refreshment. And as the heat of that
infernal fire without light is to penetrate even to the entrals of those
miserable persons, so the candor and brightness of the celestial light is to
penetrate the bodies of the Blessed, and fill them with an incomparable delight
and sweetness. All then, what we are to do, is to live in that true and perfect
life, all is to be joy in that eternal happiness. Therefore, as St. Anselme
says, Ansel. de Simil. c. 59.
the eyes, nose, mouth, hands, even to the bowels, and marrow of the bones, and
all and every part of the body in general and particular shall be sensible of a
most admirable pleasure and content.

Joan. de Tamba Trac. de Deliciis sensibilibus Paradisi. Et Nich. de Nise de
quat. Noviss. 3. Mist. 4. Consi.
The Humanity of Christ our Redeemer is to be the principal and chief joy of all
the Senses; and therefore John Tambescensis, and Nicholas of Nise say, that as
the intellectual knowledge of the Divinity of Christ is the joy and essential
reward of the Soul, so the sensitive knowledge of the Humanity of Christ is the
chief good and essential joy of the Senses, and the utmost end and felicity,
whereunto they can aspire. This it seems was meant by our Savior in St. John,
when speaking unto the Father he said; This is life eternal, that is,
essential, blessedness (as Nicholas de Nise interprets it) that they know thee
the only true God (in which is included the essential glory of the Soul,) and
him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, in which is noted the essential
blessedness of the Senses: in so much as only in the Humanity of our Savior
the appetite of the Senses shall be so perfectly satisfied, as they shall have
no more to desire, but in it shall receive all joy, pleasure, and fullness of
delight; for the eyes, shall be the sight of him who is above all beauty: for
the ears, one only word of his shall sound more sweetly than all the
harmonious music of the Celestial spirits: for the smell, the fragrancy that
shall issue from his most holy Body shall exceed the perfume of spices: for the
taste and touch, to kiss his feet and sacred wounds shall be beyond all
sweetness.

It is much also to be noted, that the blessed Souls shall be crowned with some
particular joys, which the very Angels are not capable of. For first it is
they only who are to enjoy the Crowns of Doctors, Virgins, and Martyrs, since
no Angel can have the glory to have shed his blood and died for Christ: neither
to have overcome the flesh, and by combats and wrastlings subjected it unto
reason. Wherefore Saint Bernard said, The chastity of men was more glorious
than that of Angels. Secondly, men shall have the glory of their bodies and joy
of their senses, which the Angels cannot: For as they want the enemy of the
Spirit, which is the Flesh, so they must want the glory of the victory. Neither
shall they have this great joy of mankind in being redeemed by Christ from sin,
and as many damnations into hell, as they have committed mortal sins, and to
see themselves now freed and secure from that horrid evil, and so many enemies
of the Soul, which they never had: which must needs produce a most unspeakable
joy.

Cap. VI.
The excellency and perfection of the Bodies of the Saints in the life eternal.

WE will not forbear also to consider, what man shall be when he is eternal,
when being raised again at the great day he shall enter Soul and Body into
Heaven. Let us run over, if you please, all those kinds of goods which expect
us in that Land of promise. When God promised Abraham the Country of Palestine,
he commanded him to look upon it, and travel and compass it from side to side.
Genesis 13.
Lift up thine eyes, says the Lord, and from the place, where thou stand,
look toward the North, and toward the South, and toward the East, and
toward the West: All the land which thou see I will give unto thee and thy
seed for ever. And immediately after, Arise and walk the land in length and
breadth, for I will certainly give it thee. We may take these words as spoken
unto our selves, since they seem to promise us the Kingdom of Heaven; for no
man shall enter into that which he docs not desire: and no man can desire that
as he ought to do, which he has not walked over in his consideration; for that
which is not known is hardly desired. And therefore we ought often to
contemplate the greatness of this Land, the length of its eternity, and the
breadth and largeness of its felicity, which is so far extended, that it fills
not only the Soul, but the Body with happiness and glory: that glory of the
Soul redounding unto the Body, and perfecting it with those four most excellent
gifts, and replenishing it with all felicity which can be imagined or desired.
If Moses, seeing an Angel in a corporal figure only upon the back part, and
but in passage, received so great a glory from the light and beauty which he
beheld, that his heart not being able to contain it, it struck forth into his
face with a divine brightness, what joy shall the blessed Souls receive from
the sight of God himself, when they shall behold him as he is face to face, not
in passage or a moment, but for all eternity? This joy by reason of their
strict union their Souls shall communicate unto their happy Bodies, Albert.
Mag. in Comp. Theol. l. 7. c. 38.
which from thenceforth shall be filled with glory, and invested with a light
seven times brighter than that of the Sun, as is noted by Albertus Magnus. For
although it be said in the Gospel, that the Just shall shine as the Sun, yet
Isaias the Prophet says, that the Sun in these days shall shine seven times
more than it now does. This light, being the most beautiful and excellent of
corporal qualities, shall cloth the Just as with a garment of most exceeding
luster and glory. What Emperor was ever clad in such a purple? what humane
Majesty ever cast forth beams of such splendor? Joseph. l. 19. c. (...);
Herod upon the day of his greatest magnificence could only cloth himself in a
Robe of silver admirably wrought, which did not shine of it self, but by
reflection of the Sun beams, which then in his rising cast his rays upon it:
and yet this little glittering was sufficient to make the people salute him as
a God. What admiration shall it then cause to behold the glorious Body of a
Saint, not clothed in Gold or Purple, not adorned with Diamonds or Rubies, but
more resplendent than the Sun it self? Put all the brightest Diamonds together,
all the fairest Rubies, all the most beautiful Carbuncles: let an Emperial Robe
be embroidered with them all: all this will be no more than as coals in respect
of a glorious body, which shall be all transparent, bright, and resplendent far
more than if it were set with Diamonds. O the basenese of worldly riches! they
all put together could not make a Garment so specious and beautiful. If here we
account it for a bravery to wear a Diamond Ring upon our fingers, and women
glory in some Carbuncle dangling at their breasts, what shall it be to have our
hands, feet, arid breasts themselves more glorious and resplendent than all the
Jewels of the World? The Garments which we wear here, how rich soever, are
rather an affront and disgrace unto us than an ornament, since they argue an
imperfection and a necessity of our bodies, which we are forced to supply with
something of another mature. Besides our clothes were given as a mark of Adams
fall in Paradise, and we wear them as a penance enjoined for his Sin. And what
fool so impudent and sottish, as to bestow precious trimming upon a penitential
Garment? But such are not the Ornaments of the Saints in Heaven; their luster
is their own, not borrowed from their Garments, not extrinsecal without them,
but within their very entrails, each part of them being more transparent than
Crystal, and brighter than the Sun. It is recounted in the Apocalypse as a
great wonder, that a Woman was seen clothed with the Sun, and crowned with
twelve Stars. This indeed was far more glorious than any Ornament upon Earth,
where we hold it for a great bravery to be adorned with twelve rich Diamonds
and a Carbuncle; and what are those in comparison of the Sun and so many Stars?
Yet this is short of the Ornament of the Saints, whose luster is proper to
themselves, intrinsecally their own, not taken and borrowed from something
without them, as was that of the Woman's. The State and Majesty, with which this
gift of splendour shall adorn the Saints, shall be incomparably greater than
that of the mightiest Kings. It were a great Majesty in a Prince, when he
issues forth of his Palace by night, to be attended by a thousand Pages, each
having a lighted Torch; but were those Torches Stars, it were nothing to the
state and glory of a Saint in Heaven, who carries with him a light equal to
that of the Sun seven times doubled; and what greater glory than not to need
the Sun, which the whole World needs? Where the Just is, shall be no night; for
wheresoever he goes, he carries the day along with him. What greater authority
can there be than to shine far brighter than the Sun, carrying with him far
greater Majesty than all the men of the Earth could be able to confer upon
him, if they went accompanying him, carrying lighted Torches in their hands?
St. Paul beholding the gift of Clarity in the humanity of Christ remained for
some days without sense or motion. And St. John only beholding it in the face
of our Savior fell down as if dead, his mortal eyes not being able to endure
the luster of so great a Majesty. St. Peter, because he saw something of it in
the transfiguration of Christ, was so transported with the glory of the place,
that he had a desire to have continued there for ever. Neither was this much in
Christ, since the people of Israel were not able to suffer the beams which
issued from the face of Moses, though then in a frail and mortal body. Caesar.
lib. 12. mir. cap. 54.
Caesarius writes of a great Doctor of the University of Paris, who being ready
to give up his ghost, wondered how it could be possible that Almighty God could
make his body composed of dust to shine like the Sun. But our Lord being
pleased to comfort and strengthen him in the belief of the Article of the
Resurrection, caused so great a splendour to issue forth of the feet of the sick
person, that his eyes not being able to suffer so great a splendour, he was
forced to hide them under his Bed-cloathes. But much more is it, that in bodies
already dead this glory should appear. The body of St. Margaret, Daughter to
the King of Hungary, sent forth such beams of light, that they seemed to be
like those of Heaven. The splendour also of other dead bodies of the Saints has
been such, that mortal eyes were not able to behold them. If then this Garment
of light do beautify those dead bodies without souls, how shall it illustrate
those beautiful and perfect bodies in Heaven, who are alive, and animated with
their glorious spirits for all eternity? St. John Damascen said, that the light
of this inferior World was the honor and ornament of all things. How shall
then the immortal light of that eternal glory deck and adorn the Saints? for it
shall not only make them shine with that bright candor, we have already spoken
of, but with diversity of colors shall imbellish some particular parts more
than others. In the Crowns of Virgins it shall be most white, in that of
Martyrs red, in that of Doctors of some particular brightness. Neither shall
those marks of glory be only in their heads or faces, but in the rest of their
members. And therefore Cardinal Bellarmine says, Bellar. conc. de Beat. p. 2.
that the bodies of St. John Baptist, and St. Paul shall shine with a most
incredible beauty, having their necks as it were adorned with collars of gold.
What sight more glorious than to behold so many Saints like so many Suns to
shine with so incomparable luster and beauty? What light then will that of
Heaven be, proceeding from so many lights, or, to speak more properly, from so
many Suns? By how much the number of Torches is greater, by so much is also
greater the light they produce altogether. How great then shall the clarity or
that holy City be, where many Suns do inhabit? And if by the sight of every one
in particular their joy shall be more augmented, by the sight of a number
without number what measure can that joy have, which results from so beautiful
a spectacle?

2.
As all the bodies of Saints are to be wholly filled with light, so they are to
enjoy the privileges of light: which amongst all material qualities is enobled
with this prerogative, that it has no contrary, and is therefore impassible.
And so the glorious bodies of the Saints, having nothing that may oppose them,
are also freed from sufferance. Besides, nothing is more swift than light; and
therefore those bodies, who have the greatest share of light, are also the most
swift in motion; whereupon there is no Element so nimble and active as fire: no
nature so swift as that of the Sun and Stars; and light it self is so quick,
that in an instant it illuminates the whole Sphere of its activity. In like
manner the glorious bodies of the Saints, as they are to enjoy more light, so
they are to move with more speed and agility than the very Stars themselves.
The light is also so subtle and pure, that it stops not in its passage,
although it meets with some bodies solid and massy. The whole Sphere and body
of the Air hinders not the. Sun from enlightening us below; and Crystal,
Diamonds, Glass, and other heavy bodies are penetrated by light. But far
greater shall be the subtility and purity of the blessed bodies, unto whose
passage nothing how gross or opake soever shall be an obstacle. For this reason
the Saints in holy Scripture are often called by the name of Light: and
particularly it is said, that the ways of the Just are like a shining light at
midday. For as the light, because impassible, makes his way through dirty and
unclean places without defiling its purity, passes with speed and penetrates
other bodies, that stand in its way: So the Saints endowed with the light,
which they receive from this gift of Clarity, cannot suffer from any thing,
having an agility to move with speed from place to place, and a subtlety to
penetrate wheresoever they please.

The goods resulting from these privileges and endowments of the glorious
bodies are more in number than all the evils of this mortal life. The only
gift of impassibility frees us from all those miseries, which our bodies now
suffer: the cold of Winter, the heat of Summer, infirmities, griefs, tears, and
the necessity of eating, which one necessity includes infinite others. Let us
but consider what cares and troubles men undergo only to sustain their lives.
The Labourer spends his days in plowing, sowing, and reaping: The Shepherd
suffers cold and heat in watching of his flock: The Servant in obeying another
will and command: The Rich man in cares and fears in preserving what he
possesses. What dangers are past in all estates only to be sure to eat? from
all which the gift of impassibility exempts the Just. The care of clothing
troubles us also little less than that of feeding: and that of preserving our
health much more. For as our necessities are doubly increased by sickness, so
are our cares; from all which he, who is impassible, is free: and not only
from the griefs and pains of this life, but if he should enter into hell, it
would not burn one hair of him.

The Prerogative also of the gift of agility is most great; which easily
appears by the troubles and inconveniences of a long journey, which (howsoever
we are accommodated) is not performed without much weariness, and oftentimes
with danger both of health and life. A King though he pass in a Coach or Litter
after the most easy and commodious way of traveling, must pass over rocks,
hills, and rivers, and spend much time; but with the gift of agility a Saint in
the twinkling of an eye will place himself where he pleases, and pass millions
of leagues with as much ease and in as short a time, as a furlong. We admire
the Story of St. Anthony of Padua, who in one day passed from Italy into
Portugal to free his Father condemned wrongfully to death; and at that of St.
Ignatius Patriarch of the Society of Jesus, who in a short time transported
himself from Rome to Colen, and from thence to Rome without being missed, less
than in two hours space. If to the mortal bodies of his Servants God
communicates such gifts, what shall he do to the glorified bodies of his
Saints? What an excellency of nature were it to be able in one day to visit all
the great Kingdoms of the Earth, and see what passed amongst them, in an hour
to go to Rome the chief City of the World: from thence to pass to
Constantinople the head of the Eastern Empire: In another hour to the Great
Cair, and consider there the immense multitude of the Inhabitants: In another
hour go to Goa the Court of the East Indies, and behold the Riches thereof: in
another to Pequin, the Seat of the Kings of China, and contemplate the vast
extent of that prodigious City: in another to Meaco the Court of Japonia: in
another to Manila the head City of the Philippin Islands: in another to Ternate
in the Maluca's: in another to Lima in Peru: in another to Mexico in New Spain:
in another to Lisboa and Madrid, in another to London and Paris, the principal
Seats of Christendom, marking at ease what passed in the Courts of those great
Monarchs? If this were a great privilege, what shall that be of those glorious
bodies, who in a short space can traverse all the Heavens, visit the Earth,
return unto the Sun, and Firmament, and there observe what is above the Stars
in the Empyrial Heaven? Greg. li. 3. Dial. 36.
St. Gregory writes in his Dialogues, that a Soldier assaulting a holy
personage, and having his naked sword lifted up and ready to give the blow, the
man cried out to his Patron St. John for help, who instantly withheld the
Soldiers hand, that he could not move it. How soon did St. John hear him in
Heaven, who invoked him upon Earth? with what speed did he descend to assist
him, withholding and drying up the arm of the wicked Soldier? the bodies of
the Saints are to move hereafter with no less speed, than their spirits do now;
the weight of their bodies shall no ways hinder them; they shall therefore in
the same manner walk or stay upon Water, Air, Heavens, as upon Earth. It was
miraculous in St. Quirinus Martyr, St. Maurus, and St. Francis of Paula, that
they walked upon waters, passed rapid rivers and seas without Vessels; but the
glorious bodies shall not only be able to traverse the seas, mount into the
air, but enter into flames secure and without hurt. It is said of S. Francis of
Assisium, that in the fervor of his prayers and contemplations he was seen
lifted up into the air; and the great Servant of God Father Diego Martines, of
the Society of Jesus, was lifted up in prayer above the highest trees and
Towers, and hanging in the air persisted in his devotion. If God vouchsafe so
great favors to his servants in this valley of tears, what privileges will he
deny to the Citizens of Heaven?

To this so notable gift of Agility shall be annexed that of Penetration: by
which their glorious bodies shall have their way free and pervious through all
places; no impediment shall stop their motion, and for them shall be no prison
or enclosure. They shall with greater ease pass through the middle of a rock,
than an arrow through the air. It shall be the same thing for them to mount
unto the Moon, where they shall meet no solid body to oppose them, as to pierce
unto the center through rocks, metals, and the gross body of the earth. We
wonder to hear that the Zahories see those things, which are hid under the
earth. Let us admire that which is certain, that the Saints cannot only see,
but enter into the profundity of the earth, and tell what minerals and other
secrets are contained in its entrails. Metaphrastes writes, that a certain
Goth, a Soldier of the Garrison of Edessa, fell passionately in love with a
Maid of the same City, and sinding no other way to enjoy her, demanded her in
marriage; but the Mother and Kindred gave no ear to the treaty, trusting little
to a Barbarian and a Stranger, who carrying her into a Country far distant (as
his was) might there use her at his pleasure. The Soldier notwithstanding
persisting still in his suit with many promises of good entertainment, gained
at last the consent of the Maid and her Friends, only the Mother would not be
satisfied, before they had entered all together into the Temple of the holy
Martyrs St. Samona, Curia, and Abiba, and that there the Soldier had renewed
his promises by solemn oath, and called the holy Martyrs as witnesses; which
done, the Maid was delivered unto him; whom he not much after carried into his
own Country, where he was formerly married, and had his Wife yet living. There
better to conceal his wickedness he fell into a greater, and like a wild beast
without pity enclosed the poor woman alive in a Sepulcher, and there left her.
She thus betrayed, had recourse unto the Saints, whom she with tears invoked as
witnesses of the Soldiers treachery and breach of faith. At the instant the
holy Martyrs appeared in a glorious equipage, and casting her into a gentle
sleep, conveyed her (the Sepulcher still remaining locked) without hurt into her
own Country, where they left her. The Barbarian ignorant of what had happened,
and persuading himself she was long fince dead, returned a second time to
Edessa, where convinced of the crime he satisfied it with his life. If the
Saints then have power to make the persons of others pass through distinct
bodies, much more are they able to make their own to penetrate them without
impediment.

Finally the Servants of Christ shall be there so replenished with all goods
both of soul and body, that there shall be nothing more for them to desire. And
every one, even during this life, hoping for those eternal goods, may say with
St. Austin, What would thou my Body? what is it thou defirest my Soul? There
ye shall find all which you desire. If you are pleased with beauty: there the
Just shine as the Sun; and if with any pure delight: there not one, but a whole
sea of pleasure, which God keeps in store for the Blessed, shall quench your
thirst. Let men then raise their desires unto that place, where only they can
be accomplished. Let them not gape after things of the earth, which cannot
satisfy them, but let them look after those in Heaven, which are only great,
only eternal, and can only fill the capacity of man's heart.

CAP. VII.
How we are to seek after Heaven, and to prefer it before all the goods of
the Earth.

LEt a Christian compare the miseries of this life with the felicities of the
other: the weakness of our nature in this mortal estate with the vigor and
privileges of that immortal which expects us: and let him excite and stir up
himself to gain a glory eternal by troubles short and temporary. Justinus lib.
1.
Cyrus, when he intended to invade the Medes, commanded his Persians: upon a
certain day to meet him with each one a sharp Hatchet. They obeying, he willed
them to cut down a great Wood; which performed with much toil and diligence, he
invited them for the next day unto a sumptuous. Banquet: and in the height of
their mirth demanded of them, whether they liked better the first days labor,
or that days feast. The answer was ready; all cried out, That days
entertainment. With this he engaged them to make war upon the Medes, assuring
them, that after a short trouble in subduing an effeminate Nation, they should
enjoy incomparable pleasure, and be Masters of inestimable riches. This served
him to make the Persians follow him, and conquer the Kingdom of the Medes. If
this motive were sufficient to make a barbarous people prefer a doubtful
reward before a certain and hazardous labor, why should not a certain reward,
and infinitely greater than the labor suffice us Christians? Let us compare
that Celestial Supper of the other life with the troubles of this, The
greatness of the Kingdom of Heaven with the littleness of our services, The
joys above with the goods below, and our labors will seem feasts, our
services repose, and the felicity of earth misery and baseness. What is the
honor of this life, which is in it self false, given by lying men, short and
limited, in respect of that honor the Just receive in Heaven, which is true,
given by God, eternal, extended through the Heavens, and manifested to all that
are in them, Men and Angels? What are the riches of the Earth, which often
fail, are ever full of dingers and cares, and never free their owners from
necessity, in comparison of those which have no end, and give all security and
abundance? What are their short pleasures, which prejudice the health, consume
the substance, and make infamous those who seek them, in respect of those
immense joys of glory, which with delight join honor and profit? What is this
life of misery to that full of blessings and happiness: and what those evil
qualities of our bodies now to those precious gifts of glory after our
resurrection? We are now all rottenness, unweildiness, corruption, uncleanness,
infirmities, loathsomness and worms. Then all shall be light, incorruption,
splendour, purity, beauty, and immortality. Let us compare these together, what
difference there is betwixt a body sickly, weak, pale, and loathsome, or some
eight days after death full of worms, corruption and stench abominable, with
the same body being now in glory, exceeding the Sun far in brightness, the
Heavens in beauty, more odoriferous than the purest Roses or Lillies.

Neither do the evils, or goods temporal bear any comparison with the eternal;
since, as the Apostle says, That which is momentary and light does cause an
eternal weight of glory. In the beginning of the Civil Wars with the Senate
of Rome carried on against Caius and Fulvius Gracchus, Val. l. c. 4.
the Consul Opimius by public Edict promised, that whosoever should bring him
the head of Caius Gracchus, should receive for reward its weight in gold. All
esteemed this a recompense highly to be valued, that one should receive equal
weight of that precious metal to the weight of dead flesh. But God's promises
far exceed this. For a labor or trouble as light as a feather he gives eternal
weight of glory. The Apostle says not, that God Almighty does give only a
great weight for light merits, out also adds over and above, that it shall be
eternal. It were a great happiness, if according to our penances or voluntary
labors we should receive only equal proportion of bliss, yet so as it were
eternal; because how little soever it were, it were to be purchased at a very
cheap rate, though it were in substance but so much for so much, so that the
difference were only such in the duration thereof: as if for the toil of one
days labor were given a whole year of rest. But Almighty God giving much for
a little, for that which is light massy and heavy, for a thing momentary an
eternal reward, what greater increase or advantage can we possibly receive?
Se^imuleyus will be a great confusion unto us, who hearing the foresaid
Proclamation of the Roman Consul, stuck not at any toil or danger, until he had
cut off the head of Gracchus, greedy of the equal weight thereof in gold. Let
us have the like courage the Soldier had to take away the temporal life of a
Man, to the end we may not bereave our selves of an eternal life. And since the
purchase of Heaven is so cheap, let us procure to augment the gain, and let us
not have less desire of goods eternal, than Setimuleyus had for temporals: who
desirous of a great reward filled with melted lead all the hollow places of the
head, which he had cut off. Let us fill our momentary and light works with
great affection and love. Let us increase our desires, and in any work how
little soever accompany the same with a great will, with a vehement desire to
hoard up eternal treasures for temporal pains. What an advantageous exchange
will it be to buy Heaven for a draught of water, for that which is but vile,
and lasts but a moment that which is of inestimable price, and is to last for
all eternity? What sort of bargain would it be, if one could buy a Kingdom for
a straw? yet so it is. For that which is no more worth than a Straw we may
purchase the Kingdom of Heaven. Certainly all the felicity, riches, and earthly
delights are no more than a straw compared with the glory of Heaven. How fond
and foolish would he be, who having a Basket full of chips, would not give one
of them for an hundred weight of gold? This is the sottishness of men, that for
earthly goods they will not receive those of Heaven. Who is there, that having
offered him a precious stone for some small sand, should not have so much wit,
as to give a thing so base and abject for a thing so noble and precious? Who
being offered a rich treasure for an handful of cinders, would not admit of so
gainful an exchange? What hunger-starved man being invited to a full Table of
dainty dishes upon condition he should not eat an apple paring, would reject
the invitation? Heaven is offered us for things little and of small estimation.
Why do not we accept the offer? Christ our Savior called the Kingdom of Heaven
a precious Margarite and a hidden Treasure: for which we ought to forsake all
the goods of the earth: by reason they are all but dust and misery in respect
of a treasure of Pearls and Diamonds, St. Josaph at did very much in leaving an
earthly Kingdom for a greater assurance of that of Heaven. He did very much
according to our deceitful apprehension and false estimation of things. But if
it be well considered, he did very little, much less, than if he had given one
Basketful of Earth for another of Gold, a Sack full of Small-coal for a great
Treasure, and a Nut-shell for a great Banquet. Whatever is in the Earth may
well be given for the least crum of Heaven; because all the greatnesses of this
World are but crumbs, nut-shells, and trash compared with the least particle of
heavenly bliss. All the felicity upon Earth has no substance nor weight, if
compared with the weight of eternal glory, which is prepared for us. This David
did, and convinced by the greatness of heavenly glory, said unto our Lord: I
did eneline my heart to do thy justifications. The heart of man is like a just
balance, that inclines that way, where is the greatest weight. And as in the
heart of David the temporal weighed little, and the eternal much, so inclined
by the eternal weight of glory which attends us, and moved by the hope of so
great a reward, the fulfilling of the Law of God prevailed more with him, than
his own appetite and inclination.

. 2.
If we shall consider the labors, for which eternal glory is promised us as a
hire and reward, the Apostle spoke with great reason, that all, which we can
suffer in the time of this life, is no ways worthy of that glory to come,
which is to be manifested in us. To St. Austin all the torments of Hell seemed
not much for the gaining of Celestial glory but for some short time. And if we
consider the greatness of that joy, all the penances of St. Simon Stylites, the
fasts of St. Romualdus, the poverty and nakedness of St. Francis, and the
scorns and affronts put upon St. Ignatius, are no more than the taking up of a
straw for the gaining of an earthly Empire. All Stories are full for how small
matters upon earth men have exposed themselves to great and almost certain
dangers. Because David caused it to be published in his Army, that he that
should first set upon the Jebuseans, who were the hardiest of all his Enemies,
should be made General, Joab doubted not to expose his life to manifest danger,
breaking through the Pikes and Lances to obtain that honor at the price of
his own blood. Because King Saul published in the Army, that he would give his
Daughter in Matrimony to him, that should overcome the Giant Golias, there
being none found that durst attempt it, David slighted all danger in hopes of
obtaining such a recompense. What have not men attempted to gain a terrestrial
reward? Nothing has seemed much unto them. For the gaining then of Heaven all
things ought to seem little unto a Christian. Seneca wondered at what Soldiers
did and suffered for so short and transitory Kingdoms as are those of the
Earth, and that not for themselves, but for another. Much more may we wonder
that the sufferings and labors of this life, by which we are to gain the
Kingdom of Heaven, not for a stranger, but for our selves, seem so great and
grievous unto us. What did not Jesbaam perform for the advancing of the Kingdom
of David, though he was esteemmed a poor wretch and a dastard? 2 Reg. 23. and
1. Paralip. 11. Vid. Sanctium and Tirinum. 2 Reg. 23.
seeing that the Kingdom of David lay at stake, he took such courage, that he
set upon 800 men, and slew them in his first fury: and at another occasion he
killed 300. For the same Kingdom of David Eleazar Son of Ahostes fought with
such constancy and valor, that he slew innumerable Philistines, continuing the
Battle until he was so weary, that he was not able to move his arm no longer,
and it remained so stiff with weariness, as if it had been of stone. If for a
Kingdom of another Man's Dominions these men were so valiant, why do not we
take courage, and procure with great valor to make conquest of the Kingdom of
Heaven, though we lose all our strength, and even our lives in the Conquest,
since in respect of it all toil and labor is nothing? For the advancing then
of the Kingdom of David his worthies performed such actions, as, if they were
not authorized by holy Scripture, might seem incredible. But what speak I of
advancing his Kingdom? when only to fatisfie a gust of his, and perhaps an
impertinent one, which was to drink of the water in the Cisterns of Bethleem,
the young men threw themselves into the thickest of the Enemies Squadrons, and
with their naked swords cutting a passage through the midst of the Army
fetched the desired waters. If men undergo such hazards for the Kingdom, nay
for the pleasure of another, and that momentary, what ought we to do for those
eternal joys, which are to be our own, and for the Kingdom of Heaven, wherein
we expect such immense honors, riches, and pleasures? Why do we not all take
heart and courage? It is the Kingdom of Heaven we hope for, joys, riches, and
honors eternal are those, which are promised us. All is but little what can be
suffered in time to obtain the same. Semma for the defense of a poor field
sowed with lentils durst fight alone against an Army of the Philistians. 2 Reg.
23.
For the defense then of grace, which is the seed of God, and to assure our
glory, which is the fruit of the Passion of Christ, it is not much, if without
shedding of blood we fight against our unruly appetites, and conquer our
corrupt nature in this life, that we may render it more perfect in the other.
To this purpose the consideration of glory is most powerful, having still
before our eyes Heaven, which is promised us. And let not the eternal reward
proposed by Christ be less efficacious than the temporal proposed by Man. This
was signified by our Lord unto the Prophet Ezechiel in those four living
creatures so much different in nature, Ezekiel. 1.
but all one in their employment and puesto, to wit, an Eagle, a Lion, an Ox,
and a Man, which he beheld in the middle of the air, flying with each one four
wings as swift as a flash of lightning. What thing could so force the heavy
nature of an Ox, as to equal the flight of an Eagle? or what could associate
the fierce nature of a Lion with the gentleness of a Man? The same Prophet
declares it, saying, that they carried Heaven on their heads, having the
Firmament above them; Because if Heaven be in our thoughts, it will encourage
us to all things: It will make material Men equal unto Angels, and subject them
unto reason, who in their customs are brutish as wild beasts; so as he, who is
slow and heavy as an Ox, shall fly with four wings: and by conquering his own
nature become in his flight equal to the birds of the air: and he, which feeds
grovling upon the earth, shall elevate himself, and quit his short and
transitory pleasures for those which are eternal.

3.
Neither is this much. For so great is the good, which we expect, that for it
to be deprived of all other goods whatsoever ought to be esteemed a happiness,
and to suffer all torments and afflictions as a pleasure. Let us hear what St.
Chrysostom says. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Hom. 19.
How many labors soever thou shall pass, how many torments soever thou shall
endure, all are nothing in respect of those goods to come. Let us hear also
what St. Vincent Martyr said unto Dacianus the President, and with what joy and
patience in his torments he confirmed what he had spoken. When they hoisted him
up on high upon the Rack, and the Tyrant in a scoff demanded of him, where he
then was, the Saint smiling and beholding Heaven, whither he was going,
answered, I am aloft, and from thence can despise thee, although insolent and
puffed up with the power thou have upon Earth. Being after menaced with more
cruel torments, he said, Methinks thou do not threaten, but court me,
Dacianus, with what I desire with all the powers and faculties of my Soul. And
when they tore his flesh with hooks and pincers, and burnt him with lighted
torches, he cried out with great joy, In vain thou weariest thy self, Dacianus,
thou can not imagine torments so horrid, which I could not suffer. Prison,
Pincers, Burning-plates of iron, and Death it self are unto Christians sports
and recreations, and not torments. He who had the joys of Heaven before his
eyes scorned and laughed at the bitterest torments upon Earth. Let us consider
them also, and we shall not shun the sufferance of any thing, whereby we may
gain Heaven. What pity is it, that a Christian for some short and sordid
pleasure should lose joys so great and eternal: because he will not bear some
slight injury here, should be deprived of celestial honor there: for not
paying what he owes, and not restoring what he has unjustly taken, should
forfeit the divine riches of Heaven: and for one pleasant morsel, which the
Devil offers him, should deprive himself of that great Supper, whereunto God
invites him? Who would choose rather to feed upon bones and craps, which fell
from the Table, than to he a Guest at the Banquet, and feed upon the choicest
and most savoury dishes? That which the world offers in her best pleasures, is
but shells, offals, and parings; but that whereunto God invites us, is a full
Table, wherein may be satisfied the most eager hunger of humane appetite. With
reason it is called in holy Scripture the great Supper, and in some places the
Nuptial Supper, by reason of that satiety, which nothing upon earth can give
us. It is called also a Supper, and not a Dinner, because after dinner we use
to rise, and go about other occasions and employments, but after supper there
are no more labors; all is rest and repose. The principal dish, which is
served in at this great Supper, is the clear vision of God, and all his Divine
perfections; after that a thousand joys of the Soul in all its powers and
faculties: then a thousand pleasures of the senses, with all the endowments of
a glorified Body. These latter are as it were the Desert of this Divine
Banquet. And if the Desert be such, what shall be the substance of the Feast?
What comparison then betwixt those great and eternal goods of Heaven, and those
which the World gives us? Certainly they are not worthy to be called so much as
the shells of happiness.

It is much to be reflected on, that those who enjoyed not that great Supper,
which is a figure of glory, were not deprived of it by doing any thing, which
was a sin in it self. For one excused himself, because he had bought a Farm:
another because he was to prove his Oxen: a third because he was married: none
of which were sins; but for the preferring those things before the Kingdom of
Heaven, which being an incredible madness and blindness, made them not worthy
to be admitted. And truly all those, who are wholly taken up and employed in
the things of the Earth, do no other than perferre the scraps and parings of a
poor and rustic Dinner before the Royal Feast of a powerful King. Moreover
although God had not invited us most miserable and vile worms unto a Supper of
so infinite sweetness, but had only promised us the crumbs, which fell from his
Table, yet ought we to have preferred them before the contents and commodities
of this World. Let us fear least even in lawful pleasures there may be danger.
For as the evils of sin are the cause of damnation, so the goods of the world
may be the occasion of sin. Let us look only toward Heaven: let us open our
eyes and consider, that those who were called by God to some especial vocation,
and did not embrace it, are introduced by holy Scripture as damned, and
forsaken by God; though their sin is not named, as it appears in these three,
who were invited; But much more to our terror in that young man in the Gospel,
who having demanded of Christ our Redeemer, What he should do to gain eternal
life, and being answered, That he should keep the Commandments of the Law,
which he replied he had done from his youth, Yet because the Lord called him by
a special vocation to a greater perfection, which was to leave all and follow
him, he went his way sorrowful, because he had much riches; whereupon our
Savior pronounced that memorable and terrible Sentence, That it was easier for
a Camel to enter the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom
of Heaven; signifying thereby, that although he had kept the Commandments, yet
he was excluded Heaven. For those, whom our Savior favors with particular
inspirations and callings, do not assure their salvation by a desire to keep
the Commandments, but by endeavoring to observe the Evangelical counsels,
quitting not only sins and the occasions of sinning, but the impediments of
virtue and perfection, by which they might not only more assure Heaven, but
also obtain more glory; and if they do it not, may justly fear lest they may so
much disoblige God Almighty by despising his vocation, that he will not
vouchsafe to grant them the efficacious helps of keeping his Commandments.
Little is all which can be done for the gaining of Heaven, little what is
suffered, little what is forsaken, little all the care to obtain it, little
what caution not to lose it, little what impediments are to to be avoided,
little what austerities of life we undergo to assure it. And if we judge not
so in this valley of tears, let the Saints judge in Heaven, who are of a
different opinion from those upon earth. D. Mig. l. 3. de Vit. Isabel. c. 9.
St. Teresa of Jesus appearing upon an occasion to that blessed woman Isabella
of St. Dominick, this most observant religious woman begged pardon of the Saint
for a disgust that she persuaded her self she had given her, when being
Prioress of Pastrana she put up a very narrow Grate, where the Nuns were to
hear Mass. To some it seemed over-streight, as also to St. Teresa, and she
would have taken it away, but did not do it, because the Prioress Isabella
replied unto her, saying, It was not convenient, that being so nigh to Secular
people they might be seen by them. But the Saint being now dead and glorious,
Isabella of St. Dominick was much afflicted to consider that by her replyings
she had displeased her holy Mother. The Saint answered her, saying: Some things
here do appear unto me far different. And doubtless in Heaven things will
appear far otherwise, where all care and solicitude in not offending God will
seem little, and what ever negligence and hinderance in his service will appear
grievous.

CAP. VIII.
Of Evils eternal: and especially of the great Poverty, Dishonor, and Ignominy
of the Damned.

WE have not only reason to despise the Goods of the World from the
consideration of Heaven, but the Evils also from that of Hell, in comparison of
which all temporal evils are to be esteemed as happiness and blessings, and all
the happiness and contents of Earth to be abhorred as evils, at least if they
any ways dispose to those eternal torments, and that perpetual privation of
joys without end. And truly such are the two extremes which attend us after
life, that either of them were sufficient to make us despise all Goods and
Evils temporal whatsoever. But joynning the privation of the joys of Heaven
with the condemnation unto the torments of Hell, it is admirable how any can
delight in the things of this life, and not tremble at what may succeed. By
reason of this danger we ought to abhor and spit at the pleasures and goods
of this life, and to admit and embrace, if occasion be, the greatest evils of
it, and to contemn both the one and the other, neither loving the goods, nor
fearing the evils. Yet certainly the goods of the World are so much more to be
despised than the evils, as they usually are the greater occasions of sin, and
so consequently of eternal damnation. The holy Scriptures and Writings of
Saints are full of menaces against the Rich, the Prosperous, and the Lovers of
the World, who are those, which for the most part people Hell. The Prophet
Baruch says; Baruc. 3.
Where are the Princes of the Nations, which commanded over the beasts of the
earth, and sported with the birds of the air, which store up silver and gold,
in which men put their trust: and there is no end of their seeking? who stamp
and work silver, who are sollicitous, and their works are not found? They are
exterminated, they have sunk down into hell, Jac. 5.
and others have risen in their places. St. James says, Weep you, who are
rich, and lament the miseries which are to fall upon you. St. Paul not only
threatens those who are rich, but those who desire to be so, saying, Those who
desire to be rich fall into the snare and temptation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 6.
and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which drown them in death and
perdition. With this counterpoise then and hazard who would desire the wealth
of the World, since only the desire of it is so poisonous? Let those who dote
upon the World hear St. Bernard, Bernard. in Medit.
who says, Tell me now, Where are those lovers of the world, who a little
while ago were here with us? there is nothing remaining of them but dust and
worms. Mark diligently what they once were, and what they now are. They were
men, as thou now art, they did eat, drink, laugh, and pass away their times in
mirth and jollity, and in a moment of time sunk down into hell. Here are their
Bodies eaten by worms, and their Souls condemned to eternal flames, until
united again they both shall sink together into everlasting fire, that so those
who were companions in sin, may be also in torments, and that one pain involve
them, who were consorts in the love of the same offense. What did their vain
glory profit them, their short mirth, their worldly power, their fleshly
pleasure, their false riches, their numerous families? where is now their
laughter, their jests, their boasting, their arrogance? how great shall be
their sorrow, when such misery shall succeed so many pleasures: when from the
height of humane glory they shall fall into those grievous torments and eternal
ruin, where according to what the Wiseman said, the mighty shall be mightily
punished?

If then those, who most enjoy the World, run the greatest hazard of being
damned, what can more induce us to the contempt of it, than the consideration
of so lamentable an end? And what can more set forth the malice of temporal
goods, than to be the occasion of eternal evils? If a curious built house be
subject to some notable inconveniency, no man will dwell in it; if a courageous
horse have some vicious quality, no body will buy him; and if a Crystal cup
have a crack, it shall not be placed upon a Royal Cupboard; yet the pleasures
and goods of the World, though subject to all those faults, how are they
coveted, loved, and sought after, and in them our perdition? Certainly, if we
should consider seriously the eternal evils, which correspond to the short
pleasures of this life, we should have all humane felicity in horror, and
trembling to see our selves in fortunes favor should fly from the world as
from death. The reverend and zealous Father Friar Jordan, being desirous to
convert a certain Cavalier to God and from the love of the world, for his last
remedy had recourse unto this consideration. Seeing him a beautiful young man,
active, and well disposed of body, he said unto him: At least Sir, since God
has bellowed so comely a face and personage upon you, think what pity it were
they should be the food of eternal fire, and burn without end. The Gentleman
reflected upon his advice; and this consideration wrought so much with him,
that abhorring the world, and quitting all his possessions and hopes, he became
poor in Christ, and entered into Religion.

. 2.
Let us now come to the consideration of Eternal Evils. that from thence we may
despise all which is temporal, be it good or bad. The evils of Hell are truly
evils, and so purely such, that they have no mixture of good. In that place of
unhappiness all is eternal sorrow and complaint, and there is no room for
comfort. Aelian. lib. 3. varia: Hist. c. 18.
Aelian relates a History, which being taken as a Parable, may serve to
illustrate what we are about to speak of. He says in the utmost borders of the
Meropes there is a cetrain place called Anostos, which is as much to say, from
whence there is no return. There was to be seen a great Precipice, and a deep
opening of the earth, from whence issued two Rivers, the one of Joy, and the
other of Sadness: upon the brinks of which grew diverse trees of so different
fruits, that those who eat of the one, forgot all that might cause grief, but
those who eat of the other were so possessed with an unconsolable sadness, that
all was weeping and lamentations, until they at last died with signs and
shedding of tears. What do those Rivers signify, but the one of them that,
whereof David speaks, which with his current rejoiced the City of God: the
other that Flood of evil, which enters the Prison of Hell, and fills it with
groans, tears, and despite without the least hope of comfort? for there shall
the door be eternally shut to all good or expectation of ease; in so much as
one drop of water was denied the rich Glutton from so merciful and pitiful a
man as Abraham. There shall not be the least good that may give ease, nor shall
there want a concourse of all evils which may add affliction. There is no good
to be found there, where all goods are wanting: neither can there be want of
any evil, where all evils whatsoever are to be found; and by the want of all
good, and the collection of all evils every evil is augmented. In the creation
of the World God gave a praise to every nature, saying, It was good without
farther exaggeration; but when all were created and joined together, he said
They were very good, because the conjunction of many goods advances the good of
each particular: and in the same manner the conjunction of many evils makes all
of them worse. What shall Heaven then be, where there is a concourse of all
goods, and no evils? And what Hell, where there are all evils, and no good?
Certainly the one must be exceeding good, and the other exceeding evil. In
signification of which the Lord showed unto the Prophet Jeremias two little
Baskets of Figs: Jer. 24.
in the one of which were excessively good ones, and in the other excessively
bad, both in extremity. He does not content himself in saying they were bad, or
very bad: but says, they were over-bad: because they represented the miserable
state of the Damned, where is to be the sink of all evils without mixture of
any good at all. And for this reason it is not a sufficient expression to say,
they are evils: but they are to be termed evils excessively great.

No man will admire this, who knows the grievousness of a mortal sin; for
committing of which, as he is a man, he deserves hell, and as he is Christian,
(according to St. Austin) a new hell: that is, an Infidel merits one hell, and
a Christian two, who knowing Christ incarnate and crucified for him durst yet
sin and offend him. Sin is an excessive evil, because it is an infinite evil:
and therefore it is not too much, if it be chatized with infinite evils. It is
an evil, which is greater than the whole collection of all other evils; and for
this reason it is not too much rigor, that the sinner should be chastized with
the collection of all evils together. Those who wonder at the terribleness of
eternal pains, know not the terribleness of sin. Whereupon St. Austin says;
Aug. lib. 21. c. 12.
Therefore the eternal pains seem hard and injust unto humane apprehension,
because in the weakness of our natural understanding the sense of that eternal
wisdom is wanting, by which might be perceived the great malice of the first
prevatication. If then for that first sin committed, when Christ had not yet
died for man, eternal damnation was not thought too much, what shall it be,
when we know that our Redeemer was so gracious as to give his life, because we
should not sin? From the necessity of so costly and precious a Medecin may be
collected the greatness of the infirmity. I say the greatness, and danger of a
disease is known by the extraordinary remedies which are applied unto it, and
by the things which are sought out for the cure, and without which the malady
would be without remedy. We may therefore gather the infinite malice of a
mortal sin, because there was no other means sufficient, but one so
extraordinary, as was God to become Man, and give his own life for Man, dying a
death so shameful, and painful as he did: offering a price so great, as was the
excessive worth and infinite price of his merits and passion. Sin is an injury
against God; and as the injury increases according to the greatness and worth
of the person offended, so, God being infinite, the injury becomes of infinite
malice: and as God is a good, which includes all goods, so a mortal sin, which
is an injury done unto him, is a mischief which exceeds all evils, and ought to
be punished with all pains and torments.

3.
Let us now consider the several sorts of pains in Hell, and the greatness of
them. In the Roman Laws according to Tully and Albertus Magnus we find
mentioned eight several kinds of punishments: Alber. Mag. l. 7. Comp. Theolog.
c. 22.
which are The punishment of Loss, when one is mulcted in his goods, The
punishment of Infamy, Banishment, Imprisonment, Slavery, Whipping, Death, and
the punishment of Talion. To these may be reduced all the rest; and we shall
find the Divine Justice to exercise them all upon those, who have despised his
mercy, and injured his infinite bounty and goodness. In the first place there
is the pain of Loss, and that so rigorous, that the depriving the damned Soul
of one only thing, they take from him all good things; For they deprive him of
God, in whom they are all comprised. This is the greatest pain that can be
imagined. O how miserable and poor must the damned Soul be, who has lost God
for all eternity? He, who is condemned by humane Laws to the loss of his goods,
may, if he live, gain others, at least in another Kingdom, if he fly thither;
but he who is deprived of God, where shall he find another God? and who can
fly from Hell? God is the greatest good, and it is therefore the greatest evil
to be deprived of him; Because (as St. John Damascen says) evil is the
privation of good, and that is to be esteemed the greatest evil, which is a
privation of the greatest good, which is God, and must certainly therefore
cause more grief and resentment in the Damned, than all the torments and
punishments of Hell besides. And in regard there is in Hell an eternal
privation of God, who is the chief Good, the pain of Loss, whereby one is
deprived for ever of the greatest of all goods, this privation will cause the
greatest pain and torment. If the burning of a hand cause an insufferable pain,
by reason that the excessive heat deprives the Body of its natural temper, and
good constitution, which is but a poor and short good, how shall he be
tormented, who is deprived and eternally separated from so great a Good as is
God? If a bone displaced or out of joint causes intolerable grief, because it
is deprived of his due state and place, what shall it cause in a rational
creature, to lie eternally separated from God, who is the chief end, for which
he was created? Chrysostom. 24. in Math. Tom. 2. fol. 82, p. 2.
St. Chrysostom gives us some understanding of this grief, when he says, He,
who burns in Hell, loses also the Kingdom of Heaven, which is certainly a
greater punishment than that torment of flames. I know many who are afraid of
Hell; but I dare confidently say, that the amission of glory is far more bitter
than all those pains, which are to be suffered in Hell. And no wonder that this
cannot be expressed in words, since we know not well the happiness of those
divine rewards, by the want of which we ought also to measure the infelicity of
their loss; but we shall then without doubt learn, when we are taught by sad
experience. Then our eyes shall be opened; then the vail shall be taken away;
then shall the wicked perceive to their greater grief and confusion the
difference betwixt that eternal and chief good, and the frail and transitory
pleasures of this life. If St. Chrysostom says this of the loss of the reward
of eternal happiness, that it is a greater evil, than the torment of hell fire:
what shall the loss of God be, not only as our Good, but also for as much that
in himself he is the chief Good, of which the damned are to be deprived for all
eternity.

Moreover this condemnation of a Sinner unto the loss of God, and all which is
good, shall extend so far, that he shall be deprived even of the hope of what
is good, and shall be left for ever in that profound poverty and necessity,
without expectation of remedy or relief. What greater want can any one have,
than to want all things, and even hope of obtaining any thing? We are amazed at
the poverty of holy Job, who from a Prince and a rich man came to lie upon a
dunghill, having nothing left but a piece of a broken pot to scrape away the
putrefaction from his sores. But even this shall fail the damned, who would
take it for a great Regalo to have a dunghill for their bed instead of the
burning coals of that eternal fire. Neither shall they be Masters so much as of
that broken pot, wherein to contain a little water, if it might be given them.
Jsai. 30.
For, as Isaias says, There shall not remain unto them so much as the shread
of a broken pot to hold a little water from the pit, nor shall there be any
found to give it them. That rich Glutton in the Gospel, accustomed to drink in
Cups of Crystal, to eat in Silver, and to be clothed in Silks and curious
Linnens, can tell us how far this infernal poverty extends, when he demanded
not wines of Candie, but a little cold water, and that not in Cups of Gold or
Crystal, but upon the fingers end of a Leper. This rich and nice Glutton came
to such an extremity, that he would esteem it a great felicity, that they would
give him but one drop of water, although it were from the filthy and loathsome
finger of a Leper; and yet this also was wanting unto him. Let the rich of the
World see to what poverty they are like to come, if they trust in there riches;
let them know that they shall be condemned to the loss of all which is good.
Let them reflect upon him, who was accustomed to be clothed in precious
Garments, to tread upon Carpets, to sleep upon Down, to dwell in spacious
Palaces, now naked thrown upon burning coals, and packt up in some narrow
corner of that infernal Dungeon. Let us therefore fear the riches of this
World, and the poverty of the other.

. 4.
This poverty or want of all good of the damned is accompanied with a most
opprobrious infamy and dishonor, when by public sentence they shall be
deprived for their enormous offenses of eternal glory, and reprehended in the
presence of Saints and Angels by the Lord of Heaven and Earth. This infamy
shall be so great, that St. Chrysostom speaks of it in these words. A most
intolerable thing is Hell, Chrysostom. in Math. 24.
and most horrible are the torments; yet if me should place a thousand Hells
before me, nothing could be so horrible unto me, as to be excluded from the
honor of glory, to be hated of Christ, and to hear from him these words, I
know you not. This infamy we may in some sort declare under the example of a
mighty King, who having no Heir to succeed him in his Kingdom took up a
beautiful Boy at the Church door, and nourished him as his Son, and in his
Testament commanded, that if at ripe years his conditions were virtuous and
suitable to his calling, he should be received as lawful King, and seated in his
Royal Throne; but if he proved vicious and unfit for Government, they should
punish him with infamy, and send him to the Galleys. The Kingdom obeyed this
Command, provided him excellent Masters and Tutors; but he became so untoward
and ill-inclined, that he would learn nothing, flung away his books, spent his
time amongst other Boys in making houses of dirt, and other childish
fooleries: for which his Governors corrected and chastised him, and advised him
of what was fitting and most imported him; but all did no good: only when they
reprehended him, he could weep, not because he repented, but because they
hindered his sport: and the next day did the same. The more he grew in age, the
worse he became; and although they informed him of the Kings Testament, and
what behooved him, all was to no purpose; until at last after all possible care
and diligence his Tutors, and the whole Kingdom weary of his ill conditions, in
a public Assembly declared him unworthy to reign, dispoiled him of his Royal
Ornaments, and condemned him with infamy unto the Galleys. What greater affront
and ignominy can there be, than this, to lose a Kingdom, and to be made a
Gally-slave? for I do not know which of these things that young man would be
more sensible of. More ignominious and a more lamentable Tragedy is that of a
Christian condemned to Hell, who was taken by God from the gates of death,
adopted his Son, with condition that, if he kept his Commandments, he should
reign in Heaven, and if not, he should be condemned to Hell. Yet he forgetting
these obligations without respect of his Tutors and Masters, who were the holy
Angels, especially his Angel Guardian, who failed not to instill into him holy
inspirations, and other learned and spiritual men, who exhorted him both by
their doctrine and example what was fitting for a Child of God; But he neither
moved by their advices, nor the chastisements of Heaven, by which God overthrew
his vain intentions, and thwarted his unlawful pleasures, only lamented his
temporal losses, and not his offenses: and at the time of his death was
sentenced to be deprived of the Kingdom of Heaven, and precipitated into Hell.
What infamy can be greater than this of the damned Soul? for if it be a great
infamy to suffer death by Humane Justice for some crimes committed, how great
an infamy will it be to be condemned by Divine Justice for a Traitor and
perfidious Rebel to God? Besides this bitterness of pains the damned persons
shall also be eternally branded with the infamy of their offenses; so as they
shall be scorned and scoft at by the Devils themselves, and not only Devils,
but all rational creatures; Men and Angels shall detest them, as infamous and
wicked Traitors to their King, God, and Redeemer. Jsai. 13. Facies combustae
vultus eorum.
And as fugitive Slaves are marked and cauterized with burning irons, so this
infamy by some special mark of ugliness and deformity shall be stamped upon
their faces, and bodies; so as Albertus Magnus says; so ignominious shall be
the body of a Sinner, that when his Soul returns to enter it, it shall be
amazed to behold it so horrible, and shall wish it were rather in the same
state, as when it was half eaten up by worms.

CAP. IX.
The Punishment of the Damned from the horribleness of the place, into which
they are banished from Heaven, and made Prisoners in Hell.

ANother kind of punishment of great discomfort and affliction is that of
Exile, which the Damned shall suffer in the highest degree. For they shall be
banished into the profound bowels of the Earth, a place most remote from
Heaven, and the most calamitous of all others, where they shall neither see the
Sun by day, nor the Stars by night, where all shall be horror and darkness; and
therefore it was said of that condemned person, Cast him forth into utter
darkness, forth of the City of God, forth of the Heavens, forth of this World,
where he may never more appear, into that land, which is called in the Book of
Job, A dark land, Job. 10.
covered with the obscurity of death, a land of misery and darkness, where the
shadow of death, and no order, but everlasting horror inhabits: a land,
according to Isaias, Jsai. 34.
of sulphur and burning pitch, a land of pestilence and corruption, and a land
of uncleanness and misery. S. Tho. in 4. Sent.
St. Thomas says, that in the last purification of the World there shall be a
separation made in the Elements, in such a manner, as the pure and refined
parts shall remain above for the glory of the Blessed, and the impure dross and
dregs shall be thrown into Hell for the punishment of the Damned. Wherefore as
every creature is matter of joy to the Blessed, so every creature shall add
unto the torments of the Damned. This appertains unto Divine Justice, that as
separating themselves by sin from him, who is one, they placed their ends in
material things, which are many: so from many things they should receive their
affliction. Into this Sewer and Sink of all the Elements, into this land of
punishment and torments shall be banished the enemies of God.

The punishment of Exile was most grievous unto the Roman Citizens, when for
some enormous fault they were cast forth of the City, and banished into some
desolate Island or barbarous Nation. Ovid, when he was sent into Pontus, did
not cease from lamenting his misfortune, still sighing after his own Country.
And Cicero, when he returned from banishment, as if he had entered into a new
World, whereof they had made him Lord, cried out with admiration and joy, O
what beauty is this of Italy! what civility of People! what Fields! what Vines,
and Crops of Corn! what decency of the City! what humanity of the Citizens!
what dignity of the Commonwealth! If men were thus transported by the
difference betwixt some Countries and others, and betwixt some Men and others,
what difference shall the Damned find betwixt Heaven and Hell, and betwixt the
conversation of Angels and of Devils? What a grief shall it be to see
themselves deprived of the Palaces of Heaven, the society of Saints, and that
happy Country of the Living, where all is peace, quietness, charity, and joy,
where all shines, all pleases, and all parts resound with Alleluja's? David
being absent from his Country amongst barbarous Nations, although his life were
preserved by his banishment, yet could not choose but resent it as his death.
And the People of Juda, whilst they remained in Babylon, thought it impossible
for them to sing (being an action of mirth) whilst they were in a strange
Country. Certainly if the Damned had no other punishment, than to see
themselves banished amongst Devils into a place far distant from Heaven, sad as
night, without the sight or comfort of Sun or Moon for all eternity, it were a
torment unsufferable.

Seneca. Justin. Valerius. Suidas.
It was a great Tyranny in Alexander after he had cut of the nose, ears, and
lips of Calistenes, to cast so worthy a person into a Dungeon, only
accompanied with a dog. A spectacle indeed lamentable, to see so discreet a man
used like a brute, and not have the company of one, who might comfort him. But
the Damned would take it as a favor to have the company of Dogs or Lions
rather than that of their own Parents. The Tyrants of Japonia invented a
strange torment for those who confessed Christ. They hung them with their heads
downwards, half their bodies into a hole dug in the earth, which they filled
with Snakes, Lizards, and other poisonous vermin. But even those were better
companions than those infernal Dragons of the pit of Hell, whereunto not half,
but the whole body of the miserable sinner shall be plunged. The Romans when
they punished any as a Parricide, Isid. l. 5. Etymo. c. 47.
to express the hainousness of the fact, shut him up in a Sack with a Serpent,
an Ape, and a Cock. What a horror shall it be in Hell, where a damned person
shall be shut up with so many malicious spirits? Here if a house be haunted
with a Goblin, none dare dwell in it; There they shall be forced to dwell with
millions of Devils. Here none will live near a Pesthouse, or ill Neighbors.
Think upon what neighborhood is in Hell. Cato counseled those, who were to
take a Farm, to have a special care what Neighbors it had. And Themistocles
being to sell a certain Manor, Plutar. in Them.
caused the Crier to proclaim, That it had good Neighbors. How com's one then
to purchase Hell at so dear a rate, as the price of his Soul, having such
cursed Neighbors, where all scoff and decide him, all will abhor him, all
will be irksome and troublesome, their disquietness and ranting will be
insufferable, and the very sight and ugliness of them will fright and astonish
him? How grievous is the banishment into that place, where none wishes well
unto another: where the Fathers hate their Sons, and the Sons abhor their
Fathers? This may appear by this example, which is rehearsed in the lives of
the Ancient Fathers of the Desert. A Son of an Usurer being converted to
penance by a Sermon, wherein that vice was reprehended, begged of his Father
and of another Brother of his, that forsaking that infamous vice they would
restore all that they had unlawfully gained. They not harkening to him, but, as
they use to say, being deaf of that ear, he retired into the Wilderness, and
became a Monk in company of other Servants of Almighty God. His Father and
Brother died without repentance of their sins. The holy Monk was much afflicted
for the miserable condition he feared they were in, and begged earnestly of
Almighty God, he would please to reveal unto him their state and condition.
Being one day persisting in this prayer, an Angel appeared unto him, and taking
him by the hand, carried him to the top of a high Mountain, from whence he
discovered a deep valley full of fire, whence having first heard a fearful cry,
he presently saw his Father, who boiled in the fire like a pea in a boiling
pot, and his Brother swimming as it were in the flames now above, and now
below. The Son spoke unto his Father, saying: Cursed be thou (Father) for all
eternity, because by an unjust inheritance thou have been the cause of my
damnation. And the Father answered him: Cursed be thou, Son; for to the end I
might leave thee a rich Inheritance, I stuck not to gain it by unjust means.
They disappeared, and the Monk much astonished returned home to his Monastery,
where he lived in very rigorous penance till death. In other banishments, when
Parents or Friends meet in a Country far from home, they endeavor to comfort
one another, and even enemies are then reconciled. But in this banishment of
Hell friends abhor Friends, and Parents hate, and are hated by their Children.

2.
To this may be added, that in this banishment of the Damned the exiles are not
allowed the liberty of other banished persons, who within the Isle or Region of
relegation may go or move whither they please: but not so the Damned in Hell;
because the place of their exile is also a Prison, that so this grievous sort
of punishment may be also added to their other torments. Hell is the Prison of
God, a most rigorous Prison, horrid, and stinking, wherein so many millions of
men shall for ever lie fettered in chains: for chains, or something answerable
unto them shall not there be wanting. Whereupon St. Austin says, and is
followed by the Schoolmen, Aug. l. 1. de Civit. Cap. 10.
that the malign spirits shall be fastened to fire or certain fiery bodies, from
which the pain which they receive shall be incredible, being thereby deprived
of their natural liberty, V. Less. de Perfec. Divin. l. 13. c. 30.
as it were fettered with manicles and bolts, so as they are not able to remove
from that place of mishap and misery. It were a great torment to have burning
irons cast upon our hands and feet; but this and much more shall be in Hell,
where those fiery bodies, which are to serve instead of shackles and fetters,
are (as grave Doctors affirm) to be of terrible forms proportionable unto their
offenses, and shall with their very sight affright them.

Besides, the bodies of the Damned after the final Judgment past shall be so
straightened and crowded together in that infernal Dungeon, that the holy
Scripture compares them to grapes in the Wine Press, which press one another
until they burst. Most inhumane was that torment inflicted upon three Fathers
of the Society of Jesus by their Enemies at Mastrick. They put certain rings of
iron stuck full of sharp points of needles about their arms and feet, in such
manner as they could not move without pricking and wounding themselves. Then
they compassed them about with fire, to the end that standing still they might
be burnt alive: and if they stirred, the sharp points pierced their flesh with
more intolerable pains than the fire. What shall then be that torment of the
Damned, where they shall eternally burn without dying, and without possibility
of removing from the place designed them? where whatsoever they touch shall be
fire and sulphur; into which their bodies shall at the latter day be plunged,
as their souls at present swim in the middle of that lake or pond of fire, (as
the Scripture calls it) like fishes in the Sea, which enters into their very
substance more than the water into the mouth, nose, and ears of him who is
drowned.

Neither shall unsavory smells, so proper unto Prisons, be wanting in that
infernal Dungeon. For first that fire of sulphur being pent in without vent or
respiration shall send forth a most poisonous sent; and if a match of brimstone
be so offensive here, what shall such a mass of that stuff be in Hell?
Secondly, the bodies of the damned shall cast forth a most horrible stench of
themselves, and that more or less according to the quality of their sins. It
happened in Lions that a Sexton entering into a certain Vault, where the body of
a man not long before dead lay yet uncovered, there issued forth so
pestilential, a smell, that the dead man killed the living. If one man's body
then cause such a stink, what shall proceed from a million of bodies, which,
though alive for their further evil, yet are dead in the second death? besides
(as has been said) all the uncleanness and filth of the World, when it is
purified, must fall into that eternal Sink, which shall infinitely increase
this noisome quality. Paulus Jovius writes, that the Enemy of mankind
Actiolinus the Tyrant had many Prisons full of torments, misery, and ill
smells: insomuch as men took it for a happiness rather to die, than to be
imprisoned: because being laden with irons, afflicted with hunger, and
poisoned with the pestilential smell of those who died in Prison, and were not
suffered to be removed, they came to end in a slow but most cruel death. The
Messenians also had a most horrible Prison under earth, full of stench and
horror, into which offenders were let down with a cord never after to see the
light. But what are these Prisons to that of Hell, in respect of which they may
be esteemed as Paradises full of Jessemy and Lillies? Victor. Afric. l. 2. de
Persec. Vandal.
Victor Africanus relating the torments which the Arian Vandals inflicted upon
the holy Martyrs, accounts the stench and noisomness of the Prison to be the
most hidious and unsufferable of all the rest. There were, says he, in one
Prison 4996 Martyrs, which was so straight and narrow, that they flung the holy
Confessors into it one upon another, who stood like swarms of Locusts, or, to
speak more piously, like precious grains of Wheat. In this want of room they
had not place to comply with the necessities of nature, but were forced to ease
themselves where they stood, which caused so horrid a savor, as exceeded all
the rest of their afflictions. One time (says the Author) giving a good sum
of money to the Moors, we had leave, whilst the Vandals slept, to see them,
and at our entrance sunk up to the knees in that filth and loathsomness. It
seems that the stink of Hell could not be more lively expressed than in the
uncleanness and stench of this Prison; but without doubt all this was but a
rough draught and a dead image of that which shall be there, in respect whereof
this here was Perfume and Amber.

If one were cast into some deep dongeon, without clothes, exposed to the
inclemency of the cold and moisture of the place, where he should not see the
light of Heaven, should have nothing to feed on but once a day some little
piece of hard barley bread, and that he were to continue there six years
without speaking or seeing of any body, and not to sleep on other bed but the
cold ground, what a misery were this? one week of that habitation would appear
longer than a hundred years. Yet compare this with what shall be in that
banishment and prison of Hell, and you shall find the miserable life of that
man to be a happiness. There in all his troubles he should not meet with any to
scoff and jest at his misfortunes, none to torment and whip him; but in Hell he
shall find both. The Devils shall not cease to deride, whip, and cruelly
torment him. There should be no horrid fights, no fearful noyses of howlings,
groanings and lamentations. In hell the eyes and ears of the damned shall
never be free from such affrights. There should be no flames of fire to scorch
him. In hell they shall burn into his very bowels. There he might move and
walk. In hell not stir a foot. There he may breath the air without stink. In
hell he shall suck in nothing but flames, stink, and sulphur. There he might
hope for coming forth. In hell there is no remedy, no redemption. There that
little piece of hard bread would every day seem a dainty. But in hell in
Millions of years his eyes shall not behold a crum of bread, nor a drop of
water, but he shall eternally rage with a dog-like hunger, and a burning
thirst. This is to be the calamity of that Land of darkness: barren of all
things, but of the brambles and thorns of grief and torments.

CAP. X.
Of the Slavery, Chastisements, and Pains eternal.

ANother grievous Punishment amongst the Romans was that of Servitude or
Slavery, especially of those, who for some great and heinous offenses were
condemned as Slaves, not to the service of any particular person, but to
undergo such and such punishments: and were therefore called Slaves of
Punishment. This miserable slavery is that which the damned are to suffer in
Hell, who are condemned to be eternally Slaves of pains and torments, and of
their Ministers and Hangmen, the Devils. Those Slaves the Romans esteemed worse
than the dead. Cuiac. Observe. l. 3. c. 10.
For, besides the loss of liberty, (which is next to that of life,) their
condition was most infamous, and their life most miserable. Yet in respect of
the slavery of the damned, who are subjected to their pains with all their
senses and powers both of soul and body, it might be accounted free and
glorious. With their touch they are to serve that burning and never consuming
Fire: with their taste Hunger and Thirst: with their smell Stink: with their
sight those horrid and monstrous a Shapes, which the Devils shall assume: with
their hearing Scorns and Affronts: with their imagination Horror: with their
will Loathsomness and Detestation: with their memory Despair: with their
understanding Confusion, with such a multitude of other punishments, as they
shall want eyes to weep for them. Aelianus lib. 14. C. 22.
Aelianus writes of Trizus the Tyrant, that he commanded his Subjects not to
speak together: and when they used signs instead of words, he also forbad
those. Whereupon the afflicted people met in the Marketplace at least to weep
for their misfortunes. But neither was that permitted. Greater shall be the
rigor in Hell, where they shall neither be suffered to speak word of comfort,
nor move hand or foot, nor ease their hearts with weeping; neither, if all the
pores of their bodies, or hairs of their heads were turned into eyes, would
they suffice to do it. Jeremias the Prophet lamented with floods of tears, that
Jerusalem, which was the Queen of Nations, should be made a Slave and
tributary. What tears are sufficient to lament the damnation of a Christian,
who from an Heir and Prince of the Kingdom of Heaven has made himself a Slave
to the Devil and those eternal punishments of Hell, unto which he is to pay as
many tributes, as he has senses, powers, and members? Let us mark how great is
the tyranny of the Devil, even over those, who are not his slaves. What rigor
and punishments has he exercised upon those, who are the servants of God? what
will he do then upon his own Slaves and Captives? We will only (passing over
others) instance in one related by holy Scripture. Let us behold in what
grievous manner (having demanded license from God) the Devil afflicted holy
Job, making him from head to foot but one sore, so loathsome and infected, that
lying upon a Dunghill he scrapt away the worms and corruption of his wounds with
a potsheard: so lean, that only so much flesh remained about the lips of his
mouth, as might enable him to speak and answer. The night, which uses to be a
refreshment and ease unto the afflictions of others, increased his pains with
visions and phantasms. In conclusion his Wife could not endure the noisomness
of his putrified body: and his three Friends, who came to visit and comfort
him, were so amazed at his affliction, that in seven days they could not
speak unto him. From whence we may draw two most important arguments. The
first, That if God permitted the Devil so to handle the simplicity, piety,
obedience, purity, and sanctity of Job, only to prove him, to convince the
Devil, and leave us an example of patience, How will he suffer the Devil to
deal with the doubleness, crasty boldness, impudence, and uncleanness of
others, who shall be condemned into Hell fire? The second, If the Devils
tormenting him, even until he became a Leper, and the most loathsome spectacle
that the world ever looked upon, the Scripture only says, That God touched
him, attributing to God what the Devil did, as we attribute unto the Judge the
torments executed by the Hangmen: when God shall then discharge his whole wrath
upon a slave in Hell, what whips, what torments shall fall upon him?

Let us now come unto the punishment of Whipping, under which is understood all
chastisement of pain executed upon evil doers. This was signified unto the
Prophet Jeremy, Jerem. 1.
when the Lord showed him a rod, (for with rods they anciently whipped offenders)
and immediately after a pot of boiling fire, by which was signified hell: giving
us to understand that the whipping of Divine Justice shall be executed in the
eternal fire of hell. But not rods or scourges, but strong hammers are reserved
for Sinners; And therefore the Wiseman said; Prove. 19.
Smiting hammers are prepared for the bodies of fools; for so the Scripture by
Antonomasia calls the damned: because they were such fools, as they knew not
how to purchase Heaven at so cheap a rate as God proposes it, and so fell into
the eternal torments of hell for a momentarie pleasure. Surius 14. Apri. in
Vit. S. Lidw. 3. p. c. 2.
St. Lidwina heard in hell, amongst groans and complaints, the heavy blows of
hammers, with which the damned were most cruelly tormented: signifying by those
strokes the violence, with which the Divine Justice falls upon sinners. For as
the slaves of the earth are whipped and punished by their masters, so the slaves
of hell are tormented by the Devils, who have power and dominion over them.
And even as slaves are whipped and chastized by their Masters, so the Torments,
treating the damned as their slaves, lay upon them a thousand afflictions,
griefs, and miseries. But who shall be able to express the number and greatness
of their torments, since all their powers and senses, soul and body are to
suffer in a most violent manner? And every member of their body shall suffer
greater pain and torment, then if it were torn from the body. If one can not
tell how to suffer a toothache, headache, pain in the ear, or the pain of the
chollick, what will it be, when there shall not be any joint, or the least part
in the body, which shall not cause him a most intense pain: not only the head,
or teeth, but also the breasts, the side, shoulders; the back, the heart,
thighs, the knees, the feet, the nerves, the veins, and all the entrails even
to the very bones, and marrow?

2.
Besides this, every sense from his particular object shall receive a
particular punishment. The eyes shall not be only grieved with a scorching
heat, which shall burn their very pupils, but shall be tormented with monstrous
and horrible figures. Many have lost their wits through fear of such
apparitions, and some their lives. St. Bernard explicating the 90. Psalm,
reports that a certain religious person being ready to die beheld two Devils in
that horrid and ugly shape, that he cried out as if he had been distracted,
Cursed be the hour that I entered into Religion; and then holding his peace, not
long after with a quiet and appeased voice and countenance he said; Nay rather
blessed be the time that I became of this Order; and ever blessed be the Mother
of Christ, whom I have always loved from my heart; And then turning to those
who were in prayer, he said unto them, Marvel not at the turbation of my
spirit, for two Devils appeared unto me in that monstrous and horrid form, that
if there were here a fire of sulphur and melted metal, which were to last unto
the day of Judgment, I would sooner pass through the midst of it, than turn
again to behold them. If then two Devils caused such amazement, what shall the
sight of legions do, each exceeding other in deformity? If the Devil be so
ugly and terrible in this life, what shall he be in his proper place of
damnation, and especially so many together? Many are affrighted very much
passing only through a Churchyard, only for fear of seeing a phantasm; in
what a fright will be a miserable damned soul, which shall see so many, and of
so horrid shapes? St, Gregory reflecting on that which is spoken in the book of
Job, Job. 10.
That in Hell shall inhabit everlasting horror, says in this manner; How can
there be fear, where there is so much grief? We grieve for a present evil, and
fear for that, which is to come: and he who is arrived at the utmost of misery
has nothing more to fear; and not to fear is a kind of good: and no good can
happen in Hell. He answers, That as death perpetually killing the damned leaves
them alive, that they may die living, so pain torments them, and in such manner
affrights them, that they are still in fear of greater succeeding pains. Their
fight also shall be tormented with beholding the punishment of their friends
and kindred. Egesippus writes that Alexander the Son of Hircanus resolving to
punish certain persons with exemplary rigor, caused 800 to be crucified; and
whilst they were yet alive; caused their wives and children to be murdered
before their eyes, that so they might die not one but many deaths. This rigor
shall not be wanting in Hell, where Fathers shall see their Sons, and Brothers
their Brothers tormented. The Torment of the eyes shall be also very great, in
regard that those, that have given others scandal, and made others fall into
sin, shall see themselves and those others in that Abyss of torments. To the
sight of these dreadful and grievous apparitions shall be added that nocturnal
horror and fearful darkness of the place. Nicholas de Lira says, In Exodus 10.
says, that therefore the darkness of Egypt was said to be horrible, because
there the Egyptians beheld fearful figures and phantasms, which terrified
them. In the like manner in that infernal darkness the eyes shall be tormented
with the monstrous and enormous figures of the wicked spirits; which shall
appear much more dreadful by reason of the obscurity and sadness of that
eternal night.

The Hearing shall not only be afflicted by an intolerable pain caused by that
ever burning and penetrating fire, but also with the fearful and amazing noises
of thunders, roarings, howlings, clamours, groans, curses, and blasphemies.
Sylla being Dictator caused six thousand persons to be enclosed in the Circus,
and then appointing the Senate to meet in a Temple close by, where he intended
to speak unto them about his own affairs, to strike the greater terror into
them, and make them know he was their Master, he gave order, that so soon as he
began his oration, the Soldiers should kill this multitude of people, which
was effected. Upon which were heard such lamentations, outcries, groans,
clashing of Armor, and blows of those merciless homicides, that the Senators
could not hear a word, but stood amazed with terror of so horrid a fact. Such
shall be the harmony of Hell, when the ears shall be deafned with the cries and
complaints of the damned. What confusion and horror shall it breed to hear all
lament, all complain, all curse and blaspheme through the bitterness of the
torments, which they suffer? Sur. in ejus vita, 14. Apr.
St. Lidwin being in an ecstasy saw a place so dreadful made of black stone,
and of such a depth, that it would fright one to look into it. The Saint heard
there within most fearful groans, cries, and howlings, noise, and horrible
knocking as it were of hammers, wherewith those within were tormented. She was
so astonished to hear this, that if all the noise and lamentations of the world
were joined together, it would be of no trouble in respect of it. The Angel
told her, That was the habitation of the damned. And demanding of her, whither
she had any desire to see it: she said, No, she would not see it, because only
hearing what there was done, caused her an unsufferable grief.

The Smell also shall be tormented with a most pestilential stench. Horrible
was that torment used by Mezentius, to tie a living body to a dead, and there
to leave them until the infection and putrified exhalations of the dead had
killed the living. What can be more abominable, than for a living man to have
his mouth laid close to that of a dead one, full of grubs and worms: where the
living must receive all those pestilential vapors breathed forth from a
corrupted carcass, and suffer such loathsomness, and abominable steneh? But
what is this in respect of Hell: when each body of the damned is more loathsome
and unsavory than a million of dead dogs, and all these pressed and crowded
together in so straight a compass? Isaias in respect of their stench calls them
dead bodies, Isai. 34.
when he says: The stench of their carcasses shall ascend. And St. Bonaventure
goes so far as to say, that if one only body of the damned were brought into
this world, it were sufficient to infect the whole earth. Neither shall the
Devils send forth a better smell. For although they are spirits, yet those
fiery bodies, unto which they are fastened and confined, shall be of a most
pestilential savor. And in this manner a Devil, who had appeared unto him,
being put to flight by St. Martin, left such an horrible stench behind him,
that the Saint deemed himself to be already in hell, and said unto himself: If
one only Devil having been here has caused this, what will all the Devils
together, and damned men do? Libel. de provid. number. 3.
In the Book of the Doctrine of the Fathers it is written, that a pious Damsel
being carried by an Angel to see Hell, she saw her own Mother there put into a
Cauldron of boiling pitch up to the neck, and great numbers of vermin swarming
in it of a most intolerable stench.

What shall I then say of the Tongue, which is the instrument of so many ways
of sinning, flattery, lying, murmuring, calumniating, gluttony, and
drunkenness? who can express that bitterness which the miserable shall suffer,
greater than that of wormwood or aloes? insomuch as the Scripture says, The
gall of dragons shall be their wine, and they shall taste the poison of Asps
for all eternity. Unto which shall be joined an intolerable thirst and dog-like
hunger; conformable unto which, David said, They shall suffer hunger as dogs.
Quintilian says, Quintil. Declam. ^2.
That Famine is the most pressing of all necessities, and most deformed of all
evils; that Plagues and Wars are happinesses in respect of it. If then a
Famine of eight days be the worst of temporal evils, what shall that Famine be
which is eternal? Let our Epicures and Belly-Gods hear what the Son of God
prophesies; Luc. 6.
Woe unto you who are full, for you shall be an hungered; and with such an
hunger, as shall be eternal. If the other evils of this world, as Quintilian
affirms, may be esteemed not much in comparison of hunger even in this temporal
life, what will they be in respect of the hunger of the life to come? Hunger in
this life does bring men to such extremities, that not only they come to
desire to eat Dogs, Cats, Rats and Mice, Snakes, Toads, Leather, Dung, and eat
them in effect: but also Mothers come to eat their own Children, and men the
flesh of their own arms, as it fell out to Zeno the Emperor. If hunger be so
horrible a mischief in this life, how will it afflict the damned in the other?
without all doubt the damned would rather tear themselves in pieces, than
suffer it. Neither shall thirst torment them less.

The sense of Touching, as it is the most extended sense of all the rest, so
shall it be the most tormented in that burning fire. Bar. ad an. 191.
We are amazed to think of the inhumanity of Phalaris, who roasted men alive in
his brazen Bull. This was a toy in respect of that fire of Hell, which
penetrates the very entrails of the body without consuming them. The burning of
a finger only does cause so great a torment, that it is unsufferable; but far
greater were it to burn the whole arm: and far greater were it besides the arms
to burn the legs: and far more violent torment would it be to burn the whole
body. This torment is so great that it cannot be expressed in words, since it
includes or comprises as many torments as the body of man has joints, sinews,
arteries, etc. and especially being caused by that so penetrating, and true
fire, of which St. Austin says, that this temporal fire is but a painted fire
in respect of that in Hell; in so much that the fire of Hell does exceed ours
by so many degrees, as a thing in life and reality exceeds the same in a
picture. In conformity to what is here said venerable Peter Cluniacensis
writes, (and when we read such like stories, from the representations therein
contained we are to raise our thoughts to the substance therein represented)
This venerable man then writes, That a wicked Priest being ready to give up the
ghost, there appeared unto him two fiery Devils, who brought with them a
Drying Pan, in which they told him they would fry him in Hell; and a drop of
hot liquor then falling out of the Drying Pan upon his hand in a moment burnt
him to the very bones in the sight of all that were present, who remained
astonished to see the efficacy, and violence of that infernal fire. Whereupon
Nicholas of Nice says, that if there were a fire made of all the wood in the
world, it would not be able to cause so much torment, as the least spark of
Hellfire. Caesarius does also write, Caesar. l. 12. mirac. c. 23.
That Theodosius Bishop of Mastrick had a Servant by name Eberbach, who in a
raging fit of anger gave himself to the Devil, upon condition he would help him
to take revenge upon his Enemies. Some years after this man fell grievously
sick of a disease, that brought him to the point of death; and being now dead
in all men's judgment, his soul was cast into a sea of fire, where he remained
suffering until such time as an Angel of Heaven came unto him, and said, Behold
what they are to suffer, that serve the Devil. But if so great a mercy should
be showed unto thee, as to grant thee longer life, would thou not spend it in
doing penance for thy sins? He replied, There can be nothing so hard or
painful, which I would not undergo to escape this torment. Then the Lord used
that mercy to him, as to let him return to the use of life and senses, and
rising off the Biere, where he was already placed to be carried to burial, all
that were present were astonished at him: who at the same instant began a
course of life of most austere and rigorous penance. He went barefoot upon
thorns and briars, store of blood issuing from the wounds received. He lived
only on bread and water, and that in a very small quantity. What money he had,
he gave to the poor. There were many, who wondering at the rigor of his
penance, endeavored to moderate the excess of his fervor and austerities; to
whom he answered, Wonder not hereat; for I have suffered torments of a far
different kind: and if you had been there, you would frame a far different
apprehension of them: And for to explicate the excessive torment that fire
caused, he said, That if all the trees in the world were put in one heap and
set on fire, I would rather burn there till the day of judgment, than suffer
only for the space of one hour that fire, which I have experienced. Now what a
miserable unhappiness will it be to burn in those flames of Hell not only for
one hour, but till the day of Judgment, yea even for all eternity, and world
without end? Who would not esteem it an hideous torment, if he were to be burnt
alive an hundred times, and his torment were to last every time for an hours
space? with what compassionate eyes would all the world look upon such a
miserable wretch? Nevertheless without all doubt any of the damned in Hell
would receive this as a great happiness to end his torments with those hundred
times burning. For what comparison is there betwixt an hundred hours burning
with some space of time betwixt every hour, and to burn an hundred years of
continual torment? And what comparison will there be betwixt burning for an
hundred years space, and to be burning without interruption as long as God is
God? Let a Christian, who has ever committed a mortal sin, consider this, and
let him see what can be difficult, sharp, and intolerable, since thereby he
deserved to be cast into Hell: and let him see, whether he think any
tribulation and affliction would be too great to give satisfaction. Well may he
say, I deserved to suffer greater torments, and therefore will not complain of
this my light suffering. Beda de Gest. Anglorum. l. 5.
Venerable Bede does also write of one, to whom the pains and torments, as also
the joys and bliss of the other life were shown: and having obtained leave to
return to this world again, he renounced all he had in this life, and betook
himself unto a Monastery, where he persevered in a most rigid manner of life to
his dying day: in so much that his manner of living gave perpetual testimony,
that, although he was silent, yet he had seen horrible things, and that he had
hopes to obtain other great ones, which did indeed deserve to be thirsted
after. He entered into a frozen River, which was near the Convent without
putting off his clothes, having first broke the ice in several places, that he
might be able to get into the water; and afterward let his clothes to dry
upon his back. Some admired, that a man's body was able to suffer so great cold
in the Winter time; And to those, who demanded, How he could possibly endure
it: He replied, I have seen colds far greater. And when they said unto him: How
can you so constantly keep such a rigorous and austere manner of life? He
replied, I have seen far greater austerity. Neither did he relent in the rigor
of his penance even in his decrepit age: but was very careful to chastise his
flesh with continual fasts; and his exemplar conversation and wholesome
admonitions were such, as he did much good to many, and efficaciously stirred
them up to the amendment of their lives.

We must make use of this self-same consideration to encourage our selves to
suffer in this life all that can be suffered, in regard that in the other we
should suffer more than can be suffered. Hell certainly is more unsufferable
than fasting with bread and water: far more than a rough hair-cloth, or a
discipline though never so bloody: far more than the greatest injuries or
disgraces, that can be put upon us. Let us then suffer that which is lesser to
be freed from that which is greater; especially being so much greater, by how
much a living creature exceeds a painted one. Let us not complain of any thing
that may happen unto us in this life: But let us rather be comforted, that we,
who have deserved to be in those eternal flames without profit or hope of
reward, may by our patient suffering here some temporal afflictions expect an
everlasting reward for them in Heaven. The Mother of St. Catharine of Siena
carried her to certain Baths to divert and recreate her, because she was very
weak, Hist. S. Dom. 2. p. lib. 2.
and disfigured with leanness. But the Saint could find in this entertainment a
sharp cross, which was, that entering into the Bath alone, she went to the
Bathhead, where the water came out in a manner boiling hot, and there suffered
her self to be scalded to that degree, that it seemed impossible for a weak
Damsel to have been able to endure it. Her Confessarius asked her afterward,
How she had so much courage to abide such heat, and for so long a space? She
replied, That when she placed her self there, she also placed her consideration
in the pains of Purgatory and Hellfire, and withal begged of God Almighty,
whom she had offended, that he would be pleased to change the punishments she
had deserved by her sins into temporal pains and sufferings: whereby all the
pains of this life seemed very easy unto her to suffer, and the great heat of
the scalding water of the Bath seemed a refreshment to her in respect of the
fiery Furnace of Hell, in which the damned are for ever and ever to be
tormented.

And in regard holy Scripture calls Hell a Poole or Lake of fire, Pet. Damian.
l. 2. ep. 15. ad Desid. c. 4.
I will here rehearse a story out of St. Petrus Demianus, which will give us to
understand the terribleness of this torment. In Lombardy (says he) there was a
man cunning and crafty, of a notable talking tongue, and a friend of breaking
jests on all occasions: and commonly by reason of his quick wit he came off
with credit; And if at any time it happened to him otherwise, he knew how to
put it off very handsomely. In fine he was one of those that knew very well how
to live in the world. But what end had all his tricks and slights? he died; for
against this stroke he had no defense. His body was buried in the Church, and
his soul in the place, which God grant no body may ever come in. An holy
Religious man being in prayer he saw in spirit a great Lake, not of water, but
of fire, which boiled like a Pot, and cast flames now and then up into the
heavens, which sent forth sparks in so great quantity, and with such fearful
noise, that it caused great horror to hear and see it. What would it be to
suffer it? The miserable foul of this man we speak of did suffer it in all
extremity. Moreover he saw that the Lake was encompassed round about with
fearful Serpents and terrible Dragons, which had their mouths open toward the
Lake, with many rows of sharp teeth to guard the Lake. In this confusion of
fire and cruel beasts the Soul of the miserable Babbler was howling and crying,
and swimming upon the flames endeavored to get to the banck, and drawing nigh,
the comfort he found was, that a Serpent stretching out a long neck and a wide
mouth was ready to tear him in pieces and swallow him; He endeavored to turn
another way in the Lake, and drawing near the side he lighted upon a Dragon,
the only sight whereof made him make more haste back again, than he had done
to come thither. He swam in the Lake burning alive: and wherever he came, he
found the like encounter; but which is worse, he shall remain there whilst God
is God, without any remedy at all. And with much reason, says St. Peter
Damianus, he suffered this punishment of not being able to get out of that Lake
of fire, in regard he in this life got so cunningly out of any adversity by his
many shifts. In this manner God Almighty gave to understand by this revelation
the extremity of this torment. But it is to be noted, that it is far greater
than is here expressed; because this was not so much to tell us what hell is,
as to declare by some similitude or representation, which may remain fixed in
our senses, that, which indeed exceeds all similitude or resemblance.

3.
The pains of the Powers of a damned Soul.

THe Imagination shall no less afflict those miserable offenders, increasing
the pains of the Senses by the liveliness of its apprehension. For if in this
life the imagination is sometimes so vehement, that it hurts more than real
evils, in the other the torment, which it causes, will be excessive. Vide
Marcel. Don. in Hist. M^dica l. 2. c. 1.
Alexander Tralianus writes of a Woman who was extremely ill, only with a
false imagination that she had swallowed a Snake, and was persuaded that she
already felt most grievous pains by the Snakes gnawing of her entrals. What
will the apprehension of the truth do in those miserable wretchches, when the
worm of their conscience will be continually gnawing their very hearts?
Assahara^ius writes of others who complained of the great pains they endured by
whipping, when no man touched a thread of their Garment. Much more is that
which Fulgosius recounts as an eye-witnese, that being Judge in a Duel, one of
the Competitors made the other fly, Baptist. Fulgos. l. 9.
but instantly fell down dead himself without any other cause than an
imagination that he was hurt to death; for he neither received wound nor blow,
neither was the sign of any found upon his dead body. If in this life the
imagination be so powerful in men, who are in health, and have other
diversions, as to cause a sense of pain, where none hurts, grief, where none
molests, and death, where none kills, What shall it be in Hell, where there is
nothing of delight to divert it, where so many Devils punish and afflict with
torments, preserving only life that the pain of death may live eternally? And
if we see some timorous people with an imaginary fear tremble and remain half
dead, there is no doubt but the imagination of those miserable persons joined
with the horror of the place, where they are, will cause a thousand pains and
torments.

The powers of the Soul shall be those which shall suffer the greatest lashes.
The Will shall be tormented with an eternal abhorring and rage against it self,
against, all creatures, and against God the Creator of all: and shall with an
intolerable sadness, anger, grief and disorder of all the affections violently
desire things impossible, and despair of all what is good. And if joy consists
in the possessing of what one loves, and pain in the want of that which is
desired, and being necessitated to what is abhorred, What greater pain and
torment than to be ever desiring that which shall never be enjoyed, and ever
abhorring that which we can, never be quyt of? Bern. l. 5. de Consid. ad Eugen.
Papam.
Wherefore St. Bernard says, What thing more painful, then ever to will that
which shall never be, and ever to will that which shall not cease to be? That
which he desires, he shall never obtain: and what he desires not, eternally
suffer. And from hence shall spring that raging fury, which David speaks of:
The sinner shall see and he raging, he shall gnash his teeth and be consumed.

This rage and madness shall be augmented by the despair, which shall be joined
unto it. For as no man sins without injury to the Divine mercy, presuming to
sin in, hope he may repent and be pardoned: So it was fit that the Divine
justice should chastise the sinner with a despair of all remedy, that so he,
who abused the Divine benefits with a false hope, might feel the punishment of
a true despair. This torment shall be most terrible unto the damned. For as the
greatest evil is eased by hope, so the least is made grievous by despair. Hope
in afflictions is supported by two things; One is the fruit, which may result
from suffering; The other is the end and conclusion of the evil suffered. But
in regard the despair of the damned is of so great evils, the despair it self
will be a most terrible one. If one suffers and reaps fruit from it, it is a
comfort unto him, and the grief is recompensed by the joy of the benefit
thereof; but when the suffering is without fruit or profit, then it comes to be
heavy indeed. The hope of a good harvest makes the labourer with cheerfulness
endure the toil of plowing and sowing; but if he were certain to reap no
profit, every pace he moved would be grievous and irksome unto him. A
Day-labourer with the hope of his wages goes through the toil of the day with
great comfort: But if they commanded him to work for nothing, he would have no
heart to work at all. The holy Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, what penances,
what rigours, what martyrdomes have they willingly undergone, expecting the
fruit they were to draw from their patience? And though in temporal afflictions
this hope of recompense should fail, yet the hope, that they would sometime
cease and have an end, would afford some comfort and ease unto the sufferers.
But in Hell both those are wanting; The damned shall neither receive reward for
their sufferings, nor shall their torments ever have an end. Of them it is that
St. John speaks; They shall seek death, and shall not find it; Apoc. 9.
They shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them. O let a Christian
consider how great a recompense attends the least of our sufferings here in
Christ's service, and how vain and unprofitable shall all our sufferings be
hereafter. One penitent knock upon the breast here may gain eternal glory;
There the most intense pains and torments both in soul and body cannot deserve
a drop of cold water, nor so much ease, as to turn from one side to the other.
In this raging despair ends the temerarious hopes of sinners. Hell is full of
those, who hoped they should never enter into it: and full of those, who
despair of getting out of it. They offended with a presumptuous hope they
should not die in sin: and that proving false, are fallen into eternal
desperation. There is no hope can excuse the falling into so great a danger.
Let us therefore secure Heaven, and not sin.

The Memory shall be another cruel Tormentor of those miserable sinners,
converting all they have done good or bad into torments: The good, because they
have lost their reward, The bad, because they have deserved their punishments.
The delights also, which they have enjoyed, and all the happiness of this life,
in which they have triumphed, (seeing that for them they fell into this
misery,) shall be a sharp sword, which shall pierce their hearts. They shall
burst with grief, when they shall compare the shortness of their past pleasures
with the eternity of their present torments. What Mathematician so learned, as
can perfectly set out the excess of those eternal years of the other life unto
those short few and evil days of this? What groans, what sighs will they pour
out, when they see that those delights have hardly lasted an instant, and that
the pains they suffer for them shall last for ages and eternities, all that is
past appearing but as a dream? Let us tremble now at the felicity of this life,
if it make such wounds in the hearts of those, who have used it ill. Let us
tremble at all our pleasures, since they may turn into Arseneck and Hemlock.
The miserable wretch shall with great grief remember how often he might have
gained Heaven, and did it not, but is now tumbled into Hell, and shall say unto
himself, How many times might I have prayed, and spent that time in play? but
now I pay for it. How many times ought I to have fasted, and left it to
satisfy my greedy appetite? How many times might I have given alms, and spent
it in sin? How many times might I have pardoned my enemies, and chose rather to
be revenged? How many times might I have frequented the Sacraments, and forbore
them, because I would not quit the occasion of sinning? There never wantted
means of serving God: but I never made use of it, and am therefore now justly
paid for all. Behold accursed Caitiff, that entertaining thy self in pleasures,
thou have for toys and fooleries lost Heaven. If thou would, thou might
have been a companion for Angels; if thou would thou might have been in
eternal joy: and thou have lost all for the pleasure of a moment. O accursed
and wretched fool, thy Redeemer courted thee with Heaven, and thou despisedst
him for a base trifle. This was thy fault, and now thou suffer for it; and
since thou would not be happy with God, thou shall now be eternally cursed
by him and his Angels.

The Understanding shall torment it self with discourses of great bitterness,
discoursing of nothing but what may grieve it. Aristotle shall not there take
delight in his wisdom, nor Seneca comfort himself with his Philosophy. Galen
shall find no remedy in his Physic, nor the profoundest Scholar in his
Divinity. A certain Doctor of Paris appeared after death unto the Bishop of
that City, and gave him an account that he was damned. The Bishop demanded of
him, if he had there any knowledge. He answered, That he knew nothing but only
three things; The first, that he was eternally damned: The second, that the
Sentence past against him was irrevocable: The third, that for the vain
pleasure of the world he was deprived of the vision of God. And then he desired
to know of the Bishop if there were any people in the world remaining. The
Bishop asking him the reason of that question, he answered, that within these
few last days there have so many souls descended into Hell, that methinks
there should not any be left upon earth.

In this power of the Soul is engendered tho worm of conscience, which is so
often proposed unto us in holy Scripture as a most terrible torment, and
greater than that of fire. Only in one Sermon, or rather in the Epilogue of
that Sermon Christ our Redeemer three times menaces us with that Worm, Marc. 9.
which gnaws the consciences and tears in pieces the hearts of the Damned,
admonishing us as often, That their worm shall never die, nor their sire be
quenched. For as the worm, which breeds in dead flesh, or that which breeds in
wood, eats and gnaws that substance of which they are engendered; so the Worm,
which is bred from sin, is in perpetual enmity with it, gnawing and devouring
the heart of the sinner with raging, desperate, and now unprofitable grief:
still putting him in mind, that by his own fault he lost that eternal glory,
which he might so easily have obtained, and is now fallen into eternal
torments, from whence there is no redemption. And certainly this resentment of
the loss of Heaven shall more torment him, than the fire of Hell. Of an evil
conscience even in this life St. Austin said, Aug. in Psalm. 45. Quint. Declam.
12. Senec. ep. 97.
that amongst all the tribulations of the Soul none was greater than that of a
guilty conscience. Even the Gentiles knew this, and therefore Quintilian
exclaims, O sad remembrance and knowledge more grievous than all torments! And
Seneca says, that evil actions are whipped by the conscience of themselves: that
perpetual vexation and resentment brings great afflictions and torments upon
the Actors: that wickedness drinks up the greatest part of its own poison, and
is a punishment unto it self.

Certainly it were a great rigor, if a Father should be forced to be present
at the execution of his Son: but more, if he should be compelled to be the
Hangman; and yet greater, if the Gallows should be placed before his own door,
so that he could neither go in or out without beholding that affront and
contumely; but far greater cruelty, if they should make the guilty person to
execute himself, and that by cutting his body in pieces, member after member,
or tearing off his flesh with his own teeth. This is the cruelty and torment of
an evil Conscience, with which a sinner is racked and tortured amongst those
eternal flames, not being able to banish his faults from his memory, nor their
punishment from his thoughts. The envy also, which they shall bear toward
those, who have gained Heaven by as small matters as they have lost it, shall
much add to their grief. Those who are hungry, if they see others meaner than
they feed at some splendid and plentiful Table, and cannot be admitted
themselves, become more hungry; so shall it fare with the damned, who shall be
more afflicted by beholding others, sometimes less than themselves, enjoy that
eternal happiness, which they through want of care are deprived of. Esau,
though a Clown, having understood, that his Brother Jacob had obtained* his
Fathers Benediction, cried out and roared like a Lion, and consumed himself
with resentment and horror. What lamentations shall those of the damned be,
when they shall see that the Just have gained the Benediction of God, not by
any deceit or cozenage used by them, but that they lost it through their own
neglect? Those who with opinion of merit earnestly aim at some vacant Dignity,
if at length they see themselves neglected, and with shame put off, their grief
and indignation swells above measure: In like manner, I say, shall it be with
those damned wretches, who will be far more afflicted by the consideration of
those great goods and eternal felicities, which they see themselves have lost,
and those to enjoy them, whom they deemed far inferior to them in merit. Let
us now therefore have remorse of conscience whilst we may kill the Worm, lest
it then bite us, when it cannot die.

CAP. XI.
Of Eternal Death, and the Punishment of Talion in the Damned.

AFter all this there shall not want in Hell the pains of Death, which amongst
humane punishments is the greatest. That of Hell is a living Death, and does as
far exceed this of earth, as the substance does a shadow. The Death, which men
give, together with death takes away the pain and sense of dying; but the
Eternal Death of sinners is with sense and by so much greater, as it has more
of life, recollecting within it self the worst of dying, which is to perish,
and the most intolerable, of life, which is to suffer pain. And therefore St.
Bernard calls the pain of the damned a living Death, and a dead Life; and Pope
Innocent the Third an immortal Death. O Death, how much less cruel art thou in
taking away life, than in forcing to live in so painful a manner? Greg. Moral.
l. 9. c. 49.
St. Gregory also says: In hell there shall be unto the miserable a death
without death, and an end without end; for their death shall ever live, and
their end shall ever begin. Mortal sin is the greatest of all evils, and
consequently deserves the greatest of all punishments. Because in ordinary
death, which takes away the use of the senses, the rigor of it is not felt,
God ordained another kind of death, in which the senses perpetually dying
should perpetually feel the force of pain, and should ever live in the agony of
dying. This David signitied, when he said, That death should feed on the
damned; for as the Flock pastures upon the grass, but ends it not, because it
still grows green and fresh again: so that death feeds upon sinners, but
consumes them not.

This death of the damned the holy Scripture calls the second death, Because it
succeeds the first, and comprehends both that of soul and body. And with much
reason may it also be called a double death: because death is then doubled when
we die, and feel the torment of dying: which in the first death of the body we
do not. Even here amongst us, if there should be a condition, in which we might
be sensible but of some part of that which death brings along with it, it would
be esteemed a greater evil than death it self. Who doubts but if one after
burial should find himself alive and sensible under the earth, where he could
speak with no body, see nothing but darkness, hear nothing but those who walked
above him, smell nothing but the rotten stink of their bodies, cat nothing but
his own flesh, nor feel any thing but the earth which oppressed him, or the cold
pavement of the Vault where he lay: Who doubts not, I say, but that this estate
were worse than to be wholly dead, since life only served to feel the pain of
death? For this reason the ingenious Romans, when they would punish Sacrilege,
which is the greatest crime, made use of interring the offenders alive, as of
the greatest punishment: and therefore executed it upon their Vestal Virgins,
when they offended a against their chastity, as upon Oppia and Minutia, that
being alive they might feel the pain and bitterness of dying. And certainly
Zeno the Emperor found this punishment so bitter, that he devoured his own
flesh by morsels. What Sepulcher is more horrible than that of Hell, what is
eternally shut upon those who are in it, whore the miserable damned remain not
only under earth, but under fire, having sense for nothing but to feel death,
darkness, loathsomness, pain and stink? This is therefore a double death,
because to feel the pain of death is an evil double to that of dying. Lib. 6.
de Civit. ca. 12.
Wherefore St. Austin said, No death is greater or worse than where death dies
not.

Besides, this death of Hell may be called a double death, in respect it
contains both the death of sin, ang the death of pain: those unfortunate
wretches standind condemned never to be freed from the death of sin, and for
ever to be tormented with the death of pain. There is no greater death than
that of the Soul, which is sin, in which the miserable are to continue whilst
God is God with that infinite evil, and that ugly deformity, which sin draws
along with it, which is worse than to suffer that eternal fire, which is but
the punishment of it. After sin, what pain should there be greater than that of
sin it self? and for this reason in Hell, in regard it is the torment for sin,
it is a greater pain than death it self, or the most horrible death of all. Who
trembles not with the only memory that he is to die, remembering that he is to
cease to be, that the feet, whereon he walks are no more to bear him, that his
hands are no more to serve him, nor his eyes to see? Why then do we not rather
tremble at the thought of Hell, in respect of which the first death is no
punishment, but a reward, a happiness, and a joy, there being no damned in
Hell, but would take that death, which we here inflict for offenses, as an ease
of his pains? O how much does the Divine Justice exceed the humane, since that,
which men give unto those whom they condemn for the greatest offenses, would be
received by those, whom God condemns, as a great ease, comfort, and
accomplishment of their desires, who shall desire death, and death shall fly
from them? for unto all their evils and miseries this as the greatest is
adjoined, that neither They nor It shall shall ever die. This circumstance of
being eternal does much augment the torments of Hell, such being the condition
of eternity, (as has been already declared,) that it does infinitely augment
that, whereunto it is annexed. Let us suppose that one had but a Gnat, that
should sting his right hand, and a Wasp at the left, and that one foot should
be pricked with a Thorn, and the other with a Pin. If this only were to last
for ever, it would be an intolerable torment. What will it then be, when hands,
feet, arms, head, bread, and entrails are to burn for all eternity? The only
holding one finger in a Candle for the space of a quarter of an hour no body
would be able to suffer it. To be then plunged into the infernal flames for
years eternal, what understanding is there that is able, I do not say, to
express in words, but to frame a due conception of this torment? That a torment
is never to cease, and that the tormented is to live for ever, the only
thinking of it causes great horror; What would it be to suffer it? Sur. To. 7.
die 14. April.
A certain man who had not much repentance or feeling, it seems, of his sins,
having expressed diverse most heinous offenses to the holy Virgin St. Lidwine,
the Saint replied, That she would do penance for them, contenting her self,
that he should only lie in his Bed one night in the same posture looking up
toward Heaven without moving or turning himself all night. The man very
contented and joyful, If my penance, says he, be no greater than this, I shall
soon have performed it. But he was scarce laid down in his Bed, when he had a
mind to turn on one side, it being a great trouble to him not to do it,
persuading himself, that he never lay so uneasy his whole life before: and
said unto himself; My Bed is a very good one, and soft, I am well in health,
what is wanting to me? nothing else is wanting, but only to turn me from one
side to the other. But this what is it? be quiet, and sleep as thou art till
morning. Can thou not? then tell me, what does aile thee? By this means he
called to mind eternity, discoursing thus with himself: How comes this to pass
that thou can not red one single night, it being such a torture to be still
without turning thy self? What would it be, if thou were to remain in one
posture three or four nights? Certainly it would be a death unto me. Truly I
should never have believed one could suffer so much in a thing so easy. Woe is
me. How little patience have I, since a thing so small and trivial grieves me
so much! What would it have been, if the had commanded me to lie watching many
weeks? What would it be, if I had the Colic, or were tormented with the
Stone, or Sciatica? Far greater evils than these are prepared for thee in Hell,
whither thou posts by running into so many sins. Consider what a Couch Is
prepared for thee, in that abyss of misery, what Feather-bed, what Holland
Sheets. Thou shall be cast upon burning coals, stames and fulphur shall be thy
Coverlets. Mark well whether this Bed be for one night only Yea nights, days,
months and years, ages and eternities thou art to remain on that side, thou
fallest on, without having the least relief to turn thy self unto the other.
That fire shall never die, neither shall thou ever die, to the end its torments
may last eternally. After an hundred years, and after an hundred thousand
millions of years they shall be as lively and as vigorous, as at the first day.
See what thou do by not fearing eternal death, by making no account of
eternity, by setting so much of thy affection on a temporal life. Thou do
not walk the right way; change thy life, and begin to serve thy Creator. So
did this man, being convinced by this discourse. He amended his life. And let
him do the like, who comes to read this. Let him know, that if they should tell
him, that he were not to stir out of a Bed of roses for twenty years space, he
would not be able to suffer it. How will he be able to lie upon a Bed of hot
burning coals in flames of sulphur for all eternity?

2.
Unto all those pains shall be joined that of Talion, which is, To pay with
proportion so much for so much, which also shall not be wanting in Hell. And
therefore it is said in the Ayocalyps, By how much she glorified her self, and
lived in delights, Give her so much of torment. There shall the delicious
person be afflicted, he, who contemned others, be despised, and the proud
trampled under foot: it being most convenient for the Divine Justice, that the
damned in hell should be punished in the same manner, wherein they have here
offended; as may appear by this example rehearsed by Henry Gran. A young
Damsel, Henric. Gran. d. 9. c. 200.
as to outward appearance, given to Prayer, Fastings, Watchings and Penance,
and for this reason esteemed by all for a Saint, She fell dangerously sick, and
having made her confession died. Within a short time after she appeared to her
Confessarius in a black and fearful shape. The priest not knowing her, demanded
Who she was. I am, quoth she, that one, that was held by all for a Saint. I am
none, but a most miserable wretch, since I am condemned to hell fire, where I
shall never cease to be tormented in company of the most abject and
contemptible Fiends, and that for the content and satisfaction I took in my
self, and for the pride I had, esteeming my self far above others, having a
base and vile conceit of all. For this vice I shall live in eternal torments.
Though God should dry up the Sea, and fill up the empty places thereof with
the smallest sand that can be imagined, and should permit that a little Bird
should but take one grain every hundred years, God's wrath and Justice would
not be satisfied with the torments my Soul shall suffer until such time as the
said little Bird should take out every grain of the foresaid sand. For were
this granted, I would most willingly suffer all the time required for the
performance thereof all the pains and torments of all the damned Souls in Hell,
with this only proviso, that at last my Soul might come to obtain salvation.
But there is no remedy now; And therefore, Father, do not put your self to the
trouble to pray tor me, being nothing can avail me.

In this History we have seen Pride chastised by humiliation. In tills that
follows we shall see Pleasures and delightful entertainments chastised with
proportionable torments. Cantip. l. 2. c. 49. p. 2. Joan. Major. v. Infernus.
Exemp. 6.
Cantipratensis writes, That in the parts of Teutonia there was a Soldier very
valiant, and much given to Tilting and Running at the Ring. And according as he
lived, so he died miserably. His Wife, who was a devout person, and of exemplar
life, after the death of her Husband had in an Ecstasy manifested unto her the
miserable state of her Husbands Soul. It was represented unto her, as if it
were still united to the Body, encompassed with a multitude of Devils; Whereof
the Principal in her hearing gave command, they should furnish their new Guest
with a pair of Shoes fit for his feet, which piercing them might reach to his
very head. Then he commanded they should put him on a Coat of Male made full of
sharp points, which might pierce his whole body in all parts. After this a
third command was, that they should put him on a Helmet with a sharp nail that
might pierce his head, and come to be clenched below his feet. Finally by his
command they hung a Target about his neck so heavy, that it might crush all the
bones in his body. All this being punctually and speedily performed, the Prince
of darkness told his Officers: This worthy person, alter he had entertained
himself in Tilting and the like menages of valor, was accustomed to refresh
his toyled limbs with sweet Baths, and then to retire to some soft Bed,
sporting himself afterward with other comfortable dalliances of sensuality.
Give him now somewhat of those refreshments which are usual here. They
presently hurled him into a fire prepared: then to ease him, they placed him in
a Bed red hot, where a Toad waited for him of an immense size, with eyes most
dreadful, which clipped the Soldier very close, kissing and embracing him in
such a rueful manner, that it was the most dreadful of all the torments he had
suffered, and brought him even to pangs of death. That good woman, who by Gods
appointment had seen what past in her Husband, had this vision so fresh in
memory all the days of her life, and with such continual oppressions of heart,
that none, who had known her before, beholding her afterward, could otherwise
imagine, but that she suffered some great and extraordinary affliction.

Many other pains and torments proportionable to the crimes committed may be
seen in the works of Wermero. A Gentleman of noble Parentage, Wermer. Mon.
Carthu. in fasciculo morum.
an English man by birth, by divine inspiration became a Cistercian Monk. He
entered upon this course of life, and continued with such great courage, that he
stuck not to challenge the Devil, and bid him defiance. The Enemy made his Cell
the field of battle. Here he assaulted him first with whips: then upon a
certain occasion gave him such blows, that the blood burst out at his mouth and
nose. At the noise the Monks came in, and finding him half dead, they carried
him to his Bed, where he lay for the space of three days without giving any
signs of life. In which time in the company of an Angel he descended into a
very obscure place, where he saw a Man seated in a Chair of fire, and certain
Women very beautiful thrusting into his mouth burning torches, drawing them out
at other parts of his body, which had been the instruments of his sins. The
Monk being astonished at this spectacle, the Angel told him: This miserable
wretch was a very powerful man in the world, and much given to Women, and for
this reason the Devils in shape of Women do torment him as thou see. Pasing a
little farther he beheld another, whom the infernal spirits were fleaing alive,
and having rubbed all his body over with salt, they put him to roast upon a
Gridiron. This man, said the Angel, was a great Lord, so cruel to his Vassals,
as the Devils are now to him. A little farther they met with other persons of
diverse states and conditions, which were tormented with several kinds of
torments: Many Religious both men and women, whose lives had been contrary to
their profession: Talkers, Censurers of other men's lives, Slaves to their
bellies, defiled with lust, and other such like vices. To these the Ministers
of vengeance, in shape of most ugly fellows, gave many blows, in such sort,
that they dashed out their brains, and made their eyes fly out of their heads,
because in their works they were blind, and without judgment: a chastisement,
Prove. 19.
which the Wiseman appoints for such like persons. Afterward he lifted up his
eyes, and beheld one fastened to a horrible Wheel, turning in such a dreadful
manner, that the Monk here was almost besides himself. That, thou see, is
terrible, said the Angel; but far more terrible will be what thou shall now
see. At the instant the Wheel began to run from alost down to the most profound
depths, with such horrid joggs, and with such noise, as if all the World,
Earth, Heaven, and all were breaking in pieces. At this so sudden and direful
accident all the Prisoners and Goalers of Hell brake out into great cries,
cursing and damning him, that came in the Wheel. This man, said the Angel, is
Judas the Apostle, who betrayed his Master: and as long as he shall reign in
glory, which shall be world without end, so long shall this miserable wretch
lie thus tormented. With these Representations God has given us to understand
the proportion his Justice observes in his chastisements, to make us form some
lively apprehension of the greatness of those pains: they being indeed far
greater than what ever we can conceive by all the rigor imaginable exhibited
to the senses. And in regard what enters by the senses prevails more with us,
for this reason he represents unto us the torments of the soul sutably to those
so horrible to our senses, as is to dash out the brains, and make the brains
fly out of the head. For though it be true that this effect is not wrought
indeed, yet the torments inflicted upon the damned Souls are without companion
greater, then it would be for a man in this life to be so beaten about the
head, till his brains and eyes flew out. Let us therefore fear the Divine
justice: and let us understand, that in those parts of the body we offend God
Almighty with greater delight, we shall be sure to be punished with greater
torment.

And here may be given this further instruction, that as these and many such
like stories, related for more variety of discourse in this Treatise, oblige us
not to a full and absolute belief of them: so they desire the favor of so much
credit at least, as is allowed to Livy, Justine, or other Chronicle-writers;
especially the Recorders of these being such, as are no less grave and wise,
and acknowledge moreover a greater obligation of conscience not to wrong the
World with lies, or empty relations taken up upon the account of frivolous
reports, especially in matters of such concernment, And as we think it not
amiss to make use, as occasion serves, of profane Examples and Authorities in
confirmation of what we usually either speak or write, so without all doubt the
same use of Sacred and Ecclesiastical occurrences may be no less available in
such matters as these.

CAP. XII.
The fruit which may be drawn front the consideration of Eternal Evils.

ALl which has been said of the pains in Hell, is far short of that which
really they are. There is great difference betwixt the knowledge we have by
relation, and that which we learn by experience. The Machabees knew that the
Temple of the Lord was already profaned, deserted, and destroyed. They had
heard of it, and lamented it; but when they saw with their eyes the Sanctuary
lie desolate, the Altar profaned, and the Gates burnt, there was then no
measure in their tears. They tore their garments, cast ashes upon their heads,
threw themselves upon the ground, and their complaints ascended as high as
Heaven. If then the relation and discourse of the pains of Hell makes us
tremble, what shall be the sight and experience. This notwithstanding the
consideration of what has been said may help us to form some conception of the
terror and horror of that place of eternal sorrow. Let us, as St. Bernard
says, descend into Hell whilst we live, that we may not descend thither when
we are dead. Let us draw some fruit from thence during our lives, from whence
nothing but torment is to be had after death. The principal fruits, which may
be drawn from that consideration, are these. In the first place, an ardent love
and sincere gratitude toward our Creator; that having so often deserved Hell,
he has not yet suffered us to fall into it. How many be there now in Hell, who
for their first mortal sin, and only for that one have been sent thither? and
we, notwithstanding the innumerable sins, which we have committed, are yet
spared. What did God find in us, that he should use a mercy toward us for so
many sins, which he did not afford to others for so few? Why are we not then
more grateful for so many benefits, which we have no ways deserved? How
grateful would a damned person be, if God should free him from those flames,
wherein he is tormented, and place him in the same condition we now are? What a
life would he lead? what penance would he undergo? what austerity would not
appear a pleasure unto him? and how grateful would he be unto so merciful a
benefactor? He has done no less for us, but much more. For, if he has not
drawn us out of Hell, he has not thrown us into it as we deserved, which is
the greater favor. Tell me if a Creditor should cast that Debtor into prison,
who owed him a thousand. Ducats, and after the enduring of much affliction at
last release him: or should suffer another, who owed him fifty thousand Ducats
to go up and down free without touching a thread of his garment: Whether of
the Debtors received the greater benefit? I believe thou will say the latter.
More then are we endebted unto God Almighty, and therefore ought to serve him
better. Consider how a man would live, who should be restored to life after he
had been in Hell. Thou should live better, since thou art more indebted to
Almighty God. Lib. 4. Dialog. cap. 36.
St. Gregory writes of one, who though he had not been released out of Hell,
but only was upon the point of damnation, yet led afterward such a life, that
the change was admirable. (The Saint says, that a Monk called Peter, who,
before he retired to the desert, was in a trance for some time as dead: and
being restored to his senses made this relation; That he had had a sight of
Hell, and that he had seen in it great chastisements, and innumerable places
full of fire; and that he knew some, who had been very powerful in the World,
hanging in the midst of the flames; and himself being now at the brink to be
cast into the same, he saw on the sudden a bright shining Angel, who withheld
him, faying; Return to thy body, and confider well, with what care and
diligence it suits with thy profession to lead thy life from hence forwards. So
it was, that being returned to his body, he treated it with such austerity of
penance, watches and fasts, that although he should not have spoken a word, his
manner of life did publish sufficiently what he had seen.)

Secondly we are taught to exercise an invincible patience in suffering the
afflictions and troubles of this life, that by enduring these thankfully we may
escape those of the other. He who shall consider the eternity of those torments
which he deserves, will not grumble at the pains of this short life how bitter
soever. There is no state or condition upon earth, how necesitous, how poor,
how miserable soever, which the damned would not endure, and think it an
infinite happiness, if they might change with it. Neither is there any course
of life so austere, which he who had once experienced those burning flames, if
he might live again, would not make more rigorous. He who has once deserved
eternal torments let him never murmr at temporal evils; let his mouth be ever
stopped from complaining of the crosses, or petty injuries offered him in this
life, who has committed offenses worthy the pains of the other. From this
consideration there was nothing which the Saints would not willingly suffer, no
penance which they would not undergo. Apoc. 14.
Wherefore St. John the Evangelist, after he had spoken of the smoke, which
ascended from the torments of the damned for a world of worlds, and and that
they did not rest by day nor night, presently adds, Here is the patience of the
Saints; because seeing that all the troubles of this life were temporal, and
the torments of the other eternal, nothing that they endured seemed much unto
them. Chrysostom. To. 5. Epist. 5. ad Theod.
So did St. John Chrsostome, and advises us to do the like, bearing with
patience all temporal pains whatsoever with the consideration of the eternal.
From the consideration of little thing (says he) let us frame a conjecture of
the great. If thou go into a Bath, and shall find it excessive hot, think on
Hell; If thou art tormented with the heat, think on Hell; If thou art tormented
with the heat of some violent Fever, pass unto the consideration of those
eternal flames, which burn without end: and think that if a Bath or Calenture
so afflict thee, how shall thou endure that River of fire. Homil. 2. in 1. Ep.
ad These.
And further the same Saint. When thou shall see any thing great in this
present life, think presently of the Kingdom of Heaven, and so thou shall not
value it much; and when thou shall see any thing terrible, think on Hell, and
thou will laugh at it. When the concupiscence or desire of any temporal thing
shall afflict thee, think that the delight of sin is of no estimation, and that
the pleasure of it is nothing. For if the fear of Laws, which are enacted upon
earth, be of that force, that they are able to deter us from evil actions,
much more will the thought of things to come, and that immortal chastisement of
eternal pain. If the fear of an Earthly King divert us from many evils, how
much more shall the fear of a King eternal? If the fight of a dead man detain
us, much more shall the thought of hell and that eternal death. If we often
think of hell, we shall never fall into it.

We ought also often to call to mind the evils of the next life, that we may
more despise the pleasures of this: because temporal felicity uses often to end
in eternal misery. All that is precious in the world, honor, wealth, fame,
pleasure, all the splendor of the Earth is but smoke and a shadow, if we
compare the small duration of them with the eternity of those torments in the
other world. Put all the Silver in the world together in one heap, all the
Gold, all the Precious-stones, Diamonds, Emeralds with all other the richest
Jewels, all the Triumphs of the Romans, all the Dainties of the Assytians, etc.
all would deserve to be of no other value than dirt, ignominy, and gall, if to
be possessed with hazard of falling at last into the pit of Hell. Let us call
to mind that sentence of our blessed Savior: What will it avail a man, to gain
the whole world, if he lose his soul? If they should make us Lords and Masters,
I say not of great wealth, but of the whole world, we should not admit of it
with the least hazard of being damned for ever. Let one enjoy all the contents
and regalo's imaginable, let him be raised up to the highest pitch of honor,
let him triumph with all the greatness of the world, All this is but a dream,
if after this mortal life he finds himself at length plunged into hellfire.
Whosoever should consider the lamentable day, in which two Sons, and three
Daughters, and his Wife the Emperess were put to death in presence of the
Emperor Mauritius, and afterward himself was bereaved of life by command of a
dastardly Coward and vicious fellow, no doubt but he would esteem as very vain
and of no worth all the twenty years of his Reign in his powerful Empire and
Majesty, though his punishment was not to last for ever, in regard he had the
good fortune to save his Soul. Wherefore if one only disastrous day, after the
enjoying of so much felicity and greatness of the world for twenty years space,
is sufficient to cause a contempt of all that pomp, and make the same appear as
smoke, not only one year of affliction, not a thousand ages, but eternity in
torments how will it, make all humane prosperity to seem nothing else but a
shadow and a dream? If the sad death of one, though he saves his soul, shows
the vanity of all humane felicities, The lamentable death of one, who is damned
to Hell, and an eternity of unspeakable misery how will it make evident, that
all felicity and humane greatness is nothing but smoke, a shadow, and nothing?
Let us reflect a thought upon the Emperor Heliogabolus, who gave so great a
scope to all his sensual appetites, and was most exactly industrious in making
use of time to the advantage of his pleasures, What account are we to make of
his two years and eight months reign, if we give credit to Aurelius and
Eutropius, turning our consideration to the other Scene of his miserable death.
For the Pretorian Soldiers having drawn him out of a Sink or Privy, where he
had hid himself, then haling him upon the ground, they threw him into an other
Sink most filthy and abominable; but in regard there was not room enough for
his whole body, they pulled him out again, and dragging him through the great
place called Circus, and other public Streets of Rome, at last they cast him
into the Tyber, having first tied great stones about him, to the end he might
never appear more, nor obtain interrement. All this was done to the great
content of the people, and approbation of the Senate. Who should see this nice
and effeminate Prince wallowing in the Sink, abused by his Soldiers, and
drowned in the Tyber, what estimate would he frame of all his greatnese? But
see him now in the horrid Sink of Hell, abused by the Devils, and plunged into
that pit of fire and brimstone, where he is to suffer excessive torments for
all eternity; what will that short time of his Empire seem, being compared, I
do not say with three hundred thousand millions of years, but with an eternity
of pains, which he is to suffer, causing all the past glory of his Empire, and
splendor of his fortunes to vanish into smoke? You may look upon a Wheel of
Squibs or Fireworks, which whilst it moves, casts forth a thousand lights and
spl^^dours, with which the beholders are much taken: but all at last ends in a
little smoke and burnt paper. So it is. Whilst the Wheel of felicities was in
motion, according to the style of St. James, that is to say, whilst our life
lasts, its fortune and prosperity appeared most glorious; but ceasing, all
comes to end in smoke: and he, that fares best in it, becomes a firebrand of
Hell. Rabanus said well, that when a strong fever. Raban in Eccl.
or some great unexpected change in his estate happens to one, it makes him
forget all his former contents in health, and wealth: his sickness and
adversity taking up so the whole man, as that he has no leisure to employ his
thoughts upon any thing else; and if perhaps any passage of his former
condition chance to come to his mind, it gives him no satisfaction, but rather
augments his pain. Wherefore if even temporal evils, though very short, are
sufficient to make former felicities of many years vanish: what impression will
temporal goods make in us, if we employ our thoughts upon eternal evils?

Besides this the eternity of torments in hell, which is to be suffered
hereafter without profit, may move us to husband the short time of this life
most to our advantage, and with the greatest fruit. How many miserable Souls
now suffer those eternal pains for not employing one day in penance, nor
endeavoring to make one good confession? What would a damned Soul give for one
quarter of an hour out of so many days and years, which are lost, and shall
not have one instant allowed him? Thou, who now live, and have time, lose not
that which imports so much, and once lost, can never be redeemed. ( Peter
Reginaldus writes, that an holy Religious man, being in prayer, heard a most
lamentable voice; whereupon demanding, Who he was, and Why he lamented; it was
answered, I am one of the damned. And thou must know, That I and the rest of
the damned Souls lament and bewail nothing more bitterly, than to have lost
time in the sins we have committed. O miserable creatures, who for having lost
a short space of time lose an eternity of felicity! They come to know too late
the importance of that which they have lost, and shall never come to regain
it.) Let us now make use of time whilst we may gain eternity; and let us not
lose that with pleasure, which cannot be recovered with grief. Let us now weep
for our sins with profit, that we way not weep for our pains without fruit. Let
us hear what St. Bernard says; Bernard. Sermon. 16. in Cant.
Who shall give water unto my head, and who shall give a fountain of tears unto
mine eyes, that I may prevent weeping by weeping? Let us now weep in time and
do penance with sorrow, that our tears may be dried up, and our sorrow
forgotten, since eternal happiness is no less efficacious to make us forget the
tears and grief of this life, than hell the pleasures of it. Wherefore Isaias
says, My former cares are forgotten, Isai. 65.
and are hid from mine eyes. Upon which words St. Jerome glosses. It is the
effect of mirth and confession of the true God, that an eternal oblivion shall
succeed precedent goiefs. For if former evils shall be forgotten, it is not
with the oblivion of memory, but with the succession of so much good, according
to that, In the good day an oblivion of evil. Lastly let us draw from the
consideration of hell, a perfect hatred to all mortal sin, since from the evil
of sin proceeds that evil of pain. Terrible is the evil of sin, since it cannot
be satisfied even with eternal flames. But this requires a larger
consideration, which we are now come unto.

CAP. XIII.
The infinite guilt of mortal Sin, by which we lose the felicity of heaven, and
fall into eternal evils.

THe horrible and stupendous malice of mortal sin is so foul and accursed,
that though committed in an instant it deserves the torments of hell for all
eternity; and an unlawful pleasure, enjoyed by a sinner but for one moment,
deprives and disinherits him of eternal felicity. Because therefore the scope
of this work is to beget such disesteem of temporal goods, as for them we may
not lose the eternal, I thought it not besides my purpose to procure, as much
as I could, a horror and detestation of sin, which is the occasion of the loss
of heaven: and therefore intend in this place to say something of the malice of
it, the rather because it conduces much to the knowledge of those differences,
which are betwixt things temporal and things eternal; Whereof the most notable
is, that as temporal goods are of that nature, that he who loves and seeks them
with solicitude, most commonly falls into that horrible evil of sin: So he who
loves and sets his heart on things eternal, secures himself against it.
Besides, having treated of the eternal pains of hell, that we may not wonder at
the severity of the Divine Justice, it was necessary that we should say
something of the horrible and grievous malice of sin, for which so infinite a
punishment is inflicted. Many admire that a sin committed in an instant should
deserve the eternal punishment of so terrible and cruel torments. But this
proceeds from their ignorance; because they know not the malice of a mortal
sin. St. Austin, whose deep understanding was enlightened by an especial grace,
wondered rather that there were not two Hells, and that a new one was not
created for that Christian, who durst offend his God after he was incarnated
for his redemption. And Divines generally affirm, that the chastisement of sin
in hell is much less than it deserves. Who will not then admire this Monster of
mischief, that being but one evil draws after it so many, and that one sin
should deserve so many punishments, and yet have a malice capable of more?

A terrible case that for a sin, which past only in thought, which none knew
but God, and he who committed it, and perhaps not he neither, as being
uncertain and doubtful of his own consent, and which endured no longer than an
instant, should yet be punished with so real and eternal pains. The reason is,
That such is the intension of malice in sin, that it is equivalent to the
extension of an infinite evil. The punishment and the sin are like the shadow
and the body; The sin is the body and the solid evil, The punishment but as the
shadow. And in the reason of a true and real evil, the sin as far exceeds the
punishment of hell fire, as a man exceeds his shadow. For as that is truly and
really a man, and this but a man in appearance: so sin is truly an evil, the
pain only appears so, but is in truth a good, being an act of justice caused
by God, who can cause no evil. Hence you may trace the malignity of a sin, in
comparison whereof the pains of hell, although so terrible, are not evils, but
their shadow; and may also learn, that the commission of a mortal sin is as much
to be feared above the pains of eternity, as a real sword before its shadow.
The sword kills, the shadow at most can but fright. So a mortal sin is that,
which takes away the life of the Soul: the pains can only fear us: but without
sin the torments of hell are not of power to kill or hurt us. See then what a
fool thou art, if to avoid some temporal evil thou presumest to commit a mortal
sin, which is as great a folly, as to stye from the shadow of a sword, and run
thy selt upon the point.

It is true that sin is really an evil, and the eternal fire of Hell in
comparison of it but a shadow; but by this shadow we may judge the greatness of
the substance, and by the terribleness of the punishment the grievousness of
the sin. For as by the shadow we know the bulk of the body, although we see it
not: so by the pains of Hell we conjecture the malice and enormity of sin,
which appears not. What would we say of a body, which, the Sun being at midday
and in his height, should cast a shadow of an infinite extension? This could
not be, unless the height of that body should rise unto the Sphere of the Sun,
and being placed opposite unto it should thence produce so vast a shadow. In
this manner sin causes a pain of infinite extension, because the intension of
its malice reaches so high, as to oppose it self unto God, who being the chief
good, sin must needs become the chief evil; I speak of mortal sin. If we
therefore tremble at the thought of Hell, we may shake at that of sin. Who is
not amazed, that God should behold a creature of his own burning in flames, and
should there leave him without compassion for all eternity? But this is not
caused by want of goodness in God, but by excess of malice in sin: not because
the mercy of God has limits, but because the wickedness of man has none. So
heinous then is the offense of a mortal sin, that eternal flames cannot purge
it, nor torments give a greater satisfaction, than what is due unto the
Di-Justice. This is that, which the Lord said by Oseas; Osee 12.
Ephraim provoked me to wrath in his bitternesses; That is, us St. Jerome
interprets it, with his wickedness he made me bitter and rigorous, who of my
self was sweet and merciful. Such is the grievousness of sin, that it makes the
sweetness, bounty, and divine pity of God not to companionate that Soul, which
is in the bitterness of Hell.

2.
Sin is then an infinite offense against God. Let it not therefore appear much
unto him, who knows the ineffable greatness and perfection of the Divine
essence, that though committed in an instant, it should deserve an eternity of
punishment. For by how much greater is the Majesty of God, which is despised,
by so much greater is the injury offered him; and therefore as the Majesty of
God, which is despised by sin, is infinite, so the despite of it must contain
in it self a certain kind of infinity. By how much greater is the reverence
due to a person, by so much greater is the disrespect and affront offered him;
And as to God there is due an infinite reverence, so the injury done him is of
an inexplicable malice, which with no good works of a pure creature, how many
and great soever, can be expiated. Less. de perfec. divi. li. 13. cap. 16. nu.
187.
So great (says a grave Doctor) is the malignity of a mortal sin, that being
put in the balance of Divine Justice it would out-waigh all the good works of
all the Saints, although they were a thousand times more and greater than they
are. Which consideration, although most fearful, yet it ought not to seem
incredible: because the good works, with which God is honored by his Saints,
although considered in themselves they are of great value, and by his grace
worthy of eternal life, yet in respect of God, unto whom they add nothing, and
who is nothing better by them, they are not valuable: Unto whose divine
goodness, not only they but infinitely more and greater are but a debt. But
for God to be despised by his Creature, who by infinite titles is obliged to
serve him; and who ought to bear him (if he could) an infinite love, and
reverence him with an infinite honor, is a thing so highly repugnant to his
Majesty and benefits, that he apprehends it more in the nature of evil, than
all the good works of the world in the nature of good: and if God were capable
of grief, would more afflict him, than all the pious actions of the Saints
content him. Certainly amongst men the honor, which is given to one, who
deserves it, takes not so much, as a contempt done unto him, who merits it not.
A King values not much the honor which is given him by his Vassals, because he
takes it not for a courtesy but a duty; but to be outraged and scorned by one,
especially whom he had favored with his benefits, sticks near unto his heart;
for not only Kings, but all men think honor due unto them, and disrespect an
injury. And as fire being inordinately applied to the hand makes it sensible
of a greater grief, that it can receive delight by being sound, because
excessive heat is repugnant, and a natural temper due unto it; so disrespects
and affronts offered to a noble personage, which are repugnant to his worth,
grieves him more, than he can be pleased with all the honors and respects due
unto him. There is no resentment amongst men so quick as that of dishonor, nor
any thing which causes more grief and vexation. If some person of quality
should have his hat plucked off from his head in scorn, and receive a dozen of
bastonadoes from some base fellow, that affront would not be recompensed,
although a thousand should put off their caps to him, and kiss his hand. By
this may in some sort appear the stupendous irreverence and incivility toward
God in a mortal sin; in so much as St. Paul calls it kicking or spurning the
Son of God. And therefore it is no marvel, if one only grievous offense
over-weigh all the service and honors done by the Saints and holy Angels, and
that all that they have or can do, cannot in rigor satisfy for one mortal
sin. This is the reason why it was necessary that God should become man, being
the Divine Justice could not be appeased with less than the satisfaction of a
Divine person. Let those therefore cease to marvel, that a momentary sin should
be punished with eternal torments, who see that for sin God was made man, and
died for man. And certainly it is a far greater wonder, that God should die for
the sin of another, than that man should for his own sin suffer an eternal
punishment. And if the malice of sin be so exorbitant, that nothing could
satisfy for it less than God, it is nothing strange, that that, which has no
limit nor bound in evil, should have no limit in punishment, but should exceed
all time, and be eternal. And if a treason committed against a temporal Prince
be chastised with loss of life and goods of the Traitor, and with the
punishment also of his posterity, which, in as much as concerns the Prince, is
eternal: Why should not the offense of a vile worm against his Creator be
tormented with eternal pains? The greatness of honor decreases and grows less
according to the height and dignity of the person honored, so as that honor,
which done to an ordinary person, would seem excessive, given unto a Prince is
nothing. And to the contrary the greatness of an injury rises and grows higher
according to the worth of him, who is injured: so as God, who is infinite,
being the person offended, deserves that the injury done unto him should be
chastised with an infinite punishment at least in time, or that he, who
satisfies for it, should be a person of infinite worth and perfection.

From hence it follows, that the guilt of mortal sin being so horrid, there can
be no satisfaction of a pure creature sufficient to expiate it, nor any merit
which can deserve the pardon. Let us grant that Adam had never offended, nor
contaminated the whole race of mankind with his sin. Let us grant that there
had never been a sin of David, St. Paul, St. Austin, St. Mary Magdalene, or any
other Man or Angel whatsoever, and that there had been but one only mortal
sin, the least of all others, committed by a man in a wilderness without
witness, by night, and that only in thought: yet such were the grievousness of
this one sin, that for it no punishment of the creatures were sufficient to
satisfy the Divine Justice. If God should ruin Heaven, throw down the Stars,
dry up the Sea, confound the Elements, and strike whole mankind with thunder,
all would not give an equal satisfaction to the Divine Justice for this one
sin. For this destruction of Heaven and Earth and Man were but of things finite
and limited, and the injured person is God, who is infinite, and betwixt finit
and infinite there is no proportion. In like manner no merit of mere creatures
were sufficient to deserve pardon for it. If all mankind should cloth
themselves in sackcloth, and fast with bread and water, If all the Martyrs
should offer up their torments, and all the Confessors their penances, and the
very Mother of God all her virtues, and should dissolve her self into tears,
all were not enough to deserve the pardon of that one sin; Only the Son of God
could be sufficient satisfaction. Let men consider this; let them weigh the
grievousness of a sin against God, and let them tremble at the very thought
that possibly they may commit it.

. 3.
The offense, which is done to God Almighty by a mortal sin, is in it self and
in its own substance most grievous, as we have already observed; yet there are
certain Circumstances, which do much increase the good or evil of that action,
whereunto they are annexed: And that of sin is so accursed and abominable on
all parts, that not one or two, but all circumstances joined together concur
to make the insolence and malice of it most insupportable. We will therefore
consider them, Tull. in Rhet^. S. The. 1.2. q. 7. ar. 3.
one by one. Tully, whom St. Thomas and the rest of Divines follow, makes them
seven, which contribute much to the qualification of a moral action. The
first, Who it is that does it; The second, What it is he does; The third, Where
he does it; The fourth, With what helps; The fifth, Wherefore; The sixth, After
what manner; and The seventh, When he does it. Aristot. Eth. 3.
Unto these seven Aristotle adds another, About what it is. These
circumstances are in absolute actions, which have no relation to another. For
in actions, which have a respect to a third person, another circumstance ought
much to be considered: which is, Against whom it is. Let us now see how in all
those circumstances sin is most abominable and accursed. For if we consider
Who it is that sins, it is a most vile and wretched man, who presumes to lift
up his hands against his Creator. And what is Man but a Vessel of dung, a Sink
of corruption, and by birth a Slave of the Devil? and yet he dares offend his
Maker. An offense against God were most grievous, though from another God (if
it were possible) infinite and equal to himself; but that his creature should
be so audacious against his omnipotent Lord, is beyond amazement.

But What is that, which a sinner does, when he offends? It is, according to
St. Anselm, an endeavor to pluck the Crown from the head of God, and place it
upon his own. It is, according to St. Bernard, to desire to murder his God. It
is, according to the Apostle St. Paul, to kick and spurn against the Son of
God. It is to crucify again the Lord of life. If any of these things were
attempted against a Majesty upon earth, it were enough to make the offenders
flesh to be plucked off with pincers, to have him torn in pieces with four
horses, to pull down his house, and sow the place with salt, and make his whole
Lineage infamous. If such an offense committed by one man against another,
betwixt whom the difference is not great, being both equal in nature, be so
heinous, what shall it deserve being committed against God the Lord and Creator
of all, whose immense greatness is infinitely distant from the nature of his
creature? O good God, who is able to explicate what a sinner does against thee
and himself? he despises thy Majesty, razes out thy Law from his heart, laughs
at thy Justice, scorns thy threats, despises thy promises, makes a solemn
renunciation of thy glory thou have promised him, and all to bind himself an
eternal slave unto Satan, desiring rather to please thine enemy than thee, who
art his Father, his Friend, and all his good: desiring rather to die eternally
by displeasing thee, than to enjoy heaven for ever by serving thee.

Let us now see Where and in What place a sinner presumes to sin, and be a
Traitor unto his God. It is even in his own world, in his own house, and
knowing that his Creator looks upon him, he offends him. If a sin were
committed where. God could not see it, it were yet an enormous fault; but to
injury his Creator before his face, what an unspeakable impudence? If he who
sins could go into another world, where God did not inhabit, and there in
secret under the earth should sin after such a manner as only himself should
know it, yet it were a temerarious boldness; but to sin in his own house, which
is this world, what hell does it not deserve? For a man only to lay his hand
upon his sword in the Palace of a King is capital, and deserves death. For a
sinner then by his sins to spurn and crucify the Son of God, in the house of
his Father, and before his face, what understanding can conceive the greatness
of such a malice? And therefore David with reason dissolved himself into tears,
because he had sinned in the presence of God, and with a grief, which pierced
his heart, cried out, I have done evil before thee. Besides this, we not only
sin against God in his own house, but even in his arms, whilst we are upheld
by his omnipotency. If there were a Son so wicked, who whilst he was cherished
in his Mothers bosom, should strike and buffet her, and endeavor to kill her
with his poniard, every one would think that Child some Devil incarnate. How
then dares man offend God, who sustains, preserves, and has redeemed him?
Certainly that Christian ought to be esteemed worse than a Devil.

The hainousness of this malice in sin is much augmented by the Helps, which a
sinner uses to effect it. For he turns those very divine benefits, which he
has received from God, against him, who gave them. The sense, which men
usually have of ingratitude, is most apprehensive. If to forget a benefit be
ingratitude, to despise it is an injury: but to use it against the Benefactor,
I know not how to call it. This does he who sins, making use of those
creatures, which God created for his service, to offend him, and convert his
divine benefits into arms against God himself. What could we say, if a King to
honor his Soldier should make him a Knight, arm him with his own arms, and
should girt his sword about him with his own hands, and that the Soldier, so
soon as he was possessed of the sword, should draw it against the King, and
murder him? This wickedness, which seems impossible amongst men, is ordinary
in man toward God; who being honored so many ways by his Creator, and
enriched by so many benefits, for as much as in him lies, bereaves God of his
honor, and, according to St. Bernard, desires to bereave him of his life. His
understanding, which he received from God, he uses in finding out a way to
execute his sin; with his hands he performs it, and with all his power offends
him, who gave them. Besides, the impudence of man arrives at that height, that
he makes God himself assist him to sin. This is that, which our Lord much
complains of, when he says by his Prophet, You made me serve you in your
wickedness; because God concurring to every action and natural motion of man,
who without his concurrence could neither move hand, nor foot, nor tongue, man
disposing his tongue to murmur, and his hand to steal, makes use of the
concourse of God against God himself. Who is so pitiless and inhumane to
enforce the Father to assist in the murder of his only Son, compelling the
Fathers hand to execute the stroke, which is to pierce the heart of his only
begotten? Equivalent to this is done by a sinner, making God to concur to an
action, by which man sinning crucifies again the Son of God. What cruelty is
this in a sinner, who for this only impiety deserves a thousand deaths?

But if we shall consider, Why man does this: it is a circumstance which will
amaze us at the malice of sin. Why does a sinner give this disgust unto his
God? Wherefore does he despise his Creator? Wherefore is he a Traitor unto the
Lord of the World? Wherefore does he kick and spurn at Jesus Christ? Wherefore
does he abhor his Redeemer? Wherefore crucifies he the Son of God? What
reason has he for so monstrous a wickedness? Is it perchance, because the
world should not be ruined? Is it perchance, because his salvation stands upon
it? Is it perhaps to make himself a God? Is it perhaps in respect or for love
of another God? No, it is none of these, but only for a base and filthy
pleasure, for a foolish fancy of man, because he will, and no more. O horrid
insolence! O mad fury of men, which without a cause so grievously offend their
Creator! How is it, that the Heavens resolve not into thunderbolts, and throw a
thousand deaths upon them, who do and dare by their sins irritate and offend so
good and gracious a God?

The Manner also of our sinning would astonish any, who should seriously
consider it. It is with so much impudence, contempt of God, and such a
Luciferian pride: After having heard so many examples of his chastisements
executed upon sinners, After having seen that the most beautiful and glorious
of all the Angels, and with him innumerable others were thrown from Heaven, and
made firebrands in Hell for one sin, and that only in thought, After having
seen the first man for one sin of gluttony banished from the Paradise of
pleasure into this valley of tears, dispoyled of so many supernatural
endowments, and condemned to death, After having seen the World drowned, and
the Cities of Pontapolis burnt with fire from Heaven, After having seen those
seditious against Moses swallowed by the earth, and with their Children, Goods
and Family sink alive into Hell, After having known that so many have been
damned for their offenses, After that the Son of God had suffered upon the
Cross for our sins, After all this to sin, is an impudence never heard of, and
an intolerable contempt of the Divine Justice. Besides, what greater scorn and
contempt of God than this, that God, who is worthy of all honor and love, and
the Devil, who is our professed enemy, pretending both to our Souls, the one to
save them, the other to torment them in eternal flames, yet we adhere to Satan,
and prefer him before Christ our Savior and Redeemer, and that so much to
our prejudice, as by the loss of eternal glory, and captivating our selves unto
eternal torments and slavery? No way of injuring can be imagined more
injurious, than when by the interposing of some other vile and infamous, he,
who is worthy of all love and honor, is put by and slighted. The manner also
of sinning aggravates the sin, as the sinner does, by losing thereby eternal
goods. Though he, who sins, lost nothing, yet the offense against God were
great, and the affront to Reason it self not inconsiderable. But well knowing
the great damages, and punishments likewise, that attend sin, and the evident
hazard he runs, and yet to sin, is a strange temerity and impudency.

If we shall likewise consider, When it is that we sin, we shall sinde this
circumstance no less to aggravate our offenses than the former; Because we now
sin, When we have seen the Son of God nailed unto the Cross, that we should not
sin: When we have seen God so sweet unto us, as to be incarnate for our good,
humbling himself to be made man, and subjecting himself to death, even the
death of the Cross for our redemption: having instituted the holy Sacraments
for a remedy against sin, especially that of his most holy Body and Blood,
which was a most immense expression of his love. To sin after we had seen God
so good unto us, so obliging unto us with those not to be imagined favors, is
a Circumstance which ought much to be pondered in our hearts, and might make us
forbear the offending of so loving a Lord. And that Christian who sins after
all this, is to be esteemed worse than a Devil. For the Devil never sinned
against that God, who had shed his blood for him, or who had been made an Angel
for him, or who had pardoned so much as one sin of his. When those sinned, who
were under the law of nature, they also had not seen the Son of God die for
their salvation, as a Christian has; for which, as St. Austin says, There
ought a new Hell to be made for him. And there is no doubt but Christians will
deserve new torments, and greater than those, who have not had the knowledge of
God, nor received so many benefits from him. This is confirmed by what is
written of St. Macarius the Abbot, who finding in the Desert a dead man's head,
and removing it with his staff out of the way, it began to speak, which he
hearing, demanded, Who it was. It answered, I am a Priest of the Gentiles, which
heretofore dwelt in this place, and am now together with many of them in the
middle of a burning fire, so great, that the flames encompass us both above and
beneath. And is there, replied the Saint, any place of greater torment? Yes,
said the dead; Greater is that, which they suffer who are below us. For we, who
knew not God, are not so severely dealt with, as those who knowing have denied
him, or not complied with his holy will. These are below us, and suffer far
greater torments than we.

These are the Circumstances observed by Tully, and are all found to aggravate
the guilt of our sins. Neither is that, added by Aristotle, wanting; which is,
About what. About what do we offend God? About what happens this great
presumption, but about things which import not, but rather endamage us; About
complying with a sensual gust, which in the end bereaves us of health, of
honor, of substance, and even of pleasure it self, suffering many days of
grief for a moment of delight; About things of the earth, which are vile and
transitory: and about goods of the world, which are false, short, and
deceitful. What would we say, if for a thing of so small value as a straw one
man should kill another? No more than a straw are all the felicities of the
world in respect of those of heaven; and for a thing of so small consideration
we are Traitors to God, and crucify Christ again, and that a thousand times,
as often as we sin mortally against him.

Lastly, Against whom we offend much aggravates our sins. For besides that God
is most perfect, most wise, beautiful, immense, omnipotent, infinite, we sin
against him, who infinitely loves us, who suffers us, who heaps his benefits
and rewards upon us. To do evil to those, who make much of them, even wild
beasts abhor it. What is it then for thee to injure him, who loved thee more
then himself; who has done thee all good, that thou should do no evil? Fear
then this Lord, reverence his Majesty, love his goodness, and offend him no
more. This only consideration, To have sinned against so good a God, was so
grievous unto David, that in his penitential Psalms, he exclaims with tears,
and cries out from the bottom of his heart, Against thee only have I sinned.
For although he had sinned against Vrias, and against all Israel by his ill
example, yet it seemed unto him, he had only sinned against God, when he
considered the infinity of his being, the immenseness of that love, which he
had so grievously offended. Sin then is on all parts most virulent, on all
parts spits forth venom. Behold it on every side, it still seems worse; for
being the chiefest evil, it can on no part appear good: all is monstrous, all
poison, all detestable, all most evil, and therefore deserves all evil. And it
is not much, that that should be chastised with eternal torments, which opposes
it self unto the sweetness of an infinite holiness.

4.
Sin is so evil, that it is every way evil. It is not only evil as it is an
injury to God, but it is evil in it self in its own nature. For if there were
no God, or that God were not offended with it, yet it were a most abominable
and horrid evil, the greatest of all evils, and the cause of all. In regard of
this deformity and filthiness of sin, the Philosophers judged it to be abhorred
above all things. Aristotle said, Aristotle. 3. Eth.
it were better to die than to do any thing against the good of virtue. And
Seneca and Peregrinus with more resolution said; Although I were certain that
men should not know it, and that God would pardon it, yet I would not offend
for the very filthiness of sin. For this Tully said, That nothing could happen
unto man more horrible, than a fault. And even those Philosophers, who denied
the immortality of the Soul, and the providence of God, affirmed, that nothing
should make us to commit it. And there has not wanted some Gentiles, who have
suffered great extremities to avoid a vicious act. Plut. in Demetrio.
Democles, as Plutarch writes, chose rather to be boiled in scalding water,
than to consent to a filthy act. With reason Hippo is celebrated amongst the
Greek Matrons, who chose rather to die than offend. Neither was that horror
less, which Verturius conceived against uncleanness, who suffered prison,
whips, and rigorous torments rather than he would sin against chastity. Equal
to this, was that of the most beautiful youth Espurina, of whom Valerius
Maximus and St. Ambrose write, Ambl. l. 3. de Virg.
That he slashed and wounded his fair face, that it should not give occasion to
others of offense even by desire. All those were Gentiles, who knew not Christ
crucified for man, nor saw hell open for the punishment of sinners, nor fled
from sin because it was an offense unto God, but only for the enormity and
filthiness it had in it self. This made them endure prisons and tortures rather
than admit it. What then should Christians do, who know their Redeemer died to
the end they should not sin, and how much sin is offensive to God? Certainly
they ought rather to give a thousand lives and souls, than once to injure their
Creator by committing an offense, which not only Gentiles, but even Nature has
in horror, which has planted in brute beasts, although they cannot sin, yet a
natural aversion from that which looks like sin. John Marquess of Gratis
desired much to have a Foal from a generous Mare, which he had, by her own Son:
but could never effect it; neither would she ever admit him, until deceived by
clothing him in such sort, as she knew him not. But when he was uncloathed,
and she discovered the deceit, she fell into that sorrow and sadness, that
after she would never feed, but pined her self to death. The like is reported
by Jovianus Pontanus of a delicate Bitch of his, which he could never (although
he caused her to be held) make to couple with her Son. So foul and horrible is
but the shadow and image of sin even unto brute beasts. Why should not men
then, who are capable of reason, and have an obligation unto Gods commandments,
say and think with St. Anselm, Lib. de simil. c. 19.
If I should see on this part the filthiness of sin, and on the other the
terror of hell, and it were necessary for me to fall into one of them, I would
rather cast my self into hell, than admit of sin: For I had rather enter pure
into Hell, than to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven contaminated with sin. Whosoever
than he be, who is infected with that horrible evil of a mortal sin, he cannot
choose but be most miserable and wretched. For, as St. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Ser. 5. de ie.
The greatest evil is to be evil. And although the Surgeon do not cut the
cankered flesh, yet the ulcerated Patient will not be freed from his infirmity.
So although God should not punish a Sinner, yet he would not be free from the
evil, death, misery, and abomination of sin. And therefore St. Austin says;
Aug. To. 8. in. Ps. 49.
Although we could cause, that the day of Judgment should not come, yet we
ought not to live ill. This monstrous deformity of sin our Lord was pleased to
express by a visible Monster, and that after a most strange manner, as is
related by Villaveus. He writes, Villaveus lib. 8. c. 35.
that in the year 1298. Cassanus King of the Tartars with an Army of 200000
horse entering Syria made himself Master of it, and brought a great terror upon
all those neighboring Countries; in so much as the King of Armenia delivered
him his Daughter, although she were a Christian, and he an Infidel, to be his
Wife. Not long after the Queen proved with child; and, when her time came, was
delivered, not of a Child, but of a most horrible and deformed Monster. Whereat
the barbarous King being astonished and incensed, by the advice of his Council
commanded that she should be put to death as an Adulteress. The poor Lady
grieving to die with the imputation of a sin, whereof she was innocent,
commended her self to our Savior, and by divine inspiration desired, that
before her death the Thing, which she had brought forth, might be baptized:
which was granted; and no sooner performed, but that Monster became a most
beautiful and goodly Boy; and the King amazed at the miracle, with many other
of his Subjects became Christian, acknowledging by what had happened the beauty
of Grace, and the deformity of Sin, although that deformity proceeded not from
any actual sin either mortal or venial, from which the Child was free, but
only from Original guilt, which without the fault of his proper will descended
unto him from his Parents. The deformity of sin comes from the contrariety of
it to reason, which renders a Sinner more foul and ugly than the most horrid
Monster, and more dead in soul, than a putrid and dead Carcass. Pliny admires
the force of lightning, which melts the gold and silver, and leaves the Purse,
which contained it, untoucht. Such is sin, which kills the Soul, and leaves the
Body sound and entire. It is a flash of lightning sent from Hell, and worse
than Hell it self, and such leaves the Soul, which it has blasted.

What shall I then say of the evils which it causes? I will only say this,
that though it were the best thing of the world, yet for the evil effects,
which it produces, it ought to be avoided more then death. It bereaves the soul
of grace, banishes the holy Ghost, deprives it of the right of heaven,
despoiles man of all his merits, makes him unworthy of divine protection, and
condemns a sinner unto eternal torments in the other world, and in this to many
disasters; for there is neither plague, war, famine, nor infirmity of body,
whereof sin has not been in some sort the occasion; and therefore those who
weep for their afflictions, let them change the object of their tears, and weep
for the cause, which is their sins. These are they, which ought to be
lamented, these only deserve our tears: and all the tears in the world are net
sufficient to bewail the least of them. When our Savior was led to be
crucified, he commanded they should not weep for him but for their sons. Those
sons are our sins engendered from our corrupt nature: let us weep for them.
Finally, such is the malice of a mortal sin, that he who commits it, deserves
the eternal pains of Hell; and we ought rather to suffer a thousand Hells, than
once to commit it.

The love of things temporal opens the way to this Monster of malice, and the
desire of things eternal shuts it up. Let every one therefore consider where he
places his affections. Let him hear Ecclesiasticus, who says, The heart of a
wise man in his right hand, and the heart of a fool in his left; because the
wise man places his affection in that which is eternal, and the fool in that
which is temporal, as St. Jerome interprets it, who says, He, who it wise,
ever thinks of the world to come, which leads him to the right hand; and be,
who is a fool, thinks only of the present, which is placed on the left. How
deceived shall the lovers of the world find themselves, when they shall see,
that for their sins they are placed on the left hand of the Son of God, Judge
of the quick and the dead? and how shall the lovers of Heaven rejoice to be
placed on his right, as heirs of eternal glory? Abundance and prosperity in
temporal goods uses to be a greater occasion of sin, than either a moderate
fortune, or an absolute poverty. Wherefore Christ our Redeemer counseled them,
who desired to follow him in perfection, that they should pluck from their
hearts all affections, which either had, or might be occasion of sin. When the
Machabees recovered Jerusalem, 1 Macah. 4.
and entering into the Temple found the Altar of Holocausts profaned, there was
a great doubt amongst them, whether they should use it, because it had been
sometimes dedicated to God, or destroy it, because it had been employed in the
service of the Devil. The Scripture says, That a good counsel came into their
thoughts, which was to destroy it, and make a new one. This good counsel let us
follow: let us destroy what has or may be an occasion of sin; and if the
Machabees plucked down that, which had been dedicated to God, because it had
been a means for others to sin, let us quit the occasion, wherein not others,
but we our selves have offended, which is our affections to temporal goods, and
settle them upon the eternal.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE TEMPORAL and ETERNAL.
CAP. I.
Notable difference betwixt the Temporal and Eternal, the one being the End,
the other the Means. Where is also treated of the End, for which man was
created.

HItherto we have spoken of the difference and distance betwixt the Temporal
and the Eternal, comparing the one with the other, and considering them rather
in their proper nature and substance, than the exterior respects and relations,
which they have unto others. We will now begin to consider them from thence
also, that it may appear that the things of the earth (on what side soever you
look upon them) are most vile and despicable, but the eternal of great worth
and value. There are many things, which, although in themselves they are held
as vile and sordid, yet for some respect or circumstance become of great
esteem. But things temporal as well in their own proper essence and being, as
in the extrinsecal relations and respects they have unto others, as they are
amongst Angels most contemptible, so ought they to be amongst Men, because
really, and in themselves they are so. Vile and base they are, because little,
mutable, and transitory. And although in their own nature they were most
precious and eternal, yet with us they ought to be of no value, because they
are our Means and not our End: created to be our Slaves, and to serve us, and
not adored by us as Masters, because they have been the instrument of our sins:
and because the Son of God descended from Heaven, and died, that we might
despise them. These Circumstances, although they were in themselves of worth
and value, yet unto us ought to render them most odious and contemptible.

Here then is the great difference betwixt the temporal and eternal, That the
one is the End, and the other but the Means; the Eternal is the end of man, but
of the Temporal man himself is the end. The eternal is man's utmost perfection,
and his perpetual happiness; the temporal only to be made use of for obtaining
the eternal, so as the eternal, being our end, is to be loved and desired for
it self, the temporal to be made no account of, but as it may conduce to the
obtaining of the eternal. This being a matter of so great importance, it is
fitting that we seriously consider it. Open then thine eyes, O man, and reflect
Wherefore thou were born. All things have some end for which they are, and thou
also ought to have one. Thou came not into the world for nothing; for
something thou were created. Open thine eyes, and see for what, and having
found it, wander not from it; for if thou do, thou art for ever lost. What
Traveller sets not before his eyes the place, whither he intends to go and
rest? what Artificer, who proposes not unto himself some Idaea, which he is to
imitate in his work? Wherefore then do thou live without thinking why life
was given thee? Know that thou were born for God, and for nothing less than God
and his service. For this life was bestowed upon thee: for this thou were drawn
from a not being to a being, and did pass from nothing to a reasonable
creature, so many thousands remaining uncreated, who would have served God (if
they had a being) better than thy self. See then what thou owe him for this
bounty; wherein are included two most incomparable benefits; The one for having
created thee, setting apart so many worthier creatures: The other, for having
given thee the most noble and excellent end, that possibly can be imagined,
which is himself. When the Children of Israel past the Red Sea, and Pharao and
his Soldiers were drowned in their pursuit, the Lord would have them celebrate
this great benefit for even; and Moses and all the people sung praises and
thanks unto the Lord for their deliverance. See then what thou owe unto God
for having past thee from a not being unto a being, an infinity of other
creatures possible remaining drowned in the abyss of nothing. Forget not
therefore the benefit of thy Creation, by which from nothing thou becamest a
man, and were made capable of eternal happiness. David forgot it not: and
therefore to his 75. Psalm gives this remembrance for a Title, For the end, For
him who passes, or leaps from the other part; because he, who passes from
nothing to be a Creature capable of reason and glory, ought always to look
upon the end, for which he was created, and from that consideration to make a
change of his life, as David did of his; who confesses in the same Psalm, That
his change came from the right hand of the most high. Let us then, as he did,
remember to change our customs, from tepid to become fervent, and from Sinners
just; because the end, for which we were created, is only God. This only
consideration of so high an end will be able to work a change in us. And for
this reason David gave this Title to another Psalm, To the end; For those that
are to be changed, or altered. The holy Prophet well knew the importance of
this mindefulness of our last end, and therefore he repeated it in his Psalms,
to the end that having our attention always fixed upon it, we should not cease
to aim at it, nor spoil our intentions by the mixture of other thoughts of
less consideration: as he gives to understand in the Inscription of his Psalm
74, which says Unto the end; Corrupt not. Another Version says: To the end:
Lose not; As if he should say: Look upon the end, for which thou art created,
to the end thou may not lose it. Let us also consider that glory being no
ways due unto our nature, yet God out of his mercy created us to enjoy it; and
when he might have made us for a natural felicity and perfection, was pleased
to create us for a supernatural. Other creatures he made for us, but us for
himself. There is no creature has a more noble end than we; there is neither
Seraphin nor Archangel that surpasses us in this. Let us therefore know the
value of it, that we may not lose it, and with it our selves.

Consider also that if God should not have made thee for himself, nor to the
end thou might serve him, but had left the free and at liberty, and had
only given thee a being, yet even for that thou owe him all what thou art.
The Son, although the Father be not his end, yet ows him all respect and
reverence, because he begat him. The Husbandman, who plants a tree, has right
unto the fruit. God therefore, who created and planted thee, has right unto
thee and all that thou art. And if his right be such for making thee, it is no
less for ordaining thee for himself. There is no Dominion so absolute, (as both
Divines and Philosophers affirm) as that of the End over those things, which
are in order to it; in so much as Marcilius Ficinus says; Mar. Ficinus l. 1.
Epis.
The end is a Lord more excellent then those things, which as Servants and
Ministers relate unto it. For this reason man, although he be neither the
Creator nor utmost end of Corporal things, yet because he is their immediate
end, and that they were ordained for his use, is their Lord, and God, who is
the utmost end of man and them, is the Lord of all.

Philo calls the End the head of things. For as a Prince is the absolute head
and Lord of his vassals and Kingdom, so the End is Lord and head of those
things, which have a relation unto it; and therefore man, who is wholly from
God and for God, ought not to stir a hand or a foot but in order to his
service. One of the Philosophers calls the End The cause of causes; another,
The principal of all causes. If therefore unto God, because he is thy efficient
cause, thou owe him what thou art, for being thy final cause thou owe him
more then thou art. For this obligation looks not upon that which thou have
received, which is thy finite and limited being, but upon that for which thou
art ordained, which is a being divine, infinite and without limit. Even God
himself, as he is the efficient cause of things, does as it were serve himself,
as he is the chief good and Final cause of things, and does not make them but
for this end. What right then have thou to work for any thing but God, since
God does not, nor will work for any thing but himself. The End is the cause of
causes; and therefore if thou owe thy self unto God for being thy Maker, thou
owe thy self unto him for being thy End; for he had not been thy Maker, if it
had not been for some End, which was the cause of thy creation.

. 2.
Consider the force of the End in the several Orders of things Natural,
Artificial, and Moral, that thou may from hence gather what force it ought
to have in things supernatural. With what violence do the the Elements tend
unto their center, because it is their End? With what force does a stone fall
from high, and with what violence does it press unto its natural place, and
bears down all before it? And the fire, that it may attain his Sphere, how it
mounts above the highest hills and rocks? Consider a great Stone hung in the
air by some Cable, how it strives to get loose, and being at liberty with what
violence it falls upon the earth, with what speed and earnestness, without stay
or diversion to one part or other, it tends straight to its Center. In this
manner thou ought to seek after thy Lord God, with all the powers of thy
soul, with all the forces of thy body, and all the affections of thy heart; all
thy inclinations are to tend that way: thou art to go directly to him without
diverting on either hand, or looking upon any creature, which may detain thee,
bearing down all things temporal before thee. A stone, that it may attain its
end, sticks not to fall in water, fire, or to be dashed in a thousaud pieces;
and thou, that thou may attain thy God, art not to stop at any thing, not at
the loss of goods, or honor, or at the very tearing of thy members in pieces;
and, as our Savior says, If thy Eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, or cut off
thy Foot or Hand, if it offend thee; for it is better to enter into heaven
blind or lame, then to fall into hell fire sound and entire. Things natural
find no quiet, but in their Center; and the Mariners needle rests not but when
it beholds the North; no more shall the Soul ever meet with repose but in God.
And certainly the cause of the greatest miseries and afflictions in the world
proceeds from our deviating from God, who is our only End and eternal
happiness. Let the heart of man therefore undeceive it self; for it shall never
find quiet and content but in its Creator.

If we come to things Artificial, Those which are not directed to some end,
what are they but a disorderly confusion? If a Painter should draw his lines
without proposing any Idea unto himself, what would be the issue of his work
but a great blot? If in painting some great Captain, he should instead of a
Sword place in his hand a Distaff, what a ridiculous figure would he make? If a
Statuary should give a number of great strokes upon a piece of wood without
intention of making an Image, he would do nothing but weary himself, and spoil
the wood and his instruments. This thou do in all thy works, when thou
look not upon God and eternity as thy end; thou do only make a blot of
thy life, and loosest thy self and those creatures, which thou usest otherways
then for the obtaining of heaven. God created thee according to his image, to
the end thou should perfect that image, and make it every day more like unto
thy Creator. But thou not looking upon him in thy actions, make thy self a
monster, and confoundest and blotest out his divine Image. Finally as all,
which is done in art without order to the end, is error, so all, that thou
do without looking upon God as thy utmost end, is confusion and perdition of
thy self. Reflect then wherein thou may at last conclude: since thou have so
often forgotten God and wandered from thy end.

If we look upon Moral works or humane actions, When they are not proportioned
to their Ends, what are they but madness and indiscretion? for what is madness,
but a diversion of things from their end? If one who were desirous to avoid
cold, should strip himself naked, and fly from the fire, would not all say
this man were mad? and wherein consists his madness, but in not fitting things
to the end he ayms at. Thou art no wiser thy self, if desiring and seeking thy
own good and happiness, thou flyest from God, and do not follow him in all
thy actions. This, as St. Austin notes, is the error of man, who naturally
loving happiness, by mistaking the way to find it, becomes miserable. Who but a
fool or a mad man, fit to be bound in chains, having great thirst would fill
himself with Salt? and yet all this folly consists in nothing but not
proportioning the means unto their end. He who is dry ought to go to some
fountain, and there to quench his thirst; and man, who desires to ease his
heart, is to repair unto God, and there he shall find rest. To divert himself
after the creatures, and there to feed his pleasures, is no other then to eat
Salt, which increases his thirst and appetite, and scorches his Entrails. We
are fools therefore in not looking upon God in all our actions, and not
ordering them unto him as to our end. He were to be esteemed a Sot, who being
to light a Lamp would fill it with water instead of oil, and yet strive and
trouble himself to make it burn. These follies we commit every day, when we use
the Creatures to other ends then the service of God; so as they can neither
kindle in us the fire of his love, nor sustain the luster and dignity of the
reasonable Soul. From all then which is said it follows, That what is not
adapted to its proper end, is contemptible, monstrous, and unprofitable. For
this reason David said, All have declined, that is, All have wandered from
their end, which is God, and are made unprofitable. Man therefore, whilst he
servs not his Creator, is a thing vain and stands for nothing; and it were
much better for him not to be, then not to order himself to his end. The
Labourer, who has planted a tree to the end it should bring him fruit, if it
yield none, plucks it up by the roots and burns it; And in the Gospel the
barren Figtree was commanded to be cut down.

3.
This force of the Final cause is such, that things ordering themselves unto
it, receive a better being, and a more noble estimation from their end, how
mean soever, then from any thing they can attain, which is not their end,
though never so precious. A Spade receives his value from digging the earth,
and for that end is esteemed and bought by the Labourer; but if you give it a
Painter to limm with, he will not allow it a place in his shop. The Sick man,
whilst he is infirm, will pay any thing for a bitter purge, which being well he
hates. Even vessels for unclean offices, being placed in Corners, are of use
and sought for; but set upon a Cupboard are a scorn. So much it imports things
to be accommodated unto their proper End; which how vile and base soever giv's
them estimation: but severed from it, though they mount unto the Clouds, they
loose their value. Mark then in what condition is that man, who seeks not after
God, and addresses not his actions unto him, who is so high an End. It is also
to be considered, That as there is nothing so base, which being applied unto
his proper end, has not some good: so there is nothing, how precious soever,
which being diverted from his end, looses not his worth. He, who is ready to
die for thirst, will esteem a little water out of a ditch more then all the
treasures of the world: so Lisimachus valued a Jarr of water above his Kingdom.
From whence it follows, that it is the End, which gives things their value and
estimation.

Open then thine eyes, and consider, That thou art not in the world for
nothing: That thou were not created without a Wherefore, and for What; thou
have an end, and ought to pursue it: and if thou neglectest it, thou art
worse then when thou were not. Thou have an End, and the greatest and most
high, that can be thought of, which is the glory of God. Certainly if God had
only created thee to serve him without hope to enjoy him, or ever to attain
unto his glory, yet thou ought to have esteemed it highly. The Queen of
Saba, when she beheld the greatness, 3 Reg. 10.
wisdom, and majesty of King Solomon, cried out with wonder, Blessed are thy
Servants, which stand here in thy presence. If this wise Lady held it for a
happiness to serve Solomon, what an honor and felicity is it to serve God? But
that infinite goodness was not content that thy End should be only to serve,
but that thou should pass so far as to enjoy him, and be partaker of his own
blessedness. In this high End thou art not only equal unto Angels, but a
sharer with God, who as he has no other end or blessedness but himself, so he
would not that thou should have a less End or happiness then thy Creator.
Thou were born then for a great good, since thou were born sor the chiefest
good. Mal. l. 2. Sent.
Whereupon the Master of sentences says, God created the rational nature, that
he might know the chief good, and knowing and loving it might possess it, and
possessing it enjoy it. God created the Elements for those natures, which have
life; He created the herbs of the field for those creatures, which have sense;
Those which have sense for Man: and man for an End, which should surpass all,
as being created, not for an end within nature, but for one above it, a
supernatural and divine End. Know therefore how to esteem it: and having
received so great an honor, disgrace not thy self by stooping to things of a
lower condition. De Novis. art. 56.
Well said Dionysius Richell. Since the dignity of man is so great, who is
created for so excellent an end, the felicity of Angels, and the clear
contemplation and fruition of his most glorious Creator, Is it not a great
ingratitude, baseness, and folly of carnal and wicked men to turn from their
God, and not regarding so great happiness, to place their selicity in things
carnal, transitory, vain, base and unclean, that is, in the delights of the
flesh, the riches of the world, and in humane praise and glory? for whosoever
sins mortally, preferrs the Creature before the Creator, places his end in a
thing frail and created, adhering more unto that then his Maker, which must
needs be a great injury to God, and a contempt of that felicity, for which he
created us. Have this still before thine eyes, That thy End is greater than the
World, since it is God, which created the World. Consider that by how much the
honor is greater to be ordained for so excellent an end, by so much the
ignominy is greater to deflect from it. Know therefore thine own worth and
dignity, and preserve it, and direct all thy works and actions to so glorious a
mark; and since God has created thee for the same End with Angels, live like
an Angel, and endeavor to fill up their seats, and to be a companion of their
glory. If is a great privilege of humane nature, that being in substance
inferior to that of Angels, yet it may equal and excel it in happiness. For
God, that the Angels might attain their End, proportioned his grace conformable
unto their natures, giving more unto the more perfect: but unto Men, he gives
his grace without this restriction, so as man, if he please, may be more than
an Angel.

The ancient Philosophers knew very well the great importance of the End of
man, and were therefore very sollicitous in finding out what it was, that
having once found it, they might direct the actions of their life unto it. For
they said, and truly, That all they did was error, if first the end of man,
whereunto humane actions might be addressed, were not known; And therefore Marcus
Aurelius said in his Philosophy, That they dote, Antoninus l. 2. Philos.
who propose not unto themselves some mark, whereunto they may address all
their thoughts and endeavors. But after that they had once agreed, that the
end of man was to live conformable unto his nature, what did not many of them
then do to adjust their actions, and obtain it? what excellent lessons, and
instructions did they leave us? and although the End of man in their opinion
did not transcend humane nature; yet the Stoics and Cynicks forsook honors,
wealth, and pleasures, that they might the better accommodate their lives and
actions unto it: living not only without doing ill, but doing, what they
thought to be, good, maintaining still, that we ought in all things to conform
our selves unto virtue: and all this for that natural End, which they had found
out; Philo de Migr. Abraham.
Concerning which Philo speaks these words; The End, so celebrated by the most
excellent Philosophers, is to live according to nature: and this is done, when
the Soul entering by the way of virtue walks in the paths of right reason, and
follows God, ever mindful of his Commandments, and observing them with firmness
in all his words and actions. If man then ought to do this in order to his
natural End, what ought he to do in order to his supernatural, and to Eternity?
Antoninus the Philosopher, judging that the End of man was to live according to
nature, thought it a great madness not to conform himself to the accidents of
life, and bear them with calmness and equality of mind; insomuch as he said, To
do otherwise was the plague sore, and impostume of the World. What would he
have said of committing grievous and deadly sins, which separate us from God,
who is above all nature, and the Author of it? He was so sollicitous in
ordering himself to this End, that from morning until night all his thoughts
were busied in the contemplation of the End, whereunto he was born, and in
fitting his actions to comply with it. M. Aur. Anton. Phil. l. 5. in princ.
Whereupon he gives us this advise. In the morning when thou risest, and
find thy self oppressed with sleep and sloth, have this thought ever in
readiness, that thou risest to exercise the actions of a man, and shall
therefore say unto thy self, Whence comes it, that thou so sluggishly go
about that, for which thou were born, and for which thou came into the world?
were thou perhaps born to pamper thy self in a soft and warm Bed? This indeed
is pleasing, but were thou born for thy gust and pleasure, and not for labor?
see thou not how Plants, Spiders, Ants, Bees, and all things employ
themselves in their proper duties: and thou only refusest to exercise the
office of a reasonable man in what appertains unto thy nature? I confess some
refreshment is necessary; but in this Nature has prescribed a rule, as in
eating and drinking; but thou in this passest what is sufficient, and in what
thou ought to do fallest short, and reachest not unto reason. This happens,
because thou do not love thy self; for if thou did, thou would comply
with thy nature and her commands. Those Craftsmen, who love and take pleasure
in their arts, employ themselves so seriously in them, that they neither think
of bathing nor feeding; but thou prisest not thy nature so much as a Turner or
Comedian does his Trade, or a Covetous man his gold, or an Ambitious man his
vain glory. For these, that they may attain at what they aim, forget both food
and sleep; but thou esteemest the actions, proper to a reasonable Soul,
unworthy of labor or solicitude. All this is from that wise Emperor, who
from the consideration of his End and Nature animated himself to comply with
his duty and obligation.

. 4.
From what is spoken we are to gather the estimation we are to have of the
Eternal, and with what earnestness we are to desire and seek it, since it is
the End, for which we were only born: and that for it self we are not so much
as to look at the Temporal, as not being at all ordained for it. But that we
may likewise see what use we are to make of it, and the difference arising
betwixt it and the Eternal, The one being our End, and The other at best but
our Mean, to obtain it, As we have already declared the nature of the Eternal,
so we will with as much brevity, as is possible, explicate the nature of the
Temporal, the which as a Medium has no other reason to be loved or valued by
us, but as it conduces to our chief End, which is God and his glory. For as a
Soldier, when he is in health, values not the Physician and his Medicines,
because they avail him not to the conquering of his Enemy: and when he is sick
or hurt, cares not to put on his arms, because they conduce not to the recovery
of his health: In the like manner we are to keep our hearts and wills free and
disinterressed from any thing, but that which leads to our End and Salvation.
The Traveller, who is fixed in his determination of arriving to some certain
place, if he meet with two or three several ways, desires not this more than
that, but only in as much as this may more readily bring him to his rest. He
cares not whether it be plain or hilly, whether it lead to the right hand or to
the left: all is indifferent, so it bring him whither he pretends. After the
like manner we are to behave our selves in the use of things temporal. We are
neither to love the Goods of this World, nor fear the Evils of it: but free
from both, make only choice of that which leads to our Salvation. If poverty
bring thee to God, embrace it with both arms and esteem it; If riches and
greatness withdraw thee from him, trample them under foot, despise and cast
them from thee, as if they were poison; If disgraces and neglect of men assist
thee to gain Heaven, rejoice in thy affronts; If honors make thee forget thy
Creator, abhor them as death; If pleasures distract thee from him, unto whom
thou owe so much, deprive thy self of the contents of this life, that thou
may not lose those of the other; And if grief or torments make thee know thy
Redeemer, receive them with all submison and willingness. Wherefore thou art
neither to desire, or abhor good or evil in this life, but in as much as it
unites or separates thee from God, who is thy true and only End. This
indifferency was well known unto David, as he is explicated by St. Austin in
that Psalm, which he entitles and dedicates Unto the End, where he considers
himself as created by God for so high an End as to serve and enjoy him. upon
which supposition he utters this Sentence; As are his darkness, so is his
light; Psalm. 138.
because we are no more to incline our affections to the luster and splendour of
this life, than to the obscurity, ignominy, and afflictions; no more to the
light and prosperity, than to the darkness and adversity of it; and therefore
the holy Father speaks in this manner; In this night, In this mortality of
humane life men enjoy both light and darkness. Light is prosperity, and
darkness adversity. But when Christ our Savior shall come and inhabit the Soul
by Faith, and shall promise another light, and shall inspire and endow man with
patience, and shall so move him as not to be delighted with prosperity, nor
dejected with adversity, The faithful man shall then begin to use this world
with indifferency, and shall not be puffed up, when things succeed happily, nor
broken and dejected, when they fall out crosly, but shall bless God in all
conditions, Whether he abound or want, Whether he be sick or in health, and
shall be ever ready to sing this Song: I will bless the Lord at all times; his
praise shall be ever in my mouth.

Another condition of the Medium, which is either the same that we have spoken
of, or united unto it, is, That we are not to enjoy the Medium, but only to
use it: For in enjoying the Soul rests and contents it self, which is proper to
the End; but in the use it ayms at the attaining something further, which is
proper to the Medium. We are therefore not to seek after any creature, but in
as much as it may be a Means to conduce to our End, which is the Creator; and
he, who seeks after things temporal for themselves, does no less an injury unto
God, than to change basely his End, leaving the Eternal for the Temporal, and
the Creator for the Creature, and becomes so much a Sot and a Fool, as he
mistakes his true End, and makes the Medium his End, and submits himself to a
vile Creature. From whence may be understood that difference betwixt things,
which is noted by St. Austin and Divines, that somethings are to be enjoyed,
and others only made use of. We are only to enjoy the Eternal, and use the
Temporal only so far as may help to save us, and no further. For, as the same
Saint says, The vicious life of man is no other, than that which he uses ill,
and that which he enjoyes ill; and to the contrary the holy and laudable life
of the good is that which uses this World aright, and enjoyes God aright. From
hence also may be resolved that doubt amongst the ancient Philosophers, Which
are the true goods, which Controversy was also on foot amongst the faithful in
David's time. Wherefore he demands in one of his Psalms; Quis ostendit nobis
bona? Who will show us the good things? This doubt is resolved, and an answer
is given to the question: That those are the Goods, which unite us unto God,
and those the only Evil, which separate us from him. Whereupon St. Austin
says; Aug. in Psalm. 138.
We now know no other evil than to offend God, and not to obtain what he has
promised: neither know we other good, than to please him, and attain unto what
he has promised. What have we then to say unto the goods and evils of this
life, but to be indifferent unto either? because being now drawn forth from the
womb of our Mother Babylon, esteeming them as indifferent, we say, Such is his
darkness, as is his light; neither does the prosperity of this life make us
happy, nor the adversity miserable. Socrates said, that the chiefest wisdom was
to distinguish good from evil. And Seneca knew no better rule to distinguish
them, than by their end; and therefore says: When thou would know what thou
have to desire, Sen. Ep. 71.
and what to fly, look upon the chief good, and the end of thy whole life; for
unto that all which we do is to relate; And so according to what we have said
concludes, that only to be good, which is virtuous, and all other goods false
and adulterate. Thou art eternally so enjoy thy Creator. Content thy self with
this hope, and place not thy joy in the Creature, which is only lawful for
thee to use.

. 5.
But we are much to consider, that the most excellent use of the Creatures for
the attaining unto the Creator is the contempt of them. God would have it so
easy for thee to obtain thy End, that thou could not miss the means, since
even the want of all things may further thee. Let no man therefore complain of
the necessities of life, since, though all things fail him, the means of his
salvation will not fail him; for even that want may be a means to obtain it. If
thou shall therefore fall into such a poverty, as thou have nothing to sustain
thee, if it conduce to thy salvation, think thy self the happiest man in the
world, and embrace it with a hundred hands; for as all things, which hinder us
from our end, are to be contemned, so whatsoever helps us to the obtaining of
it, (although it be grief, pain, or death it self,) is to be esteemed above all
value. So great a matter it is to be a means of thy salvation, that Christ our
Lord, who is the beginning and end of all things, disdained it not himself:
incarnating, dying, and remaining for that end in the most blessed Sacrament of
his Body and Blood. And if it cost the Son of God so dear to be a means of thy
salvation, do not thou stick at any thing (how horrible soever it appear to
humane nature) that may advance and secure it, but esteem it as a Paradise,
though it be infamy, shame, or dishonor.

Thou travellest toward Heaven; that is the end of thy journey. Make thy voyage
secure, whatsoever it cost thee. He who goes for the Indies, if he may embark
bark in a strong and well-rigged Vessel, will not make choice of that which is
rotten and worm-eaten. Take the certainest way for Heaven; and believe me,
there is none more ready, then that of the Cross of Christ, his Humility, and
Mortification. In all things thou desire still the best for thy self. Know
there is nothing better, or more imports thee than a good life. Make it then a
good one: and content not thy self with this which thou now live, if thou
can make it better; and no way more ready and available to improve it, than
by imitating the life of thy Redeemer, to despise all that is Temporal. This is
the most proper and certain way of obtaining the Eternal, whereunto thou art to
aspire, and for which thou were born. Have still thy end before thine eyes; for
thou errest so often as thou do not behold it, and can not err without
great danger. St. Greg. Isid. Clar.
Many compare this life unto a high and narrow Bridge, so narrow that it is
scarce broad enough for our feet: and if we fall, we precipitate into a filthy
Lake, where.Serpents and Dragons wait to devour us, And who being to pass such
a Bridge in an obscure and dark night, having no other guide to direct him but
a little light placed in the end of the Bridge, durst for one instant remove
his eyes from it? In the like condition are we. This life is a straight Bridge,
over which we are to pass in the night and darkness of this world. We cannot
come off safely in this dangerous passage without still looking at our end, and
at that divine light, which enlightens our Souls. Let not our eyes wander from
it, lest we fall into that Gulf, and perish for all eternity. This perdition
David signified in the Title, which he gave unto his 13. Psalm, which he calls
For the End, where he says, That those who look not upon God as their utmost
End, making no more account of him than if he were not, That such became
abominable and corrupted in their intentions: That there was not one amongst
them, who did well: That all became vain and unprofitable, and failed in their
thoughts, words, and actions: That their mouths were as pestilential as an open
sepulcher, which none could endure for the stench of worms and corruption: That
the poison of Asps was in their lips, and deceit and bitterness in their
mouths: That all their ways were wickedness, and That therefore their feet ran
swiftly to shed blood: That their hearts were full of fearful imaginations, and
That they trembled where there was nothing to fear; finally, That all their
courses were nothing but ruin, and unhappiness: That they did not invoke and
pray unto the Lord: That they knew not the ways of peace: That the fear of God
was not before their eyes. All this, which David deciphers, happened, as he
says, unto this wicked people, because they had not God in their hearts, nor
did propose him as the end of their actions. And truly from this defect springs
all that is evil. For without God there is neither quiet, peace, nor virtue;
for true peace consists in seeking nothing but God, and for God. In this
consists the liberty of the sons of God, the contempt of the World, the
tranquillity of the Mind, and the conformity with the Will of God. And most
certainly the foundation of all virtue is to know that we are born for nothing
but the service of God; and so forget it, as the wicked do, is (as David says)
a certain kind of Atheism, making us live, as if there were no God, in
looseness of manners without prayer, and without the quiet and repose of the
Soul. To these three heads the Prophet reduces the disorders of those, who
think not of their chief End, nor remember that there is a God. And therefore
he, who to the contrary shall still fix his thoughts upon that whereunto he is
ordained, shall be endued with virtuous Customs, fervor, and frequency of
prayer, and possess the quiet and peace of mind. For as the Iron touched by
the Loadstone rests not until it respect the North, no more shall a heart ever
enjoy repose but in beholding his chief and utmost End, which is God.

CAP. II.
By the knowledge of our selves way be known the use of things Temporal, and
the little esteem we are to wake of them.

BEfore we pass further I must here advertise you of a point of great
importance, which is, that for the right use of things the knowledge of the
things themselves, and the end whereunto they serve is not sufficient; but
there is required also a knowledge of the person, who is to use them. It is not
enough for the wise Physician to know the use and property of his Medicaments,
unless he know the nature and quality of his Patient, his temper, strength,
age, and other circumstances, that according to them he may administer his
Remedies. And therefore having shown the End of man to be eternal, and that the
things of this world are only to be used as means to obtain it, we shall now
for the completing of this matter speak something of the estate and quality of
Man, as he now is, that he may thereby know what use of things temporal is most
convenient for him.

Humane nature is at the present in a far different condition from that wherein
it was, when God at first created man, and placed him in Paradise; so as a far
different use of things temporal from that, which was then lawful and
convenient, is now to be required. And therefore it is fit that we know what
Man is, that we may acertain the use of Man, and the things of Man, which
cannot be done without the knowledge of what he is in general, and also that
every one know what he himself is in particular. Dion Chrysostom. Orat. 10.
And therefore Dion Chrysostomus is says, He, who knows not Man, cannot make
use of Man: and he, who knows not himself, cannot make use of himself, nor of
those things which belong unto his nature. But who can arrive unto the
knowledge of himself? It is so difficult, that the Devil, although he knew how
important this knowledge was to Man, and wished nothing but his ruin and
perdition, yet confident in the impossibility of attaining it, and desirous to
gain the credit of a wife God among the Grecians, he caused this Command, Know
thy self, to be placed in his Temple of Apollo in Delphos. And truly the light
of Heaven is necessary for this knowledge; and we guided by what faith
dictates, and the Saints inctruct us, will endeavor to say something, whereby
we may at least be less ignorant of what we are. It is then to be considered
What Man is of himself, and what he is of God, that is, what he has of
himself, and what he has received from God. What he has from God must needs
be good, since he gave it, from whom can proceed no ill. And if upon this
score, because it is good, he has less ground to humble himself, I am sure he
has none to boast of, since it is wholly the Divine benefit, not having any
thing of himself, but what he has received. Only he may consider, that by the
sin of Adam he has put himself in a worse condition both for soul and body,
than when he received them from God. His Soul is now full of ignorance and
imbecility to what is good, and subject to a thousand miseries, which it then
had not; And his Body, which is now mortal, was then immortal, and free from
the corruption of those infirmities, which (as has been already said)
accompany it, until it end in dust, worms, and ashes. But these (although by
the perverseness of our nature they are become much worse) yet coming from God
are good, and are ah honor and glory in respect; of what he possesses from
himself.

This the Arausican Council declares in two words, that is, We are nothing of
our selves but a Lie and Sin; that is the nothing that we were, and the evil we
are. A lie we are: because what is a lie, is not; And from our selves we have
only a not being; for what have we but what God has given us? take away what
we have received, and there remains nothing. This is what is ours: what is
more, is our Creators; and therefore we are not to use it according to our own
fancy, but his pleasure. Thou art also to consider, that thou ought to
humble thy self more for being nothing, than for being but dust and ashes. For
those are something; and betwixt something and nothing there is no proportion,
and, as the Philosophers say, an infinite distance. Thou have not from thy self
so much as a possibility of being; for if God were not God, thou could not
have been at all. From this consideration thou have great reason to humble thy
self. For to be nothing is a Well without bottom never to be drawn dry: yet
this Nothing is far better than what thou art by Sin. Here the most holy Saints
have sunk down in amazement, and some unto whom our Lord has revealed what
they are, have been so astonished, as they had certainly died, if they had not
been comforted and upheld by the Divine hand. For having sinned thou art as
evil as sin it self. Call to mind what we have said of the infinite malice and
abomination of sin. All this falls upon him who commits it, With reason
therefore did Dion the Philosopher say, That it was most hard to know ones
self: because it was most hard to comprehend the malice of sin, which being the
chiefest evil becomes in a manner as difficult to be known as the chiefest
good: and therefore no better way to find what it is, than to proceed after the
same way we do in the knowledge of God.

. 2.
St. Dionysius Areopagita teaches us, that in the knowledge of God we may
proceed alter two manners: either by the way of Affirmation, attributing unto
God all what is Good and perfect: or by way of Negation, denying unto him all
what is good or perfect in the Creatures, as being of a goodness and perfection
infinitely above it. In the same manner we are to proceed in the knowledge of
Sin, either by Affirmation, in attributing unto it all the ill in all creatures
whatsoever, or by Negation, denying it any ill, as being a malice of another
kind, horrible and enormous, above all other Evils imaginable. Call together
therefore all the evils thou have seen, heard, or read of; Join all these in
one; a mortal sin is worse then all these together. The miseries of Job,
stilence in the time of David, the torments of Phalaris, Nero, Dioclesian, and
all the Tyrants are far short of it in malice. Is it as bad, as all those
afflictions and miseries, which they suffered, who perished in the Deluge, and
those who were burnt alive in Sodom and the neighboring Towns, and as all
they suffered, who were put to the sword in Amalee, and all those that were
hunger-starved in the siege of Jerusalem? One only mortal sin goes far beyond
all the aforesaid miseries. All the Plagues, Wars, Sickness, Famines, all,
that has been suffered since the World began, come not near the ill of one
sin. Good God! how vast is that evil, which is equivalent to so many evils?
where shall we find an evil that may equal it? where shall we meet with an end
of so much malice? Certainly all the evils, that have been since the World
began, or could succeed in a million of Worlds to come, fall short of it. If
nothing then upon earth be comparable unto it, let us seek it beneath the earth
amongst those eternal evils, which shall never have end. Let us enter Hell, and
consider the torments there, which are or have been suffered by Men or Devils
even from the least and most unknown of the damned unto Lucifer and Antichrist.
Is there any thing there, that may equal, the evil of one sin? No; we shall not
there, find it. Reflect, I say again, and mark if thou find any torment
amongst so many miserable creatures, as suffer in Hell, which may parallel the
malice of one only mortal sin. There is none to be found. But I Will give thee
leave to make a collection of those many torments, which may seem unto thee in
reason comparable to a mortal sin, and you shall find that Sin does not only
equalize, but exceed the malice of them. Join then together, and put in one
heap all the torments that are inflicted upon all damned creatures, Men and
Angels, and compare the malice of them all with that one of mortal sin, and you
shall find that the malice of sin does far surpass the malice of all those.
That gnashing of teeth, that inconsolable weeping, that burning fire, which
penetrates the bowels for all eternity, all that our imagination can frame,
reaches not so immense an evil. If we cannot therefore find the depth of the
malice of sin by way of Affimation, let us try what may be done by the other
way of Negation. But this will also fail us. For the evil of plagues, famine,
and death are not it; A mortal sin is more then these. The evils of poverty,
dishonor, and torments are not it: It is more then these. The torments of hell
are not it; It is above hell and all the pains of it. Think with thy self that
all the atoms, which are to be found in the air, all the sands in the sea, all
the leaves on the trees, all the grass in the fields, all the stars in the
heavens, think, I say, that they are foul and ugly bodies, all most deformed
Monsters, and frame to thy self a Monster and ugly Creature, which should be
made of all these: will this equalize the foulness of a mortal sin? It is not
this ugly Monster, nor this foul deformed Creature: but it is a foulness and
ugliness, that does far surpass all these, and all horrid shapes and figures
imaginable. And let not this seem strange unto thee; For not only the evil of
a Mortal sin, but even that of a Venial is greater than all the evils of Hell,
or the evils within or without it; all tht monstrousuess, all the deformity of
all things, that are or can be contracted into one, do not equal it; Sin is
more than all. And therefore as St. Dionysius said of God, That he was above
what was good, or what was fair, because his goodness and beauty were of a
superior kind* So it may be said of sin; It is neither deformity, abomination,
horror, or malice, but is something more than all these.

Let a sinner therefore know himself, and that he is by sin above all that is
ugly, foul, or monstrous. For as he, that has whiteness, is as white as that
which makes him so, so he, that is in sin, is as horrible and ill as sin it
self. Let him then reflect whether he is to sink charged with such a guilt, and
how much he ought to abhor and loath himself. Certainly if he should sink into
Hell, he would there find no torment worse then himself. If he should return
into the Abyss of nothing, he would be there better, then in that Abyss of
malice, which is in sin. Let him then reflect whether so unworthy and vile a
wretch ought to have the same use of the creatures, as if he were in the state
of innocence, and without this blemish of sin. Let him consider if a person so
infamous, so abominable as himself ought to use the things of this world for
his delight, honor, pomp, and ostentation. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius, Lord
of the world, and possessor of the greatest honors it could give him, though a
Gentil, yet thought himself so worthy of contempt, that he writes in this
manner; "Treat thy self, O soul with ignominy, Anton. lib. 2.
"and despise thy self; For thou have no title to honor. It is a prodigious
thing, that he, who has committed a mortal sin, should desire honor and
respect: That he should complain of the troubles of this life, and desire to be
cherished and made much of: That he, who is the shame and infamy of the world,
should gape after glory: That he who is a Traitor to his God, should wish to be
honored and respected. He who has deserved hell for an eternity, why should
he grumble at a short sickness or the necessities of this life, which if he
make the right use of, may serve as a means of his salvation? Let him
therefore, who has sinned, know that he is not to make the same use of the
creatures, as if he were innocent; he is not to aim at other honor, then that
of God; he is not to seek after ease and the Commodities of life, but the
security of his salvation: not to thirst after the pleasures of the world, but
to perform strict penances for his sins past. O if one knew himself perfectly,
with what different eyes would he behold the things of the world? he would look
upon them as things not appertaining to him at all; and if he did not despise
them, at least he would make no account of them. The Son of God, only because
he took upon him the form of a sinner, would not use the goods of this life,
but rather embraced all that was troublesome, painful, and bitter in it. why
should he then, who is really and in substance a sinner, seek honors and
delights? Let him know the means of his salvation, since Christ himself has
taught them, to wit, Penance, Mortification, and the Cross. If Christ, because
he bore the sins of others, used not temporal goods and the Commodities of
life, why should man, who is laden with his own sins, complain he wants the
pleasures and conveniences of it? Why should he gape after the goods of the
earth, who is infected with a greater evil then that of hell? The admirable
man, blessed Francis Borgia, the great despiser of himself and the world, out
of this consideration was most content in the tribulations and want of all
things temporal: and the least comfort in his greatest necessities seemed too
much for him. All men wondered to see him so poor, and the incommodities he
suffered in his travail, when he visited the Colleges of the Society in Spain.
Amongst the rest a certain Gentleman, amazed at his great pains and sufferance,
said unto him, Father how is it possible, that having been so great a Lord you
can endure the troubles and inconveniences of the ways? To whom the servant of
God answered; Sir, do not pity me; for I always send before me a Harbinger,
who provides plentifully for all things necessary. This Harbinger was the
Knowledge of himself, which in his greatest necessities made what he had appear
too plentiful.

3.
Besides this, he who has sinned ought to Consider, that he has need of Gods
holy hand to draw him out of that misery, or, if he be already by repentance
freed, to preserve him from falling again into it; That the means to obtain
this is not the pride of the world, the riches of the earth, or the pleasures
of the flesh, but fasting, sackcloth, humiliation and penance. Let him remember
that of himself he is nothing, and to that nothing has added sin; that being
nothing he can do nothing that is good: and that by sin he has disobliged him,
who only could assist him in doing good. Man is of himself nothing but a Lie,
and Sin, two horrid and profound Abysses. Let him imitate David who said, I
cried unto thee, O Lord, from the deeps: what other deeps, then those two of
Nothing and of Sin, which have no bottom? Let him then, who has once offended
his Creator, know himself, and where he remains. Let him pray, sigh, and cry
from his nothing, and from the depth of his misery, that he may be heard of
his God. And certainly for him, who is in the condition of a penitent and to
demand mercy, it is not seemly to use superfluities, to employ himself in
vanities, to take delight in the world, enjoy the Creatures, and seek after
greatness. And although it were lawful in the integrity of nature, when man was
free from the corruption of sin, to use the Creatures with more liberty, yet
being now fallen, it is no ways tolerable: but let him look upon himself as
one guilty, who has offended his God, and is in fine a miserable man.

The Philosophers, who considered nature, not as it was by sin, but as it ought
to be in it self, measured there virtues by that rule, and therefore knew not
the virtue of humility, nor used that of penance; And the virtues of
Magnanimity, Constancy, and Magnificence they extended so far, that many
actions, which the Stoics and Peripateticks called virtuous, may be esteemed
vicious. But the horribleness of sin and the weakness of humane nature being
now discovered, the estate of things is changed, and humility ought still to
reign both in our souls and bodies: and many acts of other virtues esteemed by
them are to be corrected. We are to choose different Mediums for the advancing
our End from those of the Philosophers, both because the ends we aim at are not
the same, and because we know our selves to be in a far other condition then
they imagined. The End proposed by the Philosophers was merely natural, to wit,
the Happiness and felicity of this life. The estate of humane nature they
conceived to be free, and uncontaminated by sin, and that it had suffcient
force of it self to do good. In all this they were deceived; and it is not
therefore strange, if for the obtaining of their ends they taught ways
distinct from those of Christians, who know their end to be supernatural, to
wit, the happiness not of this, but of the other life: who know also their
estate of nature not to be free and entire as it was at first, but corrupted
and defaced by sin, and that of it self it has neither force, nor efficacy to
execute any thing that is good, unless assisted by the grace and mercy of God.
It is therefore no marvail, if Chrisitians, who know themselves, their end, and
condition, make use of such Vetues and Mediums as the Philosophers knew not.
Neither is it much that the Philosophers took some virtuous acts for vices,
since they mistook many vices for virtues. Aristotle the Prince of natural and
moral Philosophers knew not Humility, voluntary Poverty, and Penance to be
virtues, but rather condemned the last to be a kind of insensibility, and one
of those vices contrary to the virtue. of temperance. The Stoics also held
Pity and Commiseration for a vice. But since the Gospel of Christ these are
become the most necessary and recommended virtues, and the most apt and ready
means for the obtaining of our salvation. These three virtues, in which
consists the contempt of all things temporal, Aristotle knew not, because he
knew not himself. By Humility Honors are despised, by Poverty Riches, and by
Penance the Pleasures and Regaloes of the world. And therefore he who will make
the right and profitable use of things temporal for the gaining of eternity,
must as a sinner humble himself, and do penance, must not employ, himself and
the time of his life in gathering and heaping up riches, which are so far
from being goods, that to innumerable persons they have shut up the gates of
the true and real goods, which are only the eternal, unto which we are wholly
to aspire, not trusting in our own forces, but in the mercy and passion of
Jesus Christ.

CAP. III.
The value of goods eternal is made apparent unto us by the Incarnation of the
Son of God.

BUt above all which has been said the incomparable difference betwixt things
Temporal and Eternal is made most apparent unto us by the Incarnation and
passion of Jesus Christ. The gaining of eternity is a matter of so high
concernement, that the Son of God, to the end we might obtain it. was incarnate
and made man; and that we might despise things temporal is also of so great
importance, that for it it was convenient that Christ our Redeemer should
suffer and die. I know not what can raise in us a higher conception of the
greatness of the one, and baseness of the other, then these high and
stupendous acts of God Almighty. And therefore (though briefly) we will say
something of them both, beginning with that admirable and great mystery of the
Incarnation.

Great is all that which is eternal, and so much imports us, that rather than
we should lose it God wrought a work of that height and love as amazed the
Angels. In which we will consider four things: The greatness of the work, The
manner of putting it in execution, The evils from which it frees us, and The
good we gain by it. For the first, which is the Greatness of the work, we are
to suppose the estate of man, as he then stood; which was the most miserable,
infamous, and wretched condition that could be imagined. He was become a slave
so the Devil, polluted with sin, condemned unto eternal punnishment, enemy to
God, and without hope of remedy. For even the highest Seraphins could not
imagine, that without prejudice to the Justice of God it was possible for man to
be redeemed from that miserable and ignominious estate. For although all the
men in the world should suffer a thousand deaths, and all the orders of holy
Angels in heaven should offer themselves in sacrifice, and should suffer
eternal torments in hell, all would not satisfy for one mortal sin. All created
remedies were then impossible; and although God should have created some more
excellent and holy creature than the most high Seraphins, yet that and they
were insufficient to appease the divine justice incensed against man. what
remedy then, where none was to be had? what hope, when all was despair?
Certainly from what was, or could be created it was impossible: and from the
Creator it was not known to be possible; and if it was known to be possible,
who could hope that the offended party ty should satisfy for the offense
committed against himself? that the Creditor should pay what the debtor ought?
What hope then of remedy, when all hope failed both from Heaven and Earth? The
only remedy, and that only known to God, was, that God without prejudice to
his justice might cover man with his mercy: but that much to the cost of God
himself, and the greatest work, whereunto his power and wisdom could extend.
But who could think he would employ so great a work for his Enemy? that he
would let up the rest of his omnipotency for him, who was a Traitor to his
Lord? Only this way remained, for God to make himself man, the most great and
stupendous work possible or imaginable. But who could believe this should be
done for man, so vile a creature, made of a little earth, and of so small
importance to God? This was a work to be reserved for God himself, if his own
divinity, life, or salvation (if it were possible) should come in question; let
it be lawful to speak in this manner, to express in some sort that, which is
inexplicable, and to set forth this ineffable mystery, and the
incomprehenssible goodness of God. But to do this for the life of a Traitor,
for the salvation of a Faith-breaker, to advance an Enemy, who could once hope
or dare to imagine it? If man for the service of God had, as a faithful
servant, hazarded his person, and run himself into that miserable and sad
condition, it might have been presumed, that God out of his goodness and
acknowledgment, would have stretched his power for his freedom; but that man
having robbed God of his honor, contemned him, and made himself equal unto him,
and that God should yet after all this humble himself for him, debase himself
so low as to be made man, and that for his Enemy, who could think it? But such
is the goodness of God that he overcame our hopes with his benefits, and did
that for us, which would have only sufficed for himself, and for himself he
could have done no more. O most stupendous love of God! O most immense
charity of our Creator, who so much loved man, that he stuck not to do what he
could for him! O ineffable goodness, which would discharge that debt, which his
enemy owed! O divine nobleness, that would so much to his own cost do good to
man, from whom he had received so much evil! To redeem man, though it had cost
him nothing, had been much; but at so great a rate, who could imagine it? But
the thoughts of God are far different from those of men.

. 2.
Let us now look upon the Greatness of this work: great after diverse manners;
great by the humbling of God so much below himself, great in it self, so great,
as the omnipotent power of God could work no greater. Here the divine
Attributes were drawn dry. For (as St. Austin says) neither God could do a
greater work, nor knew how to determine it better: there was found the bottom of
the whole omnipotency of God: for a greater work then this was neither possible
nor imaginable. For as nothing greater then God is possible, so no work can
possibly be greater then that, whereby man is made God. See then what thou
owe him for this excess of favor, that being his Enemy he did all for thee,
that his omnipotency could, that his wisdom knew, or his divine goodness and
love could will. All his Attributes thy Creator employed for thy good; employ
thou all thy powers in his service. God did all he could for thee; do thou all
thou can for him. He wrought the work of thy redemtion with all his forces
and omnipotency; do thou then with all thy power and forces observe his divine
will and pleasure, loving and serving him in all things. See thou not here
his infinite love and goodness made apparent and laid down before thine eyes?
do thou yet doubt to love him with all thy powers and faculties, who loved
thee with all his omnipotency? See what a love was this, when he did that for
thee being his enemy, greater than which he could not do for his friend: nor
for himself, if his own glory were at stake. See thou not clearly his
infinite goodness, that overcame so infinite a malice, man not being able to do
a work against God of so stupendous wickedness, but God would do a work for
man of a more stupendous goodness, not suffering his divine goodness to be
overcome by humane malice. God saw that man did a work so profoundly evil, that
there could not possible be a worse: for nothing can be so bad as mortal sin.
He therefore determined to do a work so infinitely good, that in goodness it
was impossible to be a better; and this for accursed Thee. what say thou to
it? What say thou to such an overflowing bounty, To such an excess of love?
Hear what the Apostle says. If thy Enemy be a hungered, Ad Roman. 11.
feed him; if he be thirsty, give him to drinks so shall thou heap coals of
fire up in his head* Be mt overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good.
This did thy Creator fully perform with thee although his enemy. Yield thy
self then vanquished, and blush that thou love him not better then the
Angels. Thy estate was not only necessitated by hunger and thirst, but thou
wast plunged into eternal misery, and want of all things that were good,
deprived of glory and eternal happiness. If then to bestow a bit of bread, or a
Cup of water upon a necessitated enemy be sufficient to call color into his
face, and are as coals to inflame him in love and charity: What is it for God
to have communicated his Divinity unto man, and to have given his life for him,
when he was his Enemy? How comes not this to make us blush for shame, and set
us afire in his divine love? These benefits are not to be coals, but flames,
which ought to kindle in us the fire of true love and charity. Give thy self
then for overcome, and love that divine goodness, which for thee being the
worst of all his Creatures did the best work of his omnipotency. O nobleness of
God Almighty, O divine sense of honor, (that I may so speak)! Man had overcome
all works good or bad in malice; but such was the immense goodness of God, that
he would not suffer man to do a work so excessive in evil, but he would do a
work for the salvation of traitorous and false man more excessive in good.
Wherefore O Lord did thou not this, when the Angels sinned, who were better
then man? What goodness is this, that thou forbearest so fowl a sinner? Is it
perhaps that thy work might appear the greater? Would thou expect until man
had first set up his rest in impudence and malice, that thou might then set
up thy rest in mercy and goodness? Who sees not here, O Lord, the infinitness
of thy love, and the immenseness of thy bounty?

After all manners this excellent work proclaims thy excess of bounty, because
it is after all manners infinitely good, and opens as many parts to the
understanding of our souls to adore and admire thee. For this work is not only
infinitely good in substance, but in each particular circumstance. In it self
it is infinitely good. For no work can be better than that which makes man so
good, as it makes him God. It is good because by it the Divinity is
communicated unto a creature, and, which is more, unto the lowest, and most
vile of those who are capable of reason. For as it is the property of what is
good to be comunicative, so here we see the infinite goodness of God, who
wholly, and all what he is issues forth of himself, and is communicated unto
man. Who is not amazed, that the same Divinity, which the eternal Father
communicates unto the eternal Word, who is God as he is, should after an
admirable manner be communicated unto human nature, which was enemy unto him? O
Sea of divine goodness, that thus powrest forth thy self to do good without
regarding unto whom! O Ocean of bounty, that thus overflowest in benefits even
toward thine enemies! This work is likewise infinitely good, because with
goodness it overcoms an infinitely malice, and frees him, who was so evil, that
he deserved an infinite punishment. It is infinitely good, because it sets forth
God with an infinite desire to pardon, and do good even unto the greatest
Traitor, and who least deserved it. It shows him also infinitely good and
complete in all virtue and perfection, that rather then to fail the least jot
in his Justice, he would take upon him that which was due unto a most unjust
and accursed offender, and humbled himself unto death, that he, who was
condemned to die, should not perish eternally. I know not any thing; that can
set forth God as a more exact and perfect pattern of all virtue, then a work of
so much Justice and Mercy. Who would not be amazed at the goodness and piety of
a great Emperor, who having a desire to pardon a notorious Traitor, should
rather, then abate one jot of his inflexible justice, take upon him the habit
and shape of that Traitor, and die publiqnely in the market place, that the
offender might be spared? This did God, taking upon him the form of a Servant,
and dying upon the Cross to free condemned man from eternal death. O God every
way most perfect and good, which art so scrupulous in thy justice, and so
indulgent in thy mercy: rigorous with thy self, that thou might be merciful
with us. O God infinitely good, infinitely holy, infinitely exact and perfect in
all / Let the Angels praise thee for all thy perfections, since all are
transcendent and infinitely good.

. 3.
To this maybe added the excellent Manner, by which a work every way so
excellently good was performed, and with what love and desire of thy benefit it
was wrought. From whence could a work of so much goodness issue, but from a
furnace of love in the divine breast? And if by the effect we may know the
cause, that love, which made God resolve upon a work so admirable strange and
high, could not be other then immense in it self; for since the work was
infinitely good, it could not proceed but from an infinite love: nor that love
but from an infinite being. Besides this, it was a great prerogative and honor
to humane nature, that God should rather make himself a man than an Angel. With
being an Angel he might have freed Man, and honored the Angels, communicated
his divine goodness unto the Creatures, and done a work of infinite bounty and
favor. This notwithstanding, he was so passionate a lover of man, and, (if I
may so say) so fond of humane nature, that he would not only oblige man by
redeeming him. but in the manner of his redemption; he would not only that Man
should be redeemed, but that he should be redeemed by a Man, and so would not
only give the remedy, but confer also the honor upon our nature. Neither
was he content in honoring man more than Angels, but would redeem him, and not
the Angels. This was a demonstration of his affection unto Man beyond all
expression, that not pardoning the Angels, who were of a more excellent and
supreme being then ours, he yet took pity of us, and not of them, and would do
that for us, which he did not for them. Unto this add, that, when Man sinned,
and the whole stock of mankind was ruined, there remained no just man to
commiserate and intercede for him. But when the Angels fell, there remained
thousands rightious, who might pity those of their own nature, and be sensible
of their loss; and yet he would do this for Man and not for Angels. The time
also, when this great work of mercy was put in execution, shows not a little
the sweetness of God Almighty to our nature. It was in a time, when mankind was
most forgetful of God: when men strove to make themselves adored for Gods, and
those, who could not attain unto it themselves, adored other men worse then
devils. Then did God think of making himself Man, and for Man, who would make
himself God. This was a love indeed, to do most for us then, when we most
offended him.

But let us see what good we received by this great work. Certainly if we had
received no good at all, it was much to free us from those evils, whereunto we
were plunged: to deliver us from the ignominy of Sin, from the slavery of the
Devil, and from the horror of Hell. To free us from these evils without any
other benefit might be held an infinite good. And though there had been no
evils to be freed from, nor goods to be bestowed upon us, yet the honor, which
our nature received in having God to become one of us, was an incomparable
blessing. But joining to this honor our deliverance from those horrid and
desperate evils, what happiness may be compared to ours? Justin writes that
Alexander the Great beholding Lysimachus wounded in the head, and that he lost
much blood, took his Diadem, and bound it about his temples to stay his
bleeding. This was a great favor from so mighty a Prince, as well in the care
he took of him, as in the manner, taking the Ensign of Majesty from his own
head, and giving it to his vassal. But Lysimachus had not injuried Alexander:
he had served him faithfully, and received that wound in his quarrel. Neither
did Alexander give him his Diadem for ever, but suffered him only to wear it
upon that present occasion. But the mortal wound of sin was not received by man
in defense of God, or in his quarrel, but in rebellion against him. Yet God
vouchsafes to cure the Traitor, honors him with his own Diadem, which is his
Divinity, communicating it upon him, not for a short space, and then to take
it from him, but b^stowing it upon him for all eternity. What a bounty is this
unto an enemy, that in freeing him from such a misery, crowns him with so
great happiness?

But if to all this we shall add those other blessings, which he bestows* upon
us, giving us his grace, adopting us the Sons of God, and making us Heirs of
heaven, how infinitely will our obligations increase, since we are not only
freed from so great evils, but enriched with unspeakable benefits, and our
nature honored by his favors above that of Angels? All is marvailous, all is
great, all is transcendent in this unspeakable goodness. The work it self is
transcendent, the manner and love, by which it was performed, is transcendent.
The evils, from which it frees us, are eternal: the rewards, which it prepares
for us, are eternal; whose greatness though it were not otherwise to be known,
might in this sufficiently appear, that to free us from so many evils, and
crown us with so many goods, it was necessary that he who was eternal, should
make himself temporal, and should execute this great and stupendous work so
much to his own loss.

CAP. IV.
The baseness of Temporal goods may likewise appear by the Passion and Death of
Christ Jesus.

THe greatness of eternal goods and evils is by the Incarnation of the Son of
God made more apparent unto us then the Sun beams; since for the freeing us
from the one, and gaining for us the other, it was necessary so great a work
should be performed, and that God judged not his whole omnipotency ill
employed, that man might gain eternity. Yet does not this great work so
forcibly demonstrate unto us the baseness of things temporal, and the contempt
which is due unto them, as the Passion and Death of the Son of God, which was
another work of his love, an other excess of his affection, another tenderness
of our Creator, and a most high expression of his good will toward us: wherein
we shall see how worthy to be despised are all the goods of the Earth, since to
the end we might contemn them, the Son of God would not only deprive himself
of them, but to the contrary embraced all the evils and incommodities this life
was capable of. Behold then how the Savior of the world disesteemed temporal
things, since he calls the best of them, and those, which men most covet, but
thorns; and to the contrary that, which the world most hates and abhorrs, he
qualifies with the name of blessings, favoring so much the Poor, who want all
things, that he calls them, blessed, and says, Of them is the Kingdom of
heaven. And of the Rich, who enjoy the goods of the earth, he says, It is
harder for them to enter into heaven, then for a Camel to pass the eye of a
needle. And to persuade us yet more, he not only in words but in actions chose
the afflictions, and despised the prosperity of this life; and to that end
would suffer in all things as much as could be suffered. In honor, by being
reputed infamous: In riches by being despoyled of all even to his proper
garments; In his pleasures, by being a spectacle of sorrow, and afflicted in
each particular part of his most sacred body. This we ought to consider
seriously, that we may imitate him in that contempt of all things temporal,
which he principally expressed in his bitter death and passion. This he would
have us still to keep in memory, as conducing much to our spiritual profit, as
an example which he left us, and as a testimony of the love he bore us, leaving
his life for us, and dying for us a public death full of so many deaths and
torments. Zcnophon in Cyro lib. 3.
Tigranes King of Armenia, together with his Queen, being prisoners unto Cyrus,
and one day admited to dine with him, Cyrus demanded of Tigranes, What he would
give for the liberty of his wife; to whom Tigranes answered, That he would not
only give his Kingdom, but his life and blood. The woman not long after
requited this expression of her husband. For being both restored to their
former condition, One demanded of the Queen, What she thought of the Majesty
and Greatness of Cyrus; to whom she answered; Certainly I thought not on him,
nor fixed mine eyes on any but him, who valued me so much, as he doubted not to
give his life for my ransom. If this Lady were so grateful only for the
expression of her husbands affections, that she looked upon nothing but him,
and neither admired nor desired the greatness of the Persians, What ought the
Spouse of Christ to do, who not only sees the love and affection of the King
of Heaven, but his deeds: not his willingness to die, but his actual dying a
most horrid and cruel death for her ransom and redemption? Certainly she ought
not to place her eyes or thoughts upon any thing but Christ crucified for her.
Sabinus also extolls the loyalty and love of Ulysses to his Wife Penelope, in
regard that Circe and Calypso promising him immortality upon condition that he
should forget Penelope, and remain with them, he utterly refused it, not to be
wanting to the love and affection he owed unto his Spouse, who did also repay
it him with great love and affection. Let a Soul consider what great love and
duty it owes to its Spouse Christ Jesus, who being immortal, did not only
become mortal, but died also a most ignominious death. Let us consider whether
it be reasonable it should forget such an excessive love, and whether it be fit
it should ever be not remembering the same, and not thankful for all eternity,
hazarding to lose the fruits of the passion of its Redeemer and Spouse Christ
Jesus. Upon this let thy Soul meditate day and night; and the spiritual
benefits, which she will reap from thence, will be innumerable. Albertus Magnus
used to say, Lud. de Ponte P. 4. in introduc.
That the Soul profited more by one holy thought of the Passion of Christ, than
by reciting every day the whole Psalter, by fasting all the year in bread and
water, or chastizing the Body even to the effusion of blood. One day amongst
others when Christ appeared unto St. Gertrude to confirm her in that devotion
she had to his Passion, he said unto her: behold Daughter, if in a few hours,
which I hung upon the Cross, I so enobled it, that the whole world has ever
since had it in reverence, how shall I exalt that Soul in whose heart and
memory I have continued many years? Certainly it cannot be expressed, what favor
devout Souls obtain from Heaven in thinking often upon God, and those pains, by
which he gained tor us eternal blessings, and taught us to despise things
temporal and transitory.

But that we may yet reap more profit by the holy remembrance of our Saviors
passion, we are to consider, that Christ took upon him all our sins: and being
to satisfy the Father for them, would do it by the way of suffering; for which
it was convenient that there should be a proportion betwixt the greatness of
his pains and the greatness of our sins. And certainly as our sins were without
bound or limit, so the pains of his torments were above all comparison: showing
us by the greatness of those injuries, he received in his passion, the
greatness of those injuries, we did unto God by our inordinate pleasures. We
may also gather by the greatness of those pains and torments, which were
inflicted upon him by the Jews and Hangmen, the greatness of those which he
inflicted upon himself; for certainly those pains, which he took upon himself,
were not inferior to those he received from others. But who can explicate the
pains, which our Savior wounded by the grief he conceived at our offenses took
upon himself? For such is the malice of a mortal sin, that, if we did but know
it as it is, our hearts would burst with grief, and we could not suffer it and
live; and therefore many have been known to die suddenly by the violent
apprehension of their sins. Vincent. Sermon. 6. Post invocavit. Fra. Francisco.
Diego. en la Hist. de la Prove. de Aragon l. 2. c. 6.
St. Vincentius Ferrerius writes of a certain light woman, who going to a
Sermon decked and adorned in all bravery, when she heard the Preacher with great
zeal and fervor set out the hainousness of the sin of dishonesty, she with
mere grief and compunction fell dead in the place; and a voice was heard: she
was in heaven. The same St. Vincent being in Zamora, two condemned persons were
led forth to be burnt for their filthiness. The Saint drawing near to them so
laid open the deformity of their sin, that they both died of grief in the way
to execution. Another time the same Saint hearing the Confession of an
incestuous person, so moved him to contrition, that he died at his feet. If
then the grievousness of sin be so great, as the grief of it brings death upon
them who truly apprehend it, what shall we think of the grief of Christ, who
perfectly knew the hainousness of sin, and took upon him all the sins of the
world, and grieved for every one of them, as if he himself had committed it?
Who can declare or imagine the grievousness of his resentment, when he saw his
Father (whose honor he desired and endeavored even from his very bowels) to be
injured after so many and so horrid manners? Suar. in 3. p. to. 2. disput. 33
sec. 2.
Grave Divines affirm that the grief, which Christ suffered for sins of men,
was more vehement and intense, then all other griefs, what objects soever they
have, or can have by ordinary power either in Man or Angels; which afflictions
he suffered all his life: and therefore one of the Psalms says; he was in
labors from his youth; which another Lection reads; He was agonizing and
exhaling his soul. It was a custom among the Jews, that hearing any to
blaspheme or injure God, they tore their garments in sign of grief. What grief
did then the Son of God endure for all the blasphemies, and injuries committed
by the whole world against his Eternal Father? Certainly he tore not his
Garments, but his Body, and powered forth his sacred blood at a thousand
fountains before he subjected it to the power of his Enemies, revenging the
sins against his Father upon his own person, and tormenting himself for our
sins before he was tormented by others. Such was the zeal of the glory of God,
which burnt in his breast, that he would not pardon himself, to the end he
might obtain pardon for Man. If the zeal of Phinees was so great, that
beholding two persons commit a sin he could not contain himself from revenging
it even with their deaths; If that of Elias took away the lives of so many
false Prophets, and Moses purpled his hands in the blond of his People, causing
so many thousands of them to be slain: What shall be the zeal of Christ at the
sight of the sins of all the world? how vehement his desire, that God should be
revenged? and since he would revenge them upon himself, what grief and anguish
did he endure for the sins of the whole world? Certainly no words can possibly
express it. But not contented with those he gave himself, he would subject
himself also to those which he received from others, which certainly were no
small ones, but such as were proportionable to his burning zeal, and therefore
beyond utterance painful and severe. Yet those, though rigorous and great, were
short of that interior grief, which he took upon himself; for those were
inflicted by the rage and madness of the Jews, but these by his own zeal and
charity; and therefore by how much his love was greater than the hatred and
malice of his enemies, by so much greater was the grief of his heart than that
of his senses, and than those pains which he suffered in his sacred body. But
it is fit we should also often reflect upon the greatness of those, which were
more particularly suffered for our Example, that we may thence learn to despise
the goods of the earth, which we see charged with so many evils, and avoid all
sorts of sins, since our sweet Savior took their punishments upon himself in
so high a degree.

. 2.
Wherefore as Christ our Redeemer suffered for the sin of Man, which is totally
evil in it self and all the Circumstances, as we have already discoursed: so
his Passion was likewise every way most grievous and painful, as we shall
perceive in observing those seven Circumstances noted by Tully. First behold,
who it is that suffers. It is he who deserves it least: He who is Innocence it
self: He who is a Person as holy, as the holy Spirit of God: He who is the
offended Party; yet suffers for the offender: He who is Lord of all: He whom
the Seraphins acknowledge and adore: He who has done innumerable benefits for
his very enemies: Our Father, who created us and made us of nothing: A man most
delicate for the vivacity of his spirits, and the perfection of his temper. All
this must needs augment his grief, as being a Person of such Worth and
innocence, as he deserved it least, and of so temperate and perfect a
complexion, as he felt it most. This Circumstance of the Person, who suffered,
is recommended to our consideration by the Apostle, when he says; Heb. 12.
Think upon him, who sustained such contradiction from sinners against himself;
For he it is, who now sits at the right hand of the Father, who died betwixt
two Thieves. Think who it is, that was allowed no place on earth, but hung upon
a tree in the air; It is He, who is to judge the living and the dead. Think who
it is, who suffered upon the Cross; it is He, who is life eternal. Think who it
is, who permitted himself to be apprehended, whipped, crucified; it is He who
made the earth to tremble, and caused fire to issue out of the Sanctuary, and
consume those who obeyed not his holy Word and Law.

The second Circumstance is, what it was he suffered. Certainly more than was
ever suffered by man; injuries, affronts, inhumane and cruel torments: He
suffered sutably to his infinite charity, and that burning thirst he had to
suffer for Man. So excessive were his pains, that the Rocks clove in sunder in
their presence, the Mountains sunk, the Elements trembled, the Heavens clothed
themselves in mourning, the Sun and Moon were darkened, and the Angels of Peace
wept. So great they were, that the very apprehension of them made the Son of
God sweat drops of blood; so many in number, that it is held to by known by
Revelation they were ninety seven thousand three hundred and five. And
afterward in time of his Passion he shed from his sacred eyes, as Peter
Calentinus writes, to the number of seaventy two thousand two hundred drops of
tears, and this for our sins, begging the Eternal Father for pardon and our
salvation. In lib. inscrip. Faustus annus. Joan. Aquilan. Sermon. de Pass.
Lansperg. hom. 50. de Pass. Ansel. in Spec. Evan. Ser. 1. c. 22. Vide Joan.
Burg. p. 2. c. 7. and p. 3. c. 3.
The lashes he received from those barbarous fellows past in number five
thousand. Some say, it was revealed to St. Bernard how they amounted to six
thousand six hundred seaventy six. Lanspergius writes, that a Servant of God
understood from Heaven, that if one for the space of twenty years should every
day say an hundred times the Lords prayer in reverence of those stripes our
Savior received, for every drop or blood would correspond one prayer; and
according to this account those drops amount to seven hundred and thirty
thousand five hundred. He that has numbered the multitude of the stars, the
sands of the sea, the drops of rain, might well keep an account, and give also
an exact knowledge of the aforesaid numbers, as being of more account. The
Crown of thorns was another Torment very cruel, of which St. Anselm says, that
it pierced his venerable head with a thousand wounds. And who can express the
unspeakable torment of hanging upon the Cross, the whole weight of his body
sustained by his nailed hands and feet? Finally so strange and horrible were
his pains, that not only to suffer them, but even to imagine them, caused St.
Lidwine to bewail them even with tears of blood. Cantip. l. 1. c. 25.
Cantipratensis writes of a devout person, who died of mere sorrow upon
consideration of the excessive torments undergone by the Son of God. And there
is no doubt, but the blessed Virgin, if it had not been for her eminent
constancy, fortified by divine grace, Albert. Mag. super Mis.
as Albertus Magnus said, had expired in those tears of blood she poured forth
at the foot of the Cross. And if the sword of grief, which pierced the heart of
the Mother, was so sharp, what was the grief of the Son? The passion of
torments was in him real, in her but for his sake; and certainly the compassion
he had of us sinners was greater than the compassion she could have of him. And
if the grief of the Virgin was so terrible, Ansel. de Excess. Virg.
that, as St. Anselme says, all the torments endured by all bodies whatsoever
were in comparison of it little or nothing: And St. Bernard thinks that her
pains were a thousand times double to those of Childbirth: Bernard. de lament.
Virg. Bernardin. Ser. 61. art. 3. ca. 2.
And Sr. Bernardine exceeding all this is confidedent, that if the grief of the
Virgin were divided amongst all the creatures that can suffer, all would
suddenly die as incapable of it: If such then and so great were the pains of
the Virgin, what shall be said of those which Christ suffered and felt, since
no sorrow was as his, no pain could stand in competition with his? If then in
Torment he suffered so much, as none but he could suffer, in Honor and
reputation he suffered no less, and in all manners, that the fury and envy of
his Enemies assisted by the Devils could invent. And if he suffered so much by
the compassion of his torments, he suffered much more by the compassion of our
offenses.

Thirdly, the grief of his pains was much augmented by the place, Where he
suffered, which was the Court of Judaea, a place where he had heretofore been
much esteeemed: and of late received in triumph as a man come from Heaven: And
certainly to pass suddenly from one extreme to another, from the height of
honor to the bottom of contempt and scorn, increases much our afflictions; For
he became the most infamous man in the world, arraigned and condemned to suffer
between two Thieves, in a public place designed for wicked persons and
murderers, and in the presence of his Mother, which doubled the grief of his
heart.

Fourthly, the persons, by whom he suffered, was a great aggravation unto his
grief. It was by them of his own Nation, such as he had favored with infinite
benefits: and finding some compassion in Strangers he found none in his
Countrymen; The rage and madness, wherewith his enemies desired his death,
being such, as the Scripture compares them to Dogs, wild Beasts, and Unicorns.

The fifth Circumstance, and that which most increaved his sorrow, was, To see
those excessive pains and torments misbestowed, foreseeing that the greatest
number would not benefit themselves by them. For as the hope of profit, which
is a main end in all our labors, is a great comfort unto us, so the despair of
it as great an affliction. And Christ our Redeemer suffering, that his merits,
blood, and passion might profit all men, when he knew that the hundredth part
would not lay hold of it, and that innumerable persons would prove ungrateful
for so great a benefit, it was a grief, which beyond all apprehension pierced
his tender and most loving heart.

Sixthly, the Manner of his suffering was most grievous. For it was by being
generally abandoned of all things, not having any thing whatsoever to comfort
him. His own people procured his death with great injustice, the Gentiles
executed it with as great cruelty, and the Priests and the learned in the Law
were the leaven that sowred the whole lump. The Princes blew the coals, and
kindled such a flame in the People as could not be quenched with those infinite
injuries and affronts, which were heaped upon him; nor were they satisfied with
seeing him hang upon the Cross, whom they had so unjustly punished, but rent
his very bowels with their taunts and scoffs. And which was more than all, even
in his own Disciples, which he had bred up in his own School, he found little
firmness and loyalty. Amongst his twelve chosen Apostles One sold him, and
became the Captain of those, who apprehended him: Another, unto whom he had
given the principality over the rest, denied him thrice before his face,
cursing himself, if he knew him, and the Rest forsook him in the power of his
enemies. O never to be paralelled example of the inconstancy of humane things,
and of the constancy which a Christian ought to preserve in all events! What
felt that blessed heart of our Savior, when he saw himself surrounded by so
many enemies, and so few friends left him? Psalm. 21.
Of him it was truly written; My heart became as melted wax in the midst of
my bowels. True it is, that his blessed Mother, when she could neither assist
or defend him, yet forsook him not; but alas her presence did not mitigate but
increase his sorrow. The eternal Father, who could only help him, would not
then appear for him, but gave him over to suffer with all rigor at the
pleasure of his enemies: which was the more tenderly resented, as I may say, by
our blessed Lord, because his enemies cast it in his teeth, saying, He trusted
in God; let him deliver him, if he will have him. But for all this his Father
would not then free him, or afford him any comfort, which our Savior most
lovingly complained of, when he said; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Even a cup of water failed him to quench his scorching thirst: so as the
whole manner of his passion, was the most grievous and opprobrious, that could
be imagned.

Lastly, the Time of his Passion made it much more grievous. It was the Eve of
the Passover, when the whole Nation was assembled, when there was the greatest
concourse of people to behold him. It was at a time, when he was known to all
by the fame of his great works and miracles. It was in the flower of his age;
and O what pity was it to behold so flourishing, so beautiful, so excellently
composed a body reduced by the grievousness of his torments to such an exigent,
that, as the Scripture says, his tongue stuck to the pallat of his mouth, so
fallen in flesh, that all his bones might be numbered, the whole structure of
his body so discomposed, that he became as Melted wax, or Spilt water, resolved
into the dust of death: dry as a piece of an earthen pot, insomuch as he
seemed a Worm and not a Man, the Scorn of the people, and Shame of humane
nature. It is also worthy our admiration, that in that short process of the
Passion of Christ he suffered so many griefs and pains, in so many kinds, and
with such circumstances to aggravate them, as no man in the whole success of
time since has suffered any sort of calamity, or adversity, which our Redeemer
did not then suffer in a more bitter manner.

In all circumstances were the pains of Christ most grievous, because in all
circumstances the offenses of men were most heinous. It was convenient that he,
who came to do us all good, should suffer so much evil: that he, who had no sin
of his own, should undergo the punishment due unto the sins of others: and
that he, who was infinitely good, should suffer the evil of so much grief and
torment, to the end we might be instructed that those are not evils, which the
world fears, but those which sin brings along with it: and that the goods of
the world are so far from being real goods, that they are rather to be esteemed
as evils, since the Redeemer of the world deprived himself of the goods, and
burdened himself with the evils, to the end that we imitating in our lives his
most precious death might despise all temporal goods, which are so short and
false, that even the evils of the world are more true and real goods than they.
Let us then be ashamed, seeing Christ in so much sorrow, to seek after
pleasures. Let us have at least as great respect unto our Redeemer, as Ethay
the Gethite had to David, who when the holy King fled from his Son Absolon, and
persuaded him not to follow him in that dangerous condition, made him this
answer; The Lord live, and my Lord the King live, in what place soever thou
shall be either dead or alive, there also shall thy servant be. If this was
spoken by a Stranger, what ought to be the loyalty of a natural Subject? Let us
bear that faith unto our Savior, which Vrias did to Joab his General, when he
said, The Ark of Gad, and Judah, and Israel lodge in Tents, and my Lord Joab,
and the Servants of my Lord remain upon the earth, and shall I enter into my
house, and eat, and drink, and sleep with my Wife? by thy health, and the
health of thy Soul, O King, I will do no such thing. If Christ remain upon the
Cross and in sorrow, how come thou to seek for ease? If Christ be poor, why
do thou abound? If Christ suffer, why do thou pamper thy flesh? If Christ
humble himself, why do thou swell in pride? If Christ be in afflictions, why
art thou in delights? Remember what he taught thee from the Cross, and esteem
only that, which he so much valued, as to deprive himself of the transitory
goods of this life. Consider the afflictions and penance, which the most
innocent Jesus took upon him for thy sins, that thou may undergo some for
thy self. When the Jews were freed from the captivity of Babylon, Esdras
knowing the great sins they had fallen unto by their conversation with the
Gentiles, out of a sense and feeling of their transgressions, rent his garments,
and tore the hair off his head and beard, afflicted himself, and abstained from
food, praying unto the Lord, and weeping for the sins of the people; which
resentment and penance of his for the sins of others so mored the Jews, that
they began to weep and do penance themselves for their own sins, and that with
so great compunction, that they trembled for sorrow, and publicly confessed
their offenses. Why are not Christians then moved with sorrow and repentance,
when they behold not an Esdras, but the Son of God so overcharged with grief
and sorrow for the sins of the world, that he distilled drops of blood from the
pores of his blessed body, and rent his garments, not of wool, but of his
sacred humanity, which he willingly offered to be torn with scourges, thorns,
and nails, suffered himself to be plucked by the hair of the head and beard, and
his sacred face to be buffetted and spit upon, would not taste, eat, or drink
any thing but gall and vinegar, weeping from the Cross for the sins committed
by us wretches? Let us then weep, afflict our selves, and do penance for our
own sins, since we see our innocent Savior did it for the sins of others, that
imitating him in submitting our selves to those temporal afflictions we may be
partakers of his eternal glory.

3.
Those seven Circumstances, which so much aggravate the pains and torments of
our Savior Jesus Christ in his passion, ought to pierce our very hearts and
souls with grief and sorrow. But if they should not prevail with us to despise
the world, and love him only who so infinitely loved us, yet there are other
Circumstances, which with new obligations will not only move, but force us, if
we be not more hard than stones, to love and die for him. Whom would not the
sweet manner of his passion move, seeing the Son of God suffer with so much
love and patience, without complaint of any thing, loving us with that fervor,
that what he did, seemed little unto him, ready, if it had been necessary, to
suffer as much more for us? yea, such was his burning charity toward Mandkind,
that if there had been no other way left for our Redemption, he would not have
refused to continue in those bitter torments till the day of Judgment. The
affection of Jesus Christ what gratitude does it not deserve? And if in
benefits the good will, wherewith they are conferred, is most to be esteemed,
When the benefit is infinite, and the will of infinite love, what shall we do?
If, when that Traitor, who murdered Henry the Fourth King of France, was
justly sentenced to those cruel torments wherein he died, the first begotten
Son of the dead King, and Heir unto his Kingdom had clothed himselt in the
habit of the Murderer, and offered to be torn in pieces for him, and to die,
that he might be freed from his torments, and not only offered but actually
performed it, What love and thanks would the Prince deserve from that Caitiff?
O King of Glory, and only begotten Son of the eternal Father, in as much as
lay in us, we were desirous to murder thy Father, and to destroy his Divine
essence and being, and therefore were most worthy of death and eternal flames.
But thou were not only willing to die for us, but effectually gave thy blood
and life with so inhumane torments for us, and were prepared to suffer more and
greater* for our good. How shall we repay so great a love? what thanks, what
gratitude for so immense a benefit? Let us also consider, What we our selves
are, for whom he suffered. For he suffered not for himself, or because it
imported him: he suffered not for another God, nor for some new creature of a
superior nature to all those who now are: not for a Seraphin, who had
faithfully served him for an eternity of years, but for a miserable vile
creature, the lowest of all those, which are capable of reason, composed of
dirt, and his Enemy. This should make us more grateful, that God suffered so
much for us, who least deserved it.

To this may be added that he suffered thus much for us, not that his suffering
was necessary tor our redemption and freedom out of the slavery of sin, but
took upon him all these pains and torments only to show his love unto us, and
to oblige us to imitate him in the contempt of the world and all humane
felicity. Let us then behold our selves in this Mirror, and reform our lives.
Let us suffer with him, who suffered so much for us. Let us be thankful unto
him, who did us so much good, and so much to his own cost. Let it grieve our
very souls that we have offended so good a God, who suffered so many evils,
that we should not be evil. Let us admire the Divine goodness, who being the
honor of Angels, would for so vile a creature abase himself to the reproach of
the Cross. Let us love him, who so truly loved us. Let us put our trust in him,
who without asking gave us more than we durst desire. Let us imitate this great
example proposed unto us by the Eternal Father upon Mount Calvarie. Let us
compose our lives conformable unto the death. of his Son our Savior in all
humility and contempt of temporal felicity, that we may thereby attain the
eternal: that humbling our selves now, he may exalt us hereafter; that
suffering here, he may in his good time comfort us; that tasting in this life
what is bitter, we may in the other be satiated with all sweetness: and that
weeping in time we may rejoice for all eternity; To which end our Savior said
unto the great Imitator of his Passion St. Francis: Francis, take those things
that are bitter in lieu of those that are sweet, if thou intendest to be happy.
And accordingly St. Austin: Brethren, Augus. Ser. 11. ad fra.
Know that after the pleasures of this life are to follow eternal lamentations:
for no man can rejoice both in this world and the next. And therefore it is
necessary, that he who will possess the one, should lose the other. If thou
desire to rejoice here, know that thou shall be banished from. thy Celestial
Country; but if thou shall here weep, thou shall even at present be counted as
a Citizen of Heaven. And therefore our Lord said: Blessed are those who weep,
for they shall be comforted. And for this reason it is not known that our
Savior ever laughed: but it is certain, that he often wept; and for this reason
chose a life of pains and troubles, to show us that that was the right way to
joy and repose.

CAP. V.
The Importance of the Eternal, because God has made himself a means for our
obtaining it, and has left his most holy Body as a Pledge of it in the Blessed
Sacrament.

ANother most potent motive to induce us to the estimation of what is Eternal,
and the contempt of what is Temporal, is, That God has in the most holy and
venerable Sacrament of his body and blood made himself a means, that we might
attain the one by despising the other; Which holy Mystery was instituted, That
it might serve as a Pledge of those eternal goods: and therefore the holy
Church calls it a Pledge of future glory; and, That it might also serve us as a
Viaticum, whereby we might the better pass this temporal life without the
superfluous use of those goods, which are so dangerons unto us: Our Lord
bestowing this Divine bread upon us Christians, as he did that of Manna
heretofore unto the Hebrews. And therefore as we gave a beginning unto this
work with a presentation of that temporal Manna, which served as a Viaticum
unto the children of Israel in the wilderness, so we will now finish it with
the truth of this spiritual Manna of the blessed Sacrament, which is a Pledge
of the eternal goods, and given as a Viaticum unto Christian people in the
peregrination of this life.

Let a Christian therefore know how much it imports him to obtain the Eternal,
and with what earnestness his Creator desires it; that having obliged us by
those high endearments of his Incarnation, and Passion in suffering for us so
grievous and cruel a death, would yet add such an excess of love, as to leave
himself unto us in the most blessed Sacrament, as a means of our Salvation. Who
sees not here the infinite goodness of God, since he, who as God omnipotent is
the beginning of all things, and as the chief good of all goods, and most
perfect in himself, is likewise their utmost end, would yet for our sakes make
himself a Medium, which is common to the creatures, and argues no perfection?
Our Lord glories in the Scripture that he is the beginning and end of all: And
with reason; for this is worthy of his greatness, and declares a perfection
whereof only God is capable. But to make himself a Medium, and such a Medium,
as was to be used according to humane will, and subject to the power and
despose of man, was such a compliance with our nature, and such a desire of our
salvation, as cannot be imagined. the Means of our salvation may be considered
either as they are on Gods part, or on Man's part; for both God and Man work for
man's salvation. That God should serve himself for himself in the Incarnation
and Passion for the salvation of man, was a high expression of his love: but
yet it was God, who was served, and who made use of one of the divine persons
for the end which he pretends of his glory; but that man should make use of God
for his own glory, is beyond what we can think. What a wonder is it that
Christ should equal himself with Water, Oil, and Balsome? For as we use Water
in Baptism to justify our selves, in Confirmation of Balsom to sanctify and
fortify our selves,, of Oil in extreme Unction to purify our selves, so in
this Sacrament we may use Christ for the acquiring of greater grace; and
increase of holiness. A great matter then is the salvation of man, since for
this purpose God, who is his End, was content to be his Means. I know not how
the incomprehensible goodness and charity of God can extend beyond this. Let
man therefore reflect how much it imports him to be saved; Let him not stick at
any thing that may further it; Let him leave no stone unremoved, let him leave
no means unattempted, since God himself becomes a Means of his salvation, and
to that end subjects himself to the disposition and will of a Creature. Let
nothing which is temporal divert him, since God was not diverted by what was
eternal. If therefore to quit thy honors, deny thy pleasures, distribute thy
riches unto the Poor be a means to save thee, stick not at it, since God stuck
not at the greatness of his being, which is above all, but gave himself for
thee.

The blessed Sacrament was also left us as a Pledge of future glory and eternal
happiness. For when Christ our Redeemer preached unto the world the contempt of
temporal goods for the gaining of the eternal, and pronounced that comfortable
sentence, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven,
not saying Theirs shall be, but Theirs is, giving it them in present: It was
convenient, that since they could not then enter into the possession of those
heavenly joys, which they had purchased with all they had upon earth, that
some equivalent pledge should now be given them in the time of their
forbearance. This pledge is the most blessed Body of our Redeemer Christ Jesus,
Son of the living God, which is of greater worth and value, then the heavens
themselves. Well may we then despise the fading goods of this life, when we
receive in hand such a pledge of the eternal. Well may we renounce the
perishing riches and the pleasures of nature, when the treasure of grace is
bestowed upon us.

The blessed Sacrament is also out Viaticum here upon earth; Whereby we are
given to understand, that this life is but a pilgrimage, wherein we travel
toward eternity: and that therefore we are not to stay and rest in what is
temporal. And because we are neither to enjoy the goods of this temporal life,
nor yet to enter upon those of the future, to the end we may better suffer the
renuntiation of the one, and sustain the hopes of the other, this blessed
Sacrament is given us as a Viaticum: so as the soul wandering in this valley of
tears (wherein she is not to please or detain her self in the delights of the
world, since her journey is for heaven) might have something to comfort her in
this absence from her Celestial Country. Let us then consider the value of the
End whereunto we travel, since the journey is defrayd with so precious a
Viaticum; and that the pleasures of this world are so prejudicial unto our
Salvation, that this Pledge is given us from heaven, to the end we should not
so much as taste them. The Israelites in their peregrinaon in the wilderness
had Manna for their Viaticum which supplied all their necessities for it not
only served to sustain their bodies, but whilst they fed upon it they were
not subject to infirmities, neither did their garments decay with wearing,
insomuch as having it, they had all things. All this is but a shadow of our
Divine Viaticum: having which, we need nothing, and being provided of so
Celestial a good may well spare what is temporal.

. 2.
A most principal end also of the institution of this most admirable Sacrament
is to be a memorial of the Passion of the Son of God: which being so
efficacious a motive unto the contempt of things temporal (as we have already
said) our Savior has almost in all the things of nature left us a draught of
it. For this reason in the holy Shroud, Paleot. adm. Hist. de Christi stigmat.
Adricom. 2. par. descr. Hiero. n. 44. Lansp. hom. 19. de Passione. Andrad. in
descrip. Terraesanctae. Petrus de P. A. Consil. Reg. Francis. lib. 5. in Constable.
in lib. inscrip. Fraustus. Annus.
wherein his wounded body was wrapped, when they took him from the Cross, there
remained miraculously imprinted the signs of his Passion. For this, when
laden with his Cross the pious Veronica presented him with her Vail, he
returned it enriched with the Portraicture of his sacred countenance: And, as
Lanspergius notes, the fingers of the armed Soldier, who gave him the blow,
were imprinted in the same Vail. For this, when he fell prostrate in the
Garden, and in a sweat of blood prayed unto his Father, he left ingraved upon
the stone, whereon he prayed, the print of his feet, knees and hands. And not
far from thence is found another stone, where, after he was apprehended, the
Soldiers throwing him down upon the ground, he left imprinted the end of his
toes, his hands and knees; which stone, as Borcardus notes, is so hard, as it is
not possible to raze or cut any thing out of it even with iron instruments: and
this to the end the memory of his ineffable meekness and partience should be
perpetual. In like manner where he past the brook of Cedron he left another
mark of his sacred feet, as likewise of the rope, wherewith they carried him
tied. So firmly would our Savior have the memory of his Passion fixed in our
hearts, that he has left the signs of it in the very rocks. There has been
also seen an Oriental Jasper accidentally found, whereon the dolorous
countenance of our Savior has been exactly formed. And blessed Aloysius de
Gonzaga walking upon the Seashore found (with great content of his spirit) a
pibble, whereon were distinctly figured the five wounds of Christ our Redeemer.
And not only in stones, but in several other pieces of nature, Anast. Sinaita
in Hexamer.
as St. Anastatius Sinaita observes, he has left us no obscure remembrances of
his Cross and Passion. In the flower Granadilla are perfectly represented the
Nails, Pillar, and Crown of thorns. In dividing the fruit of the tree Musa
appears in some of them the Image of a Cross: in others of Christ crucified:
and in Gant they hold in great esteem the root of a beautiful flower brought
from Jerusalem, wherein is also lively represented a Crucifix. Neither are the
Elements left free from such representations. Alfonso the first Portugal beheld
in the air an Escucheon with the five wounds; And the Emperor Constantine the
principal Instrument of the Passion, the Cross, which has also diverse other
times appeared. But what more gracious and loving demonstration of the memory,
which he desires we should still preserve of his torments, then the wounds
which he has imprinted upon the persons of many of his servants? Blos. li. 15.
c. 3. Tritem. in Crim. ad an. 1500. Surius 14. Aprilis. Mosc. in vita S. Clarae.
For besides St. Francis, who was marked with the most evident signs of his
favor, the like were received by St. Gertrude, and St. Lucia of Ferrara. And
what more express memorial of the passion of our Redeemer, then the heart of
St. Clara of Monte Falco, in which was found the Image of Christ crucified, the
Pillar, Whip, Lance, and other instruments of the Passion? We should never make
an end, if we should recount all those several ways, by which Christ our
Savior has represented unto us his death and passion, to the end we should
ever have it present and fixed in our memory. But above all, the most blessed
Sacrament (in which divine mystery the lively representation of his death is as
often repeated, as his holy body is consecrated in the whole world)* was a
great demonstration of his infinite love toward mankind: Wherein he gives us
to understand, that he desires not only once, but a million of times to die
for us, and that, though he cannot now return again to be crucified by reason
of the impassibility of his glorified body, yet his divine charity has found a
way after an unbloody and impassible manner to repeat the Sacrifice of the
Cross, and the fruit of our redemption. How great a gratitude do we owe our
Savior for so infinite an expression of his good will toward us? and how can
we be grateful, it forgetful of so profitable and advantageous a benefit? Let
not then his Passion depart from our thoughts; but let us rather depart from
our pleasures, and despise all humane felicity, since we behold the Lord of the
world in such humility.

Moreover this most blessed Sacrament is not only a Memorial of the Passion of
Jesus Christ, but of the Incarnation and wonderful works of God: and not only
brings into our memory what Christ did, when he suffered for us, but what the
Eternal Word did, when he became flesh for us: that immense God, unto whom the
whole Globe of the Earth serves but as a footstool, descending from Heaven, and
so far lessening himself, as to cover that infinite Majesty under the form of a
Servant; of which this Divine Sacrament is a most excellent and lively
representation. For in it also the God of Heaven, being already incarnate and
made man, descends from Heaven, and vails himself under the accidents of a
little bread and wine, and there is, as it were, annihilated for us, and become
nothing. Besides, as in the Eucharist we receive Christ crucified, so in it
also we receive the Word incarnate; insomuch as these two great wonders of God,
the Passion and Incarnation are not only represented, but as it were
multiplied unto us in this blessed Sacrament: which was a high thought of God,
and according to what he said by his Prophet David, Psalm. 39.
Thou have made thy wonders many, O Lord: And there is none who is like unto
thee in thy cogitations. Here God made his wonders (that is, his Passion and
Incarnation,) many, repeating, and, as it were, multiplying them in this
blessed Sacrament: Which was a most high thought of him, who is the supreme
Wisdom; nor could it enter into any understanding but that of the Divinity,
that that which was so extraordinary, and so far above the reach of all created
capacities, as the Son of God to be sacrificed, and the eternal Word to descend
from Heaven and be made man, should become so ordinary and familiar, as we
daily see it in the use of this Divine Mystery. But God did not only here
make his wonders many, but made them great, as the same David cries out; How
magnified are thy works, O Lord! Psalm. 91.
Thy cogitations are most profound. For although the works of the Passion and
Incarnation are so great, yet they are as it were enlarged, and made greater by
this holy Sacrament. The greatness of the work of the Incarnation consisted in
this, that God abased himself, and was made man: and the greatness of that of
the Passion, in that he humbled himself unto death. But in this Sacrament he
abases and humbles himself yet lower, becoming food for man, which is less than
to be man, or to die, which is natural unto man. Besides this, the general
fruit of the Incarnation and Passion is after a most admirable manner
particularly applied in this blessed Sacrament to every one, which receives it
worthily. The Death and Passion of Christ upon Mount Calvarie was no doubt a
great work of God; but in this Mystery we behold the same Death, Passion, and
Sacrifice after an unbloody and impassible manner, which is certainly the
greater miracle, and expresses more the Divine power. The Incarnation likewise,
when the Eternal Word entered into the womb of a Virgin, was a great work of
God; but in this Mystery it is in a certain manner extended and made greater;
and is therefore called an extension of the Incarnation, our Lord here entering
into the breast of every Christian, and uniting himself unto him.

These are the marvails of the Law of Grace; concerning which the Prophet
Isaias said unto the Lord: Isai. 64.
When thou shall do wonders, we shall not sustain them. Thou have descended,
and the mountains melted at thy presence. From the beginning they have not
heard, nor understood with their ears, neither has the eye seen, O God,
besides thee, what thou have prepared for those who expect thee. The Prophet
speaks of those wondrous works, which were to be seen at the coming of the
Messiah, which wore to be such as the world had never heard of, nor had ever
entered into any thought but that of God; and therefore the Apostle alleging
this place, says, That the eye has not seen, nor the ear has heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man what God has prepared for those who love
him: Since over and above those two stupendous wonders of taking flesh and
dying for us, he has given himself as food unto those Souls, who remain in his
grace and love him; which is so great and marvailous a work, as only God could
think of it, and besides God none. And as only God can truly value it, so it
is not in the power of man sufficiently to acknowledge it: No humane heart
being able to support the weight of such an obligation, and the greatness of
the Divine love, which shines forth in this wonder of wonders. Tertul. li. de
Patien. cap. 1.
Tertullian said, The greatness of some goods were intolerable; the which
according to the Prophet Isaias is verified in this Divine good and benefit,
which we were not able to support. Wherefore it is called in holy Scripture,
The good, or the good thing of God: because it is a good and a benefit, which
more clearly than the Sun discovers the infinite and ineffable goodness of God,
to the astonishment and amazement of a humane heart; and therefore the Prophet
Oseas says, Osee 3.
They shall be astonished at the Lord, and at his Good; because his Divine
benefit amazes and astonishes the Soul of man to see how good the Lord is, and
how great the good which he communicates unto us; All which tends to no other
end than to make us despise the goods of the Earth, and to esteem only those
of Heaven, which we attain unto by this Divine mystery. For this therefore did
Christ our Redeemer institute this most blessed Sacrament, that by it we might
withdraw our hearts from things temporal, and settle our affections upon those
which are eternal, for which it is most particularly efficacious, as those who
worthily receive it have full experience.

. 3.
Wherefore let that Soul, who goes to communicate, consider, Who it is that
enters into him, and Who he is himself, who entertains so great a Guest. Let
him call to mind with what reverence the blessed Virgin received the Eternal
Word, when he entered into her holy Womb; and let him know it is the same Word,
which a Christian receives into his entrails in this Divine Sacrament: Let him
therefore endeavor to approach this holy Table with all reverence, love, and
gratitude, which ought, if possible, to be greater than that of the blessed
Mother. For then the obligation of Mankind was not so great, as now it is. For
neither she, nor we were then indebted unto him for his dying upon the Cross.
Let him consider that he receives the same Christ, who sits at the right hand
of God the Father, That it is he, who is the supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth,
He, whom the Angels adore, He, who created and redeemed us, and is to judge the
living and the dead, He, who is of infinite wisdom, power, beauty, and
goodness. If a Soul should behold him, as when St. Paul beheld him, and was
struck blind with his light and splendor, how would he fear and reverence him?
Let him know that he is not now less glorious in the Host, and that he is to
approach him with as much reverence, as if he saw him in his Throne of glory.
With much reason did St. Teresa of Jesus say unto a devout Soul, unto whom she
appeared after death, That we upon earth ought to behave our selves unto the
blessed Sacrament, as the blessed in Heaven do toward the Divine Essence,
loving and adoring it with all our power and forces. Consider also, that he,
who comes in person to thee, is that self same Lord, that required so much
reverence, that he struck Oza dead, because he did but touch with his hand the
Ark of his Testament, and slew 50000 Bethshamits for their looking on it; And
thou not only see, and touchest, but receivest him into thy very bowels.
See then with what reverence thou ought to approach him. The Angels and
Seraphins tremble before his greatness, and the Just are afraid. Do thou then
tremble, fear and adore him. S. John standing but near unto an Angel remained
without force, astonished at the greatness of his Beauty and Majesty; and thou
art not to receive an Angel, but the Lord of Angels into thy entrails. It adds
much to the endearment of this great benefit of our Savior, that it is not
only great by the greatness of that, which is bestowed, but by the meaneness
of him, who receives it. For what art thou but a most vile creature, composed
of clay and dirt, full of misery, ignorance, weakness, and malice? If the
Centurion held himself unworthy to receive Christ under his roof, and St.
Peter, when our Savior was in this mortal life, deemed himself not worthy to
be in his presence, saying, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man: and
St. John Baptist thought himself not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe,
How much more ought thou to judge thy self unworthy to receive him into thy
bowels, being now in his glory seated at the right hand of God the Father? The
Angels in heaven are not pure in his sight: What purity should thou have to
entertain him in thy breast? If a mighty King should visit a poor Beggar in his
Cottage, what honor, what respects would it confer upon him? Behold God, who
is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, comes to visit thee, not in thy house,
but within thy self. Seven years did Solomon spend in building a Temple,
wherein to place the Ark of the Testament. Why do thou not spend some time
in making thy self a Temple of God himself? Noah was a hundred years in
preparing a Vessel, wherein to save those, who were to escape the Deluge. Why
do thou not spare some days or hours to make thy self a Sacristy for the
Savior of the World? Behold thy own unworthiness, and what thou go a-about.
Moses, when he was to make an Ark for the Tables of the Law, not only made
choice of precious wood, but covered it all with gold. Thou miserable and vile
Worm, why do thou not prepare and adorn thy self to receive the Lord of the
Law?

Consider also what is the end, for which thy Savior comes unto thee. It is by
communicating his grace to make thee partaker of his Divinity. He comes to cure
thy sores and infirmities; he comes to give remedy to thy necessities; he comes
to unite himself unto thee; he comes to Deifie thee. Behold then the infinity
of his Divine goodness, who thus melts himself in communication with his
Creatures. Behold what is here given thee, and for what it is given thee. God
gives himself unto thee, that thou may be all divine, and nothing left in
thee of earth. In other benefits God bestows his particular gifts upon thee;
but here he gives thee himself, that thou might also give thy self unto him,
and be wholly his. If from the Incarnation of the Son of God we gather the
great love he bore unto mankind, passing for his sake from that height of
greatness unto that depth of humiliation, as to enclose himself in the Womb of
a Virgin: Behold how in this he loves thee, since to sustain thee in the life
of grace he has made himself the true food of thy Soul, and comes from the
right hand of the eternal Father to enclose himself in thy most impure breast.
Jesus Christ comes also to make thee one body with himself, that thou may
after an admirable manner be united unto him, and made partaker not only of
his spirit, but of his blood. That, which this Consideration ought to work in
the breast of a Christian, may appear by what a less than this wrought in the
heart of a Heathen. The Emperor and Philosopher Antoninus writes, Anton. l. 1.
and 2.
That in respect we are a part of the world, we ought to rest content and
satisfied with what accidents soever shall befall us, and to do nothing
unworthy of reason. What ought we then to do for being a part of Christ? Our
works certainly ought not to be only worthy of Angels, but of the sons of God.

Neither does the manner, by which this Divine benefit is conferred, a little
endear it unto thee. It is with such singular love, as is in uniting himself
unto thee: It is in feeding thee with his precious body and blood: It is by
humbling himself as much as he could for thee: It is by treading under foot the
most constant Laws of Nature, and working more* prodigious miracles for thee,
than Moses did in Egypt. All which is a demonstration of that infinite
desire, wherewith he pretends thy good, sticking at nothing that may advance
it. God gives himself unto thee after the most easy and facile manner for man,
and after the most extraordinary for God. He gives himself unto thee for meat.
Nothing is more natural for man than to eat, and nothing more supernatural,
than that God should serve as meat. Let him then, who comes from receiving this
heavenly food, consider what he owes for so unspeakable a benefit. Let him make
account, that Christ seated in his heart, speaks unto him after the manner he
spoke unto his Apostles, when he had washed their feet. Thou know, O soul,
what I have done unto thee; Thou know the gift I have bestowed upon thee;
Thou know the honor and savor I have conferred upon thee; Thou know
what thou have received; Thou know what thou have within thee. Know it is
thy God and Redeemer; know it is he who desires all good unto thee. Be
therefore thankful unto him; desire nothing of earth, but fix wholly upon what
is eternal and thy chief good.

CAP. VI.
Whether temporal things and to be demanded of God; And that we only ought in
our Prayers to aim at goods eternal.

THe difference betwixt Temporal and Eternal is easily discovered by the small
account which God makes of granting things temporal, and the great pleasure he
takes in our demanding things eternal. The temporal is sometimes granted as a
chastisement, The eternal as a great reward: and were it not for the infinite
merits of his Son would not be granted at all. For this reason Christ himself
commands us, that we should ask the Father in his name, assuring us that
whatsoever is so demanded, shall be granted* And when he invites his Disciples
to ask, he tells them, That hitherto they had demanded nothing: esteeming that
though indeed they had asked, him somethings temporal, yet because they had not
as yet demanded any thing that was eternal, they had asked nothing. So as the
promise of our Savior, That his Father would grant all our petitions in his
name, is to be understood only, When we petition for the eternal goods of
grace and glory. The temporal is of so little worth, that for it self, or in
his name Christ would not have us ask it. Neither does he promise that it
should be granted; For in the Divine acceptance, all, which does not conduce
and help to our salvation, is reputed as nothing. Whereupon St. Austin, says;
Augus. Trac. in Johan.
This joy is demanded in the name of Christ, if we understand divine grace, if
we demand that life which is true happiness. If any thing else be demanded,
nothing is demanded; not that in reality in it self it is nothing, but that in
comparison of so great things, whatsoever besides is desired, is to be esteemed
as nothing; in so much as, according to St. Austin, though you demand temporal
things a thousand times over, yet you demand nothing.

For this reason many wise men have doubted whether we may lawfully petition
God for the temporal things of the world. I will first deliver the opinions of
the greatest Philosophers, and then how the gravest Divines have decided this
controversy. Marcus Aurelius in the name of many Philosophers says, That we
are not at all to demand what is temporal, but that we are rather to pray, that
we may not esteem or desire them; and therefore in a most prudent discourse,
wherein he wants nothing of a Christian, but the acknowledgement of one sole
God instead of many, he thus argues. Marc. Antonin. lib. 9.
Either the Gods can do something or not. If not, Why do thou pray unto
them? If they can, Why do thou not rather pray them to grant that thou
may neither fear nor desire the things of the earth, not to be afflicted
more with their want, than their possession? For if the Gods be able to assist
men at all, they are able to assist them in this. Perhaps thou will say, The
Gods have subjected these things unto thy own power. Be it so. Yet tell me: Is
it not better thou should use these things, which are in thy power, with
freedom, than with a servile and abject mind to be sollicitous and afflict thy
self for those things, which are not in thy power? And who has told thee, that
the Gods do not help us in those things, which are subject unto us? Begin then
to pray tor those things, and thou shall see what will happen. This man prays
he may enjoy such a woman: Do thou pray thou may have no such desire.
Another prays he may be eased of something which troubles him: Do thou pray
thou may have no need to be eased. Another prays he may not lose his Son:
Do thou pray thou may not fear it. Make thy prayers after this manner, and
see what will follow. In so much then as it was the opinion of this
Philosopher, that we should not pray unto God for things temporal, but for the
right way of using them, which is true virtue: Let us also hear what was said
by Socrates the most excellent of Moral Philosophers, who judged (as St. Thomas
relates him) that nothing in particular was to be demanded of God, S. Tho. 2.2.
q. 83. art. 5.
but only that he would give us good things, because God only knows what is
good and expedient for us: and men for the most part desire and pray for those
things, which (if obtained) are hurtful. This opinion is approved by St. Thomas
and the rest of the Divines in as much as concerns temporal things, which we
may use ill. Whereupon the Angelical Doctor concludes, that we are not
determinately to pray for any thing temporal, but only for spiritual and
eternal. These are only those, which ought and may be absolutely prayed for;
other things, as they serve to obtain these, in a secondary way, and as much of
them only, as is sufficient, and expedient for to obtain the eternal.

It is most certain, that those prayers, which are offered to God only for the
obtaining of things eternal without respect to any temporal or earthly
commodity, are as a sweet savor unto the Lord, like that Rod of perfume so
much celebrated in the Canticles, Cant. 3.
composed of incense, myrrh, and spices, which ascended straight unto heaven.
Whereupon St. Gregory says, that prayer is called that little Rod of sweet
smoke: because, whilst it only supplicates for eternal blessings, it mounts
directly to heaven without inclining unto any thing that is earthly. Well may
it be seen how little our Savior is pleased with earthly petitions by that
answer he gave unto the Wife of Zebedeus, when she desired that her two Sons
might have the honor to sit one at the right hand of his Throne, and the other
at the left; Our Savior answered, They know not what they asked; because, as
St. Chysostome says, Their petition was for the things temporal, and not
spiritual and eternal. Certainly a fool he is, who when he may have heaven for
asking, trifles away his time in demanding things of the earth. A fool he is,
who when he needs but to demand eternal glory, busies himself in praying for
temporal honors. A fool he is, who having but to ask grace from God, loses his
time in asking favors from men. Certainly he knows not what he prays for, who
prays to be rich. He knows not what he prays for, who prays for great Places
and Commands. Finally, who prays for honors, accommodations, pleasures, or
any thing that ends in time, knows not what he prays for, because he knows not
how little is all that which time consumes.

. 2.
Paludanus observes three errors in the Petition of the mother of St. James and
St. John. The first, Palud. Enarr. 1. de S. Jacobo.
that she did not observe a due order in the petition; The second, that it was
not clear and free from affections of flesh and blood; And the third, that the
subject of it was vain and unprofitable. All these errors are sound, when not
attending unto the eternal we petition for what is temporal. For of the first,
who sees not that he who demands temporal things, violates and perverts all
order? for what more disorderly proceeding, than to demand little, when we may
obtain much, to sue for that, whereof we have no need, and to neglect that,
which is extremely necessary? The necessities of the body hold no comparison
with those of the soul. The soul has more necessity of divine grace, than the
body of food. The soul has more enemies: and stands therefore in more need of
the favor and assistance of heaven. Gelas. contra Pelag. Epis. 5. lib. 6.
It is against her, that the infernal powers have conspired; and therefore it
is she who stands in most necessity of divine succor. Gelasius the Pope
speaking of our first Parents, says, That when they were in the state of
innocence, replenished with all those gifts of graces, wherewith God had
enriched them, and that they had not those adversaries which now we have, (for
neither the world nor the flesh were then their enemies,) Yet because they did
not pray for the divine assistance and favor, that they fell into sin. Having
received, says this great Pope, such abundance of grace, yet because they did
not pray, (as their is no mention that they did) they were not secure. How
needful is it then for us to pray, who want that original justice, have our
nature weakened and corrupted by sin, our flesh rebellious against the soul, the
World with all its instruments of vanity and deceit, and so many occasions and
dangers of sinning, our enemies and the devil himself irritated by those
singular favors expressed toward our nature by the Son of God, more fierce
against us then before? So as it is not possible to declare the great need we
have of divine grace. And now to forget this great necessity, and to forbear
crying unto heaven for a remedy, from whence we can only hope it, how great a
folly and disorder is it? If a man in the Dog-dayes were exposed naked in some
Desert against the scorching beams of the Sun, and ready to perish for thirst,
and should meet one, who were furnished with plenty of cool water, would he not
ask some to refresh him? or if he forbore to ask it, would he demand a warm
Jacket, which were only useful in Winter, and in Summer a burden and a
trouble? Certainly a greater madness and disorder cannot be imagined; And yet
ours is far worse, if we demand temporal goods, which can only hinder and
entangle us, and neglect to pray for the water of divine grace, without which
we are certain to perish. But even in temporal things themselves we know not
what order to observe in our demands: because we are ignorant which are most
convenient for us. Who knows whether it be better for him to be sick or in
health: since it may so happen, that being in health he may fall into some
grievous sin and be damned, and being sick he may repent and be saved? Who
knows whether poverty or wealth may be more convenient for him: since being in
abundance he may forget God, and being in necessity of all things he may have
recourse unto his holy service? Who knows whether it be better for him to be
honored, or suffer confusion: since honor may puff him up in vanity, and
humiliation may make him prudent and wary? No man knows what is good or evil
for him. That which we desire is oftentimes our ruin and destruction, and those
evils which we weep for, as often turn into our greatest happiness. How can
there then be any order in our prayers for temporal things, whereof we are
totally ignorant whether they are good or hurtful.

The second great error in our prayers for temporal things is the disordinate
affection, and want of pure intention, which accompanies such petitions:
whereas our prayers ought only to proceed from a pure and mortified mind,
wholly intent upon the service of God. To signify this, The fire, which was to
burn the incense, was fetched from the Altar of Holocausts; and that our prayers
may be acceptable and of a sweet savor unto God, they are to spring from an
enflamed heart, Sacrificed unto his divine Majesty in a true Holocaust of our
whole will and affections; And he who demands any temporal things from God
Almighty after another manner, may justly fear least they may be granted for
his greater punnishment. Therefore St. Thomas says, St. Tho. 2.2. q. 83. art.
19.
that our Lord God grants unto sinners what they desire with an evil affection
for a Chastizement of their desires. So he granted Quails unto the murmuring
Isrealites, who died with the morsel in their mouths. We ought therefore to be
cautious in our prayers, and tremble at our own desires, since their success
may prove so dangerous unto us. And I wonder not at all that he, who desires
the goods of this world, is often punished in the grant of his petition, since
it is a kind of impudence to use God as a Medium for the obtaining of that,
which does or may separate us from him, who is our chief and utmost end. Guigo
Cathusianus says, Guigo Carthus. in Medit.
that he, who prays for temporal things, uses God Almighty, as the Spouse does
her Husband, when she desires him to bring her with his own hands some vile
slave, with whom she may adulterate. So we desiring temporal goods increase our
affection to the things of the earth, which make us forget the love of our
Creator, and praying for them, pray for the instruments and occasions of
offending him. Let us not commit this treason against our Lord God, but let us
ask what may redound to his glory and our own profit, which is only that, which
is spiritual and eternal, to wit his grace, his knowledge, the imitation of his
Son, the contempt of the world, and what is conformable to his holy will. This
we may safely ask, and this he will certainly give us, because it is for our
true good. And therefore in the prayer, which our Lord himself has taught us,
when we have said, Thy will be done, we proceed in a bolder manner, and say in
an imparative way, Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses, having then a kind of certainty of obtaining, when we have first
conformed our prayers to the divine will; and it is then, as Origin notes, a
singular confidence we have in God to command what we pray for.

The third error in our petitions for temporal goods is, that we pray for
things vain without substance or profit; for such is all temporal greatness and
felicity, short, vain, inconstant, transitory and unworthy the heart of man,
which ought wholly to fix upon the eternal, and trample the rest under foot,
like that mysterious woman in the Apocalypse, who was surrounded and penetrated
by the Sun, which filled the heart and bowels, but trod the Moon under her
feet: the Sun which is perfectly circular, being a Symbol of eternity, and the
Moon, which is defective and mutable, a figure of the temporal. The Sun has
its own proper light: the Moon none but what she borrows from the Sun. In the
same manner the eternal is a good in it self, and desirable for it self; the
temporal has no good at all, but what it acquires by being a means of
obtaining the eternal. All humane felicity is but vanity, smoke, thorns,
deceit, and misery. With what face can a Christian demand such stuff from God
Almighty? and such is all humane prosperity in Gods acceptance. Chrysos. hom.
79. in Mat.
Out of which consideration St. Chrysostom speaks in this manner; A Roman
Judge will not understand thy allegations, unless thou speak unto him in the
Roman tongue. In the like manner Christ will not hear thee, unless thou speak
unto him in his own language, and thy mouth be conformable unto his. In the
language of our Redeemer, riches are thorns, honors smoke, and pleasures
vipers; and therefore he who prays for things of this nature, prays but for so
many evils. And as there is no Father, that, if his Son instead of bread demand
a Scorpion, will give it him; so God to those, whom he loves and holds as
Children, when they ask him temporal goods, denies them: because he sees they
are not good for them. For this reason the honor demanded by the Wife of
Zebedaeus for her two sons was denied by our Savior with this answer, That
they knew not what they asked, demanding that for a good, which was not, and in
room of the honor, which they desired in a temporal Kingdom, he gave them
Martyrdom, which they thought not of, which conduced to real and eternal
happiness.

Let us learn therefore How and for What to pray, that we err not in a matter
of such importance: For if the error be so much greater, by now much the
matter, in which it falls, is of greater moment, an error in matter of prayer
must be most great, especially having a divine precept, and an infallible
promiss, that if we demand what is necessary for our Salvation in his name we
shall not fail of obtaining it. Let us not therefore ask that in the name of
our Savior, for which he would not die, but that which he bought for us with
his precious blood and life, which is the blessings of heaven, and our eternal
felicity. For this let us sigh, for this let us pray, and let us reflect how
great and faulty a carelessness it is not to pray ever for that, which imports
us so much as heaven, and for which only we have a certain promise to be heard,
and not for other things, which the world esteems, and time consumes.

CAP. VII.
How happy are those who renounce Temporal goods for the securing of the
Eternal.

IF all which has been said suffice not to make us despise the goods of the
earth for the gaining of those blessings we hope for in heaven: and if neither
the example nor remonstrances of our Savior will serve to make us esteem the
Eternal, and contemn the Temporal, but that we will for all this prefer the
one, though little and base, because present, before the other, though great
and immense, because to come: Yet let our present interest, and the word and
promise of the Son of God move us, which certainly, if seriously weighed, will
not only persuade us to despise, but totally to renounce the goods of the
world, as many of the Philosophers have done, that they might more freely enjoy
the pleasures and commodities of this life, and many Saints for the hopes they
have had of the other. Let us here call to mind what was said by the Savior of
the world, Mat. 19.
Whosoever shall leave father, or mother, or brothers, or sisters, or house, or
land for my sake, shall in this life receive a hundredfold and after death
life eternal. In which words we are to consider the greatness of the promise,
and the importance of that, for which so great things are promised. Without
doubt it must be of high concernment to renounce our temporal goods, since the
Son of God invites us to it with so great promises, and if it be convenient to
renounce them as things poisonous and hurtful to us, we can have no excuse for
not despising them; or at least, if we do not despise them, yet we can have no
reason to love and prefer them before the eternal. Much and extremely much it
will concern us to despise that, which is convenient for us to leave, and as
much to pluck from our hearts the affection of those things, which are not fit
for us to possess. Neither is it much to say, that it is advantageous for us to
renounce these temporal things, since St. Bonaventure judged it necessary; and
therefore, according to the Apostle, says, That the root of all evil is
avarice, from which, and from pride, which accompanies it, all sins have their
birth, food and increase. Whereupon St. Austin calls it the foundation of the
City of Babylon. This Covetousness is seated in the affections of the soul as
in its proper subject, but is fed and receives nourishment from those exterior
things, which we possess. Wherefore wholly to extripate it two things are
necessary, not only to quit this interior thirst and gaping after riches, but
also that exterior possession of them. The first is to be done by the will and
spirit: but the second by an actual and effectual execution and forsaking them;
and it is for this that we are promised in this life a hundredfold, and in the
next eternal felicity. O how great a distance is there discovered betwixt
things temporal and eternal, since the only hope of the eternal bestows more
upon us even in this life, then we can receive from the dominion and possession
of all that is temporal! Temporal goods by being enjoyed and possessed are not so
much as doubled, but by being renounced for Christ are multiplied a
hundredfold, and hereafter conferr the Kingdom of Heaven. Abundance of
temporal goods (as has been already observed) hinder and obstruct the
pleasures and contents of this life, for which we seek them, and hereafter
throw their possessors into hell flames; so as they are not only the occasion
of eternal pain, but by anticipation of many temporal inconveniences. For, I
know not how it coms to pass, the most rich are not the most contented, nor yet
the least necessitated. It seems their goods diminish in their hands, and are
of less value amongst them, than the poor: at least ten is not worth to a rich
man, so much as one to a poor; so as the poor, who have renounced their goods
for Christ, find them multiplied a hundredfold, and the rich, who forgetting
their Redeemer employ themselves wholly in heaping up wealth, find them as much
diminished, and of a hundred enjoy not one. Besides, the rich are so encumbered
with cares, dangers, fears, and perturbations, that they know not the true
contents of this life, and yet run the hazard of eternal damnation in the
other. But to the contrary those, who are poor in spirit, and have forsaken
their possessions for Christ, are in this world filled with joy, peace and
comfort, and in the next enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven. O how happy are they who
understand this, and know how to change earth for heaven! O how truly does
Christ call happy the poor in spirit, who have left all for his sake, and
therefore enjoy a double happiness, the one present, and the other future: here
a hundredfold for that which they possess not, and hereafter the possession of
life eternal! O how happy is he, who knows with the riches of the earth to
purchase the treasure of glory in death, and in life to receive them a
hundredfold doubled!

Cassian. Collat. ult. c. ult.
This according to Abbot Abraham is fully verified in religious persons, who
have quitted all they have upon earth to live in an estate of poverty: who for
one Father, which they have left, find a hundred in religion, and for one
Brother a hundred who embrace them with Christian charity, for one possession a
hundred possessions, and for one house a hundred houses in the multitude of
Monasteries founded for their Order; so as there is no doubt, but this reward
is not only doubled unto them a hundredfold, but multiplied to a far
greater proportion. The same may be seen in other servants of God, who serve
him in voluntary poverty, Beda de Not. Sancti Benedic.
who by how much (as Bede notes) they have served God with more affection in
renouncing their temporal goods, by so much has God stirred up the affections
and liberalities of others to supply and assist them in all their wants. So as
they are served with the goods of all, and, as the Apostle says, having
nothing possess all.

But although this recompense should fail us, yet one a hundredfold greater
then this will not fail us, which is that noted by St. Jerome, Lib. 3. in Math.
He who for our Saviors sake leaves carnal things, shall receive spiritual,
which in comparison and value are, as if some small number were compared with a
hundred. We seek the goods of the earth for the ease and content of life. But
if this may better and with more advantage be acquired by the contempt and
leaving them, what can we desire more? Certainly he who quits all for Christ,
enjoyes a hundred times more content and pleasure then he who flows in the
greatest riches and abundance; for (according to what has been said) the goods
of this life are tedious and troublesome even to life it self: so the freedom
from those cares and incommodities, which accompany them, eases the heart, and
makes our life more sweet and pleasant. Whereupon St. Chrysostom notes, That
as the Children in the midst of the fiery furnace in Babylon were refresht by
a cool wind and pleasant dew, to those, who are in poverty (which the holy
Scripture calls a furnace) are recreated by a gentle air from heaven, and the
dew of the holy Spirit: and that in so high a manner, as St. Bernard speaking
of the Monks of Claraval, says, That they drew from their Poverty, Fasts, and
austere Penances such joy and spiritual comfort, that they were jealous, and
afraid, least God had given them their whole and complete reward in this world:
and it seemed unto them, that having their heaven in this life, they should
lose it in that to come. Whereupon it was necessary for St. Bernard to prove
unto them in one of his Sermons, That he did injure the grace of the holy
Spirit, who placed grief in what it communicated. Certainly the Servants of God
are highly rewarded, since they receive even in this life such celestial joys
for those temporal trifles, which they have quitted. If one for a certain
weight of Copper were to receive the like in Gold, Cassian. Sup.
I believe he would think he had made a good bargain. The like exchange they
make, who receive those spiritual joys for the pleasures of the earth. In
Histor. Cistere.
This is fully verified in that which happened unto Arnulphus the Cistercian,
who being rich, noble, and abounding with all, which the world esteems, moved
by the Sermons of St. Bernard, became a Monk in the Monastery of Claraval,
where after a holy life led in much rigor and austerity, he at last became
very infirm, and through the great grief and pains, which he suffered, would
often fall into faintings and sounding trances: but still, when he recovered
from his fits, would cry out, It is true, it is true, which thou have said, O
blessed Jesus. And to some present, who thought the extremity of pain did make
him rave, he would say, Brethren, I have spoken this in my right judgment and
senses; for that which our Lord promised in the Gospel, That he, who for his
sake should leave Father, Mother, or Goods, should receive a hundred fold, and
hereafter life eternal, I now find true by experience: For this grief and pain,
which I feel, is so sweet unto me out of the hope I have of eternal happiness,
that I would not lose these pains and this hope not only for what I have left
already, but for a hundred times more. And if to me, who am so great a sinner,
those pains, which I deserve, are a hundred times more sweet than any former
power and pleasures in the world, What are they to a just man, and to the
zealous and devout religious? By this it evidently appears, that spiritual joy,
though but in hope, affords a thousand times more pleasure and content, than
the possession of all the carnal and temporal delights in the world. At what
this Servant of God said, all who were present remained astonished, that an
ignorant man wholly unlettered should understand and speak of so high matters.

. 2.
The joy of the poor in Christ Jesus, who have renounced all for his love,
springs from two causes; First from that content, which Poverty it self by its
freedom from temporal troubles and the imbroilments of life brings along with
it. And this even the Gentiles confessed. And therefore Apuleius called it Merry
and and cheerful Poverty. And Seneca would say, That a Turf of earth gave a
sounder sleep, than Wool dyed in Tyrian Purple. And Anaxagoras, (taught by
experience) That he found more content in sleeping upon the Earth, and feeding
upon Herbs, than in Down Beds and delicious Banquets accompanied with an
unquiet mind. The second cause of this joy is not the nature of poverty, but
the particular grace of God, who rewards them with the pleasures of heaven, who
have renounced those of earth, and fills with spiritual riches those, who have
left the temporal. For in truth poverty is much beloved and privileged by
Christ: and therefore he rewards the poor even in this life with many
particular graces and favors.

Besides this, the many and great commodities, which this contempt of earthly
things brings along with it, may serve as a reward equivalent to a hundred, yea
a thousand-fold. For if all the world were given to escape the committing of
one sin, it were not an equal value; and by Evangelical poverty and contempt of
the world the sins, which we avoid, are innumerable. For by it we not only
pluck up the root, but quit the instruments of sinning. Take away abundance,
and you take away insolence, arrogance, and pride, which spring from it, as
smoke from fire; you take away also the means of committing many other sins,
which riches feed and nourish. Neither is the attaining of many virtues, which
accompany Poverty, as Humility, Modesty, and Temperance, of less value than the
avoidance of those sins. And therefore it is a great truth, Homil. 8. in Ep. ad
Hebr.
which Saint Chrysostom notes and ponders, That in Poverty we possess Virtues
more easily. Neither is it slightly to be valued, That the state of Poverty
assists much toward our satisfaction for those sins we have committed,
according to what is spoken to the just man by Isaias the Prophet; I have
chosen thee (that is I have purified thee) in the furnace of poverty. It is
likewise a great matter to be free and uninterressed in the base and
unprofitable employments of the earth, whereby the poor have time to exercise
virtue, to converse with God and his Angels, and contemplate Eternity.

The honor also and dignity to command these things below, which is attained
by the poor in spirit, may well be valued at a hundredfold. For as it is a
great baseness in the rich to be slaves to their avarice, and to things so vile
as riches: So it is a great honor to the poor to exempt themselves from this
slavery and servitude, and to lord it over all; and, as the Apostle says, by
contemning all to possess all; so as there is no Riches, no Kingdom comparable
to this of Poverty. Kingdoms have their limits and boundeties, which they pass
not; but this Kingdom of Poverty is not straightned by any bounds: but for the
same reason, that it has nothing, has all things; for the heart cannot be
said to possess any thing without being Lord of it: and it cannot be Lord of it
without being superior unto it, and not that, unless it subject and subjugate
it unto it self. So as it is by so much more a possessor, by how much it is
more Lord and Superior. Now he who desires to be rich, must needs love those
things, without which he cannot be rich: nor can he love them without care,
solicitude, and slavery; but he who contemns them, is not only Lord, but
Possessor of them. And for this cause St. John Climacus said very well, Grad.
17.
That the poor religious person, who casts all his care upon God, is Lord of
all the world, and all men are his Servants. Moreover the true love of poverty
does not basely cleave unto these temporal things; for all it has or can have
it respects nothing; and if it want any thing, it is no more troubled, than if
it wanted so much dung and dirt.

But above all rewards is that of God, who is possessed by poverty: In Psalm. 118.
and in St. Ambrose his opinion is that hundredfold, which is received for
what we leave. For as the Tribe of Levy, which had no part in the distribution
of the Land of Palestine, received this promise from God, that he would be
their Share and Possession of inheritance: So with much reason unto those, who
voluntarily refuse their parts in the goods of the earth, God himself becomes
their possession, riches, and all good even in this world; and passes so much
further as to give them in the other the Kingdom of Heaven. Aug. Ser. 28. de
Ver. Apost.
Whereupon St. Austin speaks in this manner. Great happiness and felicity is
that of a Christian, who with the rich price of poverty purchases the precious
reward of glory. Will thou see how rich and precious it is? The poor man buys
and obtains that by poverty, which the rich man cannot with all his treasures.
And it was certainly a most high counsel in our Lord God, and an act worthy of
his divine understanding to make Poverty the price of his Glory, that none
might want wherewith to purchase it. Wherefore many of the Saints have been so
enamoured of Poverty, that they have purchased it with more eagerness, than the
rich have fled from it, and have had this advantage over them, to be more
voluntarily poor, than the other could be rich.

CAP. VIII.
Many who have despised and renounced all that is Temporal.

SO evident is the baseness of temporal goods, and the mischiefs they occasion
in humane life so apparent, that many Philosophers without the light of faith
or doctrine of the Son of God were not ignorant of it; and many so deeply
apprehended the importance not only of contemning, but renouncing of riches,
that they lived most contentedly in great poverty and moderation. Aristides,
although a principal person in Athens, was so affected to poverty, that he
always went in a course broken Garment, hungry and necessitated; and though he
had a friend of great wealth called Clinias, could never be persuaded to accept
the least relief from him. It happened that this Clinias being accused before
the Judges, to aggravate his other crimes, it was laid in his dish, that being
rich and able, he had not assisted his friend Aristides. Clinias perceiving the
Judges to be highly incensed, and all men to cry out against his inhumanity,
went to Aristides, and desired him to defend him from that false calumny, and
to satisfy the Judges and people how often he had offered his wealth and
fortunes to serve him, and that it was he himself, who had still refused it.
Aristides did so; and informed the Judges of the innocence of his friend, and
that it was his own desire rather to live in his own poverty, than to brave it
in the riches of another; saying withal, That rich men, who misspent their
fortunes, were every where to be found, but few who passed their poverty and
want of necessaries with a generous mind; which so soon as he had declared,
There was none present, who envied not more the poverty and beggary of
Aristides, then wished the wealth of Clinias. Zeno, as St. Gregory Nazianzen
and Seneca write, when news was brought him, That he had lost all, answered, I
see that Fortune will have me henceforward profess the life of a Philosopher
with less difficulty. Valerius Maximus reports of Anaxagoras, that when he
received the like news, all he said was, If my goods had not perished, I had.
Cato reports of Crates the Theban, that he flung his substance into the Sea,
saying, It is better I drown you, than you me. Diogenes left all he had but a
wooden Dish: and by chance seeing one drink out of the hollow of his hand,
broke that also. Laertius writes, that one scoffing at Aeschines a Philosopher
of Rhodes, said, By the Gods, Aeschines, I am sorry to see thee so poor; who
answered, By the same Gods, I pity thee for having so great riches, which thou
have gotten with trouble, preserv'st with care, spendest with grief, keep
with danger, defendest with a thousand fears and passions; and which is worst
of all, Where are thy riches, there is thy heart.

This point is singularly well handled by St. John Chrysostom in his second
Book against the despisers of a Monastic life, Chrysostom. Lib. 2. con. Vituper.
Vitae Monast.
which he dedicates to the Philosophers of the Gentiles, wherein he only uses
such reasons, as may be apprehended by the light of nature, comparing Plato
with Dionysius, Socrates with Archelaus, and Diogenes with Alexander; all which
he makes much more glorious in their poverty, than the others in all their
power and Dominions. He relates also that of Epaminondas the Theban, who being
called to a certain Council, could not come, because his Cloak was in washing,
and he had no other to wear: and yet was more esteemed and reverenced by the
Greeks, than any of their Princes; from whence the holy Doctor inferres, That
when there was no Evangelical Law, nor Examples of Saints, yet in natural
reason, and by natural testimonies Poverty was of high esteem and dignity. This
being so, as certainly it is, what can we say, but that is not Poverty, which
we call so, but great and true Riches?

. 2.
It is much to our confusion, that the Gentiles should so far despise temporal
goods, not being guided by that faith of Eternity, which we profess; The which
gives so great a light unto the discovery of that distance, which is betwixt
the one and the other, that many, whom it has enlightened with the beams of
truth, have not only despised what the world holds in esteem, but have sought
and embraced the contrary, rejoicing in poverty, ignominy, and austerities,
performing such actions to this effect, as have not fallen under imagination;
whereof I shall here relate some admirable Histories, and will begin with that
of Mark of Alexandria, which we find written in certain Greek Commentaries. Ex
Cod. M. S. Graec. Biblioth. Vid. Raderum 2. P. opuse. sui Viridar. c. 3. pa. 79.
The Abbot Daniel going with his Disciples unto Alexandria, beheld there, in
company of other fools, this Mark, who went wholly naked, but where modesty
required something to cover him, distributing what was given him with many
sottish gestures amongst the other fools his companions. The prudent Abbot
seriously marking him, presently found by that spirit of trial, wherewith the
Lord had endued him, that this folly was Celestial wisdom; and therefore
meeting him the next day in one of the public Marketplaces, he endeavored to
detain him, that he might speak with him, but, he still counterfeiting the
fool, strove all he could to get loose and run away from him, insomuch as the
Venerable old man was fain to cry unto those, who were present, to assist him:
who, seeing a Monk struggle with a Fool, cried out as fast to him, to beware of
the Madman. At last some Priests and Ecclesiastics, who knew the Abbot,
passing by, asked him, What he had to do with the Fool, and what he would with
him: Unto whom he answered, If you desire to know, bring him before the
Patriarck, and let him examine what he is. They did so, but Mark would neither
answer nor speak a word, until the Patriarck commanded him under an oath to
declare Who he was, and what were his intentions. Then the counterfeit Fool,
forced by this adjuration to leave off his dissembling, confessed he had been a
grievous sinner, and had continued in dishonesty of life fifteen years, but by
the goodness of God repenting his sins, he had resolved to perform as many
years of penance, and had in a place convenient for the purpose spent eight of
them; but desiring to pass the rest of them in greater rigor and austerity, he
came to Alexandria, there to be treated in that manner as they had seen him, in
which he had now continued other eight years. Those who were present could not
out of tenderness refrain tears, and were much edified at the extraordinary
ways, by which the spirit of God recalls those, whom he has chosen. But their
admiration was much increased, when the next day the Abbot Daniel having sent
his Disciple unto Mark to visit him, and to advise him to return to the silence
and solitariness of his Cell, he found him dead, and that he had already
rendered his soul unto his Creator. Unto whose Interrement all the Monks and
Priests of Alexandria, with an incredible number of the People, repaired,
praising the Lord for the marvailous works of his providence, that whom he had
chosen to be despised and contemned in life, he had in this manner preserved to
be honored in death. Who sees in not this admirable man a high contempt and
renunciation of those three kinds of goods, whch the world so much esteems? He
so despised Riches, as he had not a garment or ragg to cover his nakedness. He
so much contemned Honor, that to the end he might be more humbled and
scornned, he conversed with fools, and made himself one of them; and so
renounced all Pleasures, that he persevered in perpetual fasts, forsaking and
giving away his food amongst his companions.

Ex M. S. Graec. Hist. Patrum.
Let us now relate another story of equal fortitude in the contempt of the
world, but in a weaker sex. In Thabenna upon the banks of the river Nilus, in a
Monastery of 300 Virgins consecrated to God, there was amongst them one, called
Isidora, scorned, despised, and held for a fool by all the rest: the which so
nourished that opinion, and in such manner showed her self distracted, that she
did not for all this forbear so to exercise the works of charity, and
humilliation toward the others, as if she were a slave to each one of them.
Her employment was commonly in the Kitchen, where she made clean and washed the
dishes. The others upon no occasion would sometimes buffet her, call her fool,
sot, and mad-woman: whereat she either held her peace or laughed like some
simple Ninny, by which art she freed her self from sitting with the rest in the
Refectory, not eating any thing, but the scraps and remainder of others. She
went always barefoot, with her head covered with some dirty cloth; and
although she were the scorn of all, yet she was never heard to speak any thing
in her own defense, or show the least resentment of any thing they did unto
her. Pallad. c. 42. de S. Pitirum.
At the same time there lived in Porphirite that great man of penance, and of
equal fame and goodness, called Pitirum, unto whom an Angel appeared, and said,
Thou have little reason to glory in thy so many years austerity and observance
of a religious life. Come and thou shall see a Maid more holy then thy self.
Go to the Convent of the religious in Thabenna, amongst whom thou shall find
one with a Diadem, (so the Angel called that foul cloth, which the humble
Virgin, that she might be more despised, wore about her head.) Know, said the
Angel, that this Maid is better than thy self, her patience is daily excercised
by a number of women, she is despised, scorned, and treated as if she were a
dog, and yet permits not her thoughts to be troubled or distracted from God by
any thing: And thou being here alone suffer thy thoughts to wander up and
down the whole world. Which said, the Angel departed; And the Abbot Pitirum at
the same time, in compliance with what was commanded, went towords the place
appointed, and being so famed for sanctity, easily obtained leave to see the
Monastery. And the Abbess and all the Nunns came forth to enjoy the comfort of
seeing so singular a man for sanctity, as also to receive the benediction of
the Bishop, who with one of his Deacons accompanied him. The Abbot not
perceiving her amongst the rest whom he sought for, demanded if none of the
Religious were wanting: and they answearing, None, replied, It is impossible;
for I see not her, whom the Angel of the Lord showed me. Whereupon they said,
There only wanted one, who was a fool, and remained in the Kitchen. The Abbot
commanded her instantly to be fetched, which with much ado (she resisting all
was possible) they did by force. The holy Abbot instantly knowing her by that
covering, which the Angel called a Diadem, fell prostrate at her feet, saying,
Mother, I beseech thee bless me, and by thy holy prayers recommend me unto our
Lord. The other religious astonished at the accident said, Take heed, Father,
what you do; This is a fool and deprived of her senses. To whom the Abbot, It
is you are fools; This is wiser than you or I; and I would to God that at the
day of Judgment I might be found in as happy a condition as she. The Nunns
amazed at what they heard, kneeling at the feet of the Abbot demanded pardon
for the injuries they had done unto the servant of God, confessing their
faults: One, the scoffing at her manner of clothing, Another, her buffetting
her, Another, her flinging water in her face, Another, her plucking her by the
Nose. In fine, none but had done her some affront or other. Whereupon the Abbot
returned home much comforted, and the religious from thence forward gave her
such respect, as was due unto her virtues. But she, not enduring to be so much
honored and esteemed, left the Monastery, (for then enclosure was not of
obligation, as now it is,) and went to some other place, where she might be
more despised, at least her virtues not so much known. Who sees not here the
world trodden under foot by this religious Virgin, who lived with such content,
humiliation, and patience in the midst of so much poverty, esteeming herself
happy in being a slave and scorned by all?

Nissen. in vita Thaumaturgi.
Admirable likewise is that Story related by St. Gregory of Nessen of a certain
Philosopher, called Alexander; who being very beautiful of face, and of a
goodly* stature and presence, yet knowing by the light of faith, which perfects
Philosophy, the vanity of the things of this World and their danger, was
resolved (despising himself and those gifts of nature) to live in labor and
humility; And that his beautiful face might neither be occasion of sinning to
himself nor others, he went unto the City of Comana, and made himself a
Collier, hoping thereby either to be altogether unknown, or at least forgotten.
There he remained a long time, all tattered in apparel, and his face so
besooted, as he seemed as if he were a coal himself: insomuch as he was
esteemed the most vile and despicable person of the whole City. It happened
that (their Bishop being at the same time dead) St. Gregory Thaumaturgus came
thither, entreated by the Citizens to bestow a Bishop upon them; whereupon the
people presented unto him the most noble and learned persons of their City,
that he might out of that number make choice of whom he pleased. But the Saint
advised them, that for so great a dignity, as that of Bishop, they should not
only look upon those parts, which shine and appear glorious in the world, but
upon virtue and sanctity: and that therefore they should also present unto him
others, although of a meaner condition. To whom some in a scoffing way replied,
If such people be fit to be made Bishops, let us propose Alexander the Collier:
it seeming unto them, that there was not in all the City a meaner or a more
contemptible person than he. The Bishop moved by God, hearing him named,
commanded him to be called, And made him Bishop: Our Lord causing him, who
despised himself, to be honored of others, and placed him, who was hidden and
covered under his own lowness and humility, upon the Candlestick of his Church.
And he after proved so excellent a Bishop, and so perfect a follower of Christ,
that he came to give his blood for his holy name, joining to the Crown of a
most holy life the Laurel of martyrdom.

No less wonderful was that contempt of the world in Simeon Sales, Evagrius
lib. 4. coll. 33.
who living, as it is reported by Leontius and Evagrius, in great poverty and
contempt, covered as much as he could his fasts, large hours of prayer which he
spent with God; And to that end, when he was in public, endeavored so to
behave himself, as all men might take him for a fool and a distracted madman,
without the appearance of any virtue at all: so as he was often seen to enter
Taverns, and when after his great fasts his hunger caused him to eat, he would
feed openly in the Streets upon vile and course meats: and if any of
understanding by chance looked more narrowly into his way of living, as
suspecting that, what he did, might be to conceal his virtues, so soon as he
had the least inkling of it, he would presently depart to some other place,
where he might be free from knowledge or esteem. It happened in a certain place
where he was, that one finding a Maid with child, and urging her to confess who
had defloured her, she to conceal the offender, laid it upon Simeon the Fool
(for so they called him.) He contradicted it not, but was contented for Christ's
sake to bear the infamy, until God was pleased, that the true Father of the
Child should be discovered; and in the mean time had so much charity toward
her, who had laid that scandal upon him, that, she being in great necessity and
infirm of her childbirth, he secretly brought her to eat. But our Lord at last
made him venerable to the whole world, who had made himself a fool to gain the
wisdom of Heaven.

There are many also who to avoid the opinion of Saints, and the honor which
the people gave them, have done things extraordinary, and such as in the eyes
of men seemed unworthy. Gra. 25.. 1.
St. John Climacus writes, that blessed Father Simeon understanding that the
Governor of the Province came to visit him as a man famous for sanctity, took
a piece of bread and cheese in his hand, and sitting at the door of his Cell,
eat it in that ravenous and odd manner, that he seemed out of his wits; and the
Governor conceiving him to be so, contemned him and returned home. There lived
also in the inner part of the Desert a Venerable old man, unto whom a Disciple
had associated himself to learn his sanctity and serve him. Upon the fame of
his holy life a certain man repaired unto him, and with tears in his eyes
besought him, he would come unto his house and pray for his Son, who was
grievously sick. The Hermit was content to go along with him; but the Father
of the Child made haste before, that he might in company of his Neighbors
return and meet him, and so receive him with more honor. No sooner did the old
man perceive him a far off in this equipage, but presently imagining what the
matter meant, he stripped himself, and plunging into a River close by, began to
bathe himself. His Disciple being much ashamed of this light action, wished the
people to return home, For the old man was out of his wits; And going to his
Master, said; Father, what is it thou have done? all those, who saw thee,
thought thou were possessed. To whom the holy man answered: It is well; It is
that which I desired.

. 3.
Amongst those, who with Evangelical poverty have embraced the contempt of the
world, many have been great Lords, Princes, Kings, and Emperors. Amongst the
Almanes their Prince Charles is the most famous, who being rich, and highly
esteemed for his glorious actions, touched with the desire of heavenly things
left all to his Brother Pepin, came to Rome, built a Monastery upon the Mount
St. Silvester, and there remained sometime a Monk; but being much troubled with
the many visits of the City, which was at hand, and his retirement disquieted,
he left it, and went to Mont-Cassino, where he was received by Petronace the
Abbot, and there lived with great joy and content: and profited so much in the
exercises of humility, that it is written in the Annals of the Monastery, that
the Abbot appointed him to take care of the Flock: which mean office he
executed with as great cheerfulness, as if he had governed a Kingdom as before;
and one of his Ews by chance falling lame, he was seen to carry her home upon
his shoulders, a King not disdaining so mean a service. We know also in our
Spain, that King Bamba, after he had reigned eleven years, and performed many
brave actions, deprived the Pirates of Africa of 200 Ships, and taken Paul their
King, (who went against the King of France) prisoner, The last of his glorious
actions was, to close himself up in a Monastery, where he lived seven years in
great observance of Religion, and died the year 674; And was after in 786
imitated by Bermudus King of Castile. There is scarce any Province of
Christendom, wherein some Prince has not renounced his temporal Kingdom for
gaining the eternal: instructing us, that true greatness consists in humbling
our selves for Christ, and true riches in being poor both in will and deed.

But not to enlarge my self too far in recounting the Stories of those many
Princes, who have known how to exchange their temporal Riches for an eternal
Kingdom, I will content my self with relating one, which includes many
examples. Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 10. p. 2. Hen. Gran. d. 5. Ex. 25.
Thomas de Cantiprato witnesses, that in his time died St. Matilda, Daughter to
the King of Scots, who had four Brothers. The first, being a Duke, desiring to
become poor for Christ's sake, left his wife and fortunes, and forsook his
Country. The second bidding also farewell unto the world, became an Hermit.
The third was an Archbishop, who quitting his Bishopric entered into the Order
of the Cistercians. The fourth, named Alexander, was the youngest of all his
Brothers, and being now arrived at sixteen years of age, his Father would have
compelled him to take the Government of the Kingdom upon him; Which being
understood by his Sister Matilda, who was twenty years old, she called him
aside, and spoke unto him in this manner. My most sweet Brother, what is that
thou meanest to do? Thy elder Brothers have forsaken the things of the Earth
to gain those of Heaven, and will thou to gain this Temporal Kingdom, which
they have left, lose that which is eternal, and thy own Soul? Alexander, his
eyes becoming fountains of tears, answered her in this manner. Sister, what is
it you advise me? I am ready to execute your commands without varying in the
least circumstance. The holy Maid glad of his resolution changed her habit, and
both of them secretly leaving their Country came into France. There she taught
her Brother how to order a Dairy, milk Cows, and make Cheeses, and after found
a way to have him received into a certain Grange of the Cistercians, where he
performed this office to such satisfaction of the Monks, that in a short time
he was admitted amongst them a Lay-Brother. His Sister Matilda seeing him thus
placed, said one day unto him; Brother, certainly a great reward attends us
from the Lord, for having thus left our Parents and our Country for the love of
him. But we shall receive a far greater, if for the short time of our lives we
deprive our selves even of this content of seeing one another: and that we so
give our selves over to that Divine and Sovereign Majesty, that we meet no
more, until we meet in Heaven, where we shall see and converse one with another
in true and eternal comfort. Here the Brother fell a weeping, apprehending this
as the greatest difficulty he had hitherto encountered in the whole course of
his life. But at last he mastered it, and they both parted never to see one
another more upon earth. The holy Virgin went unto a certain Town nine miles
distant, where she lived retired in a little Cottage, and sustained her self
wholly by the labor of her hands, admitting neither present nor alms. Her Bed
was the ground or little better; she eat upon her knees, and in that posture
spent many hours in prayer: wherein she often was so rapt from her senses, that
she neither heard the noise of thunder, nor perceived the flashes of lightning.
Alexander was never known whilst he lived. But St. Matilda was nine years
before her death: and therefore attempted often to have left the place; but was
so strictly watched, she could not. She wrought many miracles both during her
life and after death. A certain Monk sick of an Imposthume in his breast
offered up his prayers at the Tomb of Alexander; and to him the Servant of God
appeared more resplendent than the Sun, adorned with two most beautiful Crowns;
The one of which he wore upon his head: The other he carried in his hand; And
being demanded of the Monk, what those two Crowns signified, he answered, This
which I bear in my hands is given me for that temporal Kingdom which I forsook
upon earth; The other of my head is that which is commonly given to all the
Saints of Heaven. And that thou may give credit to what thou have seen in
this Vision, thou shall find thy self according to thy faith cured of thy
infirmity. In this manner God honors those, who humble themselves for his
glory.

CAP. IX.
The love, which we owe unto God, ought so to fill our Souls, that it leave no
place or power to love the Temporal.

WE have already produced sufficient motives and reasons to breed in us a
contempt of the things of this world, and to wean our affections from them, as
well for being in themselves vile, transitory, mutable, little, and dangerous,
as for that the Son of God has done and suffered so much to the end we should
despise them. I will only now add for the conclusion of this matter, That,
though they were of some real worth or value, (as they are not,) yet for all
this we ought not to love them, since so great is that love and affection,
which is due from us unto God, that it ought so fully to fill and possess our
hearts, that it leave no room for any other affection than it self. For if it
were commanded in the Law, when men had not the obligation which we now have,
(the Son of God not having then died for our redemption) that we should love
him with all our heart, all our soul, and all our powers: how are we to love
him, when our debt is so much greater, and that we have a further knowledge of
his divine goodness? If then there ought to be no place for any love but his,
how can we now turn our eyes unto the creature, or set our hearts upon it, when
a million of hearts are not sufficient for our Creator? There is no one Title
for which God is amiable, but upon that title we owe him a thousand wills, a
thousand loves, and all what we are, or can be; What do we then owe him for all
together? Consider his benefits, his love, his goodness, and thou shall see,
that though thou had as many hearts as there are sands upon the Seashore, or
atoms in the Air, all were not capable of that great love, which is due unto
him. How can thou then divide this one heart, which thou have, amongst so
many creatures? Consider also the multitude and greatness of his divine
blessings, and deal but with God, as one man does with another. If we say of
humane benefits, that gifts break rocks, how comes it that divine benefits do
not move a heart of flesh? Prove. 22.
And if, as Solomon says, Those who give gifts steal the hearts of the
receivers, how comes it that God robs not thee of thy soul, who not only gives
thee gifts, but himself for a gift? Consider the benefits thou did receive in
thy Creation; They were as many as thou have members of thy body, or faculties
of thy soul. Consider those of thy Conservation; Thou have received as many, as
there are distinct natures in Heaven and in Earth. The Elements, Stars, and the
whole world were created for thy preservation, without which thou could not
subsist. Look upon the benefits. of thy Redemption; They are as many as are the
evils of Hell, from which they have freed thee. Look upon those of thy
Justification; they are as many as the Sacraments, which Christ has
instituted, and the examples which he has left thee. Think what thou owe him
for having made thee a Christian, pardoned thee so often, and given thee still
fresh grace to renew thee. All these and a thousand other benefits and
obligations demand and sue for thy love. And not only these benefits from God,
but even those from men cry out unto thee to love him; For there is no benefit
which thou receivest from man, but comes from God. On all parts then, and for
all things thou art obliged to love God; for it is he who does thee good in
all, and is worth unto thee more than all. How comes it then, that, since he
has done all this for us, we yet think not what we are to do for him, nor how
we shall express our thankfulness for such and so great benefits? David was
troubled with this care when he said, What shall I return unto the Lord for all
which he has given me? And yet the Lord had not then given him the Body and
blood of his Son, nor had his Son then been born or died for him. Since then he
has done all this for us, why do we not study how we may be grateful for such
infinite and unspeakable mercies? But what can we return which we have not
received? Let us deliver him back our souls, hearts, and bodies: looking upon
our selves hence forward, as on a thing not ours but his, acknowledging that we
owe him more than what we are, or can do. So shall we not debase our love by
placing it upon the creatures.

If we shall then consider the infinite love which God bears us, we shall find
that we have no love left to bestow upon any thing but him, no not upon our
selves. To know truly the greatness of this divine love, we are to suppose that
true and perfect Love consists much in action, but is most apparent in patience
and suffering, and also in communication of its proper goods unto those whom it
loves. See then how great is his love, who has wrought such stupendous works
for thee, as are his Incarnation and thy Redemption: and continues still until
this hour working for thy good after a thousand ways in all his creatures,
making the Corn to grow which is to feed thee, the Wool to increase which is
to cloth thee, supports the Sun which is to enlighten thee, draws Waters from
the veins of the earth to quench thy thirst, and in every thing still operates
for thee. Consider how he gives a being unto the Elements, life to Plants,
sense to Beasts, understanding to Angels, and all to thee, working in thee
alone all which he works in the other degrees of nature. How apparent then is
the love of God in his works, who does so great things for the good of man, who
deserves to be forsaken by him, and reduced to nothing? Consider then the
excess of love in his patience, who has endured such cruel torments, and so
painful a death for thee, and has born with thee as often as thou have
offended him; And if patience be a trial of love, where shall we find so great
an example? How excessive were that love, if a King, who after his Vassal had a
thousand times attempted to murder him, should not only pardon, but continue
still to favor and enrich him with his own Rents and Revenues? who would not be
amazed at such a love, and think that King infatuated? O goodness and
longaminity of God, who suffers us a thousand times to turn again and crucify
thee our Redeemer, the King of Glory, and art still silent! Behold also his
love in communicating all the good he has unto us. The Father delivers up his
only Son, the Son his Body and Blood for us, and they both together send the
Holy Ghost, by whom we are by grace made partakers of the Divine Nature. See if
a more great, more real, or more tender love than this can be imagined, wherein
he shares with us all he has, and gives us all he can. And if love be to be
paid with love, what love do thou owe him? See if thou have an affection yet
free to be employed upon any but thy Lover and thy God. Requite then this
excess of good will by having no other will but his, and answer his love with a
love like his, of works and patience. Our Lord is not content we should only
love him with our tongues, but reprehends those, who cry unto him, Lord, Lord,
and do not what he commands: For even good words, if they want works, are
condemned as false and feigned. Let us love him then in earnest; let us suffer
for him, and communicate with him all we have. Let us not think to come off
with this love gratis; it is to cost us all is ours. If we love our God truly,
who so much loved us, we must resolve to lose honors, wealth, and pleasure in
serving and requiting him.

Above all, if we consider him to be God, who is infinitely beautiful, good,
wise, powerful, eternal, immense, immutable, there is no heart possible, which
can equal the love, which he deserves for any one of those Divine Attributes.
What shall then his whole infinity deserve, which eminently contains all the
beauties and perfections of his Creatures either real or imaginable? for all
are but as a drop in respect of an immense Ocean; all depend upon God, who so
communicates his beauties and perfections to the Creatures, as they still
remain in himself after a more excellent manner, and in such sort distributes
them, as he parts not from them, but unites them all in one simple perfection.
From whence, as from a fountain, all that is good flows, and is yet still in
the Original in a more high and transcendent manner. And if men (as the wise
man says) admiring the beauty of some creatures, adored them as Gods, let them
hence understand how beautiful is the Lord of all things, since he who made
them is the Author and Father of Beauty; And if they wonder at their force and
virtue in their operations, let them know, that he who made them is more
powerful than they; And by the beauty and greatness of the created, let the
understanding climb to the knowledge of the Creator: and hence collect, that
if the effect be good, the cause must needs be so too; for nothing can give
what it has not; And therefore he who made things so beautiful, and so good,
cannot choose but be most beautiful and most excellently good himself. So as if
the imagination should join in one piece all the good, and all the perfection
of all creatures possible or imaginable, yet God were infinitely more perfect
and more beautiful than that.

From hence it follows, that as God is infinitely perfect and beautiful, so he
must be infinitely amiable; and if infinitely amiable, we are to love him with
an infinite love: so as if the capacity of our heart were infinite, it were
wholly to be employed in loving him. How can we then, since our hearts are
limited, and the object infinite, spare any part of it for the things of this
life? Besides, such is the loveliness of God, that we are not to love our
selves, but because he loves us; and if we are not to love our selves but for
his sake, how are we diverted to love other things for their own sake? O
infinite God! how do I rejoice that thou art so good, so perfect, so
beautiful, the source and original of all beauty and perfection, as that I
ought not only to withdraw my love and affection from all other creatures, but
even from my self, and place it wholly upon thee, from whom my being, and all
the good I have is derived, as the beams from the Sun, or water from the
Fountain. For as the conservation of the rays, according to a mystic Doctor,
depends more upon the Sun than upon themselves, and the current of the stream
more from the Fountain than it self: In such manner the good of man depends
wholly upon God, who is the Spring and Fountain of all his good and perfection;
from whence it follows, that man, when he relies upon himself, is sure to fall,
and when he loves himself, loses himself, but flying and abhorring himself
preserves himself, according to what is written in the holy Gospel, He who
loves bis life shall lose it, and he who hates it in this world shall gain it
for ever. Hence it comes, that we are now no more to look upon our selves as
upon a thing of our own but only Gods, depending both in our spiritual and
corporal being from that infinite Ocean of being and perfection. Hence the
Soul, finding it self now free and unfettered, flies unto God with all its
forces and affections, not finding any thing to love and please it but in him,
in whom the beauty and perfections of all creatures are contained with infinite
advantages. When one has once arrived unto this estate, how dissonant and
various soever his works be, the end, which he pretends, is still the same, and
he ever obtains what he pretends, if shutting his eyes to all creatures as if
they were not, he looks at nothing but God, and how to please his Divine
goodness, and that only for it self. It may be, that looking at the particular
ends of each work, our actions may be in several conditions; sometimes they are
in beginning, sometimes in the midst, sometimes in the end, and oftentimes by
impediments and cross accidents, which happen, they acquire not what they aim
at; but look upon the intention of him who works, and they are still in their
end: For in what condition soever the work be, he who does it with this
intention only to please God, is ever in his end, which no bad success or
contradiction can hinder. According to this which has been said, it is a great
matter by Divine light to have arrived at this knowledge, That all goods and
gifts descend from above, and that there is an infinite power, goodness,
wisdom, mercy, and beauty, from whence these properties, which are here below
participated by the creatures with such limitation, are derived. It is a great
matter to have discovered the Sun by his rays, and guiding our selves by the
stream to have arrived at the Fountains head, or to have found the Center,
where the multiplicity of created perfections meet and unite in one. There our
love shall rest as having nothing further to seek; And this is to love God with
all the heart, all the soul, all the mind^, and all the powers. And as those,
who arrive at this happy state, have no other care, no other thought, than to
do the will of God here upon earth with the same perfection it is done in
heaven: So they have no other desires, than by leaving earth to enter heaven,
there by sulfilling wholly the Divine will, to supply what was defective upon
earth. Nothing detains them here but the will of God; they have nothing begun
which is not ended; they are ever prepared; all their business is dispatched,
like those servants, who are always expecting their Lord, and still ready to
open the door, when he shall call. Let us then prepare our selves by
withdrawing our love from all which is temporal and created: and placing it
upon our Creator, who is eternal, let us love him, not with a delicate and an
effeminate love, but with a strong and manly affection, such a one as will
support any weight, overcome any difficulty, and despise any interest rather
than be separated from our beloved, break his Laws, or offend him though never
so lightly. Let this Love be strong as death, that it may look death in the
face, and not fly from it: which when it suffers, it conquers. Let thy fire be
so enkindled* that if whole rivers of tribulations fall upon it, they may be
but like drops of water falling upon a forge, which the flame drinks up and
consumes, and is not quenched, but quickened by them. Be above thy self, and
above all that is below; And if the world offer thee all, it is Mistress of, to
despoil thee of this love, tread it under thy feet, and despise it as nothing.

To this love it belongs, To accommodate ones self to poverty, Not to repine at
hunger, nakedness, cold or heat, who as companions go along with it, To suffer
injuries meekly, To bear sickness and infirmities patiently, Not to be dismayed
in persecutions, To endure temptations with longanimity, To bear the burdens
of our neighbors cheerfully, Not to be tired with their thwart conditions, Not
to be angry at their neglects, nor overcome by their ingratitude, In spiritual
drynesses not to leave our ordinary devotions, and in consolations and
spiritual gusts not to forbear our obligations: Finally, that we may say with
St. Paul, Romans 8.
Who shall separate us from the charity of Christ? tribulation? or distress? or
famine? or nakedness? or danger? or persecution? or the sword? I am sure, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither
things present, nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.

