No Popery, OR A CATECHISM AGAINST POPERY: WHEREIN The Heretical Doctrins,
Idolatrous Worship, and Superstitious Practices of the ROMAN CHVRCH ARE Briefly
yet Plainly Refuted, and the Protestant Principles Proved by Testimonies of
Holy Scripture, and Evidence of Reason.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

Little Children keep your selves from Idols.

1 John 5.21. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at
the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1682.

TO THE READER.
AMongst the various Methods of Instructing such as are weak and ignorant, none
has been found more useful than that by way of Question and Answer. And as
Christianity did at first diffuse it self by this way of Teaching, so the Truth
and Purity of it have been best preserved, when Pastors have effectually
applied themselves to Conscientious Catechizing of those under their Care and
inspection. By this means did the Waldenses and Albigenses maintain the
Doctrine and Worship of the Gospel among them, when Error, Superstition and
Idolatry had overspread the face of the Western Churches. Nor was any thing
more useful to the promoting the Reformation, than the Catechisms of several
Eminent Persons, whom God employed in that Blessed Work. For though Preaching be
a very good way of pressing known principles upon the Consciences of men, yet
Catechizing does much excel it in conveying Light and Knowledge into their
minds. And through the woeful and universal neglect of this, does Ignorance
come so much to abound, even where Sermons are most frequent, as well as plain
and practical. For through want of Acquaintance with the points and subjects
concerning which Ministers treat in those continued Discourses, they are
incompetent Auditors of what is delivered, and so lose much of the benefit of
it. And as the present decays in Religion, are to be ascribed to no one thing
more than a faileur of Catechizing; so the Ignorance which thereupon ensues, is
that which betrays multitudes to be imposed upon and perverted by such as lie
in wait to deceive. For next to the being strangers to the power of that
Religion which we do profess, the want of being well grounded in the Doctrines
of it, is that into which the revolt of so many to Popery is to be issued and
resolved. And as the apprehension of our security from the Re-introduction and
Establishment of the Romish Religion in these Nations, has occasioned our
sloth and negligence in unmasking and detecting the folly of the Tridentine
Faith; so the just fears we are brought under, of its obtrudeing its self once
more upon these Kingdoms, do bespeak all who desire to approve themselves
faithful to God, and the Souls of Men, to concern themselves more in
discovering the falsehood of all the Articles of the Romish Creed.

And as the difference betwixt the Professors in Britain, and those that
profess the Reformed Religion in France, is to be admired with respect to that
Ability which appears in them beyond what is in us, to refute and expose the
Papal Tenants; so their present stedfastness in the Doctrines of the Gospel,
when they are called to suffer the Loss of all things for them, is much owing
to their having been instructed before hand in all the Principles that lie in
Controversy between them and the Papists. For though the Transcript of Gospel
Truth upon our Hearts will be our best Preservative in a day of Trial, yet the
being able to give an account of the reason of our Belief, is needful as well
for the honor of our Religion, as the prevention of our Apostasy, when we come
not only to be accosted with Arguments against it, but threatened with Fire and
Faggot, unless we renounce and abandon it. And though there be many Discourses,
wrote with great Strength and Learning, both to inform and fortify our minds
in the Belief of the Doctrines which we profess; yet there are but few
Discourses in Print, either of that brevity, or accommodated for manner and
plainness, to the Capacity of the weak, as is necessary. The want whereof, as
it recommends the seasonableness of this Catechism and familiar Treatise; so if
People will but consult their own Souls, they will have reason for being
thankful to God, for the provision which is here vouchsafed them. In which as
they will find the Errors of the Romish Church truly represented, so they will
find them as nervously confuted and overthrown.

The Order of Sections.
Sect. 1. OF the Scripture page 1 2. How the Scripture may be known to be
Divine. 4 3. Of the Authority of the Scripture. 7 4. Of the Perfection of the
Scripture. 10 5. Of the Reading of the Holy Scripture. 14 6. Of the Church. 17
7. If the Church can Err. 20 8. Of the Marks of the true Church. 24 9. Of our
Separation from the Roman Church. 30 10. Of the head of the Church. 32 11 Of
Invocation of Saints. 36 12. Of the Intercession of Saints. 42 Sect. 13. Of
Images. 45 14. Concerning Prayers for the Dead. 47 15. Of Purgatory. 48 16. Of
human satisfactions. 52 17. If the Sufferings of Christ were accomplished in
the Cross. 56 18. Of Pilgrimages. 58 19. Of Monkish Vows. 1. of that of single
life. 59 20. Of Vowing Poverty. 61 21. Of Vowing obedience. 62 22. Of Lawful
Vows. 63 23. Concerning Fasts. 64 24. Of Holy Days. 68 25 Of the Providence of
God. 69 26. Of man's free will in the state of Sin. 72 27. Of man's free will
in the state of Grace. 74 Sect. 28. Of Justification. 77 29. Of Merits. 81 30.
Of Predestination. 84 31. of Perseverance. 86 32. Of the certainty of
perseverance and Salvation. 88 33. Of Sin, and if all men are Sinners. 92 34.
Of venial and mortal Sins. 95 35. Of the Works of Supererogation. 97 36. Of
Repentance. 100 37. Of Auricular Confession. 101 38. Of Absolution. 103 39. Of
Satisfactions and Indulgences. 105 40. Of the Sacraments. 106 41. Of
Confirmation. 107 42. Of the Sacrament of Penitence. 109 43. Of Marriage. 110
44. Of Extreme Unction. 112 45. Of the Sacrament of Orders. 113 46. Of the
Order of Priesthood. 115 47. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. 118 48. of Baptism.
122 49. If original sin continues after Baptism. 124 50. Of the Necessity of
Baptism. 125 51. Of the Lords Supper. 126 52. of the Communion under both
kinds. 134
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 22. read imaginations. page 9. l. 26. r. have. p. 22. l. 9. 10.
for interted r. interrupted. p. 25. l. 24. for in r. ing. page 31. l. 13. r.
Schism. p. 38. l. 15. r. God's. p. 59. l. 21. after (resolution) r. in. p. 66.
l. 8. r. Tim. p. 69. l. 1. r. of signal. p. 72. l. 21. for (freely) r.
spiritually. p. 74. l. 5. r. calling. ibid. l. 24. r. John. 8. p. 80. l. 27. r.
justifies. p. 82. l. 4. r. cannot. p. 88. l. 18. blot out the i. p. 99. l. 5.
r. young. ibid. l. 9. for (has) r. have. p. 109. l. 8. r. you. p. 113. l. 1.
r. being. p. 119. l. 1. r. offers. ibid. l. 5. r. many. p. 122. l. 11. r.
Gratulatory.

A CATECHISM AGAINST POPERY.
SECT. I. Of the Scripture.
Quest. WHat Religion are you of?

Answ. Of the Reformed Christian Religion.

Q. Why call you your Religion, the Christian Religion?

A. To distinguish it from the Religion of the Jews, Turks, and Pagans.

Q. Why call you it the Reformed Religion?

A. To distinguish it from the Religion of the Church of Rome.

Q. Why are you not of the Romish Religion?

A. Because in and by that Religion none can be Saved.

Q. Why so?

A. Because the Roman Church has perverted the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
established Idolatry, and has taken Antichrist for her head.

Q. Upon what is the true Christian Religion Founded?

A. Upon the Word of God.

Q. What mean you by the Word of God?

A. The Holy Scripture contained in the Old and new Testament, written by the
Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles; which St. Paul calls Scripture divinely
inspired, 2 Timothy 3.16. And St. Peter, 2d. Epist. 1.21. speaking of the
Scripture says, Prophesies came not by the will of men, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Q. Why call you the Scripture the Bible, that is the Book or Writing?

A. Because it is the Book and Writing which ought to be most highly esteemed
by us, and wherein we may be instructed of the Will of God for our Salvation.

Q. How divide you the Scripture?

A. Into two Parts, the Old and New Testament.

Q. What does the Old Testament contain?

A. The five Books of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms. Luke 24.44.

Q. Why take you not in Tobit, Susanna, Judith, and others which we call
Apocripha?

A. Because the Jews to whom the Oracles of God were committed, Romans 3.2. never
acknowledged these Books; Jesus Christ nor his Apostles never cited them,
neither were they read in the Synagogue; it is not reasonable then that these
Books which were not received as Sacred and Canonical by the Jewish Church
(which then only was the Church of God) should be received as such by the
Christian Church: Besides, in these Books are found many Fables which are not
agreeable to the Spirit of God; who is Truth and Wisdom.

Q. What does the New Testament contain?

A. The four Evangelists, the Acts, the Epistles of St. Paul, of James, of
Peter, of John, of Jude, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Revelations.

Q. Why has it pleased God that his Word should be put in Writing?

A. That men might not alter or change it, and make their own imagination and
inventions pass for Divine Inspirations, and the Word of God.

Q. But why do you found your Religion on the Word of God?

A. That we may have solid and firm Comfort in Life and Death. Romans 15.4.

Q. Wherein consists your Comfort in Life and Death?

A. In that Jesus Christ has redeemed us from the power of the Devil, so that
living and dying we are his.

SECT. II. How the Scripture may be known to be Divine.
Q. HOw know you the Scripture to be the word of God?

A. Three ways: 1. By the Testimony of Believers under the Old and New
Testament. 2. By the Scripture it self, for as the Sun makes it self to be seen
by its own Light, and the Fire makes it self to be felt by its Heat; so the
Scripture makes it self known to be Divine by the Majesty of its Style, and
fullfilling of its Prophesies, the excellency of its Doctrine, and its
efficacy to persuade and comfort Consciences, as David Psalm 19.7. The Law of
the Lord is perfect converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure
making wise the simple. 3. By the Testimony of the Spirit of God, such as Jesus
Christ gave to the Consciences of the Disciples going to Emaus; Did not our
heart burn within us (said they one to another) while he talked with us by the
way, and opened to us the Scripture? Luke 24.32.

Q. How does the Sprrit testify the Scripture to be the Word of God?

A. Not by extraordinary Revelations as Prophesies were formerly made known to
the Prophets, which themselves often understood not, but by Hearing and
Meditating upon the Scripture, instructing, comforting and sanctifying the
Heart, he makes known by these Divine effects to them that read and hearken
thereunto with Humility, Attention, and Reverence, that the Doctrine which is
contained therein is truly Divine.

Q. Does the Testimony of the Church give Authority to the Scripture?

A. No, for seeing it is God that speaks in the Scriptures; its evident he
cannot take his Authority from men, John 5.34. I receive not testimony from man.

Q. Is then the Testimony that the Church gives to the Scripture unprofitable?

A. No, for by it men are first brought to inquire after the Scripture, and to
read it, and the Universal consent of the Church obliges them to an
advantageous opinion of the Divinity of the Scripture, which makes it be read
with more Fear and Reverence.

Q. What is the difference between the testimony of the Church, and that of the
Scripture it self accompanied with the testimony of the Spirit of God?

A. The Testimony of the Church being only a Testimony from men, can produce
only an human Faith or an Opinion, but the Testimony of the Scripture it self,
being the Testimony of God produces a Divine Faith. The Testimony of the Church
is like that which John Baptist gave to Jesus Christ, John 5.33. and that of
the Samaritan John 4. for as that woman brought those of Sychar to Jesus
Christ, so the Church brings us to the Word of God; but the Scriptures
Testimony of it self, is like that of Christ himself by his Works, which
testified of him that the Father had sent him, John 5.36. so that Believers
knowing the Divinity of the Scripture by the reading of it, may say as these of
Sychar to the woman: Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have
heard him our selves. The Testimony of the Church is only a simple Testimony;
but that of the Scripture is with Authority, and from the Sovereign Judge.

SECT. III. Of the Authority of the Scripture.
Q. Has God established in the Church a Sovereign Judge with full power to
decide matters of Faith without Appeal?

A. None but the Word contained in the Holy Scriptures, and it is by this Jesus
Christ has told us that men shall be judged at the last day, John 12.48. He
that rejects me has one that judges him, the word that I have spoken, the
same shall judge him at the last day: And St. Paul, Romans 2.16. says, That God
will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to his Gospel, and
Believers never acknowledged any other judge, of their Controversies about
matters of Faith, but the Word of God; by it the Priests determined about
things difficult, Deuteronomy. 17.9.11. By it Ezechias and Josaphat reformed the
Church, and re-established the pure service of God, 2 Chronicles. 31. and 17.7.9. By
the Scriptures Jesus Christ combated Satan, Matthew. 4. He proved the
Resurrection from the dead to the Saducees. Matthew. 22.23.29, 31, 32. And showed
to his Disciples the necessity of his Death, and of his Resurrection; Luke
24.46. By them John Baptist proved his Mission, Matthew. 3.3. And by them the
Apostles overcame the Jews, and showed powerfully that Jesus was the Christ,
Acts 9.22. and Acts 18.28.

Q. Has God commanded us to consult the Scriptures as our Judge?

A. The Prophet Esaias 8.20. sends to the Law and to the Testimony, and if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no Light in them: And
Jesus Christ commands the Jews to search the Scriptures, because they testified
of him. John 5.39. and Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them: And St. Peter after having mentioned the voice from Heaven, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, adds, We have also a more sure Word
of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18.19.

Q. But when there is a difference about the interpretation and sense of the
Scripture, is it not necessary to have a Judge who can judge Infallibly and
with Authority of the meaning of the Scripture, and declare it to us for our
agreement?

A. God has not given this power to any in the world, but Scripture must
Interpret Scripture, one passage must be Interpreted by another, as they did in
the time of Esra, who made them understand the Law by Reading of the Scripture,
Nehem. 8.8.

Q. How can you decide matters of Faith by the Scripture, since it is obscure?

A. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, of whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds, even Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. But it is
not obscure to them who have received the Spirit of God that they might know
the things that are freely given to us of God. 1 Cor. 2.12. And to accuse the
Scripture of obscurity, is to accuse it falsely, for David, Psalm. 119.105.
says, Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.

Q. Yet St. Peter says in the 2 Epistle 3.16. That in the Epistles of St. Paul
there are some things hard to be understood.

A. I grant there are many obscure places in the Scripture to exercise the
Faith of Believers, and keep the most Learned humble, but God has so ordered
that all things necessary to Salvation are clear and easy to be understood.

Q. But since St. Paul would have Believers to judge of his Doctrine, 1 Cor.
10.15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say; Why should not the Church
assembled in Council hvve that Authority?

A. There are two kinds of judgment, one is a judgment of Authority, the other
of discretion, by which particular Believers ought to try the Spirits whether
they be of God, and discern the true Doctrine of Christ from lies, and of this
judgment Paul speaks when he says, judge ye what I say; but for the judgment of
Authority, God has not given it to any Mortal man, not to the Councils
themselves, which have no power to make any Canons or Decisions to oblige the
Consciences of any, but so far as they are conform to the word of God: Jesus
Christ only has Sovereign Authority in the Church as the well beloved Son that
the Father has commanded us from Heaven to hear, Matthew. 3.17. and John 5.22.
Jesus Christ says, that the Father has given all judgment to the Son.

SECT. IV. Of the Perfection of the Scripture.
Q. IS the Scripture the perfect Rule of our Faith?

A. Yes, Because all the Articles of Faith, and Doctrines necessary to
Salvation are contained therein, and therefore St. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.15. says,
That the Holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

Q. St. Paul speaks there only of the Books of the Old Testament, for the New
was not then writ, so it follows by your reason that the New Testament is
superfluous, since the Old is sufficient for to instruct us to Salvation.

A. Upon the contrary St. Paul speaking of the Books of the Old Testament only,
fortifies strongly our reason for the sufficiency and perfection of the
Scripture, for if the Books of Moses and the Prophets were sufficient to make
the Church wise unto Salvation, Why may not the Scripture be sufficient now,
since to Moses and the Prophets, God has added the Evangelists and the
Apostles? Besides, it follows not that because the Books of the Old Testament
were sufficient for the Church then, that the New is Superfluous, since God
has pleased to give it us to manifest the Doctrine of Salvation more clearly,
and fully, as 2 Timothy 1.10. Paul says, That Jesus has brought Life and
Immortality to light through the Gospel.

Q. Is all Tradition to be Condemned?

A. No, for this word Tradition signifies nothing but a Doctrine given from
hand to hand; the Scripture it self is a Tradition, and the Doctrine of
Salvation before it was written, was a Tradition, and has been called
Scripture since it was put into Writing, and St. Paul calls the Doctrine of the
Gospel, Tradition, which is written, 1 Cor. 15.3. I have given unto you that
which I have received, viz. That Christ dyed for our Sins according to the
Scriptures.

Q. What Traditions then are to be condemned?

A. All Traditions of men wherewith they pretend to bind the Consciences of
men, and give them for Articles of Faith, which S. Paul Colos. 2.8. would that
we should take heed of: Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and
vain deceit, after the Traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and
not after Christ. Such were the Traditions that the Pharisees added to the Law,
which Christ condemns, Matthew. 15.3. Why do ye transgress the Commandment of
God, by your Tradition? applying to them what God says of Hypocrites, Esaias,
29.13. In vain they do Worship me teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men. Such are the Traditions which the Roman Church has added to the Gospel,
as Worshipping Images, and Praying to Saints, which though they have no
foundation in the Scripture, but are formally condemned therein, yet the
Council of Trent has commanded them to be received with the same Devotion and
Piety, that the Scripture is.

Q. Nevertheless St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Commands the Thessalonians to hold
the Traditions that they had been Taught by Word or Epistles; and 2 Timothy 2.2.
He recommends to Timothy to commit to faithful men, the things which he had
heard in presence of many Witnesses.

A. I Answer, that those Traditions and Instructions of St. Paul, are not
Traditions of men, but the Word of God, as he himself says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. And
the Instructions he gave Believers by Word and Living Voice are the same he
has writ in his Epistles, and that we may be assured that his Doctrine is not
Traditions of men, he protests to the Jews, Acts 26.22. That he had said no
other things than these which the Prophets and Moses did say should come; and
to Teach us that these things did contain all that is Necessary to Salvation,
he assures the Ephesians, Act. 20 27. That he had declared unto them all the
Counsel of God.

Q. Yet the Church believes many Doctrines which are not contained in the
Scripture, as the perpetual Virginity of the Holy Virgin, the Baptism of
Children, the translation of the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday, the number of
the Sacraments to be but two.

A. For the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin, the Church receives it
not as an Article of Faith necessary to Salvation, but as an Article becoming
the honor they think themselves obliged to render to this Sacred Vessel; But
for the other points, they are taught in Scripture, if not in formal terms, at
least by necessary consequences. St. Peter Acts 2.38.39. would have all the
Jews Baptized, because the Promise was to them and to their Children, and we
see that in the time of the Apostles, Acts 20.7. and 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.10.
Believers Assembled themselves for Prayer, and to make Collection the first Day
of the Week, which St. John calls The Lord's Day: And the Church may well
conclude there are but two Sacraments, since they see not in the Scripture that
Jesus Christ has instituted any more.

SECT. V. Of Reading the Holy Scripture.
Q. IS it Lawful for all Persons to Read the Scripture?

A. Jesus Christ Recommends the Reading of it indifferently to all, John, 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, and Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. God Commands Kings to have the
Book of the Law, and to read therein every day; and the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. Charges that his Epistle be read to all the holy Brethren, and 2 Timothy 3.15. he praises Timothy, because from a Child he had known the Holy
Scriptures: And the Eunuch of Queen Candace did Read in the Chariot, Esaias the
Prophet, Acts 8.28. And in all the Synagogues the Law and the Prophets were
read every Sabbath Day, Acts 15.21. and 17. The believing Bereans having heard
the Doctrine of St. Paul compared it with the Scriptures to know if it was as
he had said: And though the Revelations be the most obscure Book in the
Scripture, yet the reading of it is recommended to all, Rev. 1.3. Blessed be he
that reads and they that hear the words of this Prophecy.

Q. It seems notwithstanding, that it would be expedient to hinder the simple
People from the reading thereof. St. Peter tells us that there are in the
Epistles of St. Paul, things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to their
own destruction.

A. Upon the contrary, the simple and ignorant are to read the Scriptures that
they may become wise to Salvation, and Jesus Christ tells us that the ignorance
of the Scriptures is cause of Errors: You Err not knowing the Scriptures, said
he to the Sadduces, Mat. 22.29. And David, Psalm. 19. says, That the Law
enlightens the Eyes, and makes wise the simple; And though there be some
ignorant and unstable, that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, yet
it hinders not St. Peter from recommending in the same place to Believers, the
Epistles of St. Paul. And in the first Chapter of the same Epistle, he tells us
That we have a sure word of Prophecy, whereunto we do well to take heed, as to
a Light that shines in a dark place. For because those that are Profane abuse
the Word of God and his Graces, the Children of God must not be forbidden the
Use thereof.

Q. What Profit then do Believers receive from the Reading of the Scriptures?

A. By them they are instructed in the Knowledge of God, fortified in the Faith
and Expectation of their Salvation, comforted in their Afflictions, furnished
against Temptations of Satan, the World, and the Flesh; For whatsoever things
were written afore-time, they were written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope. Romans 15.4.

SECT. VI. Of the Church.
Quest. WHat signifies this word Church?

A. An Assembly.

Q. How many ways is the name of Church taken in the Scripture?

A. Four ways principally, 1. For the Church of the Elect. 2. Generally for the
Universal Visible Church, and they that make profession of Faith in Jesus
Christ. And it is this Church St. Paul speaks of, when he says, That in a great
house there are not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood and of
Earth, because that this Church is composed of good, and of evil ones: 2 Timothy
2.20. 3. The Church signifies an Assembly of the Leaders of the Church, which
Jesus Christ speaks of Matthew. 18.17. When there is a quarrel between two
Brethren, he will have the party offended tell it to the Church. 4. The name
Church is given to each particular Christian Assembly, which is a part of the
Universal Visible Church, such in the time of the Apostles was the Churches of
Corinth, of Ephesus, of Rome, etc. to whom St. Paul directs his Epistles.

Q. What is meant by the Church of the Elect?

A. It is the Assembly of all Believers that Goth has Elected in Jesus Christ,
of which some are Glorified in Heaven, others are yet Combating on the Earth,
others are not yet born or called to the Faith, but must be in their time, and
subsist already in the Counsel of God: of these Jesus Christ speaks John 10.16.
saying, Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, they also I must bring
and they shall hear my voice.

Q. Where does the Word of God speak of this Church of the Elect?

A. The Apostle Hebrews 12.23. calls it the Heavenly Jerusalem, the General
Assembly and Church of the first born; It is this Church which St. Paul calls
the Body of Christ, for Christ cannot have dead Members. 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians.
4.12. Colos. 1.24. and the Spouse of Christ Ephesians. 5.32. for Christ cannot have
an Adulteress for his Spouse: St. Peter 1 Epist. 2.9. call this Church A chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People.

Q. Which Church is spoken of in this Article of the Apostles Creed, I believe
the Holy Catholic Church?

A. Of the Church of the Elect, for we believe things that are not seen, as the
Apostle Heb. 11.1. says, Faith is the Evidence of things not seen. And after
those words, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, is put the Communion of
Saints in this Church, that the Profane may be excluded.

Q. Why is this Church of the Elect said to be invisible, since it is composed
of men who are Visisible?

A. Not only because the Glorified Saints are out of our sight, and that those
who belong to the Election of God, and are not yet born, cannot be seen, but
also because that though the Elect that live upon the Eatth are visible men,
yet it is not visible that they are Elected, God only knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Q. How understand you that out of the Church there is no Salvation?

A. First, Out of the Church of the Elect none can be saved: for they that have
no Communion with the Members of the Body have none also With the Head, which
is Christ, and which is the only name by which we can be saved. Secondly, Out
of the Communion of the Catholic Visible Curch there is no Salvation, if there
be not an impossibility which cannot be overcome; as suppose some among the
Turks and Pagans Converted to Christ at the hour of death: but it is altogether
necessary to Salvation when it is possible, to be joined to some Assembly of
Christians, and make profession of the Faith of Christ, for with the heart man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
Salvation: Romans 10.10. But this Maxim may not be understood of any particular
Church, much less of the Roman Church, which is the most corrupted of all the
Churches which call themselves Christian Churches.

SECT. VII. If the Church can err.
Quest. IS there any particular Church in the world to whom God has given this
privilege not to err, but to be infallible?

A. There is none which has this privilege: The Church of Israel, who before
the coming of Jesus Christ was the only Visible Church of God has erred, and
fell many times into Idolatry, in the 2 Chronicles. 15. it is said that for a long
season Israel had been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest and
without Law and the Prophets. Isaiah 56.10. Reproaches the Church of Israel,
that their watchmen were all blind and ignoraant, Ezekiel. 20.7. We may learn that
the Church of Israel committed Idolatry in Egypt, did she not err in making of
the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. And when Juda had as many gods as Cities, Jerem.
2.28. And in the time of Jesus Christ the Church of the Jews was infected with
many Heresies, and with the evil Leven of the Pharisees; and there is not to be
found an example of any particular Church from the Apostles time till now, that
has persisted in their purity; and it was for good reason that St. Paul
writing to the Church of Rome bids her take heed least she should be cut off
for her incredulity, Romans 11.21, 22. For she has fallen the most heavily and
gone the furthest astray from the truth of all others.

Q. But if it be so that every particular Church has erred and may err, then
it follows that all the Church has failed, and then what will become of the
promise Jesus Christ made to his Church, that the Gates of Hell should never
prevail again her? Math. 16.18.

A. Jesus Christ in that passage speaks not of any particular Church precisely,
but of the Church of the Elect, and gives us assurance by these words, that all
the machinations of the World and Satan shall never be able to hinder the
Church from subsisting in the Earth, but that there shall be a company of
Believers which shall confess his Name, for the Foundation of the Lord stands
sure, God knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and notwithstanding the Corruption
of the World, there is all ways reserved some who boweth not the Knee before
Baal. 1 Kings 19.18. And if it happen that some Church fall from the Truth, God
raises up another in whom he manifests his Knowledge.

Q. What you say seems contrary to your received opinion, that the state of the
Church has been interred.

A. We only understand by this the general condition of the Church in the West,
which by reason of the Dominion of the Pope, and the Supperstitions in the
Roman Church has been interrupted, or greatly Corrupted; but it follows not
that though there were not in the West pure particular Visible Churches, that
there was not in the East and other parts of the World.

Q. But though each particular Church may err, yet General Councils assembled
in the Name of Jesus Christ cannot err, for Jesus Christ has promised that
when two or three are gathered together in his Name he will be in the midst of
them. Matthew. 18.20.

A. I answer it cannot be affirmed with any certainty of Faith, that there has
been any Council that has not erred in some kind, except that of the Apostles
Acts 15. because they were immediately and infalliably lead into all Truth as
Jesus Christ promised, John 14.26. The Church of Israel assemnled in Council
erred, having condemned Jesus Christ to death as a Blasphemer: Many that have
named themselves General Councils have manifestly erred, as that of Nice 2.
which commanded to Worship Images upon pain of Curse and Anathem, and that of
Constance which took away the Cup in the Sacrament from the people; though they
grant that Jesus Christ had Instituted it, and the Primitive Church had
practiced otherwise: such Councils, though they say they are assembled in the
Name of Jesus Christ, are not so, since they Combat his Doctrine.

Q. What call you then a Council assembled in the Name of Jesus Christ?

A. These who being assembled by his Authority submit their decisions to his
Holy Word.

SECT. VIII. Of the marks of the True Church.
Quest. BY what mark know you the True Church, since there are so many, and so
different in their sentiments, and each of them pretending to be the true one?

A. By that which Jesus Christ gives us, John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me: and Chap. 8.31. If you continue in my word, then are you my
disciples indeed. That is then the true Church which is Conform to the word of
Jesus Christ, and obeys his voice.

Q. But what say you to Antiquity?

A. That it is a deceitful mark, untruth being little later then Truth; An
error is nor the truer because it is ancient: Antiquity destitute of Truth is
but an ancient error, as an Ancient Elegantly spoke, Jesus Christ said not, I
am Custom, but I am the Truth John 14. The only Antiquity that we receive is
the first Truth which we have in the Holy Scripture, to the which we Appeal for
the condemnation of all error, saying with Jesus Christ, In the beginning it
was not so. Matthew. 19.8.

Q. What ju^gment make you of Succession in the Chair?

A. That is also a false mark, for Heretics may also make use of Antiquity,
and Succession in the Chair without Truth is void: We are not to judge of the
Truth of a Church by her Succession, but upon the contrary of her Succession by
the Truth she Teaches: The Pharisees in Moses Chair corrupted the Law; and at
this time the Doctors of the Roman Church, in the pretended Chair of St. Peter,
Combat his Doctrine.

Q. Visibility and splendour may not it be a mark of the True Church?

A. No, for the Word of God upon the contrary foretells crosses and afflictions
to befall the Church, and there happens sometimes so much calamity to the Church
that she seems to be hidden, or to be vanished from the Earth, as when she was
Captive in Egypt and in Babylon, shut up in the Family of Abraham, and when
many days passed in Israel without the True God, and without a Teachin Priest,
and without the Law. 2. Chron. 15.3. and when Idolatry was publicly introduced
into the Kingdom of Juda, and into the Temple of Jerusalem.

Q. But the Christian Church having received more authentic promises for
extention and splendour, it is not likely to be invisible, and that City set on
a Hill cannot be hidden. Matthew. 5.14.

A. It is true that by the calling of the Gentiles the Christian Church is more
extended than that of the Jews was, and there shall always be a Visible
Christian Church in the World, but it is not necessary to a particular Churches
being pure that it be Splendent and Visible: The seven thousand men that had
not bowed their Knee to Baal, were the true Church, though they appeared not in
Israel, and since the Church of Jerusalem ceased not to be the True Church,
when, Revelation 12. she was forced to fly into the Wilderness to shun the
persecution of the Jews: and Rev. 12. Wings are given to the Church that she
might fly and hide her self in the Wilderness: And Chap. 13. there is spoken of
a time wherein all the Earth should Worship the Beast. Jesus Christ says Luke
18.8. When he shall come he shall find no Faith in the Earth; and they of the
Church of Rome themselves, say that Antichrist will make the Sacrifice of the
Mass to cease for three years and a half.

Q. May not perpetual duration be a mark of the true Church?

A. No, because perpetual duration is a thing not known, but hoped for, and
there is no particular Church has received any promise from God to endure for
ever.

Q. But some will say, we wonder not that you reject those precedent marks,
seeing it is two hundred years ago only, since you appeared in the World, so
that you cannot show your Succession, nor where you were before Calvin and
Luther.

A. We do not boast of our Succession, but of our Truth, yet we prove
sufficiently that our Religion is not new, but the first and most ancient, in
making appear that we have the same Religion that Christ and his Apostles had,
and being truth it self, by consequent it could not be interrupted, Truth being
Eternal and immutable, and there must needs therefore always have been some
Church in the World, that has made profession thereof, for the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail against the Church. Those then that ask us, where our Religion
was before Luther and Calvin, we will ask them where theirs was in the time of
Christ and his Apostles; both of us begin the History of our Religion at that
time.

Q. May not multitude be a good mark of the True Church?

A. No more than the rest, for it agrees better-with a false than with a True
Church, Jesus Christ commands us to enter in at the strait gate, for broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in there at,
Matthew. 7.13. and Luke 12.32. he calls his Church the little flock, and Exodus
23.2. we are forbidden to follow a multitude to do evil; in short, multitude
cannot be a good mark of the True Church, since Pagans and Mahumetans are more
in number than the Christians, and amongst the Christian Churches, the
Heretics are commonly more numerous than the Orthodox, as Christian Catholics
were fewer than the Arians.

Q. What think you of Miracles?

A. That we have reason to suspect that Mark, since Jesus Christ has foretold
us, Matthew. 24.24. That false Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, showing
great signs and wonders: and St. Paul foretells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. That the son
of perdition will come with signs and lying wonders.

Q. How know you that the Miracles of the Roman Church are lying wonders?

A. First, Because they give Authority to lies, as Worshipping of Images and
Praying to Saints: Secondly, Because often they are not done in the Name of God
and Jesus Christ, as the Miracles of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, but in the
name of some Images or Saint. Thirdly, Because they are feigned inventions and
contrivances to deceive the simple and credulous, and to keep them in their
Superstition, therefore they do them not in public before those they call
Heretics, to Convert them, but secretly without Witnesses.

Q. Has the True Church no Miracles?

A. Yes, Those of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, which having sufficiently
comfirmed the Doctrine declared to us, we have no need of new Miracles to give
Authority thereto: an Evil and Adulterous Generation seeks after a sign.
Matthew. 12.39. and 16.4. Signs are not for them that believe, but for them that
believe not. 1 Cor. 14.22.

Q. May the titles of Catholic and Holy, be marks of the True Church?

A. No, Because names are not essential properties, and an Heretical Church may
as well assume these Titles as the True one; besides the Title of Catholic or
Universal, can be no mark of any particular Church.

Q. What think you of Union?

A. That it is not an absolute mark of the Church, for it is found in false and
Heretical Churches which are well United, but Union in Faith, and Conformity to
the Word of God, is a true mark of a Church, but if destitute of Truth it is
only a conspiracy against God.

Q. What judgment make you of Holiness.

A. That is the only right mark of the True Church, provided that Holiness in
Doctrine be understood as well as in manners.

SECT. IX. Of our Separation from the Roman Church.
Quest. WHy have you separated from the Church of Rome?

A. Because our Conscience would not suffer us to partake of her Errors and
Superstitions, since we find not in her the only mark of the True Church, which
is Conformity to the Word of God, nor the pure Administration of the Sacraments.

Q. But ought not Christian Charity and the love of peace make us bear with
their errors? St. Paul tells us that Charity bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.
and should the infirmities and faults of our brethren make us separate from
them, and break the Union of the Church by a Schism?

A. We must bear with our Neighbors faults, but we must not consent to them;
now we cannot continue in Communion with an Heretical Church, but we must
consent to their Errors. 2 Cor. 6.14. What Fellowship has Righteousness with
Unrighteousness, and what Communion has Light with Darkness, and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? And it were not just that to
please our Neighbors we should defile our selves with their Superstition: St.
Paul recommends Truth to us as well as Charity, and Ephesians. 4.3. he would have
us to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

Q. But may not our separation be justly accused of Schesm?

A. No, For it is not absolutely Separation which makes Schism, but that which
is the cause of Separation; now our Separation being upon a just account,
cannot be called Schism; for the Errors and Superstitions of the Roman Church,
made our Separation necessary, for God having discovered them to us, by his
Word, we could not without bringing guilt upon our selves neglect that
Commandment of God, Revel. 18.4. to come out of Babylon, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues: besides it does
not become them to reproach us with our Separation, and to accuse us of Schism,
since they first thrust us from amongst them by their Excommunications and all
sorts of violence; and we may much more justly call them Schismatics, they
having so unworthily separated from Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and from the
purity of his Doctrine by so many Heresies which they teach.

Q. Yet could you not for peace sake have dissembled, and contented your selves
with distasting them in your heart.

A. No, For God vomits out of his Mouth those that are luke warm, Revel. 3.16.
and would have us to glorify him as well in our bodies as in our spirits,
which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. and that as we believe with the Heart unto
Righteousness, we should with our own mouth make Confession unto Salvation.
Romans 10.10.

SECT. X. Of the Head of the Church.
Quest. WHo is the Head of the Church?

A. Jesus Christ only, for St. Paul says Ephesians. 4.5. There is one Lord, and one
Faith; and Chap. 1.22. he says that God has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body: Now
as Jesus Christ has but one mystical Body, viz. his Church, also this Body can
have but one Head.

Q. But has not Jesus Christ established under him one here upon Earth, to be
the visible Head of the Church?

A. No, for the Word of God has made no mention thereof, and Ephesians. 4.11. St.
Paul rekoning up the Offices in the Church, says, He gave some Apostles, and
some Pastors and Teachers; but says nothing of this pretended Head, which
should have been the first: And Jesus Christ forbids all Superiority of
Authority amongst his Disciples, Luke 22.25, 26. The Kings of the earth
exercise Lordship over them, but ye shall not be so; and Matthew. 23.8. Be not ye
called Rabby for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren.

Q. It would seem that Jesus Christ looked on St. Peter as a Head, Ordinarily
he is first named in the Gospel, and Matthew. 16.18. Jesus Christ says to him,
Thou art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church.

A. His being named first does not import any Superiority of Authority or
Jurisdiction, but of Honor and Order because of his Age or Gifts; and when
Jesus Christ says upon this Rock will I build my Church; he had not regard to
the person of St. Peter, but to his Doctrine, and the Confession he had made in
the name of the other Apostles, saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, and on this consideration, not only Peter, but the rest of the Apostles
are called the Foundation of the Church, as we are taught by St. Paul, Ephesians.
2.20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

Q. But Jesus Christ in the same place promises to give him the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and that whosoever he shall bind on Earth, shall he bound in
Heaven.

A. In those words he gives no Authority to St. Peter, which he gives not to
the other Apostles, to whom also he has given the Keys, and the power of
binding and loosing, and of remitting and retaining sins. John 20.21. As my
Father has sent me, so send I you, verse 23. Whosoever sins ye remit they are
remitted: But supposing it were as true as it is false, that Jesus Christ did
in this passage Establish Peter Visible Head of the Church, it would not follow
that the Bishops of Rome are his Successors in that Office, since we see no
warrant for it in the Scripture, neither has the other Apostles had any
Successors in their Offices as Apostles.

Q. But since the death of Jesus Christ, and his Ascension, did not the
Apostles acknowledge St. Peter for their Head?

A. No, on the contrary Acts 8.14. the Apostles, send him with John, to Preach
the Gospel in Samaria, and St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.5. That he esteems not
himself a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, and Gal. 2.9. Naming James
before Peter, he says, James, Peter, and John gave him the right hand of
Fellowship, and proves at length in the same place, that he was not called to
be an Apostle by any but by Jesus Christ alone: and 1 Cor. 1.12.13. He reproves
those amongst the Corinthians that did choose to themselves any other Head or
Patron but Jesus Christ, every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo,
and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for
you? Or were you Baptized in the name of Paul? To acknowledge then another Head
than Christ, is to divide Christ. Neither can we acknowledge any other Head but
he who was Crucified for us, and in whose Name we are Baptized: St. Peter
himself takes no other Title in his Epistles, but that of Apostle and Elder,
and speaks to the Pastors of the Church, not as having Authority over them, but
as their comparison in service, 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders that are among you I
exhort, who am also an Elder.

SECT. XI. Of the Invocation of Saints.
Quest. MVst we pray to Saints?

A. No, Because we have neither Command nor Example in the Word of God for it,
and when the Apostles desired Jesus Christ to teach them to Pray, he injoyns
them to pray to God only, Luke 11.2. When you Pray, say Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. Now that which is without the Word of God, is without Faith, Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: It is then a
sin to Pray unto Saints, since it is to Pray without Faith, which is required
in Prayer, James 1.6. Let him ask in Faith nothing wavering.

Q. But is not Praying to Saints expressly forbidden in the Word of God?

A. Yes, For God has commanded us to Adore and Serve him only, Matthew. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; now praying
is one of the chief and principal Acts of Religious Worship and Service, and
St. Paul teaches us that we cannot call on those we do not believe in, Romans
10.14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? then we are
not to Pray to Saints, since it is not lawful to put our confidence in them,
for God declares them cursed that put their trust in man, Jerem. 17.5. Cursed
be the the man that trusts in man.

Q. It is true we are to serve God only with the service of Latria, but may we
not serve the Saints with the service of Dulia?

A. The word of God admits not of this distinction, and Gal. 4.8. St. Paul
condemns the Pagans that they gave service of Dulia to those which by Nature
were no Gods; Now however excellent the Saints are, yet they are not by Nature
Gods.

Q. But why may we not as well pray to the Saints in Heaven, as we desire the
Prayers of Believers here on Earth?

A. Because we cannot Pray to Saints which are at such a great distance from
us, and have not Ears to hear our Voice, but we must acknowledge them to be
searchers of our Hearts, and to know the intended thoughts of our Souls, which
is to attribute to the creature that which is only due to the Creator: 2.
Chron. 6.30. For thou only know the hearts of the children of men.

Q. It is true there is none but God that can immediately know the hearts of
men, but Saints may know them when God reveals them to them, as he did to
Elisha, what his servant Gehazi did to Nahaman, 2 Kings 5.26.

A. I grant God can do it, but it is not sufficient to Pray in Faith that we be
assured of the power of God, but likewise of his Will, but we are so far from
having ground to believe that God will reveal the Prayers of men here below, to
the Saints in Heaven, that on the contrary the Scripture tells, Eccles. 9.5.6.
That they have no more portion for ever in any thing that is done under the
Sun, and therefore Elijah bids Elisha ask what he would before he was taken
away, 2 Kings 2.9. Presupposing that it would be in vain to ask him any thing
after: and God having extraordinarily made a Revelation of this kind to one of
his Prophets, to give Authority to his Ministry, cannot be drawn into a
general consequence for all Saints.

Q. Nevertheless it would seem that seeing God who knows all things; they
should see all things in God as in a Glass.

A. That does not follow; for the Angels who see the Face of God, know not the
time of the day of Judgment, Matthew. 24.36. And if they who see God should see
all that God sees and knows, they would become Gods, seeing that they would
have infinite knowledge: Saints see nothing in God but what is necessary to
make them happy.

Q. Yet Jesus Christ says, Luke 15.7. That there is great joy in Heaven over a
sinner that repents, then Saints must know the repentance of sinners, and
consequently their thoughts and inclinations?

A. Jesus Christ speaks not of Saints but of Angels, as he explains himself
verse 10. saying, There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one
sinner that repenteh: Now we need not wonder that the Angels have some
knowledge of men's repentance since they are sent hither for that end, as the
Apostle tells us, Hebr. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation.

Q. But what say you of the Letter Elija writ to Joram after he was taken up
into Heaven? 2 Chronicles. 21.12.

A. That Elija writ not that Letter after he was taken up, but before, having
writ it by a Spirit of Prophecy, and left it on the Earth, and so was given
afterward to Joram by some Prophets to whom Elijah had committed it.

Q. Nevertheless glorified Saints must have some knowledge of the condition af
Believers here on Earth, since they take care for their Salvation, and St.
Peter promises to Believers, 2 Epist. 1.15. That after his death he would
endeavor that they might remember the things that he had taught them.

A. This passage is not well and rightly translated so, for St. Peter says not
that he will endeavor after his death that Believers should remember those
things; but, that they should remember them after his death.

Q. At least it is lawful to Serve and Pray to Angels, which assist us and are
near to us.

A. Not at all, for Revel. 22.9. and 19.10. St. John was going to Worship the
Angel, and the Angel rebuked him, and took him up, saying, See thou do it not,
I am thy fellow servant, worship God; and St. Paul rejects Worshipping of
Angels as superstitions, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which
he has not seen.

Q. Yet we see that under the Old Testament Believers have often worshipped
Angels, and Prayed to them: Abraham bowed himself toward the ground before
them; and a little after Lot, Genesis 18. and 19.

A. I answer Abraham and Lot did not think they were Angels, but men that were
strangers, for whom they make ready Meat, therefore this homage was only Civil,
and acccording to the Eastern custom when they meet one another, but when they
knew one of them was the Lord, they Worshipped him, and Prayed to him likewise
as God.

Q. What think you of this passage in Genesis 48.16. Where Jacob dying, blesses
after this manner the children of Joseph; The Angel which redeemed me from all
evil bless the Lads, and let my name be named on them, and the names of my
Fathers, Abraham and Isaac; for it would seem that in this passage Jacob prays
to an Angel, and that he would have the children of Joseph pray to Abraham and
Isaac?

A. I answer this was no Created Angel, but Jesus Christ, whom Malachie calls
the Angel of the Covenant, Chap. 3.1. And one of those that appeared to Abraham
and Lot, who is often times in the 18. and 19. Chapter of Genesis. called the Lord,
and he with whom Jacob Wrestled; Hosea 12.3, 4. the Prophet says, Jacob by his
strength had power with God, yea he had power over the Angel, and prevailed;
and Jacob's desiring that his name, and the names of his Fathers should be
named on the Children of Joseph, is not that he would have them to Pray to him
and his Fathers, but that the Children of Joseph, to wit, Ephraim and Manasseh
should be called by his name, as Children of Jacob, and be partakers with them,
as two different Tribes, which was observed when the Land of Canaan was
divided: but besides this, it is in vain for the Doctors of the Roman Church to
allege passages out of the Old Testament, for the Invocation of Saints: since
they think that the Saints were shut up in the Limboes of the Fathers, and did
not then see the Face of God, which is the principal ground they have for their
Invocation of Saints.

SECT. XII. Of the Intercession of Saints.
Quest. WE being miserable sinners, how can we draw near to the Divine Majesty,
if we do not employ some of Gods friends for Mediators, as when we will speak
to the King, we adress our selves to some of his Favorites?

A I grant we dare not approach to God but by a Mediator, but we need not for
that end employ Saints; for if we have sinned we have an Advocate with the
Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2.1. And Jesus Christ says,
John 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father
but by me.

Q. But may not Saints and Angels be also Mediators?

A. No, For St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God, and men, the man Jesus Christ.

Q. This passage seems to be altered, for in the Greek it is, There is one
Mediator, and not one only Mediator.

A. The Greek word as in this Context signifies one only, as also Ephesians,
4.4, 5, 6. And they of the Roman Church in the Louvain Version have turned it
so, in the next Chapter Verse 2. That a Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife,
they have it of one only, and it is clear that in that place it should be taken
so, for the Apostle would have us to understand that there is one Mediator as
there is one God: now there is but one only God, there is therefore also but
one only Mediator.

Q. It is true there is but one Mediator for redemption, but there may be more
for Intercession.

A. Not as Intercessor is to be understood in this question, for one who can
procure us the favor of God by his own Merit and Intercession, and so those of
the Roman Church understand the word, when they pray God in the Mass to hear
them for the Merits of the Saints, whose Relics are under the Altar: Now there
can be no such Intercessor but Jesus Christ only, who alone has reconciled us
to God by his blood, and is the only Advocate and Propitiation for our sins, 1
John 2.2. And it is in this beloved that God accepts us, Ephesians. 1.6.

Q. Why may not glorified Saints Pray to God in Heaven for us, as well as
Believers Pray for one another on the Earth; have they less Knowledge and
Charity in Heaven, then they had on Earth?

A. Glorified Saints may pray for the Church in general, but not for particular
Believers, not for want of Charity, but for want of knowledge of the persons
and their necessities; for though their knowledge be much more perfect because
of their seeing God, yet have they no more communication with Believers here on
Earth, as it has been said before, that they have no more portion for ever in
any thing that is done under the Sun.

Q. But is it not expedient at least to make use of the Intercession of Saints
to go to Jesus Christ for us?

A. No, For he commands us to come to himself, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden.

SECT. XIII. Of Images.
Quest. IS It not lawful to make Images of God?

A. No, for the Prophet Isaiah shows us that God cannot be represented, Chap.
40. Verse. 18. To whom will ye liken God, or what Likeness will ye compare unto
him! And Deuteronomy. 4.15. Moses speaks to the Israelites, saying, Take ye heed
unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of Similitude on the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire: 16. Lest ye corrupt your
selves, and make you a Graven Image, the similitude of any Figure, the likeness
of Male or Female.

Q. Nevertheless, God has often appeared to Believers under the Old Testament
in humane shape; as to Abraham and Lot, Genesis 18. and 19.

A. Extraordinary Appearances of God are not to be the Rule of our Actions, but
his Commands: and though God appeared in Humane Likeness, yet the Church of
Israel never made any such Representation of him.

Q. Is it lawful to make Images of Saints, and give to them any Religious
Worship or Honor.

A. No, for God has forbidden us to bow down before any Image whatsoever in
his second Gommandment, Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath. Thou
shall not bow down to them, nor serve them.

Q. This word should he translated Idol, and not Image; for God forbids there
only the Pagan Idols, which did represent false Gods, and not Images of Saints.

A. Images both of Saints and Angels are forbidden; for he forbids to make
any Likeness of any thing that is in Heaven.

Q. Why then did God command to put Cherubims upon the Ark, and in the
Tabernacle, which did represent Angels.

A, That was a Command of the Ceremonial Law, which since has been abolished
by Jesus Christ; but the forbidding to worship Images is a Command of the Moral
Law, which is eternal and indispensable. Besides, they were not put there to be
worshipped by the people, for there were two Veils between the people and them,
so that the people could not see them: and there was, moreover, an express
Command to make Cherubins, whereas there is none to make Images of Saints, and
to put them into the Church.

Q. Is it lawful to worship the Relics of Sainis?

A. No: We should have a respect unto the Sepulchers of the Saints and Martyrs,
since their Bodies have been the Temples of the Holy Ghost; but to give them
any Religious Worship, is to leave the living God to serve dead Idols; And God
hid the body of Moses, lest the people of Israel should have committed Idolatry
with it. Deuteronomy. 34.6.

SECT. XIV. Concerning Praying for the Dead.
Quest. MVst we pray for the Dead?

A. No, Because we have neither Command nor Example in the Word of God: and
since the Scripture speaks only of two places, Heaven for the Righteous, and
Hell for the Wicked, our Prayers cannot draw the Wicked out of Hell, for their
Torments are to be Eternal; nor can they add to the Happiness of those in
Heaven, because it is already Complete.

Q. Yet we have an Example in the 12th Chapter of the 2d. Book of the
Maccabees, where Juda and his Men prayed for their Brethren which were slain,
and under whose Garmen^^ were found things consecrated to Idols, that their sin
might be pardoned.

A, This Book is not Canonical, nor was ever acknowledged as such by the Church
of the Jews, and there were many Superstitions sliden in among the Jews in the
time of the Maccabees; so their Practice cannot be an Example to be followed:
neither did they pray that they might be delivered out of Purgatory, but that
they might be happy at the Resurrection, as it appears from Verse. 44.

SECT. XV. Of Purgatory.
Quest. DO You believe that after this Life the Souls of all Believers go to
the fire of Purgatory for many years to be tormented, that they may be purged
and cleansed from their sins.

A. No, For the Scripture speaking of the Condition of Believers after this
Life, tells us, Isa. 57.1. That the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come, and shell enter into Peace: and Rev. 14.13. that Blessed are the Dead
that die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, said the Spirit, that they may rest
from their Labors, and their Works do follow thom. And Eccles. 12.7. Then
shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto
God who gave it. And 2 Cor. 5.1. that If our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens* Likewise, Jesus Christ, by the Parable, Luke, 16. of
Dives and Lazarus teaches us, that Believers after Death are carried into
Abraham's Bosom, where they are comforted; and at his Death he says to the
Converted Thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Luke 23.43. and
St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Promises to himself, That having kept the Faith and
fought the good Fight, he should receive the Crown of Righteousness: and the
Spirit of Christ says to Believers, Rev. 2.10. Be Faithful unto Death and I
will give thee a Crown of Life. In a word, Jesus Christ, John. 5.24. says,
That he that believes on him, shall never enter into condemnntion, but is
passed from death unto Life: And St. Paul, Romans 8.1. says, There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus: then certainly neither in this
Life, nor in that which is to come, is there any condemnation to them; it must
then be much rashness to condemn those whom God has justified, and to think
that God takes pleasure to punish his Children many thousands of years for Sins
already pardoned, and for which he has had full satisfaction by the death of
his Son our Savior.

Q. But since the Scripture tells us, Rev. 21.17. That no unclean thing shall
enter into the Holy City, is it not necessary that Souls so much infected with
Sin should be purged with fire that they might be presented pure and holy unto
God?

A. In this passage of the Revelations God speaks of wicked persons, and not
of Believers, such as Traitors, and Adulterers, who committed abomination and
falsehood, and who entered not into the City of God, Revel. 22.15. And it is
not material fire that cleanses the soul, but the blood of Jesus Christ that
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. for by virtue of his blood our sins are
blotted out: we are also cleansed by the Holy Ghost in Regeneration and
Sanctification: Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the
spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11.

Q. Have Believers no need then to be purged after death?

A. No, For God has in this life freely forgiven all our sins, Col. 2.13.
Neither is there any place for Repentance and Amendment after this life, and
where the Tree faleth there it shall be, Eccles. 11.3.

Q. What do you understand then by the fire St. Paul speaks of 1 Cor. 3.15.
That the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is?

A. I understand the Word of God by which all Doctrines are to be tried, for
the Apostle in that place speaks of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as of a
Building, whose Foundation is in Jesus Christ, and upon which Pastors builded
some Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, that is, good and solid Doctrines, and
others, Wood, Hay, and stubble, that is light and curious Doctrine, which will
perish and vanish away when they are examined by the Word of God, as Wood, Hay,
and Stubble in the fire is burned, and turned to Smoke.

Q. Does not that saying of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.29. What shall they do which
are Baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not, imply a Purgatory?

A. This passage cannot prove Purgatory, for it is only the Resurrection that
the Apostle considers. Many Learned men in the Church have thought that St.
Paul speaks of certain Heretics, who denied the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
and yet when any of them dyed without Baptism, Baptized some others for the
dead and in their name, fearing that they should be punished for dying without
Baptism.

Q. But Jesus Christ says in Matthew. 12.32. That the sin against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven either in this world, or in the world to come, there must
then be a world to come in which sins are forgiven and punished?

A. These words, shall not be forgiven, signify only that it shall be punished
in this World; and in that which is to come; as St. Mark explains it Chapter
3.29. He that Blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost has never Forgiveness; but is
in Danger of Eternal Damnation: Also by the World to come may be understood the
day of Judgment, in which the Scriptures tell us Sins shall be forgiven, and
punished, because then shall be publicly pronounced the Sentence of
Condemnation or of Absolution, according as St. Paul prayed for Onesyphorus,
That he might find mercy of the Lord in that day. 2 Timothy 1.18. because then
mercy or Punishment would be manifested.

SECT. XVI. Of Human Satisfactions.
Quest. CAn men satisfy the Justice of God for their Sins by Works of
Penitence, as Fasting, Alms, Stripes, and such like?

A. No, for they are imperfect, and to think that any Suffering and Pains, but
those of Jesus Christ, can Reconcile us to God, is to esteem the Blood of Jesus
Christ and his Sufferings, superfluous and unprofitable; for God takes not two
payments for one debt, and the Scripture tells us, Col. 2.13.14. That God has
freely forgiven all our Trespasses in blotting out the hand-writinng of
Ordinances that was against us, Nailing it to his Cross, and this Word freely
excludes all Satisfaction on our part, for as St. Paul, Romans 11.6. says, If by
Grace, then it is not by Works.

Q. But they will tell you that they hold those penitential works, Satisfactory
only by virtue of the death of Christ.

A. These things are contradictory, for Jesus Christ dyed that we should not be
obliged to make satisfaction our selves, and to pay that debt which it was
impossible for us to pay; and the Apostle, Hebr. 1.3. tells us, That he had by
himself purged our sins, and not by our making Satisfaction.

Q. God has indeed freed us from the guilt of our sins, for Jesus Christ's
sake, but not from all the punishment of them.

A. This is an absurd evasion, for the forgiving of Sin, is nothing else, but
the not punishing of it, and when we desire That God would forgive our Sins as
we forgive them that trespass against us, we pray That God would not inflict
the punishment that we deserve for our sins; no more than we seek to Revenge
the Wrongs done unto us.

Q. Yet God often inflicts punishments after he has pardoned Sins, as he did
upon David after having signified to him that his Adultery and Murder were
pardoned. 2 Samuel 12.10, 14.

A. Such punishments God inflicts for to humble and correct his Children, but
not to satisfy his Justice, and are rather Effects of Love and Mercy, than of
Justice, therefore Eliphas says to Job, Happy is the man whom God Corrects,
therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty, Job 5.17.

Q. What think you of Stripes and Pilgrimages, and such voluntary works, by
which the Roman Church think they make satisfaction to the Justice of God?

A. Not only that they cannot satisfy Gods Justice, but that they deserve
punishment, because they are Superstitious Traditions of men, and of which it
shall be said, Who has required these things at your hands?

Q. What say you to the Counsel that Daniel gave Nebucadnezar, to redeem his
sins by Alms? Dan. 4.27.

A. That he does not mean that the Alms of Nebucadnezar could be the price of
his Redemption, but that he would change his life in the presence of God, and
make up the time spent in unjustice, and extortions, by a serious amendment of
life, and giving liberally Alms to the poor, and that in so doing God would be
propitious to him; who according to his mercy to repenting sinners has
promised, Ezech. 18.21, 22. That if the wicked turn from his sins, they shall
not be mentioned unto him; and the word Translated by some, Redeem, signifies
to break, to tear, and undo what has been done.

Q. If by our Works we cannot make satisfaction for our selves, than we can far
less do it for others?

A. That is certain, therefore the Apostle Galat. 6.5. tells us, That every man
shall bear his own burden, and 2 Cor. 5.10. That we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body
according that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

Q. Yet, Colos. 1.24. St. Paul tells us, That he fills up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in his Flesh, for his Body sake, which is the
Church?

A. St. Paul saying, for his Body which is the Church, answers this objection,
for this shows us, that besides Jesus Christ's Natural Body, whose sufferings
were accomplished on the Cross, when he said it is finished, John 19.30. he
has a Mystical Body, viz. the Church whose Afflictions and Sufferings are
called Sufferings of Christ, because of the near Union with Christ, who looks
upon that which is done to any of his, as done to himself, Matthew. 25.40. and
who cried from Heaven to Saul, who Persecuted the Churches, Act. 9.41. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? and St. Paul, saying that he suffered for his
Body which is the Church does not mean for her Redemption, but for her Example
and Edification.

SECT. XVII. If the Sufferings of Christ were accomplished on the Cross.
Quest. YOur saying that the Sufferings of Jesus Christ were accomplished on
the Cross, seems to contradict that which they say you Teach of Christ's
descending into Hell, that the Soul of Jesus Christ did locally descend into
Hell after his death, and was tormented with the Devils till his Resurrection.

A. This Accusation is an impudent Calumny invented by the Monks to make us
odious to the people, for on the contrary, we have always Taught that the
Sufferings of Jesus Christ were finished in his death, and we overthrow the
Doctrine of Purgatory, and of Limbo's, and Christ's Local Descension into Hell,
by his own words to the Converted Thief upon the Cross, Luke, 23.43. This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise, which words show that his Soul was with our
Saviors in Paradise that same day.

Q. What has given occasion to this Calumny?

A. An Evangelical Doctrine plainly taught in the Word of God, that Jesus
Christ suffered not only in his Body, but likewise in his Soul, having been
extremely afflicted and grieved therein, which made him sweat drops of blood,
Luke, 22.44. and to say, Matthew. 26.38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto
death, and upon the Cross, Why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Which also
was very necessary for our Redemption, for he being the Redeemer of our Souls
as well as of our Bodies, it was necessary he should suffer for us in his Soul,
as well as in his Body.

Q. Yet it will seem no Calumny to say That you Teach that Jesus has been
damned, for these words are found in one of your Catechisms, (viz.) in the
French, Section 10. How could Jesus be in such damnation?

A. The Author of that Catechism, by that word damnation, means nothing but
condemnation, according to the primitive signification of the word, and the
word (such) which is added to that of damnation, fully justifies that; for
being a relative word, it must needs design the damnation spoken of before,
which is such as all Christians grant Jesus Christ has suffered (viz.) That he
drunk the Cup of the Wrath of God for Sin, and suffered the Punishment that
Sinners had merited; and afterward the same Author explains himself so clearly,
that without much Malice he cannot be accused of teaching that Jesus Christ
suffered the Punishment of the damned in Hell with the Devils; for he put this
difference betwixt Jesus Christ's Suffering and the Wickeds Sufferings, that the
wicked continued therein, but that the Anguish which Christ suffered was but a
Sting for to prick him, and that the wicked despair and are angry against God,
and blaspheme him: whereas Jesus Christ never ceased to hope always in God in
the midst of his distress.

SECT. XVIII. Of Pilgrimages.
Quest. IS it lawful to go in Devotion to the Images and Relics of Saints to
be cured of any Distemper, or for good success in our undertaking?

A. No, For this is to leave the Creator, and go to the Creature, whereas we
ought to have recourse to God only for Grace, to help us in time of need Heb.
4.16. And the mercy of God being extended to all Nations, he is not more
accessible in one place than in another, as Christ says to the Samaritan upon
the contest between them and the Jews about the place of Worship, which the one
would have to be in Jerusalem, the others in Mount Garizim, John 4.21, 23.
Woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father, but the true worshipers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth.

SECT. XIX. Of Monkish Vows, and first of that of a Single Life.
Quest. MAy one lawfully Vow a single life to God?

A. No, For a single life is only fit for those that have the gift of
Continence, for those that have it not, God commands to Marry, 1 Cor. 7.9. If
they cannot contain let them marry, for it is better to marry than to burn.

Q. But may not perpetual Continency be Vowed to God?

A. No, For it is the gift of God, and not in our power, St. Paul speaking of
this gift 1. Cor. 7.7. says. I would that all men were even as I my self, but
every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, another after
that.

Q. Who are then they that make themseves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven?
Matthew. 19.12.

A. Those that finding that God has granted them this gift, have taken up a
firm resolution in themselves to abstain from Marriage, that they may serve God
with more liberty and less distraction; but Jesus Christ himself says in the
same place that all men cannot receive this saying: Matthew. 19.11.

Q. Yet St. Paul Condemns widows, who having consecrated themselves to the
service of the Church, would afterward Marry, 1 Timothy 5.12. Having damnation
because they have cast off their first faith.

A. St. Paul condemns them, because by Marrying they make themselves incapable
of fulfilling their promise to serve the Church, and not for their Marrying,
and therefore least they should be obliged to quit their Office, and so violate
their Faith by Marrying, he forbids to receive any into that number under
threescore, and commands young Widows to Marry, saying, I will therefore that
the younger women marry, 1 Timothy 5.14.

Q. Is this command in the 1 Cor. 7.9. If they cannot contain let them Marry,
made to Ministers and Ecclesiastical persons as well as to other people?

A. Yes, For Ministers are as much obliged to obey God as others: and therefore
Ecclesiastical persons under the Law, did Marry both Priests and Prophets, and
under the Gospel St. Peter was Married, and Philip the Evangelist, St. Matthew.
8.14. Acts 21.9. And St. Paul 1 Cor. 9.5. tells us that he had power to lead
about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other Apostles and Brethren of the Lord, and
Cephas: And 1 Timothy 3.2. he would have a Bishop to be the Husband of one Wife,
and therefore speaking of them who forbid Marriage, he calls them seducing
Spirits teaching Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.

SECT. XX. Of Vowing Poverty.
Quest. IS it lawful to Vow Poverty to God, and quit our Goods for to shut our
selves up the rest of our days in a Cloister, and beg our Bread from door to
door?

A. No, Jesus Christ indeed Commands us to quit joyfully our Goods, Wives, and
Houses for to follow him, when we cannot keep them without dissembling or
abandoning the Truth, but he commands us not to beg, but on the contrary would
have us Genesis 3.19. to eat our bread in the sweat of our faces; and 1 Timothy 6.18.
that the Rich should be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; and Ephesians. 4, 28, the Apostle would have us labor, working with
our hands the things which are Good, that we may have to give to him that
needs.

Q. Yet Jesus Christ commands the young men Matthew. 19.21. to sell what he
had, and give it to the poor?

A. Jesus Christ commanded this young man to do it that he might make manifest
his Covetousness, and to show that he loved not God with all his heart, as he
had boasted. Luke 14.26. but he commands not others to do it.

SECT. XXI. Of Vowing Obedience.
Quest. IS it lawful to Vow a blind Obedience without contradiction to a
Superior?

A. No, For God only has Sovereign power over our Consciences; 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye
are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

Q. What think you of the Vows of Children that without the consent, and
against the will of their Parents and Superiors put themselves into
Monasteries?

A. That they are void, for the Scripture tells us, Numb. 30.5. That if a
Father disallow the Vows of a Child yet in his house, they shall not stand; and
they that allow such Vows make void the Commandment of God, Honor thy Father
and thy Mother, by their Tradition, as Jesus Christ charge the Pharisees,
Matthew 15.6.

SECT. XXII. Of Lawful Vows.
Quest. WHat is requisite in lawful Vows?

A. First, That they be made to God only, and not to Creatures, Psalm. 76.11.
Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most high.
Secondly, That the things Vowed be lawful and good: It was a wicked Vow of the
Jews, not to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, Acts 23.12. Thirdly, That
it be not rash, as Jeptha's was, to Sacrifice the first thing that should meet
him after his Victory, Judge. 11.31. and Herod's, Matthew. 14.7. Fourthly, That the
thing Vowed be our own, and that it be in our power to fulfill it.

Q. Are unlawful and wicked Vows to be kept?

A. No, For a wicked and rash Vow ought not to make us violate our first Vow in
Baptism to obey the Commandments of God; and the keeping and fulfilling such
Vows is as great or greater crime than the making of them.

SECT. XXIII. Concerning Fasts.
Quest. WHat think you is to be blamed in the Romish Fasts?

A. Four things chiefly. 1. Their making them consist in distinction of meats,
and not in abstinence from meats. 2. Their ordering them precisely at a certain
time of the year, without respect to the fittest time, in which we ought
particularly to humble our selves before God. 3. Their being become
Superstitious, and being imposed with as much or more rigor than the
Commandments of God. 4. And above all, the believing that they merit Eternal
Salvation in observing of them.

Q. Are such Fasts Condemned in the Word of God?

A. Yes, for St. Paul forbids us to make any distinction of meats, 1 Cor.
10.25. Whatsoever is Sold in the Shambles that Eat, asking no question for
Conscience sake. And our Lord Jesus Christ tells us, Matthew. 15.11. Not that
which goes into the mouth defiles a man, but that which comes out of the
mouth defiles a man. And 1 Cor. 8.8. Meat commends us not to God, for
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse.
And Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. And above all the Apostle speaks very
expressly, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink. And 1 Timothy 4.3.
he says that they are seducing Spirits, teaching doctrins of devils, who
command to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving, of them which believe and know the truth.

Q. It may be answered to these passages, that in them St. Paul condemns two
sorts of persons, First, Those who under the Gospel would oblige Christians to
observe the Ordinances of the Law, touching the distinction of meats, which we
ought not any more to observe, because they were shadows of things to come, but
the body is of Christ. Colos. 2.17. And Secondly, Those who looked on some
meats to be polluted by Nature, as some Heretics have done; but these passages
do not seem to condemn those who in some certain times ordained abstinence from
some sorts of meats to humble and subdue the flesh.

A. To the first I Answer, That if S. Paul Colos. 2.20. would not have us to
Obey the Ordinances of the Law about the distinction of meat, because we are
dead with Christ; though they were Ceremonies instituted of God, much less are
we obliged, seeing we are dead with Christ, to observe New Ordinances, which
are but inventions of men, for we ought to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, and not be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage,
Gal. 5.1. And Secondly, in that passage of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. where he calls
them seducing spirits, that teach to abstain from meats that God has created
to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe the Truth; he speaks
in the general without any restriction: and Colos. 2.22, 23. He condemns them
that say, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, though such things had a show of
Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting of the Body, not in any
honor to satisfying of the flesh: Now the forbidding to eat flesh upon certain
days, must be of these kind of Ordinances.

Q. Do you blame then all manner of Fasts?

A. No, for though Fasting of it self be an indifferent thing, yet it becomes
profitable and good, when Superstition and the opinion of Merit is separated
from it, and when it is employed to subdue the flesh and humble the mind, to
help forward Repentance, and to excite Zeal in Prayer, and therefore the
Scripture ordinarily joins Prayer and Fasting together, Matthew. 17.21. Jesus
Christ says, that There is a kind of Devils that goes not out hut by prayer
and fasting: And 1 Cor. 7.5. St. Paul would would have the Husband and the Wife
to separate themselves for a time, to give themselves to Fasting and Prayers.

Q. When is Fasting requisite?

A. First, In time of Affliction, either public or private, for extraordinary
Humiliation before God, in such a time is needful; as in Joel 2.15. when the
Church was in distress they were commanded to Blow the Trumpet in Sion,
sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly. Secondly, When it is necessary to
make Request by Prayer to obtain something of importance for the Church, and to
obtain a Blessing upon their Ministry. Acts 14.23. And besides these public
Fasts, every one ought to fast and to implore the Mercy of God for their Falls,
and for his assistance in dangers, for to prepare them better for the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper.

SECT. XXIV. Of Holy Days.
Quest. WHat do you blame in the Church of Romes Holy Days or Feasts.

A. First, That it is a departing from the Liberty that God has given us in
the fourth Commandment, Six days shall thou labor. Secondly, By them the Yoke
is again put upon the Christians, which Jesus Christ delivered us from by his
death, as heavy or heavier than it was upon the Jews: Whereas S. Paul commands,
Colos. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an
Holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of
things to come, but the Body is of Christ. Thirdly, That they are dedicated to
the Saints. Fifthly, That the Observation is required as a thing as necessary
as the Observation of the Lords Day. Sixthly, That they think they merit
Salvation by the Observation of them.

Q. Are you then against all Holy Days, except the Sabbath day.

A. Believers may profitably assemble themselves together on other days as well
as on the Sabbath day, to celebrate the Memory of signal Deliverances that we
have received from God by Jesus Christ, by Prayers and Thanksgiving, and
Meditation on the Word, to give thanks for extraordinary deliverance, or for
public humiliation, provided that these days be celebrated without
Superstition, and without Scruple of Conscience, and without an Opinion of any
particular Holiness in that day, or Merit in its Celebration.

SECT. XXV. Of the Providence of God.
Quest. Does any thing happen in the World that is not ordered by the wise
Providence of God?

A. No, For A Sparrow falls not to the ground without the Will of your Father
which is in heaven, and the very hairs of your head are all numbered, Matthew.
10.29.

Q. Do Evils come to pass by His Will and Permission?

A. Yes, For if he would not have them to come, he is Almighty, and could
hinder them; Amos 3.6. Shall there be Evil in the City, and the Lord has not
done it? Does not Evil and Good proceed from the Most High? Lam. 3.38.

Q. These places speak of Afflictions and Calamities which happen to men by the
Providence and Permission of God, for the manifestation of his Justice in the
punishment of the wicked, and of his Goodness, in trying of his own people: But
do you believe that the sins and actions of the wicked are ordered by the
Providence of God?

A. Yes, For the Word of God shows us, that the selling of Joseph by his
Brethren came to pass by the Providence of God, for the preservation of Jacob's
Family; Genesis 50.20. As for you, ye thought evil against me; but God mean^ it
unto good, to bring to pass to save much people alive* Likewise the taking away
Joh's Goods was an effect of God's Providence for his trial; and therefore he
says, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of
the Lord, Job 1.21. And S. Peter says, Act. 2.23. that Jesus Christ was
delivered by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God. And Act. 4.27,
28. he speaks thus; Of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of
Israel, were gathered together to do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Council
determined before to be done.

Q. Can this be, and God not be the Author of sin, nor Partaker of the sins of
the wicked?

A. Yes, Even as a Physician gives not to Leeches their bloody Nature, but does
fitly himself with the inclination of this Animal, to draw blood of his Patient
for his health and comfort, so God does not give to the wicked their
wickedness, nor incite them to evil against his Children, but does wisely
employ their wicked inclinations for their Consolation and Salvation; knowing
how to make all their evil designs serve, by his admirable Providence, the end
that he has determined, and tend to the accomplishment of his wise and holy
Will.

Q. Does not that excuse the wicked, since they only execute the Will of God?

A. No, For they do it without their knowledge, and contrary to their
intentions; for we are not to rule our Actions by God's Decree which is unknown
to us, but by his Commands which are revealed to us; Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things
belong unto the Lord our God, but these things which are revealed belong unto
us, and to our Children.

SECT. XXVI. Of Man's Free Will in the State of Sin.
Quest. IS Not this Doctrine of Providence contrary to that of Man's Free Will?

A. Not at all, For God so governs the things of the World, that he lets them
act according to their nature and inclination; necessary things necessarily,
and the Free, as Men and Angels, freely.

Q. Wherein cons^sts the Free Will and Liberty of Man in the State of Sin,
before Regeneration?

A. In four things; 1. in Natural Actions, as Eating and Drinking. 2. In Civil
Actions, as Buying and Selling. 3. In external, good and virtuous Actions; as
frequenting the Assemblies of God's People, giving Alms, etc. 4. Above all, he
is free and at liberty to sin.

Q. Has not an unregenerate man Free Will to Actions freely good and pleasing
unto God; such as Faith, Repentance and Love to God?

A. No, for Jesus Christ teaches us, that Whosoever commits s^n is the
servant of sin, John 8.34. and Matthew. 7.18. that A corrupt tree cannot bring
forth good fruits. And S. Paul, Romans 8.7. tells us, that The carnal mind is
enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be. And the same Apostle says that Men, before they are savingly called, are
dead in their trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1.

Q. What think you of the brave Actions of Pagans, and the heroic Virtues
which shined in them?

A. That they were brave and splendid Actions, but that they could not be
pleasing unto God, because they were not moved by the consideration of his
Glory, but by their own Ambition; and that these great men not being in Christ,
and being destitute of faith, could not please God; as the Apostle teaches us,
that Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

Q. May not these civil Virtues which are in unregenerate men be saving
dispositions to the Grace of God, and merits of Congruity, which may incline
God to be merciful to them?

A. No, For S. Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.9. that God has saved us, and called us
with an holy Calling? not according to our works, but according to his own
Purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.
And our Lord Jesus Christ does not refer the Cause of his Disciples being
called to the knowledge of God, rather than the Pharisees, to any thing but
God's good pleasure: Matthew. 11.26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because thou have hid those things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Q. What does a man then contribute toward his heavenly Callong?

A. No more than one dead to his Resurrection, or Adam to his Creation, or a
Child to his Conception: and therefore Regeneration is called in the Word of
God a Resurrection, Col. 2.12. You are risen through the faith of the operation
of God, who has raised Jesus Christ from the dead. And a Creation, Ephesians.
2.10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. A
Generation, James 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us with the Word of Truth,
that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures.

SECT. XXVII. Of Man's Free Will in a State of Grace.
Quest. BUT After God has called a man from a state of Sin, to a state of
Grace, has be not Free Will to apply himself to that which is good?

A. Yes, For Jesus Christ says, John 6.36. If the Son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed. even as when Jesus Christ had raised Lazarus from the
dead, he commanded that they should untie him, and let him go: So after God
has raised a man from the state of spiritual death, and delivered him from the
bonds of Sin, he walks freely in the paths of Righteousness, and with
gladness of heart willingly employs himself in his Service, Romans 7.22.

Q. Do you think that after God has called a man to Salvation, he leaves him
to himself and to his own conduct?

A. No, For the same Grace of God which has begun the work will accompany us,
Phil. 1.6. He which has begun a good work in you will perform it until the day
of Jesus Christ. And Chap. 2.13. It is God that works in you both to will and
to do of his good pleasure. All the good motions of regenerate men proceed from
the Grace of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to
think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God.

Q. This being so, a regenerate man is not at liberty, since it is not he
properly that acts, but God in him.

A. This does not follow, for God works so in the Will of Believers, that he
takes not away their liberty; but, on the contrary, makes it more perfect;
making them incline to good, not constrainedly, but with a willing and filial
Obedience, Psalm. 119.32, 35.

Q. How do you understand this Divine Cooperation?

A. That God does not deal with Believers as Stones or Stocks, which are moved
and drawn without feeling, but as with Creatures endowed with Reason, he
conducts and moves them to good by enlightening their Understanding and
sanctifying their Will and Affections: So that whereas they were refractory, he
makes them become obedient; and by the efficacy of Grace, and a force without
constraint, he so draws them, that he makes them follow his Will and Conduct
freely and with delight, as the Spouse says in Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we shall run
after thee. And the Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 5.21. Turn us, O Lord, and we shall
be turned. And John 6.44. Our Savior says, No man can come to me except the
Father draw him. We go then to Christ when it pleases the Father to draw us.

Q. Does not this Doctrine make men negligent in good Works?

A. No, On the contrary, S. Paul, Phil. 2.12. exhorts us, to work out our
Salvation, etc. because It is God that works in us to will and to do,
according to his good pleasure.

Q. Is this Free Will to do good in Believers perfect?

A. No, For their Regeneration is yet imperfect, and there remains something of
their Bondage to sin; which is the cause that they do not the good that they
would, but the evil that they would not, as S. Paul speaks of himself, Romans
7.15.

Q. When is it then that Man's Free Will shall be perfect?

A. When the Soul, delivered from this mortal Body, shall enjoy the presence of
God in Heaven; for there the Soul being made perfectly holy, shall be also
perfectly free as the Angels are, and the Spirits of the Just.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Justification.
Quest. WHat does this word Justify signify in the Scripture.

A. To absolve the Just; and therefore it is ordinarily opposed to the word
Condemn, Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. And Matthew. 12.37. By thy
words thou shall be justiised, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Q. Who is it can justify and absolve us?

A. God only, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect?
it is God that justifies.

Q. Wherein consists that Justification?

A. In the free Remission and Pardon of Sin, which he gives us, as David says,
Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sins are
covered, Romans 4.6, 7.

Q. Upon what consideration does God justify men, and pardon their sin?

A. Upon the account of Christ's Righteousness, and full Obedience he has
rendered unto his Father, which he has particularly testified in being
obedient, even to the death of the Cross; Phil. 2.8. And offering himself a
sacriffce for the propitiation of their sins, as we are taught by S. Paul, Romans
3.25. And Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his Grace. And Romans 5.19. That
by the obedience of one, many are made righteous.

Q. Do not men's Works contribute to their Justification?

A. No, For S. Paul, Phil. 3.9. desires to be found in Christ, Not having
(says he) mine own righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousnoss which is of God By faith. And
Romans 3.24. being justified freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption
of Jesus Christ, excludes Justification by Works; for Romans 11.6. If by Grace,
then it is no more of Works. And having established the Righteousness of God,
instead of the Righteousness of the Law, he concludes, Romans 3.8. that A man is
justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Q. It is answered, that the Apostle excludes only the works of the Ceremonial
Law, and not those of the Moral Law.

A. He excludes also the works of the Moral Law, for he speaks of the Law by
which we are made to know sin? Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law there shall
no flesh be justified in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Now
it is the Moral Law by which we know Sin; we shall not then be justified by the
works of the Moral Law.

Q. It may be said likewise that S. Paul excludes only works done before
Regeneration, and not these that are done in the state of Grace.

A. He excludes also works done after Regeneration, for he excludes the works
of Abraham and David, who were regenerated, Romans 4.3, 6, 7.

Q. Why can we not be justified by works that are done by the Grace of the Holy
Ghost?

A. Because they are yet imperfect; for the Spirit of God does not regenerate
Believers so perfectly in this life, but there rests something of the Old Man,
which obliges them to look after their Justification through the Remission of
their Sins.

Q. Faith is imperfect, yet S. Paul tells us that we are justified by it.

A. We are not justified by Faith as a Work, nor because of the excellency and
perfection of it; but as it is an instrument, by which we apply the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ: and therefore S. Paul calls it Kom. 3.22. The
righteousness of God which is by faith in Jesus Christ.

Q. How then do you agree that which S. Paul says, that Man is justified by
faith, without the works of the Law: And that which S. James says, that Man is
justified by works, and not by faith only? James 2.24.

A. St. Paul speaks of the Justification wherewith we are justified before God,
but S. James of that wherewith we justify our selves. God justifies us as a
Judge, who absolves us upon the account of the death of Jesus Christ, and not
at all upon the account of our works; but we justify our selves by our works,
as Witnesses by which we manifest and declare that we are justified, and that
our Faith is sincere and true, as S. James explains it, saying, verse. 18. Show
me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. And
verse. 17. that Faith without works is dead.

Q. Who are they that God justiifes?

A. They only, who being converted to God by a serious Repentance, believe in
Jesus Christ our Lord, according to that which St. Peter said to the Jews Acts
3.19. Repent ye and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, and Acts
10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Q. These thing being so explained, how do you define Justification?

A. A gracious sencence whereby God, in his mercy, declares such an one
(absolved from his sins, and justified in his sight) as Repents of his sins,
and believes in Jesus Christ; in consideration of his Righteousness and
Obedience, and of his death which he has suffered for sinners.

SECT. XXIX. Of Merits.
Quest. CAn we Merit Salvation by our Works?

A. No, For we are justified freely by the Grace of God, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ: Romans 3.24. And we are saveed not of works least any
man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9. The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23. Now
Grace and Works, Gift and Merits are incompatible, and the Scripture calls us
Children, to teach us that we obtain not Salvation as Buyers and Mercenaries:
but as Children and Heirs, Romans 8.17. Col. 3.24.

Q. Why canaot Works done by the Grace of God Merit?

A. First, Because they are imperfect. Secondly, Because they do proceed from
the Grace of God, for that which is given cannot merit from him who gave it.
Thirdly, Because they are due, and the payment of Debts is no Merit, Luke
17.10. When you shall have done all these things which are commanded, say you,
we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do:
Fourthly, Because they signify nothing to God: My goodness extends not to
thee, Psalm. 16.2. Job 22.2, 3. and 35.7. and Fifthly, Because they are not to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.

Q. Why then does the Word of God speak so often of salvation as of a reward?

A. It is not a reward merited, or given to a Mercenary as a thing due, of
which St. Paul speaks, Romans 4.4. To him that works is the reward not reckoned
of Grace, but of debt: but Salvation is a free reward which is given as to a
child, of which David speaks, 103.4. The Lord crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercy.

Q. What say you to that which is said of believers, Revel. 3.4. That they are
clothed in White Robes, for they are worthy: and to this that St. Paul calls
Life Eternal a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall
give him? 2 Timothy 1.8.

A. I answer Belivers are worthy of Life Eternal, not because they have merited
it, but because God by his Grace has made them worthy, that is to say
according to the style of the Word of God, capable of receiving it: as John
Baptist, Matthew. 3. says, Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, he does not
understand that they merited Repentance, but that they should be agreeable to
Repentance: And St. Paul exhorts the Philippians, that their conversation be
worthy of the Gospel, that is to say becoming the Gospel: also God is just in
giving Life Eternal to those that believe, not because they have merited it,
but because it is just with God to accomplish his free promise, Nehem. 9.8.

SECT. XXX. Of Predestination.
Quest. WHat is it you call Predestination?

A. The absolute and free decree of God by which out of the corrupt mass of
men, he has pleased to choose some to be Vessels of Grace and Mercy, and to
bring them to Salvation by Faith and Sanctification, leaving the others in
their corruption and misery.

Q. God has not elected all men then to Salvation?

A. No, for Jesus Christ says, Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. That many are called,
but few chosen.

Q. Has God chosen those that he has Elected to Salvation upon the account of
their excellency, or of Faith foreseen in them?

A. No, For so it would be men that should choose God, and not God that should
have chosen men, contrary to that which Jesus Christ says to his Disciples,
John 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that you should bring
forth fruits: Faith is not the cause, but the effect of Predestination as it is
said, Acts. 13.48. As many as were Ordained to Eternal Life, believed.

Q. What then is the Cause of Men's Election?

A. Only the good pleasure of God. Ephesians. 1.5. God having predestined us unto
the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will: And therefore St. Paul, Romans 11.5. calls the Election of Believers, an
Election of Grace; and Romans 9. he tells us, That the Children being not yet
born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said,
The Elder shall serve the Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated, verse. 11.12.13. It is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy. verse. 16.

Q. Is the Election to Salvation irrevocable?

A. Yes, for 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, The Lord
knows who are his?

Q. If it be so, what ever Sins the Elect commit yea and though they should
want Faith and Repentance, they must of necessity be Saved.

A. You make the end combat the means, for whom God has elected to Salvation,
he has elected to Sanctification as a means necessary to obtain it, for
without Faith, Repentance and Sanctification, none shall see God: Heb. 12.14.
and John 15.16. I have chosen you, says Christ, that you should bring forth
fruits, and that your fruit should remain; and Epbes. 2.10. We are his
workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto Good Works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them: see 2 These. 2.13. Ephesians. 1.4.

SECT. XXXI. Of Perseverance.
Quest. MAy those that God has predestined to Salvation, fall finally and
totally from the Grace of God?

A. No, For that Chain that St. Paul speaks of cannot be broken, Romans 8.30.
Whom he did Predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. The Decrees of God
are irrevocable, and his Covenant with his Elect is eternal. Jerem. 32.39. I
will give them one heart, that they may fear me for ever, verse. 40. I will make
an everlasting Covenant with them that I will not turn away from them, etc.

Q. Then the Faith of the Elect cannot be totally lost?

A. No, because it is the Faith of the Elect, Tit. 1.1. and Jesus Christ says,
John 5.24. He that believes in him has Everlasting Life, and shall not come
into condemnation. And John 4.14. He promises to give water that whosoever
shall drink thereof, shall never thirst, but it shall be in him a well of water
springing up into Everlasting Life. And St. Peter, 1 Epist. 1.23. That the word
of God by which we are regenerated, lives and abides for ever, and is not a
corruptible seed, but incorruptible.

Q. Yet the Scripture speaks of Stars fallen from heaven. Rev. 6.13. and of
them who have made shipwreck of Faith. 1 Timothy 1.19.

A. We say of such, that which S. John says, 1 Ep. 2.19. They went out from us,
but they were not of us; that is, They conversed with us, but they were not of
our body, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us: They were called and not chosen.

Q. From whence proceeds that perseverance?

A. Not from the power and nature of Faith considered in it self, but from the
continual assistance of God, and from the certainty of his promises, for Jesus
Christ says, John 6.39. This is the Father's will which has sent me, that of
all which he has given me I should lose nothing: his Gifts and Calling is
without Repentance, Romans 11.29. We are kept by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last Time. 1 Peter, 1.5. Add the
efficacy of the intercession of Jesus Christ, For he prayed for us that our
Faith fail not. Luke 22.32. Joh. 17.20.

SECT. XXXII. Of the Certainty of Perseverance and Salvation.
Quest. ARE All obliged to believe that they shall be saved, and persevere to
the end?

A. No, for those that continue in unbelief and impenitence, ought not to have
this persuasion, but they that do seriously repent, and believe in Jesus Christ
their Savior, are obliged to believe this Evangelical Promise, That whosoever
believes on the Son of God should not perish, but have Everlasting Life, 1
John, 3.16. and are obliged to obey the Command of God. Hebr. 4.16. to come
boldly unto the Throne of Grace, and Chap. 10.22. To draw near to God with a
true heart in full assurance of Faith.

Q. We ought indeed to go to God with full assurance of Faith, that he is
merciful, and will pardon our Sins, if we have the repentance that is
necessary, but to be assured that we shall never fall from the Grace of God
seems to be an inconsiderate Affirmation, since we fall every day in diverse
manners, and have every day need to implore the mercy of God, and to renew our
Reconciliation: we may indeed be assured of the goodness of God, but we ought
to suspect our own infirmity.

A. It is true; but also we ought to be assured that God will accomplish his
power in our weakness, and will be merciful to us in his Son, and will not
permit sin so to prevail as to make us wholly fall away from a State of Grace,
and so fall short of the Salvation which he has promised: And every Believer
ought to say with S. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.18. The Lord shall deliver me from every
evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom. And to accuse those
who are assured of their Salvation and of Perseverance, of rashness, is to
accuse David, Asaph, Jacob, Job, Paul, and other Saints, who were assured that
they should not be greatly moved, Psalm. 62.2. But that after God had guided
them with his Counsel, he would receive them into Glory. Psalm. 73.24. That they
should see God with their eyes. Job 19.27. Who have waited for the Salvation of
the Lord. Genesis 49.18. And who were persuaded that neither death nor life should
separate them from the love of God, Romans 8.37.

Q. You speak of some privileged Saints, Prophets and Apostles which might have
a Revelation of their Salvation; but it follows not that other Believers must
have such Assurance.

A. It does follow, since that these Saints had not this Assurance by an
extraordinary Revelation of their Salvation, but that it was built upon the
goodness of God, the stability of his Promises, and upon the efficacy of the
death and intercession of Jesus Christ, which are Motives and Considerations
common to all Believers.

Q. Have Believers always this Assurance?

A. No, For Faith has its weaknesses and distempers; and according as Sin and
the Flesh predominates, Faith and Assurance diminishes; but at last Faith
becomes victorious.

Q. But may not one be deceived in this Assurance, and take carnal Security for
true Faith and Assurance?

A. I grant some may deceive themselves, but from thence it follows not but
that true Believers may know they have a true Faith, otherwise S. Paul's
Exhortation was in vain, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the
faith, if it cannot be known by Examination.

Q. By what marks do you certainly know true Faith?

A. By its effects, as a Tree by its Fruits, Matthew. 7.16. If it works by
love, Gal. 5.6. If it produces in us the love of God, and disesteem of the
World; Ardour and pleasure in praying to God, and Zeal for his Glory. And
besides these Testimonies, a Believer has The spirit of God, which bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, Romans 8.16. Which
seals us unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. and Who is the Earnest of
our Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the
praise of his Glory, Ephesians. 1.14.

Q. This Doctrine seems to incline men to be licentious; for every one may say,
If I have assurance of Salvation, what need I employ my self in good works?

A. This is the thought of a profane person, and not of a child of God; for
none can promise themselves Salvation without good works. We know not our
Election by Election, but by the examination of our Consciences; therefore S.
Peter 2 Epist. 1.10. compared with verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. would have us give
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure by good works. And the Holy
Ghost, who is the Spirit of Adoption in the hearts of Believers, is also the
spirit of Holiness: And in witnessing to them that they are the children of
God, he gives to them also such holy Motions and Affections.

Q. Yet in the Scripture we are often exhorted to fear and trembling, Psalm.
2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. And Phil. 2.12. S.
Paul would have us to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling. And 1
Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall.

A. By these words we are not exhorted to distrust, but to a reverend fear, and
to walk before God with an holy care and fear, lest we should offend him. And
this fear of God is so far from being prejudicial to the Confidence we ought to
have in the goodness of God, and to the assurance of Salvation, that on the
contrary, it is an effect of Faith, and a most assured indication, that our
Assurance is not a carnal Security, but sincere and right; and in this fear
Believers walk on to the Salvation that they wait for, Jer. 32.40. Acts 9.31.

SECT. XXXIII. Of Sin, and if all Men are Sinners.
Quest. WHat is Sin?

A. Whatsoever is contrary to the Law, 1 John 3.4.

Q. Are all Men defiled therewith?

A. Yes, except only Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb without blemish, 1 Pet.
1.19. For if we say we have no sin, we are Liars, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. In many things we offend all, James 3.2.

Q. Yet the Scripture gives testimony to many Believers, that they have walked
without reproach in the Commandments of God, that they have been holy and
righteous, and have loved God with all their heart; as David, Job, Zacharia and
Elizabeth.

A. These things are not said of them, because they were without sin, for the
Scripture it self gives us an account of great sins committed by them; as of
David's Adultery, Zacharia's Distrust, Job's Murmuring; but because they walked
in the integrity of Conscience, and gave themselves with all their heart and
power to serve God.

Q. In what sense then are Believers called just and holy?

A. They are called just and righteous, because the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ is imputed to them, Romans 1.17. and they are accepted of God as righteous
themselves. Secondly, They are called righteous in opposition to the wicked,
which the Word of God calls Workers of iniquity. Thirdly, They are particularly
called holy, because God sanctifies them by his Spirit, and consecrates them to
his Service, and calls them to be Saints, Romans 5.17. and 6.17.

Q. Why does David say then, Psalm. 18.24. that God has recompensed him
according to his Righteousness, and according to the cleanness of his hands?

A. He speaks so to maintain the innocence of his Carriage in respect of Saul
and his other Enemies, which persecuted him without cause: but when he speaks
of his Righteousness before God, he prays, that He would not enter into
Judgment with his Servant for in thy sight, says he, shall no man living be
justified, Psalm. 143.2. and Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared.

Q. Notwithstanding, S. Paul speaks of perfect men, Phil. 3.15. Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded.

A. S. Paul calls not them perfect in respect of their fulfilling of the Law,
but in respect of the perfection of their growth, and Advancement in the
knowledge of God; and therefore he opposed, 1 Cor. 14.20. perfect men to
children; Be not childrin in understanding, but be ye children in malice, but
in understanding be ye men, in the Original, be ye perfect. And the Apostle,
Heb. 5.14. says, that Strong meat, that is to say, Solid Doctrine, belongs to
them that are of full age; even those, who, by reason of their use, have their
Senses exercised to discern both good and bad.

SECT. XXXIV. Of Venial and Mortal Sins.
Quest. WHat does Sin deserve?

A. Death; The soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4.

Q. Yes indeed, for mortal sins; but there are venial sins which are of so
small importance, that it would seem that they merited not to be punished with
death.

A. The Word of God makes no such distinction, it shows us indeed that some
Sins are more grievous than others, and that he who knows his Masters will,
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes; but it shows us likewise,
that all Sins without exception are by nature worthy of death. Romans 6.23. The
wages of Sin is death. And our Savior tells us. Matthew. 12.36. That for every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment: and Matthew. 5.22. That he who called his Brother Fool, is worthy, or
in danger of hellfire; which are the sins that now are thought to be the most
venial. But there is no sin venial before God, since thereby his infinite
Majesty is offended, and his Law infringed. All sins are mortal to the
impenitent, and all are venial and pardonable to those that repent.

Q. It will seem notwithstanding, That S. John makes that distinction in his 1
Epist. 5.16. There is a sin unto death, and there is a sin not unto death.

A. By sin unto death, he does not mean every sin that deserves death, but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, for he would not have us pray for him that
sins this sin unto death. Now it is evident that we ought to pray for them
that have committed mortal sins and sins worthy of death; but St. John would
not have us to pray that God would pardon the sin against the Holy Ghost,
because Jesus Christ tells us, Matthew. 12.32. That it shall not be forgiven
neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Q. Why is this Sin never to be forgiven?

A. Not because it is too great for the infinite Mercy of God to pardon, but
because it is a Sin that the wicked never Repent of, but is always accompanied
with hardness of heart even to the last.

SECT. XXXV. Of Works of Supererogation.
Quest. CAN We do more good than God has commanded?

A. We acknowledge our selves so far from being able to do more good than God
has commanded, that we feel our selves incapable of doing that which he has
commanded us to do; as, to love him with all our hearts, and with all our
strength; and who can love him more? And Phil. 4.8. we are commanded to Do all
things that are honest, just and praiseworthy: It is impossible then to do any
things that are honest, just or worthy of praise that are not commanded. And
Jesus Christ says, that He came only to do the Will of the Father. Therefore
they that think they can do more than the Will of God, think themselves better
than Jesus Christ himself.

Q. But there are Counsels of Perfection which are not comprehended in the Law;
which if a man do, he does more than God commands him; and notwithstanding they
are works pleasing to God, as to give our Goods to the Poor, and for a Minister
not to take any Reward for his Labor when he may be without it, for a chaste
person not to Marry that he may serve God with less distraction.

A. To that I say, that those counsels are from God, and are the suggestion of
his Spirit, and are not only counsels but commands, and a man that finds
himself called to do those things, would sin greatly if he did resist, for God
counsels nothing but what he commands, and therefore the commandments of God
are called also his counsels: The Pharisees because they rejected Jesus Christ
and his Baptism are condemned, because they had rejected the counsel of God,
Luke 7.30. and Prove. 1.25, Wisdom pronounces sentence of condemnation against
them that set at naught her counsel.

Q. What think you of the Works of supererogation and counsels of the Romish
Church, by which they pretend to merit a degree of glory in Heaven above
others, as that of voluntary poverty, and Monastical Obedience, and perpetual
abstinence from certain Meats.

A. That they are works displeasing unto God, because he has neither
counseled nor commanded them, and they are so far from meriting a degree of
glory above ordinary, that they deserve punishment, for the Law being the most
perfect rule of our duty, to go beyond it, is to transgress, and to them it
shall be said, Who has required those things at your hands? Esaias 1.12. And in
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew.
15.9. for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. Romans 14.23.

Q. But our Lord seems to give a more perfect counsel than the Commandments of
God, for to the Yoang Man that said, he had kept from his youth all the
Commandments of God, Jesus Christ gives this counsel. Mat. 19.21. If thou will
be perfect, go and sell that thou has, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in Heaven?

A. I answer first, That this counsel was a command to this Young Man;
therefore if he had done it, he had done no work of supererogation, but only
that which was commanded him, besides Jesus Christ does not give him this
counsel to oblige him to do something more perfect than the Law he thought he
had fulfilled, but to discover his presumption and to manifest that he boasted
in vain that he had kept the Law from his Youth since his heart was so set upon
his riches, that he would not part with them for the service of God.

Q. Why then does the Gospel tell us, that Jesus Christ loved him?

A. This love did not imply that he had no sin, for Jesus Christ loved sinners,
and died for them, but it was a love of compassion toward this young man, in
whom he knew there were some endeavors that deserved praise, and some fear of
God.

SECT. XXXVI. Of Repentance.
Quest. WHat is Repentance?

A. A serious displeasure for having offended God, accompanied with a firm
resolution of turning from Sin, from whence follows a true amendment of Life;
Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out.

Q. Into how many parts does the Church of Rome divide Repentance?

A. Into four parts; Contrition, Confession, Absolution and Satisfaction.

Q. Is this a good Division?

A. No, For Absolution can be no part of Repentance, for it is not a thing done
by the Sinner, but conferred by the Pastor: and Satisfaction, which they make
to consist in undergoing some Penalties that the Priest enjoins them after
Absolution is an humane invention, of which there is no ground at all in the
Word of God.

Q. Do you approve of Contrition?

A. Yes, provided they do not make it consist in external things; as knocking
their breast, and saying mea culpa, nor that they imagine that they merit
pardon by it: but that it consist in having a contrite heart, and humbled by
reason of their grief for sin, and filled with that sorrow which works
repentance to salvation not to be repented of, which St. Paul speaks of, 2 Cor.
7.10. and which is the contrition David extolls so much, Psalm. 51.17. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart, etc.

SECT. XXXVII. Of Auricular Confession.
Quest. WHat say you of Confession?

A. That it is necessary to salvation to Confess our sins to God. Prove. 28.13,
He that covers his sins, shall not prosper: but who so confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy: and 1 John 1.9, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

Q. May not Confession be made to Pastors of the Church?

A. Yes, We would have sinners that have scandalized the Church by some great
sins, to confess and testify their Repentance before the assembly of Pastors
and Elders. 2. That a sinner who finds his conscience burdened with some great
sin should confess it to his Pastor to ease his oppression, and by this seek
consolation and assurance of the forgiveness of his sins: after this manner
they came to John Baptist, Matt. 3.6. confessing their sins.

Q. What do you blame then in the private Confession of the Church of Rome?

A. 1. That it is tyrannical, and a torture to the consciences of the People,
obliging them upon pain of damnation to pour forth all their thoughts in the
ear of a man, and to discover unto him not only all their sins, but likewise
all the circumstances which vary the nature of sin, of which if they omit any
thing knowingly, their Confession is without fruits, and their Absolution void,
which obliges man to a thing impossible, and which the word of God obliges him
not to. 2. That they Confess their sins to Saints. 3. That by their Confession
they pretend to merit Salvation.

Q. But S. James obliges us thereunto. James 5.16, Confess your faults one to
another, and pray one for another.

A. He says Confess one to another, and not to the Priest, he speaks of a
mutual Confession that Believers should make one to another of their reciprocal
offenses, even as they ought to pray unto God one for another.

SECT. XXXVIII. Of Absolution.
Quest. HAve Priests power to absolve from, and to pardon Sins?

A. Priests being criminal themselves, have no Authority to remit Crimes, and
to exempt those that are Criminals with them from punishment. There is none but
God, to speak properly, that can forgive sins, for he only is the Party
offended, as David says, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee only have I sinned. It is God
alone that is the Sovereign Lawgiver to save or to kill, according to his good
pleasure, and to inflict punishments upon the Transgressors of his Laws, there
being none but he only that knows the sincerity of the Sinner's Repentance, so
none but he can absolve the Penitent: It is I, says the Lord, Isa. 43.25. even
I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy Sins. Therefore the Pharisees were in the right to conclude, when
Jesus Christ forgave the Sins of him that was sick of the Palsy, Mark 2.7.
That he did attribute to himself a Divine Power.

Q. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ promised to his Apostles, and in them to all
Pastors, that whosoever sins they remitted, they should be remitted, Joh. 20.23.

A. Pastors remit and retain, tie or untie, not by Princely Authority of
Jurisdiction, but by Ministerial Declarative Authority, as Heralds and
Ambassadors for Christ, declaring from him forgiveness of sins to those that
Repent and Believe in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. And declaring on the contrary
the wrath of God against the Unbelieving and Impenitent, besides they pardon
and remit sin with respect to Ecclesiastic Censure that they impose or
mitigate as they find expedient for the humiliation or consolation of the
sinner.

Q. When Jesus Christ says, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, does he not
give Pastors authority without limitation, insomuch that God obliges himself to
ratify all kind of absolution or condemnation that they pronounce to sinners?

A. No, for God obliges not himself to ratify all sorts of Sentences and
Judgments of Pastors which are very often rash and contrary to Justice and
Charity. but this general sentence must be understood with the same restriction
that the general promise that Jesus Christ made us. Joh. 16.23, That whatsoever
ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you; to wit, when the
things we ask are necessary to salvation, and according to his will: so God
promises to ratify the Absolution and Pardon that Pastors pronounce, when it
is done according to his word, and when they assure penitent souls of the
forgiveness of their sins.

SECT. XXXIX. Of Satisfactions and Indulgences.
Quest. Has a Pastor power when he gives absolution to a sinner, to impose
any penance upon him, as Alms Deeds, Fasting, and such like things, to make
sarisfaction for his sins, for which he has received Absolution upon his
Confession?

A. No, for the word of God teaches us on the contrary, that God pardons us all
our sins only for Christ's sake, Colos. 2.13. And our Savior when he pardoned
the Woman taken in Adultery, did not inflict any punishment upon her, but only
said to her, Go and sin no more, Joh. 8.11. Besides it is a great abuse to
impose alms, praying and fasting as a punishment, which are good works, and
ought to be done with pleasure and delight.

Q. What do you believe concerning the Indulgences of the Church of Rome, and
of the treasure of the Church from whence the Popes draw the superabundant
Satisfactions of Jesus Christ, and of the Saints for the comfort of Sinners in
this life, and the Dead in Purgatory?

A. That this Doctrine is nothing but a chimera, and an invention of the
covetousness and ambition of the Pope to rule over the Consciences and Purses
of Christians; those pretended favors not being communicated but to those that
stretch forth their helping hand, as they speak: and I acknowledge no other
satisfaction but the free Redemption of my Savior, nor any other Indulgences
but the Mercy of God, which pardons all our Offenses freely for Jesus Christ's
sake.

SECT. XL. Of the Sacraments.
Quest. WHat is a Sacrament in the Christian Church?

A. It is a visible Sign instituted by Jesus Christ in his Church, for to
represent his Person, his Death, and his Graces that he has purchased for us
by his death.

Q. How many such Sacraments do you acknowledge?

A. Two: Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.

Q. Why do you acknowledge no more?

A. Because that in reading of the Gospel, I see only these two instituted in
the Church.

Q. Yet the Church of Rome, besides these two, believes five others;
Confirmation, Penance, Marriage, Extreme Unction, and the Sacrament of Orders.

A. I cannot acknowledge them for Sacraments, because they have not the
Conditions necessary to the lawful Sacraments of the Christian Church.

Q. What are the Conditions of a lawful Sacrament?

A. 1. That it be instituted by Jesus Christ. 2. That it be a visible sign of
an invisible Grace. 3. That it represent Jesus Christ and his Graces. 4. That
they be common to all Believers. 5. That it be conferred by a lawful Pastor.

SECT. XLI. Of Confirmation.
Quest. WHat is the Sacrament of Confirmation?

A. It is a Sacrament of the Church of Rome, which cannot be reiterated, and is
done by a Bishop; which Bishop greases the face of a Child in form of a Cross,
saying in Latin, I mark thee with the mark of the Cross, and confirm thee with
the Crisme of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. And the End of this Sacrament is, as they say, that the Christian
may be confirmed in the Faith, and be made a complete Christian, and they would
even have this Sacrament observed with greater veneration than Baptism, as
being done by a more worthy person, to wit, a Bishop, and which has a greater
virtue than Baptism.

Q. Why do you not acknowledge this to be a Lawful Sacrament?

A. Because Jesus Christ has not instituted it, and I see no ground for it in
the Word of God, and it is an extreme rash impiety to forge in the Church a
Sacrament to which they attribute more virtue, and give more Reverence than to
Baptism.

Q. We see though that Jesus Christ put his hands upon Children, Matthew. 19.13.
and the Apostles laid their hands on persons Baptized before that they might
receive the Holy Ghost. Act. 8.16.17. and 19.6.

A. This laying on of hands is no Sacrament of the Christian Church, but a
Ceremony always used to those that were blessed, or received to any Office in
the Church: So Jacob laid his hands upon Ephraim and Manasse when he blessed
them, Genesis 48.14. Moses upon Josuah, Numb. 27.23. The Apostles upon those for
whom they implored Grace from God and the assistance of the Holy Ghost, but in
that there was nothing done like what is done in Confirmation, neither as to
the sign nor as to the words. In the Reformed Churches, the laying on of the
hands is still observed at the Ordination of Ministers, to the end to implore
the Grace of the Holy Ghost for them, but it is not for that a Sacrament of the
Church.

SECT. XLII. Of the Sacrament of Penitence.
Quest. WHy do yot not acknowledge Penitence for a Sacrament of the Christian
Church?

A. Because 1. Jesus Christ has not instituted it: for Repentance has always
been necessary, since sin, and as agreeable to God before Christ came into the
World as since. 2. It is an absurd thing to make a Christian virtue a Sacrament
and exterior sign. 3. In Confession, Contrition and Satisfaction, there is no
material sign visible to represent to us any invisible Grace in Jesus Christ.
4. These three parts of their Penitence are not conferred by the Pastor, but
are the exercise of the person Repenting. 5. This pretended Sacrament is not
coferred in the Church as other Sacraments, but it is practiced by the Sinner
privately.

Q. They will tell you that in absolution there is a visible sign of an
invisible Grace: That in the Priests absolution there is a certain sign of the
interior absolution that God grants to a Sinner.

A. I say to that 1. That if the sign be only in absolution, it is not in
Penitence, for absolution is no part of Penitence, for Penitence is in the
Sinner, and absolution is given by the Pastor. 2. That in Absolution there is
no visible Sign. 3. If words may be called visible signs, then all the clauses
of the Gospels Sermon, may be called Sacraments.

SECT. XLIII. Of Marriage.
Quest. WHY do you not acknowledge Marriage for a Sacrament?

A. 1. Because it was not instituted by Jesus Christ; for Marriage was Lawful
before his coming, and was Instituted even before Sin. 2. It cannot be a
Sacrament of the Christian Church, since Marriage is Lawful even amongst
Pagans. 3. There is not in Marriage any material visible sign, nor any word
added to the Element, the consent of parties being that which makes Marriage,
for it is not properly the Minister that Marries, he only stipulates publicly
the mutual obligations and consent of the parties. 4. It is not (according to
the opinion of the Roman Church) common to all Believers, since Priests ought
not as they say to partake thereof: And it is an absurd thing that it should be
a Sacrament to the People, and a Pollution and Sacrilege to the Priest.

Q. Yet St. Paul calls Marriage a Sacrament, Ephesians. 5.32. This Sacrament is great.

A. These words are so in the vulgar Latin version, but in the Greek it is,
This Mystery is great, and he speaks not there of Marriage, but of the Union
between Christ and his Church, for the Apostle adds, But I speak concerning
Christ and his Church. Likewise it is to be observed, That the Latin version
usually turns the word Mystery into that of Sacrament, and calls the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in flesh, a great Sacrament of Godliness, 1 Timothy
3.16. And the Mystery of the Woman the Sacrament of the Woman. Rev. 17.7.

Q. Yet in this passage St. Paul teaches us that Marriage is a Figure of the
Spiritual Marriage between Christ and his Church.

A. It is true, but every Figure and Comparison that the Scripture uses to
represent to us the Spiritual Graces of God, and the union of Jesus Christ and
his Church are not Sacraments, otherwise a Vine, the Light, a Door, a Shepherd,
and such like comparisons that Jesus Christ did use should be Sacraments of the
Christian Church.

SECT. XLIV. Of Extreme Unction.
Quest. WHy do not you acknowledge the anointing of the sick for a Sacrament of
the Church, since St. James 5.14, 15. recommends it? Is any sick among you, let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing
him with oil in the name of the Lord; and Mark 6.13. We read that the Apostles
anointed the sick with oil and healed them?

A. This anointing was not an ordinary Sacrament, and ought not to be continued
in the Church, because it was done to be a sign of miraculous healing, as
appears by these two passages, in which health followed this anointing; since
the gift of healing is ceased, it is necessary that the Sign and Sacrament
cease likewise, therefore anointing now is nothing but an unprofitable
Ceremony, not beinp practiced for the healing of the Sick; but on the contrary,
when the Sick is near to death: and therefore they call it Extreme Unction.

SECT. XLV. Of the Sacrament of Orders.
Quest. WHy do you not acknowledge Orders for a Sacrament?

A. 1. Because, according to their account, there are seven different sorts of
Orders, there must then be thirteen Sacraments instead of seven. 2. Because it
is not common to all Believers, but particular to Ecclesiastical Persons only.
3. Because there is no material sign in it. 4. It does not represent to us the
death of Jesus Christ, and his Benefits. 5. The greatest part of these Orders
was not instituted by Jesus Christ; as Porters, Exorcists, Acolyts,
Under-Deacons. 6. It is a great absurdity to make a Sacrament of the ordinary
Offices in the Church.

Q. May not the Imposition of Hands upon a Pastor, to establish him in his
Office, be called a Sacrament, since it is a visible Sign of an invisible
Grace, to wit, the Grace of the Holy Ghost?

A. It may be called a Sacrament, but not in the same sense that Baptism and
the Lord's Supper are; for this Imposition of Hands is not a sacred Sign of the
Covenant of God in Jesus Christ, it is not common to all Believers, and it
cannot be a Sacrament of the New Testament, since it was practiced under the
Old, Number. 27.23. Deuteronomy. 34.9.

Q. Do you believe that the conferring of Orders upon a man imprints such an
indelible Character upon his Soul, that the flames of Hell cannot efface it, or
raze it out?

A. I believe this Character is a vain imagination; and I know no other
Character that is printed upon the Soul, but that of the Spirit of God, whereby
the Elect are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.

SECT. XLVI. Of the Order of Priesthood.
Quest. WHat think you of the Order of Priests?

A. If the name of Priest, from Presbyter, be taken as it was in the time of
the Apostles, for an Elder, or Pastor, whose Office is to instruct and lead the
Flock of Jesus Christ, as S. Peter exhorts the Elders in his first Epistle,
Chap. 5.1. This Order is very lawful, and instituted by Jesus Christ. But if by
Priest they understand a Sacrificer of the Body of Jesus Christ. I hold that
Order to be unlawful, and an invention of men.

Q. Why do ye esteem it such?

A. Because no man takes this honor of Priesthood unto himself, but he that
was called of God, as was Aaron, Heb: 5.4. It is rashness then to look on
themselves as Priests, without producing any Authority from the Word of God for
the institution of this Order. St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. and 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.
where he reckons the Offices of the Church, says not a word of this: And to the
Hebrews, in all his Epistle, in which he treats expressly and at length of the
Priesthood of the Christian Church, speaks not of any other Priest of the Body
of Christ, but Christ himself, who offered himself to God by his Eternal
Spirit, Hebr. 19.14. It is also to be considered that the Apostle Hebr. 7.
gives two reasons for abolishing the Priesthood of the Law, which destroys also
that which is now Established, the one is that the Priests were subject to
death, the other that they were obliged to Sacrifice first for their own sins,
and then for the sins of the people: Priests being then still Mortals and
Sinners, ought to be abolished: Besides the Sacrificer being more excellent
than the Sacrificed, and he who Sacrifices more powerful and more excellent
than the Victims; it is too bold an enterprise to pretend to Sacrifice Jesus
Christ, for it is to make themselves greater and more excellent than Jesus
Christ himself.

Q. They pretend notwithstanding to prove their Priesthood by these words of
Jesus Christ, Do this in remembrance of me.

A. But they do it without ground, for First, Since Jesus Christ by these words
Instituted the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, what appearance is there that by
the same words he should Institute another Sacrament. Secondly, Jesus Christ in
these words commands his Disciples to do afterward that which he had ordered
them to do then (viz.( to take and eat; now to take and eat is not to
sacrifice. Thirdly, Moreover, he commands to do this in remembrance of him:
Now, it is absurd to take and sacrifice a person in remembrance of him, for we
remember things absent.

Q. Yet the holy Scripture speaks of other Priests under the New Testament than
Jesus Christ, for St. John says, Rev. 1.6. that Jesus Christ has made us Kings
and Priests unto God and his Father. And in 1 Pet. 2.9. St. Peter calls us a
Royal Priesthood.

A. It is greatly to be observed, that this Title is given indifferently to all
Believers, and never particularly to Priests: and Believers are called Priests,
because, as we are taught in 1 Pet. 2.5. They are an holy Priestood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Q. And what are these Sacrifices?

A. Good Works, Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings; Heb. 13.15. Alms and
Repentance; Psalm. 51.19. And Romans 12.1. Present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God; which is your reasonable Service.

SECT. XLVII. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Quest. DDo you believe that in the Mass the Priests offer the Body of Jesus
Christ a Propiciatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead?

A. As I acknowledge no other Priest in the Church but Jesus Christ, who is a
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110.4. Also I
acknowledge no other Propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, but the death of Jesus
Christ, who has loved us, and has given himself for us an Offering and
Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.

Q. Why do you not acknowledge any other?

A. Because the Word of God makes no mention of any other under the Gospel: And
the Apostle to the Hebrews, who writes an Epistle, expressly to teach us by what
Sacrifice Sins are truly expiated, and the Sacrifices of the Law fulfilled,
mentions no other but the Blood of Jesus Christ, who, by his Eternal Spirit,
offered himself to God to purchase for us an Eternal Redemption: yea, he tells
us expressly, that Jesus Christ offess not himself often, Heb. 9.25, 26. And
that, as It is appointed for men once to die, and after this the judgment, so
Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of Man; Heb. 9.27, 28. That by one
Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified through the
Offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10.10, 14.

Q. It is true, he offered himself but once a bloody Sacrifice, but he offers
himself an unbloody Sacrifice every day at the Mass.

A. This distinction is not found in the Word of God, neither is there any
propitiatory Sacrifice without shedding of Blood; Heb. 9.22. Without shedding
of blood is no Remission.

Q. It is only by the death of Jesus Christ that Forgiveness of Sins is
purchased for us; but by the Mass, as by an Applicatory Sacrifice of the
former, is applied to us the Propitiation of Sins.

A. I answer to that, That as it is not needful that Jesus Christ die again
that his death may be applied to us, neither is it needful that he be
sacrificed again, that his Sacrifice may be applied to us. God has appointed
other means than the Mass to apply the death and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ unto
us, viz. the preaching of the Gospel, Sacraments and Faith.

Q. But if Jesus Christ is not offered every day, wherein consists his
everlasting Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck?

A. The Apostle to the Hebrews makes it to consist in two things; 1. In the
perpetual Efficacy of his Blood once offered on the Cross, and therefore it is
said, Heb. 12.24. that His blood speaks better things than that of Abel. 2.
In that being entered into the holy Place, according to the Office of the High
Priest, he interceeds continually for us. Heb. 7.24.25. This Man, because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood; wherefore he is able also to
save them to the utmost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them.

Q. They allege, for the Sacrifice of the Mass, that which is said, Genesis
14.18. that Melchisedeck sacrificed Bread and Wine.

A. If it were so in this passage as it is alleged, there could nothing be
gathered from it, but that the Priests according to the Order of Melchisedeck
should offer Bread and Wine, and not the Body of Jesus Christ. But this passage
is not well translated; for in the Hebrew it is not that Melchisedeck
sacrificed, but that he brought forth, or presented Bread and Wine; and that to
Abraham, for to refresh him and his people, and not to God in Sacrifice.

Q. They prove likewise the Sacrifice of the Mass by Mal. 1.11. From the rising
of the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among
the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a
Pure-Offering.

A. In all this passage there is nothing spoke of the Sacrifice of the body of
Christ, but the Prophet speaking of the Calling of the Gentiles, foretells that
every where a pure Offering should be offered unto God; for so the Word of God
calls the preaching of the Gospel, Prayers and Alms, and such like good works,
which are spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5.

Q. What answer you to that which the Apostle says, H. 13.10. We have an Altar
whereof they have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle?

A. That by this Altar is meant the Sacrifice that is spoken of in all the
Epistle, viz. the death of Jesus Christ, and not the Sacrifice of Mass, of
which there is no mention made.

Q. Of what Sacrifice then speaks the Apostle besides the Sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, when he says, Heb. 9.23. That it was necessary that the Heavenly things
should be purified with better Sacrifices than those; naming more than one?

A. He speaks only of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, more excellent than all
the Sacrifices of the Law; and names it Sacrifices, putting it in the Plural:
1. Because of his opposing it to the ancient Sacrifices of the Law. 2. Because
of its Excellency; so David calls Repentance, Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of
God, and The most Holy Place, in Greek is called Holy Places; The Right Hand of
God, is called Right Hands.

Q. May not the Lord's Supper be called a Sacrifice?

A. Yes, in the same sense that Alms and good Works are called Sacrifices, not
Propitiatory, but Congratulatory, or a Thanksgiving Sacrifice. It may also be
called a Sacrifice, because it represents the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ's
death, even as the Sacraments take the name of the things they represent.

SECT. XLVIII. Of Baptism.
Quest. WHat does Baptism represent to you?

A. Two Washings: 1. The Washing of our Justification, which consists in the
Forgiveness of our Sins. 2. The Washing of Regeneration, which consists in our
being renewed spiritually by the Holy Ghost.

Q. Are those Graces communicated by Baptism, Ex opere operato, as they speak
in the Schools, by the thing done? that is to say, by the bare Action of the
Sacrament, wiihout the disposition of him that receives contributing thereunto?

A. No, But by the power of the Holy Ghost in them who have Faith and
Repentance: for as it was not the blood of the Heifer that purified the
Conscience, neither is it the Water of Baptism, but the Blood of Jesus Christ
that cleanses from Sin: and therefore Baptism is called, 1 Pet. 3.21. A figure,
which saves us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, says the Apostle,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

Q. Why then are Children baptized which are not capable of Faith and
Repentance?

A. Because, having an interest in the Covenant, they ought also to receive the
Sign thereof, Acts 2.38, 39. Be ye baptized, every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins; for the promise is unto you, and to
your children. But these Children when they come to Age must apply to
themselves the Promise made to them in Baptism, or else the Sacrament will
serve only to aggravate their Condemnation.

SECT. XLIX. If Original Sin continues after Baptism.
Quest. Has Baptism that efficacy wholly to efface or abolish Original Sin; so
that after Baptism there remains in Man no sinful Corruption?

A. No: For Experience shows that Children have perverse inclinations, and are
sinners after Baptism; and if they were not sinners they would not die; for
says the Apostle, The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. And St. Paul, who was
circumcised, and after that baptized, grants that sin dwelt in him, and that he
was sold under sin; Romans 7.14, 17. The Romanists themselves confess in the
Council of Trent, that Lust continues after Baptism: Now, if we believe St.
Paul, Lust is Sin; Romans 7.7. I had not known Lust, except the Law had said.
Thou shall not covet.

Q. But how often does the Scripture tell us, that We are baptized to the
Remission of Sins, and that We are therein washed from our Sins? Act. 22.16.

A. We do receive Forgiveness of Sins therein; and to those that believe in
Jesus Christ, their sin shall not be imputed, but that does not hinder, but
after Baptism our Corruption does continue, more or less, even till death.

SECT. L. Of the Necessity of Baptism.
Quest. IS Baptism so necessary to Salvation, that without it we cannot be
saved?

A. Baptism is necessary to Salvation when it may be had, and this holy
Sacrament ought not to be neglected: but to exclude from Salvation a person who
could neither have the time nor the opportunity to be baptized, or a Child
whose sudden death has prevented Baptism, is a cruel Doctrine, and contrary to
the goodness of God, who tieth not his Grace to exterior Elements, and makes
not the Salvation of Children to depend upon the negligence of their Parents.

Q. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ says to Nicodemus, John 3.5. Except a man be
born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

A. Jesus Christ does not mean the material Water of Baptism, but the Grace of
the Holy Ghost, which is often, both in the Old and New Testament, called
water, Is. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed: And Jesus Christ promised
to give them that believe on him, a well of water springing up into Everlasting
Life. John 4.14. By those words Jesus Christ does not show Nicodemus the
Necessity of being Baptized, since he was already Circumcised, but the
Necessity of being Regenerated, that he might enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

SECT. LI. Of the Lords Supper.
Quest. FOR what End did Jesus Christ institute the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper?

A. That it might be a memorial of his death, as Saint Paul teaches us, 1 Cor.
11.26. As often as you Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords
Death till he come. And himself when he Instituted this Sacrament says, This
is my Body which is broken for you, this do in Remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.24.

Q. Do you believe that Jesus Christ when he says, This is my Body, changed the
Bread substantially into his true Body, and was pleased that as often as the
Pastors should pronounce these words, they should Transubstantiate the Bread
and Wine into his Body?

A. No, for since Reason and Faith teaches me that there is no change of
substance in those signs; sight, taste, touch and smell assure me that it is
true bread and wine; reason tells me that a human body cannot be enclosed in
breads accidents, and that accidents cannot subsist without their subject, and
when it is destroyed; that it implies a contradiction that one body can be in
heaven and in earth at the same time, and not in the middle space: that it can
have all its parts and dimensions in one small point, and be more spiritual
than a spirit. Briefly, faith which teaches me that Jesus Christ has an human
nature like to ours in all things, Sin only excepted, permits me not to believe
that Jesus Christ has a body invisible, impalpable, without dimensions,
without voice or motion: faith persuades me that Jesus Christ is in Glory at
the Fathers right hand, permits me not to believe that his body is on earth,
subject to be trodden under foot by Infidels, taken away by Thieves, eaten by
mice, and suffer, now he is in Glory, more Reproach than ever he suffered
during his humiliation here below; in a word, faith which teaches me that the
heaven must receive him until the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. And
that we have the Poor always with us, but that we have not him always, Matthew.
26.11. That he has left the World, that he is gone to his Father, John 13.1.
and 16.17. and 14.3. hinders me from believing that he is here again on the
Earth, shut up in a Pix Matthew. 24.26. If any shall say, Behold he is in the
secret Chambers, believe them not; the Greek word signifies Ciboires, i. e. the
Boxes wherein the Sacrament is kept.

Q. But yet he has said himself of the Bread, This is my Body; and of the Cup,
This is my Blood, Matthew. 26.26.

A. Yes, but he said likewise, that it was Bread; He took bread, and said, this
is my Body: and he said of the Cup, that it was the Fruit of the Vine, Matthew.
26.29. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. says that we break and eat Bread. I
am then obliged to believe that it is Bread, and the Body of Jesus Christ.

Q. How can one and the same thing be Bread and the Body of Christ, which are
two Natures so different?

A. It is Bread in substance, but the Body of Jesus Christ in figure and
signification, according to the nature of Sacraments, which take the name of
the things signified, as likewise the things signified take the names of their
figures, even as the Rock in the Desert is called Christ, the Paschal Lamb, a
Passover, Circumcision the Covenant of God, Jesus Christ the Bread which came
down from Heaven, the Vine, the Door, the light, etc.

Q. How know you that these words, This is my Body, ought to be taken
Figuratively?

A. First, Since Jesus Christ by these words instituted a Sacrament, they must
be understood Sacramentally, and Jesus Christ instituting this Sacrament
instead of the Passover, in which a Lamb is called a passage, it was reasonable
that in the Sacrament of the New Covenant, the sign should take the name of the
thing signified even as the other did. Secondly, Jesus Christ himself would
have us to understand it figuratively, for he commands us to do this in
remembrance of him, he would not then have us to Eat his Body really and
corporally, for we are said to remember only things corporal when absent.
Thirdly, Besides our Savior gives us this Body as broken and delivered for us;
now he is not really broken in the Sacrament, but only in Figure. Fourthly, The
bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, as the Cup is the New Testament of his
Blood, now a Cup cannot be a New Testament but figuratively, neither can the
Bread be Christ's Body any other way.

Q. What can you answer to these words of our Savior where he so plainly says,
That his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, John. 6.55.

A. I say, First, That in this sixth Chapter of St. John Jesus Christ speaks
not of the Lords Supper, for it was not then instituted. Secondly, That the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is truly the meat and drink of our Souls, but
not of our Bodies; that his Body is spiritual meat, and not material, and by
these words Jesus Christ teaches us, that as truly as Bread and Drink
nourishes our Body, his Body crucified for us, and his Blood shed for our
Redemption, nourishes, comforts, and fortifies our Souls, for what Nourishment
is to the Body, that Consolation and instruction is to the Soul.

Q. But this word indeed seems to exclude all Figure?

A. Not at all, but only all doubt or untruth, for does not Jesus Christ say,
that he is the true Vine, John 15.1. and yet he is so only Figuratively.

Q. How know ye that Jesus Christ speaks of a Spiritual meat and drink in the
sixth of St. John?

A. Because his disciples murmuring at the the hardness of that saying
concerning eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood, he tells them, what if you
shall see the Son of Man ascending up where he was before verse 62. insinuating
to them that when they should see him ascend into Heaven, they should not have
such gross apprehensions as to imagine they could corporally eat him on the
earth: And that they might understand those words spiritually, he adds, It is
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak
unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, verse. 63.

Q. How then can you eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, as he commands us
in this Chapter?

A. Spiritually, and by faith, which is the mouth of the Soul, according to
Christ's exhortation in this Chapter, verse. 35. He that comes to me shall
never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. And it appears,
that he speaks not of a corporal eating of the Sacrament of Christ's body in
this Chapter, since he says, verse. 54. that Whosoever eats his flesh, and
drinks his blood, has life eternal. And, on the contrary; Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, verse. 53.
Now it is certain that many of the Elect are dead, and could not have this
Sacrament. And verse. 56. he says, that He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Then the Manducation of Jesus Christ and
his dwelling in us, must be understood spiritually; for if it be necessary that
we eat Jesus Christ corporally, that he may dwell in us, by the same reason
Jesus Christ should eat us, and we should enter into his body, that we might
dwell in him.

Q. How is it then that Jesus Christ dwells in us, and we in him?

A. Jesus Christ dwells in us by his Spirit, and we receive him by faith;
Ephesians. 3 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: and John 1.12. As
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; even to
them that believe in his Name. To believe in Jesus Christ then, is to receive
him: and 1 John 3.24. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit
which he has given us.

Q. If you take only the figure, and not the true body of Jesus Christ in the
Lord's Supper, what advantage have you more than the wicked and profane, who
often take the figure as well as you?

A. Very much: for the wicked only eat the exterior part of the Sacrament with
their bodily mouth; but Believers, together with the Sacrament and Sign, eat
the thing signified by faith, which is the mouth of the Soul; viz. the body of
Jesus Christ which was crucified for us, and drink his blood which was shed for
the Redemption of our Souls.

Q. This eating with the mouth of the Soul seems to be an imaginary thing.

A. Not at all: for as the Soul is as real a thing as the Body so the
Operations thereof are as certain and real as those of the Body, or rather more
certain; and if the Body is really nourished by Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, the soul is not less nourished and strengthened by embracing by Faith
Jesus Christ our Savior, who died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification.

Q. Do you not believe that the eating of the Sacrament of Christ's Body, does
put into the Body a Seed of immortality, as Jesus Christ says, John 6.54. Whosoever
cateth my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day.

A. This saving effect does not accompany the corporal eating of the Sacrament,
but the effectual working of the Holy Ghost, which by Faith produces a new
life in the Elect, gives them an assurance, and even beginning of a glorious
immortality, as we are taught by St. Paul, Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you.

SECT. LII. Of Communion under both Kinds.
Quest. MAY one lawfully partake of the Sacrament under the sign of Bread only,
as it is practiced in the Church of Rome at this time?

A. No, For Jesus Christ has said, Matthew. 26.27. Drink ye all of it.

Q. But he speaks to his Disciples who were Priests and not to others?

A. The Apostles did not appear there as Pastors, but as the Lords Disciples
obliged to obey his Commands, and if this Command Drink ye all of it, oblige
none but Pastors, no more does the other, take eat, both commands being made
to the same persons and consequently then, the people must be deprived of the
whole Sacrament.

Q. Have ye no other passage where the people are commanded expressly to partake
of the Cup?

A. St. Paul. 1 Cor. 11.28. commands all without exception to examine
themselves, and so Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup; whoever then are
obliged to examine themselves, are also obliged to drink of this Cup; and since
they of the Church of Rome understand the words of Jesus Christ, John 6. to be
spoken of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, what can they answer to words so
express verse 53. Verily, verily, I say unto you except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

Q. But what need is there of drinking, since under the Species of Bread, or of
Wine, Jesus Christ is wh lly contained.

A. This evasion comes from a false Supposition that Jesus Christ is
corporally, and wholly contained in each Crum of Bread, even as it is usual for
one error to produce more; whereas we should mark this, that since Jesus Christ
has commanded the Cup to be taken as well as Bread, he would not have us
believe this pretended Concomitance and Real, Corporal, substantial presence of
his Body, but would have us believe that the participation of the Cup is as
necessary as the the partaking of the Bread.

Q. Notwithstanding there are examples of Believers in the Scripture, who have
taken Bread only in this Sacrament, Acts 2.46. It is said that the Lords
Disciples continued in the breaking of Bread?

A. The consequence is most absurd, that the Disciples broke Bread, therefore
consequently they did not partake of the Cup; as if we should say, there they
have eaten consequently they have not drunk; but were not the Lords Disciples
Priests and Pastors? They were certainly obliged then to drink the Cup, as
well as to break the Bread, according to the Opinion of these of the Roman
Church, that it was to Pastors that Jesus Christ gave this command, Drink ye
all of it.

THE END.

