THE PARALLEL: OR, The New Specious Association AN Old Rebellious Covenant.
Closing with a Disparity between A TRUE PATRIOT, AND A Factious Associator.

LONDON, Printed for B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and T.
Sawbridge, at the Three Flower-de-luces in Little Britain, MDCLXXXII.

The Parallel.
NEver did a piece of Villainy deserve sharper Animadversion, or the Contriver
of it more severity; and both I fancy might have had their deserts already, did
not the grossness of the Treason, almost supersede reflection, and the
greatness of the Traitor exempt him from Punishment; so that there is even a
sort of necessity severely to reflect on such a horrid Contrivance; as only by
the boldness of its being undertaken, seems to dare and provoke it; and presume
upon an Impunity, from the very greatness of its guilt; and this enormity of
the Subject may serve to make this Paper a palatable sort of scribble, though
the superfluity of so many Pamphlets is enough to make it nauseous: But the
Author of it desires as little to be known, as that of the Association; and
therefore comes into the World, as some late Criminals out of Prison, with an
Ignoramus. But with this advantage, That if the one were detected, no Law would
make him lose so much as one of his Ears; whilst it would adjudge the other to
forfeit his Head; I mean those Laws that are still the same, though the Justice
of them be perverted; That Justice which our kind Prince diffuses indeed like a
mighty Stream, but is still swallowed up in the Gulf of that unfathomable
thing, called a Conscience; That arrogant conceit of doing well, of doing God
good service and the King, though it be in committing Sacrilege, and
commencing Rebel; That prodigious Paradox, that unintelligible Lump of
Contradiction, which now can huddle together a guilty piece of Innocence, make
Teason a species of Loyalty; Saint and Rebel, Terms Aequivocal or even
Homonymous; and with the most unreasonable part of Logic unite the most
opposite Shapes, patch up a Centaure in imagination; make a fantastic Monster
leap up with a thought, and with an extravagant conceit, jumble together that
hotch-potch Animal, that Heterogeneous Composition of an Honest Knave.
Certainly these Dictates of Conscience can now no longer be called Inspiration,
or the suggestions even of common sense, much less he impulses of a reasonable
soul, (for as some rapt Zealots would have them thought,) the Spiritual
Infusions of Enthusiasm and Revelation, when they shall preposterously suggest
the greatest Criminals innocent, and acquit by the Sentiments of a few Men,
those whom almost Mankind condemns.

To reflect here a little on the proceedings of our late Juries, is so far
pertinent to this discourse, as they themselves seem a band of covenanting
Associators, such as would have acquitted the Factious Inditer of this
Association, had they found him musing on it at his Desk, with an imperfect
draught of the bloody Scheme in his hand, and blowing up the Government with
his dangerous Ammunition of Pen, Ink, and Paper; such as would have cleard a
Protestant Joyner, had they seized him with his hands on his Majesty; and would
rather reason themselves out of Sense, then such a Villain out of his Life; and
what is the greatest Paradox, still conceit themselves Honest-men and True,
whatever all the World thinks to the contrary. I fancy such disaffected
creatures will think me but an improper Animadverter on the Subject in hand,
who am so easy and credulous a fool, as to believe the ridiculous design of
seizing his Majesty, and the strange Paradox of a Presbyterian-Plot. As for the
first, I will tell these merry Gentlemen, they only make it ridiculous, by
laughing at it; and though it is not probable that they would have served his
Majesty like a little diminutive King at Chess; huddl'd him up into a Bag, and
so marched off with the Prize; yet Mr. College had provided, I think, a Sack
for him, in his emblematical representations of the Monarchy, and trussed him
upon shoulders too in his Pictures; But, to speak seriously, I cannot see the
ridiculousness of keeping a King Prisoner, till those Bills are extorted into
Laws by his Confinement, which were never like to meet with his Royal Assent
without such a Constraint. And instead of thinking such designs but the
deliriums of a cracked Scull, I should rather imagine them the politics of
their hot Brains: especially when the proceedings of their very Forefathers,
makes them so good Statesmen, and tickles the young Heirs, with the pleasant
thoughts how bravely their Grandsires domineered with their Proposals, over the
poor Prince at Holmby.

Then my thoughts of the Presbyterian-Plot are briefly thus. That though we
cannot detect any private Commissions to raise Forces; yet we have as much
ground to believe it as the Popish one, in which there has not one Commission
been found amongst all the seized Papers, notwithstanding so many sworn to be
delivered; and this I urge, not as detracting from the certainty of the latter,
the Generals of which I believe as much as my Creed, but only to show that
such Gentlemen ought not to be so partial to their own Cause, as to make that
an argument in their own defense, which by no means they can allow in
another's. And there may be a complicated Conspiracy, though not proved with an
actual Rebellion, and which I am apt to believe has been carrying on, ever
since the death of the Protector, as well as the other ever since the decease
of Queen Mary; but however, if I mistake not, we have of late met with many
detections of their overt-acts, to subvert the Government, besides those
by-tricks of Libelling, and defaming it; witness only, this Association at
present, because it is to be the subject of this Discourse; And now I believe
they understand of what kind of Principles I am composed of, what Sentiments I
have of their Plots, which whether rational or no, they must not Judge because
Party: and then what wonder is it, if the detection of their Conspiracies, and
the Punishment of the Delinquents be so difficult to be compassed, when both
must lie in the breast of such as seem to espouse the Prisoner's Cause, and
with a resolved sort of incredulity to believe neither Evidence on Oath, matter
of Fact, or their own Senses? What wonder is it if His Majesty, cannot have the
Common Justice they distribute to their private selves; to every Tyler, or Jack
Straw, that has but a Property to a Stall, a Shop, a Tool, or a green Apron;
when these Gentlemen of the Yard and Tool, themselves must decide the
Controversy; who I warrant you will be sure to take more care of their own
Property, than of his Prerogative? But are these all the thankful
Acknowledgments His Majesty must expect for His Gracious Charter? Must the
King's Enemies be spared, because the Cities Friends? Must he by giving, pass
himself into a Donative? By his own Grant, seclude himself from the benefit of
the very Laws he gives Life too? And must those Immunities, and Privileges he
gives them for their Liberty, be used by those ungrateful Wretches as Spoils
and Trophies of his Prerogative? Certainly from such Proceedings as these, what
other deduction can be made by sober thoughts, but that they declare an open
defiance to the Government; that they will stand to their City Charter, and
their Arms together; and seal it just as the Great one was by the Barons in
Blood?

From those partial interpretations of Guilt and Innocence, what can an
indifferent person think, but that the abused name of Conscience, is applied
only now to the Capriciousness of Fancy; subjects only Patriots and Rebels,
according to the diversity of thought?

The King a Nursing Father, as long as his politic Sons will think him so;
transformed into a Tyra^ as soon as they please to conceit otherwise; the naked
Hulk of the Sta^ ^l'd by Popish Pirates, when every froward Fool does not sit
at the He^ and the Convocation of the Church, a Conclave of Cardinals, when
each dissenting Ass cannot commence a Prolocutor. I have observed the Seat and
Empire of the Soul, or at least the several Faculties of it, by the grave Sages
in Philosophy, to have been confined to such Apartments in the Body, as were
most adapted for the Faculty that was to be exerted in it; and accordingly,
Reason is circumscribed within the Compass of the Meditullium, and Sphere of
the Brain; the Appetitive Soul placed in the Breast; the Sensitive in the
Nerves; and all Passion in the Heart. If these are warrantable conjectures, I
don't see but I may with as much Reason, and Philosophy, place some Men's
Consciences in their Stomachs; because it is disposed by the help of its
Fibers, to contract, or dilate it self, according as the more scrupulous, or
bolder Animal, shall direct his intentions; often straining at a Gnat, as if it
were to take a Potion; whilst Camels and Elephants are swallowed without a
Grimace, and go down like their Sack-posset: This helps them to slip down
Oaths, with a more than Jesuitical dexterity; to make an Explanation of a Test,
after it is in their Bellies; or if it will not digest with that preposterous
piece of Cookery, it is but playing a Jugler's trick, and bringing it up like
their pieces of Inkle; sometimes imitating the squeamish Maw of a Cormorant,
taught to throw up all; sometimes that of another sort of Fowl, which is said
to concoct Iron and Stones; And all this irreconcilable proceeding, carried on
without the least Dispensation of Reason, or Religion; and consequently less
warrantable than the damned Equivocations of Priests and Jesuits; their blind
opinion of some Supreme Powers, Absolution, and Indulgence, somewhat extenuates
the guilt of those perjured Villains; whilst every Man's prejudiced Opinion,
pretends here to be its own absolver; the sole Measures of all Guilt, and
Innocence; and the Lawful Standard both to good and bad actions: And then, what
wonder is it, if the Proceedings of the King, and the Advice of his Council,
are exposed as light and empty; when they must be weighed in the poised
Balance of every prejudiced Noddle, that has but one grain of Sense more, of
Loyalty less, than his listening Rabble; the result of whose judgment is
Reverenced as an Oracle, by the silly Rout, each Seditious expression treasured
up as a politic Aphorism, and the bold Dictator like a pleasant piece of
Pageantry, riding Cock-horse on the Shoulders of the Mobile; in a confused
noise of Shouts and Acclamations, and all the wild Representations of a
distracted People.

I hope by this Preliminary discourse, to have prevented the farther perusal of
the rest, by any that find themselves galled, or pricked, with the
consciousness of their meriting any of the past reflections; for such persons
though partial enough to themselves, hard to be persuaded, especially of any
thing that looks like Guilty, are commonly a little troubled to be thought so;
and for such disaffected Readers, it is a kindness both to them and the Author,
to be civilly nettled in the beginning, lest by a gentler style, they should be
decoyed to the end; and then rail at him with as much rage, and indignation, as
they use against the Government; Christen him for a Popish Dog, and Irish
Bogg-Trotter; when otherwise, perhaps, he may escape with the gentler
Animadversions of a Malicious Ass, and Scribbling Fool.

But the harshest of such peoples Judgment, and Censure, will be superseded by
their own ignorance or prejudice; and this Paper allowed to speak Truth, though
it don't carry in its Front an impudent Lie, or a Vox Veritatis; thought to
have somewhat of Judgment and Reason in it, though not subscribed by a
Theophilus Rationalis. Those Juggling tricks of putting off Lies, and Nonsense,
and making the first Page a Confutation of all the rest.

And now to begin with this complicated piece of Rebellion, smoothly carried
on, under the specious name of an Association; the Method I shall observe,
shall as much as possible, make the Contents correspond with the Title Page,
and not, like some, let the first Leaf quarrel with the whole Pamphlet. And,

I. We shall show the most undeniable agreeableness of this Association, with
all the old Leagues, and Covenants; in circumstances of Time, and Affairs. II.
Their affinity in Matter, Form, and Words, and draw the Parallel even to
Demonstration; with a little Comment on each Paragraph: And answering
Objections, they use to defend it: And lastly, Show the disparity between a
True Patriot, and a Factious Associator; and that his expelling the Duke, is no
such Evidence of his loving his Country.
That this Paper was penned at a time, when the unhappy Differences between the
King, and his Commons were in their highest ferment; will not be questioned by the
very Bigots of the Cause, unless they intend to doubt of the Author's Prudence
too; who, without doubt, is a person of as politic a Head, as ever brooded on
the Elements of Treason, or hatched a Rebellion: And if not at present
restrained, more by some State-maxims, than Loyal Principles; could raise a
more formidable one, than the late Covenanting Banditi, dispersed at
Bosworth-Bridge; So that in the very seasonable Contrivance of it, it Parallels
the ingenuity of the old Rebellious Scot, who drew up theirs in as convenient a
Season; when the Nation seemed Unanimous enough to Rebel, without drawing up of
a formal League of Gueranty, of cheating poor deluded Souls into the miserable
necessity of fighting against their Prince, or being perjured for him: But this
mutual Agreement was thought then most effectual to secure their Designs, as if
they had distrusted of not being Traitors enough, unless their Treasons were
divulged with a public Manifesto; and a sort of Noverint Vniversi; or that the
Conspiracy would have looked more Black and Hellish, by being acted
under-board, and in the dark.

Whoever was the bold Contriver of this Association, certainly had no intent to
let it lie long in a Closet, only to keep the Rats, and Mice from falling out;
or persuade them to a Union against their common Enemies, the Cats, and
Weasels; the purport of the thing shows the intent, that it was to be
communicated; and to such a Party too, as by their own confidence they boast
the mightiest, and most numerous; which if it were really so, their
licentiousness is such, that I am apt to believe, instead of keeping it in
Closets, some of them would have got it read at Crosses, and Marketplaces;
proclaimed it like some Bartholomew Show, and with Drums and Trumpets gulled
the silly Rout into Rebellion, as fast as the Fools use to crowd into the
Booth: But it is shrowdly to be suspected, they are awed still into good
manners, and civility. Sure, otherwise, it were but a panick fear, so much to
dread those Guards, could they make so little resistance.

They would not be looked on with such Terror, and Amazement, as is expressed
in their Oath; if they would but suffer these Frogs to fill the King's
Chambers, with their harsh and discontented Murmurings, as they did the
Egyptians once, with their Croakings: These little Democraticks, the scum of
those beggarly Elements, Mud, and Water; still as mean as the one, and restless
as the other; and with their Brethren in the Apologue, presently Petitioning
their Jupiters for a new King, as soon as weary of the old: Could these
timorous Rats but get these dreadful Guards, truly to represent Aesop's Puss,
and be really hung up by the Gaunches, we should have them soon grow as bold as
Poll-Cats, and quickly divide the spoil of the King's Houses; and sure our
Provident Patriot would never have exhorted the Subscribers to his Covenant, to
disband those mercenary Forces, could they have marched into White Hall, with a
Nemine Contradicente; and have Rebelled without blows or knock: But sure his
Majesty has Friends, and Forces enough to defend him, besides those that he
pays for his preservation: The strongest Guards he has at present, are the
faithful Hearts of his Honest Subjects, hardened into Loyalty, by the miseries
they suffered for it; with Arms steeled against the Pistols and Blunderbusses
of any new Rebels; having so lately been proved in the blood of the old; and
why then must a Thousand Men, or a handful of Guards, frighten so many
Millions; block up one of the most popular Cities in the World; hinder the
resolute Rabble from posting into Rebellion, and riding Tantivy to the Devil?

Now to satisfy any one that our English here, are as well Versed in the
cunning Arts of drawing up Leagues and Covenants, as the Scot, that universal
ill in the North; and proverbially wicked heretofore; let him but consult those
Compendious ways our Gentlemen here took to promote their Rebellion, and he
will find, that they drew up several Oaths, and Covenants, one of which was
agreed on, and subscribed by a long List of Members, the sixth of June, 43.
before the Scotch Solemn League came over into England; which was not taken by
the Parliament here till the twenty fifth of September following: This first
that they agreed to, was an Instrument, that would have cut through all
Government, and Monarchy; and his Majesty's Head off too, without seconding the
blow with another Engine, bought in the North. It was an agreement to Rebel
unanimously, to dispense with all the old Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to
their King only, by ramming down new ones to fight against him: But yet as if
they had distrusted an English Engagement, and their own Oaths and Covenants
not bold and rebellious enough, to carry on their designs; Messengers are
dispatched into Scotland, to fetch the draught of their Solemn League for a
better Specimen; and to Complement the Scot into a Rebellion, which he had
shown himself ready enough to embrace; and to show their own readiness to
swallow any thing that looked like a Combination against Monarchy; down goes
the same Solemn League with our Parliament here, which had been drawn up and
Subscribed by the Scots there: And now both Nations are agreed, and have very
solemnly Sworn the Destruction of one unhappy Monarch: And no doubt, rather
than the prosperity of the King's affairs should have obstructed the deep
Designs of our Rebellious Senate, to subvert the Government; some of the
timorous Members that were alarmed with the noise of it, would have Voted an
Embassy to the Turks, or Tartars; invited Mahometans to their assistance,
Sworn, and Subscribed to the very Alcoran; otherwise, certainly they would
never have submitted to such weak Concessions, to promise conformity to the
Kirk, admit the Scot into the Kingdom, and let Foreigners share in that
plunder, and booty, which at first they had only designed for themselves.

To such extremities does the undertaking of one Villainy often reduce Men, that
they are forced many times to be wicked even beyond their intention, and with a
preposterous sort of the Politics, to resolve on those Measures, which are
partly destructive to their own Cause: I think we cannot at present invert the
proceedings of the late Times, and prove that the Scot is now likely to call
upon us for our late Association, as we did heretofore on them for their Solemn
League; And much rather that the Loyalty of the present Scotch-men should
prevent the making such a dangerous Trope, and fatal Inversion; then that their
reciprocal affection to our late Covenant should give occasion for it. But
though their kindness to the Government has of late been thus eminently
manifested in their last Parliament, yet it is only of those that are most
eminent among them: And this our Malcontents here, can make use of, both as
an argument to strengthen their Cause, as well as to shake the Butteress of our
own, and with an ingenious sort of Sophistry, pervert the argument of their
Opponents, to their own advantage: They know, though no hands can be found to
their Association in the Council of Scotland; yet they can be met with in a
Field-Conventicle; and though the Test has been by many swallowed without so
much as a Grimace, yet there are as many that have made very sower Faces at it;
some squeamish stomachs quite refused it; some made an Explanation of it,
before it came to their mouths; others after it was in their Bellies; and some
to Droll off the Authority of the Imposers, and ridicule the Oath, are said to
have tendered it to their Dogs, and hanged the Curs for refusing it; witty
waggs, no doubt, and such as can give the World a Specimen of their parts, by
being ingenious Traitors; these are their politic surmises, and presumptions,
upon which, for all this, they build great expectation from the North; which I
hope, though they may serve to animate the Party, will never be sufficient to
strengthen it, prove but the slender Twiggs of slight Argumentation, and such
as none but bare hope, and a sinking Cause would take hold of.

The first Factious Union we read of, that was made use of to resist any Lawful
Authority, was that in the year 1638; when the young Embryo of a Covenant was
first hatched in Scotland about Glascow, and which served for a Type and Copy
to those several, that have since followed; This Primitive one was agreed to,
in opposition to the King's Proclamation, for the dispersing of the dangerous
Rabble; but his Majesty's Security was then dreaded, even by those that
declared so much for his Preservation; and straight in defiance of the King's
Commands, they read their own Protestations, made by the Lord Hume, and Lord
Lindsey, and others of several degrees, and quality; which they published
straight, at Lithgow and other places, as Edinburgh; and to show how much they
dared Authority, they made the Heralds that came to see the Commands of their
King Obeyed, stay to see them very formally contradicted, and exposed: And it
was high time then to Unite, for the Justification of those Villainies, which
naught but Impudence and a Combination could defend; And I have still observed,
that they all along drew up these Instruments, according as they grew more, and
more Rebellious, making them perfect Leagues of Guaranty; to defend themselves
like Outlaws, and a sort of English Banditi, from the punishments that the
Statutes of Treason would have inflicted: And I am sorry to find that our
Associators already fly to these Extremities, to which none of the late Rebels
came, till they had made a further progress; and this bold leap shrouldly
insinuates, that they have proceeded further then the Nation is aware of, and
that they are conscious of more Treason, than is yet discovered.

These were the occasions of drawing up their first Covenant in Scotland; which
was preached up at Glascow to be Christ's Contract; and the people desired to
be hand-fasted to him, by shaking hands with it, by one Cant a zealous ignorant
Bigot, that pretended himself an Ambassador from Heaven; though indeed only
that of Sir Henry Wottons, sent abroad to lie for the Public. And thus we see
such Zealots are forced to make one sin subservient to another, and Blasphemy a
Pander to Rebellion. The correspondency that there is between this Old
Combination, and our late new One, is observable in this; that the one was to
justify a Protestation against the King's Pleasure for dispersing the Rabble,
and dangerous Multitude; the other to contradict his Will in the legal
Succession of his Brother; And thus in some sense it agrees with the very
Primitive Union; my endeavors shall be to show its agreement with all the
rest, and of which, in truth, our Association seems a choice sort of Epitome;
And I don't doubt but its Author had a collection of them on his Desk, for his
better information: and thought his Subject very justisiable, because example
for it; but that he has of the deposing the King, and murdering of him too, if
he has a mind to plead Prescription; and make Treasonable Practices like the
legal Proceedings in Parliament, warrantable by Presidents.

An English Oath and Covenant, comes out on the 6 th of June 43. and seemed the
effect of the Cities importunity; His Majesty's Loyal City; yet I think seldom
called so, but in some Appeal from the Country, or in the head of their own
Petitions. The Citizens promise the Loan of Forty Thousand Pound demanded by
the Parliament, upon condition an Holy League and Covenant be imposed on the
whole Kingdom; A great sum for the purchase of their own Slavery, but a small
price for the Head of a King; To please this City (that Bedlam of deluded Fools
and Madmen, gulled always with the specious names of Liberty and Religion, and
as yet not wise enough to see even through a transparent Fallacy, and
experienced Cheat;) to please these peevish Idiots, they have their humor, an
the Parliament the money; out comes an Oath subscribed by a great number of the
Worthy Members, and the scandalous Roll to be filled up by the Gentlemen of the
Shop and Yard, many of which afterward served a longer Apprentiship, in the
bloody Rebellion, than e're they did in their own Profession and Employment.

About the 24 th of August, 43. The Scots being ^ickl'd with the promises of
our English Committee that was sent thither with an unlimitted Commission, and
ordered to close with them upon any Conditions; first put out a Declaration to
publish their intentions of assisting their Friends, the Parliament in England;
and so the bargain is struck for rooting out Monarchy and Episcopacy, and the
King sold before he came to their hands; and strait all that were not
incapacitated either by Youth, or Old Age, all from Sixteen to Sixty that could
but lift an hand against their Sovereign, are mustered up for the march: And
then to secure to themselves the promises of their Chapmen, which were no less
then a share in all the Revenues of the Church; the cunning Merchants, instead
of Bond and Obligation, the common ties in ordinary Traffic, invent a new sort
of security by solemn League and Covenant; which was presently sent over to
their State-jobbers at Westminster, on the 31 of the same Month; and on the 25
th of September following was by them subscribed in St. Margarets Church; a
most improper place for ratifying such a bloody Covenant, a Contract which
Heaven it self could never sanctify, and which for its lying and hypocrisy,
seemed the very draught of Hell. Now the method I shall take, shall be to
Parallel our discovered Association, both with this Holy League that was drawn
up by the English, and the solemn One that was afterward sent them by the
Scots, and upon the comparing of the several Paragraphs digress a little into
some needful Animadversion; but for a little while still continue some general
Observations.

These Treasonable Bonds and Obligations our old Rebels bound themselves in,
that so they might both be secure of one another; and Rebel with a sort of
Public Manifesto, and no person question the notoriousness of that Fact,
which by being so publicly divulged, and impudently owned, was made a little
famous; and this, no doubt, made Mr. Nigh to give it such an Elogy; but not
content to impose on the frailty, only of a few credulous Mortals, they
endeavor to abuse even Omniscience it self; entitle Heaven to those Villainies,
which naught but the depth of Hell could contrive; call that their Rebellious
Association, an Holy League, and make their own abominable Cause, that of the
Almightie's; certainly these Men that declared so much for Religion, could
hardly be supposed to know their Bibles; where they might soon have found God's
dislike of such proceedings, where Rebellion is made worse then the sin of
Witchcraft; and altogether as much an Imp of Hell and the Devil; but the
profane madness of Zealots is such, that they can imagine even the Deity
concerned above, for the Seditious Murmurings of the Rabble below: and that
when ever their Vicegerents are complained of by the Faction; they are strait
by the King of Kings for their satisfaction, deposed; And God will make the
Sons of Princes bow down unto ye; the greatest that have afflicted and despised
ye, shall lie at your fect. Heyrick to the Commons, May 27. 46. p. 31. The
natural horror, and detestation, I have always had of these late proceedings,
though only acquainted with their Narratives, has often made me thank my God,
that I had no being in this World, when it was arrived to such an Insuperable
wickedness; when Vice seemed to have fixed her Pillars here in this Isle, and
made it sin almost to a Non ultra; the kind breath that I first drew was with a
restored Peace, and a recalled Sovereign, and with both those I hope it will
expire too; And this just resentment, and pardonable passion against such
villainous Practices, will often transport me into some digression; the design
being only to make a comparison, between those two Old Covenants, and our late
New One; but if the Parallels are not so Mathematical, or the Lines observe no
such Geometrick distance; any deflexion will be very excusable, when the very
hand trembles that draws them.

But to go to the Comparison, though our late Association does not carry in its
impudent Front an impious Name too, though Holy League now be none of the
Sanctified Title for Rebellion, yet the effects of it may be as dangerous and
the intent as full of Treason; neither would it have been a piece of Policy or
even common Prudence in the Contrivers, to have called it either League or
Covenant; for those very people that would have applauded the design, might
have disliked such an Appellation; And many that are ready enough to engage in
a Treason, would be loath to have a T burnt in their Forehead; Association
will be easily swallowed, when League might stick a little in the Throat. The
distinguishing Streamers of Blew and Green Ribband at present take mightily,
though the bloody colors of a Parliament Army, would not be presently so
pleasant a spectacle.

But yet here there is almost an Identity of practice; the Almighty is most
solemnly invok't in the beginning of the Oath; Privileges of Parliament; Laws
of the Kingdom; Liberties of the Subject; Popery; Protestant Religion; all the
same numerical pretensions, the same Words, Expressions, and Out-crys; and what
can be the consequence, but that the same Rebellion will follow too? When that
Holy League was bought by the City in forty three, at forty thousand pound;
when the Citizens had been the Parliaments Chapmen, it was thought fit they
should be their Factors too; and in order thereunto, they were hired to put off
those gross Commodities, of Mutiny, Petitioning, Besieging of West-minster, and
White Hall, railing at the King, abusing of his Council; bawling for Justice,
with Noise, Tumult, and Insurrection, and all the confused representations of a
wild, and distracted people: Such Factious drudgery being most proper to be
carried on, by those Tylers, Straws, and Masinelloes; unbecoming the gravity of
a Senate, that sat brooding on the pure Elements of Treason; drawing out the
Schemes, and Plat-forms of a Commonwealth; and being too certain in their
State-Astrology, calculated the future ruin of Three Kingdoms: Circumstances,
I fancy, were much the same, when this Modern Union, with Oath and Obligation
was first contrived; which it is very probable was drawn up by some politic
Head, that knew what Influence it would have on the Juncture of affairs; no
doubt 'twas first hatched when the last Parliament sat at London, when the
Licentiousness of the City was such, as nothing but the Tumults in the late
Times could exceed it; and perhaps nothing but an Act, and fear of Punishment,
obstructed the concourse of the Rabble, with their Old way of Petitioning with
Blunderbusses, Pikes, and Staves. White Hall was then often times block't up
with this Armed Rout, when their Leagues and Covenants were on the Anvil; And
we have those now, that when this Association was a hammering, could threaten
to pull the black Man out of it. Dissenting Protestants were then to be
favored, and connived at; And now the Laws to be Repealed for exempting them
from punishment. The King then declared a favourer of Popery; Now suspected
ready to introduce it. The Queen then traduced for a Plot on the Nation; And
now aspersed with the same Accusation. His Majesty's Friends past for Evil
Counselors; And now Betrayers of the Liberties of the Subject. Judges and
Privy Counselors were then impeach't; And I think some of them meet with the
same dealing at present. The proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts were then
examined; Now taken into consideration. Montague, Manwaring Clergymen scouted;
Thompson and others taken into custody. The King to have no Money till
Grievances were redressed; None now till the Bill of Exclusion is past.
Tumultuous Petitioning then encouraged and promoted; Now, a Proclamation
against it to be examined, and the advisers punished. Arbitrary Power then the
sole cry; Now the doleful burden of the Song. This was the state of Affairs,
when their Leagues were a making; This our Condition now the Association is a
Foot: All the difference is, the King is not yet driven out of his Palace; nor
a Parliament Army yet in the Field.

Thus having Paralleled the Circumstances of Time and Affairs, when these
Engines of Rebellion were set a work; we will fall a comparing these
Instruments of the Devil themselves.

The Introduction to the Solemn League and Covenant, begins in this manner;
Solemn League.
We Barons, Knights, and Burgesses; And in the same words the Contriver Ushers
in his Association; Associat.
We Knights, Burgesses, etc.

But one would think this Verbal transcription might have been civilly spared,
till these Knights and Burgesses had shaken off all their Allegiance to their
Prince; and been upon the same terms with the King, that they were when they
called in the Scot, and took the Covenant, that was cut and dried for them in
the North. I fancy, were the rude Animal that Penned it, known to the Lower
House, he would have but little thanks for complementing them with the first
place in his Paper; and placing so many worthy persons in the highest rank of
his Treason, as if they were to be as Eminent for that, as they are for their
Love and Service to their Country; why had it not better, and more civilly,
begun without naming any body? Or, if there must needs have been some Head to
this Rebellious Monster; the word Citizens, might have served to complete this
prodigy of intended Treason; I am sure this Instrument expresses more the sense
and clamor of their mighty Babylon, than of the Country Representatives: And
then why not, We Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, as well as Barons, Knights, and
Burgesses; But he proceeds very methodically, and according to the true
Standard of all Leagues, and Covenants.

Associat.
Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priest, and Jesuits, with the
Papists and their Adherents, and Abettors; have for several years pursued a
most Pernicious and Hellish Plot; to Root out the Protestant Religion, to
Subvert our Laws, and Liberties, etc. Holy League, June 6. 43.
Whereas there has been, and now is in this Kingdom, a Popish and Traiterous
Plot; for the Subversion of the True Protestant Reformed Religion, and Liberty
of the Subject, etc. That there is a Popish Plot now, is the advantage this
Associator has above him that contrived the Form of that on the Sixth of June;
and so has the opportunity of telling Truth, when the other was forced to Ly
for it: There was no Popish Plot then that was ever discovered by the most
industrious Bigot of the Cause, or even appeared by the most partial Historian
to their side; perhaps there was no Salamanca Doctors in those days, that
could out-witt, and trepan the Subtle Jesuit: But methinks if there were any
Record extant, it might be found in the careful Collections of Mr. Rushworth;
who never omitted inserting the least scrap of Parchment, that could serve for
his purpose: indeed he gives a Specimen of a Letter, found upon the taking some
Jesuits at Clerkenwell; how far that may prove a Plot upon the Nation, I
submit to the Judgment of the Reader. However we see that the Outcry was then
as great upon Presumption; as now upon Proof: and Popish Plot, Popish Army,
Popish Council, Popish Prelate, was the Burden of all their Oaths, and
Covenants; the Bug-bears to fright the Childish Rabble, from their Respect to
the Crown, and Reverence to the Church. And had they not at present a Popish
Plot, a Pandor for their own; it is shrewdly to be suspected they would not long
be without it, but transcribe the Politics of their Forefathers, make up with
Fiction what is wanting in Discovery; hatched those Eggs of Plot and Conspiracy,
in some Oven, or Dunghill; which Truth and Nature were never like to bring to
any maturity; and therefore certainly it is the interest of our Church to cry
down Popery, more than of those that dissent from it, because whilst it still
subverts ours, it can help to establish theirs, so that imagining people in
their Wits we must suppose them promoting of their Interest too, and then this
consequence will naturally follow, That the Church of England, really deserts
that of Rome, whilst the Dissenters do but pretend it; now in the next
Paragraph the Associator falls aboard the Duke; who must sustain a full
Broadside of accusation, and all the whole stock of Argument, but I have heard
of a fellow that shot at a Deer, but killed the King, and you shall see what a
by-blow he gives His Majesty.

Associat.
And it being notorious, That they have been highly encouraged by J. D. of Y.
who has so far prevailed, that he has created many and great dependants upon
him, by bestowing Offices of Preferment both in Church and State, etc. So this
is good and serves the turn most admirably; the Duke is a Papist, governs the
King; gets in Popish Officers, and then the transition is very rational to
prove the King Popishly affected that hearkens to him. But sure this bad Logic
was never intended to be imposed on the Nation, to be received as Gospel, sworn
too and vowed, as well as their Covenant in Baptism; I thought the danger of
the Popish Successor had been such, that there was nothing left to mind beside:
but this Associator seems to be of the opinion of a late Answer to the Kings
Declaration.
Politician, who thinks the Duke more dangerous, as a Minister of State, than
Heir of the Crown; If so, why will the removing of him from the Kings Ear not
satisfy these discontented men? certainly in reason there ought to be no more
clamor, and discontent, when the Matter and Object of both is removed; and if
the presiding at the Helm, and disposing of Church and State Affairs be such a
Grievance, then it is no wonder there has been such continual Outcries, against
the King, and Council, and no doubt in a short time will be raised too against
the Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Affairs. But then what can be the result of
this to sober thoughts, but that all this stir is made, either by those that
have a mind to have some share in the preferring of others, or would needs be
preferred to somewhat themselves? And then all the clamorous Accusations here
against his Highness, insinuate that something must be speedily done against
him, and his Adherents: so then it seems the Gentleman thinks like other
people, that it is a chance but the King may survive his Brother, therefore it is
fit to begin presently, lest the pretense for Rebellion, should be superseded
by his untimely end; thus these Sycophants hugg the Case of the Duke, as they
do their darling the Plot; and wish him no more out of the way, than they do
their E. of S. the want of the one, would take away the pretense for their
Combination; the other a Patriot. I must confess, as to this particular Case of
the Duke, the Parallel cannot be so exactly drawn with old Leagues and
Covenants, because they had then no such unhappy Prince that could serve to
palliate their intended Rebellion; and it cannot be expected it should agree
with them in all particulars; when this presaging Comet of a War appears now so
many years since, though unhappily on the same Horizon.

But by what I can observe from the History of those times, a Duke was then the
burden of the song; It seems to me a disputable Problem, whether the Duke of
Buckingham's fall by that Villanious Assassin, did not prevent his dying a
glorious Martyr for his Prince, and a Sacrifice to the Vengeance of the people;
though even that unexpected end and private Murder, may serve to inroll him in
the Martyrology, as well as those* that were afterward more publicly executed
by the bloody Senate. For it appeared by the confession of the zealous
murderer, that he rather espoused the Nations Cause than his own; Vide Rushw.
that he looked on the Duke as an evil instrument in the Commonwealth; and why
so? because he was convinced of it by the Remonstrance in Parliament: And if
that will presently make the person impeach't an Outlaw, brand him like a
Cain, to be killed by every one he meets, as this murderous Villain seems to
suggest in his bold Attempt; Then I pity those unfortunate Gentlemen that are
exposed by the late Votes, as Enemies to their King and Country, (i.e.) as
persons that may be pursued like Wolves, and worried with Dogs; and take it for
a kindness to be thoroughly dispatched, suffer but a single death, by the
generous hand of some friendly Felton. That Parliament in the late times, whose
Votes thus animated this Assassin, you see had a Duke too, whom they thought
too near the King's Ear, and Heart, and though they did not draw up a Covenant
against him, as this Associator has against ours, yet the Clamor of the Commons
at that time, was the same with this Association, and that even to a word, viz.

I. That he had so far prevailed as to create many and great Dependants upon
him, etc. II. Vide Associat.
That notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the Parliament, to
deliver His Majesty from his Councils, and out of the power of the said Duke;
yet he has been so prevalent that Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued
and Dissolved, when in hot pursuit of ill Ministers.
This was exactly the fearful outcry, against the Duke of Buckingham, the
praelude to the War that ensued; and that is Verbatim the bold Associators
Accusation of the Duke of York: And very probably the Signal to the Rebellion
he intends.

To proceed now to Parallel the rest of the Paragraphs in the Preface to that
Oath of Association.

Associat.
And as we considering with heavy hearts, how greatly the Strength, Reputation,
and Treasure of the Nation is wasted and consumed, by the intricate expenses,
and management of these wicked destructive designs; and finding the same
Councils still pursued with the utmost divellish malice, and desire of Revenge.
And now pray mark the Original.

Scoth. sol. Leg.
And calling to mind the Conspiracies, Attempts, Practices of the Enemies of
God, and how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption is of late, and at this
time exercised and increased; whereof the deplorable, distressed and dangerous
estate of this Kingdom, are present and public Testimonies. What reason there
was then of those complaints, is best known to those that made them; The state
of the Kingdom was dangerous, distressed, deplorable. And I Will give them leave
to describe it, in the most miserable terms, that a tongue full of grief can
express, or a disturbed Soul conceive, and shall sympathise very much with them
in their Lamentations; But tell them, that in these Hypocritical bewailings of
their Country, they much blazon their own cruelties toward it; And shall show
how I apprehend the Nation came to fall into that lamentable condition. Its
State began to be dangerous as soon as the City to be discontented; 'twas
distressed when the King was forced to borrow money upon Loan; 'twas most
deplorable when he was necessitated to take up Arms for his Life, and at last
with so much ignominy to lose it too. But why this Associator should sing this
sorrowful Ditty, and think the present times so deplorable, is not quite so
intelligible; unless he is conscious of his having contributed much toward
their being so, and this peevish complainer somewhat of the humor of those
Madmen who have almost an abstracted Idaea of those things they rave for,
imagine those Phrensies the real Objects of their deluded Optics, which in
truth are only of their distempered Intellectuals.

Poor tender heart! how it grieves him to consider, the Reputation, Strength,
Treasure of the Nation, so miserably wasted and consumed; and in kind
compassion to his distressed Country, has thought on a Sovereign remedy to
close its wounds, and unite the pieces of a brokenhearted, dejected, and
disaffected People; a prescription much like those of our late Quacking
Divines; the Soul's Balm of Gilead; the Salve and Ointment for a bruised
Conscience: And now we have got some closing, healing Balsam of Association,
for the uniting of all disunited Protestants; But I am afraid such Unctions as
these, will produce the same Symptoms that the Fat and Grease does in a
Chandler's Shop; make the little Tenement the more ready to catch at every
spark, and break out the sooner into flame: And first this Honorable Person,
(for certainly he is no small Man amongst the Faction) is mightily concerned
for the Reputation of the Nation; when 'twas a Covenant that made it
scandalous, even to the Rebellious Dutch; and made our old Albion look like a
pitiful Colony in New England; full of Quakers, Anabaptists, and all the wild
distraction of Schism and Division; the decay of its strength shivers him into
quaking Fits, and dismal apprehensions of being knocked on the Head by the
French; when all this while not one mite must be contributed for the getting so
much as a Cudgel-butt to ward the blow; I fancy this Gentleman espouses the
Maxims of the late Political Casuist at Malmsbury, who has laid it down as a
principle, that Subjects owe no longer obedience to their Prince, than he has
strength and ability to defend them: If so, it is no wonder the Treasury is so
poor, and the strength of the Nation so much decayed; as in spite of all
reason to the contrary, our Associator is willing should still be so; for
'twould be but madness in him, and a breaking of his own measures, to wish the
King any Money, or in a condition to protect his Subjects; for that would
remove those dispensations he would have to warrant his disobedience, and then
he must rebel without a License: But certainly this is not only Transcribing of
the Politics of Mr. Hobs, but Improving of them too; shows him not only ready
to dispense with his Allegiance to the King, whenever his Exchequer is low; but
very willing it should always be so; and then upon that account not barely to
withdraw his obedience, but very fairly draws up a Covenant for Rebellion; and
so puts in for another position, of that Eminent Philosopher, A state of War:
But yet give me leave to inform this sorrowful Associator, and with as merry a
heart as he pretends his to be heavy; that this his considering Cap, is not
rightly placed on his factious Noddle; and though he considers the Strength,
Treasure, and Reputation of the Nation so much Wasted and Consumed, I apprehend
no such thing at all, but rather the quite contrary.

First, Were our Reputation so low with our Neighbors, as to make them think
us a Bankrupt Kingdom; a Parcel of poor Rascals, forced to cheat our Creditors,
and compound for Bread; as this honest Patriot kindly fancies his Country to
be; I cannot see why our Trade and Trassick; and that almost with the whole
World too, should continue still interrupted, and without the least danger of
being impeded; I know the Actions of the several Companies, rise and fall, upon
the several emergencies of new affairs: But certainly, the Credit and
Reputation of the Kingdom, no way depends on those vicissitudes; yet I grant
there is a great noise of a certain great City's growing poor; but I think it
would be happier for a certain King that lives near it, were it less wealthy;
it was Jesuran's waxing Fat, that made him kick at God Almighty, and it is that,
I believe, makes them to spurn at the Crown.

Secondly, Were the Strength of the Kingdom so much decayed; so weak and
contemptible, I cannot imagine why our Assistance should be desired by our
Neighbors, when not in a capacity to defend our selves: Sure the late League
of Guaranty was not then proposed to our Nation, nor tendered to the King of
England, and his entrance desired before all the Princes of the Empire, if we
are looked upon as a people so weak and inconsiderable, and our King's
Protection and Alliance not worth the seeking. Sure the Nation that has beat
the Dutch, and fought the French with all his lusty Guard of Switzers, is not
so suddenly dwindled into Pigmees, and only fit to sight with Cranes; and
perhaps this Associator and his Crew, may upon grapling find, that it is no such
easy matter to subdue those Guards, he would so willingly remove; and that his
Majesty has too stout a Party of Cavaliers, to suffer a second Plunder, and
Sequestration.

Thirdly, Though he suspect the Treasury to be at so low an Ebb; to have
nothing visible in it but dry Dust, and barren Sand, and so to give occasion
for such a seasonable Uniting against the Government; he may find himself much
out in his Sounding; and that his Will, and good Wishes were the plummet,
instead of Reason and Deliberation; and that the Tide there, by his leave, is
too high for him yet, to wade through into Rebellion; and now it is time to
parallel another Paragraph.

Associat.
We therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way to exclude the D. but finding
the means utterly rejected; we thought fit to propose to all True Protestants,
an Union amongst themselves; by Solemn and Sacred promise of mutual assistance;
and hold it our bounden Duty to join our selves in a Declaration, of our united
affections, and resolutions, in the Form ensuing. Scotch solemn League.
We have now at last after other means, of Supplication, Remonstrances,
Protestations, and Sufferings, for the Preservation of our selves, and
Religion, after mature deliberation resolved and determined to enter into a
Mutual and Solemn League and Covenant, which we all Subscribe, and with our
hands lifted up to the most high God, etc. Holy League, June 6. 43.
And finding that many ways of force and treachery are continually attempted,
to bring to utter ruin and destruction, the Parliament; and that which is most
dear unto us, the Protestant Religion; it is thought fit that all who are true
hearted, and Lovers of their Country, should bind themselves each to other in
a Sacred Vow. Here the Associator has shown himself a right siltching Plagiary,
and not only Copied out the Sense of his originals, but almost the very words,
after many Remonstrances, Supplications, Protestations; after a Parliamentary
way to exclude the Duke: He might as well have said, Now there remains nothing
to do but to drive the King out of his Palace, Proclaim all his followers
Delinquents; all his adherents Enemies to King and Country; send post to
Scotland, Messengers to the Field-Conventicles, get another Army from the
North, swallow a second Solemn League; and then we shall have exactly a second
43. the perfect Revolution of a sad Platonic Year, as well as a Plato
redivivus: But I hope the times will prove kinder to this Associator, than he
willingly would be to himself: And though so resolutely posting to the Devil,
he may meet with many a kind block in the way; such a Covenant is sooner drawn
up than Subscribed to; and more of Subscriptions may be got than of Horse, Men,
and Arms to defend it; and though all the Villainy should succeed even to
Rebellion, there is power enough left in the Government, they fancy so weak, to
keep them from setting up again their Idol of a Commonwealth; and making the
deluded people fall down and worship the Gods of their own hands. Finding our
selves not able to exclude the Duke, we think fit etc. He might as well have
said, Are resolved to bring it about one way, or another: But how long has it
been a warrantable piece of Doctrine, to attempt that by foul means, which they
despond of getting by fair? sure the Lawfulness of this can never be justified
by the best of their Casuists, neither Dr. O. nor Mr. B. will preach up this as
sound Doctrine; at present I don't know what might be done were Conscience
Liberty tolerated again, and one of them made the mouth or Prolocutor of an
Assembly: for it is observable that such men's opinions proportionably widen with
their Authority; and as soon as their dominion, which is founded in Grace,
begins once to be enlarged by it too, they Commence Latitudinarian in Cases of
Conscience, answerable to the extent of their Power and Government; and thus a
fellow trots along, a pretty sober Republican, as long as the Law can bridle
him, and make the Beast submit to Monarchy; but grows a Devilish headstrong
Rebel, when once the Reins are got between his Teeth: And I believe only the
thoughts of his having unhorsed his Rider, makes our Associator so bold as to
kick at him too. But I hope he will find there is Law enough left to back him
yet; and that there are Whips, Scourges, Axes, and Gibbets, notwithstanding
they are now grown no more terrible than Bug-bears, and Scare-crows; as if only
designed to frighten Children, and Small-birds: And all this boldness infused
into all sorts of villains, with a Dose of Ignoramus.

I don't see but upon the same grounds these following Proceedings may be very
justifiable, and the Gentleman shall give me leave to insert a Clause or two
for him in his Association, which by negligence I fancy, and not want of good
will were omitted.

We therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way to remove all evil Counselors
from the King; some of which were impeach't, (as also several of the Arbitrary
Judges) of High Treason; on purpose to bring them to condign Punishment. But
these means of the King and Kingdoms safety being rejected, Ergo --

And what then? must we therefore presently swear, to draw the one out of the
Council Chamger by the Ears, and dragg the other out of Westminster Hall to the
Block? But here you shall have the Tenor of the Oath, and the Copies from which
it was drawn.

Associat.
I A. B. Do in the presence of God, solemnly Vow, Promise and Protest, to
maintain and defend, to the utmost of my power, with my person, and Estate, the
true Protestant Religion, the Power and Privileges of Parliament, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Scoth Covenant.
I A. B. With hands lifted up to the most High God do swear, That I shall
sincerely, really, and constantly, endeavor the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in Scotland, etc. That I will with the same sincerity, etc. endeavor
to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom. Holy League.
I A. B. In the presence of Almighty God, do declare Vow and Covenant, in order
to the security, preservation of the true Reformed Religion, and Liberties of
the Subject, etc. Certainly they must be the softest fools in the World, an
easy sort of Idiots, below the cunning of common brutes, that can be cheated
with the same bait, whose disguised hook they have already felt, and smarted
by; I believe the contriver of this Oath, intended the imposing it only on
Fools and Madmen, or the City Mobile worse than both; Religion and Liberty may
go down again with such Asses, who apprehend neither aright; such as understand
the sense of Magna Charta, and their Geneva-Bibles though in plain English, as
much as they would the one in its antiquated French, and the other in its
original Hebrew. But sure no man in his Wits can imagine the wiser part of the
Nation, so soon deluded with a repeated fallacy: It Is observable when on the
specious pretenses of Religion and Liberty, the Government of Church and State,
were both subverted, the Magistracy triumphed over by the Criminals and Rogues,
it was to punish us, and the Church persecuted by those factious Dissenters
that were to be corrected by it, when the whole Kingdom at last was set in a
Combustion, and naught at length but the Kings blood thought sufficient to
quench the flame; it is observable, I say, that some of the trepan'd Nation
began to reflect on the barbarousness of such horrid Proceedings; And to be
surpised with a sort of horror at their own Progress; and being pinch't with
the Quaere, Why they first engaged in such designs? would still answer that
they never intended it should have come to that pass; A poor excuse and
expiation for so much Guilt and Villainy. But sure such Gentlemen, ought now to
be very careful of putting to Sea again, that have been so dangerously tossed in
the Storm; and not to be decoyed out with the calm smilings of a ruddy Sky, and
the slattering hopes of fair weather. But yet, it is but saying to some, the
Religion is again in danger, their Privileges infringed; And we are for
launching out again into the purple Waves, and another Red Sea of Blood;
drawing up Covenants again, abusing the King, Libelling the Government, with
Pen and Pasquil, the next door to the reforming it with the Sword. But I hope
the constitution of it is such that it will not now be so easily subverted;
like a well set bone, grown the stronger for its being broken; and like the
Buildings of their great and mighty Babylon, which are now the better secured
against the wild ragings of a Fire, by their suffering so much in the
rebellious Flame.

Associat,
I will endeavor to resist all encroachments of Arbitrary Power, and endeavor
entirely to Disband such mercenary Forces as we have reason to believe were
raised to advance it, and are still kept up in and about the City of London, to
the great Amazement and Terror of all good People of the Land. Scotch solemn
League.
We shall with all faithfulness endeavor the suppressing of all such as have
been and shall be incendiaries, malignants, evil instruments, dividing the King
from his People. Under these they comprehended, as appeared by their
Proceedings afterward, all those that stood up for the defense of their
Sovereign; all those Forces which for a while kept his Majesty from the Block,
were then looked on too as mercenary Switzers, hired to promote an Arbitrary
Power. Holy League.
I will not consent to the laying down of Arms, so long as the Papists now in
open War against the Parliament, shall by force of Arms be protected from the
Justice thereof. And they might as well have called them Turks or Tartars, for
'twas the interest only of those Rebels to fix the most opprobrious names on
the Kings best Subjects. And Papist then was as odious an appellation, as
malice could affix on the worst of Enemies; And was as dreadful as our
Associators new Scarecrow mercenary Forces.

The Terror of Arbitrary Power I grant is dreadful enough to those that know
what it means; but made use of as a more frightful Bugbear, to those poor
souls, that hardly understand what it signifies. To such it serves only as a
Watchword to fall on, without examining whether there be any occasion for it
or no; it is but dressing up a Lamb in a Bears Skin and setting on the Mastiffs;
the ignorant Currs will soon worry the most innocent creature, without
discovering the Cheat; This terrible word Arbitrary, has much the same effect
with the unintelligible and fearful dargon of Witches, of Juggling Devils, and
Impostures in the Black-Art; It charms the people into an inconsiderate horror
and detestation of some persons, they know not why, nor wherefore; Suspends all
the suggestions of reason and humanity, so long as the raging fit of Exorcism
endures; But when a little time has cooled the possessed Lunaticks into more
sedate reflection, and common sense; the motives to all this beastly rage are
found very trifling, or quite false, and unaccountable; Those mercenary Forces
which this Associator talks of, either were those which were raised even by the
consent of Parliament; which was employed in their granting a supply for their
Pay; Or else he only means His Majesty's Guard; which I agree with him are
still kept up, and for very good purpose too. If he means the former I am so
far of his opinion that they were mercenary Forces; for they took pay to die as
other Soldiers do, some of them being Ship't over into Flanders, according to
the design they were raised for, and there knocked in the head by the French;
But that they were all mustered up to cut our Throats, to introduce an
Arbitrary Power with the Sword, and Massacre all that opposed it, are certainly
surmises as groundless as Jealousies can invent, and like those reports of the
French landing at Purbeck, and the Battles that were seen in the Air, or of the
modern Dr. Faustus that flew from St. Omers to Salamanca; And if the baseness
of the common Soldiers that were listed, and their Officers affection to
Popery shall warrant such suspicions; I don't see how it is possible for His
Majesty upon the most pleasing account, to raise an Army without such mean
beggarly fellows in it, and defend his Officers from being suspected as
Papists, so long as there are only poor men that will take common pay, and
disaffected persons to create such Jealousies; And what can such suspicions
terminate in, but to make the credulous, and those that will not believe fairly
dispatch one another, about a quarrel Whether their business is to be done by a
third? a pretty way to make an end of the dispute, and themselves together: And
then by the Associator's leave, such suspicious thoughts, not only reflect on
the integrity of so merciful a Prince, who is grown almost gray under his
clemency; and very unlikely to take much comfort in his Mercenary Forces; and
Arbitrary sway in his old age; which would but serve to discompose that remnant
of Life, we commonly desire to pass in the greatest tranquillity: But these
surmises detract also from the prudence and honesty of a Parliament, that first
moved for their raising, and voted a Subsidy for their pay; and sure he is too
tender of the honor of that Assembly, to fancy they would make their fellow
Subjects contribute to their own ruin, and buy their slavery at the expense of
Blood and Moneys.

If he means the Guards, (which is very probable, because he says still kept up
in and about the City of London) then I deny that they are to the Terror and
Amazement of all good People, for none but the bad are concerned for it; and
it is strange that those which are so much for the preservation of his Majesty's
Person, will not allow of a competent Guard to preserve him from the Bullet of a
Pickering, or the Blunderbuss of Mr. College.

And yet these Gentlemen that are so mightily apprehensive, of an unaccountable
Danger of Arbitrary Power, and its being set up by the King's Guards, are the
very same persons that grin at his Majesty's thanks for his Declaration to
govern by Law; blazoning that gracious act to consist party per pale, of
weakness and impertinencie; and this they do with these their two bandied
argumentations; First, That such a Submissive Declaration argues too great
condescension in a Monarch, and weakly makes him Appeal to his Subjects: And
secondly, That the declaring his intention to rule by Law, was as impertinent,
as the thanks for it unnecessary; because that by those Laws, and his
Coronation Oath, his Majesty is obliged to do it: I think I have expressed
their meaning in as civil terms as they usually complement his Majesty withal:
And now they may fairly give me leave to tell my own sense and judgment of
these their sentiments, and opinions.

In my poor Apprehension, this gracious Declaration, seems (...) all their
froward Petitions; And will these bawling Bratts not so much as be pleased with
the very Rattles they cry for? They still bawled for frequent Parliaments, and
here the King promises they shall have them. Popery must be kept out, and
Property secured; And in this he declares to preserve the Protestant Religion,
and protect them in their Rights and Privileges; The dread of A bitrary Power
was the Burden in all those Papers and Parchments they presented; And there
they are assured that he will govern according to Laws, and take them for his
sole Measures: And now must the same factious Scriblers, that writ such smooth
Panegyric on all their Petitions, be hired to make such Satirical
Animadversions on his Majesty's Declaring to gratify them? And shall the King
be urged and vexed into Compliance with all their petulant Requests, and then
have his good Nature traduced for Easiness and Folly; And shall both Meekness
and Tyranny by turns abuse the Government; secure an Odium upon it, by making
both Extremes serve for the purpose? If so, for God's sake let them show me the
Possibility, of keeping up a Monarchy, amongst such perverse and implacable
Republicans; and as for the Condescension they talk of, his Majesty is somewhat
beholden to these Gentlemen, for being so jealous of his Honor. But I would
ask them what other way could be taken to bring his Majesty's Subjects into
right understanding of his good Inclinations toward them; These Arguers are
Conscious to themselves, with what black Representations they have blemished
his Government; and to whom shall the King appeal for his Justification, but to
his poor Subjects that are scared out of their Loyalty by their false, and
scandalous Suggestions? Will Not they allow the King, what is granted to the most
profligate Wretch, and Criminal at a Bar, not so much as to make his Defense;
not to have the benefit of every common English Man; And what they themselves
would expect, if they had their Deserts, and were arraigned for Treason? Sure
they show themselves most inveterate Traitors, that after they have represented
their Prince as a Tyrant, would put him out of a possibility, of showing
himself Gracious and Merciful; they know they have a great advantage with the
Rabble against their King upon even Terms; why then must he be Libelled, and
not suffered to venture a Reply? And why shall his Majesty be denied, what
their Hamburg Sheriff did attempt, to vindicate himself in Print? All the
Answer they can make to it is, That then the People will be brought into their
Wits again, and they will lose the benefit they make of their Distraction.

The other Whirlbat which they flourish about mightily, and put into the Hands
of every young Combatant, that has a mind to skirmish for the Cause, is briefly
this; That both the King and the Thanks were needless, because the King could
not do otherwise by Law, and his Oath: But this is like all the rest of their
Arguments against the Government, full of Cavil and Spite.

We will grant them the King cannot bring in Arbitrary Power by Law; but if they
tell the People that it will be brought in without it, is the King bound by Law
to tell them he intends no such thing? These factious Gentlemen are as much
bound by the Law, and their Oaths of Allegiance, to live like dutiful Subjects,
and to love their Sovereign; and should they declare thus much to their King
under their Hands (as they would do, did they really love him,) I fancy they
would be very much netled, should not his Majesty return them so much as Thanks
for such a Testimony, and perhaps grumble too if they were not preferred for
such a work of Superarrogation; Though all this while they are as much obliged
by their Oaths to obey, as he is to protect, but yet these reciprocal
Assurances on both sides may be merely voluntary. Suppose some of these Arguers
met with a suspected Band of licentious Libertines, whom they thought neither
the Law of God or Man could deterr from committing any Villainy; would not they
thank this Banditi for assuring them of a safe Passage, without Plundering or
Murder? I appeal to the whole Kingdom whether some of our suspicious Wretches
do not daily represent the King and his Council as dangerous altogether, as any
such parcel of Russians, such as would be for enslaving the Nation, and cutting
of Throats with our Associators mercenary Forces: And must not the King be
permitted to wipe off such black Scandals? expel such Panick Fears, and be
thanked by his Loyal Subjects, for such comfortable Promises? In short if they
are satisfied that the King cannot Rule but by the Law, why do they dread so
much an Arbitrary Power? If they are afraid he will Rule without it, why will not
they thank him for his Assurance to the contrary? This Digression is so fur a
pertinent Comment on the last Paragraph we handled in the Association, as it
clears his Majesty from designing an Arbitrary Sway; which the bold Associator
would insinuate. And now we will proceed to compare the rest of his excellent
Stuff.

Associat.
Moreover J. D. of Y. having publicly owned the Popish Religion, etc. I will
never consent that the said J. D. of Y. or any other who has any way adhered
to him, and the Papists, etc. shall be admitted to the Succession of the Crown
of England; But by all lawful Means, and by force of Arms will oppose him, and
endeavor to subdue and destroy him, and all his Adherents, that intend to set
up his pretended Title. Holy League June 6.
That I will according to my Power and Vocation, assist the Forces raised by
both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their
Consent. Solemn Leag. Negat. Oath.
I. A. B. Do swear from my Heart, that I will neither directly, nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this Cause, etc. And that my
coming and submitting to this Parliament, is without any Design whatsoever. Now
I would have any one tell me what will be the difference between assisting the
Forces of the Parliament, against those of the King; swearing neither directly,
or indirectly to adhere to his Majesty; and this Clause of Fighting, Subduing,
Expelling, Destroying the Duke and all his Adherents, when as much a King as
ever his father was; which is supposed and employed in this Clause of the
Association; And that all this shall be done, when he comes to the Crown, and
seeks to set up his pretended Title? But why must his Title only be pretended,
when he will have as much right to wear the Crown, as the Head upon which it is
now so miraculously placed? What can be the result of this, but that those men
who will think his Title then but pretended, have but little better Opinion of
his present Majesty's? Certainly upon the same Ground that they will not admit
him to the Throne, they may pull the present King out of it: for it is but
rejecting the Duke for giving Life and Birth to the Plot, and the King for
conniving at the Conspiracy (that horrid accusation wherewith some Traitors
have already traduced his Majesty,) and then farewell Government of old England;
good Night to the best tempered Monarchy in the World.

But then for the Clause of all Adherents to be destroyed too, It Is such an
unlimited piece of Massacre, that for ought I see half the Nation must be
forced to swim in their own Blood by these tender Lovers of their Country, and
these Patriots put in for a more barbarous cutting of Throats than that of the
Danes in the same Kingdom; that of Paris in France, or Piedmont in Italy: This
word Adherent must include the extirpating the whole Line of Succession,
notwithstanding it is pretended only in opposition to the next Heir; For it
does the Prince of Orange his business, whom they all acknowledge a Protestant
Prince, as much as if he were the greatest Bigot of Rome; it is but saying he
adheres to his own Father-in-Law, one from whose Blood he must derive some of
his Pretensions, and then the Protestant Prince must be destroyed too,
according to the word of the Association, as an Enemy to Laws, Religion, and
Country.

But now at last comes a Paragraph, not to be paralleled by the old Covenants
only because fuller of Treason, and Rebellion, The obeying of the Parliament in
Forty two, and Forty three without a King, was pretended somewhat warrantable,
because his Majesty had unhappily passed an Act for Triennial Parliaments, and
then another afterward for their perpetual sitting; But this Gentleman without
any more Ceremonies, without expecting such an unreasonable Grant from the
King; resolves that Affairs shall be carried on with such a resolute piece of
Treason, that none but desperate Men and mad, such as had bid Defiance to the
Laws of God and Man, would ever engage in; which read Verbatim, if it be
possible for any Loyal Heart that loves his King and Country, to have so much
Patience.

Associat.
And lest this just and pious Work should by any means be obstructed, or
hindered, for want of Discipline and Conduct, or an^ evil minded Persons under
pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association, should attempt
or commit Disorders, we will follow such Orders as we shall from time to time
receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting; or the major
part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association, when it shall
be prorogued or dissolved, and obey such Officers as shall by them be set over
us in the several Countries, Cities, and Buroughs, until the next meeting of
this and another Parliament; and will then show the same Submission and
Obedience unto it, and those who shall be of it. I don't doubt but had this
Associator been known to both Houses of Parliament, their professed Loyalty is
such, they would have voted his head to be preferred to that honorable place
among the Traitors on the Bridge; A just requital for paying such a Treasonable
deference to that honorable Assembly; and so boldly complementing them without
their leave into Rebellion; A Pious Work indeed, and such as I don't doubt,
without a seasonable repentance and an insinite Mercy, will damn the Contriver.
And lest any evil minded Persons should commit Disorders. A very careful
Patriot certainly, one who will not suffer so much as a little disorder to be
committed; But it would be a little hard for the poor Mouse that picks a little
hole in the Bread to be caught by the neck by the Thief that stole the whole
Loaf; Strickt discipline indeed! that makes the least disorder in raising of
Forces so criminal and obnoxious; and yet the mustering them up to rebel, a
work Pious and meritorious. Sure the Contriver of this work is not so well
acquainted with the House of Commons, and their Privileges, as he would be
thought to be; or else is resolved to act and forge in spite of all equity and
truth. For none that have stretched the Power of that Assembly to its utmost
extent ever allowed it a right of sitting like so many petty Kings in
Representative; To issue out Proclamations, raise Forces, and command obedience
from their fellow Subjects.

I confess we had a Parliament that did all this, raised an Army, made their
Generals, fought their King, but sure this Associator cannot be such a Villain
to think the late Representatives of the Nation, would all have commenced
Traitors; and after a most inconsistant rate, imitated that Parliament in 41.
Which some of they themselves by particular Act since have declared guilty of
Rebellion, nay to outdo and transcend them in their Treason, to sit in
opposition to his Majesty's Command, whereas those did by his unhappy
Permission. But this bold Associator can go further yet; resolves the sitting
House shall not only be obeyed as the Supreme and Legislative power of the
Nation, but that the Major Part of those Members whom he civilly supposes ready
to subscribe, after Prorogation, after Dissolution, shall be submitted to, as
invested with an higher Supremacy then any would be willing to allow his
present Majesty; and that this select Committee in their Respective Countries,
Cities, and Buroughs, like so many Stadt-holders in their several Provinces,
shall create Officers, muster their Armies, fall a plundering again of
Delinquents, and hanging up every Malignant Dog that dares but show his teeth
or wagg his Tail; but all this while we must not imagine this to be a design to
set up a Republic. The Contriver of all this horrid Treason and Rebellion, was
only some bold impudent Scribler, some little factious fellow of a Ribband
Club. I wish such a Design were only in the single heart of some poor ordinary
rascally Traitor; I fancy then we should quickly have his heart out with his
bowels; I fancy the Rogue would hardly lie so long incognito or meet with a
Stickling Ignoramus. But if ever the Design take in the Kingdom, we shall see
some of our lostiest Cedars will aspire to the Reputation of having brought it
about, and not suffer every factious Mushroom that just railed against the
Government assume the glory of having subverted it too; If there be such a
brave party ready to subscribe this excellent design (as he seems to insinuate
that drew it up,) his Majesty certainly has more need to double his Guards for
his own preservation, then to dismiss them to please such dangerous
Associators; and none that have read the common Apologue of the Sheeps being
worried by the Wolves as soon as persuaded to dismiss their Dogs, but from the
Fable can deduce so good a Moral as to see through the shallowness of their
disguised Intentions, and keep themselves from being circumvented with such
another cheat. I wonder what should make this Politician think such a Major
Part of Members so great a Part of the Government too as singly to require
obedience; would it not be as much Treason to swear fealty to them, as if it
were done to persons that were nothing of that Politic Body? Perhaps with this
Associator and men of his Principles, the Swearing only to obey Members of that
honorable Assembly much extenuates the guilt of disobeying their Prince, but
yet he is for submitting to the Orders of those that have no Relation to it,
Disbanded Members that have no more share in the Government then a petulant
Officer in the Company from which he is cashiered; I know these Idolatrous
Adorers of their own created Gods, have such strange Opinions of their deisied
Creatures; that they cannot imagine them to be reduced by the breath of a King
into their primitive Stations, from which by that very mouth they were called,
cannot imagine that such a dignified thing, after having once represented the
sense of his whole Corporation, to be able to commence again a common Subject,
and to have no more understanding than his Electors. Be it so, still there is
no reason why this Gentleman must be supposed to retain somewhat of Sovereignty
too, only because it has been, and looked upon a King; do more than they will
allow his Majesty, carry his Power with him wherever he goes, and in his little
Borough make Orders, and Laws, only because he has voted in the place where
they are legally made. These are such Extravagancies in Opinion, that not a
discreet Person that ever served his Country in that Capacity, but will detest
to be thought guilty of, nothing but the wild Conceits of some City Mechanics,
or Country Clodpates that send them thither, or the treasonable Insinuations of
such an Associator to subvert the Government.

The close of all these Solemn Leagues are still the same, very pious indeed
and unanimous.

Association.
Neither will we for any respect of Persons, or Causes, or for fear of Reward
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in prosecution thereof
during our Lives, upon Pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted as perjured
Persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our Native Country, to which
Pains and Punishment we do voluntarily submit our selves, etc. Scotch solemn
League.
That we shall assist and defend all that enter into this League and Covenant:
Nor suffer our selves Directly, nor indirectly, by whatsoever Combination,
Persuasion, or Terror, to be divided, or withdrawn from this blessed Union, and
Conjunction; all which we shall do as in the sight of God, in the presence of
the Almighty, the searcher of all Hearts, as I shall answer it at the great
Day, when the Secrets of all Hearts shall be disclosed. Holy League 6. of June.
I will likewise assist all other Persons that shall take this Oath, in what
they shall do in pursuance hereof; and this Vow and Covenant I make in the
presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all Hearts, with a true Intention to
perform the same, as I shall answer it at the great Day, when the secrets of
all Hearts shall be disclosed. If these Instruments of Hell were to be compared
with any thing besides themselves, I should assimulate them to the Serpent I
have read of in Pliny's natural History, which he calls Amphisbaena; describing
it with a smooth, delicate Head at both ends; and in those two fine Extremities
all the Cunning of the crafty subtle Animal seems to be lodged, while all the
other parts besides are nothing but Venom, and Viper; All these subtle Engines
you may observe to begin with abundance of cunning Insinuations, as if all were
done for the real Advance of Religion and Piety, with a having before our Eyes
the Glory of God, etc. See Scotch Coven. With a finding to the Grief of our
Hearts, that the Popish Priests and Jesuits, vid. Pref. to the Assoc. And then
all conclude, in calling it a blessed Union for the Glory of God; vid. Solemn.
Leag. A righteous End, and pious Work: See Assoc. All with the Name of God at
both Ends; whilst all the Bowels and Entrails of these Monsters, are full of
the Devil; full of Venom against the Government; Treason against the King; And
Lies to the very Face of that God they so solemnly Invoke. Well, then it seems
by the resolute Close of this Association, that no respect of Persons or
Causes, Fear, or Reward, shall make them desert their Fellows and Associates;
Stout Champions indeed! and so true to the Cause, as to make it a sort of
Treason to Conspire the giving it up: With a kind of Martial Law to punish the
Delinquents, as a Council of War does those that fly from their Colors, or
yield up a Garrison; And yet all this while think it not so much as a
Peccadillo, to Plot against the State, and Rebel against their Sovereign. For
certainly if no Persons or Causes, must make them desert so wicked a
Conspiracy, or permit any single Conspirator to turn an honest Renegado; Then
all his Majesty's Proclamations like those of his Father's, for laying down
their Arms, must be answered with a Remonstrance; They may get some young Spawn
of old Oliver for their General; and in spite of King and Laws, march with
their Colors flying, and Drums beating, throughout all the Kingdom from
Barwick to the Mount; and all this must be done if enjoined by the Major Party
of Members. Not only upon those common Obligations, most Laws bind Vassals to
Obedience, viz. by being Penal or Capital; not only such light Punishment, and
Vengeance must follow the violating the Contract, but Damnation too, and every
dastard Delinquent, that has not an Heart, like one of Matchiavil's complete
Rogues, stout enough to go through all this Villainy; must be prosecuted with a
Pillory here, and Damned as a perjured Person hereafter.

I know the Italian Bandities, and our English Highway-Man, though but common
Outlaws on the same terms the Subscribers of this Association would be, punish
one another many times by mutual agreement, and that according to the Penalties
of those very Laws of the Kingdom they daily violate. But however though such
exact Justice be observed amongst Thieves and Robbers it cannot extenuate the
guilt of those Murders and Villainies they commit. And why all the Blood that is
shed, all the Plunder that is committed by such a select Band of Covenanteers
is not as much a Violation of the Laws, as Murder and Robery, I cannot
understand; then it seems also no Hope of Fear or Reward must separate these
resolute Fellows; If so, I would ask these Gentlemen, whether the Fear of God,
and the Devil, the Hopes of Heaven, and Happiness may not also be excluded by
so universal a Negative? If they say they only mean by it the allurements of
Men, or Terrors of some earthly Powers; Then it had been but prudently done to
have mollified it with some such Limitation. If they make no such excuse for
it, then I think it stands still a daring piece of Atheism, and resolute
profaneness; neither were they to separate themselves during Lives, so this is
a most excellent and vigorous prosecution indeed, they are not so much as to
think themselves absolved from this Oath, though the reasons and occasions for
taking it were quite removed and obviated, for it is such an indispensable
Obligation as must not cease but with their breath; and they swear to hold
their Combination by the same Tenure some do their places with a Durante Vita,
so that suppose by an untimely death, or a natural one, the Duke, that unhappy
Burden of this lamentable Song, were removed; they still oblige themselves to
obey what Orders they shall receive from those Perpetual Dictators, so long as
they enjoy Breath and Life to put them in Execution. And all this
notwithstanding a surviving King or Protestant Successor, how near this would
have come to the nature of a Commonwealth, I submit to the determination even
of those men that think all Republican Designs at this time so ridiculous and
impossible.

Thus having with as much patience and moderation, as such a provoking Subject
would permit; paralelled, examined, the nature, tendency of this specious
Association it self by comparing each particular Paragraph, we will now make
some observations on the whole complicated Piece of Digested Treason: And then
expose those little Subterfuges, that Varnish of reason and argumentation they
are forced to fly to, that defend it like sinking Mariners, catching at every
little Board and Plank, to buoy up the head of so desperate a Cause.

This whole Scheam of Rebellion will upon a careful perusal be found, in some
places of such an unlimited extent; in others full of mental reservation;
sometimes you meet with a deep Equivocation; then with a plain Lie: here some
factious insinuation, and at last perfect treasonable Positions, that one would
swear the Council of a Conclave, Hell, and a Republic, had all consulted the
form and manner of the drawing it up. And each inserted its Paragraph,
according to their several abilities, of Equivocating, Lying, and Speaking
Treason.

First none are Excluded that will but come in and take this Oath; For they
swear to protect all such as shall enter into it in just performance of the
true Intent and meaning of it; so that if Turk, Jew, Infidel, or any Heretic
in the World that is no professed Papist, come and subscribe, he is presently
to be protected and defended: I know that in the Preface to this Pious Work,
it is only extended to all True Protestants; but that general appellation is so
indefinite, that I do not see why it may not comprehend an Army of Tartars, if
they will but land here and protest against the King and Government; then it is
so Extensive that all Adherents must be destroyed; so that the King by denying
his Royal Assent to dispossess his Brother of his unquestionable Right, and the
Lords the passing the Bill in the Higher House, being in all reason to be
judged Adherents to the Duke; must be cut off every mothers Son, which
certainly would be a worse piece of business for the Peers, then heretofore
their being Voted Useless; Useless Trunks they would make them indeed now, when
by such an Association they would go near to lose their heads.

Secondly, all this old Chiming and Ding Dong about Liberty, and Property, that
must ring through the Country on the communicating this new Covenant, and charm
the listening Clod-pate like a merry Peal of Bells on a Holyday, is nothing else
but Mental Reserve and mere Equivocation; For first by the name of Liberty
cannot be meant that of enjoying the Freedom of their persons from confinement;
as every good Subject may well expect, so long as he lives in Conformity to the
Laws, that would justly confine, and punish him if he did not; for ^hen it
would have been but a piece of impertinency to have inserted it; for the whole
Nation at present enjoys all this; therefore it must necessarily follow that
all that can be employed in this Ambiguous Phrase Liberty, by such Associators,
is a Liberty of rebelling with impunity, a License to perpetrate all those
villains, for the obtaining of which the specious Pretense of Liberty can but
possibly be suggested; and which indeed is now adays upon all occasions so
cunningly pretended that I don't see but in a short time the whole Kingdom may
set up for Levellers and Libertines; every poor beggarly Rascal plunder his
wealthy Neighbor till he make the squares even, -- every bloody Villain stab,
shoot, and murder all that oppose his Designs, whilst the suppressing this
Barbarism shall be thought an infringing of Liberty; Forbidding the Israelites
to spoil the Egyptians, and then no wonder if they murmur against Moses and
Aaron in their Tents: And then by Property can never be meant the keeping of
their Possessions in quiet: so long as there is no one that disturbs them in
it: But if they are resolved to be their own Tormentors out themselves from
their Tenements, by voluntary slight, run away as if they would leave
themselves behind: haunted by their own Shadows: fancy French Armies at
Purbeck, Navies at Portsmouth, and then depopulate their Habitations of their
own accord: Certainly this cannot be charged as a Severity on the Government, as
seizing their Properties, or else Carelessness in the Magistrate in not
defending them; If the Rabble will like a Flock of Crows, or Wild-Geese, at the
Garring or Cackling of one of their Sentinels, presently take the Alarm, and
with a terrible Cry be straight on the Wing, although there be no Guns in the
Field, or Nots in the way; Sure they may thank themselves too for their own
Disturbance. And it is evident to the most discontented Wretch, though his
froward Soul force him to lie even in despite of Grace, and the Suggestions of
Conscience to the contrary: That since the King's Restoration, the Liberty,
not so much, as of the meanest Subject, has ever been Infringed, or Violated,
unless merited by his own Guilt, and warranted by the Law; nor so much as one
Tittle of Property denied to the Proprietor, besides what has been forfeited
by Rebelling against his Majesty, or the Laws of the Kingdom; What there was
before, those best know that suffered by the Tyranny of that Usurpation; So
that all that can be meant by these Associators, when they cry out Property,
is but supposing themselves to have a Right, where they have none at all, and
then cry out they are denied their Share in this and that, when all the while
they have no right to the Dividend; So that I think the reserved Gentleman that
drew it up, might have been more free and open; and in plain terms bespoke the
People, as a certain Ignoramus Criminal is said to have done; Look you my
Friends, there is a black Man at Whitehall, keeps a great deal of Room and
Land, of which we were once in quiet Possession. And I don't see why we should
for go those Properties that were held (vi and armis,) by our Grandfathers,
it is but knocking the Guards on the Head, and in with our Blunderbusses, make
those Redcoated Lobsters swim a little in their own Blood; Seize the Heir, and
the Inheritance is our own again.

Then for its black Lies, and Contradictions; They are like the Darkness of
Hell it self, so gross that they may be felt; what an impudent piece of
Falsehood is it to persuade a Nation, that it is guilty of a thing, of which to
its very self it is no way Conscious; and make it swear that the Guards are
kept up to the Terror, and Amazement of all good People, when all the while
they believe no such thing; Strange that this Amazing sit should on the sudden
surprise us, of which we have had not so much as a Symptom this twenty Years. I
suppose it would puzzle this quacking Statesman to give the true cause of this
sudden shivering Distemper in the Body Politic, as much as it does most
Physicians truly to define the matter of Agues in the Natural; But the
Associator presumes much upon the Ignorance of the People, or his own Wit and
Parts; And that they are as ready to swallow a gross Lie, as he is to ram it
down with an Oath; Or else sure he would not be so bold as to persuade them
that one or two thousand Men in Arms, would cut the Throats of so many
Millions; this is establishing Paradoxes on the Credulity of Fools and Idiots;
It Is the Happiness these man have to make the wildest Extremes subservient to
their Cause; The Infidelity of a prejudiced Ignoramus keeps it up on the one
side, and the Credulousness of those that are truly Ignorant, must be the
Butteress on the other; I have heard of a Fellow that was often drunk and
Lunatic, and in either of those sits had such dreadful Appearances of Fiery
Dragons, and strange Visions, and the Delusion of his fancy so violent, that he
could never be satisfied till he had imposed the same belief on all those that
were about him, who to avoid the troublesomeness of the Impostor were forced to
seign themselves Spectators too. I think this will be all the Terror, and
Amazement the Wise People and the Good will lie under, and as for the Fools,
and Knaves, we care not how much they are frightened by such Sir Eglamores, the
Champions of the State and their D^agons; and then what a pretty piece of
Contradiction is it, for them to swear to defend his Royal Majesty's Person,
and Estate; and then in the next line to talk of opposing Arbitrary Power?
which seems to me somewhat like the proceedings of that Traitor Judas; come on
with a Hail Master, and then delivering him to be crucified. Declaring both
offensive, and defensive War at the same time, and against the same Person. For
who can be thought to set up Arbitrary Power, and who can be meant in that
expression, but his Majesty? a Prince that has ruled them this twenty years,
with a Clemency almost to a Crime, and made himself the Object of their
discontent, only by his Gracious Indulgence: Lastly that there are Treasonable
Positions in it is pretty plain from the last Clause of obeying their fellow
Subjects, some little Regiment of a disbanded Committee; when there is an Act
of Parliament that makes it high Treason, on any Pretense whatsoever to enter
into Combination or take up Arms against the King; it is true this Monster of a
Union seems with it is Head to defend the Crown and Scepter, but with it is Tail
lashes the one from his Majesty's Head, and the other out of his Hand; destroys
the Monarchy, erects a Commonwealth, enslaves the People with the Bait of
Freedom, and to save the silly wretches from Popery, damns them to the
punishment of Treason, and the torments of Hell: And now I hope the charge I
laid down above is proved in its several particulars, and from the
agreeableness of it to such Projectors, from its Treason will be thought the
contrivance of a Republican, from its Aequivocation of a Jesuit, from its Lying
of the Devil. And now we shall consider the poor Arguments that are used by the
party to defend it; and the first Champion that enters the List seems armed
with all the authority the Supreme power of the Nation can invest it withal,
and said by the Factions Abettors of it to have been the discourse, and Design
of the Parliament; which is the plain insinuation of the Foreman, when my Lord
S. was to be put on his Trial, vid. Proceedings at the Old Baily; where these
glancing Interrogatories are still put to Mr. Secretary: Don't you know there
was a discourse in Parliament? Did not you know of such a debate in Parliament?
Have not you heard there was a talk of Association in Parliament? Pretty Questions
indeed, and is this one of them they took so much time for, this all the egg
that is laid after so much cackling and laying their heads together? I thought
a Grand Jury such Good men and true, were sworn to fifth things impartially,
without being Counsel for the Prisoner, in opposition to the King: If so let
any man judge how pertinent this Question was to the detecting the truth, and
since they are so tickled with Interogatories; Quaere whether these two or
three Quaeries may not as well be put?

1. Whether if all the Council assigned to Fitz Harris, could have pleaded more
for his Lordship, than these Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest? 2. Whether
Ignoramus Juries ought not to be considered from the Protestant Exchequer;
which like their Thames is at full Tide in the City, when it is Low Water at
White Hall? 3. Whether the Council of the one, or the Jurors of the other were
the beter paid, And what is the difference between taking up a Prejudice
against the Kings Cause, and a fee for the Prisoners?
These Quaeries being civilly proposed, we'll now make some reply to their
puzzling Interrogatories, about a Parliament; which I look upon as a sort of
riddling Sphinx, and like that Monster, with many forms, and faces, which if
not unriddled, they will be sure to make it murder the credit of the Kings
Evidence. But then if it chance to meet with its Oedipus, and be well
expounded; why should not these Gentlemen and their Cause, (to carry on the
fable,) break their necks too? we know as well as any of these Good, Honest
men, that there was a Bill proposed in the House of Commons, and that about
Association too, they having owned it, and published it in their Printed Votes,
and so not only the close, fly insinuations of their subtle Interrogatories.
But what then? does it follow this discovered paper was read there too, and
every Paragraph of it, amongst which one is plain Treason? sure that honorable
House is but little beholden to those Gentlemen for such squinting reflections.
But it seems such men may make bolder with their Representatives, and take as
much liberty with their Petty Gods, as a canting Nonconformist does with his
God Almighty. Then secondly were it read there verbatim as these bold
Insinuators would have the World believe, sure the bare debating or reading it
could not pass it into an Act too, and make it as statutable, as if the King's
Le Roy vult had passed it into Law; if so, it had then been pertinently urged
as an Argument for the Prisoner, when all the Old Acts that make it Treason to
raise Forces without the King, would have been abrogated by this New one for
tolerating Insurrection. In the mean time give me leave to think that this
Suggestion excused them no more from bringing the Prisoner to his Trial, then a
Vote of the House could have warranted them to pull him out of the Tower. And
by their leave how do all these insinuations prove the Parliament concerned in
it? the most that can be gathered from the Circumstances of Affairs, is, that
it must be only understood of the House of Commons, and now all is out, and
what none of them will own when pinch't with it, blabs forth unawares in
Confession. Unhappy Tongues, thus to betray their Masters.

So now we know what they mean by a Parliament, it seems the House of Commons
is the Parliament, and they will have this Parliament to exclude the Duke by
themselves; their Votes to be Law, and they sit again as long as they please,
and whether the King will or no; it is they must go down into their several
Buroughs; and according to this Association raise the Militia, and make the
people swear to obey them: If this be the right constitution of a Parliament,
the Lord have mercy upon us, and God save the King, and no wonder then if the
House of Lords were in the late Rebellion Voted useless, and now declared
Obstructors of Justice, and Violators of the constitution of Parliaments; and
no need will there be for Repealing an Act of Scandalum Magnatum, if they can
be so much traduced, made so scandalous without it. And give me leave to tell
these Gentlemen too, that make the name of Parliament, a Justification for all
their own Factiousness, and a Terror to all other peoples Loyalty: that this
complementing that honorable Assembly as their Patrons, and but other men's
Bugbears is no such great piece of civility. If you now adays reprimand a
fellow for talking irreverently of the King or Council, you are gagged
presently with the sense of Parliament; tell them the Duke's still the next
Successor, you are muzzl'd with the Bill of Exclusion; forbear veiling your
Bonnet to Dr. Oats's Gippo, and he flaps you in the teeth with a Parliament;
condemn the Treason of this Association, and you are stunned with such an
Interrogatory. Now it is certain that none of these things ever were the
Judgment of Parliament: Because neither the King nor the House of Lords are
ever like to be of these Opinions; and as for this Scheam of Association, I am
persuaded the Commons themselves, never thought on such strange Resolutions, as
are there intended. For as it is acknowledged by all that the murder of Justice
Godfrey (which was as imprudent, as barbarous) made the famed subtilty of the
Jesuit much suspected; and with a preposterous piece of Policy helped the
further detection of that Plot, they thought to smother in the stream of his
Blood; so it is as bad Politics in our Commonwealths-men to make the Parliament
Abettors of their proceedings, whilst it gratifies the Papist and their Cause
much more, than that cruel and inconsiderate murder, helps to put off the
through Examination of that Hellish Conspiracy; which they themselves think will
never be sufficiently sisted; so that it is no such Paradox to say the Jesuit
had an hand in this Association, as well as the Republicans, and that both
cabal in their Clubs for the subverting the State as well as in their
Assemblies for the ruining of the Church; the Consults for the one, being
carried on at their Coffee-Houses; and for the other, at their Conventicles.

Thus the boldness and presumption that the factious party take, of making
their house of Commons espouse, and warrant all their Licentiousness, is not
only an abuse put upon the whole Gentry of the Nation, but directly destructive
of those foolish Designs they think to promote by it. I know that which makes
them so Impudent to slur this Association on that honorable Assembly are those
Votes that were passed the 15 th and 16 th and 21 th of Dec. 1680. The 15 th.
Ordered that a Bill be brought in for an Association of all his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects. The 16. A Bill for uniting his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects to the Church of England, was read a first time; and on the 21, they
address, That his Majesty would graciously be pleased to assent to an Act for
enabling his Protestant Subjects, to associate themselves for the defense of
his Person. Now it is evident by these Bills, that their intent was to make his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects unite themselves to the Church of England; and in
order to that, to associate themselves for the Preservation of the Defender of
their Faith; how far these Purposes agree with the Subverting the State, and
ruining the Church, (the clear intent of this discovered Association) I submit
to the determination of this grand Inquest, who perhaps may be able to
reconcile the Contradiction.

Then such an Association as this would not only be derogatory from the Honor
of that Assembly, but from the professed Loyalty of it too: And in God's Name
what would they prove by such Arguments, and Suggestions; would they make
Treason brood within those Walls, as well as within those of their City? Do
they design that their Rowses, Wilmores, Whitakers, Harveys, shall be all their
Members in the next Parliament? Then perhaps I may not doubt of such an
Association to be carried. But that it was the design of the Parliament that
sat last at London, I must beg their Pardon if I suspend my Judgment from
concurring with theirs. The Relation and Acquaintance only my poor self had in
it, might have made a larger Body of Protesting Commons than there were of
Lords at Oxford; such as would have been very much concerned, and trembled to
have seen, the Foundations of the Government, and that of their own Walls,
shaking together. And lastly such an Imputation only contradicts it self, and
is quite impossible; for the very Act of drawing up such an Association as
this, would have made them de facto, forfeit their Allegiance to their Prince;
And then in a moral Sense discharge them from being their Countries
Representatives; and they shall as soon persuade me that the same Persons that
were then in the House, were at the same time in the Cellars to blow it up.

When they are driven from this hold of a Parliament; the next seeming place of
Strength they fly to is that of an Association in the 27 of Queen Elizabeth.
And indeed it is such a Refuge, as none but such as are put to flight out of
their wits, and all in confusion would seek to shelter themselves in; for it is
but looking on the Combination that was drawn up for the Queen's defense, and
you will quickly see how weak an one it is for our Adversaries; and all the
late Rebels might as well have made it their Pretense, for the drawing up their
Covenants; The whole Drift of that aims at the protecting her Majesty, against
all that should pretend to her Crown; and all along the Form, and Words of it
seem to denote as if it were the Queens Motion, that had first given occasion
for it, rather then that of her Commons. And it is obvious that it was done to
secure her Title against the pretensions of the Queen of Scots, who lay then in
the Tower, and within two years after, in the 29 of her Reign was beheaded. How
much the Kings Preservation was intended in the late Association, I leave his
Guards to determine, who had never more need of being doubled; And how much his
Majesty was pleased and acquainted with it, the Loyal Nobility and honest
Hearts that are about him best know, and whose Number I wish may be daily
augmented. Association, 27. in Queen Eliz. time, and Charles 2 d. compared.
In the first Lines of the Queens Association, they strongly promise to defend
her Sovereignty and Supremacy; and in this they will not allow so much as Guards
for the Defense of the King's Person. They with joyful Hearts acknowledge her a
gracious Lady, and that the Queen Reigned to their great Felicity and Comfort,
and that they have received the Benefit of Peace, Wealth, and Godly Government
under her Majesty, plentifully under her Reign, more then the Nation did under
any King before.

This Assoc. with heavy Hearts considers the King as setting up Arbitrary
Government, as Popishly affected, as Wasting, Consuming the Reputation, the
Strength, Treasure of the Nation, and does not so much as allow his Reign to
have been more Merciful than that of the late Usurper.

That says that with our whole Power, Bodies, Lives, and Goods, with our
Children, and Servants, we will faithfully Serve, and humbly Obey, our said
Sovereign Lady, against all States, Powers, and Dignities, etc.

This says that with our joint and particular Forces, we will Oppose and Pursue
unto Destruction; all that shall oppose the Just and Righteous Ends of this
Association; The Ends I think follow: to raise Forces, to Obey only the sitting
Parliament, or else the disbanded Members of a dissolved one.

In short, all that was carried on with the Queens Advice, Consent, and
Privity; The last Clauses of this sufficiently evidence his Majesty's Consent
never to be expected. That endeavored to support the Crown and Dignity, This
to lay both in the Dust; That fastened the Scepter in the Queens Hand, and This
plucks it out of the Kings: That helped to settle the Foundations of the
Government; This endeavors to undermine a settled one: That an Union of Loyal
Hearts, and would have repelled the strongest Invader; This an Association of
discontented ones, and will invite an Enemy: That was a Legal Combination of
dutiful Subjects; This can never be subscribed but by [the Rebellions.]

Another Course they take to palliate the Design, is by saying none of all this
was intended to be put in Execution, in the King's time; But only upon his
Death, to keep out the Duke of York. A very good Defense indeed: and will not that
D. of Y. be as much a King then as his Royal Brother was before him? Must his
Highness wait their Leisure to be placed in the Throne? and shall he pass for
the Peoples Heir instead of that of the Crown? Is there such a diversity in
Rebellion that it is lawful against one Prince, though not against another? Or
are these new Distinctions only the Metaphysics of Mr. Baxter; and the
politic Aphorisms of his Commonwealth? But that this Suggestion is improbable
and notoriously False, appears from this Instrument it self; For in it the
present King is accused of Arbitrary Power; his present Guards now kept up, to
be removed; and the Sitting, Prorogued, and Dissolved Members are to be obeyed;
and also such as shall be again called after such Prorogation, and D^ssolution.
-- When they are reasoned out of all their Holds, then at last they very fairly
deny, the matter of Fact; and disbelieve any such Instrument found upon any of
their Party by the King's Witnesses, making it all a Sham, and the two (...)
Persons that found the Paper, a couple of perjured Villains; But I hope they
will give the World leave to believe their Testimony upon their Oaths: before
such (...) ^everations upon nothing but Prejudice: And this so slatly denying
(...) Fact, is like a baffled young Sophisters answering his Opponents
Syllogisms with (...), instead of a non sequitur: Now whether the worthy
Patriot was (...) in whose Custody 'twas found; is only between God and
himself, and all M^d is but his Ignoramus, only because not Omniscient.

[And Now] by this time I hope they are satisfied how mightily their new
Project of Association agrees with the old Leagues and Covenants; and how
exactly their late Transactions imitate those of the true Protestants in forty
one; The recollection of which they are as much troubled at, as sick men to see
themselves in a Glass. But s^re these sort of Protestants may be more surprised
to find themselves resembling Papists too. And instead of having drawn their
late Covenant from the Records of Queen Elizabeth's times, to find it but a
clear extract of the League in France. I am sure that Association of those
rebellious Papists, those Catholic Fanatics suits, better to their Purpose,
than this they pretend to write by, which only contradicts them; And now we are
in the Vein and Humor of drawing Parallels between Covenants, I shall give them
a taste too, of that in France against the poor Hugonots, who were suspected to
be favored by the Government, just as the Catholics are still here; and let
these deluded Zealots see, that they tread not only in the footsteps of the
true Protestants of Charles the First in England, but also of the rank Papists
of Henry the Third in France, and then I hope it will make the most impudent of
them blush, to find themselves transported into such Delusions; that whilst
with so much Rage they pretend to abhor Idols, they not only commit Sacriledg,
but tread in the Footsteps of those very Idolaters, they abhor.

The head of that League was a young Duke; and our Associators would not long
have wanted one for theirs; Their youthful Leader was caressed and slattered
with hopes of a Crown; grown Ambitious, by being Popular, and discontented by
Disquiet at Court; The Toleration of Calvinism was their specious Pretense for
opposing the Government; The Connivance at Popery is with us at present the
ground for the same Pretensicus: The Names of Catholics and Hugonots, were
invented for discriminating Parties by the Zealous Papist; Whigg, and Tory are
set up now, for a distinction of the Saints by our Schismatical Pharisees: Our
late Remonstrating and Protesting, encouraged our Contriver to venture on such
an Association; Remonstrances, and Protestations ushered in this their Holy
League.

French holy League. English Association. 1 THat they would establish Religion,
the Law and Service of God in its pristine State, according to the Form and
Usage of the Roman Catholic Church. 1. I Protest to maintain, and defend to
the utmost of my Power, etc. the true Protestant Religion, against Popery, etc.
2. Finding that our Enemies aim to establish their Errors, we think it time to
hinder their Plots and Conspiracies. 2. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the
Popish Priests, and Jesuits have for many Years, pursued a most pernicious and
hellish Plot, etc. 3. That if there chance to be any Opposition made by any
whomsoever, all the Confederates shall employ their Lives and Fortunes for
destroying them by Arms. 3. But by force of Arms, if need so require; Expel,
and Destroy all such as shall adhere to him, or by his Command, etc. And pursue
unto Destruction all such as shall oppose, etc. 4. We swear by Almighty God,
even to the last drop of our Blood, not to depart from this League upon any
Command, Pretense, Excuse, or Occasion whatsoever. 4. Neither will we for
Persons or Causes, Fear, or Reward, separate our selves from this Association,
or fail in the prosecution thereof during Lives. 5. We protest that if any of
the Confederates be molested or troubled, all the rest shall defend him, etc.
5. With our joint and particular Forces, etc. to protect and defend all such as
shall enter into the just performance, etc. 6. We entreat of what Condition
soever to assist in the Prosecution of so good and pious a Work. 6. We have
thought to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by
solemn and sacred Promise. Lastly. Their League was subscribed underhand, by
the greatest part of the Commissioners of their Shires. Lastly. This Associator
swears to obey the major part of Members Subscribing this Association. Unhappy
Statesmen, whose Plots and Actions run Parallel with those of the Jesuit; and
they good Men not so much as apprehensive of the great Affinity that is between
them; who with full Mouths, ignorantly follow the Chase they seem to fly from;
and like eager Currs now and then run a little Counter: But yet I cannot choose
but smile, to see how the Faction hugs it self, when ever any learned Pen,
proves the Papist at the bottom of all these Designs, which of late has been by
several endeavored; Let but one of the Regicides read such a Pamphlet, it
wipes its Mouth and all is well; thinks himself no Agent, not so much as an
Abettor upon the discovering this unknown Principal. Whatever Authors these
are, I grant them their Assertions in some Cases may be true, and their Design
pretty honest; And in God's Name, let them paint out the Conclave as black as
Hell, and make their Plots as Catholic, as they would have their Religion;
Let them leave not a Conventicle or Elders-house without some disguised Priest
or Jesuit: Let them prove the Papists resolved the votes of Nonaddresses; and
made it high Treason to Confer with their King; that it was they alone ordered
the General to take Care of his Person, and call a Council of War to draw up
His Charge; that 'twas they passed an Act for his Trial, and a Jesuit in the
Vizzard cut off his Head: Lastly that this Association was penned at Rome, and
sent over to the Confederates in a Packet-Boat. All these things may be, but
it is a bad Argument that they are, only because they have a Possibility of
being.

But grant that there is Great Evidence for all this, what is the work at
present of some industrious Pens to prove. These Popish instigations if plainly
detected, will no more acquit our rebellious Malcontents, in a Moral sense,
than the discovering the Person that persuades him to steal, will a Felon in
Point of Law; and it seems to me a wild sort of Indulgence that the secret
Practices of the Romish amongst us, should make the Open Rebellions of the
Phanatick Party Venial. If there are Jesuits among them that buzz about these
Elements of Treason, and Sedition; why must the Government be blamed for
Connivance, and Pardoning those Villains whom they themselves protect from
punishment? If a Priest that is Close shaven shall commence a Godly Minister,
as soon as his Locks can cover his Ears, must a Field Conventicle be pardoned
when they are deluded into Rebellion, only because Father Greybeard put a trick
upon them? Were they so desirous to be really rid of those Impostors, they
would rather petition to have the Laws put in execution, than for Moderation
and Repealing them. A lousie person that would willingly be rid of his
troublesome Vermin, will be willing to suffer the trouble of scouring too; and
consent to the buying a Brush, though it be for his own back: But these Logical
heads give you a scrap of their Heereboord too, and talk of first taking away
the Cause, and then all the sad Effects will presently vanish. Very good, and
the Government is about it as fast as it can; but I am afraid were there not a
Catholic left in the Nation, the whole Lump of Factious Leaven would remain
still. I know a Monarch that denies the Popes Supremacy is as much in danger of
being secretly stabbed by the Jesuit, as the Prince that will not comply with his
Malcontents is of being Publicly butchered by the Phanatick; but I think it
cannot be collected from their Writings, that Monarchy it self is such a
Grievance to the Conclave; but this I am sure that nothing but a Commonwealth
can be gathered from the Doctrines of Mr. Calvin. So that though they can prove
the Pope to have had an hand in the Murder of our Royal Martyr, I am confident
it will be an harder Task to prove his Holiness helped up the following
Republic too; so that this Quaere will be the result; Whether the Papists got
the King murdered to set up the Pope's Supremacy, or the Phanaticks to advance
their own? In my Judgment those bloody Politics were as unsuitable to the
ends of the One, as agreeable to the Designs of the Other; and I should much
Distrust the famed Subtilty of the Jesuit if he took so preposterous a Medium
for pursuing his End. Whereas I admire the Politics of our Republicans, who
could never have resolved on better Measures for theirs. And if Success can
determine any thing, that darling Success by which they justified all their
Villainies; Then let them take their own Minion and Favorite to decide the
Controversy; and show whether the Pope was exalted here, or a Commonwealth.
And it is a little improbable that the cunning Romanist, should have taken all
this Pains, only to show himself notoriously wicked; and let the factious Spawn
of Geneva reap the Benefit of all their impious Labors. Well, but the Papists
are certainly the Teazers, and Towzers, that set on a parcel of discontented
People to worry the Government; And ought we not in Justice rather animadvert
on those that hollow them to the Sport, than on those innocent Creatures, that
only do what they are bidden? Since they are resolved to have it so, we will
grant the Supposition; but must I spit in the Mouth of that dangerous Curr,
that fell upon me? And only bang the waggish Rogue that set him on? For my
part, I should think both deserved a good Cudgelling. But what if this surly
Creature be chained up by the Laws, to the good behavior? And some tender
hearted Souls, are for pitying the Confinement of this harmless Animal; for
repealing of Statutes and slipping the Collar. Does the Papist do this too? and
does he let him loose to spoil the Egyptians? I know the Tyrannies of the
Church of Rome, which we tasted and felt in the time of Queen Mary's
Persecution, occasioned the dispersing of many sufferers into Franck-Fort and
other parts of Germany; but why they were necessitated to bring back from their
travels only those excellent accomplishments of Schism and Sedition, I cannot
apprehend. It would be a little scandalous to our nation in Particular, as well
as to the Reformed Religion in General, should those exiled Protestants of
France, upon their return to their native Country have only learnt from our
English to rebel.

I desire no one to take this as the least Vindication of the Papists; whom I
look upon as such Latitudinarians in Religion, and Morality, as need none of
their wide Dispensations, and Indulgences, to make them greater Libertines;
such as are principl'd into greater Villainies (if any such there be) than were
committed by our late Rebels: The intent of this Digression is only to correct
those, who by blackning the deep Designs and Endeavors of Rome to Subvert our
Government, would wash our Rebellious Negroes white, that accomplished it. And
it is time to give these Gentlemen a little Civil Correction, when they are
those of our own Clergy that merit it; That are come to flatter the very
Schismatiques that disturb their own Churches; As if it were only to prevent a
Second Ejectment, or get a favorable Sequestration. Amongst which sort of
mealy-mouthed Sycophants, we may reckon Mr. J. with his Daniels Den; the
Philanglus with his Moderation, and Squire R. with his Julian Ship: I look on
such Secret Neutrals at present, as Dangerous, and Scandalous to the Church; As
those that openly dissent from it; Such as do it as great disservice as the
wild Gentleman that put on a Gown, and Cassock, and ran about Streets enquiring
for a Whore: Such as han't that Kindness the Butchers Dog had for his Masters
meat, no not to the Church Government under which they live and officiate; But
close in with the invading Currs for a share, instead of offering to defend it.
I grant Moderation to be many times seasonable; but not when Transgressors
break the Laws most Immoderately: And those obstinate Antinomians from whom
Penalties cannot extert an obedience to the Laws, are very unlikely to be
persuaded with the Lenitives of Indulgence and Toleration: And as for the
plausible Arguments they use to persuade our Church to Condescension; viz.
because of the Dangers that threaten us from Rome; That sure may be a better
Motive (one would think) only for their Conformity: When the one must be done
by repealing old Canons, and making new ones; the other only by Conforming to
those already made: The one a yielding of those that have the Law of God, and
Man, on their side; The other of those that have neither, and in some sense a
sort of Outlaws. Neither have we any Security, these froward Gentlemen would
be pleased, should they be humor'd too. The peevish Lady that makes her
indulgent Lover cut off the excrescency of hair, and beard, or the
superfluities of his overgrown Mustachoes, as Mr. A. that Protestant Droll,
and gifted Buffoon, resembles our Ceremonies to; may upon the next frisk of
petulancy request the poor man to flea himself alive, or lopp away a Limb. And
what manner of yielding and condescension they expect, may be gathered from the
Paper of Union that was spread abroad at Coffee-Houses, when the Parliament
sat last at London; to whose consideration it was designed to be presented: An
Union little better than that proposed in the Scotch Covenant; By total
Extirpation of Episcopal Government: And for Succouring the Church at present
against Popery, is but a mere shamming Argument: For it is Evident they had
rather see it ruined by Turks, or Mahometans, than strike one blow to prevent
it. And it is no good Policy, for any man, though assaulted by a Lion, to let
loose a Bear for his assistance: It is also a dishonest, and imprudent sort of
diffidence for any to distrust the now Established Government, as not able to
support it self without such dangerous alliance which has once already served
the Church, as some Confederates have done their Neighboring Allies, subdued
those they pretended to assist.

The Law certainly is the greatest, and only Pillar to support the Church, and
State; And it was the Observation of as Eminent a Person as ever was in it;
That none ever wrestl'd with it, but in the end it infallibly broke their
Necks. There was never more occasion for its vigorous Execution; And it is no
such Tyranny as Mr. Baxter represents it, to punish Dissenters with a Prison,
when some of them have been willing to crowd thither, only to make up a
Conventicle; perverting the very Penalties of the Law, to a further opportunity
of breaking it; and making that subservient to the Crime, which was intended to
correct it. This Animadversion on our Dissenters, and their Advocates, is both
pertinent to this Discourse, and favorable to those it reflects on: The one,
because it is certain their Faction is concerned in this Association. The other,
because such offenders deserve to be more severely handled.

And now you shall see the Disparity between a True Patriot, and a Factious
Associator; the difference there is betwixt one that truly Loves his Country,
and him that only pretends it.

A True Patriot, will endeavor the Peace and Quietness of the Kingdom wherein
he Lives; and if he sits at Helm, will so steer the Bark, that it may fail
securely in the midst of the greatest danger; neither split on the Rocks that
threaten it on one side; Or running into the Quick-sand, that would cast her
away on the other; will endeavor to preserve the Nation from the Popery we
fear, and from the Fanaticism we have felt: One that has helped to make it
flourish in Peace and Plenty this Twenty Years; And will endeavor to keep it
in the same Prosperity still. One, that will with Equal Courage resist an
English Rebellion, that he would a Spanish Invasion: That will not endeavor to
satisfy every discontended grumbler; but remove all real motives to complaint
and murmuring: That will keep to the Rules of Law, and Justice, as the best
means to keep the Peace too: Free from all Passion and Interest; and so can
neither trouble the Kingdom, by the Turbulency of the one; or defraud it by the
Temptations of the other.

A Factious Associator, makes it his business to disturb the Country wherein
he Lives, with as much Fear and Jealousy, as Thought can suggest, or Malice
invent; for it is Quietness and Peace that makes him idle and without Employ:
It Is a sort of Sea Monster, that shows himself most before a Storm; And
endeavors to overset that Ship, which he is not Capacitated to Steer. His Eyes
are set on the Public Ministers of State, not to pry into their Actions, but
murder their Reputations: Not to search them like an Eagle, but to sacrifice
them like a Basilisk. It Is a State Cannibal that delights in blood; and
triumphs in the Miseries of a Civil War. One that makes Religion a pretense for
Rebellion; Though as empty of the one, as brim full of the other. One that
would flush himself in the Spoils of a New War; though glutted almost with the
blood that was shed in the Old. It Is the rarefied Chamaeleon, That out-does the
natural one; feeds not so much as upon Air, But only Popular breath: Sets the
Nation all in Combustion; and then like a secure Salamander, lives in the
flame. One that seems Hells Purveyor, and like the Devil makes his Covenanting
Imps subscribe their Contracts in their own blood: That Sails securely by
tacking about with Wind, and Tide; and exposes the Government to be shattered
in the Tempest: That talks of nothing but the Consumption of the Body Politic;
only because his Natural one pines with discontent.

The one will with an earnest, even anxious solicitation of mind, seek to
reconcile the jarring hearts of Subjects to their Lawful Prince; Let them
understand the goodness and equity of the merciful King that governs; will help
his gracious Monarch, to make all manner of good impression on his Subjects;
and give his people all imaginable satisfaction; will persuade them to
acquiesce with his Majesty's reasons for dissolving an old Parliament, and his
Gracious promises for calling a new one; that will thank him for such kind
Assurances and Declaration; and not extenuate so gracious an action, with a
talk of Oath and Obligation; will open the blind eyes of the deluded Rabble,
and take away the Veil of Popularity, that blinds the discontented great.

The other pursues with the greatest aggravation, the least slip in the
Government, stirs up Jealousies and Animosities between King and People, to
prevent the Reconciliation that would otherwise ensue; for then the little
Artifices he uses to foment Sedition would be illuded; and his Engines of
Rebellion, Libels, Associations, Remonstrances, would grow rusty, and useless:
He is bound in prudence to make the Peoples Cause his Own; and for his
security, to be guarded by his Whifflers the Rabble; is grieved and afflicted,
when the King comforts his People; perverts the best things, to the worst
sense; daubs and disfigures all with his Colors, which is like to wipe off the
pretense and Varnish of his Cause; cavils at the Declaration of his Prince,
because intended to satisfy the People; proves the Parliament unreasonably
dissolved, because the King gives good reason for it; makes the Nation believe
it shall never see another, when the he Declaration promises the contrary; but
yet thinks sit to extort it from the King by Petition, for fear it should pass
otherwise for his Gracious action; deludes the silly Mobile, with expectations
of being great, and persuades the Nobility, they are not truly so without a
Popular greatness.

The one is for the uniting the people in affection and charity, if he cannot
obtain it in Persuasion and Religion, will not multiply foes by Suspicion, or
create dangers out of a Panick fear; one that will never hugg a Popish Plot as
tenderly as the Nursing-Father of it, a Jesuit; No such Ambidexter, as to make
a Bugbear and Darling of the same thing, and both equally subservient to his
purpose; No such mimical Ape, as with distorting, squinting looks, ridicules
every thing in his countenance, that does not suit with his froward Genius: He
is a perfect piece of sincerity, and never makes a Juglers-box of his
Conscience, swallowing down Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and bringing up
nothing but Treasonable Covenants and Associations; like those Impostors that
are seen to let down but harmless Tape, and Ribband, yet disgorge Knives, and
Daggers. He will submit to the Lawful Authority of the State, and conform to
the constant Discipline of the Church; will with an awful respect look upon the
Crown, and pay his due reverence to the Mitre; will oppose the Toleration of
all Religion, as the ready way to have none; He will truly stand up for the
Liberty of the Subject, and not make it a pretense to enslave them; One that
will trust his Prince with Money, for the support of his Crown and Dignity, and
allow him a competent Guard, for the preservation of his Person; One that will
swear Allegiance to none, but his King; And lastly, never out of fear of a
contingent danger, will raise a present War for altering Succession.

The other is so far from reconciling differences in Religion, that he can
hardly admit of a good opinion of any, not of his own sentiments;
transubstantiates his Sword of the Spirit, into that of Steel; and makes his
Church truly Militant, by being in Arms; cries down the Plot, at the same time
he makes it support his Cause; Pulls at the Tripple Crown with one hand, and
the King's Scepter with the other: The Protestant Virtuoso, that views the
slips of Government in a Microscope; and so magnisies the biting of a Flea, to
the pinching of a Lobster; And for his transubstantiating of Metals, and
Chemical knacks, exceeds the Dutch Van Helmont, or our English Boil; with a
little Panegyric can Sublime a knave to the very Quintessence of honesty; and
then with one drop of the venom of his tongue, debase him to the worst of
villains; Can devour a Test, and belch up a Remonstrance; So refractory an
Animal as to oppose the Government in all its actions, and the Church in every
Canon and Constitution; Instead of respecting the Crown, tramples it under
feet: Makes the countenancing Dissenters, an expedient for suppressing Popery;
And the rooting out of Superstition, the means of introducing Schism, and
Division; Makes the Liberty of the Subject a pretense to depose the Prince, and
enslave the People; And is only for repealing the Laws, that he himself may be
the greater Libertine, and rebel with a License; Is for removing those terrible
Guards, because they preserve his Majesty's Person, and loves to keep his
Prince poor, out of hopes to make him contemptible; Instead of acknowledging
the King's Supremacy, swears to obey Members, and fellow Subjects; Out of dread
of a future alteration in the Church, will make a present change in the State;
And will actually raise War against the right Heir of the Crown, only because
he cannot very formally dis-inherit him.

And now because the D. gives this Associator all his pretenses for such a
Treasonable Combination; I shall in this very Case prove him but a disguised
Patriot; and that the Mediums he has proposed to himself, demonstrate him
rather a Barbarous Hun, than a true Roman Brutus; A cruel Scourge to his
Country, more than a tender Lover of it. And first for those reasons of State,
and Self-preservation, which he would have to warrant this total Exclusion,
expelling and destroying his Highness: (saving the respect I bear to the Author
and his politic Noddle) I think they may pass rather for Proverbial Sentences,
and expressions of private resentment, than Maxims of true Policy; and
Aphorisms of undoubted truth for the Countries good; For though I never much
consulted Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth, or William Pryn's Popish Royal
Favorite; Yet I cannot think the destroying the One must be warrantable, because
we have a mind to set up the Other; Or that a Popish Successor must be ruined,
for the establishing a Republic; neither can I understand why this exclusion,
must be Judged such an absolute demonstration of a man's Love to his Country;
so meritorious a piece of Piety; That it can not only expiate for all the
blood, murder and devastation, which may be the consequences; but justify this
very villainous Associator, in endeavoring to exclude him by himself; Or the
assistance of his Confederates, without the supposed legal process, of an Act
of Parliament. Certainly he is not to be esteemed a prudent adviser for his
Countries good, that only means well to it; That advises a good thing, but
such as would have the unhappy concomitancy of a greater ill. If they make the
Parliament the sole Arbitrators of the public good; I mean those whom they
commonly take for it, the Lower House: yet they are not (under favor) to
transcribe their sentiments into practice, and resolve on expelling that by
force, which their Representatives could not obtain by request. If they are
Commenced already such Casuistical Libertines; Then the present establishment
of Church and State, is to me as much a Miracle, as ever was the Restoring it.
And on the same ground they may muster up their Train-Bands, march to
White Hall, reform the Council with the push of Pike; from thence to
Westminster, and cudgel those Arbitrary Judges into better understanding of the
Laws; And then back with some Captain Hickeringill to Doctors Commons; and blow
up all the Enemies to Naked Truth, or teach them at least to keep their
Ecclesiastical Courts in better order; And all these things very lawful,
because under consideration of the Parliament. I know the disinheriting the D.
with a Bill of Exclusion will by many be thought a pretty sort of Expedient;
But the destroying him without one, must by all, be counted a Damnable
Rebellion; must involve the Nation in Blood; Purple again her Rivers with the
Slain, and make our wretched Isle seem to float once more in her red Sea;
Expose the poor Subject to the merciless Sword; and all the Miseries of a Civil
War. And now Quaere Whether this Associator's Love to his King, or his Country
outweigh each other by so much as a grain? The very dis-inheriting him with a
Bill, may have Consequences bad enough; how much more then the resisting him
without? An Excluded Prince, though with form of Justice, will find Adherents.
One would think these bad Politicians, should be worse Historians too; And not
so much as have consulted the Chronicles of their own Nation; which has already
miserably felt, and that more than once, the Bloody Consequences of a debarred
Right. Of which unhappy Wounds, the reproaching Scars upbraid us to our very
Faces, and to this very day; I hope Parallels in Discourse need not be so
Mathematical as those in Geometry: And though I cannot give an instance of a
Duke of York that was Excluded from his Right; yet it may suffice, if I tell
you of one that after much Blood recovered it. There has been a Parliament that
has Excluded the right Line, to make way for a pretended one; deposed their
King, and accepted an Usurper, (not to mention the more Barbarous Proceedings
of later Times, when they murdered a Mighty Monarch, and made an Arch-Rebel
mount the Throne.) We had before that a Prince Deposed with as much Authority
of Parliament as this can be Debarred: We had one at least of the House of York
Voted out of his Throne, but yet (as if Vengeance which is said to follow
lamely, had mended her pace) it is observeable, That only Three Lancasters, the
Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Henry successively Reigned, and maintained the
Usurpation; Of which one was a Mon-mouth too; and all the dear Conquests was by
the latter of these quite lost, which had been bought by so much Blood by the
former: And the very Crown too Voted on the Head of an Excluded Duke of York;
And the then present King only Complemented with a durante vita; and the bare
formality of wearing it: I have so little Kindness for Enthusiasm, or
Superstition, That I lay but small stress on the Jingling Homonymie, or
agreeable found of the names; Neither looking on them as Ominous or Prophetic:
Though I believe would they make for some peoples turns, they would be better
weighed, and sifted; made use of as presages, and fore-bodings of good Success;
whereas we only see it had a very bad one. I confess they have an Argument now
for altering the Succession, which they wanted then; viz. the different
persuasion in Religion; whereas they Deposed Richard the Second only for a
pretended unworthiness, unprofitableness, and insufficiency: But yet I think
the contingent danger of parting with our Reformed Religion, can never warrant
a certain involving the Nation in the Miseries of a Civil War. I conceive, if
we are Christians, it is no such absurd thing to rely upon Providence too: And
though this Associator makes Queen Marys Case such an absolute Argument of
Popery being introduced; I must beg leave to observe to him his preposterous
Logic and Reasoning, to be but proving an absolute and universal Position,
from a single, and particular instance; And those Laws then Enacted had never
so many Proviso's against the introducing that Religion, as perhaps His Majesty
would have yielded to, had they but accepted of those Gracious Tenders for
Limiting the Successor. I know the plausible Argument is carried on very
smoothly; and slips in with a whole heap of Syllogisms; If a Popish Prince,
then a Popish Council; If a Popish Council, then sure Popish Bishops; If Popish
Bishops, then the Popish Mass too. But I can tell them of a more Experienced
sort of Sorites, a sadder heap of Argumentation; And already proved by frequent
Induction; If we find a Factious City, then a Factious Sheriff; If a Factious
Sheriff, then a Factious Jury; If a Factious Jury, then all the Factious
Fellows are acquitted. I confess they have made the Argument pretty strong, by
showing themselves the Butteress to support it.

But what if I should bar the necessity of these Conclusions from the
Premises, I think I should be very Civil to Them, and Just to the Case of the
Successor. Suppose if from this Factious City, the King should take his
Gracious Charter; The City may be Factious still; without a Sheriff, without a
Jury, without the fearful Lirry of many such unhappy Consequences. And then
with Reasonable men there is always the same reason for Contraries; Suppose if
from a Popish Prince there is so much of Prerogative taken away, as when parted
with, will put him out of a capacity of imposing his Religion on his Subjects;
He may still be the same Popish Prince; without Popish Council, without Popish
Bishops, and without their Popish Mass and Religion being obtruded on the
Nation. And these sort of Expedients have been as Graciously tendered, as
strangely rejected; And our careful Patriots not being able thoroughly (as they
call it) to secure us, and the Nation by a Total Exclusion, in Kindness, and
order to its Preservation, will accept of no Mediums at all: If this be the
best Politics of this Age, I fancy the adored Matchiavil and the Writings of
the best Statesmen are unhappily lost, or little consulted. But as for the deep
Design, and Hellish Contrivance of this Associator, no doubt they are Politic
Measures, and Zealous Endeavors for his Countries good; The putting it all in
a Flame, no doubt will purge off all the Dross of Superstition, and Idolatry;
and leave nothing behind it of Arbitrary Power, besides the Tyranny of the
refined holy Commonwealth. And this is the Drift of this disguised Associator
and pretended Patriot; This Religious State-Bully, That can cheat the Nation
with the Masque of Holiness, and mere Vizard of Piety, and make Three Zealous
Kingdoms devoutly perish, even in working out their own Salvation.

If it be objected I have made too wide Inferences; And that such an
Association may not have all those bad Consequences we seem to dread from its
being carried on; I desire such Gentlemen to consider, That there is no Villainy
but may be comprehended Lawful under such a Specious Pretense; And when the old
Covenants were sworn to, some of the very Subscribers never imagined they would
have proved such Floodgates of Hell, and let in such a deluge of Impiety,
Treason, and Sacrilege. And what less can be expected from such a Combination
at this time, Than the Subversion of Church, and State? when they are come to
In the Answer to the Kings Declaration.
fancy Statute Laws insignificant, unless the very Rabble set up for the sole
Magistrates and Legislators; And all Ecclesiastical Canons, Rites and
Ceremonies; The mere Fopperies of Rome^ and as a sort of superfluous
Excrescencies Mr. A. in his mischief of Impositions.
of hair, and beard* And what other way is there left for the stopping these
Sluices of Rebellion, and Schism; But by guarding the Churches Vine from the
Wild Boar of the Forest; And defending our Royal Oak from being again cut down
with an Ax? This alone can supersede the sad Completion of the Parable of
Trees; Keep the Fire from coming out of the Brambles, and devouring the Cedars
of Lebanon.

FINIS.

