Divine Eloquence: OR, AN ESSAY Upon the Tropes and Figures Contained in the
Holy Scriptures; And reduced under The proper Titles of Rhetoric:

ALSO Several Texts of Scripture, which fall in with the Figures, are briefly
interpreted; especially those that seem to favor the Papist or the Socinian.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHAT, publish a Treatise without any Name, or so much as a Dedication? Prithee
then, who will but it, says the Reader? Why, as to that matter, Sir, you may
do as you please; but give me also leave, to use my liberty.

But, pray, Sir, what signifies any Name, at least, to a man of sense and
understanding, who does not borrow his opinion and judgment of any Book, only
from the very Title Page? And if this Essay, I now present to your perusal, is
any way valuable, it will then introduce and recommend it self, to your good
opinion of it; and if' it is nothing worth, what Name or Character can ever
justify the Publication?

But now, Sir, upon this reservation of my name, you will have this one
particular advantage; for now you can have no kind of prejudice or bias upon
your thoughts; and so you cannot but pronounce more impartially, upon the whole
matter, and not according to the general custom, discommend, or approve, as you
are disposed in your fancy, to entertain either a good, or a bad opinion of our
Author; and so, I think, it is no disadvantage to you, or to my self, whether
you know my Name, or not; or whether I am D. D. or Esquire; such a one, or
otherwise dignified or distinguished.

And now, as to the very business of a Dedication, I must very freely tell you,
Sir, I am at present, as much out of humor with that also; for, according to
the common style, it is nothing else but a great many fine words, to very little
purpose; for what you read there in Commendation of my Friend in the Country,
or of the Right Honorable, my Lord, etc. has but the least relation to them;
but if they themselves are so exceedingly vain, as to fancy their Pictures are
very like them; it is only their private opinion.

I cannot deny, that I have a friend or two, as very Beau's, as any in the
Town, and they have a Right and Title to a very just Commendation, for the
Rhetorical Twirle of their long Perriwigs behind them, or for their most
admirable use of their Snush-box, which is always so obliging, as to give my
Sparks a pretense for a Sneeze, instead of an Answer to that Question; but
then, I am very much a Stranger to all their other virtues, and I am not
Orator enough to say any thing at first sight: and, after all, let me tell you
Sir, it is no such easy matter neither, to make a fine Panegyric upon Nothing.

But now, Sir, as to the Reasons of this Publication, I cannot in my excuse
say, that I was at last prevailed upon by the violent Importunities of my
Friends, whom I could not very civilly deny: or that upon the Communications of
some Copies, I was very much afraid; one, or other, might send it to the Press;
and so I was unwilling to give them that trouble: or lastly, as some Apology,
for the incompetency of the very work it self; shall I inform you, Sir, that it
was only the diversion of my idle hours; when I had nothing else to do? And
would not this, think you, be a very civil Complement to the Reader's
understanding; if what was here done for my own Recreation, only to pass away
the time, I now should publish, for his Instruction; and so improve his
thoughts and meditations: These, and many more, are the common excuses, our
Authors often make use of, to insinuate, that they are very modest men; and
that they could still do much better, if they had taken but more time and
leisure in their Composition; and this, they presume, is a sufficient Title to
the Reader's Candor and more favorable Opinion. But I can only tell my Reader,
that after I made a Collection of these Sacred Figures of Scripture, and ranged
them into some kind of order, I very privately conveyed this Scheam of
Rhetoric into the Stationer's hands, and he seemed to fancy the Design; and
now, this is the reason, why it comes into your hands; and, if'tis any way
useful, to any sort of Persons, I am very well satisfied. I could gather many
more Flowers of Rhetoric, out of the same field* but these I made choice of,
perhaps are sufficient to discover, that the Holy Scripture is no barren nor
unfruitful land; but that it abounds with all sorts of Tropes and Figures, and
that it is the richest Treasury, containing the best, and most excellent forms
of Rhetoric, of any book whatsoever; that no Gentleman has any reason to be
afraid of losing the Elegancy of his style, by a frequent Conversation with the
holy Scripture; which has its peculiar Graces and Beauties of Eloquence; and
more especially, have not Job and Isaiah their lofty Flights of Fancy and
Poetry? which, to speak but very modestly, are not unequal to any in our
profane Authors. I know, there are some of another opinion; but then, does not
their immorality influence their mind? and does it not give such a different
color and a tincture to all their imaginations, that they can never have the
same relish and sensation of sacred matters; and why should they entertain any
honorable thoughts of that very Book, when all the precepts and institutions
of it are such a mighty Contradiction to their life and practice? why should
they esteem it worthy their perusal? when perhaps their meditations upon it,
may be no small temptation, to rectify their vile Opinions, and disturb their
present Dreams of Happiness, and at last, reduce them to a Possibility of
Salvation.

Let others then still admire their heathen Rhetoric, let them still fancy
the sacred Figures of Scripture not worthy their Consideration; yet, methinks,
when I take a view of Scripture Rhetoric, and the Richness of her Eloquence,
she seems to me, not unlike the King's daughter, who is all glorious within,
her vesture is of gold, wrought about with diverse colors, Psalm 45. 10, and 13.

And now perhaps this Essay upon the Tropes and Figures of Scripture, may still
farther recommend it self, to your better opinion, from the very use, and
benefit of Rhetoric, in general; and is it not absolutely necessary, to convey
to others, those sensible Notions or Idea's of things which are present to our
minds? for Discourse is, or, at least, ought to be, nothing else, but the
Representation, and the very Picture of our thoughts; and what can more
sensibly express them to the life, than when a Metaphor presents the images of
the soul in such an elegant and comely dress? Besides, to give our Passions
their truest air and feature, do they not require a very different garb, and
another mode of expression, than our other thoughts, which spring only from the
cooler debates of reason, and argument? If you question this, I appeal only to
the most natural Impressions of any Passions, and whether Nature her self
discovers no sensible difference, when she expresses her self in a passionate
way; as, suppose now, in a most violent transport of Anger; and cannot you
easily, by the very Face, discern what passes in the soul of a furious man.
Observe the fire, the very sparkling of his eyes, the wrinkles of his brow, the
most sudden changes of his countenance, the mighty eagerness and the hesitation
of his words; are not these the natural expressions of this angry Passion,
which give us notice of the most disorderly motions of our spirits, and that
the very stream of our thoughts are in a most violent and rapid motion; and
therefore, to express this furious Passion to the very life; must there not be
as great an alteration in all our words and phrases, as there is in our very
Faces and Complexions? and this is enough to show, that this, and every Passion
works very differently upon our minds, and requires different expressions and
colors of speech, to give it a sensible representation.

Rhetoric then is a natural Language, and a necessary Ornament of Discourse;
and many an honest Gentleman now and then stumbles upon a Trope or a Figure,
who was never acquainted with Mr. Butler or Farnaby; and much less with such
profane Authors as Aristotle or Quinctilian.

And are not Metaphors very frequent in holy Scriptures? The Prophets
themselves seldom give us a description of the fury of God's displeasure; but
they give him arms, and hands, and describe God preparing his mighty
instruments of ruin, his lightning, and his thunder; and by such formidable
representations, as these, they work more powerfully upon our minds, and there
create the deeper impressions of his almighty Power.

But if Rhetorical Figures are as common as necessary; must not that man be
very ridiculous, who examines every thing in a strict and literal sense? What
strange, what mighty inconsistent notions must they then conceive of God
himself, or of his divine Attributes? What gross and very absurd Idea's of his
infinite Power, if they should fancy God cannot accomplish the vengeance of
his high displeasure, without material organs, without arms and legs? Must not
such a man transform himself into any shape of error and delusion? if he
pretends to maintain the doctrine of literal explications; must he not imbibe
the false opinion of every Sect, as often as their pernicious errors are
sounded upon a literal sense and meaning? Thus the Quaker must become a Roman
Catholic, because, according to his Principle, he must understand these words
according to the very letter; this is my body; so must he believe the bread and
wine to be substantially changed into the very body and blood of Christ; and so
at the least eventually, if not designedly, he will maintain the most absurd
doctrine of Transubstantiation; and truly, perhaps their inward light may prove
as dangerous, and not so different from Infallibility. But I do not charge
them, as if literal expositions of Scripture, was their constant universal
Principle: but if they expound any Text literally, though never so absurd, and
so contrary to other places of Scripture: they may as well explain others in
the very same manner, till at last they become nothing but mistake and
contradiction. And now, if they will needs understand this Text literally,
Matt. 5. 34. Swear not at all; and not as if it was only a prohibition of rash
and voluntary swearing in our common discourses; although St. Paul himself
uses an oath for confirmation, Romans 1. 9. For God is my witness, whom I serve,
that without ceasing, I make mention of you always in my Prayers. And again,
Gal. 1. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie
not. Nay, even God himself, when he could not swear by a greater, he swore by
himself, Heb. 6. 13. This is enough to show, that the taking of an oath is not
sinful in its own nature; when St. Paul, and even God almighty makes use of an
oath: and therefore, if the Quaker will still expound this Text according to
the very letter, in contradiction to other Texts of holy Scripture, and in
direct opposition to the very practice of St. Paul, and even of God himself; he
may, with as much reason, expound other Texts in the same manner; till he runs
himself into the wildest absurdities.

A great Master of Eloquence has long a go made the observation, That the
Lawgiver of the Jews, meaning Moses, had a most incomparable notion of God's
infinite power, when he describes the Almighty thus giving his Orders for the
creation, and God says, (...), Let there be light, and there was light, as if
there was no distinction between his pleasure, for the creation of any Being,
and the actual formation of it: and is not the expression it self very stately,
and full of majesty? for he only says, Let there be, and it was so. There are
other expressions no less emphatical, representing God most infinite in power
and operation, Isaiah 40. 12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his
hand, and meeted out the heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the
earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in Scales, and the hills in a
balance? As much as to say, I, the Lord, only have done this. And verse 17. All
nations before him are as nothing, and to whom then will you liken me, says
the Lord? And, how does holy David break forth in a mighty admiration of his
infinite power and greatness? Psalm 104. 1, 2, 3. O Lord, my God! Thou art very
great, thou art clothed with honor and majesty; who coverest thy self with
light, as with a garment; who stretchest out the heavens, like a curtain; who
layest the beams of his chamber in the waters; who makes the clouds his
chariot, comes flying upon the wings of the wind. What can better represent to
us his most incredible swiftness? than when he thus describes God, not only
flying, but even upon the very wings of the wind; which still gives a most
sensible Idea of the quickest motion that is possible.

Psalm 50. 11, 12. How does God himself assert his own Supremacy over all
things? I know the fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field
are mine; If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and
the fullness thereof.

Isaiah 5. 26. How does God promise, that he will accomplish things most
difficult, with the greatest ease and facility to himself? I will, says God,
Lift up a sign unto the nations a far, I will hiss unto them, from the ends of
the world, and, behold, they shall come with speed: God does not say, he will
call them with the mighty voice of his thunder, but with the least kind of
noise, as it were, with a whisper; and yet even those that are in the most
distant places, in the remotest corners of the earth, shall obey the powerful
summons of his voice, and presently come, and make their appearances: Here you
have a description with no less elegancy, of the most unsearchable ways and
councils of the great God; he made darkness his secret place, his Pavilion
round about him were dark waters, and thick clouds of the sky: and the methods
of his providence are very unaccountable, and past our understanding; his ways
are extremely private, in the dark, and in the deep waters, and his footsteps
are not known.

But because some have the most severe, and rigid notions of God, shall I give
you a taste of the sweetness of his love and kindness, Isai. 49. 15. Can a
woman, says God, forget her sucking child? And the question is proposed, to
assure us it is, at least, extremely difficult, though not impossible, for a
mother to break through the strongest ties and impressions of natural
affection; yet even then, God himself assures us, though a woman may be so very
barbarous, and so inhumane to the child of her womb; yet, that he himself, had
more Bowels, more affection, more tender compassions; and could never be
unmindfull of his children: nay, so great is his care, his sollicitous
concernment for them, that in all their sufferings, God cannot but have the
same sense of Pain and misery, and sympathize with them in all their
afflictions, says the Prophet, He was afflicted, Isai. 47. 7. Nay, to the very
last degree of kindness and commiseration; that no relation, how near soever,
can have more; for like as a father has compassion on his children, so the
Lord has pity on them that fear him. And Psalm. 103. v. 13. if it is yet
possible, to give a suller sense of his infinite love and affection to us, he
assures us, that, if his Church is under the least kind of suffering, that he
himself is extremely sensible of it, even as the most tender part resents the
smallest injury; They that touch you, touch the apple of my eye.

Psalm 7. 11, 12, 13. God is there represented, as a mighty man of war,
preparing to engage his enemy; but yet, he is so indulgent, and merciful, that
he seems very unwilling to execute the fury of his wrath, but is still in
expectation of our conversion, that we will at last sue for a peace, and
repent, and obey him; but if he will not turn, says David, He will whet his
sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has prepared for him the
instruments of death. --

And is there not a greatness of spirit and majesty in this short definition
God gives of himself? I am that I am has sent me unto thee; that is, I am God
unchangeable, the same yesterday, to day and for ever, it is I that send Moses.

And now perhaps these Texts of Scripture, without any more, are susficient to
discover, that the Scripture is not written in so very low and plain a strain
as some ignorantly imagine, and perhaps it is not the least recommendation of
the inspired Writings; that no other book in all the world, can furnish our
minds with more distinct and clearer Revelations of his Being, or his divine
Attributes, no other book can so excellently describe the power, the majesty,
the infinte justice, the mercy, and goodness of Almighty God. And now, if you
are desirous to take a view of his wonders in the deep; how should man, without
an express revelation from heaven, have been able, in the least, to discover
the incomprehensible Mystery of the Trinity? or how should he, upon the fall of
Adam, have been ever capable to dive into the mysterious contrivance of our
Redemption? or acquaint himself with the reasons of Christ's Incarnation, his
Death, and Passion, Resurrection and Ascension. And if you please to take into
your serious consideration, the Divinity of its Doctrines, what a noble Scheme
is the Christian Religion of all moral virtues, such as a Seneca or a Plutarch
never dreamt of; and what are all their Systems of Morality, in comparison of
the Christian Institution? what Charity, what Forgiveness of Enemies, what
Provocations to mutual Love, what tender Compassions to one another in
distresses, and miseries, are we obliged to put in practice, upon every
occasion? yea, what Purity in all our thoughts, what Innocence, what Sincerity
in all our Intentions? these are all such mighty Perfections of moral Virtues
as we can only learn from Scripture. Perhaps others may recommend the practice
of Virtue, from common decency, and convenience, or from a temporal
satisfaction attending the exercise of it, but we derive our Obligations much
higher; for if we had only hopes of being happy in this life, we were of all
men the most miserable, for how does the Christian Religion extend our Prospect
beyond the grave? and give us those comfortable hopes of a Resurrection, and of
eternal happiness hereafter, which the heathens did but guess at.

But perhaps the spirit and the inimitable style of the Scripture may still
more effectually recommend it to your perusal; and has it not, think you, a
mighty force, power, and efficacy; when our Savior began his Institution to
the Christian Philosophy only with this very plain and naked Benediction,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, and, Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness sake. Who can believe such kind of Blessings, such Invitations,
to embrace the terms of the Gospel, should be so very prevalent, and bring in
such a numerous company of Proselytes, Jews and Gentiles? Who can believe that
Christianity should advance, and make its way into the world against the
opposition of so much wit, and power, from such sort of encouragements? Thus
the very difficulty of its moral Duties, and the discouragement of the
Proposals, and the mighty plainness of its Principles, are so far from being in
the least disadvantageous to the Christian Religion, that they are no small
argument of its Divinity; it being impossible it should ever make such a
progress in the world, unless it had been assisted by the power and the wisdom
of God himself; and thus the divine Authority of its Original commands our
respect and reverence.

And after all; the Simplicity of the Scriptural Style, is not without Majesty.
How plain, yet how magnificent is this expression? I am, that I am has sent
me, Exodus 3. 14.

And now, as to the Translation of the Bible it self; I will not deny, but as
very many places are not without a graceful, and elegant ornament of
expression; so there are some other parts, less artificial, neither is this so
very strange; since the original Languages sometimes carry in them a native
Grace, and Emphasis, hardly expressible in a Translation, at least, with the
very same beautify and significancy of speech. And if our Translators, here and
there, fall below the spirit and the dignity of the Original, they are very
excusable, because they were sometimes afraid to venture at a phrase or a
fineness of a period; lest they should deviate more from the true sense and
signification of the Text; and, after all, you will discover some elegant
Turns, and some Beauties of Rhetoric in the Translations, which do not so
clearly shine out in the very Original, which I have purposely inserted
sometimes, to let my Reader see, that if our Translators lose in one place, yet
they gain in another.

As to my own part, I shall only tell you this; that I was extremely pleased,
when any Figure was lodged upon any Text of Scripture, that seemed to favor
and countenance any false doctrines, especially the Romish, or the Socinian,
that I might take an occasion to make a little inroad into them, and recover
them from the unkind and false imprisonment of the enemy: and when several
other Texts of Scripture were in darkness, and obscurity, or under any
difficulty, I have endeavored, to let in more light into them, by an easy
explication, or a short paraphrase upon the words; which perhaps were not
always so very plain, and obvious, at least, to every man's capacity and
apprehension.

Sir, I will now trouble you no farther, but I hope, you will receive it
kindly, as if in this Essay some things, at least were tolerable.

Farewell.
Divine Eloquence: OR, AN ESSAY Upon the Tropes and Figures Contained in the
Holy Scriptures.
A TROPE.
A Trope is nothing else, but the change of a word, from its natural
Signification, into another, whereby the Idea of any thing is more sensible to
us. Instance,

Matt. 4. 19. And I will make you Fishers of men: that is, Instruments of
drawing and converting men unto God; and our Savior uses the term by, way of
allusion to them, that being their former Employ.

Psalm. 65. 14. The valleys, says our Psalmist, shall stand so thick with Corn,
that they shall Laugh and Sing: that is, A very plentiful harvest is the
occasion of joy and pleasantness; laughing or singing are the proper
expressions of a gay and cheerful Spirit; and so those terms applied to other
things by way of Analogy, represent to us the excessive joy and pleasure of
Plenty.

Luke 13. 32. Go, and tell that Fox, meaning Herod, that crafty and politic
Dissembler: and the application of the term, gives us a fuller notion of his
Hypocrisy.

I shall here set down only three Affections belonging to a Trope, leaving the
fourth, to those who are more industrious to find it out: viz. Hyperbole,
Allegory, Metalepsis.

HYPERBOLE.
Hyperbole, from (...), to exceed. This Figure represents things greater,
lesser, or better, than they are in their own natures; and this sort of Trope
is extremely useful, when our ordinary terms are so very weak, that they carry
in them no proportion, with the notices of our mind; and so the soul, for fear
of speaking too little, presently flies out, and enlarges too much; but let no
one fancy, that the use of this Figure is in the least unlawful; for if we
sometimes express ourselves in the highest, or in the lowest degree imaginable,
yet it is no Lie, for we have not the least intention to deceive any one; but we
only fly so extravagantly high, that our discourse may come down with more
force into the minds of our audience, and give them such a sense of what we are
talking, as may oblige them to conceive it is highly impossible; or else to
enlarge their thoughts about it.

2 Samuel 1. 23. of the latter kind, Saul and Jonathan were swifter than Eagles,
they were stronger than Lions: and by such sensible Idea's, and familiar
Resemblances, you conceive still but an higher notion of their mighty strength
and activity.

Genesis 32. 12. Thy Seed shall be as the Sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered
for multitude; and the Comparison only implies, that his family should be
exceeding numerous.

Psalm. 107. 26. The Waves of the sea Mount up to Heaven, and go Down again to
the Deep; that is, the foaming Waters are carried up exceedingly high, and they
tumble down again into the lowest places of the Earth. See Luke 10. 15. to the
same purpose.

Rom 9. 3. I could Wish that my self were Accursed from Christ, and as One cut
off from the Communion of his Church, for my Brethren and Kinsmen according to
the flesh; which Wish was absolutely a thing impossible; yet such a kind of
Imprecation could not but give the Jews, an infinite Assurance of St. Paul's
excessive Love and Charity to them. See John 21. 25. the World it Self could
not Contain the books that should be written; a figurative expression very
large.

Genesis 11. 4. Let us Build a Tower, whose Top may reach up unto Heaven: that is,
rise up exceeding high, and lofty.

There are two sorts of this Figure Hyperbole; Auxesis, and Meiosis.

Aaxesis.
James 4. 1. From whence come Wars and fightings among you? Wars is a word that
carries in the very sound of it a public Dispute and Engagement of Nations
against one another; but the term here is only made use of, by way of
amplification, and signifies the private quarrels and animosities of Christians
among themselves.

Judges 5. 4, 5. Lord, when thou Marchedst out of Edom, the earth Trembled, and
the heavens Dropped, the clouds also Dropped with water, the mountains Melted
before the Lord: Not that all these wonderful Effects did then actually come
to pass; but they are here specified, to give us a mighty notion of God's
presence, and how the most sacred Majesty of it strikes an universal Fear, and
Consternation every where.

Meiosis.
Meiosis, a Figure of diminution, when we use a less word or expression, than
the matter requires.

James 4. 17. To him that Knows to do Good, and does it Not, to Him it is
Sin; but not a sin of the least degree, as the phrase at first sight, seems to
import; but of a very great Aggravation, being against Reason and Reflection,
and so a very dangerous and presumptive sin.

Matt. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments, and
shall teach men so, shall be the Least in the king dom of Heaven: (...). a very
soft expression, and much milder than such sort of false Teachers can pretend
to deserve; but indeed it signifies, such shall be accounted as nothing, and
insignificant, in the Church of God.

1 Cor. 10. 5. But with Many of them God was not Well pleased: A very soft and
favorable expression, God was not well pleased, (...) whereas it is very plain
by the Consequence, that he was extremely angry, insomuch that in the fury of
his displeasure, they were presently cut off and destroyed in the wilderness.

Matt. 3. 11. But he that Comes after Me is Mightier than I, whose Shoes I am
not Worthy to Bear: This was spoken by St. John, not without the greatest sense
of his own unworthiness; even to that degree, that he thinks himself not worthy
to perform the offices of the meanest Servant, for his Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ.

1 Samuel 24. 15. After whom is the King come out? after a Dead dog, and after a
Flea: The most inconsiderable sort of Creature. See 2 Samuel 9. 8. and 16. 9.

Numbers 13. 33. We saw Men, and were as Grasshoppers before them: A people of
the least size and figure in comparison of them.

Matt. 2. 6. And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the Least among
the Princes of Juda: (...)* which is by no means a term of diminution; but, on
the contrary, it rather signifies, thou art very great and honorable, upon the
Birth of our Savior, being the place of his Nativity.

Isaiah 40. 17. All Nations before me are as Nothing; and they are counted to
him, Less than Nothing and vanity* As if in respect of God's Superlative
Greatness, it was not sufficient, to say the whole Universe was nothing: But
still the Prophet goes farther, and says, it was lesser, even than Nothing; to
give us a fuller sense, if possible, what an Inconsiderable thing the whole
World is.

Psalm. 22. 6. The Royal Psalmist styles himself a Worm, and no Man.

Genesis 18. 27. Now have I taken upon me to Speak unto the Lord, which am but
Dust and Ashes: A Preface of the highest sense of his own Unworthiness; as if
Moses had said, What, shall I presume to plead with the great God, who am vile
Earth, and, which is worse, a most miserable Sinner? -- Oh, let not the Lord be
angry.

AN ALLEGORY.
An Allegory is the Continuation of a Metaphor, and as that consists, in the
translation of one word, from the proper signification of it; so the Allegory
translates many terms, from their native sense and meaning; this Figure must
not be interpreted according to the strict and literal signification, but with
respect to a metaphorical sense eminently contained in it.

Matt. 3. 12. Whose Fan is in his* Hand, and he will thoroughly Purge his Flour,
and Gather the Wheat into his Garner, but he will Burn up the Chaff with
Unquenchable fire: this is all* spoken in allusion to the righteous and to the
wicked, who are here termed the wheat and the chaff: and the Figure explains
what a discrimination and difference, God will at the last day make between
them, upon his impartial distribution of Rewards, and Punishments.

Psalm 1. He shall be as a Tree planted by the rivers of waters, that brings
forth fruit in his season, his Leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he
does, it shall prosper; intimating to us, under this sensible Allegory, the
happy and flourishing condition of the godly Man.

Galat. 4. 25. This Agar is mount Sinai, in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem
that now is: that is, Agar bears some proportion to the earthly Jerusalem of
this Age; for as the Jews, so all that spring from Agar, are under a servile
state. But then, Verse. 26. Jerusalem which is from Above, is free, which is the
Mother of us all: but there is another Church, namely, the Christian,
answerable to Sarah; and as all born of Sarah were free, so all Christians, now
living under the milder dispensations of the Gospel, are perfectly set free
from spiritual bondage. In short, Agar, by way of Allegory, represents to us
the state of the Jewish Church, who are in a servile condition; but Sarah
denotes the Christian Church, which is in a perfect state of freedom, and not
in the least obliged to observe the ceremonial Law of Moses.

Matt. 13. where you observe, the sowing of Seed represents the dissemination
of the Word of God; which improved, or miscarried, in proportion, as the heart
of the Believer was more, or less prepared for it. But some fell on the Good
ground: that is, some were of a good and virtuous disposition of mind, and
there the Doctrines of Christ, here called the spiritual Seed, did spring up in
their souls, and thrive and grow exceedingly well; and they became
extraordinary Professors of Christianity.

Eccles. 12. there is a very elegant Description of the many Infirmities of
Oldage carried on Allegorically: Verse 2. While the Sun is not dark; that is,
while thy Reason and Understanding is bright and vigorous within thee. Verse. 3
When the Keepers of the house shall tremble; that is, the Hands which keep and
defend the Body, shall grow weak and languishing. -- and the strong men shall
bow themselves; that is, the Legs, through the Infirmity of Age, shall not be
able to support themselves, but sink under the burden and fail. -- and the
Grinders shall cease, because they are few; that is, not so many in Number, and
very much decayed in their strength and firmness. -- and they wax dark that
look out at the windows; which very well expresses the dimness of sight, and
the Eyes being, as it were, the windows of the Body. -- Verse 4. and the Doors
shall be shut without, by the base sounding of the Grinding; that is, the
Mouth, and Lips, and Jaws, shall fall in, and close and contract themselves,
not being able to keep their distances, and open and chew any more; as being
much more tired, through the failure of Teeth, that they cannot without much
time and labor perform their Offices -- and he shall rise up at the voice of
the bird; that is, the old man shall be more watchful, and without soundness
of Sleep, and so presently awaken at the least noise, at the voice of the
Cock-crowing. -- and the Daughters of music shall be brought low, that is, the
Organs of the voice decay, and now are unable to create, and send out the
pleasant and harmonious sounds in singing* -- and the man shall be afraid of
high places; that is, the poor old man shall tremble to go up into any high
place, for fear his Head, through weakness, turns giddy, and he fall and tumble
down again. Verse. 5. And the Almond-tree shall flourish, that is, his Head
shall be as white with Gray-hairs, as the Blossoms of an Almondtree. -- and the
grass-hopper shall be a burden; that is, the old man shall be so much decayed,
and so extremely weak, that he cannot sustain the weight of the lightest
burden.

Luke 15. You have there an Incomparable Instance of God's Mercy and Compassion
to Penitent Sinners, very lively described, under the notion of a tender and
affectionate Father, to his prodigal Son, upon his Recovery and Reformation of
his former life.

And, What is the whole Book of Canticles, but a continued Metaphor? where the
sweet Conference between Christ and his Church, is represented in such words
and expressions, as seem only proper to Man and Wife, and therefore Christ
condescends to express himself in the same familiar dialect, to give us the
best assurance of his infinite Love and Affection to his Church.

Matt. 25. 1. Where you have the state of the Church represented in the
Character of a Wedding, and with the usual Ceremonies belonging to it; and the
whole Allegory, as to the Morality of it, may suggest thus much; that it is not
sufficient for us to be once prepared and disposed to follow Christ, unless we
also persevere in our Course after him. Now then, the Bridegroom is Christ
himself, the time of the Wedding is at his last coming, the night is the
melancholy state and condition of the Church in the World; the Virgins are they
that make profession of the purity of the Gospel, and the wise Virgins are the
true Believers, that are constantly provided in their Hearts, to receive him at
his coming, making an holy Life and Practice their daily Business, through the
assistance of Divine Grace, which is the Oil that burns, howsoever it be not
always in actual exercise; but the foolish ones are they in the Church, who
have been very negligent to excite and cherish the Gifts and Graces of the Holy
Spirit: the Lamps are their Hearts, which are unprovided, the Slumber is their
Remissness and Cessation from continual exercise of Piety, without expectation
of Christ's sudden appearance, caused chiefly through the Infirmity of the
Flesh, that is unactive and tired out through his long delays of coming.

The Holy Scripture is very full of Allegories of all sorts: See Job 20. 12,
13. -- c. 27. v. 20. -- c. 28. v. 9. Psalm 23. v. 1. -- 69. 1, 2, 3. -- 75. 8.
-- 80. v. 8, 9, 10. Prove. 3. 8. Isai. 1. 5, 6, 7. -- 30. 30. Matt. 3. 10, 12.
-- 5-13. -- 7 3, 4, 5, 6. -- 9. 14. Luk 9. 62. Romans 11. 16, 17, 18. But I
should be too tedious should I give you an accurate view of the particular
Instances belonging to this Figure.

METALEPSIS.
Metalepsis multiplies a Trope in one word, when one improper term serves to
express another by it, till you arrive at the most proper one of all.

Matt. 21. 20. All the City was moved: The word City here signifies Jerusalem;
the general term comprehending the particular, by Synecdoche generis, and
Jerusalem denotes the Inhabitants of it, by a Metonymy of the Subject.

Lament. 4. 4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his
mouth for very thirst: here first, by the extreme thirst of the sucking Infant,
is signified the barren and dry breasts of the Mother; and by her Want of Milk,
extreme Hunger and Famine; and by Famine, the dismal Poverty and Misery of the
People.

Four kinds of a Trope.
There are four sorts of a Trope, Metonymy, Irony, Metaphor, Synecdoche.

METONYMY.
Metonymy, of the cause, when the name of the very Person serves to express the
act, or operation, proceeding from him: thus,

The Holy Spirit sometimes signifies only regeneration, or a new birth, which
is the peculiar efficacy of the third Person in the Blessed Trinity.

Psalm. 51. 10. Renew a Right spirit within me: and to the very same purpose see
Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ephesians. 4. 23. Romans 12. 2. all which places seem to imply nothing
less than a moral change wrought in our Souls by the Influence of divine grace,
whereby we become regenerate or born again.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. it is the admonition of St. Paul, not to quench the Spirit,
(...), a similitude borrowed from the fire of the ancient Altars, which was
continually to be preserved alive; and so here, he must not extinguish the
Gifts of the Spirit, but keep them in constant exercise, such are Grace,
Charity, meekness, etc. See Matt. 25. 8.

2 Timothy 1. 6. The very same Apostle commands us to stir up the Gift of the Holy
Spirit, that is, Grace, or Faith, or Godliness, or some other divine Quality
which is excited in us by the mighty energy, power, or operation of the Holy
Ghost.

Spirit also sometimes signifies a divine power or energy reigning in the Soul
of the regenerate Man: See Luke 1. 46, 47. My soul does magnify the Lord, and
my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. There are not a few other places of
Scripture where you will find the word, Spirit, is often made use of, to
express the new Man, and spiritual strength, Romans 1. 9. Galat. 3. 3. Acts 17.
16.

2 Kings 2. 9. It was the earnest request of Elisha to Elijah, let a double
portion of thy Spirit be upon me; that is, give me an extraordinary measure of
the gift of Prophecy, and power in working Mirecles, which are here called the
portion of thy Spirit, as being the peculiar gifts of the Holy Spirit conferred
upon us. See Number. 11. 25. 2 Kings 4. 1, and 42.

Dan. 5. 12. Daniel had a more excellent spirit, that is, a more eminent gift
of the spirit, more knowledge, and more understanding.

Numb. 11. 25. The Spirit of the Lord rested upon the seventy Elders; that is,
the Gift of Prophecy and Prediction.

Acts 19. 2. We have not so much as heard, whether there be Any Holy Ghost:
that is, we are very much Strangers to the virtue, power, or influence of him.
And you find afterward, they received the Holy Ghost; that is, the divine
Inspirations of him, which did eminently appear in the Gift of languages and of
power of working Miracles, and other kind of Wonders. To the same purpose, see
Acts 1. 5. Jo. 7. 39.

Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit; that is, in a Rapture or Ecstasie, in which
the Understanding is exalted after a wonderful manner, to the Contemplation of
Heavenly things.

Ezekiel. 37. 1. The hand of the Lord carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord;
that is, by a vision occasioned by him; where you see, in both these places,
the Spirit, the efficient Cause, is put for the Effect, proceeding from him.

Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets; that is, the Books of Moses;
where by a Metonymy of the efficient Cause, the Author is put for his Writings.
See Luke 24. 27.

Ephesians. 4. 20. But ye have not so learned Christ; that is, the Gospel and
Doctrines delivered by him.

Acts 2. 4. They began to speak with Other tongues; that is, with different
sorts of languages.

Prove. 25. 15. A Soft Tongue breaks the Bones; that is, a mild and courteous
way of speaking, softens the hardest Heart, and most obstinate Resolutions;
where you see, in both these places of Scripture, the instrumental Cause
signifies the Effect it self produced by it.

Genesis 11. 1. And the whole earth was of One lip; that is, of one language, and
uniform way of speaking; Instrumentum pro Effectu ipso.

Job 31. 6. Let God weigh me in an even Balance; the instrument of Equity and
Justice, for equity it self; and so without a Metaphor, the Phrase signifies no
more, but, Let God try and examine me impartially.

Ezekiel. 7. 15. the Sword is without, and the Pestilence and the Famine within;
that is, death, and ruin, is scattered every where; and is signified by those
which are the unhappy instruments of it.

Matt. 10. 34. I came not to send Peace, but a Sword; that is variance, and
death, and persecution; instrumentum, pro Re effecta. Not that our Savior's
Coming was the proper Cause of such Unhappiness; but so it should eventually
happen out upon his appearance in our Nature, because his Kingdom was of
another World, and so extremely contrary to all the designs and interest of the
present World.

Metonymy of the Matter.
Metonymia Materiae, when the very name of the matter signifies the very thing
made and fashioned out of it: thus,

Psalm. 115. 4. Their Idols are Silver and Gold.

Dan. 5. 4. They praised the Gods of Iron and Brass; that is, made out of those
metals.

Genesis 3. 19. Dust thou art, that is, thou art formed out of it.

Psalm. 105. 18 He was laid in Iron, that is, in Chains of Iron.

Metonymy of the Effect.
Metonymy of the effect, when the thing caused is put for the efficient Cause
of it.

Genesis 4. 13. My Punishment, says Cain, is greater than I can bear, that is, my
iniquity is greater than can be forgiven* There, punishment signifies the very
sin it self, as the immediate Consequence of it.

2 Kings 4. 40. there is Death in the Pot; meaning some most destructive and
poisonous thing, which causes Death.

John 17. 3. And this is life Eternal, that they may know Thee, the only true
God; that is, the Knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ, is the principal
Cause of everlasting Salvation to all that live suitably to those notices.

Luke 2. 30. My eyes have seen thy Salvation, (...) that is, our Savior
himself, the Author of it. So Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy Salvation;
that is* the promised Messiah. So Isai. 49. 6. All flesh shall See the
Salvation of God; that is, a Savior.

Genesis 25. 13. Two Nations are in thy womb; that is, the Fathers of two Nations,
Esau and Jacob.

Romans 7. 7. Is the law sin? says our Apostle; that is, Is the Law it self the
proper cause of Sin? or, Is there any such malignity in the very nature of it,
as produces any such Effect?

1 Cor. 10. 13. Let every one Please his Neighbor for Good, to Edification;
that is, so behave himself in all things of indifferency, that such a
deportment may be the cause of their good will and pleasure, and purchase their
favor and kind opinion of us. So Romans 15. 2.

Metonymy of the Subject.
A Metonymy of the Subject; when the Subject is made use of, to signify the
accident or quality inherent in it.

Prove. 6. 32. whosoever commits Adultery with a woman, wants a Heart; that is,
wisdom and understanding: so he that trusts in his own heart, i. e. in his
own discretion and prudence.

Psalm. 7. 9. the heart is put for the thoughts and inclinations of it, Psalm
62. 8. - 142. 2.

Continens, pro Re contenta. The thing containing for the very thing it self
contained.


Luke 22. 17. He took the Cup, and gave thanks, (...) where the cup is put for
the liquor contained in it, as is more plain from v. 18 I will not drink of the
Fruit of the Vine. Thus in the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, this cup
is the N. Test. in my blood, not the vessel it self, but the liquor in it.

The Place signifies the Thing or Person in that place. The place serves to
denote any thing in that place.


Matt. 8. 34. The Whole city went out to meet him: Locus, pro Incolis. So Mark
1. 33. Isai. 38. 18. The Grave cannot Praise thee: they that are dead, and
buried, are incapable of it.

Genesis 7. 1. Come thou, and All thy house, into the ark; thou and all thy family.

Psalm. 69. 22. Let their Table be made a Snare to them; that is, Let their
meats and drink, prove dangerous to their health and happiness.

Woe unto thee Corazim, woe unto thee Bethsaida. So Matt. 10. 15. - 3. 5. where
the places signify the inhabitants of them, and those heavy judgments
denounced against their impenitency and disobedience.

Luke 15. 18. I have sinned against Heaven, that is, God himself; for although he
is Omnipresent, and so in all places of the World at the very same time, yet if
we can say God dwells any where, we may more properly say, he is in heaven.

The name of the things represented is sometimes used to express the sign of
it: thus,

Ezekiel. 7. 27. The Prince shall be Clothed with Sadness and desolation; that
is, with such garments, as are the proper expressions or signs of mourning and
lamentation.

Mark 14. 22. Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and Brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, saying, Take, eat, This is my body: where the Verb substantive,
is, must not be taken in the strictest sense; but there it must be expounded
thus, this Bread is representative of, or signifies my Body broken, being to
you all, a sensible sign or resemblance of it. Wine is sometimes called
Christ's Blood.

Matt. 26. 27, 28. Our Savior took the Cup and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it; for this is my Blood: which is a figurative expression; Nomenrei
signatae, pro Signo; and how very absurd is the Consequence, if you suppose
there is no Figure, and that the words must be taken in their literal strictest
sense? For then the Article, this, referrs to the cup, and so, this cup is my
blood; which is such an Absurdity, that to avoid such a plain Contradiction, we
must confess, that nothing else can with any tolerable sense, be there
signified by those words; but that the wine contained in the Cup, represents,
or is a manifest sign of my blood: And that this is a true and proper
explication of the words, is still more plain from the next Verse, v. 29. where
our Savior assures his Disciples, that although he commands them all to drink
of it; but, says he, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the vine; where he
himself plainly calls it wine, immediately after he gave it to his Disciples,
although in verse. 28. he calls it his blood. But I referr you to a Treatise
upon this Subject written by his Grace, the Arch Bishop of Cant. where this
absurd Doctrine of Transubstantion is sufficiently exposed.

Genesis 17. 10. This is my Covenant, Every Male-child shall be circumcised; where
Circumcision, the Sign or Condition of it, is yet called the Covenant it self.

1 Samuel 18. 7. Saul has slain his Thousands, and David his Ten thousands:
Metonymia Subjecti, Dux, pro Exercitu; the Armies of these two Generals had
done so.

Metonymy of the Adjunct.
Metonymy of the Adjunct; when that which belongs to any thing, serves to
represent the thing it self: thus,

They shall bring down my Gray-hairs with sorrow to the Grave; that is, me,
that now am Gray and old in years.

Genesis 31. 53. Jacob swear by the Fear of his father Isaac; that is, by the God,
whom Isaac feared.

2 Kings 20. 1. Set thine house in order; meaning his household affairs.

The time is put for things that are done, or are in time.

My Times are in thy Hands; that is, my life and continuation of it is in thy
Power.

John 12. 27. Save me from this hour; that is, from that Agony and Passion I
must undergo at that very time.

Ephesians. 5. 16. The Days are evil; that is, The men of these times are so.

Job 32. 7. I said, Days should speak, and Multitude of years should Teach
wisdom: that is, Men of great age and experience should instruct us. The Sign
for the Thing expressed by it.


The Sign is commonly used to express the very Thing signified by it.

A Throne is put for a Kingdom, Psalm 89. 4.

Scepter signifies regal Power, Genesis 49. v. 10. The Scepter should not depart
from Judah.

Romans 13. 4. He bears not the Sword in vain; that is, power and authority.

Phil. 2. 10. At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow; that is, at the
Person, when his name is mentioned.

The Gospel of Uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel of
Circumcision was to Peter; that is, Paul had the same Commission, to go and
instruct the Gentiles, as Peter had, to teach the Jews; these two terms being
signs of distinction between them, Circumcision, and Uncircumcision.

His enemies lick the Dust; a sign of slavery and subjection, and so signifies
their enemies should be slaves to them.

Lament. 2. 10. The elders of the daughters of Sion sit upon the Ground, and
keep Silence; they have cast up dirt upon their heads, they have girt
themselves with sackcloath, the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to
the ground: meaning, they were in mighty sorrows and afflictions, described
very sensibly by all these mournful signs and representations.

Antecedent, or that which goes before, is put for the Consequent of it: Thus;

Romans 2. 5. After thy impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath unto thy self; that
is, Punishment, as the natural result of our disobedience.

He that eats or drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation: but the
word (...) implies no more than judgment or condemnation, which are antecedent
to his damnation hereafter.

Psalm. 105. 44. He gave their labor unto the locust; where labor signifies,
the profit and benefit arising from it, the very fruits of all their labor and
industry.

Prove. 24. 27. It is not good to know the face in judgment; not that the bare
notice, or the acquaintance with a Person, was inconvenient in it self: but
there is an unhappy Consequence often attends, which is favor and partiality,
to him, in matters of judgment and justice.

IRONIE.
Ironie is a sort of a Trope or Figure, by which we speak contrary to our very
Thoughts; saying one thing, but meaning what is very different to it.

2 Samuel 6. 20. How glorious was the King of Israel to day? that is, how
shameful? how dishonorable? See the Context.

Job 12. 2. No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you: as
if he said; You, surely, fancy your selves to be extremely wise; and that all
wisdom shall perish with you; which is a tacit reprehension of their imprudent
censure, in accusing Job of some impiety, as if God's judgments upon him was an
infallible sign of his wicked life; this very opinion is condemned, Luke 13. 4.

Genesis 37. 19. Behold this Master of dreams comes: this was said not without
the highest scorn and derision of Joseph, when their opinion of his
Interpretation about them, was otherwise.

Amos 4. 4. Come to Bethel, and transgress at Gilgal, multiply transgressions,
and bring your sacrifices every morning: As if the Prophet said, Come, Make
have, and make preparation to offer Sacrifices in your worship of Idols: but
then remember, you shall not go unpunished for these Offenses. And if at first
sight the words seem to be some kind of Invitation to the practice of Idolatry;
yet really they are the highest dissuasion from it imaginable.

Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thy eyes: Now what literal Expositor would not presently take this
advice of Solomon to the young man, to be a very great encouragement, now he is
in the flower of his youth, to make the very best use of his time, and to
pursue all kind of sensual pleasures? and yet, Are they not the severest check
imaginable, to stop the course of his sinful Life? -- But know thou, that for
all these things, God will bring thee into judgment: This indeed was an amazing
Sentence; and sufficient, one would think, to strike his Soul, and force her to
consider the dangerous consequence of Sin. Go on, but yet remember, there is a
day of judgment, when you must give a most severe account, of all your Excess
and Sensuality, to the supreme Judge of Men and Angels.

1 Kings 18. 27. Thus Elijah advises the Prophets of Baal, Cry aloud, for he
is a God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleeps, and he must be awaked: As if the Prophet said, Cry
aloud, ye Prophets, for perhaps your God is full of thought and contemplation,
and discoursing to himself; or possibly your God cannot presently hear the
sound of your Voices. Cry aloud, perhaps your God is in a full pursuit of his
enemies; or possibly he may be sleepy and drowzie, and you must awaken him by
your excessive Noises. And it came to pass, that Elijah mocked; and the Event
was a very sufficient demonstration of it.

2 Cor. 12. 13. What was it wherein* you were inferior to other Churches,
except it be, that I my self was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong:
as if S. Paul said, You differ from no Church planted by any of the Apostles,
but only in this one particular, that I put you to no kind of charges for the
relief of my Necessities; and this, I hope, was such a kind of injury, such a
trouble, as you, I suppose, can easily pardon. Forgive me this wrong, that I
was not so very chargeable to you, as some of the Apostles have been to other
Churches. This was a very gentile and pleasant way of reprehension, and carries
with it more force and power of Conviction, than a more serious way of
argumentation.

2 Cor. 10. 12. For we dare make our selves of the number, or compare our
selves with some, that commend themselves: though Saint Paul had very great
qualifications, and therefore had much more temptation to compare himself with
other men, especially with those, who in all respects, were so very much
inseriour to our Apostle; yet still we dare not presume, to make the least
comparisons. How pleasantly does St. Paul reprove the Pride, the Arrogance, the
vain presumption of some false Apostles, who pleased themselves with false
applauses of their own merits; and flattered themselves, that others were in no
respect comparable to them.

-- Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of man: Now
that Christ was the most sincere Lover of truth, not handling the Word of God
deceitfully, in compliance to humane passions, and infirmities, cannot be
denied without the highest Blasphemy; yet the hypocritical Pharisee said this,
in a way of scorn and derision of him; and not as if it was in the least
conformable to their opinion of our Savior Christ; but all this solemn Preface
was only made use of as a more artificial expedient to betray Christ, to
deliver his opinion with more freedom, concerning the lawfulness of giving
tribute to Caesar; for the question was very treacherous, and to determine
either for, or against Caesar, was almost equally dangerous; if he declares in
favor of Caesar, then he is no longer a friend to the common People; and if
Christ answered, that the payment of tribute was unlawful; he had been
presently found guilty of Sedition; this was their Motive to this insidious
Question, and that pompous Introduction to it, was only looked upon by them as
a more effectual and plausible way to betray him. But Jesus perceived their
wickedness, their dissimulation, their vile hypocrisy; and says, Why do ye
endeavor, under this specious pretense of respect and reverence, to ensnare
me? Why tempt ye me, ye Hypocrites?

Matt. 2. 8. Go, says Herod to the Wise Men, and search diligently for the
young child, and when you have found him, bring me word again, that I may come,
and worship him: Thus the Tyrant disguiseth his most villainous design, under
the color of an honorable respect; when his intention was to destroy and
murder him, as appears from Verse 16.

A METAPHOR.
A Metaphor is an artificial Translation of a word, from the proper
signification of it to another, because there is some proportion between the
similitude, and the very thing signified. This kind of Trope is extremely
pleasant, and not without excellent use; for it inriches our mind with two
Idea's at the very same time, with the truth, and the similitude.

Deuteronomy. 32. 42. I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh: The first Metaphor is borrowed from excessive and intemperate
drinking, intimating to us the mighty effusion of blood, and the exceeding
greatness of their ruin and destruction. The second is taken from the most
eager and hungry appetites of a beast; which makes the images of death come
much more lively to the understanding, and how impossible it is for us to
escape the edge of the Sword, when God himself is concerned in our ruin and
execution.

Zech. 9. 14 His Arrows shall go forth as lightning. A very proper simile to
express their swift death and execution.

Hos. 5. 12. I will be unto Ephraim, as a Moth; which expression represents to
us insensible decay and ruin; as a Moth secretly fretting a Garment, so Ephraim
shall silently consume away, by the most secret and unaccountable ways.

Matt. 5. 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth; for as it is the property of Salt to
preserve any thing from its Putrefaction, so the doctrines of the Apostles were
to season our minds, and preserve and purify us from all immoral Corruptions
or Impurities.

Psalm. 91. 5, 6. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the
arrow that flies by day, nor for the Pestilence that walks in darkness; and
the Expression still gives us a more lively and sensible notion of the secret
Malignity of the Plague, and how it ruins and destroys us after invisible ways
and degrees; so that the Invasion of it becomes irresistible.

Job 6. 4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within we; the poison thereof
drinks up my spirit; the terrors of the Lord set themselves in array against
me; the term is military; when an Army of Men put themselves in a posture to
attack and encompass their Enemies.

1 Timothy 6. 16. God is said to dwell in Light, which no man can approach unto:
Which Metaphor conveys to our Mind a stronger notion of his incomprehensible
Nature, and forbids our reason to make curious enquiries after God, who is
inaccessible, as the Sun is to our Eye when it shines out in its brightest
glory. Why then do thou dive into abstruse and mysterious Truths concerning
the Blessed Trinity? for with Job the Question is, Chap. 11. v. 7. resolved,
that all such Enquiries are unprofitable; Can thou find out God unto
Perfection; that is, it is all in vain, for it is impossible so to do.

Numb. 6. 25. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee; that is, the Lord be
gracious and favorable to thee, as the Sun looks most kindly upon us when it
appears in its brightest luster and glory.

-- But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
Healing in his wings: This is a very lively Comparison between Christ and the
Sun, which by his refreshing influence, warms every thing into life. So our
Savior also, by the comfortable heat and efficacy of his perfect
Righteousness, brings life and salvation, and quickens, and revives all who
were spiritually dead, and who before his appearance sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death.

Christ is sometimes called a Star, Number. 24. 17. because his appearance brought
more light of Knowledge into the world. He is sometimes called a Scepter, to
signify his royal Office; and sometimes a Father, to express his love and
affection; sometimes a Shepherd, which kind appellation declares his care and
watchfulness over us. He is termed the spiritual Rock, of which the Israelites
did drink in the Wilderness, Exodus 17. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 4. for they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ; that is, did
sacramentally represent Christ, who being smitten by his Father, did by the
precious effusion of his blood, deliver us from death.

Judges 5. 20. They fought from heaven, the stars from heaven fought against
Sisera; which is a military Expression, but here it may signify no more, than
that the very stars by their secret influences did some way or other contribute
to their overthrow, perhaps by causing great Falls of Rain or Snow.

Colos. 2. 17. Which are but a shadow of things to come; (...) transitory signs
or representations, but the body, or substance, or the reality of these
Mysteries, are opposite to ancient Ceremonies, as much as body is to shadow;
for what are ceremonies, but as it were the first drawings or shadows of a
Picture, which strokes and delineations all vanish and disappear as the life
and perfection of it is coming on.

Psalm 139. 2. Thou understandest my thoughts afar off: A Metaphor taken from a
prospect of any thing at a great distance from us; but in a proper sense, the
phrase assures us, that God by the infinite power of his prescience, knows our
thoughts before they spring up in the soul; and yet this infinite view of them
gives no determinations to them; for by his infinite understanding, how does
God foresee all the various turns and reflections of the mind, and how the soul
after many ways of thinking, will at last resolve to put this or that design in
execution; so that this infinite prospect of our thoughts derives no necessary
power and influence upon them. To use a lower Instance; And if you your self
could foresee that your friend after many changes of his mind, would certainly
travel into Italy, such a previous knowledge of his affairs and designs, by no
means gives any byas to them; neither is he obliged by any power of yours, to
prosecute his journey.

SYNECDOCHE.
Synecdoche, from (...), to comprehend: This Trope is a form of speaking, when
we make use of words that are more comprehensive, for others which are less:
and so on the contrary, when we put the name of a part to signify the whole,
or else the name of the whole to express any particular part of it; as if you
say, the Plague is in France, when perhaps it is only in Paris.

There are four sorts or species belonging to this Figure.

Synecdoche Generis.
1. Synecdoche Generis, when a general word comprehends a particular, or when
the universal denotes the special term. Thus:

Luke 2. 1. It came to pass that all the world was to be taxed; meaning the
whole Roman Empire, a small, though very remarkable, part of the World.

Exodus 9. 6. And all the cattle of Egypt died; which signifies not universally,
as if every kind of Beast were destroyed, but only, or at least chiefly, those
that then were in the fields; for that some were preserved alive is plain
enough from verse. 19.

Thus, All flesh, Genesis 6. 12. and All Creatures, Mark 16. 15. signify man only.

And, Every Creature, implies only some of each sort, and not all of every
kind, Genesis 7. 8.

So, All manner of four footed beasts, signifies a very great number, Acts 10.
12.

Exodus 20. 10. Thou shall not do any manner of work on the Sabbath day; that
is, no toilsome and servile labor, which is the business of every other day;
where the universal term of negation is limited and restrained to a particular
Negative. So,

Ye shall not swear at all, is a prohibition, not excluding all manner of
Oaths, but such only as are rash and not required in a judicial way by the
supreme Magistrate.

Matt. 27. 44. The thieves also, (...) which were crucified with him upbraided
him; where the plural Number denotes the singular, for only one of the two
Thieves did vilify our Savior, as appears from Luke 23. 39.

Synecdoche Speciei.
2. Synecdoche Speciei, when a particular word or expression of a more narrow
signification does imply one of a general and larger notification. Thus,

James 1. 27. Pure religion is this, to visit the fatherless and the widow in
their affliction; which are but a very narrow compass of Religion; but they are
taken more generally, for any Persons under any sort of Calamity.

Exodus 3. 8. A Land flowing with milk and honey; that is, abounding with all
things good and desirable.

Abraham and Israel, two proper Names, signify the Patriarchs, a word of
larger extent, Isai. 63. 16.

Exodus 20. Honor thy father and thy mother, is a duty more universal, and
commands us to pay obedience and reverence to all Superiors, especially those
in high Authority.

Synecdoche Totius.
3. Synecdoche Totius, when the Name of the whole serves to denote a part of
it. Thus,

Luke 23. 43. To day thou shall be with me in Paradise; where the word thou
seems to comprehend the whole man; but it signifies his soul only, without his
body.

2 Pet. 3. 6. The whole world being overflowed with water; that is, the earth,
the lowest part of the world.

Dan. 2. 4. O King, live for ever: where all duration of time, even to
Eternity, signifies a long part of time, for ever, that is, for a long time.

Synecdoche Partis.
4. Synecdoche Partis, when the Name of a Part or Member is made use of to
notify the whole thing or person.

Acts. 27. 37. And we were all in the Ship, two hundred threescore and sixteen
souls: where the (...) comprehends the whole man.

And the evening and the morning were the first day; where the principal parts
of the day signify the entire spaces of day and night.

Of Figures in the Repetition of the same Sound.
EPIZEVXIS.
Epizeuxis, from (...) to join together. This Figure repeats the same word in
the same Sentence, by way of emphasis, and so gives more life and passion to
our discourses: Thus:

How does Holy David express himself in an infinite Passion, upon the death of
his Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 33. O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would
God I had died for thee, O Absalom my son, my son: How often are the very same
words over and over again; to signify, if possible, the mighty grief and
anguish of his Soul, for the irreparable loss of his dearly beloved Son.

Psalm 22. 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? See Matthew. 27. 46. The
words are full of Complainings, most earnestly lamenting, that God himself was
departed from him, even when his Divine presence was most needful to preserve
him from the approach of some imminent danger, but in respect of Christ figured
by David, they are the expressions of his Humanity, representing the extreme
Agony of his Passion, and the inexpressible Pains and Torments. See Matt. 26.
38, 39. My soul, says Christ, is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. See
also Luke 22. 44.

Luke 23. 21. But they cried, saying, Crucify him, Crucify him; representing
to us their most violent Importunities, and loud Clamours of the People against
his Life.

Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me: A very earnest and passionate
Expostulation from heaven, to move and persuade Saul, that he should no longer
breath out threatenings and slaughters against the Church of Christ.

Matt. 23. 37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem; How is the same word repeated over
again very emphatically, to give us the highest conception of God's trouble and
mighty concernment for their impenitency and wilful disobedience? See Psalm
145. 18. Joel 1. 15. Exodus 34. 6.

ANADIPLOSIS.
Anadiplosis, derived from (...) and (...) duplico. This Figure pronounces the
same word in different Sentences: when the last word of the preceding
Proposition is repeated in the beginning of the following: thus;

Romans 14. 8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we
die unto the Lord: and therefore in either state, it is our business to preserve
in our minds a lively sense of God's providence; and refer our selves to his
care and protection of our souls and bodies; since whether we live or die, we
are the Lord's. See Romans 8. 17.

Phil. 2. 8. He became obedient to death* even the death of the Cross: and was
it not still an higher instance of his great Humility and Condescension;
because such a sort of death was by all reputed the most infamous and shameful
way of dying.

Knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed: thus is there a gradual progress
from the practice of one Virtue, to another, although* through some accidental
indisposition of our minds. One Virtue may not promote the exercise of another.

CLIMAX.
Climax, gradatio; when the words are in such a Position, that there is a
gradual ascent from one to another: till you arrive at the last step of the
period: Thus;

Matt. 10. 40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me: There is here a gradual advancement in every
period, and the last is the highest of all. In as much as the respect and
honor given to God the Father, upon the reception of his Son, is much greater,
than any that is paid to the Son, who, in respect of his humanity and his
mission from Heaven, was inferior to God the Father.

John 1. 11. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God: In the beginning, that is, before the creation of the world, the
(...) had then his being; for if he was not before all things; how then could
all things be made by him? The first word then signifies his eternity, the next
his personality: And the word was with God; which phrase expresses a distinct
mode or manner of subsistence of the Son, from the Father; because no Person is
said to be with himself, but with another Person. And the last words expressly
assert his Divinity; And the word was God: See this Text expounded in a Sermon
of his Grace, the Archbishop of Canterbury.

1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. All are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom*
he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he
glorified.

Matt. 5. 27, 28. Ye have heard, it has been said by them of old time, Thou
shall not commit adultery* But I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a
woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart: So that the Christian morality is much more refined; and reaches not
only to the external actions* but even those of the mind, the most secret
imaginations.

Matt. 11. 9. But what went ye out for to see; a Prophet? yea, I say unto you,
and more than a Prophet.

Matt. 8. 20. Jesus says unto them, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Here, in these Verses, there is a noble rise in the sense of the words, and
without much impropriety they are reducible to this Figure.

ANAPHORA.
Anaphora, from (...), to bring back again: it is a repetition of a word in the
beginning of several Sentences: Thus;

The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty,
Psalm. 29. 4.

Praise the Lord from the Heavens, praise him in the height, praise him all his
Angels, praise him Sun and Moon: where the Royal Psalmist affectionately calls
upon the whole order of created Beings, to sing Praises to their Maker.

Charity suffers long, and is kind, charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not
her self: where the abstract is made use of for the concrete, the charitable
Person, Psalm. 118. v. 8, 9.

Jer. 50. 35, 36, 37. A Sword is upon the Chaldeans, says the Lord, a sword is
upon the Inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her Princes, and upon her wise men, a
sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed, a sword is upon their
horses, and upon their chariots: This induction of Particulars, with the
continual application of the same term to every period, renders the discourse
much more emphatical, and infuseth into the mind a notion of universal ruin and
desolation.

EPISTROPHE.
Epistrophe, conversio, from (...), and (...), verto. This Figure returns the
same word at the end of several Clauses: Thus;

Are they Israelites, so am I? Are they the seed of Abraham, so am I? 2 Cor.
11. 22.

Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and done miracles in thy Name? Matt. 7. 22.

See Psalm. 106. where, His mercy endures for ever, is the conclusion of every
Verse, and very proper to express the endless duration of his Mercy.

SYMPLOCE.
Symploce, complicatio, from (...), to fold together; when the same sort of
words are in the beginning and in the end of several Sentences.

Jer. 9. 23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty
man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: And this is
the very Admonition of God himself, That we should not in the least place our
hope and confidence upon the best of worldly things, but only upon God
Almighty, who is only able to save, and defend us.

EPANALEPSIS.
Epanalepsis, resumptio, from (...), and (...), accipio. This Figure makes use
of the same word or expression in the beginning and ending of the same Sentence.

Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say, Rejoice.

2 Samuel 18. 33. O Absalom, my son, my son.

EPANADOS.
Epanados, regressio. This Figure employs the same word at the beginning and
middle of a Sentence, or in the middle and end of it; as if they were inverted,
and the contrary sense turned upon them*

Isai. 5. 20. Woe unto them who call good evil, and evil good; who put light for
darkness, and darkness for light.

Romans 7. 19. For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would
not, that I do.

How are the terms here inverted? good is the object of his will, but still
it is impracticable; and evil, though contrary to his will and intention^, yet
that he puts into practice.

John 8. 47. He that is of God, hears God's word; ye therefore hear it not,
because ye are not of God; that is, because ye are not regenerate by his Spirit.

2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that
are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are the savor of death unto
death, and to the other the savor of life unto life: that is, the Gospel is
preached to all persons, without any distinction, but the blessed efficacy of
it, is extremely different, and varies according to the disposition of the
receiver; for it is life and salvation to the believer; but to the faithless and
disobedient, inevitable death and destruction.

PARONOMASIA.
Paronomasia, a likeness of words; derived from (...), which in composition,
signifies with alteration, and (...), a name, from (...), to change or allude
to a name. This Figure employs the same word to a very different purpose, and
sometimes it changes one letter or syllable of a word to another sense and
signification.

Matt. 8. 22. Let the dead, bury their dead: the first words signify a moral
death, those that are dead in trespasses and sins; but the last imply a natural
death, such as are dead and departed this life.

2 Cor. 10. 3. Though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after the flesh:
though we are men, and made in the same fashion like other men; yet in this
respect we differ from them, for we place no confidence in the arm of flesh, no
assistance from the world, but all our sufficiency is from God.

2 Cor. 6. 9. As unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live:
though some may look upon us, as if they were not so desirous to know us in our
afflictions; yet others esteem and value us the more, and are willing to know
us in the greatest of our Calamities.

PLOCE.
Ploce, derived from (...), to bind together. This Figure pronounces a word so
emphatically, that it denotes not only the thing signified, but also the very
quality of it; thus it is no unusual thing to repeat the proper name of a man,
to express some remarkable virtue belonging to him; as we may say, In that
action Alexander was Alexander, that is, a mighty Conqueror.

Genesis 27. 36. Is he not rightly called Jacob, says Esau, for he has
supplanted me these two times.

POLYPTOTON.
Polyptoton, from (...), variatio casuum. This Figure employs words of the same
derivation, but alters the termination, or the Mood, Case, or Gender.

Romans 2. 21. Thou that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal?

Romans 11. 16. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things; that is,
God is supreme, and disposes every thing to serve the wise ends of his
providence.

2 Timothy 3. 13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived. See the various termination of the same words, Heb. 6. 14.

Figures in reference to a sentence, are such as affect the whole sentence, not
without some emotion of the Soul.
ECPHONESIS.
Ecphonesis, Exclamation. This is a most pathetical sort of Figure, whereby the
Orator discovers the excessive passion of his own mind, and so makes a suitable
impression upon the affections of his Audience.

This Figure is varied many ways. First, In a way of wonder and admiration of
God's infinite Perfections*

Rom 11. 33. Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

Secondly, In a way of sorrow and mourning, for God's absence, or of his
disregard to the voice of our Petitions.

Psalm. 22. 1, 2. My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? O my God, I cry in
the day time, but thou hear not.

Isai. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone; Thus, in a way of desperation, how is
the Prophet extremely sensible of his own unworthiness, as if he thought the
forgiveness of his sin was now impossible; this was the dreadful apprehension
of men in former times, when God did more signally manifest himself, Deuteronomy. 5.
25. Judge. 6. 22. and 13. 22.

Thirdly, In a way of expostulation with God himself, for his Mercy and
Compassion.

Ob remember that my life is wind; Thus he makes the short continuance of his
being, a very great inducement, that God should be more indulgent to him, and
preserve him from sudden ruin and destruction.

Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?

Job 6. 11, 12. What is my strength, that I should hope? and, What is my end,
that I should prolong my life? How does holy Job here complain of his
insufferable miseries, and longs most passionately to be at rest in his grave,
as if he despaired of any cessation from his pains and afflictions so long as
he was alive. On that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! --

Romans 9. 20. Nay, but O man, who art thou, that reply egainst God? A severe
reprehension to our peevish murmurings and complaints, as if God had not an
absolute power over us, to punish us, unless we our selves gave our consent to
the inflictions of it.

Fourthly, In a way of censure and reprehension.

Acts 12. 10. O full of subtilty, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness. And, Can there possibly be a worse Character than this?

Fifthly, In a way of most earnest wishing.

Psalm 55. 6. O that I had the wings of a Dove! that I might flee away, and be
at rest.

Sixthly, In a way of infinite commiseration and pity of our unhappy condition.

Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a
hen does gather her thickens under her wings, and ye would not?

How does God himself mourn for the misery of his People? that they so
neglected all the means to their salvation; when he himself infinitely desired
to preserve them, even with the very same degrees of tenderness, as the most
affectionate creature desires to save, and hover over her Young.

Lament. 1. 1, 2. How is the golden city spoiled? how does the city sit
solitary, that was full of people? how is she become a widow? And so the
Prophet goes on in a most elegant manner to describe the misery of her ruin and
fall from her prosperity.

Seventhly, In a way of triumph and exultation.

1 Cor. 15 55. Oh death, where is thy sting? oh grave, where is thy victory?

Eighthly, In a transport of love and admiration.

Psalm. 84. 1. Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles, thou Lord of hosts! As if the
Royal Psalmist was in such a rapture, that he could give no adequate notion of
his love and delight in God's house; by a cold affirmation of the pleasure of
it, but was forced to run himself into an Ecstasie, and so leaves the question
undetermined, as if it was unexpressible.

EPIPHONEMA.
Epiphonema is an Acclamation, containing some very remarkable sentence at the
close of our discourse; it is, as it were, the last finishing stroke which we
desire to leave upon the affections of our Audience. Thus; St. Paul after he
had confuted several false opinions concerning the manner of the resurrection,
at last he recommends the doctrine of it, advising them, upon the certain hopes
and expectations of another life, to be constant in all manner of holiness.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Matt. 6. 21. Our Savior here endeavors to call off their affections from an
excessive pursuit of the world; for if they did engage their thoughts so
exceedingly, they would leave no room for Heaven; and then at last, to leave
his discourse still more warm upon their spirits; thus he concludes, For where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

2 Cor. 10. 18. St. Paul, endeavoring to discourage the vanity of
self-commendation, leaves this sensible impression upon them, as the best
dissuasive from the practice of it; for not he that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends.

Prove. 9. 17, 18. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret, is
pleasant. This is the insinuation of the adulterous woman, concerning the high
relish of her unlawful pleasures; but then see the conclusion of such unhappy
satisfactions; but he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests
are in the depths of hell.

Eccles. 7. 31. Lo, only this have I found, that God has made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions. The only thing I fully apprehend, after
all my enquiries, is this, That God at first endowed man with a principle of
right reason for his certain guide and direction to happiness; but he lost this
noble talent through sin, which is the cause of all his vain thoughts and
imaginations.

When our Blessed Savior had performed many wonderful Cures, how do the
People, with one voice, conspire in this Acclamation, He has done all things
well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. Mark 7. 37.

EPANORTHOSIS.
Epanorthosis, from a Greek word signifying to correct or amend. When we are in
a passion we are seldom satisfied with what we say, or do; insomuch that we
are apt to fancy our expressions are no ways equal to our thoughts, and so we
still add fresh, and more words to correct, as we think, the insufficiency of
the former.

Acts 26. 27. King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou
believe. Does not our Apostle seem as it were to question the faith of King
Agrippa, as if he were not yet sufficiently convinced concerning the divine
authority of the holy Scriptures: but then St. Paul, as if he was afraid of the
incivility of the question, does not scruple to say, that there was the least
reason to suspect the belief of King Agrippa; and the insinuation of Saint Paul
was very powerful, even almost to his very conversion, Verse 28. then Agrippa
said, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. And St. Paul said, I would
to God, that not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost,
and altogether such as I am, except these bonds. And what expression can be
more Courtly, more Genteel, what more effectual to prevail upon their
affections, than thus to wish them, in all respects, like himself; but not so
miserable, not so unhappy, as to be under any confinement of Chains or
imprisonment, as he himself was at that time?

1. Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. Observe here with what care and caution St.
Paul distrusts his own natural strength and abilities as very unsufficient to
his conversion, and so presently corrects himself, and ascribes it more
especially to the influence and the conduct of divine Grace. As if he had said,
Though I was not wanting to the best of my power, to become a true Disciple of
Christ, yet must I freely say, that my conversion is principally to be ascribed
to another Cause: for the Incitations of the will, and the power, and the
occasions, and the means to make use of it, is derived from the inspirations of
the holy Spirit, which animates and gives life and vigor to all our thoughts,
and so disposes us to repentance and amendment of life. See 2 Cor. 3. 5. and
Phil. 2. 13.

Mark 9. 24 Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. How does he reprehend
himself, as if it was almost a presumption in him to speak with so much
confidence of his strength of faith, even to our Savior himself; and therefore
as if he were now diffident again, and that his belief was imperfect, and had
some degree of weakness and infirmity; he at last humbly implores the divine
assistance, to increase and fill up the measure of his faith; Lord, help thou
my unbelief.

1 Cor. 7. 10. And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord. He
presently recolle^ts himself, and assures his Corinthians that he gave them not
these directions as a mere man, but as an Apostle and a person of divine
Inspiration, and so, not I, but the Lord commands; and this he said, to give
the more force and efficacy to their obedience of the Precept.

Luke 11. 27, 28. A certain woman said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps that gave thee suck. But he said, Yea, rather blessed are
all they, that hear the word of God and keep it. As if our Savior was sensible
some might, through a mistaken principle, ascribe too much honor and respect
to the blessed Virgin, being the mother of our dear Lord and Savior; and
therefore, how does Christ himself most industriously give the preference to
those, who live and obey the precepts of the Gospel? Yea, rather blessed are
they; so that the moral birth of Jesus Christ in the soul, is a greater
blessedness, than the natural birth of him was to the Virgin Mary: to believe
and obey him, than to be the natural Mother of our Savior. So that Christ
himself lays no great matter of stress or privilege upon such a relation, but
assures them in another place, to anticipate all mistake upon such an opinion;
That he that lives in obedience to his Commands, is equally dear, and related
to him, without any distinction, the same is my sister, and father, and mother.
Matt. 12. 49, 50.

APOSIOPESIS.
Aposiopesis, a Greek word; and I have more manners, than to pretend to give
you the derivation of it.

This Figure, through some violent passion, either of sorrow, fear, shame or
anger, obliges us to break off our discourse, and though we seem to conceal
some part of it; yet, through the excess of passion, we do but the more
sensibly discover our resentments.

1 Kings 217. And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Do thou now govern the
Kingdom of Israel? The words are spoken with a mighty emphasis, and signify
much more than is there expressed; do thou, or art thou worthy of the name of
a King? thou that art so mean spirited, as to grieve thy self upon this refusal
of Naboth's Vineyard: and, where is thy princely power and authority? Do thou
now govern the Kingdom of Israel? is this any mark of thy regal Office? is this
a sign of thy indispensible power? thus tamely to sit down, thus to submit to
such a denial; Do thou now govern? --

Genesis 3. 22. -- And now, lest be put forth his hand, and take also of the tree
of life, and eat, and live for ever. These words are spoken in a way of
commination, and punishment, to Adam, for his high disobedience to God's
command; and they imply thus much; since thou have been so rebellious against
me, I will now presently drive thee out of my garden, and suffer thee no longer
to be in a possibility of making thy self happy, or to be in my presence.

Luke 19. 42. If thou, even thou, had known, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thy eyes: which
contain a most dreadful denunciation of some future judgments that were to
befall the Jewish Nation, that the time for their repentance was now past,
beyond all recovery, and therefore they were now to expect nothing else but
ruin, and desolation.

Psalm. 6. 3. My soul is sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long? The sense is
imperfect and interrupted; but thou, O Lord, how long? that is, shall thy wrath
and infliction of punishments endure? how long will thou delay to comfort and
refresh my soul, and take away the sad occasions of my grief?

Heb. 13. 1. I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: (...) which
words contain a mighty kind of resolution, though the expression is more soft
and gentle: as if God should say, in his high displeasure, I will not be found
to speak the truth, if now they enter into my rest; which is the highest
asseveration that is possible.

APOSTROPHE.
Apostrophe, a turning away, or a dislike; from (...) from and (...) verto:
it is a diversion of our discourse to another person, than we intended first
person, than we intended first of all, to make our applications; thus a Man,
who is in a violent transport of passion, turns himself on all sides, and makes
his addresses from this, to another person, whom he thinks at least, will be
more favorable to the cause of his complaining; nay, sometimes he appeals to
the most insensible things, to the heavens, to the earth; and in the fury of
his passion, makes no difference and distinction; and sometimes, like a mere
child, quarrels with any thing, without cause or reason.

2 Samuel 1. 21. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there
be rain upon you, nor fields of offering. How does Holy David, in the violence
of his sorrow and lamentation, curse these very places with barrenness, as if
they were any way in the least, accessory to the occasions of his mourning, and
therefore cruelly wishes them to be dry and fruitless, without bringing forth
any more fruit, or offerings of sacrifice; but, what is all this expression,
what is this severe malediction, but only a more pathetical instance or
aggravation of David's infinite sorrow, for the loss of his dearest friend
Jonathan? Verse. 26. Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women:
as if there was a more infinite tie of friendship, than in the very affections
of the husband to his wife. Ibid. I am distressed for thee, my brother
Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been: How does mournful David discourse to
his dearest Jonathan, as if now he was sensible, or could give attention to the
voice of his mourning? and how goes he on to recollect the past endearments of
his conversation, recalling to his mind the joys, the complacencies, and all
those innocent familiarities which rendered his company most delightful to him,
the sense of which had made such a very strong and mighty impression on his
soul; that to remember, he was once so very happy in his dearest friendship,
and not to be always so, makes him now but the more miserable, and the more
sensible of his infinite loss, of his dearest friend? -- Ye daughters of
Israel, weep over Saul: -- Oh Jonathan, thou wast slain in the high places. --
very pleasant have thou been.

Isai. 1. 2. Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The thoughts of so much
tenderness and so much indulgence, and such ingratitude upon it, so highly
provokes the Prophet, to that degree of wonder and amazement, that in his
transport of passion, he seems to fancy the most senseless Creatures were
capable to be judges of such strange ungratefulness; and therefore appeals to
them, to make their remarks upon such extravagant and unnatural rebellions.

Sometimes, for want of other objects, we turn our discourse upon our own
selves; and so the same person reproves, and is reproved by his own self. Thus,
in Psalm. 43. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou so
disquieted within me? Oh trust in God.

Sometimes again we make our addresses and applications to insensible things,
as if it was in their power to hear, and favor our petitions; Then shall they
begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us. Luke 23.
30. And the apprehensions of their dangers, and the extravagance of their fears
may justify, in some degree at least, such kind of applications, though in
themselves very vain, and most unreasonable.

How does St. Paul triumph over death, and the grave? as if they heard his
insulting eloquence, or were sensible of their overthrow. O death, where is thy
sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. v. 55.

Psalm 114. 5. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? or thou Jordan,
that thou wast driven back? The Prophet asks the waters themselves what was the
reason of the wonderful ebb of the redsea; or the standing still or partitions
of the river Jordan: and in the vehemence of his passion, seems to expect from
them a suitable answer; Why, says he, were you so very sensible of fear, when
like trembling and amazed persons, you left your places, and as it were, made
up a wall on either side; as if you had forgot your natures, and were no longer
fluid and moving; tell me then, What ailed you?

PROSOPOPOEIA.
Prosopopoeia, fictio personae, derived from (...) persona, and (...) facio.

This Figure supposes another person speaking our sense and meaning, and so we
introduce him into our discourse. Sometimes also this Figure makes inanimate
things to hear or speak, as if they were real persons.

Prove 8. 1. Does not *wisdom cry, and understanding put forth her voice? --
Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men. Thus Solomon
introduces wisdom under the character of a person speaking and giving
instructions, how they should practice, her kind admonitions. Some, though I
think, erroneously, understand the Son of God, the second person in the
Trinity, under this representation of Wisdom, who is called the (...)

But ask now the beasts of the field, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee: where holy Job advises his friends to go
to the beasts and birds for better information; and even they should be able to
tell them, that prosperity or afflictions were accidental to the pious, or to
the ungodly man, and that no man ought to esteem any one wicked, from the
sufferance of any calamity.

Prove. 30. 24, 25. The Ants are a people not strong, but they are exceeding
wise, and they prepare their meat in the summer. And now, who would not, at the
first sight, almost fancy this was a description of the State of Venice, and a
character of their wisdom and forecast in political matters; rather than a
commendation of the wisdom and providence of those little Insects, which here
are not inelegantly termed a people extremely wise.

Sometimes we introduce mute and insensible Beings, reasoning and discoursing
after the manner of Men, Judges 9. 8. See also 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. verses.
2 Kings 14. 9. The Thistle that was in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that was in
Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife; and there passed by a
wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trod down the Thistle. How does Jehoash,
under this sensible representation, deride the folly and the presumption of
Amaziah, King of Judah, who being a petty and inconsiderable Prince in
comparison of himself, therefore styles himself the Cedar; as if there was no
less difference between them, than there is between the Cedar, the great
Monarch of the forest; and the Thistle, a very mean and inglorious vegetable;
and therefore, not without the highest indignation, he scorns the very thoughts
of such a poor and despicable Relation.

Song of Solomon, c. 2. v. 7. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the
roes and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awaken my Love,
until he please. How do these very expressions discover, what a mighty
tenderness Christ has for his beloved Church, that he would not have the least
thing to trouble and discompose her? I charge you by the roes, by the example
of these fearful Creatures, which the Hunters endeavor to steal gently upon,
and not to terrify and affright them, and force them to fly, and run away, by
noise and sudden surprises.

Genesis 4. 10. The voice of thy brother's blood cries unto me from the earth.
Thus when any sin is exceeding great, as that of Murder most certainly is,
it is an elegant way of speaking, to give it a voice and language to speak, and
cry aloud to the God of heaven for justice and punishment upon the Author of
it. -- Verse 11. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which has opened her
mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand: Thus the earth it self,
though insensible, yet by this Figure is said to curse, as if she was in very
great wrath and indignation, upon this inhumane and barbarous action.

Psalm 108 2 Does not Holy David call upon his instruments of music, Awake
lute and harp. -- and 14. How does he desire the sun, and the moon, and the
stars to praise the Lord, and also the fire and bail, snow and vapors, which
fulfill his word. And again, he calls upon the more sensible parts of the
Creation, upon the beasts and all cattle, and creeping things, and feathered
fowl, to sing their praises to God their Maker.

Psalm 77. 16. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were
afraid; the depths also were troubled. Thus sight and fears, and disquietness
are applicable to things insensible, to give us a lively sense of God's majesty
and power, which strike terror and amazement into all things. Psalm 114. 3 The
waters saw thee, and fled; as if they were under great fears and apprehensions
of his coming, and so with great precipitation retired suddenly.

Of Figures which we sometimes make use of in a way of Dialogue.
APORIA.
Aporia, a word derived from (...), to be doubtful in mind, when we reason and
consider with our selves, as if we were uncertain either what to say, or do.

Luke 16. 3. Then the unjust steward said within himself, What shall I do? for
my Lord takes away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed.
Thus the steward debates with himself what course of life is most suitable to
his own humor and disposition, and that labor or poverty were equally
disagreeable.

Mark 11. 31, 32 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say, The
baptism of John was from heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not believe? but
if we say, Of men, they feared the people: for all men counted John, that he
was a prophet indeed: and they answered, We cannot tell.

ANACOENOSIS.
Anacoenosis, from (...), and (...), to communicate with others. This Figure
teaches us to advise, deliberate, or argue with others concerning the
expedience of our actions.

Phil. 1. 22, 23, 24. What I shall choose, I wot not, for I am in a strait
between two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far
better; nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. How is our
Apostle here very dubious and wavering in his mind? Sometimes he debates within
himself his own particular profit, and presently concludes, it was highly
advantageous for him to die and to be with his dear Savior. And sometimes also
he considers the good and benefit of the Church, which seems yet to require his
more immediate Care and personal presence; and thus what was so expedient to
his private interest, was very inconsistent with the public safety and
prosperity of the Christian Church. And these thoughts, and these
considerations sway his inclinations here, and there, to the great distraction
of his mind.

Psalm 139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from
thy presence? The question perhaps seems to insinuate that God's presence was
confined to time and place; but if you observe, it is rather a stronger
Confirmation that God is every where present to all persons in all manner of
places, and that no man can be, where God is not.

Luke 11. 18. If Satan be divided against Satan, how shall his king dom stand?
Thus from the evil Consequences of division, and from the manifest absurdity
that so wise a being as the Devil is, should ever conspire to destroy himself,
our Savior prooes his miracles to be performed by a divine power.

Acts 4. 19. But Peter and John said unto them, Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken unto you more than God, judge ye. And the Appeal it
self was so just and equitable, that even in their own partial opinion, they
could not but decide the question in favor of the Apostles.

Mal. 1. 6. If then I be a father, when is my honor? if I be a master, where
is my fear? If then you grant me the antecedent, why are you so absurd, as to
deny me the consequence.

Jerem. 23. 23. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar of? Is
not this the severest reprehension to those, who conceive such narrow thoughts
of God, as to think the distance of places can hinder his knowledge, or void
his presence, or render his power ineffectual?

PROLEPSIS.
Prolepsis, anticipatio: by this Figure we give a diversion to any thing that
may be objected against us, by answering by way of prevention, the very
objection our selves.

Romans 11. 19, 21, 22. Thou will say then, The branches were broken off, that I
might be graffed in. Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by faith. Be not high minded, but fear. For if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. St. Paul here obviates
the objection of the Gentiles who were inserted into the body of the Church,
and the unbelieving Jews, who are here styled the broken branches, were
rejected: this he tells the Gentiles, was a mighty favor of God, so to
incoporate them with his Church; but then he also assures them, that they must
not so far presume upon their present state and vocation; For if God spare not
the natural branches, that is, the Jews themselves, take heed lest he also
spare not the^. For if by your disobedience you now incurr God's displeasure,
you cannot in reason, but expect to suffer the same unhappy fare with the
Jewish Nation.

St. Paul, discoursing of the resurrection, resolves a difficult question
concerning the mode and manner of the resurrection, and what sort of body shall
be raised up from the grave. But some will say, How are the dead raised up? and
with what body do they come? 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36. Thou soul. Our Savior stifles
their objection, by offering another, so very difficult, that they were
unwilling to answer it. Matthew. 21. 24, 25. I will also ask you one question,
which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these
things. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? This was
such a Dilemma, and the resolution of it so highly inconvenient, that they
pretend ignorance, and answer, We cannot tell.

Romans 9. 19, 20. Thou will say them unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for
who has resisted his will? Nay but, O man, who art thou, that reply against
God? Thus St. Paul anticipates their false opinion, assuring them that the work
of grace is of God's mere free will; and, if he does deprive some of it, he is
not in the least guilty of any injustice to them, since he is under no
obligations to conferr it upon them; and this very subtraction of his grace,
upon their impenitency, and continuance in a vicious course of life, is no
cause of their sin and wickedness; but on the contrary, their disobedience and
sinful life is the reason why God withdraws the influence of his holy spirit
from them; and so our sins chase away the holy spirit, and render its operation
ineffectual to our conversion, and so the heart of Pharaoh is hardened.

EPITROPE.
Epitrope, from (...), concedo. By this Figure we often grant a thing not
unwillingly to obtain another, and show more effectually the inconveniency of
such a Practice or Principle.

Romans 2. 17. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and
make thy boast of God; and art confident that thou thy self art a guide to
the blind. Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not thy self? As
if he said, I grant thou art an Instructor of the foolish, and a teacher of
babes; but then, Why is thy conversation so unsuitable to thy doctrine? Where
is thy example? Where is thy practice? and, Why are they so disagreeable to thy
external profession? thus, How does our Apostle seem to concede all they
desire? to prove at last upon them; that their practice was not consonant to
their principles; and from that absurdity, more severely reprehends them.

Judges 10. 14. Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver
you in the time of trouble: This seems no small encouragement to their practice
of idolatry; but in reality, it is the strongest dissuasion from it; and
virtually implies the disability of other gods to save and deliver them in
times of danger.

1 Kings 22. 15. The King said to Micaiah, Shall we go against Ramoth gilead to
battle, or shall we forbear? and he answered him, Go and prosper: Where the
Prophet seems to encourage them to the battle, though he easily foresaw the
dangerous consequence of the war.

1 Cor. 14 38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant still: that is,
If after such a plain and positive proof of my ministry, he will nevertheless
resolve to continue ignorant of it, let it be at his own peril; where the
concession is nothing else but a discouragement to his want of understanding,
and reflection in a matter of so high importance.

See Amos 4. 4, 5. where the Prophet, in a way of derision, seems to approve of
their idolatrous practives.

Prove. 6. 10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep: As if he said, You do well to indulge your self in ease and
slothfulness; but then at last, how does the wise Man ruturn upon the Sluggard;
so shall thy Poverty come, as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed
Man; and so more fully convinces him of the great inconveniences of an idle
way of living.

James 2. 19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well; the devils
also believe and tremble: Where after this sort of commendation of their faith,
he at last tells them, that such a belief, without a suitable practice, is vain
and ineffectual, and that even the devils themselves have a speculative faith.

Matthew. 5. 46. If ye love them that love you, what reward have you? do not even
the Publicans the same? I will, if you please, says the Apostle, allow the
matter of fact; yet, what use can you make of it* where is the commendation?
where is the virtue of such a practice, if the worst of men do the very same?

These following are called secondary Figures of a word.
PLEONASMUS.
Pleonasmus, you know, Sir, is a Greek word, and it is uncivil to explain it in
your company.

This Figure makes use of more words than are necessary; but they give a much
stronger accent and emphasis to our discourses.

Deuter. 33. 6. O foolish people, and unwise! Which sort of expression still
more eminently denotes their want of wisdom, and discretion.

Prove. 27. 2. Let another man praise thee, and not thy own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips: And this variety of words is not so unusefull to engage
our thoughts, to consider with more attention, the subject matter of our
discourse, and the importance of it.

See Deuter. 13. 4. --

John 1. 3. (...) All things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made: And the variation of the sense in other words was
very convenient to assure us, that Christ was before the world; and that all
things in it, were the works of his hand; and from the universality of his
creative power, he must be omnipotent, and therefore God; for what less than
infinite power it self, can make and produce all things?

DIALYTON.
Dialyton, from (...), to dissolve. This Figure pretends, through a mighty have
and vehemence of speech, to use no conjunction, to render our discourse the
more emphatical and earnest; nay, should we insert the Copula, our discourse
would seem too slow and heavy, and lose much of its life and vigor, and
expressiveness.

1 Timothy 3. 2, 3. For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy. Thus the Verse
runs off presently, with more quickness and presently, than if the Particle and
was frequently interposed.

Romans 1. 29. Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, debate, deceit, malignity, etc. As
if the Apostle was in such have to run over the chief heads of their
immoralities, that he had no time for their connection. To the same purpose, See
Romans 3. 11, 12. and 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. and Psalm. 66. 1, 2, 3. all which are
disjoined and without a Copulative. See also Mark 7. 21, 22.

POLYSYNDETON.
Polysyndeton, derived from (...), multum, and (...), conjunctus. This Figure
is contrary to the former, and very often employs the copulative, to tie and
join words together. See 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Though I speak with the tongues of
men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal; and though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge, etc. where the Copulative and is not inelegantly
so often used, though the ear is the best Judge of the harmony of sounds, when
it is proper to use it, or lay it aside.

Romans 8. 38, 39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God. I place this instance under this Figure; but if you think it
rather belongs to Dialyton, nor, being a disjunctive particle; because you are
my friend, I will not stand with you for so small a matter.

See Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: The
Copulative and makes the sense pass on more leisurely, and so the words still
make a deeper impression upon the mind.

ANTITHESIS.
Antithesis represents terms contrary to each other, to convey to the mind a
more sensible and lively image of our discourse, by such an opposition in the
words.

Prove. 14 29. He that is slow to wrath, is of great wisdom; but he that is of
an hasty mind, exalts folly.

Psalm 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: where the opposition
of the terms more sensibly instructs us, that though afflictions are at present
matter of trouble, yet in the end, they are extremely beneficial.

Matt. 16. 25. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake, shall save it: though not in this world, yet in
the next, even to all eternity.

See Prove. 28. 1. and 29. 2. --

Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters, and yet increases; but not through
prodigality, and want of care, but through the prudent offices of charity.

See also Prove. 15. 18. 28. 1. Isai. 59. 9.

Secondary Figures in a Sentence.
PARRHESIA.
Parrhesia, derived from (...) and (...) This Figure takes the courage and
liberty to speak freely our sense of things which are displeasing to us; but we
then must use this sort of Figure extreme nicely in our reprehension of
Superiors; only in cases of the greatest extremity, and when our duty obliges
us to such a freedom.

Gal. 1. 10. For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of God. Where he freely tells
them, that it was a different thing to please God, and men; and consequently
insinuates, that their ways were disagreeable to God's commands. And in Gal. 3.
1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth? Was not this a very harsh expression, to call their prudence so much
into question; and again, Who has bewitched you?

St. Paul advises his beloved Timothy to preach the word, be instant in
season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, 2 Timothy 4. v. 2. And he taught
them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Matthew. 7. 29.

EROTESIS.
Erotesis, from (...), interrogo. This Figure is of excellent use, and carries
in it more force and vehemence; for bare affirmations have no life nor spirit
in them, and are less powerful to influence our sense and reason.

Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? That is, I will most
certainly receive thee, and thy Sacrifice.

Mark 12. 24. Do you not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures,
neither the power of God? Where the question being expressed with the sign of
negation, gives still the stronger force and emphasis to his discourse; and is
as much as to say, You are extremely mistaken.

Psalm 8. 4. Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him? Where the
question implies the greatest diminution; as if man was so very inconsiderable,
and unworthy of the least notice.

How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Where the interrogation carries in
it a manifest contradiction to our sense and reason: and it is no wonder if it
was so absurd and so unconceivable to understand the words in their literal
sense and signication.

John 3. 4. Nicodemus said, How can a man be born when he is old? And truly to
conceive that our Savior did speak of a natural birth, and not of a moral
change of life; a state of regeneration; was not the least absurdity.

Matthew. 21. 25. The baptism of John, whence was it, from heaven or of men? And
the question carried with it such an evident conviction, that which way soever
they answered it, they did equally confute their own selves.

Isai. 14. 12. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning?
how art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the nations? And in
Ver. 10. Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like us? Thus to see
a mighty Prince tumbling down from the highest pitch of his honor and glory;
to see his crown and Scepter falling to the ground; the mighty man to become so
very weak and impotent; is a consideration very surprising: What! Is this the
man that was so powerful, that he made the earth to tremble, and did shake the
kingdoms? What! Is this the man? Bless me! What a change is here! How are the
mighty fallen?

Job 3. 11. Why died I not from the womb? why is light given to a man, whose
way is hid? And in Verse 20. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
and life unto the bitter in soul? who long for death, but is comes not; and
dig for it more than for hid treasures. And Verse. 22. Which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find their grave. Thus, How is holy Job
full of expostulations; breathing out sad complainings, that he cannot find any
rest, or any cessation from his miseries; and enjoy the kindness of a grave.

PARENTHESIS.
Parenthesis is nothing else but the interposition of one or more words within
another Sentence, the sense of which, without the insertion, is of its self
entire and perfect. It Is a rule, that a Parenthesis should neither be very
long, nor very frequent, lest our discourse grow obscure, and not so
intelligible. Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more. 2
Cor. 11. v. 23.

PERIPHRASIS.
Periphrasis, circumlocutio. This Figure describes a thing in more words than
are necessary, for the sake of Illustration, or to avoid some Idea's not so
pleasing to the mind.

Job 18. 14. Death is called The king of terrors.

John 21. 20. The disciple whom Jesus loved: which modest circumlocution Saint
John often uses, to signify himself, who was the beloved Disciple of his Dear
Savior.

Genesis 15. 15. And thou shall go to thy fathers in peace: which is a softer
expression, and not so terrifying, as to say, Thou shall die.

Eccles. 10. 20. where the wise Man advises us not to speak evil of a King,
though in the most secret places; because such discourses are published very
unaccountably; For a bird in the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter: still varying the same sense in other words.

Hab. 3. 17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vine: although the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; although the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there be
no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation. See what a noble Confidence the Prophet has in his God, even in
the greatest extremities; and how elegantly does he express the Particulars
with a decent Periphrasis?

SYNONYMIA.
Synonymia is a Figure that uses several words of the same signification;
because we fancy that one word alone, is not sufficient to express our sense,
and to make a deep Impression upon our Audience.

Psalm. 119. 60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy commandments: As if
the Psalmist could not sufficiently set forth his readiness to obey God,
without a repetition of the same sense in other words.

Prove. 4. 14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way
of evil men; and the variety of the phrase renders the dissuasion more forcible
to us.

Prove. 6. 4 Give not sleep to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy eyelids; that is,
Be extremely watchful and restless in thy endeavors to accomplish this design.

HYPOTYPOSIS.
Hypotyposis, from (...), to represent or describe to the life. This Figure
presents the objects so very lively to the mind, that we are apt to fancy we
hear, and see them continually, as if they were really presented to our very
senses.

Psalm 37. 35, 36. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree; yet he passed away, and lo he was not; yea, I sought
him, but he could not be found. This is a very lively Character of the
prosperous condition of the ungodly man, and of the most sudden ruin, and
destruction of him: how does his image vanish away? how is his memory soon
forgotten? oh! how suddenly does he perish, and come to a fearful end?

Psalm 124. 6. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the hand of the fowler; the
snare is broken, and we are delivered: and what can give us such a lively sense
of our narrow deliverance, as this sensible description of a bird escaping out
of the very hand of the fowler; such an image as this conveys to the mind, that
our preservation was as great, as our very danger.

Prove. 24. 30. I passed by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of
the man destitute of understanding; and lo it was all grown over with thorns,
and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall was broken down;
which give us a very sensible notion of the sad effects of sloth and idleness;
and how insensible the man is of his poverty and misery coming upon him,
saying, Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep; till he is reduced to the last extremities of want and misery.

Song of Solomon, chapter 2. v. 10, 11, 12, 13. My well beloved spoke, and said
unto me, Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away; for behold the winter is
passed, the rain is changed, and is gone away; the flowers appear in the earth;
the time of the singing of the birds is come; the voice of the turtle-dove is
heard in our land; the figtree has brought forth her young figs, and the vines
with their small grapes have cast a savor: Arise my Love, my fair one, and
come away. This is a most elegant description of God's infinite kindness and
love to his Church, and with what tender Invitations he calls and desires holy
Men, to forsake the world, and arise, and follow him: the other parts of this
representation signify the coming of the Messiah, who, like the spring of the
year, gives new vigor, new life and pleasantness to the world.

Lam. 1. 4, 5, 8, 9. which presents to the fancy a sad, but very lively Image
of famine and misery.

Isai. 4. 7, 8. Ah sinful nation, your land is waste, your cities are burnt
with fire, strangers devour your land, and it is desolate, like the overthrow
of strangers: that is, so entirely wasted, as if they desired no kind of
advantage by the preservation of it from ruin and destruction.

Isai. 5. 5, 6. And the daughters of Sion shall remain like a cottage in a
vineyard, like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and like a besieged city; and
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be trodden down; I will lay it
waste, it shall not be cut nor dug; but briars and thorns shall grow up; I
will also command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. What a dismal
state of misery is this? Nothing here is presented to thy view, but a dismal
scene of destruction, and famine, and misery.

ANTHROPOPATHIA.
Anthropopathia. This Figure represents God speaking or doing after the manner
of men; and ascribing to him the parts of body, or any thing else belonging to
our humane nature.

Thus Christ is called the head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. And
God is called the head of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 3. in respect of his humane
nature, and office of mediation; for in respect of his divinity, the Son is
equal to the Father, as appears from John 5. 18. for Christ makes himself equal
with God in power, and operation, v. 19. for whatsoever things the father does,
these also does the son; likewise by reason of unity of essence, and perfect
will, and operation, which is between me and my father; and this equality of
Christ, to God the Father is very evident from Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: thought it not; that
is to say, Christ, without the least usurpation, was truly equal to God; and
unless Christ was truly God, how otherwise will you make out his mighty
humiliation, when he was made in the likeness of man, and made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant: All this seems a mighty
great diminution of himself; as if he had now brought himself, as it were, to
nothing, by this low and mighty condescension, (...), evacuavit, Christ did
almost annihilate himself, in the debasement of himself to such a low and
abject condition of life, as to be found in the fashion of a man: and this
profound humiliation of Christ, upon his appearance in our nature, can no
otherwise be rationally explained, but from the extreme distance and opposition
that there was between his divine Majesty and Glory, as he was God; and the
most abject and despicable state of his humanity. Where otherwise can be such a
mighty debasement of himself, if he was only man? Where otherwise is there such
a vast diminution, or such a strange humility; but only from the mighty
difference and disproportion between his divine and his humane nature; as he
was God, as well as man; which, in comparison to his infinite nature and
essence, was indeed nothing; here then was his mighty condescension very
manifest; here his great humiliation of himself was extremely visible.

Sometimes God is represented in Scripture as if he had a face: as, the Lord
talked to Moses face to face; not that there was such a likeness; but only,
that God was then present to Moses after the most illustrious and signal
manner; revealing himself with the greatest and familiar Intimacy to him.

Sometimes God again is endued with a soul, with acts of hatred and abhorrency
belonging to it. See Isai. 1. 14. and Psalm. 11. 6. He that delights in
wickedness, does my soul abhor.

Sometimes God is described with hands, The right hand of the Lord brings
mighty things to pass; that is, his power is very wonderful in operation.

Sometimes God is said to have eyes, Psalm 11. 4. For his eyes are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings, Job 34. v. 21. See also Psalm 139. 2.
That is, God most clearly knows and understands all the actions and designs
of men, and perfectly discerns the rise and progress, and the consequence of
his thoughts, even before they do actually spring up in his Soul; thus David,
Thou, O Lord, understandest my thoughts long before, Psalm. 139. v. 1. But what
need I introduce more Texts of Scripture, to prove that God is often described
to us after the manner and fashion of a man; such a sensible representation of
himself to us, is an infinite condescension in the Almighty; but then, let us
be most extremely careful, that we conceive him under no humane shape or
figure; as some very grossly picture God Almighty. Whereas God did purposely
appear to Moses without any body or figuration of parts, to prevent all kind of
similitude and likeness in our representations of him; which must of necessity
be the highest diminution and injury to the spiritual nature and essence of the
Great God. When therefore you hear of God's hand, there must be present to your
mind an Idea of his active, or his creative Power. And when you read of his
Almighty arm stretched out still, you must to your self form a notion of his
irresistible strength and dominion. And when feet and walking are attributed to
God, such metaphorical expressions suggest to you, that God, by the immensity
of his presence, is every where; for how can such bodily parts, or the peculiar
offices of them, be in the least degree necessary to such an infinite and
spiritual Being? Why should God have eyes, who is Sight it self? or, Why should
he have any feet, to go or walk, who by the infinity of his divine nature, is
omnipresent? and, How can God possibly go or come, who at the same instant of
time, equally fills every place; that he cannot be absent from one part of the
World, and present to the other part of it? and pray, What occasion has God for
a hand or an arm, who performs all things by the mere efficacy, and virtue of
his will? Let there be light, and there was light. Why should God have ears to
hear, who perfectly knows all the secret motions of our very thoughts, and all
their consequences, even before the actual determinations of them? or, tell me,
What occasion has God for a tongue, whose very thoughts execute his high
commands, and accomplish all his pleasure. Such parts and members as these, are
indeed very necessary to us, because all our purposes, and all our designs are
vain and ineffectual, and cannot be put in execution, without the mediation of
such organs; but the Almighty will of God commands obedience, and a most ready
submission and compliance from every thing in the Creation, and by his pleasure
only, they receive, or lose, their being, their life and operation.

Hos. 11. 8, 9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admab? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for
I am God, and not man. Thus are humane passions attributed to God himself; and,
How is he represented here expostulating with himself as a Being full of mercy
and compassion; and most infinitely desirous to abstain from punishment, even
when their sins did highly deserve the greatest infliction of temporal evils?
as if God had said, Thou deserve^ destruction no less than those wicked cities
See Genesis 19. 23. and Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Ye^ my commiseration is so infinite to thee,
that I cannot suffer my self to be so mighty rigorous, as to show my
displeasure in thy ruin and destruction. How full of condescension are such
passionate expressions? how useful and how beneficial are they, to assure us
of his infinite love and affection to the sons of men; That he is not, as some
represent him, a God inexcrable, or void of compassion, or that he takes any
complacency in the misery of his Creatures; but he even spares us, when we
deserve punishment, and in his wrath, thinks upon mercy. And now, if
sometimes God did not thus condescend to discover himself in such mighty
pathetical strains of love and tenderness to us, we might fancy there was some
kind of truth in those impious and pernicious doctrines which tell us, God
designed to make man, to make him miserable, even from all eternity; but how
unworthy are such notions of God, who is infinite in goodness and mercy? how
contradictory to his lovingkindness to us? Not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come, and be saved.

Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God; where the Passion of sorrow is
applied to the Holy Ghost, as a personal act; and cannot, with any propriety,
be ascribed to a mere power or faculty, as some fancy the Holy Spirit, and not
to be a real Person. Grieve not then the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the
Blessed Trinity, lest he withdraw his comfort, his joy, and consolation, from
your heart; lest the blessed influence of his grace departs from you, as from
an unpleasant conversation.

Genesis 6. 6. God is said to repent. See also 1 Samuel 15. 11, 29. Not that there
is the least change or alteration in God, but only in the object, in the works
of his hand, which were once good, but now are evil; for God himself is
unchangeable, and always the same; but it is his eternal will and pleasure, that
wicked men should be miserable, and good men happy; either here, in this world;
or at least in the world to come; which always is accomplished in some respect
or other, though we are sometimes unable to make the discovery of it, we cannot
look into the hearts of men, and there see their joys, or their sorrows,
growing up in their minds; and therefore how often do we make a false estimate
of the condition of the ungodly man, and fancy him to be at ease and quiet in
his thoughts, and to live with pleasure and satisfaction; who, upon reflection
upon his past actions, and upon expectation of death and judgment, is often a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, full of trouble and anxiety; and
thinks himself unhappy, and miserable, even beyond all expression.

Thus, when God is said to descend, which implies a local motion, a motion from
one place into another; yet the phrase by interpretation signifies, that God
did there reveal and manifest himself, Genesis 11. 5.

Genesis 18. 21. I will go down and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come to me, and if not, I will know; here
God himself discourses, as a man to his neighbor; as if he was not a Being of
infinite knowledge; but did receive his notice and information of worldly
affairs, by a gradual course of thinking and observation; and by farther
enquiries into second causes. Thus God suffers himself to be discribed like a
Judge, who repairs to the place where the matter in question was transacted,
that by his personal appearance, he may more fully and easily assure himself of
the innocence, or the guilt, of the accused person; and one reason why God
makes use of such a form of speaking, is, to certify us, that there is not
always one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; but that he rewards or
punishes man, according to the rules and equity of Justice; and not with
unadviseable rashness and indeliberation.

And the Lord called unto Adam, and said, Where art thou? Not that this kind of
question in the least signifies, that God possibly could be ignorant where Adam
was; but this way of speaking is rather a formal citation, or a summons to Adam
who seems unwilling to come and appear before his offended God; being extremely
conscious of his sin and guiltiness, and of his fall from the happy state of
innocence; and now beholding a mighty train of miseries, which were to follow
him as a just retribution for his disobedience. One of the Fathers is of
opinion, this expression, Where art thou? is rather a severe kind of
reprehension to Adam; as if God said, to terrify him more exceedingly, From
what grace and innocence art thou fallen? Come then, and appear before me;
Where art thou? and behold Adam was afraid.

And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters
in the seas, and let the fowl multiply in the earth; which kind of phrases
denote nothing else, but his divine appointment, of the increase of his
Creatures in their kind for certainly you can never be so unkind to your own
sense and reason, as to fancy God speaks to his irrational Creatures, as if
they were capable to hear, and obey his pleasure; but God rather dictates to
their proper natures; and by natural instinct and inclinations he has given
them power, and virtue, and efficacy, to propagate and preserve their kind.

Isai. 5. 6. I will command the clouds, that they rain no more upon it: and
now, who supposes that God himself presently sent strict orders to the Clouds,
to keep back their fall of waters; for the expressian imports no more but this,
that God, by the course of natural causes, so disposes things in heaven, and
earth, that at such a time the Clouds of heaven should be void of water; so
that he orders second causes, and the operations of them, not according to the
present exigency, but by his infinite prospect into futurity, he does
antecedently so manage every thing, that nothing falls out unexpectedly, but
according to his will and pleasure.

Psalm 18. 10. He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly; yea, God did fly upon the
wings of the wind; which expression conveys to our mind a more sensible notion
of speed; God did not ride, but fly, even upon the very wings of the wind,
which is the highest degree of speedy motion that possibly can be described, to
frame in us an Idea of his incredible swiftness.

And now, because God is so indulgent to submit himself to our Capacities, must
we presently pretend to describe him according to the narrow proportions of
man. How does God baffle us, how does he put us to silence, when he is pleased
to ask us questions beyond the compass of our knowledge? Has the rain a
Father, or who has begotten the drops of dew? Job 38. 28. that is, Am not I,
the Lord, and the Author of these, and is there any one besides?

Job 38. 19. Where is the way, where the light dwells? and as for darkness,
where is the place thereof? that is, No man knows the particular points of the
Sun's rising or setting; and now, that God may make us still more sensible of
our ignorance, Have thou, says God, entered into the springs of the seas? or
have thou walked in the search of the depth? that is, Thou art perfectly a
stranger to the whole course of nature. Verse. 22, 23. Have thou entered into the
treasures of snow? or have thou seen the treasures of hail, which I reserved
against the time of trouble, against the day of war and battle? All which
assure us, that we are unacquainted with the secret cause and origin, use, and
production of these things; and how, and when, God lays in his mighty treasures
of storm and tempest, to confound his Enemies. The falling of snow and rain may
seem very accidental, and according to the usual course of nature; but I am
satisfied, that the wind and the waters are laid up, as in a treasury; and when
God pleases, he sends them abroad, as well for the preservation of some, as
for the destruction of other people. Thus do I conclude this Figure with these
difficult and amazing questions, to let you know, that although God condescends
to speak to us in a familiar way; yet sometimes too he thinks it convenient to
let us know our distance, and our ignorance too, when he proposes such
questions to us; as declare his infinite power and greatness Such questions as
are above our comprehension, and so they should make us more sensible of our
weakness and infirmity.

CHARIENTISMUS.
Charientismus, a Figure when we return a very mild, and gentle answer,
although we are not insensible of the provocation.

John 18. 23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the
evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? How does our Blessed Savior not render
evil, for evil? How does he patiently suffer the affront, and meekly
expostulate for the Injury he received? and, How does the soft Answer turn
their wrath away? Prove. 15. 1.

When St. Paul was interrupted by Festus, with a reproachful language, telling
him that he was mad, Acts 26. 24. How does our Apostle return a soft and
submissive Answer to him, not without the greatest deference? But he said, I am
not mad, most noble Festus, v. 25.

Matthew. 15. 26, 27. When the woman of Canaan importuned our Savior to work a
wonderful Cure upon her daughter, who was tormented with an evil spirit, our
Savior tells her that, It was not convenient to take the childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs; that is, It was not proper to work those Miracles among the
heathen, which were chiefly designed for God's own peculiar People, the Jews;
observe, how they are here called the children, and the heathen are termed the
dogs. And what expression can be more harsh, more severe, or more likely to
provoke the meekest Soul to some undecent and passionate expression. But how
extremely civil, how courteous, how very obliging is her Answer? and she said,
Truth Lord; and so still gives him the greatest Title of respect and honor;
It Is true, my Lord, I cannot deny what you please to say; Yet the dogs eat of
the crumbs which fall from their masters table: as if she had said, The dogs do
receive the remainders and scatterings which fall from the table; so even I my
self, who am a Gentile, or call me, if you please, by the vilest name; so long
as you will but suffer me to enjoy the same favor with the Jews; I can easily
dispense with any such infamous or reproachful language. Such humiliation,
such an humble disposition of Soul, and such importunity, can never be
unacceptable to Almighty God; and Heaven it self cannot but favor such
desires. And you find, our Savior himself was in no small admiration, and
mightily surprised with this meek and humble insinuation, especially after so
great a provocation; for the very sound of the word, so applied, is very
ignominious; and so Christ presently tells her, O woman, great is thy faith! be
it unto thee even as thou will: Thus an importunate Prayer, accompanied with
such a deep sense of our own unworthiness, is still the nearest way to receive
and enjoy all the blessed consequences of our Petitions; and Heaven it self is
overcome with such a pleasing violence. Thus, you see, the woman was not
insensible of the provocation; and yet, how very courtly, how genteel is her
Answer? True, my Lord; yet the very dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
their masters table; and let me beg you to be so kind, as to suffer me now,
with them, to enjoy such a kind of favor, such a superfluity, and so Christ
himself breaks out in amazement of such a most kind, beseeching, unexpected
reply; O woman, great is thy faith: thy belief is mighty strange and wonderful
to me, and so very forcible, so prevailing with me, that I cannot possibly deny
what you desire.

APODIOXIS.
Apodioxis. This Figure, not without scorn and indignation, rejects any sort of
argument, as very absurd in it self, and not reducible to practice.

Matthew. 16. 23. How does Christ reprove St. Peter when he importunately desired
our Savior not to suffer persecution; Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an
offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things of God: This is a reflection
upon our Apostle of the highest nature, and certainly nothing less, than the
greatest provocation could extort such expressions from Christ himself. And
now, Who would think that St. Peter, who was so extremely displeasing to our
Blessed Savior, and so highly condemned by him, as to call him Satan, a word
of the greatest infamy and reproach; should, of all the Apostles, be the only
head of the Christian Church; as if the rest, were not as equally concerned in
the foundation of Christianity as St. Peter himself; whereas all the Preference
that was given to this Apostle, was rather with respect to his age, than to any
authority and power he received as an Apostle. Indeed, was there any
preeminence among the Apostles, I should think St. John deserves to be called
the very chief of them all; because he is remarkably distinguished by Christ
himself, and styled in the Gospel, the disciple whom Jesus loved, with more
expression of kindness, and affection, than all the rest: and, Who can be so
well qualified, to be supreme in the Church, as that Person, who was dearest to
his Savior? And therefore certainly most deserving in himself: Whereas St.
Peter was guilty of the greatest Apostasy, in his obstinate denial of Christ,
even to abjuration of him, Matthew. 26. 74. even when he had given his Savior
the highest kind of assurance, that though all the Apostles did forsake him,
yet, for his part, he was resolved, not to do the like; and yet was he the
first deserter of him.

Acts 8. 20. But Peter said, Thy money perish with thee, because thou
thoughtest that the gift of God may be purchased with money. This was an
imprecation of the highest nature.

Psalm 50. 21. Thou thoughtest that I was such a one as thy self; but I will
reprove thee, for thy sins, and set them before thee.

Matthew. 7. 16. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? How then
can you, being evil, speak good things? Matthew. 12. 34. and the very absurdity
of the question was too manifest to require an answer.

LITOTES.
Litotes. This Trope we make use of, when we say not so much as we think; yet
such a way of speaking is often much more forcible, and makes stronger
impressions upon us. It Is, in short, a sort of Figure extremely decent, and
never used without modesty and discretion.

What, shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. Romans 11. 21. Which was a
softer way of reprehension, to tell his Romans, when they were guilty of very
great irreverence in the Blessed Sacrament, that he could not much commend
them, upon that account; and though the expression seems very mild, and
favorable, and genteel, What shall I say unto you? I praise you not. Yet it
really signifies thus much, I do highly blame, and discommend such kind of
practices.

I hear there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it? As if the
Apostle was not willing to tell them he was certainly assured of it; but rather
chooses to say, that his information was from some rumor and report abroad, and
then declares he had some reason to believe there was separations among them,
and this he mentions in such a way, to correct and reform them more effectually
and make them still more sensible of the sin and danger of division; and so is,
as it were, unwilling to think them so ill Christians, as to be guilty of so
great and so dangerous a sin.

Psalm 51. 17. A broken and a contrite heart, O Lord, shall thou not despise:
which is spoken with a mighty sense of his own unworthiness, and the expression
implys a great deal more, than barely that God will not reject or disregard him
that is so penitentially sorrowful for his sins; for it signifies, that God
will graciously pardon and receive such a person into his favor and friendship.

Psalm 9. 12. He will not forget the cry of the poor and humble; that is, God
will be certainly mindful and remember their afflictions and miseries, and at
last severely punish their cruel Oppressors.

Job 31. 16. If I have withheld the poor from their desire. Verse. 17. Or have
eaten my morsel my self alone. Verse. 19. If I have suffered any to perish for
want of clothing, or let the poor go naked, without a covering* Thus, with
what modesty and reservation does holy Job speak of his own justice, his
hospitality, his charity to the poor, not without some extenuation of it.

SARCASMUS.
Sarcasmus. A most severe way of mockery and derision, not unlike an Irony.
Unless that it is commonly malicious, or more scoffing in its kind.

Psalm 103. 3. They that carried us away captive required of us a song; and
they that wasted us, required of us mirth; saying, Sing us one of the songs of
Sion. This must be spoken not without contempt and scorn, and derision to them;
to desire at a time so very unseasonable, when they were slaves and captives,
mourning under great oppressions, to commemorate their former days of joy and
liberty; such a request must needs be highly provoking, and give them still but
a fresher sense of the present miseries; especially considering the persons who
importune them to be joyful and pleasant; for they were the lords and masters
over them; and therefore they tell them their petition was then extremely
improper, and most disagreeable; How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange
land?

Exodus 14. 11. And they said unto Moses, Because there were no Graves in Egypt,
have thou taken us away, to die in the wilderness? A sarcastical way of
speaking, as if they said, We could die, and be in our graves with less trouble
in our own land; why then are you so barbarous to us, as to tire us out with
long and tedious journeys, only to kill and destroy us in the wilderness;
wherefore are you so unmercifull, why do you deal so unkindly with us?

Genesis 3. 22. And the Lord said, Behold the man is become like one of us. Was
not this a severe reflection upon the fall of Adam? and a mighty reproach to
his weakness and infirmity, when he listened to the false suggestions of the
Devil, telling them, Ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. Genesis 3. 5. See
Matt. 3. 7. James 2. 19.

Nahum 3. 14. Draw thy waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds, go into
the clay, and tread thy mortar, make strong thy brickhill: that is, Go, and
make all these warlike preparations for a siege; go, and repair, and fortify
thy breaches; all this is nothing else but a jeer, mockery and derision; for
the Prophet tells them in the very next Verse, They shall be destroyed, there
shall the fire devour thee, and the sword shall cut thee off. See also the like
Sarcasm, Nahum 2. 1.

Matthew. 27. 29. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon
his head, and a reed in his hand; and they bowed the knee before him, and
mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews. Such a kind of scepter and crown
they bestow upon him, to betray him to more disgrace and infamy; and when he
appeared most ingloriously and unlike a Prince, then do they most contemptibly
pretend to pay him the highest honor and reverence.

PATHOPOEIA.
Pathopoea* This Figure excites a most excessive Passion in the soul of Man,
such as sorrow, joy, desire, and the like.

Hosea 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. What a mighty
pathos have these words? how are these expressions extremely passionate? what
tenderness? what compassions? what riches of mercy and kindness does God
himself show to his people, even when their fins are become unpardonable? yet
then his love, his compassion is so excessively great, that he cannot suffer
himself to destroy them, as those wicked places, Genesis 19. 23. Deuteronomy. 29. 23. But
the Lord represents himself in a very great disorder and confusion, and as it
were divided and swayed by different Inclinations; sometimes as a just and a
most righteous Judge; and then, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
And now again, he considers also, that he himself is a God full of mercy and
compassion; and then says, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I
will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am a God, and not a man. Methinks
such tender and affectionate expressions as these give no great countenance to
the doctrine of reprobation; for if God from all eternity decreed man to be
miserable; why should God himself express such an infinite concernment upon the
prospect of his ruin and destruction? why should the Father of Mercy weep and
lament over him, when he was lost beyond all recovery so long ago, and by his
very decrees, if they are in the right*

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
were sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thee, as the hen gathers
her chickens under her wing, and ye would not. Read here the tender sense of
God, upon the misery of his People: how willing, how desirous he is, to be
their Savior, expressing the very same care, the same affections for their
preservation, as the most fond Parent has for her own beloved Children.

1 Cor. 4. 14. I write not these things to shame you; but as my beloved sons, I
warn you. And can there be any thing said more passionately? What can be
expressed with more kindness and more affection? or more sensibly discover his
infinite concernment for their Salvation. See also 2 Cor. 2. 4.

For out of much affection and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you with many
tears, not that you should be grieved, but that ye may know the love which I
have more abundantly unto you: This is a pastoral Care, worthy our Apostle;
this ardency of love and affection, is most incomparable: how does St. Paul,
with an infinite tenderness insinuate to his dear Corinthians, the reasons why
he was so extremely troubled for their sakes, was not in the least to make them
sorrowful, and to draw tears from their eyes; but only to discover his most
tender love and compassion for them, not willing in the least that any should
perish, but that all should repent and be saved.

Prove. 31. 1. What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, O son of my
desires? Asif his mother Bathsheba was at a mighty loss, what sort of
instructions to give to her son Solomon, or what precepts are most proper and
convenient for him; and the question implies the care, the solicitousness, and
the fondness of a tender* mother.

John 21. 15. Our blessed Savior, with a mighty passion, seems to ask St.
Peter no less than three times, Simon Peter, love thou me? Insomuch that the
Apostle himself was very much troubled, that his Savior should so very often
question his affection to him; and Peter was grieved, because he said also the
third time, Love thou me?

Isai. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child? Yea, they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee. Thus God himself puts a question concerning the most
unnatural thing; for a mother to be unmindfull of the Child of her womb; and
yet tells, us, though this be extremely difficult, and the greatest violence to
humane nature; yet such inhumanity is possible: yet nevertheless, God assures
his People, that it is not possible for himself to be so unkind, or so
unmindfull of them.

Something extremely kind I feign would say,
But find my words can never force their way.
Jer. 31. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I
speak against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him. And now, can you persuade your self, that such most tender
thoughts as these, can proceed from God, if he was a cruel Being? does such
affectionate language declare, that God takes any delight in the misery of his
creatures, or that he can in the least, be accessory to their impenitency, or
to their eternal ruin and misery, when he discovers himself so affectionately
kind and tender, that he languisheth, when we are in the least unhappy, or when
any misfortune comes upon us?

If my Ephraim but complains,
I have sense of all his pains.
Rivers of water run down my eyes, because men keep not thy Law: This is an
excessive passion of grief; Can any sorrow be like to this kind of sorrow? Can
there be a greater demonstration of his love to God, than to be so infinitely
afflicted, to see some so very disrespectfull, so disobedient to God's
Commands? Greater love has no man than this. Let others then take delight to
blaspheme his Name; let others crucify their Savior again, and once more put
him to open shame, while the godly Man is more happily employed, and pours out
his soul in weeping and lementations, and with the Prophet, cries out in the
most passionate manner, Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night for the manifold sins and
provocations of thy people Israel! Jerem. 9. 1.

Gal. 4. 19. My little children, of whom Itravail in birth again, until Christ
be formed in you: first, he salutes them with the kindest and most affectionate
Appellation, My little children: Then, as if he suffered the greatest pains and
anguish for them, not unequal to those of a woman in labor, Of whom I travail,
until the Image of Christ, and his Righteousness, be formed in your souls. And
the metaphor is very proper; for the moral birth, to be regenerate, and to be
born again; is no less difficult, no less painful and laborious, than the
natural birth, or our fir^^ formation in the very womb.

FINIS.

