The NORWICH and NORFOLK Weavers ANSWER to the PETITION and CASE of the
Wool-Combers; Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Parliament.
SOME Wool-Combers in Suffolk and parts adjacent, being notoriously known to
make false and defective Yarn, and having sometimes deservedly suffered for
such their Offenses, who being uneasy under the same, as it is common for all
Offenders so to be, are therefore very industrious to obtain such an Alteration
in the Law, as that they may for the future make and vend their defective Yarn
unmolested; and in order to that end have presented a Petition to the
Honorable House of Commons, and printed a Case, complaining of great Hardships
and unjust Prosecutions against them by the Wardens and Assistants of the
Company of Weavers.

And notwithstanding their Complaints are for the most part false, malicious,
and unreasonable, and delivered in abusive and skurrulous Language, with odious
Comparisons, yet we think it not proper to Reply in such a Dialect, but shall
only give a modest and true Answer to the most material Parts of their Petition
and Case, which is humbly submitted to consideration.

The Petition and Case sets forth, That whereas the Weavers of the City of
Norwich and County of Norfolk obtained an Act of Parliament the Fourteenth Year
of King Charles the Second, whereby they are empowered to search and seize all
Worsted Yarn Reeled short or false, in all Fairs, Markets, and other Public
places of Sale in the City and County of Norwich and Norfolk: And to lay a Fine
upon such Yarn so defective as a Jury shall find, not exceeding a Moiety
thereof, etc. But that contrary to the very Letter of the Law (though under
pretext thereof) they have made great spoil of the Wool-Combers, by seizing and
rifling the Wagons of common Carriers, and breaking open private Chambers and
Warehouses, with diverse other exorbitant proceedings; That the Exactions of
the Wardens (who are both Searcher, Seizer, Judge and Jury) are swallowed up in
unnecessary Charges, or consumed riotously in Treats: To prevent which, they
humbly pray and propose,

That the Wool-Combers may be empowered to punish the Spinster by some Corporal
Infliction or Penalty for making false Yarns.

That if any Yarn be found defective, then instead of laying a Fine thereupon,
the same may be cut in pieces, etc.

To all which it is answered;

That the Company of Wardens and Assistants have all along taken great care to
act according to the Powers granted them by the said Act of Parliament, and
have rather been too remiss than severe in Prosecuting Offenders.

That there are yearly chosen 42 Wardens and Assistants, and if at any time any
particular Officer has, through Mistake, Ignorance, or too much Zeal to remedy
the Abuses and Evils by the said Act intended to be redressed, seized any
defective Yarns in any place, where according to the Letter of the Law the same
was not seizable, such Actions have not been allowed of by the Company, and
therefore (it is hoped) ought not to be charged upon them as a Crime.

That the Moneys arising by the Fines of defective Yarns, (which Yarns have not
been condemned by the Wardens, as is falsely suggested) have not been consumed
in unnecessary Charges, or riotously in Treats, but have been applied as the
Law directs.

That many of the Wool-combers have used indirect means to avoid the Wardens
search, by coming to Norwich sometimes upon the Sabbath day, sometimes in the
Night, and by conveying their Yarn into private places, and there selling it to
the great prejudice of all honest Traders: And therefore the Weavers, and all
regular Wool-combers, have much greater reason to complain against such
Practices, and pray that the Power of Search may be enlarged.

As to the inflicting a Corporal Punishment or Penalty upon the Spinster,

It Is answered, That the Weavers are well content that a Punishment or Penalty
may be inflicted upon the Spinster who shall make false Yarn; and are also
desirous, and think it as reasonable and necessary, that a Punishment or
Penalty may be inflicted upon the Woolcomber who shall tolerate, or knowingly
allow or suffer them so to do, which has been a practice too much used by many
of them of late years.

As to the cutting of Yarns in pieces,

It Is answered, That the Method was formerly used, but found so inconvenient;
that when the last Act was made, it was thought fit by the Wisdom of that
Parliament, that it should be turned into a Fine.

That for above Thirty years Experience the Method now used in fining defective
Yarns has been found to be of great service and benefit to the Weaving Trade,
which has of late years been very much increased, to the great benefit and
advantage of this Nation, and more especially to the clamorous Wool-combers.

That if any Wool-combers are desirous to have defective Yarn cut in pieces,
they may now do it, and it will most properly be done by them at their
Spinning-Houses before the Spinsters Faces, which may be a great means to deter
them from making false Yarn for the future.

That the true Reason why the Petitioners are so industrious to obtain such a
destructive Act (as we have great cause to believe) is the assurance they have,
That if the Law be once made so severe, and there be nothing allowed toward
the defraying the necessary Charges of Prosecution, or so often as there be a
great demand for Yarn, that thereupon the Prosecution will in a great measure,
if not wholly cease, and then they should be at liberty to make and vend their
defective Yarns unmolested, to the great prejudice, if not ruin of so ancient
and beneficial a Trade as the Worstead-weaving Trade has been, and is to this
Nation. And should that Trade fail the Wool-growers would soon find the ill
effects thereof.

Whereas it is objected, That it would be to the ruin of the Wool-combers,
their Wives and Children, to stand a Suit at Law against the Wardens when they
seize their Yarns contrary to Law,

It Is answered, That the Wool-combers assert that they are above 500
substantial Traders who employ 150000 Families, and it seems very strange that
the Prosecution of a Warden or Assistant, if he acts contrary to Law, should be
to their ruin.

And whereas they say (by way of aggravation) That where many of them pay One
shilling Tax toward the Support of the Government, they pay Five to the Wardens.

It Is answered, That there has not for Eight years last past been above 120 l.
one Year with the other received for all the Fines of defective Yarns, which is
a very inconsiderable Sum, considering the vast quantity of Yarns that must be
made by 500 substantial Traders who employ 150000 Families.

That according to a modest computation the Yarns used by the Weavers fall
short of what they would be worth, if made as the Law directs, at least 25000
l. per Annum, which is chiefly occasioned by the want of a greater Power to
Search, and therefore it is hoped it will not be unreasonable that the Power of
Search should be enlarged.

And whereas they say, That some Weavers would serve the Office of a Warden
gratis without costly Treats, voluptuous Banquets, or other private Advantages,

It Is answered, That all the Wardens and Assistants do serve without any reward
for their great pains and troubles, other then the necessary and reasonable
Charges and Expense upon that account, of which they give an exact account,
which is allowed by the Justices of the Peace, (...)s the Act directs in that
case.


