THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM THOMAS Earl of Arundell, Lord Marshall,
from Middleborough in Zealand, to Mr. Pym. And read before the Committee the
18. of September, 1641. Whereunto is added the Copy of another Letter sent to
Mr. Pym also from the Committee in SCOTLAND, Sep. 13. 1641. With the names of
the Committees that sat there for that day.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

The true Coppie of a Letter sent from the Lord Marshall from Middleborough in
Zealand to Mr. Pym, which was read before the Committee on the 18. of
September, 1641.
Good Mr. Pym,
I Thought it fit and agreeing with the trust put into my Hands by the House of
Commons, and according to the order which you left with me to give this
account.

That upon her Majesty's Arrival at Flushing, and a Receipt under her hand and
Seal, J delivered unto her the four Bills of Exchange for seven thousand
pounds, as I was directed by the House.

That after her Majesty had made a long stay at Dover, and resolved to pass by
Dunkirke; On Friday morning last, Sir John Pennington coming a shore and
bringing with him Captain Vernon, which was sent on purpose from Flushing, and
but then arrived, bringing with him a Letter from the Brothoroad, who attended
her Majesty's coming to Flushing by command of the Prince of Orange, and the
States, with great devotion, her Majesty changed her resolution from Dunkirke
to Flushing, and instantly rose took boat and imbarqued her self in the
ship; The wind held fair and we hoyst up Sail, and with a prosperous and
happy success, next day at 10. of the clock in the morning, we landed at
Flushing, being arrived, the Count Brotheroad attended her Majesty and will
do to the Confines of the States Provinces; her charges, and the charges of
all her reteinues are wholly defrayed by him, and great acknowledgement made to
her both of old and new obligations, her Majesty acknowledging this way, far
to exceed that of Brabant and Flanders, both in safety and speed, wherein I
proved a true Prophet unto her Majesty.

The Prince of Orange past the day before with his Army of 20000 men, from
Ramkyns to Philippin Sconce, in a thousand Shallops and Barques, where he will
fall, is yet very uncertain, but this is certain, that Flanders at this time
must needs be in many great and hard straights, it having in it three Armies on
foot, and the Cardinal being sick.

Middleborough Sept. 11. 1641. Sir, I am your affectionate friend, Arundell and
Surrey; Marshall.


This day also Mr. Pym read a Letter from the Committee in Scotland, dated the
13. of September, 1641. directed to himself, because the House was adjourned.
SIR,
COnceiving it likely that the House would be adjourned before this can come to
your hands, we make our Addresses to you, desiring you to publish it to the
House if it be fitting, that we doubt not but since our dispatches from York,
the House has considered of providing money, to pay of the rest of the Army,
Garrisons, and Artillery, for we find the effect thereof in part here, by the
intelligence that comes from York hither, but have no enformation of our
selves, whether there be money enough provided, to effect the whole work,
that we (...) not able to give the Scots any satisfaction, who desire to know
the truth and certainty the (...) c^rtaine day, for the (...) Army within this
(...) is no day prefixed, wherein our Garrisons, Army, and Artillery, shall be
disbanded, they are forced to be at an extraordinary charge, in the keeping up
that part of theirs, which is still on foot, we therefore propound, as in our
former Letters, to the Wisdom of this House, that some speedy order be taken,
for the discharging of all, both of the Army, Garrisons, and Artillery, and
that some course be provided, for the Removeall of the Ammunition, which shall
be left unspent, whereof we desire likewise, if it may stand with the full
pleasure of the House, that we may have a full and particular advertisement of
the Peremptory day which the House shall set for the disbanding of the Army,
Garrisons, and Artillery, as also for the Removeall of the ammunition, that we
may be enabled to give the Scots satisfaction therein, and that we may have
ground to press the Scots likewise for the disbanding of theirs, upon the same
day, which we doubt not, will be performed accordingly,

Edenborough Sept. 13. 1641. Sir, we are your affectionate friends and
servants. PHILLIP STAPLETON. JOHN HAMBDEN.



At the Committee appointed during this Recesse holden in the Exchequer Chamber
September 18. Mr. Pym chosen for the Chair, with the names of the Committees
there appearing for that day.

Sir Robert Pie. Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Spurslow. Alderman Soames. Mr. Bence. Lord
Faulkeland. Sir Richard Cave. Sir William Drake. Sir Samuel Luke. Sir Peter
Wroth. Sir John Culpepper. Sergeant Wyld. Sir John Francklyn. Mr. Stowen. Sir
Gilbert Gerrard. Mr. White. Mr. Pym. Mr. Solicitor.
FINIS.

