Parliamentum Pacificum:

OR, THE Happy Union OF KING and People IN AN Healing Parliament: Heartily
Wished for, and Humbly Recommended, By a True Protestant, and no Dissenter.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by M. Turner At the Lamb in Holborn, 1688.

White Hall, February 15. 1687/8.
Let this be Printed,

SUNDERLAND P.

Parliamentum Pacificum, etc.
THE design of this ensuing Discourse, you will soon see, is not only directed
to the Plainer Sort; for then it would supersede all sort of Explanation; but
may serve to satisfy some Persons of a finer Mould, and who to be sure in the
business of the State will make a better Figure: I am sure the Good that it
designs is so Universal, that it only Labors to make but One Interest of KING
and People; to prove that disagreeing Parliaments can never Procure the
Kingdoms Peace; that the reasonable Desires of the Prince (though unreasonably
represented) are really consistent with the Service of the Country, and that
it is possible for a Courtier, or a Papist, to make a good Patriot; and, for
this purpose, as we direct our Discourse to those that are to Choose our
Senators, so we shall as humbly submit it to the Consideration of such as are
Chosen, that both tender Scruples, and learned Objections, may be so far
satisfied and reconciled, as to consent and conspire in Unanimous Endeavors,
for the settling of a Nation; an Healing Parliament, and Universal Peace.

Though I do not here prefix a fine Frontispiece, with as foolish an Explanation
of it, yet I think fit to let the Reader know that the Title Page will be best
explained by those that follow it, when I shall show Him:

1. That We once had a Parliament that was called the Healing One. 2. When I
shall show the Manner How it was made to be so. 3. The Maxims and Methods that
it Took. 4. The wholesome Effects that followed from it is sober Consultations.
5. The Ways that are taken now to hinder the having such another. 6. The Means
that may be used to prevent the Malice and Insinuations of such as would
Obstruct it.
SECT I. That We had a Parliament called the Healing One.
THe Parliament then, that was called this Healing One, and that by the best of
Authorities, the KING's; by the most merciful Monarch, His Late Majesty, that
Prince of pious Memory, giving in express terms of his own, this Character at
their dissolution, That to all Posterity, it should be Called the Blessed and
the Healing Parliament: This Parliament I say, that had so good a Name, and
that from so good a KING (though another is Famed for Working Wonders) brought
about I think the Best of Miracles: the Restoration of their KING, and in that
the Succession of the Present, and was the same that succeeded the Pack't
Assembly, which upon the admission of the Secluded Members dissolved it self,
on the seventeenth of March, 1659. and with their expiring breath, summoned
that which is the subject we insist on to succeed them, on the Twenty fifth of
April next ensuing: That which had so glorious a Character of so great a KING,
and whose wholesome Constitutions, for the Healing our Breaches, and Curing our
Divisions, I would willingly recommend, not only to the Nation for the next
Great Example, but in the Words of this Royal Character, for a Pattern to all
Posterity; and such an One will only be able to pursue the gracious Designs of
our Present Sovereign, as well as merit the glorious Elogy of the Past, settle
such a Lasting Liberty, and Peace, as may not only secure it to his desiring
Subjects, for his own Life (but in his own Words too) to Posterity, to make it
a Magna Charta, that those that come after may never be able to Alter it.

SECT. II. The Manner How it was made to be so.
I Wish I had no such pertinent Proof for Application, to tell the Church of
England that has hitherto been famed, not only for a Loyalty boasted of, but
approved, that this Healing Parliament of those times, was brought about not
only against their Expectation, but also against the very Provisions of two
direct Tests to prevent it, which seems to intimate that divine Providence in
its designs for Universal Peace, can never be baffled by Men's Politics, and
that the Measures of humane Wisdom, for their own preservation, may be much the
same with Ill Men, as well as with those that are really Good; and that the
same sort of Oaths and Abjurations which the Present Established Church has
framed for it is support (or as some say Insupportable Dominion) were also
contrived against the Meeting of this Parliament of Peace, by those very
Villains that had raised the War: Ab Host doceri, is a good Maxim in a Camp
Martial; but an ill Lesson to be Learnt by a Church, even though She were
Militant too.

I do not say but that good Men may take the same measures for maintaining
their legal Power, that have been used by the Bad for a bare support of
Usurpation, but then they ought to take great heed too (especially in Cases of
Conscience) lest any force of Compulsion betray the Weakness of their Cause.

It Is known then upon Record, and may be Read in the Journals of the Commons,
that the Seditious Assembly of Forty One, whom the Laws of the Land have
declared to be so, and that Treasonable too (and sure then the Church so
Signalized for Loyalty, will never look on their Proceedings as good
Presidents:) it is certain I say, that those framed all the Tests and Oaths
imaginable, for the Excluding all the rest of the Nation, from all Offices in
the State and Government in the Church; and well they might; for well they
knew, had their Cause been better, it would have born it self out against the
Worst of Men; but it being so bad, they might fear to trust the Best of
Subjects; for this, then, they framed their Negative Oaths, Engagements,
Covenant, Solemn Oath, Oath of Abjuration; and in their dying Votes, and
expiring breath, contrived these Tests against the Concord and Peace of the
Parliament that was expected. First, J. A. B. do acknowledge, and (...) are;
that the War undertaken by both houses of Parliament, against the forces raised
by the King, was just and lawful; 2d That Magistracy and Ministry are the
Ordinances of God. So here they had found out a Test too, and that for Church
and State, and ordered that those who would not acknowledge this, were never to
be admitted into any Office of Trust, Vid. the words of 25 Car. 2.
Civil or Military; and made incapable to be Elected to serve as members in the
next Parliament that was suddenly to sit.

The Church-Royalists, and Clergy then, as the Narratives of those times tell
us, who had suffered so much in the service of their Sovereign (when it was
their turn to suffer by such a Test) looked upon it as too severe a Trial, nay,
Preached, and Prayed it down too as a piece of Tyranny, and Persecution, tho it
affected them only in their politic capacity, and no person was afflicted by
it, with any Pecuniary mulct, or Corporal punishment: This their own Authors
say they thought hard, to suffer only for their Fidelity to their Sovereign;
and will these most unreasonable men, most injuriously suppose it Justice and
Reason, that others are exposed to be incapacitated for Trust, excluded from
Office, debarred of birthright; to be banished, fined, imprisoned, and fairly
hanged, and that only for their Faith to their God?

Gentlemen, These are great Truths, unless our Annals Ly. Nothing of florid
insinuations, but a sober and modest representation of matter of fact, which we
shall further apply to the Circumstances of our present time.

And pray, what benefit and ty, after all, had those Spiritual Bonds, and
Coercives of the Conscience and Soul, save only to ensnare people into Perjury,
or punish them for not being Perjured? (i. e.) ruining their estates in this
world, because they would not compound for their inheritance in the next. What
effect had that formidable Declaration, and Test of the Two Houses, against the
Members of the ensuing Parliament that was to Sit? why, our History tells us,
these their hard Exclusions were as little heeded by their Electors; the
recovered Nation began to revive its drooping spirits; it saw dismal
oppression, and fearful Tyranny, like a cloudy shade flying from the Land, when
the refreshing Sun breaks forth with his ray, and equally dispenses his
benefits to all below, Liberty was then too the longed for blessing, and the
Universal cry, peace of conscience, freedom of fouls, and a free Parliament
were heard in the Land, where naught had been but complaining in the streets;
the freemen and freeholders began to think themselves truly free, and that even
in their Choice of Representatives, their Nations birthright, and native
Inheritance, and that notwithstanding those Negative Oaths, and Tests of
Exclusion, and their being banished both Houses with an I. A. B. Neither will
the Common Notion of Oaths imposed by an unlawful Authority, being utterly
void, satisfy all People; we have seen it would not in the Case of the
Covenant; and in some several persons, that have been good casuists too, it
being an invocation of the same just God, though administered with injustice by
men, and which perhaps in matters of Faith, the most Legal Government, (as many
think) cannot well impose.

It was at That time, the people began to think of choosing such
Representatives, as should rescue them from unreasonable Laws, and a bondage
more than that of the body: no persons then pretended Loyalty to a Party, all
were Dissenters but those in Arms; all the Nation big with Expectation of this
blessed and reconciling Parliament: nay, most of the very Army it self, signing
an engagement, to submit to all it is consultations; none were disturbed with
apprehensions of its approach, none cast down; but some in high places, and
such as were likely to fall from a power of doing mischief; That let Lambert
out of the Tower, and led him into the field; fear of Union, and a fear of
Peace: That Published Papers too, to create Jealousies of that ensuing
Parliament; and the boldest of them too, was a Letter, not to a Dissenter, but
as sent from Brussels: the Church of England-Loyalists then, were full of
Addresses, Declarations, subscribed by Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, full of
condescension to all tender Consciences; with these very soft terms and
expressions of Vid. Declarations.
Public Liberty, Public Peace, National Interest; laying aside all mention
of Parties, and Factions; and burying all Rancours, and Animosities: and had
before agreed in a reconciling Association, of Episcopal, Presbyterian, and
Independent, and all, but Papist Church Government: and certainly it will not
recommend much the demeanor of this Established Church, when it shall be said
with Truth, that she was then only meek, when humbled; and then alone merciful,
when she could not hurt.

I wish I could not put an end to this Section with another observation, that
seems to have some affinity to the juncture of affairs afoot: As it was the
Plot of that Parliament that had created all our troubles, at their expiration,
to put a test to the Loyalty of the next that was to succeed; or rather a trial
of their affection to their Treason and Usurpation: So also there was a
contrivance upon the Assembling of that Healing Parliament, to have Ejected
most of the Members after they were met, by Virtue of those very Votes, and
Tests of their opinion of the War, and of the Ministry and Magistracy being
only from God. I mention this as apposite too, because it is more than probable,
that the Contrivances of the late Tests, being to debar people of their
Birthright, their Peerage, and sitting in Parliament, they may move again Now
to have all Members excluded for their Opinions, and that they cannot take the
Oaths; as if the belief of Transubstantiation, would turn the Elements of the
man too, and unqualify a person, for the affairs of his Country; as if a
Coventicle was impossible to afford a Burgher, that understood the Constitution
of his own Corporation: But certainly there may be some means found out for
obviating such an inconvenience; and sure the KING, who by the resolution of
the Laws, and the greatest Judges of it, can dispense with those Oaths to be
taken in any Court of Judicature; can by an argument a Majori extend his
dispensation to such as cannot take it in an House of Commons, which is none;
unless it should so fall out too, as an officer upon the passing those former
Tests told General Monk, while he was talking of a new Parliament, and those
qualifications: they themselves, being to be Judges of themselves, it may so
happen, that the Major part may be of such, as are not themselves Qualified.
And I may add to the present case, of such as may not be willing, or care, that
others should so Qualify themselves for the service of their King and Country;
as in their opinions must make them renounce their Heaven, and deny their GOD.

But we must not leave this Subject yet, without answering two Objections,
wherewith the partial, and concerned, will be sure to attack us in the rear;
and therefore it is fit to face about to confute them.

First Then, that the power which oppressed the Church of England, was an
absolute usurpation, and terminated in a Tyranny not to be endured; the product
of a devilish Rebellion, and the remains of a raging War.

Secondly, That those which suffered under her Reign, have had this assurance,
and benefit too, that it shall always be by the known Laws of the Land, and
Statutes of the Realm: whereas all those Oaths and Engagements, Votes and
Ordinances, we so insignificantly mention, were just no Laws at all; so that
they suffered by nothing, as well as for it.

To this it may be as readily replied, that all sufferings (if against all
sense and reason, to the ruining men for crimes they cannot but commit) are
certainly the same to the sufferers in the Penalties and Pains, they are to
undergo, whatever be the Lawfulness of the Authority that inflicts them: It Is
as small advantage to a man that has all his goods confiscated for the Twenty
pounds a Month, to think he was ruined by an Act of Queen Elizabeth, as if he
had been plundered by an Army of Olivers; and as little comfort for the poor
Priest that must be Hanged for his Habit, to say, he dies Legally, as if he had
been Knocked on the Head for taking the Wall. Justice and Equity will be still
the same, whatever are the various Revolutions of a Politic State; and founded
upon Eternal Reason, as some Maxims in the Schools, upon the same Truth.

Thirdly, They must be soon satisfied too, and with as much Reverence to those
Mighty Powers; that no Power on Earth, no Humane Constitution, can make
Statutes against the Decrees of Heaven, or resist an Omnipotency that is
Divine; their Dictates, they say, are Spirit that influences the Will: And will
any man say Flesh and Blood shall oppose it? Souls may be said to have a
Property too that cannot be violated by the Sanctions of an Humane Assembly;
nor Persons made to suffer for obeying the Divine dictates of their Devoutest
thought; or following the Natural Principles of their Religious Education: The
one of which even a Moral Turk will tell you, must not, cannot be opposed; and
any honest Heathen in Philosophy, teach us the difficulty to Proselyte Naturam
expellas furca licet usque recurret Horat.
Nature, or pervert it; and that certainly in lesser concerns than the
Salvation of a Soul.

Dissenters represent their sufferings in all their addresses and Complaints as
Tyrannical too, they are sure the best Judges of their miseries that groan
under them, and there may be Tyranny too in the Laws, tho the Legislators had a
Lawful Power to make them; but these very Laws too have been strained by Ryots
made and Routs of Meetings.
Construction, and so they Sympathiz'd with those under Usurpation, and
suffered by none at all.

Lastly, To close this Section, with the similitude of the Circumstances of
affairs, to Crown all, the KING himself then, like his other self now; his
only, and Lawful Successor; intimated his designs against the opening of the
first Session of that Free Parliament: That he intended a freedom from all
Penalties, and suffering for Religion, promised it to General Monk, and in his
Declarations represented his readiness to Consent to any Act of Parliament, for
the full granting that Indulgence. Upon these Motives was that Miraculous
Restoration facilitated, upon these foundations was fixed that firm (and what
perhaps might have been a more lasting Peace too) had not the powerful
importunities of a prevailing Church, interrupted the felicity to the
disturbance of the State. Gentlemen, the Case of the Church of England was once
in Common with some Dissenters, and no less hard than theirs is now; they
suffered (you see) together once from a prevailing Party; and Liberty of
Conscience, was certainly then as dear to them, as this Religion Established by
Law; and that from their own mouths (if his Majesty may take their words for
it) was always dearer to them than their lives: It was as great a Crime to them
then to have a Common Prayer, as to a Dissenter now to make use of the
Directory; Her book of Liturgy was looked on then as bad as that of the Mass,
and all her Canon and Rubric, no more to be received than a Calendar of Red
Letters, or the Rituals of Rome. Alas! What a mighty Metamorphosis the felicity
of some peoples affairs can produce, to the forgetting of their misfortunes;
all their fellow sufferers, and even the Sentiments of their own Souls. The
Dissenters desire to come just to the Circumstances they were in, at the late
KING's Restoration. And why for Godsake! must this Established Church turn truly
Militant, not only against all others, but it self? And like that of Ephesus,
Leave her first Love; and as some say, her first Faith too; to forget that
compassion she had for such Sufferers, and her own sense and opinion that such
sufferings were most severe. What judgment can seriously be made by Sober
Persons; to what will impartial people impute this her hot Zeal against
Dissenters, that in the dawning of her Restitution was hardly Lukewarm? Will
it not give occasion to say, that she must answer for her self, like the
Laodicean too? Because, says she, I am rich now, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing. And if it be so, that the Dissenters were promised then
an Exemption from Penalties for matters of mere Religion; and the KING,
Parliament, and Church, thought it meet, as matter of fact will make it appear,
then certainly all this cry will sound very harsh, and unreasonable against
this present Prince, that has greater reasons for it; when he only performs the
promises of his Pious Predecessor, gratifies the desires of his Restoring
Parliament; and answers the very first Petitions of his People.

SECT. III. The Maxims, and Methods that it took.
ANd now by the Division of this Discourse, we are come to the Third Point; The
Maxims and Methods that were taken by this Healing Parliament. It met upon the
Twenty Fifth of April (and who knows but about that time our next may meet) and
may that Epoche of their Commencement, prove as great an Omen of their good
Agreement: it found the Kingdom most unhappily confused with Diversities of
Opinions in the ways of worshipping their God; it found the severe Laws, of Q.
Eliz. KING James, and Car. 1. very ineffectual for the suppressing of what was
called Schism and Dissension: For this reason they took care in the first place
in their Act for Confirming of Ministers; That none should be Ejected for their
past Nonconformity from 42 to 60, unless such as had in the time of Usurpation
Ejected others. This was agreeable to what the KING had first proposed to them;
both before privately, and afterward at the public opening of the Parliament:
for this the Lord Chancellor, in their first Adjournment, was ordered to tell
them from the KING, in these Terms:

That no sort of Piety and Godliness, should be turned into Vid. Lord
Chancellors Speech on that Occasion.
terms of slander and reproach, or distinguish between the Court, the City, or
the Country. He was ordered further to tell them, That (by that favorable Act
for confirming of Ministers) his Majesty was sensible he had gratified many
worthy, and Pious Men, and such as should always receive fresh evidence of his
Majesty's favor and Kindness. In that Parliament he had this Direction to tell
them, Of the sad consideration, that the differences in Religion should be the
ground of Animosities, Malice and Revenge, Passions which the Divine Nature
exceedingly abhorred: That the Bloody Wars proceeded from those Contentions: And
that (however descanted on, by men that have a mind to be Seditious) is just
the same, what His present Majesty was pleased to signify to be His Sense too,
in his late Declaration for Indulgence. The Ld. Chancellor further declared,
That the marks of a true Church, were Charity to one another. He tells them,
That this Disquisition had Cost his Majesty many a Sigh, many a Sad Hour: That
he had taken pains to Compose them with Learned and Pious men, of different
Persuasions, which they should shortly see by a Declaration he would Publish on
that occasion, by which they should see his great Indulgence, to those who can
have a Protection from their Conscience, to differ from their brethren:
Exhorting them all, to be but pleased themselves, and persuade others to be so.
Thus ended that Session, and was Adjourned to the Sixth of November following.

Hitherto, you see there was no Penal Statutes made, no Force to be put upon
Peoples Conscience; and the Protestant Religion still to be safe, without
making of Dissenters suffer.

Pursuant to these Gracious Sentiments of the Prince, and prudent Resolutions
of the Parliament; The KING, before their Meeting again, Published a
Declaration, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, full of gracious Concessions,
to Reconcile all different Opinions in Religion: And such was the Peaceable
Result of that Royal Indulgence, (for it was really no other) that all Subjects
seemed to be satisfied; all Differences reconciled, and the Parliament it self
afterward giving the KING public Thanks, for his Pious Inclination to Peace
and Concord. To pursue it further, The Lord Chancellor had Liberty to offer
Bishoprics and Deanaries to those that Labored for this Reconciliation; some
accepted, others refused: a Commission was issued out for an Agreement upon
some Alterations in the Liturgy, as were requisite to satisfy some Tender
Consciences: And the Ministers met upon it afterward at Sion College, and
would have agreed on a Model of Episcopacy. Here was an Agreement between KING,
Parliament, and People; but it was too great an Happiness to last long: those
that had more cruel Inclinations, and aspired to be so far powerful, as to
punish for Nonconformity, foresaw that this Parliament would never put them in
a Capacity to do it; and so prevailed, that on the Twenty Ninth of December
following, was Dissolved this Reconciling Parliament, though with the
forementioned Elogys of that Famous PRINCE; who, as he was beyond all
Character, best understood how to give One, which he did here to this Effect,
That it should be Called to all Posterity, The Blessed, and the Healing
Parliament: So also, he broke out into this more Exalted Encomium, and
Emphatical Interrogatory; That it should be a Rule to his Actions and Councils,
to Consider; what is such a Parliament like to think of this Council of Mine,
or this Action? And in this Opinion of his Parliament (though nothing can add
more to it is Fame, after such a Panegyric from it is PRINCE) was he seconded by
all Historians that Describe it, who tell us, Never did KING and Parliament
better Agree, never was a Parliament begun with greater Expectation, and only
Ended with less satisfaction in lasting no longer. Others call it the Happy
Parliament, that assured the Foundations, raised the Structure of our Ancient
English Monarchy: And Mr. Cowley, the sweetest of our Bards, sufficiently sings
it is Praises in his Ode on the Restoration.

But it happened here, as it always does, where the Countenance and Power of
the PRINCE, makes the Clergy Plenipotentiaries; when they began to find their
Strength, they as soon began to use it; and the moderate Men being baffled in
their Elections, and the more Inconsiderate sacrificing their Interest to their
Ambition; which upon Consideration now, they call Revenge, settled their
Liturgy: A Parliament was Assembled in 62. Confirmed an Absolute Act of
Uniformity; the KING's Promises, Declarations, Commissions, all Die, or had no
Life; and about 2000 of Conscientious Ministers most Unconscionably silenced
for their Opposition. Vid. Letter to Dissent.
The Gentlemen Confess their Error, and so we need not prove it.

SECT. IV. The wholesome Effects that followed it is Sober Consultations.
IF any one should Ask us now to the Fourth Point: What were the good Effects
that follow from this Assemblies sober Debates, and Consultations? Why! The
Answer is easy and short; Peace, a National and Universal Peace; a Peace in
Church; a Peace in State, so Calm and Serene, even to the satisfying of a
Conscience and a Soul; as if the Spirit of GOD had moved again upon the Face of
the Waters, after a confused Deluge, and a Sea of Blood; as if the holy Dove it
self, had brought the Peaceful Branch to our Isle, as from the Deluge to an
Ark: The Good Effects of it cannot better be guest, than from the Bad Ones that
followed it is being Dissolved; and that they were no greater, can only be
imputed to the suddenness of it is Dissolution, which was only worthy to have
been Endless, and what both it is Preceding and following one were; truly
Perpetual, and Long.

And to confirm with the most forcible Argument, from matter of Fact, the good
Effects that followed it; there was nothing of a Plot heard of, all the the
Time of it is Sitting, and what could be the Reason of such a General Calmness
and Serenity: certainly nothing else, but the Liberty every one enjoyed to
Worship his GOD in his own Way; and what was generally expected, should have
been settled by Law, and which had certainly been done too, had they sat
longer; and it is shrewdly to be suspected, that the Interest some People had,
who affected power, and feared to lose the Liberty which they better liked, to
punish other Religions by the Laws of their Church; hindered Toleration from
being made an Act of the State.

And what followed pray presently upon it is Dissolution, but the Insurrection
of Venner, and his Fifth Monarchy-men, fighting for JESUS CHRIST, for fear now
of what followed; that their Reign was like to be but short?

When the Oaths of Supremacy began to be tendered to all; and the Test of
Abjuration (that some thought a Temptation to a seeming Perjury) was
indiscriminately put; a thing, that Pryn himself (that had writ For the KING's
Coming in) though against all things before, could oppose, as contrary to Magna
Charta, when Encroachments in Ecclesiasticals began to creep on; were there not
then too, Designs and Conspiracies set afoot; and Barebone, Salmon, Wildman,
Ireton, and Others seized, and Committed to safe Custody?

When that dreadful St. Bartholomew (as they called it) began to dawn upon the
Dissenters; by which day they were obliged to read Divine Service, according to
the Act of Uniformity, wear the Vestments of the Church, or forsake their
Pulpits, after all their Endeavors to prevail with a Parliament were in vain,
and their Application to KING and Council as Fruitless; when the Bishops were
ready, and had provided men for to fill the places of such as would not take
the Test; and near two Thousand were turned out upon it: the Conformists
reserving too much the bitter Taste of their rough Usage, notwithstanding the
General Amnesty so much pressed by the KING; and one would think might have been
most Religiously observed by Prelates; Did not then first, Fears and Jealousies
begin to Invade the State, and even make the Government it self afraid? So
Conscious is Oppression of Consequences that are Fatal; that power it self can
distrust it is own Weakness; and for this reason presently upon it (being
sensible of the provocations given in Matters of Religion) Walls were ordered
to be pulled down; several Cities and Towns to be dismantl'd; at the same time
that the severities of the Laws were to be put in Execution: and what ensued?
but the suspected Plot of Danvers, Ludlow, etc. for which Phillips, Tongue,
Gibbs and Others were Executed.

Upon the Neck of that, broke out another in the North; and while they were
Laboring by Rigor to suppress the Divisions in the Church, what did they Raise
but open Rebellions in the State? Several of the Conspirators were Taken; and a
Commission sent to York to Try them; fifteen were found Guilty, the Chief of
them, one Capt. Oats: some were Executed at York, some at Leeds, some in
Adjacent Places; and so universal was the Discontent upon this encroachment of
the Liberty of Worship, that the same Conspiracy had spread it self to London,
and was first to have broke forth in Ireland.

In the Sickness time, when the KING left London and went to Oxford; which,
though not Visited, the Dissenters say, they found there their Plague too, the
Five-Mile Act, to prevent (as they called it) the spreading their Infection;
whereby indeed they were Banished Corporations and Towns, as if they were
Tainted with the Malignancy that Reigned, and only fit for a Pesthouse; and
that too with another Test to the purpose; why? What ensued presently upon it?
Before the Pestilence was hardly ceased, and the KING well returned to London,
but another Discovery for the Alteration of the Government; of which
Conspiracy, one Alexander was the Chief; the City to be Fired on the Third of
September; the same time, that it was indeed: Vid. Gazet.
and for which the Romanists were so unreasonably Reproach't; for which several
were Tried at the Old Bailey, and Executed at Tyburn.

The first Commotion that began in Scotland, was also upon the same Account;
when the Riot that was made upon one of their Justices; as was Confessed by both
sides, was only for too rigorously Executing the Laws against them in matters
of Religion; which Riot, though raised by a small Number of Inconsiderable
Sufferers, yet soon ran up so high as an Army, and which was Marching with all
have to Edinburgh.

And the last Rebellion at Bothwell-Bridge, though begun by some desperate
Villains, to defend themselves from the Justice they had deservd, for the
Murdering of the Archbishop, had never come to that height; had not the
Covenanters thinking themselves Oppressed by the Penal Laws, closed in with them,
and increased their Army to such a Number, as to make them formidable.

And Lastly, I much doubt, whether ever Monmouth himself would have made so
much work in the West, had not the Severities of the Laws then Zealously set
afoot, sent him many a Soldier into the field, that did not dare to stay a
home, for fear of fine and confiscation; and had his Majesty, as soon as he
Ascended his Throne, been Permitted by the Reasons of State, or not opposed by
the importunities of some people, to have declared his Resolutions of
Indulgence, perhaps it might have saved a great deal of Protestant Blood; and
Dissenters never have fought for that Liberty of Conscience which it seems to
them too, was Dearer then their Lives.

God forbid! That ever Rebellion should be really Justified by Religious
Pretenses; but since, Matter of Fact makes it Plain, that they are so of
Pretended, as is manifest here from the Disturbance that was given to the
State, constantly upon every Usurpation and Penalty, Trial and Test that was
put upon Peoples Souls (as is apparent from the foregoing Particulars); can any
man in his wits not close with a Provident PRINCE, to remove the very Pretenses
too of it? To quarrel at such a Prudential Act, is to tell His Majesty, they
are never Easy, but when He Is Embroiled; never Secure, but when there is an
Insurrection against their KING. These sort of Men are more dangerous in their
Sentiments, than some Country Idiots in their Suppositions; some of them wont
believe Monmouth to be Dead; and these by their own Maxims must wish him Alive.

It Is as Certain as Truth it self, if Fact can make a thing appear True; that
Sufferers for Religion (and perhaps we may except no Persuasions) will
endeavor to lay hold on any Alteration of State, to Rescue themselves from the
severity of such Oppressions; it is as natural as to sinking Men to catch at a
Plank: And I could prove this from History, for above this Hundred and Fifty
Years, from our Hen. the Eighth, to those instances I make use of in the last
Reign. To this Provocation do the Hollanders owe their Revolt, their Being, and
their Commonwealth. To this, do the Hugonots of France Ascribe their Entry
into the League: and what that Cost that Kingdom, let Ours Judge. To this, do
discontented Courtiers, and desperate Villains, owe all that which to a
Government makes them Formidable: for such Creatures as could never Hope upon
their own Interest, to Muster an hundred Men (where a general Indulgence is
Established) shall under a Pressure of Conscience, raise you a Million; and
with this Advantage too, that the Cause (whatever are the Fellows that engage
in it) will still carry the better Face; and Quallify Villains of no Religion,
to Head those that really Fight for it: and to tell you that they are The
Armies of the Living GOD, the GOD of HOSTS; and that they Fight the Battles of
the LORD. So certain it is, that those who are not permitted to assemble in
their own Church, will always be Restless and Uneasy in the State: Passive
Obedience in such Cases, we see sooner Preached than Practiced; and such as are
denied in their own Way to Worship their GOD, will as soon be deficient in their
Duty to their KING; and may the Fear of it, never make some sort Vnautiful;
that Profess, they will never be Provoked, though by Suffering for it.

So much was it the sense of His Late Majesty, as partly appears before; that
in pursuance of his Promises at Breda; and his Intimations to his First
Parliament, that was so Healing: To which he pressed a Liberty of Conscience;
that he also in his Declaration of December, Sixty Two, makes a Confirmation of
it; and says, That he was Firm in his Resolutions of Performing it to the Full:
And this even against the Sense of his New Parliament, that was more for
Penalty and Persecution. Of this, he Expressed his Sense in his Parliament, July
16th. Sixty Nine: And then, in spite of them, March, 25th. Seventy Two, made
good his Promises to All, by a General Indulgence, and a Protection of the
Church of England.

SECT. V. The Ways that are Taken Now, to Hinder the Having such Another.
HAving Discours't of the Past, we come home now to our Selves, and the Present
Time, and to Consider the Fifth Point; The Ways that are Taken now, to Hinder
the having such Another Healing Parliament: And truly, they are not much
Honester Attempts, than were used to prevent the Meeting of the First; and that
is the Old Antiquated pretense of Jealousies and Fears; only there is another
Knave turned Trumps now: (though it is the same thing to the Government, whether
it is trick't upon, by that of Clubs, or Diamonds:) It Is strange! That those
that made so lately the Folly of other Men's Fears so Ridiculous, should make
themselves now, to those very Men the most fearful Fools.

That those, who still asserted the Assurance and Security of their Religion,
from the Promise of their KING; should now, without the least Breach of it,
give him the Ly; and tell him to his Face, You are worse than your Vid. Letter.
Word. That those, who ran up the Prerogative, to the Height of it is Power;
should dispute now, the Power of their KING's Dispensing. What is this, but a
Confessing to their Foes, (whom they still followed with Fine and Confiscation)
that their Divines were Dunces, their Books were Libels, and the Famed Filmer,
the greatest Fool? It is a saying so common, and so natural, that the most
ignorant, both know it, and make use of it too; To Look before they Leap: and
would any Considerate Men, make use of the same Arguments, and take the same
Measures, for which they have so much Exposed and Reproached others? But, it
fares with them here in their Civil Matters, as the Late KING's Papers almost
unanswerably observe of their Concerns in Ecclesiasticals; That part of the
Nation, which looks most like a Church, cannot bring Her Arguments against the
other Sects, for fear they should be turned against Her self. But only here
they make the Inversion much worse: Here She takes the Old Arguments of
Dissenters on Her Side, only to make Her Own fly in Her Face; so that an Honest
and Unbyast Asserter of the Government, has nothing else to do, to Answer the
Clamors of the Present time, but to Declaim against the Cavils of the Past; and
both those are Reducible to these Three Celebrated and Contested Points.

I. Arbitrary Power. II. Freedom of Parliaments. III. Protestant Religion.
For the First, and for them all in their Order; though the present KING's
Promises, are as Current with them, as his Fathers Coin; and both bear the same
Image and Superscription. Though the Leges Angl': libertas Parliament: Religio
Protestant: have been the continual Subject of all this KING's gracious
Declarations; and particularly, in that of His Indulgence: when (to put it in
his Vid. this King's Two Proclamations to Scotland, and his Declaration of
Indulgence here.
Own Words) Property, Liberty, and the Protestant Religion, are all assured to
them, on the Word of a KING: Yet still, the Matter by some or other must be
still so managed, as to make the People to distrust, and doubt of all: Such is
the hard Fate of PRINCES (as if a Crown could not be contrived to sit soft on a
Royal Head; as if destined to be a Burden by Decree;) both Extremes shall
conspire to make it uneasy: Monarchs for the most part are Endangered, for
their not believing any Danger to be near. It Is hard they should suffer, by not
being Believed too, when they tell their Subject there is None. Mark but the
Goodness of your PRINCE, and then see, whether he deserves to be treated so
Ill. A numerous part of his People being uneasy (as certainly those must be,
that suffer for Conscience sake, and when the Iron Enter their very Souls) had
made the Government a long time so too. To silence their Clamours and
Complaints, the King would take away the occasion of their Calamities, the
severities of the Laws; and that raises now as mighty murmurings among those,
that were only for surpressing of Malcontents before; as if his Throne were
more dreadful, when he makes it even the Mercy-seat. How shall the most
gracious Prince please such a divided People? where discontent only shifts
Parties, and Loyalty seems no longer entailed, (love at least and affection)
then as the King continues his favor, or it seems only now so long as he
confines it to themselves alone, sure gratitude and friendship must not be
limited like Marriage Vows, or those of Devotion, to one Object: neither is a
King to be considerd in his politic capacity like a natural body, Whose Love
is then the most Generous, when it is most extensive; and his power best
absolute, when he Reigns in the Hearts of all; to make himself this Universal
Monarch seems only the design of his present Majesty, and to make him more
Feared than Loved are the devices of some Ureasonable men.

But the result of these Inconsistencies with themselves, they will say does
arise, and is occasioned by some deeper insight of theirs into the designs of
State, and our plausible Varnish may serve to set it off, but will never hinder
them from seeing through it; it is strange! that these politic Spectacles should
be so suddenly put on; this must make the Dissenters value their optics; proud
of a better foresight, and more acurate intuition; and tell the Churchmen, we
told you of this, and then where were your eyes? but could the Dissenters have
foreseen too his Majesty's merciful Inclination, Popery and Slavery might never
have been their Monimental Motto, or themselves seduced to follow some more
desperate Malcontents to their death and destruction: was it Sedition in them
to doubt? was it Treason almost to think? and is it a Loyal Act now, to declare
in writing the danger of the Protestant Religion? and that at a time, when the
free Exercise of it is permitted to All; certainly such unwonted Surmises from
Persons that have declared their abhorrence of them as Seditious, are as
surprising, as the new Friendship's, and show that the Tide is turned, the Wind
tackt about against their Interests; and what can Dissenters say, but that they
see through all this, and as they told the Dissenters that the Liberty they
labored for, was only a License to do what they List; so their Popery that is
now coming in, is nothing else but their Persecuting Power that is going out.

What will they not say? when they see those that exalted the seizing of
Franchises, as an undoubted Prerogative, Printed and Published the forfeiture of
all Charters, Priveledges and Immunities; and that before they were granted
with such Restrictions and Reservations as more empower his Majesty, than when
these People made them all thus dependant on the Crown: It Is strange! that even
those should murmur at his Majesty's power of Dispensing, which the practice of
the Prerogative, and the Laws of the Land did ever Allow; I do not design to
enter here upon the old distinction of Malum in se, and. Prohibitum, For that
Evil which was prohibited, when by reasons of State it comes to be dispensed
withal, is no longer so, but really good; so it would be oppression in a
Prince, to demolish the dwellings of his Subjects, but no one will say it is so
in a Siege; when he burns down the Subburbs.

But this being not only to be defended by Reason, but the Laws; was repined at
as * Arbitrary; the King upbraided with Vid. Letter: and Answer to the Test of
Church of Englands Loyalty. Vid. All Burnets Papers.
his Coronation Oath to keep all the Laws, the Judges Libelled and Satyris'd
for their sense and opinions, and with a Non Obstante posted up in an house of
Office: The rumor ran of nothing else, but all the Laws to be laid aside,
though only some Penal ones were suspended; and when they might as well have
made their Satyr and Animadversion upon every Session at the Old Baily, where
the King was never denied the pardoning of a Felon, or remitting a Fine; though
the one were for the highest misdemeanour, and the other even for murder it
self: and sure, to infer from an argument a fortiori, if the Law will justify
the Kings Mercy to a Malefactor for the shedding of blood, it will sure extend
to forgive the forfeiture of an Office or Place; and yet too, by the leave of
the mighty Dr. and his most malicious Dr. Burnet's Reflections on Declaration
for Liberty, etc.
construction, this shall not amount to the repeal of the Law, and be but a
bare suspension of the Penalty. For as it appeared in the late Case of Hales,
it was in the power of any man to Prosecute, tho it was at last left in the
King to Pardon: And if the Dr. will make have before the Parliament may make
some Alteration, he shall bring what information he pleases against any Papist
for their forfeitures; where he may show his malice, and do no mischief: So
that all his Scotch Droll, about Cass and Null, and Absolute Power applied to
the Cases in England, are nothing to the purpose. But it was not Dr. B. alone
that was thus bold, we heard nothing about that time in private discourse, but
threatening of Public impeachments; and that Parliaments had questioned Wolsey,
Bristol, and others, for advising such dispensations; and that Judges had been
with the old story of Tresilian, hanged for such resolutions. Gentlemen, it
could not be the Dissenters now that were guilty of these sort of Observations,
unless they were angry at the Clemency and Mercy that relieved them.

But that we have no reason to make this a piece of Arbitrary Power, consider
but some Presidents of Prerogative, and that in the former Reigns: King Edw.
3d. repealed an Act of Parliament (as imposed by necessity) and that by his
Royal Prerogative; the Parliament in Rich. 2d. time by several Judicial Acts,
had proceeded against the Ld. Chancellor, the Duke of Ireland, and Arch Bishop
of York, to which the King had given his assent; but as soon as he dissolved
that Assembly, all was dissolved too, that had been done against them.

And that the Resolution of our Judges may not be looked on as so Extrajudicial
and Extravagant, I Will refer them to what was resolved by the Judges in the same
Kings Reign.

I. That the Statute of Commission made in the last Parliament, was Void,
because against the Prerogative, and that the Advisers to it deserved Death.

II. That the King could cause the Parliament to proceed upon Articles by him
limited, before they meddled with any other.

III. That the Judgment against Pool in Parliament was Revocable by the King.

So that it is no new thing for the Judges in the highest manner to assert the
Prerogative, and what ever Miracles were performed afterward by that Parliament
of wonders, that does not make it less the duty of those sages to assert the
right of the Crown; though some of them were afterward by the rebellious Barons,
and the designing Duke of Gloucester brought to suffer for the service to their
King, and by the same People too, that afterward deposed their Prince. I need
no more then mention the Dispensation to the Justices against 37. of Hen. 6.
and that common Case of the Sherifs, dispensed with by the 2d. of Hen. 7. or
the Case of Coinage in his 11. when Hen. 8 rejected the Popes Supremicy in
Ecclesiasticals; it is as well known he reserved it as Entirely to himself,
settled upon him so by Act of Parliament: so that if the Pope ever had a
Dispensing power with a non Obstante; both Hen. 8 and Edw. 6. had it too, and I
think both of them made use of it with a witness: Vid. Heylin's Hist. Reform.
as also Acts and Monuments, and you will see what Waste, what Work was made with
Altars and Images; though such irreligious Violence was by the Council of
Illiberis forbidden to be shown, even the Pagan Idols.
the Sanctuary it self was not safe against their Dispensations, that were
extended even to Sacrilege too, and the Altar it self was offered up for a
Burnt-Offering to some Orders of the Council Board.

The management of Religious matters will ever depend on the Civil Magistrate;
and is a saying never the less certain, or more false, for being the sense too
of Mr. Hobbs.

The power that these assumed in Ecclesiasticals, as some think too much (as it
was derived to all their successors since) so none of them have exercised it so
little as to lose it by disuse: but in all their Dispensations to Foreigners,
that came to settle, to their Families when increased, and to several of their
native subjects at home, sufficiently manifested, that this Power was in the
Crown, that it was often made use of; and that it is very unlikely any Prince
will be willing to part with it. Who ever run the Royal Authority in Sacreds
higher than the Church that disputes it now so much; So that the Kings power is
with them what they please, when it only countenances their Establishment, and
just none at all, when it will Favor any Other. I must confess I could never
find but that Argument and Law, was ever Relatively Good or Ill, according to
the disposition of the Party that was to Gain or Lose by it, and every man will
ever be a Knave or a Fool, to those that are not of his Opinion: but yet
certainly, there must be somewhat of Intrinsic Equity, and Eternal Reason;
however confounded, according to the diversity of Parties, and partiality of
the People; and by such an Vnprejudic'd Judgment, I dare venture to try, not
only the Power of Dispensing, but of the very Repealing of the Laws.

I would ask these men, whether Queen Elizabeth did not take as great a Liberty
in Vid. Heylin's Reformation, and even Burnets too.
Ecclesisticals for the founding of their Church; greater than they can allow
his Majesty, only for the Countenancing of his, when Her Injunctions to the
Church, past as current with them for an Act of State; as if it had only been
her Coinage: and She at the same time, could dispense to read the Latin
Service, It was said by Moor in her Reign, and Justified in Parliament; that
the Queens Non Obstante was good even against the Non Obstanle, of an Act of
Parliament to her Power and Prerogative.
against what Her Self, and Parliament had Enacted? And if the Proceedings of
PRINCES, must be so much exposed to the Censure of the People: we meet with in
her Reign, perhaps the highest Instance of unheard of Power, that History
affords; or, ever was assumed by any Monarch that Sat on our Throne. And that
was her Proceeding against the Queen of Scots, the next Heir to her Crown (though
some would give Her a better Title) whom, against the Laws of Nature and
Nations, the word of a Queen, the promise of a Sister, the faith of a
Christian, after she had fled to her for Refuge; after she had flattered her to
restore her; after Eighteen Years Imprisonment, made her hold up her Hand to a
Bar, and be Beheaded on a Block. It may be the first Example of such a sort of
Suffering, that ever was offered to a Crowned Head, whatever are the thoughts
of our sublimated Dr. Burnet, and the Author of the Trial, and Examination of
the New Test of the Church of England's Loyalty.
Wits, to the contrary in the Cases they put. For Licinius you must first
observe, was by their own Confession, but a Colleague with Constantine; and we
may tell such Men of Law, that understand Loyalty to be nothing else; that till
they prove the Queen of Scots, a Coparcenary with Q Elizabeth, they are
impertinent in their Proof: but as Bad Luck would have it, when Wise Men make
Ill Arguments. Vid. Sleid. de quatuor sum. Imper. lib. 2. Eutropius, lib. 10.
Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 1.
This Licinius, was Colleague with Maximianus, conquered by Constantine, and
killed in a tumultuous Mutiny by the Soldiers. He might so well have told us
of Will, Conqueror killed Harold the Dane: And that Authors other President,
that he Cites, for a Judicial Proceeding against a Crowned Head, fails him too,
as much: though he might have told us, which Queen Joan [there being two that
Reigned,] and both Bad enough: for that of Q. Joan's of Naples Case, was
shortly this: She had Hanged her first Husband for Insufficiency; Killed the
second, in trying too much his Ability; Beheaded the third for Incontinency.
She was Vanquished by the K. of Hungary, Brother to her First Husband, and
Hanged in Revenge of his Death. Here Is the Act again of an enraged Enemy, made
the same with a friend and Ally, and the Case of the Lewdest Creature, applied
Vid. his Answer to the New Test.
to the most Pious Lady. Dr. B. himself cannot excuse the Barbarous Proceedings
that were used against her: and tho'I do not blame all the Bishops of those
Times, and This, as some severe Papers have done: yet to be Just to both; most,
both of the Clergy and the Laity that lived then, were for sacrificing of her,
to what they called Preservation of Religion: and few of those that have
followed since, have justified the Proceedings. Whatever were the Cause, the
Effects I Am sure were Fatal; and I fancy, followed by some of our own Nation
since; and that to the spilling of more of the same Blood; and verifying the
Prophetic foresight, as well as the seasonable Sarcasm of that unfortunate
Princess; that the English were ever wont to Murder their own KINGS: and no
wonder then, they would Sacrifice now the Crowned Head of another Kingdom.
Thus, Gentlemen, suffered that Pious Princess (and if any) a Blessed Saint; and
that upon the Pretense too, of a sort of Penal Law: a Test on purpose to
destroy her, and that upon the account of Religion. Buckhurst and Beal both
that brought her the dismal Tidings of her Death; intimated to her, that her
Life would be the ruin of the Religion received: and indeed 'twas as agreeable
to the pretended Interest of the State that Condemned her: for she had no other
Crime but their Fears: and if her Endeavors to escape from the Confinement of
a Faithless Ally were high Treason, She was then only in a Plott. So fell that
Unfortunate Monarch, whose Misfortunes would have melted Marble; and that by
the height of the most Arbitrary Power: in a Reign, where we dream of nothing
else, but Liberty, Property; and no other Dispensations but of impartial
Justice: And can any one think, that his Majesty himself, the direct Issue of
the same Princess, whose Religion is the same; is not Wounded too with the
sanguinary proceedings of her Times, and the severity of those Laws still in
force; by which (whatsoever is pretended) many merely for Religion suffered;
and those Catholics that were Executed, for what was adjudg'd High Treason,
found as little Mercy, as the other Justice: being Cut down alive, and
Embowelled before their Face; till the Queen was forced to Forbid such cruel
Executions.

That the Power of the Prerogative has been Arraigned with such Animadversions,
as are above Suggested; and that the KING's Dispensations have been remark't
upon, as Illegal; and without President: and that by those very men, that made
it their Business to advance any absolute Proceeding. He must have kept himself
very close, or doubt his Hearing that disbelieves it: but more than that, they
have given it under their Hand, and the most modest of their Papers, an
Answerer to the Judgment and Doctrine of the Clergy, about the power of
Dispensing; does handsomely clear them from the Belief of the Right of the
KING's Prerogative in this point; and is loath they should be taken for such
Betrayers of the Liberty of the People. Their Crime had not been so great, had
their Opinions lain under the Obloquy of such an Imputation; and the Answerer
as little obliges his Church, as the Pamphleteer: but as modest as he is, it is
manifest from it; that the Judgment of their Church is now against it, or
else, sure it must be a needless labor, if not impertinent, to take so much
pains to vindicate its Members from it: But this I must observe from my
acquaintance with all those Authors Quoted; that though they have not in express
Terms extended the KING's power to Dispense with Penal Laws, they have advanced
his Sovereignty to as high a pitch: and when the shoe pinches, we are apt to
complain, though it be of our own putting on: And those that find, from the
Revolutions of Affairs, any unexpected Inconveniences to flow from their own
Arguments, have nothing else to do, but deny the Consequence, and please
themselves with a Non Sequitur: but I Will assure you, as modest as this man is
in Questioning it, there are as bold Asserters in Print, that affirm with
Confidence, with dint of Satyr, that these Royal Dispensations, are so many
Breaches of Oaths, Irregular and Extrajudicial Proceedings. The late Letter to
a Dissenter, that has raised such a Dust, very slyly Laughs it out of doors; as
if it might be Extended to dispense with their Belief of the Church of Rome's
Idolatry. A very pretty Jest, to spoil a Latinism, and Play with his Sovereign,
that is Sacred, as well as the Religion: but he is in earnest too, and tells
them their acceptance of it, has Retained them as Counsel for the Prerogative
against Magna Charta; and that Parliaments may Pay them for it. The Trial of
the New Test, with Dr. B's Tune; another to the same; are such severe Satyrs on
the same Subject; such as the Government never suffered, I am sure in the most
seditious Times: so that I do these Gentlemen no Wrong, if we may believe our
Ears and our Eyes (and Sense with such, cannot be denied an infallible Judge)
when we lay at some of their doors, the designs of animating the People with
the Old Din of Arbitrary Power; as the Indians do their Elephants, with a red
Cloth, and bloody Colors.

The other old Outcry that is set afoot, is the popular Clamor about
Parliament; and must that too be taken up, by those that made such a Noise to
Cry it down? But here, these Gentlemen are more Pettish and Peevish; and harder
to be pleased, than ever were the Fanatics they for their implacable spirit
Condemned: They would have a Parliament, and they would have none: so it is
impossible to gratify those that contradict themselves: but we will suppose them,
only some clashing contrarieties; and so may be seemingly Reconciled. They
would have a Redressing Parliament, and not a Parliament of Addressers: and
truly for that they now labor with all Artifice and Zeal, as if they intended
to make every County an Associated One; but sure this way of working may put
the Nation in a ferment; and we can say with sad Experience, it never yet
procured the peoples Peace. Wise men will consider, though they are satisfied of
the goodness of their Cause, never to use bad means to bring it about.

And I wish we were all so wise, and would do so too; but such is the Seditious
industry of some, to Create those dangers truly out of nothing, when there are
none to Invade them that are really near: And for this the Country shall be
frightened with a Parliament of Courtiers, and the Protestants in General, that
it may be made up of Roman Catholics, both those the most Panick Fears, and
next to impossibilities; the Court never yet afforded us Members enough to make
up a full Committee; and there are not Catholics enough of great Estates in
England, to serve two in a County: if Improbabilities will not be swallowed,
danger it self, like a black Pill must be Gilded, to go down the better, and
work with the People; and they must be told of his Majesty's interposition,
that a Burgess must be made like a Bishop, with a Congee d'eslire; that he is
resolved to have a Vid. Letter, and the Trial of the Test, and Burnets Papers,
Parliament for his purpose; (and sure, in desires that are reasonable, why
should he not?) and such an one certainly is the design of settling a quiet
both of Body and Soul, to all his Subjects. We are told from all the late
Libells, that like Plague-Bills, or those of the Pox, are put into your hands:
that Returns must serve instead of an Election, that the one will never be
permitted to be Fair, and the other must sure be Foul. But these foolish
insinuations any one may see are on purpose to create Faction and Fears; and
though his Majesty's desire are as Earnest as they are Reasonable, for relieving
the distresses of his Subjects; and the giving ease, and equal privilege to
all, yet he aims at no other end than the bringing it about by Law: Interest
sure will never ly, and it is that obliges those that would have Laws Repealed,
that the Authority be Lawful that Repeals them; and it would only afford
another Parliament an Argument, to Void and Disanul what ever was Done, were
the Constitution of the Body not qualified to do it. But perhaps they may find
that by Law too, and that of their own making, his Majesty may meet with good
Returns from most Corporations, since they will not question sure the Power of
Regulating, which themselves have given and by which many of them too, not long
since were glad to be brought into the House of Commons, especially by better
Law now, since in all those new Charters, there are express Provisoes for his
Majesty's changing any Part, or altering the Whole. But is this now such a new
thing, to have the mind of the Prince set upon compassing, by the interest he
has with the People, any point of State, that he judges convenient for the
Welfare of Himself and Subjects? Those that think so, are but little acquainted
with Books or History, and not to revolve Old things, have forgot transactions
that are very New. I need not mind them, that there is hardly an account of any
Reign that does not afford us an Instance. But tell them, that they gave us one
themselves, and that in the very last: With what Vigor the Succession was
Invaded, they can Boast, to their own Honor it seems, and others Shame: and
had not his Late Majesty Interposed with his utmost Power, taking the
Forfeiture of Franchises, and Regulating Corporations; they can Glory to some
peoples Reproach, that the Tide had never been Turned; and will these men Tugg
now against the same Stream they sailed down in so merrily? If their measures
were so Fair then, how come the same Practices so Foul now? especially when by
president and restrictions, made more Warrantable too: for as they did Well to
Defend the Right of Succession; so the same Successor, with as many of their
fellow Subjects, think that Liberty of Conscience can be as well Defended.

But I can tell them of greater Liberties, that have been taken by the Kings of
England, though nothing like it has been here attempted now; and that is, if I
mistake not, in this very Point of interposition to Returns and Elections.

Richard. the 2d. called all the Justices and Sherifs to Nottingham, says our
History, intimating that he was to call a Parliament, and that they should use
the matter so, that no Knight or Burgess should be chosen, but such as the King
and Council should name; it is true, their answer was peremptory, they could not
do it: but he that reads the History, will as soon the Reason. The Lords were in
Arms, and a Rebellion in the Realm; and though this were not Justifyable by Law,
it may serve to show what great attempts have long since been made upon
Liberty; when it was resolved too in his Reign, That the King could cause the
Parliament to proceed upon Articles by him Limited: I think this might have
spoiled the Letter-Makers Jest; upon the Elections of Congee d'eslire, when it
would have changed his Liberty of Debate too, into a Merit of Obedience: and
yet these were the resolutions long since of Judges and Lawyers. But this I
know they will say, was only offered at by an Arbitrary King. I am sure an
unfortunate one, and whom his Subjects used as ungratefully. But then we will
turn the Tables, and tell them of a Popular one, whom they Complimented into
the Throne, and that is his immediate Successor: in the 6 of Hen. 4. he called
a Parliament at Coventry, and some say in his process to the Sherifs, and Writ
of Summons, my Ld. Coke will only allow to be in his Letters, he Commands that
no Lawyer shall be returned a Knight or Burgess: And so by his Royal Authority
it succeeded too. It Is true, in the next Year, and the next Parliament they
Petitioned for the Liberty of freer Elections, and had it granted them;
however, this still proves, that such Royal Interpositions are not altogether
new; and that in former Reigns, the Prerogative ran higher in this point.

So much for the second Section of the same old Clamors raised and revived: and
that the Third may be the same too, some Churchmen have taken too much Pains,
and I wish I could say, to little purpose. No sooner was the Prince by
Providence placed in his Throne, and whom their Sermons of Nonresistance they
say solely set upon it; (though his fortunate Arms in the West did somewhat
secure it too); but some of the very same men managed the matter so; as if The
Protestant Princes of Germany provided against such reflections on the Emperors
Religion at the Diet at Ratisbone.
they had a mind to Preach him out again, Arbitrary power, Popery, Protestant
Religion, was more the Theme of the Pulpit, than before it had been of the
Fanatics Papers and Pamphlets: and that at the same time that his Majesty had
commanded the Priests of his own persuasion to meddle with nothing that was
controversial, * and which was as Religiously observed by them too. This was a
Great indecency at least, if not a little disobedience, especially when after
the Kings injunctions had satisfied them; He looked upon it as tending to
Sedition. Controversies never yet edified much out of a Pulpit, and it may be
well wished there were less of it in the Press. What party was the first
aggressor will not so soon be found, though that which first desists may be found
the Wisest. Arguments may now be better worded, Some say the Protestant Side
began first in their Sermons. Vid. Preface to the further Desence of the Bishop
of Condom.
as all Arts are by length of time improved; but the best of our Virtuos^es in
Divinity, have with all their late Experiments hardly made any new Discoveries;
and little has been said after they have labored so much on both sides, but
what has been brought on the Stage before. People enter only the List now to
show their Courage, and make a Spectacle, and like Gladiaters seem to draw by
consent, and assign the Places of their Combat; and sure never was that sacred
Science so truly Polemical: whereas after all, the Mysteries of Religion must
either be left to God that gave it: to the Church that he has Established, or to
every Individual Breast. If to the first, we must leave off all disputes, and
leave the Issue to God, and the Last day; if to a Church, then without doubt to
a Universal and Catholic one: to which, if we submit to be guided by, we must
think it Infallible, whatever it be; for sure it is best to trust most our
Salvation where there is the least Error; and madness, to swear Absolutely to
the truth of a thing that may possibly be false: And if the Bible, and the
Books of Scripture as well Interpreted, must be the guide, who shall be Judge of
its being done so well? and I cannot see how a National Church, or Established
one, that will not pretend to this infallibility, can command with Punishment,
Pains, Death and Anathema, to believe as she does interpret, (unless we
acknowleg'd that Church to be always in the right, that has the Power): for if
she punishes People for not believing her to Interpret well, it will be hard
for her to avoid an impossibility of interpreting amiss, and that will amount
almost to somewhat of a Judge that cannot Err: so that unavoidably we fall into
the last part of the Dilemma, of letting every one adhere to the Expositions
and Principles of that particular Church, which agree best with his Reason, and
are most satisfactory to his Soul.

I confess, these Considerations weighed with me so much, as to think an
Established Toleration unavoidable, both from the Circumstances of the State,
and the Doctrine of the Church; for as Infallibility is hard to be believed, so
sure it is more hard to think, a Church can force you to Believe Her, that does
not pretend to it: and if an Alliance between that and Liberty, be such a
Contradiction; what an Absurdity must Persecution be, from those that will not
presume to be Infallible? and that an Absolute or Implicit Subscription to all
her Articles, has been always required, I need not prove; since Dissenters it is
certain have often Offered Conditional Ones; and were not so much as suffered
this modest Interposition, of subscribing to her Laws, So Adjudg'd, 33, 34. of
Eliz. and were Rejected on the same Account in the 13, 14. Car. 2.
as far as they were agreeable with those of GOD, and the Land; which I wish,
may not lay too much of the Schism at their door; that think it only to be
suppressed, with Severities and Executions: but while we muster up these
Arguments about Religion, we raise but the Legion of Spirits we would lay; and
is only so far, from an Impertinence and Digression, as it terminates to prove
the necessity of a Tolleration, and the design of the Discourse.

I do no Injury to them or the Truth, when I tell them thus; That the Din of
Protestant Religion, has founded too much of late the alarm from the Pulpits;
as if the Watchman had been placed upon the Top of the Tower, and seen the
whole Host of the Assyrians, to come up and besiege the A City that was of Old,
At unity with it self.
City of Jerusalem; Martyrdom, Persecution, Sufferings have been the Subject of
some Sermons, not as Passive Exhortations; but rather to create dreadful
Apprehensions, which cannot be so well Justified by such as are fond for the
retaining the Power of Forcing; and were it not so intended, the Preachers up
of such Suggestions, would see themselves impertinent; when they take their
Texts from all the miseries of the afflicted, as if they were already in
Torment: when they make the Church of England another Smyrna, and tell us of
her Tribulation of Ten Days. Certainly this is not a season of talking of Fire
and Faggot; as if all Smithfield were in a Blaze; when the tenderness of the
most Indulgent Monarch, makes it his care, that there may not be so much as a
Fine Inflicted for Religion; when He protests and declares to the contrary; and
by Practice, and the very Powers of his Prerogative (they will hardly grant
him) has endeavored to make it good. Not only some Sermons, but several Books
assert these suggestions to be sober Truth; and I hope I shall not become any
peoples Enemy for telling it: who if he were known, no one would imagine it
Malice meant. I cannot think a Particular Invective, or Satyr of a Zealot,
ought to be paum'd upon a general Assembly or the Church; or the whole Body
suffer for any Members Fault, though they would do well too, to deal as fairly
with the Church of Rome; and not reproach it for maintaining the Deposing
Power, and the Destroying of KINGS, when by their own Confession, they find it
only among some of their Writers; which by the Sorbone at Paris, were
sufficiently Condemned. It Is hard to tell a Church, She is of that Opinion
which She generally denies; and should another tell a Third what I think; were
he in his Wits, he would sooner take my word for it.

It Is to be wished she would put in practice, what I know she has often
requested from the Church of Rome for it is Justification; to Discover and
Censure such as are Transgressors in these inflaming Discourses, and by that
best of Vindication, disown them. I could recite some Passages to this purpose
out of several Prints; but can in kindness forbear them too; since they are in
pieces that have been less taken notice of; and shall only touch upon those
that are more generally Known. The Notable Letter to a Dissenter; The Trial and
Examination of the New Test of the Church of Englands Loyalty: which Latter,
though a Piece discommended by both Parties, for it is Zeal and Abuse, ought to
have been Answered with less Reflection on the Crown; and the most seditious
Papers of Dr. B. All these own themselves under their Hand, Members of that
Communion; while they industriously disperse things dangerous to the State, and
disagreeing to the Doctrines of that Church they would offer to defend. The
whole drift and design of these Discourses, is only to persuade the People,
that Popery is solely Concerned; even where the Protestant Religion is so much
promised to be Protected. I forbear to repeat Reflections on a Government, that
are Libels almost in their very repetition, to shoot back their Arrows, even
Bitter Words, should be so done too, that the Plague might be stayed, without
spreading the Infection: he is but a bad Doctor, that comes with a Dose in his
Pocket, and the Disease in his Face: It would be but little service at this
time to the Crown, to reprint a Discourse of Tolleration Discust, for the sake
of some Cold animadversions upon it; and so most Officiously Confute with an
Imprimatur, what is a Duty to silence, and suppress. Sedition that is set of
with such smooth Insinuations, should be dealt with like a Wench, that has used
much dawbing; who is then best Exposed, when you have pulled off some
Petticoats, and washed away her Paint; for the Press, and Printing, depends
upon it is Management, and is only an undecided and Indifferent Engine and Art;
either of pretended Good to the Government, or real Ill.

I come now in the next place to make some Remarks upon another Method that has
been taken to hinder the meeting of another Healing Parliament; and that is not
only in Discouraging all Addresses to the KING that intimated their inclination
toward it; but even the returning so much as Thanks to His MAJESTY, for
Repeating of his Promises to protect a Church, that has given him the greatest
Power in Ecclesiasticals: and all this ungrateful obstinacy for the sake of
Religion too; and as their best Reasons are, Vid. Oxford. Reasons. Letter, etc.
Dr. B. etc.
lest it should be thought to be Precarious: It Is to be Lamented, to see so
Learned a Body that was lately so Signalized, (as some said) for a Criminal
Obedience, a Passive one: and burnt those Authors in Effigy, that could not
come up to their most Meritorious Opinions. It Is hard to see such, so suddenly
changed, as to think it no Crime, the The Case of their Contesting College,
though Conscience must give it such a modest Complexion, was, in plain terms,
the greatest Contumacy to their King; Conscience (if ever a pretense) was truly
made so here, for not to mention his Majesty's Dispensation, and their own
Dispensing with some of their Coll. Statut. or their Societies having submitted
to the same Case, and so confessed it in former Reigns, it is known to both the
Vniversitys, that where the Stat. of their Coll. obliges them to Elect their
Fellows only from such a County. that themselves have put Persons of another to
move for a Mandamus, and brought them in too, with a Non Obstante to their
Statutes and their Oaths. But besides, neither of those are Concerned, for the
Mandate of their King is an absolute command to Admit; and their obligation to
their Oaths, is only in those Points, where they are left to Elect. In short,
their Combining to be stubborn, was but a Confederacy against the Power of
their Prince, whose Proceedings will Abound with Justice, when their Punishment
may Want Pity.
Disobeying of their Bishop, and Opposing their KING. It Is strange, that such
Men must be so sparing of their Thanks now to their PRINCE, that once thought
they could never return enough (when even for a common Kindness, we usually say
among our selves, Thank ye Twice); and to say that for the same assurance, they
had Addressed long since, when He came to the Throne; was but little better, than
telling His Majesty, He might have spared his Complement, and this
Condescension to his Subjects, was a sort of Supererrogation. I could never
imagine what was the meaning of such Irreverent Reservedness in so many Members
of a Church, that was once so Forward, as to fall under some Peoples Lash for
Officious: but some Persons now, upon the pretense of their Integrity, are
tickled with the Vanity of being Famed for stout, and standing to their
Principles; and Men of such a temper, from the Fame that they affect, must
endeavor to be surly and morose; but this is still, but a desperate sort of
Imprudence, if we consider the Case that Occasions this Discourse, no Wise Man
will be stiff and sturdy to those that can humble him; and when the Insolency
of the Provocation may procure more Mischiefs, than any by all his Bravery he
can defy.

To tell us that a Trial of the New Test. Page 6.
Legal Establishment will force a Legal Protection; and that the King has sworn
to defend the Church, as bold upbraidings as they be to the Crown, are but bad
Encouragement to continue their KING's Kindness, and as Lame excuses for their
Ingratitude; for sure the Countenance of a Prince would be somewhat of a
preservative too, and not endanger their Security from the Law: whatever Oath
he took to Protect their Religion, he did not Swear too to put out his
Declaration of Assurance also; and though he be obliged to Govern by Law, I
don't know what Law oblidges him to tell them so often that He Will; In this
sure his Majesty has done More than he was bound to do; and then, those that
are deficient in their dutiful Return, can never have done so much: no Silly
Sophistry, no Foolish Fear will wipe away the Scandal of such a reasonable
reproach; and it will sound a little harsh, (though the danger were such indeed)
when some of Her Enemies shall observe, that for keeping out some Popish
Secluded Members, the Loyal Church of England, is now the Non-addressers. But
to do Her Justice too, some of her Bishops upon more serious Consultations, did
atone for a more General defect, and Obliged their Communion by a Prudential
Act, that fain would have been so improvidently Wise as to Disoblige her self.

I could superadd here, that other silly Suggestion of the Restitution of
Abby-Lands; were not the Panick Fear of it Superseded by a Learned Treatise,
and the Confirmation of them from the Pope, even in the time of Queen Mary; the
common Intrest of Papists to Oppose it, and that his Majesty might as well set
up a Court of Wards and Liverys; and so make All Lands ly at his Mercy: and
that He himself has Assured them Expressly to the Scots in his Proclamation.

SECT. VI. The Means that may be used to Prevent the Malice and Insinuation of
Such as would Obstruct It.
AND now at length, we are arrived to put a Period to these Points; and having
considered the Methods that have been used to Hinder this Healing Parliament,
we are come to the Sixth and last Section, to Consider the Sixth Point; The
means how to Prevent the Designs and Insinuations of such as would Obstruct It.

And for that, reflect but a little on these following Considerations: if they
have but little Weight with them, you are not burdned much; if they have not a
little, it is your Interest to bear with them.

Consider, That notwithstanding the specious pretenses, of some spiteful and
malicious men, these dreadful apprehensions that are put into your heads, may
be none at all; at least not such as they are represented; that the Authors of
them may be men that oppose his Majestys Gracious intention, more out of malice
to him, than kindness to themselves, and their Church: I speak to Churchmen
(for Dissenters cannot be supposed dissatisfied with that mercy that makes them
happy beyond their expectation) but they are Members, I believe of this
Established Church (for all the many Letters to the other Congregations) that
from the present Constitution of our Government, I fancy must for the most part
be concerned, that can best Second the Clemency of their KING, and confirm to
them an established Toleration by a Law, and such an one as will repeal All
those by which they have a long time so unreasonably suffered.

I. It Is Reasonable to be done. II. It Is Fittest for them to do it. III. It Is
Their Interest so to do.
And first, let them tell me, their best pretenders to Reason; whether the
suffering for Conscience sake, can without the greatest reluctance of
Conscience it self, be defended; or whether it is advocates are not touched with
an inward aversion, at the same time they write for it, especially, should they
reflect, it may be their turn to suffer? whether a body ought to suffer for the
sentiments and suggestion of the Soul that informs it, when it consists only in
the Worshipping of the same God, in which all Christian Churches agree? sure
these men are not so fond of the Fire and Faggot they so much fear, as to
Justify for it the persecution of the Primitive Christians, and make their
Martyrdoms but so many Judicial Processes for their Nonconformity, when of the
old Heathen Emperors, few were of Opinion in this Point, to Punish people into
Compliance: the Christian Religion, I think, is now so well settled, and the
Seed of the Church, so well sown, that there is no great need of the Sanguis
Martyrum to water it; neither is the representation of it in this manner so
improper, or the comparison so absurd; for tho there may be a better Warranty
to force people of the same Faith in Christ, to the worshipping their God in an
Established Way, than the Pagans could pretend to, for the forcing us to be
Infidels; yet this would justify them still, who thought their Irreligion and
Idolatry the best of Devotion, and had the Decrees of their Emperors to
Authorize it; which were with them the Statutes and Laws of the Land: and I am
sorry that I can add, that such severities amongst our selves, seem much worse,
when we agree in one common Faith, in one Creed, in one Christ Jesus: neither
is the comparison of the Punishment, and sort of Suffering so absurd; for tho
we do not exercise, by our Laws, the Long Sheet in Foxes Martyrology, and are
left, as we see the Heathens were there, to study Torment; though the Flames that
he has made to rage so strongly through his vast Volumms, are happily quenched,
all Burnings forbidden, and Religion no more to suffer with a Writ de'
Haeretico: it will be as little credit to it still; that it is now, no Fire and
Faggot that can force a Conscience, but only an Hangman and an Halter. It Is
true, that whatever has been the severity of the Laws, such cruelties have
seldom been put in Execution; but to say, they never were, is as certainly
false: Several in Queen Eliz. Reign, suffered merely for professing of their
Faith, and my self remember three that died for it, and that only for being
Priests, in the late Perjurious time of Arbitrary Oaths, and pack't Evidence;
besides, another that was condemned and banished; whom I have met with since in
his Exile. But whatever be the Mercy of the King, the Cruelty of the Laws can
never be the more defended, and they are never the more Merciful because of the
Clemency of the Prince that remits them. In the mean time, such bloody
sanctions are certainly blots to that Religion that keeps them upon Record; and
if we commend those that are for retaining them, we must at the same time blame
those that but so lately repealed the Writ de Comburendo.

So much for the Reason of them, and but this little for Fact; they cannot tell
us of any Country that is Protestant, nor of any Catholic, but where the
Inquisition is Established, where it is made Capital to profess a particular
Faith, even in France (whose Cruelty is decry'd so much) though the fugitives are
driven to the Galleys, they are not gone so far yet, as for professing, to make
it Death. How quietly do those peaceable Countries Flourish, where at this time
for Conscience there is no Oppression at all? The celebrated Dr. ought to have
Magnified that too, as well as the Misery of those places where any Persecution
reigns. The Protestant and Popish Churches, I Have seen stand very Quietly
together in most of the Mastrich, Breda, etc.
frontier Towns of Holland; and in the Dominions of several PRINCES of Germany;
and the Magistracy by Heidelberg, Ausburg nd Duseldorp. By the Treaty at
Munster and Osnabrugh.
turns Executed by the two different Persuasions, without any Laws for Hanging
or Burning one another; and it is sure, no Bad President, if we only take
Example by our Protestant Neighbors.

But as some of our Laws are sanguinary for Matters of mere Religion: so there
are others that are less severe, though as inconsistent with the Charity of a
Church, or the Quiet of a State; such as Fines, Confiscations and
Imprisonments; and what Inconveniences they have brought upon the Nation in
general, as well as the poor Sufferers in particular, we have touched upon
before, and now as needless to relate. The Discovery of those vast Sums of
which the KING is defrauded, may hereafter make appear what was Extorted from
the Subject, to the Enriching of some Knaves, and the Ruin of more Honest
Families.

But the pressing the Reasonableness of it so much, seems almost unnecessary,
when the most invisible Commissioner from the Church that is so Concerned,
comes up so far, as to countenance with his Celebrated Reasonings the
Unreasonableness of these severe Sanctions; by seeming so willing to Suspend
them for the sake of some Dissenters, and not others: and shall this be taken
for Reason too? sure the Universities will teach him better Logic. I know the
Aphorisms of their Schools in some Sense say; That of Contraries there is the
same Reason; but sure they will not make it out in Contradictories too. Is then
Tolleration? is the Repealing of the Laws Reasonable, for the sake of some
Dissenters, and not others? I don't know what they fear of Arbitrary Power, I
am sure this is Arbitrary Reasoning; and but little better than none at all.
The Letter might have been a little more Contracted; to say much in a little,
and all the solidity of his mighty Argument made up into one syllogism (i. e.)
It is but Just that all the Penal Laws for Religion, should be Repealed; but
that all Penal Laws for Religion, should be Repealed, is not Just; Ergo, The
Laws against the Roman Catholics, etc. If there be any Contradiction in the
Terms and Premises; who can help it? for certainly suffering for Religion, must
be the same to All, whatever are the Professors of it; and if we once grant it
unreasonable to some, then presently to all unprejudiced Reason, untainted with
Interest and Art, it must conclude Universally, and extend to All; and I know
these Barbarcus Logicians know so too, and include in it both Turk and Jew, and
any thing that is Pagan, unless it be Mr. Johnsons the Vid. His Popery and
Paganism.
Papist.

Are then the Roman Catholics no Dissenters? or are they Dissenters with you
worse than Infidels? for it seems, for the Christian Protestant. Dissenters,
the Circumcised Dissenters, the Mohammedan Dissenters, and the Pagan Dissenters;
these Persecuting Laws are too Cruel and Severe. May By 1 Eliz. 3 Jac. 25 Car.
2d. and 30. They are denied Office. they are debarred from Sitting in
Parliament, to which they are Born.
Birthright, By 35 Eliz. 3 Jac. They are forbid the Court and Company, Towns
and City.
Humanity By 31. Eliz. 13 Jac. 3. Car. 1. Their Assurances, Wills. Legacies,
Trusts Voided, Goods confiscated, Estates forfeited.
and Property, be concerned in the Case, and made Motives to the removing of
what is By 1 Eliz. 3 Jac. 25 Car. 2d. and 30. They are denied Office. they are
debarred from Sitting in Parliament, to which they are Born.
Injurious, By 35 Eliz. 3 Jac. They are forbid the Court and Company, Towns and
City.
Scandalous, or By 31. Eliz. 13 Jac. 3. Car. 1. Their Assurances, Wills.
Legacies, Trusts Voided, Goods confiscated, Estates forfeited.
Prejudicial to them; and cannot Roman Catholics come in for a share by By 1
Eliz. 3 Jac. 25 Car. 2d. and 30. They are denied Office. they are debarred from
Sitting in Parliament, to which they are Born.
Birth, by By 35 Eliz. 3 Jac. They are forbid the Court and Company, Towns and
City.
Nature, or By 31. Eliz. 13 Jac. 3. Car. 1. Their Assurances, Wills. Legacies,
Trusts Voided, Goods confiscated, Estates forfeited.
common Equity; or are Papists not Born to the By 1 Eliz. 3 Jac. 25 Car. 2d.
and 30. They are denied Office. they are debarred from Sitting in Parliament, to
which they are Born.
Privileges of Society; are they all By 35 Eliz. 3 Jac. They are forbid the
Court and Company, Towns and City.
Beasts, or all By 31. Eliz. 13 Jac. 3. Car. 1. Their Assurances, Wills.
Legacies, Trusts Voided, Goods confiscated, Estates forfeited.
Beggars? (and truly if we may trust some descriptions, not long since
applauded, they have set them out but little better. Sure this is not the way
for continuing the Fame of that Church, for being always on the Vid. Trial of
the New Test. page 1.
Charitable side toward Papists; this will instead of having her Charity
mistaken, show that she mistakes her Charity. It would be a more Charitable Act
for this Church, by way of an expedient, to get one Statute to pass for making
the Papists Perfect Outlaws (i. e.) as my Ld. Coke expounds it, to be hunted
like Woolfes, then to keep Twenty-four in Force, for their Confusion, Death and
Destruction. How can it be answered either to God or Man, when by so public an
Act as a National Repeal, you declare, that to make men suffer for Religion is
Barbarous and Inhuman, and at the same time you leave upon Record the severest
of those sufferings in their fullest force; this is filing up such a lasting
reproach to your selves, that you would seem to take care, lest time should
take it off, and the Infamy fail to be transmitted to posterity.

But as by Nature and Charity they must come in for a Common Share, so I see no
reason of State, no Civil Concern that Obliges you to keep them out; it is but a
bad argument of the Clergy (as often as it is used) when from the Popes
Supremacy, they make all Papists such mortal Enemies to all Monarchs; they
might as well prove that by their own swearing to obey their Metropolitan, they
part with their Allegiance to the King of England, and so set Lambeth too
against Whitehall: It Is professed by them All, they acknowledge no other Power of
the Pope but in Spirituals; and Protestants will tell them that they do,
whatever they do or say to the contrary; nay, though some have disallowed even
that, and will no practice to the contrary please them? does not the King of
Spain, the most Catholic King alive, live as free from Rebellions (I am
ashamed to say more) then the King of England? is not the King of France as
absolute as our own at Home, and as ready to quarrel with Rome upon the least
diminution of his Right? and to come homer to our selves, have not our own Laws
justl'd out this Jealousy with the Popes Pretentions, in several Vid. Stat. of
Carlisle of Provisoes, etc.
Statutes, under our Catholic Kings.

But besides their Principles (as to their particular Practice and Behavior)
have they not given England Proof enough, they can live in it like good
Subjects; and if we put the Test of their Loyalty, against That made to prevent
Dangers from Popish Recusants, I am afraid it will spoil all the Praeamble.
Gentlemen, Matter of Fact confirms it; and it is in vain to dispute: They Fought
with You for CHARLES the FIRST, in the Field; and They alone Preserved the
SECOND in the Royal Oak; forsook their Fortune at Home, and followed Him in his
Exile Abroad. The Best of Protestants could do no more; though some might fare
better that did not so much: and their being among the Rebels, is but a Libel
of This their Celebrated Dr. has made K. James 1. to curse his Posterity: K.
Charles 1. to betray his Friends, Char. 2d. to deceive his People, James 2d. to
Oppress his Subjects: as if He had labored to ly under the Glorious Infamy of
Libelling four Kings in one piece of Paper; as if his Quarrel were too meanly
commenced, if it did not terminate in the lasting Reproach of our whole
Scottish Line; and he had better Authority to do it, because himself a Scot;
and his Sovereign Lords were all at last to Suffer, because his Master by him
was at first Betrayed. Vid. Paper, page 12, 36, 23. 1.
Burnet's, both on the How can this Established Church, if it has any Veneration
to the Dust of their Late Protestant Prince Deceased? applaud, approve of the
Writings of such an Injurious Impostor, that would have his Name Buried too;
and that tells them, The greatest Kindness that can he done to His Memory, is
to Forget Him. page 23.
KING's Declaration, and them: which is sufficiently Baffled by the well-known
Story of Coll. Ashton; who, when refused by his KING, was Courted into
Commission by the Parliament; which, as soon as Received, he Laid himself and
That at His Majesty's Feet. This is as certain, as that some Protestant
Subjects were in Rebellion; which, if such a thing must Reflect on a Church, I
am afraid that will very much suffer: and to say the National and Established
Church did disown all such Proceedings, will not much mend the Matter, when so
many of her Members were so mainly concerned; for though the Sectaries at last
prevailed, for the subverting of the State; the Commons of Forty-One that
Commenced the Quarrel were generally Churchmen; and it is not impossible for
such to be Zealous, and Discontented too; neither is the Communion bound to
answer for the faults of those members she Condemns; the Lord Lieutenants that
this Parliament chose, were for the most part Conforming men, and Essex's Army
had many such Officers too; some can tell us this for a truth, that lived then,
and their Catalogue for the Militia makes it no ly. It Is too much to remember,
and too soon to forget, that most of the Excluding Members were of that
Communion, as well as all the most Eminent Conspirators in the last Plot and
Rebellion; and even her Passive Obedience was Burlesque by one that publicly
professed himself her son: I speak it not for a disparagement to the Church, that
was then beyond dispute, both in Principal and Practice faithful to the Crown;
but to satisfy such men, that it is both imprudent and irrational for them to
fling out such arguments as will fly in their face; and as unjust to censure a
whole Persuasion, only for the fault of some of it is Professors: for
King-killing and deposing, to condemn a Catholic Communion; and from the
writings of a Jesuit to upbraid the Church of Rome, and that in Terms too
bitter for a Prayer; to make their Religion to be Rebellion, and their Faith
Faction.

And so much for the Reason of a Legal Toleration, and General Comprehension.
Now to show too, that the Members of the Church Established, ought to be willing
to get it Done: And that 2d. It is fittest for Them to do it.

And first, they must remember, that by themselves these Laws were made; and as
a learned Lawyer lets us know, that he is the best Judge of a Law that has the
Power to make it; so we may say, those that make it, when it happens to become
unreasonable, are the Fittest to get it Repealed: if the Prelates are become
less riged, if the Spirit of Persecution is turned into a Spirit of Peace, if
they make no matter of Conscience to give Indulgence, what greater proof can
they give of all this, then by their own voluntary Cancelling those severe
Laws, which themselves must own, for some considerations of State were only
made? This would be a much better evidence of their more merciful disposition
then all the Promises of T. W. It will be no such scandal, though it be true,
when all that can be said, is, You were overseen: Length of time, and
revolution of affairs, tell People at last their long errors, tho commonly too
late, and then for the most part make men wise, when they cannot make amends
for their folly. But Fortune seems to favor you now, and puts it in your
Power, to mend all that was amiss; she seems to Court your Inclinations, and
tempt you, to Credit your selves, Gratify your KING, and Pleasure all.

In the next Place, I hope it will be as plain, That 3d, It is their Interest
so to do.

First, because it is they themselves that have asserted the Kings Power in
Eclesiasticals to be such; that it may be much to their detriment to Provoke
such a Prince, whom they by Law have made so Powerful; neither is it such a
Childish reason, that it must be dally'd with, or laughed out of doors, as an
Author does it, with Vid. Trial of the New Test. page 6.
a Legal Establishment (even whilst it remains so) legally subverted. It may be
done Sir, without such a deal of Contradiction, when People make Laws that
Contradict themselves: if Popish Recusants are so dangerous, that they must not
be Tolerated in England by a Law, and we have such Laws, that set the King as
Supreme, to do whatsoever the Pope could have done; Papists may well expect to
be Protected from such a Catholic King, and perhaps Protestants owe to His
Promises most of their Security: the Review of their First Fruits, to the full
Value, as little as it terrified the bright Spirits of Oxford, may Perchance be
found the smallest part of the Prerogative; and tho such a Canon could not
Frighten them so far as to comply with their Diocesan (if matters are to be
managed merely by the Laws that are made) I fear there may be some found that
empower the Prince to deprive them of a Bishop.

Secondly, they will do wondrous well, I will not say wiser, if they do it
themselves, if only for fear lest others should do it for them: I much doubt,
if Dissenters should once come to be the Prevailing part in a Parliament,
whether they would make so good terms for this Established Church, as she might
do (if she pleased) for her self. The King has given her very good words for
it, and I wish she may not forgo the Benefit of them; He has promised to
Protect, and doubtless will not deny her any reasonable means for her
Preservation: if he has a mind to do her Good, how can she be angry, if he will
only keep her from doing ill? the persecutors of Daniel could find no Occasion
against him, but in the Case of his God; but yet we saw the King labored to
deliver him. It Is not to be doubted, if she comply with his Majesty's request,
he will refuse Hers; and why may she not be as safe with an Act of Jac. 2d. for
Establishing her the National Religion, tho she part with the 13 Eliz. for
hanging up all that differ from her? It will never be the worse Church, because
it cannot do more ill. And the Notion that some sort of people have got in
their Noddles, of the Necessity of such Laws in a Church, for the Support of
what is the Religion of the State, is false both in Reason and Fact; for
certainly, that may be supported without surpressing all other Opinions; and
there is no need that a Jesuit must be Gibbeted, and other Dissenters Banished,
and Hanged too if they return, and that Sanoumary Laws must be subservient to
an Act of Uniformity: It Is no more, then if a man should tell you; Look you Sir,
most People are of our mind, and we can get a Patent to make you think so too;
and if you wont believe what you cant believe, or believe all that we can
believe, you must even suffer what coms on it, be it Fine, Imprisonment,
Banishment, or Death; why, a moral Heathen would be divided in his passions at
the nonsense of such severity; and Democritus himself in a doubt, whether he
should laugh or cry; and such partial Christians must Blush too when they blame
the Proceedings of the most Christian King; and whom they make for it too in
their famed Antiphrasis even Antichrist himself. But one would think that doubt
should be out of doors, of a Church Established by Law not to be able to
subsist, without it reserve a Power by Law, to punish all others: when the
Present practice of so many Foreign States, proves the Consistency, and we
have the promise and experiment of two KINGS Reigns, that it shall, and can be
so in ours at home.

It Is to no purpose, to Tattle us out of the Integrity of a good Action, with
the tale of a Tub, or fool away a prudential Act, with an Aesop's Fable, Vid.
Trial of the New Test, etc. p. 5.
To tell us of the Conditions of Peace, that were made upon the surrendering of
the Dogs, and that the Sheep, afterward, were worried by the Wolves: Setting
aside the malice of the Application, it is most foolish, and impertinent, when
the contrary is more true, and these sanguinary Laws are to be laid aside, and
that only for their sucking of blood; and sure it is not the first time too, we
have known Dogs to worry Sheep.

And Lastly, Common gratitude to so good a King should Persuade this Church to
Comply with his reasonable requests: has he discountenanced any of them, but
such as have incurred it by this Obstinacy, perhaps more imprudent, than safe?
And had the Parliament dissolved, but a little condescended, I fancy there
would not have been so much work cut out for this: Has not the King, whose
Royal dispensations qualify all, preferred them Equally, both in Court and Camp,
making every man's merit his promotion, without examining of his Faith? Has
there a single man been preferred to any Benefice or Cure, but such as have been
qualified by Law, tho some perhaps have been dispensed with to keep them, that
for altering their Religion, they might not starve.

In Edw. the Sixths Reign, even from the confession of Doctor Burnet, most of
the Bishops, only for being true to their old persuasions, were troubled, were
turned out Illegally, were imprisoned several years; till Queen Marys Reign.
Vid. the continuance of his Reflection on Mr. Varilas. page 63. And sure our
present Bishop of Londons Case was never yet so hard, tho so highly resented.
Where is this mighty progress for the introducing of Popery? The KING now is
going into his fourth year, and the Church stands still it as was four years
agon; and the Mighty Din, of the measures and faggot of Queen Mary, is as much
to the Purpose, as if they told us of the fire Ordeal of Queen Emm: She removed
all the Bishops in no more than one year; and I think Queen Eliz. did it all in
one Month: and here, since Appropriating of Loyalty is so much in fashion, we
cannot but say this for the Papist too, (whose Fidelity to the Crown is too
much questioned:) this Protestant Queen was by their own Confession, and as it
plainly appears from our own Annals, advanced to the Throne, by a Popish
Parliament, then sitting; and no one can tell, had they been sitting at KING
Charles the Seconds Death, of what temper they would have been, the Legitimacy
of Queen Eliz. was then in dispute amongst all Catholics; the Succession of
his present Majesty was indisputable by his blood, and yet Heath the Popish
Metropolitan and then Lord Chancellor, without any discontent, says their own
Vid. Heylins Reformation. Page 101.
Historian, declares her Title to the Crown, to both Houses of Parliament, and
so was she received without the least opposition, which certainly does savor
somewhat of an Unquestionable Loyalty: And if that wont serve, the same Author
says more, That many in the House of Commons that had a great zeal for their
Popish interest, yet Preferred their Allegiance page 107.
to their Natural Prince, before their concernments for the Church of Rome. And
this is sure more Loyalty then was shown by the Protestant Reformers to her
Predecessor, against whom they set an Usurper in the Throne, contrived a Will,
and raised an Army; tho so much must be said for the Suffolk-Gospellers of the
Country, that they were better Subjects, then the mighty Liturgy men at Court,
and assisted Queen Mary with Men and Arms, when the other kept from her the
Capital and the Crown.

Queen Eliz. held more Bishoprics in her hand for many years, many more, then
this KING since his coming to the Crown has disposed of: their Churches, their
Chapels are all at their own Devotion, and that within his Royal Palaces, and
his own Walls. Upon Application of these very People, has he confirmed to them
several Freedoms and Immunities, where he might have interposed with his Power,
and Prerogative: These undistinguisht favors to all alike, one would think
should oblige some persons not to deny that Peace to their Sovereign, which he
labors to give to all his Subjects; A Peace of Mind, A Peace in the midst of
Arms; but such only as are employed for their defense, the credit of their
Nation, and the Terror of their neighbors; tho even that must be made their
Dr. Burnets Papers.
Grievance too, which by the Goodness, and Grandeur of their Prince, is their
greatest glory.

But there are many things besides to be considered; consider but the reason of
Enacting these Laws, especially against Popish Recusants, upon whom they are
most severe, and that they are now become the most unreasonable; because the
very occasions that called for them, and to some people seemed to make them
necessary, are now just none at all: the Preambles to those very Statutes seem
but so many Contradictions to the body of the Law. It would be hard for a Judge
or Justice to tell the King of his dangers from Popish Recusants, when he is
sure he can put his greatest faith, and confidence in them, and has so often
tried them in dangers too: but it seems they and the Statutes being the better
Judges of it, are not bound to believe the KING, but to Prosecute his friends
for High Treason, whom trusting and trying, he finds to be guilty of no Treason
at all. And had not our Protestant officers of the What can even the Church
suffer, from the Repeal, that it is not exposed to from the Kings dispensation?
And the malice of their Dr. Burnet makes them the same. Reflections on
Declaration.
Peace better repeal those Laws, that are become but a dead letter, thenly
under a seeming sort of Perjury, for not putting them in Execution?

Consider, if in the time of the late KING, by some Antecedent Vid. Q. Eliz. K.
I. K. Chapter before Cited.
Law, all the Conformists had been banished the Court, or from Access to the
Kings Person, if they had been made Malefactors, Felons, and Traitors, of whose
Loyalty he had so much proof in their adhering to the Crown, would not his
Majesty have been bound to get them repeat'd, and themselves have thought it
the most reasonable thing in the world, that the Roman Catholics in England
have for a long time lain under severity not only of Opinion, and Censure, but
Punishment and the Law? even Protestants may allow, without falling from their
Faith, or favoring their Religion: for such a modest confession in their
favor, is no Vindication of the Doctrine of their Church; and their Case to be
considered here, respects only their affairs in relation to the State; and the
matters being merely Political, must be determined by the Maxims of our
Statesmen, and so no Subject to be decided by the Schoolmen and Divines: And
since those Persons suffer from the Constitution of Past-times, partial to
themselves, since Papists that were once denied access to the person of their
KING, are now the Support of his Crown and Dignity, since such put in but for a
freedom from Penalty, and an Immunity only from their being punished as
Malefactors, it would be as great a want of honesty, to call them Knaves for
it, as it is of Wit, to think them fools.

But the Absurdity of such unreasonable Laws is somewhat more Considerable, when
they seem not a little to touch, what is expressly forbidden, The Lords
Anointed: Let them tell me, where there is another such absurd inconsistency of
State, where the Statutes and Laws serve only to pollute their very Fountain,
the KING; and make a Criminal of the Prince to that very Government in which he
Presides, where the Worship of his GOD must be said to be an Offering to Idols,
and his Conversion to a Faith, High Treason against himself.

And then again, since Papists, as it is now apparent, have proved themselves No
such Criminals to the State, No such Pests of Society, as they have been
represented; since they have Suffered the Severities of the Nations Justice,
and sealed their Innocence in their sufferings and Blood; since they were
sacrificed to the Perjury of Recorded Villains, and for a Conspiracy that can
now only be Believed by Fools upon Record; it is time sure, after this Justice
of the Nation has been satisfied so much, even to the vid. Oat's Trial.
Arraigning of it self, to let them find a little Mercy too; and the more (one
would think) for their Misfortunes.

Consider who they are that Furnish you with such distrustful Apprehensions of
the Promises of your PRINCE; and would frighten you into Dangers and Despair:
One of them a discontented Malecontent, an Exile out of your Country; a
Criminal by Process in his Own; and whose Tho'by the Dr's. leave, the Lawyers
say, Abjuration will not Transfer it; vid. Cok. 7. Rept. p. 9. Dyer, sol. 300.
Allegiance, if we believe him, is tranferr'd to another abroad; and shall the
severest Satyrs, that Sedition can afford, or Rage and Malice invent, pass with
us for pure Politics and Impartial Truth? There are Vid. Dr. B 's Papers,
Letter and Trial of the Test.
Others we have touched upon, that are no less Notorious and Applauded, whose
best of Praise, is in not being Known, that affect us like Vipers with their
sting, while at the same time, they can hide their Heads.

Never Credit those, that endeavor to Discredit their KING; for such as will
take that Liberty, forfeit their Honesty, and by the very Fact, are not to be
believed: Pray, what Attempt has he made, to make the National Religion the
Roman Catholic? Which perhaps, were it designed, is as little feasible: that
will always preserve it self the National Religion which is most generally
Received; and until they can prove to us, That the Revealing the Laws, will
make more Papists in England than Protestants; they may make many Words, but no
Arguments. Has it not all the appearance in the world, that it is the Principle
of His MAJESTY's Soul, and not any Designs of State, that makes Him desire to
have all the Souls of His Subjects at ease too; to succor, and relieve the
Oppressed; and let the Prisoner go free: if not, pray, what then Obliged Him to
that tender Compassion to the French-Protestants? They are as much Heretics to
the Church of Rome; and cannot pretend to a greater share of Friendship, from
the Agreeableness of their Doctrine or Faith: They could not Plead Privileges,
Immunities, and Magna Charta; and tell the KING He was bound by His Coronation
Oath to Protect them; yet'tis well known what Encouragement He has given Them:
He has made use of His Prerogative for Their Preservation, and even Dispensed
with Law, for the getting of their Livelihood, and exercising of their Trades;
made use of His Proclamations to Command our Charity; and repeated them often
to press the Performance. These are Great Truths, and no little Arguments to
silence some Men's seditious Insinuations; and the Celebrated Dr. would have
been a better Subject, and Historian too, had he applied the Faith of the
Prince Palatin! he so much Commends, to the constancy and goodness of his Own
at home; and not set off his adhering to their Laws, only to represent the
Breach of Ours here: besides, he might have been so Candid to observe, that the
Peaceable and Flourishing Condition of those German Countries, is chiefly owing
to that free Exercise that is permitted of Religion: the Roman and Lutheran
Churches being both sumptuously Built in some Places, and as publicly
frequented; nay, in one and the same Church we have known them successively
celebrate the Mass, and the Protestant Service, and the Magistracy took it is
Turn in Civil Administration, after the same manner as the others did in
Ecclesiastical: The Dr. would have done well to observe, that in these
Dominions, there was no Forcing of Conscience, nor any Penal Laws for it in
Force; even where the Roman Bishops Preside as Sovereign Princes; there is no
such Persecution, as in the Electorates of Cologn and Mentz: but the painful
Gentleman must be pardoned for his Elaborate Observations to abuse his Prince,
when he has dealt as boldly with the Trinity; and from the most Ancient of the
Manuscripts, made room for the Doctrine of the Vid his Letter.
Arians: If he can serve the Protestant Religion no better abroad, than by
Betraying the Christian, he had better Dispensed with his Travels, and stayed
at Home. His frequent Reflections on the late Chief Minister of His Majesty's
Justice, and now the chiefest in the State too; as they cannot detract from the
mighty Merit of that Loyal Peer, so they serve only to make up the Measure of
the Drs. Malice: his Zeal to the Service of the Crown can never be made
Criminal by the Pen of a Zealot that invades it, and he cannot but Libel the
KING's most Faithful Friends, that so willingly would Abjure his own Faith and
Allegiance.

All Injury is superseded by such Calumny, even to the contradicting of the
most common Aphorism, and nothing of it will stick, though laid on in abundance:
Consider, that such Men's Suggestions are Malicious, and must not, cannot be
Believed: Consider, that some may make a cry for their Diana; though no one be
going to intercept their Trade, or take away her Shrines: In such cases, those
that have no concerns of Employment in the Church, are the best Judges, whither
She be really injured; for partial People, and Persons concerned, are apt to
Anticipate Dangers, though they are not so much as in the Clouds, or Hanging over
their Heads; and those that are but standers by, are the best Judges of the
Fair Play: The Jealousies of such Men is a debasing of their Function that is
Sacred; when like Mechanics in a Trade, they are afraid of Interlopers, and
will give occasion to say, that this earnest Contending seems more for their
Temporal Possessions, than for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints.

If our Laws were truly like the Medes and Persians, that they Altered not, and
which was insisted on to a Persian Prince upon the like occasion, for Darius
his condemning of Daniel for the Worship of his God; then I confess the least
design of Altering such Laws, would make the very intention of it Criminal. But
when our Law it self tells us, That any Subsequent Parliament, can Null all the
Acts of the Preceding, When it has been done almost every Session, and is
absolutely necessary for the Constitution of a State; it must not be put upon
with Falsehoods and Paradoxes. And to say, that if the Penal Laws are Repealed,
Popery will then be Established by Law, will be False, both from Inference and
Fact; for sure that is not presently an Established Church that is just let
loose from the Prison and the Jayl; and there will several Statutes remain in
Force, For maintaining of her Tyths, Dignities and Revenues, For making none
capable, but such as shall be exactly Conformable: For preserving the Present,
a National One, unless she be No Church, when she has No Power to Punish.

Don't be deceived with the shadow; that all things shall be granted to your
hearts ease under the Next Successor; this (were it not a foolish sort of
argument) would help me to Cap their Fable of the Dogs, with another to the
same; but this is certainly Folding your Arms, a pensive hoping in the Shade,
when you can run out and play in the Sun; and will ever it is Beams be the less
refreshing, because it will rise again the next day; and you are not sure but
it may be in a Cloud: but then, these Men that draw such a wise Scheam of
future Politics, can they foresee the Breasts of Princes, that they thus
Promise for them, and when their Hearts are said to be only in the hands of
God? Who knows but the Royal Heir, out of a Sense of Filial Duty, and Pious
Gratitude to the memory of it is Parent, will protect All those that have
Faithfully served him, of any Persuasion whatsoever, especially when so nearly
allied to the very Bosom of a Prince, whose way of Worship neither is the same
with the National here, and in whose Countries All Religions have been ever
alike Tolerated. But besides, with submission to their most Judiciary
Calculations, I look upon it as a little sort of undecent forecast, to be
Always Erecting such Scheams for the Next Heir, both in Discourse, and Writing,
as seem almost to calculate the Nativity of the Present, and as if they would
comfort themselves, that his Reign wont be long; Arguments are made,
Conclusions are drawn, and even Projects framed, with the Premises Still, If
the King die. Regno H. 7.
Stanley lost his Head by a less severe construction of Treason Ex hypothesi;
And such insinuations seem to savor of the Prayers made by some Zealots in the
1st. of Vid. also Collins Case in Rolls Report, Jac. 1. of words spoken on
suppositions, vid. 1 Mar.
Queen Mary, that her Days might be Shortened, or her Heart Turned; but for all
the Condition annexed, it was made Absolutely Treasonable. I would not have some
men play the Gadbury too much, and limit the Life of a Monarch, by the
calculating of his Age; the Prayers of Good men may prolong it, and those of
the Bad will never cut it short.

Future Contingencies cannot be foreseen, but by that Providence alone that had
its being from All Ages, that has a Continued view of Time, and all Eternity by
Intuition, and in whose Hands alone are these Princes Hearts. Human Judgment
was always fallible, and very apt to make false conjectures; some People could
not think His Majesty would prove a Prince so Gracious, Merciful, and
Indulgent, and for that were uneasy; and who would have thought that some men
that insisted so much on Passive Obedience to the Successor, should be now
Impatient, and almost Disobedient under his Reign? To Distinguish themselves
out of their Loyalty, may show their Logic or their Law, but never will their
Love and Allegiance; I am ashamed to see men labor to make Vid. Trial of the
New Test. page 2.
Law and Loyalty the same, as if People when they have got a Capricious
Interpretation in their Head, have Authority to spoil the Common acceptance of
a Word. We all know forsooth, as well as the Critics, that Loy signifies Law;
but was ever Loyalty taken yet, in common discourse, for Lawfulness too? we are
bound to do all that is Lawful and Right to one another, by Law; and are we
therefore one another Loyal and Liege Subjects? but to take it in their
Perverted Sense, or that of Coke Littleton; to Defend this Kings Power of
Dispensing, is the most Loyal Act you can do, since by those very 2d. Inst. p.
496.
Lawyers, the Kings Prerogative is maintained to be the Best and Chiefest Part
of the Law. But I am sorry to see Churchmen now assume this very Notion for
Liegeance is the Proper Loyalty, and that implys an obligation of obedience,
from the Subject to the Sovereign by Birth, by Nature, who is called their
Natural Lord, without respect to Municipal Laws. Vid. to this purpose 2 Inst.
128, 7 Report p. 4. and many Acts of Parliament.
a reserve to their Love and Allegiance, when to my knowledge, this very
quibling on the Word, was used, not long since, by those they called Wiggs and
Phanaticks, and was by the Prerogative-Lawyers of those times laughed at, and
refuted; it is the Fate always, when men begin to grow Factious, to contradict
themselves; as if what was Loyalty under one Prince, was not so under another,
and one King cannot dispense with what the other Can.

Faction and Malicious Accusation can never carry the cause against Loyalty and
the King, consider in the Common Case of Felons, and Malefactors, the credit of
their Accusers is in nothing more Invalidated then by proving any manner of
Malice in their Prosecutors; and pray then let the King, when He Is arraigned
(for the sake of his Prerogative) have but as much Privilege as a Prisoner at
the Bar, when his Accuser too appears the most Malicious, and what is more, by
Process upon Record, the greatest Malefactor: the Law in many Cases Implys a
Malice, but here it is most plain beyond Implication, if you Consider the
Libells the learned Doctor has laid at your doors are penned by a Person that
wanted more preferment here, and who for his misdeameanors was turned out of
the little he had: By one that Vid. First Letter to Ld. Midd.
left England (and I believe him) with his Majesty's Approbation; and by his
commands was forbid to return: By one that ly's Vid. His Process and Citation.
charged with no less than High Treason, and who confesses in the Second
Address that he sent to the Secretary; that such proceedings shall provoke him.

Whatever is the veracity of the most moderate Man, he must not be believed
when he rages most Immoderately; no more than a Bear is to be trusted when you
have baited him, only because before he was quiet and tame: and men's Passions
too, in spite of our boasted Reasoning, even by being too much exalted, can
debase themselves so far as to become brutal, and then the deliberate mischiefs
they do, are the more dangerous, from the sagacity of that seduced reason, that
then truly, sells it self to do wickedly; and what more Ingenious Revenge,
could an enraged, and Vid. Second Letter.
provoked bassal take against his Liege Lord, then such a pretty expedient, for
the renouncing his Allegiance: And that he means by it more than a Vid. Third
Temporary Revolt to a foreign Jurisdiction, will appear from some passages in
his own Papers, when he suggests to our Peaceful Subjects here, the Vid. Six
Papers, page 22.
Principle of Mr. Hobbs his State of War, and the Scurvy Paragraph of self
Preservation; when he insinuates also that his Faith to his Prince may be
Temporary too at home, and to last no longer than the King will Countenance or
Protect.

What more Malicious Construction can be made from the plain meaning of Express
words? The King Declares, no one shall suffer for mere Religion. And what says
the Dr? Why, then when Religion and Policy are interwoven, they can claim Vid.
Ibid page, 23.
no benefit by the Declaration. Would the Doctor oblige the King from his
Liberty of Conscience to Tolerate Robbers and Murderers? for it is the Policy,
and Public safety of the State that punishes them still: or is it possible
that people, when they suffer for any other offense that by Law is truly
Criminal; can be said to suffer for mere Religion, when by Law too that is made
no Crime at all? Or would the Doctor have had the KING's mercy to have
Anticipated the Justice of future times, and extended to the Crimes, which
hereafter on the Pretense of Religion they may possibly Commit? and yet this
with prejudiced persons must pass for Reason that has nothing in it of Common
Consequence; and that the Doctor may not want contradiction too (for malice
will make wise men commit absurdities) tho I am sorry to see so Celebrated a
Reasoner run himself into such misfortune, only for the defaming of his own
KING: at the same time he would refute for it the Frenchman for too much
Praising of His.

In one Vid. Continuation of Reflection on Mr. Varil. p. 5.
Page of his Reflections, he makes our Queen Mary to get the better of the
Monarch of France, to be more fiery in her persecution; and to have Animated
the bloodiest of her Bishops, Bonner, he makes her as much a Monster as his own
malice, or that of the other Sex can make a Woman well to be, or be well
imagined: and what is the meaning of all this? Why! Here it is very fit for his
purpose so to do, and the Doctors Satyr, must come in here only in opposition
to the Monsieur's Panegyric; but then in another Ibid. page 150.
Page, this same Q. Mary was a Woman so far from delighting in seenes of blood,
that her Clemency was much magnified, and the mildness of that Princesses
Reign, gave no Cause to complain of the Rigor of her Proceedings, and what is
the matter now? Why, the KING, the Council, the then Chief Justice are all to
be Libelled; and the Clemency to Wiat's Crew, set against the Doctors Cruelty
in the West; and I warrant you, we should have heard nothing of Queen Mary's
being mild, had it not been to make our most Merciful Monarch Cruel: there is
not one such a touch of kindness to that Queen Mary, in all his Book of
Reformation. But after all this his forced Compliment to her Pious Memory and
mildness, his excepting it as to matters of Religion, will not much mend his
matter here, for let the Motives to Cruelty be what they will, it can never
make the Character of the Person mild, much less in matters of mere Religion;
for there it more aggravates, and for that the Doctor might have spared a
little Panegyric upon His Majesty, that in this point is so full of mercy; and
if Religion only did so Animate Queen Mary to Blood, She must in his very
instance have shed abundance, since that most dangerous Rebellion (as he calls
it) was most upon that score, though the Spanish Match was so much pretended,
though I think there was as much danger too in that which this KING went through,
and the severity no more than the necessity of the State so generally
distempered, did inevitably require.

In the next place, in another page of this applauded piece, Reflection, P. 54.
55,
To condemn a person in Absence upon Attainder, is there Justified in
opposition to Varilla's, to be always practiced by our Law, when the Absence was
wilful: but in other of his works, and even there in the next page the Cases of
Monmouth, and Armestrong, are made so many Murders, and the highest invasions
of Equity and Justice: Was the thing always practiced by Law, and shall it be,
when the Doctor pleases unlawful? But by his leave, the two Cases that he
confounds so Learnedly, were never the same: The first was an attainder in
Parliament, and never questioned for illegal: the latter was attainted too, but
upon Outlary; and though the Dr. would insinuate the Process upon his seizure to
be so unjust, only to have another touch at the Judge, it is as certain that he
suffered Justly, for to be sure the Clemency for Revoking the Judgment, was by
the Law only intended to a Voluntary surrender; otherwise the Prosecution of
the Law must be in a sort of Abeyance, and at a stand; and the KING's Officers
hearing of his abode, could not Seize an Outlawed Malefactor, till he has
absconded Out his Year and a Day: These Cases prove, that the prejudice of the
Historian has transported him to give false Colors to his Characters; even to
contradiction, only for the defaming of his KING.
but it would be well if the Dr. would make better use of his Case, and take
warning by it, to forbear his Libells, lest his High and Mighty States of
Holland and West-Friezland should be robbed of such a Jewel. If this Case does
not concern him, I know he remembers all the Reformation, and how they dealt
with a Dr. in Q. Eliz. time; that among his Mildnesses too of that Princesses
Reign Story was taken even out of Flanders; and if we Acts and Mon. page 2152.
Land. Edit. 1583.
believe his Famous Fox, cut up alive in England: His Case was so Completely
Parallel, that I compassionately wish this Dr. may never draw the lines so far,
as to perfect it in his Fate. His Case was also put too to the Consultation of
all the Lawyers; he was Tried for High Treason; he Pleaded hard for himself,
that he was a sworn Subject to the King of Spain, Vid. Fox, Ibid.
and none to the Queen of England; that the Judges had no Power to meddle with
him; however, his Plea was Overul'd with this Resolution, That no man can
renounce the Country wherein he was Born, nor abjure his Prince at his own
Pleasure: If this be 6 Papers page 21
Mohammedan Government, Murder, and Court of Inquisition, Protestants will have
little cause to thank him for his complements too on that mild Reign, and the
Mercy's of Queen Eliz. in carrying on the Reformation. Vid. Varill, page 55.


But besides; these expedients of bringing over Persons obnoxious to the
Government from Foreign Parts; which we see so confirmed by President, even
where the Protestant Party Prevailed: the Protection of the States he so stands
upon, may fail him too; and the succor of that Country which he so relyes on,
by leaning on too much, may like the Reed of another Egypt, run into his Side:
as little as he may value Mr. D' Albevills motions to remove him, his Masters
there are too cunning to Procure a Breach with a Crown, for the Protection of a
Subject that is indeed none of theirs. Those that never yet dealt so fairly
with Princes, may be suspected for such a superfluous Faith, to one that puts
himself upon them for a Vassal; but especially the danger to the Dr. may be
more than he Imagines, when the Justice and Law of Nations will oblige them to
a surrendering of him up; or at least a sending him away, unless he fancies for
that reason, the Dutch will refuse it. Men of a greater Figure have been served
so: the Earl of Suffolk attainted in Hen. 7. time, was after a long Debate,
delivered up by the King of Spain; and so was the Phil. de Commines. l. 4. Cap.
12.
Constable of France, by the Duke of Burgundy, to Lewis the 11th. and what this
Celebrated Historian must remember more, even in the times of Reformation:
Queen Eliz. demanded Morgan from France, and told the Scots when they did Both
well, that she would either yield him up to Them, or send him away from Her;
and sure He will not now Vid. Camb. 1593.
Blast and Blemish that Reign too, as well as all the rest that have been since.

This Historian must have met with too in his reading; that where the
delivering up such Fugitives has been refused, it has only been because they
would put them to as fair a Trial There; and so it was told the same Queen by
the King of Ibid. 1585.
Scots, when she writ for Fernihurst. Inferior Criminals for defrauding the
Revenue, have been returned us here, and High Treason I hope is of a higher
Nature: the Crimen laesae Majestatis Mutually concerns all Crowned Heads not to
Protect in the Fugitives of a Foreign State, no more than they can Encourage
the committing it in their own at home: and the Dutch cannot deny it us, unless
it be only because they have nothing of a Crown. It would be an hardship to a
Government, not to be endured; that an individual Subject should seize for
Contract and Debt in another Dominion, or by Reprisals at Sea right himself;
and yet Fugitives So were the Regicides to be returned us by the Fifth Article
of the Crown of Denmark. 1660. and eveh the Dutch did the same.
to find refuge for betraying even the Commonweal; this would subject the
States General to such an Incapacity of righting themselves, which every
Particular Skipper is capable of, that sells but an Herring. And at last, all
doubt is out of doors, where such Protection is provided against by the
Articles of Peace.

All Impartial People, I hope, will Pardon me for dealing a Little freely with
the Dr. that has been certainly more bold with His MAJESTY, and taken the
liberty to Libel no less than the whole Line: and for the Pertinency of such
Animadversion I appeal to all his Papers, put out on purpose to Oppose any
Happy Union, and all good agreement between King and People; and for the
reflections I Have returned, I can safely say, I have but Mildly touched upon, and
that Promiscuously, the most Provoking Sedition; from one that with the
severest Satyr has pointed at his KING.

Such rude Recriminations on the Crown, he knew would Interrupt the Peace that
is expected from an Approaching Parliament; and so to clear it from such
Scandals, and refute such Seditious Argument, must fall under our Duty, as well
as Design.

But whatever are his hopes from it is Approach, and the differences he expects
in its Debates, (who it seems is now so much a Naturalized Dutchman, as to
promise himself good Fishing from troubled Waters and the Mudd). I am Morally
persuaded they will hardly espouse his Quarrel, much less return him another
Thanks of the House: and what ever are the fond expectancies of some vain
People, will be so far from Invading the Rights of the Crown, as to Confirm
this so questioned Prerogative of their King; against which, the follies of
some inconsiderate Persons do so promise an Appeal, and will more likely draw
up a Resolve to suppress such Libels, than any Remonstrance for Grievances to
be Redrest.

The late Ld. Shaftsbury was once against All Tests, especially for Religion;
and made a Notable Speech in the House of Lords against that of the April 65.
Oxford Act being more Universally imposed: but some Years after, when he had a
mind to put tricks upon the Papists; then, Transubstantiation, Praying to
Saints, Sacrifice of the Mass, must be all confuted, and confounded with a
Test, when they might as well have Enacted the Trinity to be Nonsense; as
positively, to define, what possibly may be None, Superstition and Idolatry:
The Notions of Divinity, I think, were never before without a General Council,
so Dogmatically declared with an Ordered and Resolved, and most part of the
Christian World Transubstantiated into Pagan with an Act of Parliament.

If the belief of Catholics is so Captivated, as to consent to the Corporeal,
and Elemental change into the Substance of a God; for Godsake! Would they not
be worse then Idolators, if they did not Adore? And must they now be Voted
such, only because they do not think as others do? I must confess, I always
thought it would have been a wiser definition of this Established Church; to
have made Her Sacrament more Figurative, or the Sacrifice of the Mass less
Idolatrous; for Really Present, and the body and blood, to be verily, and
indeed Taken; are Terms that must put us to our Metaphysics; and which I have
not yet seen so well Explicated, as not to touch upon an Elemental
transmutation: Luther liked it so little, that rather than like Mahomet's Tomb,
to hang between two Elements, the Heaven, and the Earth; he made up his more
absurd composition of both.

And then for that other Idolatry of Images, and Invocation; from their plain
words, and in Charity to them, I am apt to think, has really no other
Existence, than in the Letter of our Laws, and the resolution of our Act of
Parliament; for my self have put it as a Question to several Papists abroad, as
well as to some of our own at home, even to the most ignorant Votary's: and if
any can be blind Adorers, the poorest Plebeians, to what they Exalted, and in
what they Terminated their extremes of Worship, when addressed to an Image or a
Saint? Why! the Answer was still to this Purpose, To the True GOD alone,
looking upon those Material Objects, but as so many Representations to move,
and elevate their Devotions to their Savior, and excite them to have recourse
to Him by such Intercessors: so that if we believe their own words, and men may
be allowed to know their own minds, their Church cannot be guilty of the only
Idolatry that can with any Charity be charged upon it; A Consequential, and
even that is but a forced, unkind, unintelligible extension of it; a Term that
has as much of malice in it, as of Metaphysics; and certainly can no more make
their Doctrine Idolatrous, than that would the Church of England, if her nine
and thirty Articles by a madman or a fool, should be taken for the Alcoran:
Ignorance may be the Mother of Superstition, or even a Criminal Devotion in the
Members of a Communion; when it would be madness to make the whole body of
Christians suffer for it too, as so many Turks and Mahometans.

I Will tell you now the substance of some of the Arguments of that Noble Peer,
against the first Test; An. 1665. Oxf. Act.
and you shall see, whether they will not serve against all the rest.

Ay, says he, It will be a great step to the overthrowing of the Act of
Oblivion, and reviving distinctions among Parties.

That all such former Oaths were steps to to the same end, that we should
rather think of repealing, than enjoining them to be taken by all the Officers
of the Nation, and Members of both Houses.

That Oaths ought to be simple and plain, whereas that about Religion was
intricate and dark, and only a snare to the Consciences of well-meaning men.

That such Oaths were against the Property of the Subject.

That it is directly against the Kings Crown and Dignity, that Subjects should
be sworn to matters of the Church.

That it was the highest invasion of the Supremacy, and the greatest attempt
that has been made against it, since the Reformation.

These His Arguments cannot but take with Dissenters, since it was a Speech he
made in their own favor, and defense, and sure Conformists cannot condemn the
reasonings of such a Noble Peer, who introduced both the Tests against the
Roman Catholics: And so Efficacious was his Oratory then, that the Lords Iaid
aside all further considerations of any Universal Imposition of such
unreasonable Oaths; and so concerned were they for offering the Imposing it,
that they drew up So also in 73.
Protestations against it, as the Invasion of their Peerage, and the Freedom of
Parliaments. And sure, if any of these Protesting Peers are yet Living, (as I
am sure some are,) their Honor, their Interest, their Birthright, their
Peerage, the very Judgment of their Souls, their Hands and Hearts, are all
pawned, for the repealing of such Laws, when against the Passing them they
entered such a notable Protest: a Repeal which Shaftsbury himself would be
ashamed were he now alive to oppose: This is no flourish, but Argument upon the
Case, that is kept upon Record, and that in the highest Court; and it is but
consulting the Journal of the House of Lords, and by that let the reasons of
such Laws to stand, or fall, that Honorable Assembly, when ever it Sits, will
find sufficient Reasonings, and as much Matter of Fact, for the removing all
such Tests, preserved for them within their own Walls; and their own Books show
them the best of Presidents, and a President, where the Case has been
contested, is worth an hundred when there has been no contest.

And being here come home to that, which touches the only tender Part of the
Government, The two Vid. Letter of Pens. F. to Mr. St.
Tests of Car. 2. against the Catholics: I cannot but take notice of the New
Paper of the Dutch Pensioner; that is so diligently spread for the diffusion of
an industrious mischief, and creating the most dangerous Difference, that can
arise from the debates of a Divided House; I cannot do better than close our
last Animadversions on their latest effort, that is so freshly set afoot for
our disturbance: The Reasons that it brings up in the Rear, are less to be
regarded than the Royal Characters, that it carries in the Front; and we could
forgive mijn Here F. his Arguments (if we did not refute them) when we cannot
so soon Pardon the Presumption for prefixing to a Pamphlet, Surreptitious, and
unauthoriz'd, the revered name of the Princess of O. the sweetness of whose
temper, and gentle disposition, as it cannot be supposed to delight in
severity, and Persecution; so certainly is as little pleased to promote any
thing to the disturbance of a State, to which She still seems so nearly
related; as her obliging nature does sufficiently secure us, she will favor an
Indulgence; so does that dutiful affection as morally persuade, she cannot
Patronize the opposers of her Parent. But the names of such Princes to their
pretended piece, they were well assured would make it Popular; the weakest side
is the wisest too, when it makes the strongest party: it was their last
expedient that made them trespass upon good manners, and presume to make
Theirs, Her Highnesses opinion.

It is offered it seems, in the first place, that the Papists throughout all
our three Kingdoms, should be suffered to continue in their Vid. Letter of Pens.
Religion: I confess the kindness is somewhat extraordinary, considering the
Present season; when the greatest Persecution in the Past, could not prevail
with them to renounce it: but if it shall be as the Paper promises, with as
much Liberty, as is allowed by the States in those Provinces; Then I humbly
conceive, that from their own Concessions, both these Two Tests must be taken
away; for by them both, both Peers and Commons of that persuasion are
Incapacitated for Military Employment; which the Letter it self, says by the
Laws of that Country even there they cannot; do not exclude them from: and sure
then it will ly harder upon them here, to be hindered from serving their KING
in his Camp, when a natural Liegeance requires it, Vid. Coke. 7. Rept. page 4.
express Statutes command it, and a Prince of their own Religion receives it:
Shall the Dutch trust them for their defense, that are of a different faith? 1^
H. 7.
And cannot the KING of England confide in them, because they agree in the
same? And yet by both these Tests they so contend for, the Catholics are
excluded from serving His Majesty, though they take up Arms only for his
preservation: So that this Letter-maker, must certainly fall into the necessity
of this Dilemma; that the Papists must not be permitted here the Liberty they
are allowed in Holland, or these Tests must be taken away for their more free
Admission into Military affairs; and without any medium, he must renounce his
own Position, or admit ours.

The Author of this Paper that must pass for the Pensioner, is certainly the
worst in the world to write for the Tests; when he gives it under his hand,
that he has never read them; and for that reason may be a Forreigner to our
Laws, as well as Land; when he says, that thereby Roman Catholics receive no
other Prejudice, than their being excluded from Parliaments, or public
Employments; when by the latter of those, Recusants Convict are banished the
Court, so much as seeing, or coming into the presence of their King or Queen;
or places where they reside, upon pains of incurring all the fearful Penalties,
and forfeitures, that follow the 30 Car. 2d.
violation of that Act: I hope the bare Even the Ld. Digby a Proselited Papist,
that contended for Passing the 1st. Test, used this as an Argument, because it
did Not Banish them the Court, which the 2d. does most effectually.
seeing of their Royal Sovereigns, cannot be called a Sitting in Parliament, an
Office, or public Employment, and the coming into their Presence, or Place of
abode, be presently interpreted a promotion to a Place too of high Preferment,
since it is seldom denied the poorest Plebeian, that never expects (perhaps) the
turning of the spit in the Kings Kitchen. I confess this clause is so far for
keeping them out of Public Employment, that it almost excludes them human
society: Herds them among Beasts, debases them below Brutes too; for if we
believe our old English Proverbs, even A Cat may look upon a King.

But I must tell these Politicians too, who so finely extenuate the severities
of these Tests into a mere Metaphysical Entity; A Negative sort of Punishment,
that only denies Papists to be preferred; that to any impartial person, these
disabling Laws, will appear a positive Persecution; and that only, for the sake
of Pure Religion: The Abjurations that they force upon the people in France,
are only more Universal; and with this disparity, they that there will not
renounce their Religion, must resolve to suffer as Patiently as they can, the
insolency, spoil, rapine, and outrages of all the Soldiers they send them,
which reduces several Families to misery and want; and for refusing the same
renuntiation here, many persons that have had their sole dependence upon some
office, or place, have merely for that been dispossessed and removed to their
utter Ruin and destruction; all the difference lying in this, between being
devoured by dragoons, or beggared by being turned out and discarded: or putting
the case more favorably, we will look upon Vid. Letter of Pens. F.
these Oaths only as they respect (in the sense of this Letter) the keeping
Papists out of Employment: what comfort can this be to the poor Catholics, or
what mitigation of a Protestant Persecution; when they are denied the common
Advantages that may make them rich? It must be certainly the same misfortune,
as to be turned out of their possessions, that they may be sure to become poor.

I cannot see with what Conscience this late Celebrated Vid. Letter of F.
Letter can assert, that, neither from these Tests, nor the Other Laws, Roman
Catholics are made to suffer upon account of their Consciences. This is too
gross to be put upon the Dutch themselves; for certainly were these Penal Laws
so favorable as only to incapacitate them for Office and Trust; yet even that
is a severity, which they are necessitated to suffer, and that for Conscience
sake: it is but a poor extenuation of an uncharitable temper, when he tells us
that for some Political ends, these Laws for Religion must remain unrepeal'd;
as if the Sacraments themselves, were only made to be subservient to some Civil
Institutions, and the God of Heaven, but an instrument to work out the
inventions of man: if merely for secular ends, so sacred a being, as the Drity
it self must be so solemnly invok't, (which the best Advocates for the cause do
seem to confess) I am afraid such an Invocation may be worse than that to
Saints, and be at least very profane, if not Idolatrous; neither can it be
answered us, that then all Declarations, all Oaths must be laid aside; for the
Consequence fails them too, for the Common reason of Imposing them is only, or
only should be, for the detecting of Justice and Equity, the discovering of
truth from falsehood, whereas these Protestations called Tests, are by their
own Confession kept a foot, only to be Injurious to their Fellow Subjects that
are Equitably born to the Common Privileges of their Country, and are so far
from a discovery of what is true or false, that they are made about matters so
profoundly divine and mysterious, that it is morally impossible for human
understanding to discover or find it out, unless the swearing to an Article of
Faith be found a sufficient proof of the soundness of the Doctrine, and the
books of Scripture, Ancient Fathers, modern Critics, can be all Confuted, or
be better Expounded by the Votes of an house of Commons.

This Statesman makes it so Incomprehensible for any that profess Vid. Letter
themselves Christians, to go to disturb the quiet of a state, and over-turn
Constitutions, only that they may be admitted to employments: And pray, must
not others then think it as Unchristian, to have the professors of the same
faith, and their Fellow Subjects excluded from such employs, which as their
Religion cannot really debar them from, so their very Native Birthright
demands it: it is false in fact, tho they take it for granted, that it is the
Roman Catholics alone that do so disturb, and disquiet the State of the
Kingdom; it is only these Laws that create all this disturbance to them, and
the state, these establisht-men would have been loath under the Oppression of
Oliver, to have merited the Name of disturbers of the Nation; and it is shown
before, that suffering from a power, Legal or Usurped, is still the same where
the Laws are oppressive; and if the Overturning of old Constitutions be a thing
of that consideration, (tho hardly a Parliament passes in which there are not
new ones made) if that I say be such a considerable argument, as to make it
absolutely necessary for our English Catholics to acquiesce; to continue
Outlaws, more incapacitated them some Protestant Aliens: how destructive must
this be to the Protestant Interest should the Romanists take an opportunity to
return upon us an old Law of the Romans, that of Talionis; and exclude all the
Reformed from Trust, with a Test of Retaliation? why we must submit, we must
not endeavor for our Restitution, we must not disturb the state, overturn
establishment, or repeal Laws. And must not we look very silly too, when by our
own Arguments we have silenced our selves? What a formidable blow will this
give to the Reformation in England, which was carried on (as some say) by the
overturning of all that was Ancient, and Established, Sacred and Civil, both in
Church and State; and afford them a Scurvy Argument, That they may overturn
with a better warrant than they were turned out; that their alterations will be
only a restoring of an old establishment, whereas we overturned that, to set up
new Constitutiens? In short, if they bring no better Reasons for our Religion,
than its being so much Established, it will certainly resolve it self into the
Power and Pleasure of the Prince, and really be, what they so scornfully
reject, truly Vid. Oxford Reasons.
Precarious; for surely they must see, that as soon as they had a Protestant
King, they presently had their Protestant Religion: And that in spite of far
more Ancient Constitutions, and Establishments to the contrary.

I Will grant him, that every constituted body, or Assembly whatsoever, will be
willing to make Laws for its own safety and Preservation: But whatever be the
Policy of the State, it must be still agreeable to the Rules of Reason and
Equity; otherwise it proves no more than that all things are Lawful that are
Expedient; and that a Commonwealth, (to use his own terms, as well as their
own Constitution) tho the result of an absolute rebellion, revolt, and
defection from their Prince, may make what Laws they please, to prevent any
Casual return to there natural Allegiance; or that an Assembled or tumultuous
People, may pull in pieces even a Pensioner, to provide against attempts thaet
may disturb their peace: and granting too that in Political bodies, like to
those that are truly natural, there will be always somewhat of innate tenderness
to their own Preservation; that genuin Principle, only respects all opposing of
a foreign force, and no way determines it to domestic oppression, no more
than if the lazy man that is said always to see the Lion in the way, should cut
off one of his legs, that he might the better run away with the rest of his
carcass: I am sorry I can say, that this dismembring of our selves for the
difference of Communion at home, does no less expose us to Invasions from
abroad; but I am sure the saying is as certainly True, proved by Experience and
Fact; and unavoidable from these Statutes, and the Laws; for should the best
Seaman, the best Soldier, by his birth, or Conversion, be a Papist Convict; he
is totally incapacitated, utterly impossible to do the least service to the
Kingdom or the Crown: and why should these Dutch people put that upon us, the
inconvenience of which they see in themselves; and take all the care to avoid:
unless they would Vid. Letter
have the more of the Kings Subjects unqualify'd to fight for him, only that
they might the sooner invade him. Before the making of our first Test; 1673.
when Papists Participated of Employments, had their Places in Parliament; I
cannot remember that they did Impeach our Peace; I am sure some of them did us
signal service in the Dutch Wars, his foes felt too much of the force of the
Admiral, and so may well fear the Preferment of his friends.

What the Reformed Religion suffers from the Roman Catholics in France, is no
reason at all against the repealing of Vid. Letter
these Laws in England, unless they can prove the disposition of the Princes,
and the Politics of the Two States, to be entirely the same; which as
precariously, as it is begged for an unquestionable Truth, if but duly
considered, is as positively false: for the Principle of our King will not
permit him to Persecute, and by the Constitution of our state against
Protestants in general, it cannot be done: for sure such a mighty Majority must
secure them from being suppressed, tho perhaps it cannot from oppressing all
others; and they may as well tell us, that the Hugonots in France, are able to
Frighten the Papists, and subdue them; since the Reformed there, have been
always much more formidable, both by number and force, than ever the Papists
can be supposed here; and yet even there, notwithstanding these insinuations,
till these late revolutions in the Policy of that State, the Protestants were
admitted to Offices and Trust, in Court, and in Camp, by Sea, and by Land; the
truth of which is so plain, that to name the Persons, would be needless and
impertinent.

It is more Dogmatically laid down, than Judiciously asserted, when he says,
that it is Impossible for Roman-Catholiques and Protestants to live Peaceably
together, when both are put into places of Trust: as if Religion, and Divine
Illumination, must only divest us of Humanity, enlighten us only so far, as to
see the better how to fall out among our selves. First, it is plain, that it is
very Unchristian that it should be so. Secondly, The contrary appears by
practice in several of the neighboring states to Holland, and in some Towns
that even they still call their own; where both Civil and Military matters, are
managed by both; as before we have proved, and that without these suggested
consequences of Suspicions and Animosities. Thirdly, We our selves perceive
none of this bad Correspondence, from these mixed preferments that His Majesty
bestows; but on the contrary a better understanding; and it would be hard
indeed, if the Examination of his Faith, must only qualify the man as to his
merit and desert; shall it be therefore hard for Papists in Holland to be shut
out of Military Employment, because in the first formation of their state, they
joined in the defense of their public Vid. Letter
Liberty; (that is, as I conceive in English) in maintaining that revolt they
had made from their Lawful Prince? And shall it not be as Injurious a piece of
Hardship, or the greatest injustice to exclude them here from the same
Employments, when they joined with all their Loyal Fellow Subjects in the
defense of their Sovereign, and in some cases were more eminently, and solely
concerned in his preservation? And whereas he insinuates their being mixed so
together in Offices of Trust, must so necessarily cause this contention and
Animosity? nothing is more true than the Contrary; when all our Jealousies, and
Envy, Emulation, and Division, have been occasioned by this engrossing of
Office and Preferment, from the partiality of the Laws; and men must needs be
more apt to malign those, that only will allow themselves to govern, than such
as will more modestly admit any other to share in the Government. Whatever has
been the sense of some Churchmen, they need not be ashamed to retract their
opinion, when the Recantation too will only make them better Christians, and
add the more Credit to their restored Charity; as many among them never
approved of the making men suffer for the Religion of their Vid. Protestant
Reconciler, etc.
Church; so several of them unprejudiced, thought it as hard they should
utterly be disabl'd for all Administrations in the Vid. Protest of the Lords
a-against the Tests.
State. To tell us, because we were once of an opinion, we must never change
it; is a better Rule in Religion; and if observed, would have prevented all
Schism, if not hinderd a Reformation, but is still a bad Maxim in the Politics
of a Commonwealth; for the changes and wonderful revolutions that happen in
those aggregated bodies, as well as in our Personal and individuals; which many
times in less than seven years, are mouldred all into new matter, make some
Constitutions and Establishments, Rules and Reasons, not only ridiculous but
Impracticable; and we cannot find in Scripture too, (unless interpreted by the
whimseys of such as set up for Christ's Kingdom,) that our Savior, has assured
us he will be with the Government, as well as the Church to the end of the world.
To this Point I can only tell the Pensioner further, that Catholics here are
not made uneasy under their perferments, unless it be by these Laws that make
them such Criminals only for being preferred; and Protestants may maintain with
them a good Correspondence, unless such, whose Ambition would alone share the
Administration of the State, or the favor of the Crown, and make of the very
Government it self A Monopoly.

That learned Dilemma, does not pinch, and press the Argument so close, as the
Paper Pretends, viz. That, if the Papists are so Few, the Laws have the Less
reason to be Repealed for them; and if their Numbers are much Greater,
Protestants have more reason to be afraid. This sort of syllogising, as sound
as it is, is as soon answered with another to the same, and that, out of his
Own Concessions. If their Numbers are so Few (as he says they are in Polland)
it is hard, to hinder them from Public Employments, when the Public Safety can
no ways be endangered by them: and if they are so Numerous, as he would make
them in Ireland, then we have no reason to be afraid; since where so many of
them (and we'll imagine them, if he will, the Major Part) People the Country,
Inhabit the Towns, are Entrusted with Offices, Civil and Military, the
Protestant Religion remains as firm and unviolated, and the Constitution of the
Government, as much Unshaken: and to bring it Homer to our selves in England,
in a farther Answer to these fearful apprehensions that are sent us from
Holland; That, when the Restraints of the Laws are Repealed, then we shall see
them brought into the Government; and Protestants find no more the support of
the Laws from such Magistrates. I hope he does not think too, we shall have no
Protestant Lords left, and that the Peerage it self shall be displaced: but
this Gentleman, is too much an Alien to our Commonwealth, to be admitted either
as a Judge or Iuror; being utterly unacquainted, both with Law and Fact. For
first, the Establishment of the Protestant Religion does not solely depend upon
those Statutes that are Penal, and those are only desired to be Repealed. In
the next place he has forgot, or is not yet informed, that our KINGS from the
Constitution of our Laws, have a power to Dispense with them too; which a Vid.
Six Papers, page. 25.
Dr. of Ours, and a Favorite of these Dutch, has made as dangerous as a
Repeal, and indeed, the very same: He knows not that his Majesty has Actually
exercised this Power, and Offices of all sorts of Trusts, are already in their
hands, Civil, Military, as Soldiers and Magistrates; and none can be more
Powerful to make Alterations, than such as have the Command in an Army; and yet
his fearful forebodings of future Invasions are now become no matter of Fact,
and makes that fail him too; the Protestants promiscuously enjoy, and that
quietly with them too all manner of Public Employment; and their Religion
remains as much Vndisturb'd and Established. But to infer from these Priveleges
that the Romanists already Enjoy from the Clemency and Prerogative of the King,
that therefore they must have further designs than their Own security; and that
they need nothing of a Repeal for to complete their Happiness, or to ascertain
their safety, is certainly an inference uncharitable, groundless, False: for as
they have not shown themselves so forward to subvert this Protestant Religion;
for this four Years, wherein they may be imagined to have had all opportunities
of doing it; (and if we believe Dr. B. and the mighty influence he says they
had in all the last Reign, we may add Twenty four Years more) we must conclude,
that it is the want of some Peoples Charity, that makes them so designing; and
that they are only so Formidable, because some Persons are resolved to be
afraid: but nothing is a greater Mistake and falser Inference, than from the
Immunity they Enjoy from the Mere Prerogative of the Prince, to say their
necessity for abrogating these Laws is Superseded; when their sole Safety they
must needs see (and so do their Enemies too with more satisfaction) depends
upon the Life of a Merciful Monarch (that must be mortal too) as long as these
Laws are left in Force for their future Destruction; and how completely they
are framed for it, in the loss of All Property, Liberty, and Life (if these
little things can destroy a man) by only being looked upon, will appear. Ple
appeal to any Impartial Protestant, whether his endeavors would not be the
same, if his Circumstances were so too; one would think that such Counselors
as would Lull them asleep with their seeming security, proposed only their more
easy ruin by some sudden surprise, such as are content for a time that their
helpful Hands bear with them the Sword of Justice, as long as another hangs
over their Heads; that will allow them a good Dinner, if they will but take it
under Damocles his Dagger: But Gentlemen, this is none of the greatest Kindness
to Complement them to such a Meal; it is but civilly telling them in the literal
sense, Eat and Drink, for to Morrow ye Die.

Having said so much before, on this so controverted Subject; we should hardly
have pursued it so much farther, had not this fresh Provocation, upon the
closing of this Piece, fell into our hands, which any one may see, is set a
foot, on purpose to divide the Parliament, that themselves are afraid might
otherwise Agree in an Universal Repeal: And I must tell these Contenders, as
long as a Legal Toleration will certainly be as great a security to all
Protestants, in the Liberty of their own Worship, as any Legal Tests
whatsoever: These Retainers of them, positively declare, It Is not the
Protestant Religion alone, they are so tender to Preserve; For if the Bill of
Erclusion had by the more Corruption of the House, been Past into an Act, they
might as well have labored too for the continuance of That: Since, if I have
any conception of the Politics of those times, those very two Tests they are
so Zealous to retain, were directly intended against the very Person of His
Majesty: The First, most effectually made him lose the Place of an Admiral; and
'twas with much ado, the Proviso of the Latter, left him a Place among the
Peers.

The Veneration all English Subjects should have, for the Presumptive, or
Apparent Successor of the Crown (for in spite of the Sophistry of the late Lord
Shaftsbury, the sense of the Terms is the Jame, when there is none Appears
before to Intercept him;) That as it was sufficient to recommend the Contents
of such a Piece to a Serious Perusal; so it must needs make it Merit as Modest
a Reflection, did it really bear that Image and Superscription, which I Have
reason to imagine was but a Counterfeited Coin. The Presses at London, did more
probably produce, what was their Prudence and Policy to Paum upon the Hague;
and if Holland had the honor of bringing it into light, this Pensioner of the
States, was only our Dr. at Amsterdam; however, it is handled with All the
respect imaginable, even for the sake of those Venerable Characters so
Politickly Feigned: The Name of such a Princess, by Nature the Best, and by
Birth Inferior to None; we would truly revere, though we were sure it was there
as Fa^sly prefixed, as we are still bound to Pray for the Royal Family, so must
Her Prosperity be as much remembered in our Prayers; neither will those we use
now for the Propagating of It, displease such a Generous Princess; much less,
Should make some Protestants so sullen, as in a Zeal, to decline their Church,
and Libel their very Prayers; since only they are offered for Perpetuating that
Royal Line, of which there are but few in remainder, and not so many left: and
if only the Touching upon such a Subject, shall by some be made so Criminal,
for the sake only of so Sacred a Title, though without Their Authority, they must
pardon me that undecency, since Royal Papers have been sufficiently reflected
on, that have been more Authorized, and that by those too, who with greater
decency might have spared their Animadversion.

There remains no more to be said, if men will Consider their Interest, Examine
their Reason, have a regard to Equity, they will soon see that what is desired,
is only, To do to others, as they would be done unto: But this Golden Rule,
cannot I confess, guide or direct those that can Outface it with a forehead of
brass; that can treat Princes and Vid. His Enquiry against the Bishop of Oxford.
Prelates with more opprobrious terms than themselves would bear, or so many
Porters; but this incomparable Impudence is only due to that unimitable Dr.
which in his affected Phrase, must be needs an Original, because never to be
Copied.

Such transcendent insolency soars a pitch beyond Imitation, and, is indeed
such a sublime, such a flight to which nothing but a brow of a peculiar
composition could attain; To Threaten KINGS with their Characters and Life as
it is that Altitude and Acme of the most exalted Arrogance; So it must be the
surest indication of the Profoundest folly; it does but bid a defyance to sense
and truth; and assures us he can reconcile to his Rage and Calumny, those vast
extremes of Falsehood and Contradiction; it only bespeaks the Reader to that
villainy, which the Author is intended to commit, secures him his infamy
beforehand; and blasts his Credit with an Anticipation of his Crime; the Vid.
Compare but Burnets Memoirs with Weldens Court.
Memoirs of King Charles the Second, when sent us from such hands, must needs
have as much Malice and Reputation, as the Court of King James the first; and
the Confutation of both, has been best adjudg'd to be the Province of the
Common Executioner; and if threatened men live long (as the Dr. himself
observes) it is in that sense alone he makes his Monarch Immortal.

It Is time now to Apply our selves to an approaching Parliament, since the
Party that opposes its Agreement has formed it is Faction; and been so forward,
as to be before us in their Application: for men that have but a bad cause to
carry on, commonly make diligence to supply the defect of the Goodness of their
Case; and therefore the late Letter to a Dissenter (only in a new dress) is now
directed to a Vid Letter to a Person of Quality, etc.
Person of Quality; whom the Author (forgetting his former reflections) has
already Returned a Member of the House, before his Majesty (not to mention the
leave to Debate) has granted them so much as Liberty of Election.

I need not revy upon the Reflecter on the late Letter of the Pensioner, who
has only put out a Panegyric, in the name of an Animadversion; he will find
himself refuted beforehand in our Observations upon that Original, and there is
nothing more in his Vid. Reflections on F's. Letter.
Copy besides the Malice; and that is extended even to the making of their
Primitive Hero, a Pusillanimous deserter that would keep himself at a distance
from their deeper designs; and sure it is but a bad cause that shall make a
Subjects deference to his Prince the very Occasion of his Crime; His inference
from mijn here F's. Wit and Parts, is no more an Argument that he made the
Letter, than it is a stronger one a Majori, that the same Person made both that
and the Reflection; and we know what Author it is, so much famed for his
mischief, that is as notoriously vain for the commendation of himself.

I Shall therefore close with two Exhortations to those that are to choose our
Representatives, and offer one consideration to those that are Chosen.

When ever the KING sends you his Summons, let your Elections be carried with
Moderation, and your Choice of such men, as are either concerned to Repeal
these Laws for their own sakes, or inclined to do it for the Reasons that
require it.

Let your Returns be made as fairly as possible; for that which is a sound
Parliament, will the sooner be an Healing One.

And may that Peaceful Assembly, when it Sits, consider how to Pacify the
Nation, and grant too, His Majestys Propositions for Peace. Let them consider,
that their present Prince (tho as powerful as any of his Predecessors, or more
absolute neighbors) does only desire a Repeal by Law, does allow them all that
Liberty of Debate, which even our Hen. the Eighth did indeed make but a Merit
of Obedience; and the Kings of France in the True Sense, their Le Roy Vult. I
never saw a Parliament end well, when it began at Cross Purposes with their
King. I remember the time, when it was thought a Pretty play, to Triffle with
the Crown, when It was Ask't -- A Supply. It was Answered, Popery. -- It was
Ask't -- to Consider the Navy. It was Answered, Arbitrary Power. Such Sessions
we saw end in Remonstrances, but never in any real good to the Kingdom, or the
Crown.

And may we all say to his Majesty, as it was unanimously said to General Monk
against the sitting of that Healing Assembly, [We will all submit to the
Determinations of the next Parliament:] And may that Session, prove as
Auspicious, for the settling of an Union and Universal Peace: may it answer the
intention of Our Present Sovereign, and merit the glorious Character of the
Past, that its fame may be as lasting, as the Liberty that it gives; and that
both may be transmitted, and continued to Posterity.

FINIS.

