A NARRATIVE OF SOME Passages IN or RELATING TO THE LONG PARLIAMENT.

Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Eccles. 10. 20.

Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in Chancery Lane, 1670.

To the Reader.
BEfore thou make an entry upon the following discourse, it is fit thou
should be acquainted with the occasion of its birth. A near relation of mine
was the cause of my setting Pen to paper, upon a conceit that being a Member of
the Long Parliament, my Observation might have fixed it self upon some
particulars omitted by others, which particulars he was unwilling should be
lost. And now since this issue of my Brain is come into the world with many
characters of Truth upon its body, some friends looking upon it with too
favorable an eye, will not consent that it should be stifled by a consinement
to one family or place: But on the other side, lest traveling abroad it may
contract some disadvantage by too much expectation, (termed by Sir Philip
Sidney, that friendly foe) I my self having assented to a publication, deem it
necessary so far to pass my own censure upon it, as that more may not be looked
for, than it can yield; and not only so, but otherwise to make some little
apology for the Contents of it. I may profess my self to have been somewhat
perplexed, in finding a proper name for that which I have written. It
contains matters historical and yet is no history, for it consists of
particulars without any exact order. It compriseth the business of a limited
number of years, and yet I cannot give it the title of Annals, because things
transacted in several years are set together. It consists of abrupt parcels,
and yet makes up but one continued relation. Truth is, it wants method,
containing nothing that is perfect, and if it were a perfect nothing, perhaps
it would be much better, for then it would give no offense to any, whereas now
my old Fellow Members, and Comerades of that Parliament, will say, I am
Injurious to them, in relating only those proceedings which were not
justifiable, and omitting the good things done by them, and they will also tax
me for partiality, in not speaking at all, of the provocations and wrongs
offered and done, by their opposers. To this I answer, that from beginning the
war (which with its preparatives gives limits to our business) I know nothing
publicly done, that was either good or justifiable, saving only an outward
profession of personal reformation, which unless it carried with it a real
intention, would have been mentioned with as little advantage, as had the
outward pretended public reformation, which deserved rather blame than praise.
The intention of many of us was also very good, being desirous of peace and of
a good agreement between Prince and people, but how could this appear without
doors, till the army had kicked us out of the House? And as for particular
miscarriages of the King's party, I was not resident within his Majesty's
quarters, and therefore my relations must have been subject to much
incertainty. But that which must satisfy me is this, that those Members, who
were enemies to the war, will find reason in that which I say, and as for those
Salamanders, who could live only in the fire, I regard not their censure.
Perhaps I may also be condemned by the generality as imprudent, in setting an
evil character upon the whole carriage of that Parliament, when I my self could
not but be an actor in some part of that evil. Here I am put to a double
apology for my self, first, as a Subject, and then as a Writer. As to the
first, I cannot excuse my self otherwise, than by the Sincerity of my mind and
Intentions. I may freely profess, that I never had the least disloyal thought
in relation to my Prince, and my endeavors always tended to a reconciliation
of the business, with a production of peace, and if I were at any time enforced
(for I never did it willingly) to act in the way of opposition contributory to
the war, it was with hope, that at last there would be a happy agreement. I
must thus far confess my error, that I too much feared the ill consequences of
a Parliaments being run down by force, and perhaps so great a distrust in the
clemency of his late Majesty cannot be justified; yet I may hope, that such a
tenderness upon mistake, may be esteemed venial in comparison of greater
offenses, which are included in our present Sovereigns gracious pardon. And as
for the imputation of imprudence in stigmatizing my self by too far publishing
the miscarriages of that body, whereof I was a Member, I conceive, that I
cannot better show my self worthy to be included in that his Majesty's general
pardon, than by declaring a detestation of them, and by setting them out in
their right colors, so far am I from condemning my self in that particular. As
to the whole Narrative, considering that I have trusted only to my own private
memory and Notes, I will not say, but that there may be an omission of some
particulars, as important as those inserted, but I am confident, that for the
substantial Truth of that which I have delivered, there can be no just
exception to it, and so I must referr all to thy censure.

Farewell.

A NARRATIVE Of some Passages in or relating to the Long Parliament.
CArdinal de Richelien, that great favorite of France (perhaps to insinuate
into his Masters thoughts the high importance of Naval power) caused a Ship of
extraordinary bulk to be made, which his malevolents affirmed to be an emblem
of himself: for as that Ship could not move at Sea, but in a storm, so (said
they) the Cardinal could not live in a quiet and undisturbed State. This was
said of that great Minister of State, because he held his Prince engaged in a
continual foreign war; and if such a war were imputed to him, as mischievous to
that Kingdom, what shall we think of those, who in this our Island so troubled
the waters at home (to fish out a greatness for themselves) as to sever the
Head from its Body, and by unsinnewing the government to batter down all the
Pillars that supported it, and so to bring an absolute Anarchy and confusion
upon the whole Nation? Surely the depth of this offense is not to be fathomed,
yet thus much is ordinarily said in their defense, that they were so far from
designing Anarchy, as they intended only reformation, and the setting up of a
much more accomplished government. It is easy to be believed, that confusion
was not their ultimate end, and there needs no other proof of it, than the
actings of their Leviathan Cromwell, who made his own personal greatness the
foundation of something in the way of new Government. And the intent of
reformation, or of a new model, can be no justification of any particular
Rebellion, since the same ends are pretended to by all persons, that at any
time raise a Power in opposition to the present Governors, as these very
persons found by experience during their short rule. Aristotle and his
adherents, are much cried down by our modern natural Philosophers, for making
privation a principle; but certainly these men made it the most considerable
principle in their politics; for they could not effect any thing fully, but
demolition and destruction. They never set up any thing in the way of
Government that was new, but it was in a short time disliked and overthrown:
And indeed it could not be otherwise, since the greedy Monster of their faction
could not subsist, but by devouring whatsoever was most precious in the Land;
and since the opportunity to do so could not be had, but by frequent changes of
Government; so the rapacity of this brood of Harpies caused the destruction of
so many fair Buildings, whereof the raising had been so costly, the suppression
of Bishops with their Hierarchy, and the sale of their Lands, and (I may even
say) felling of the Royal Oak it self, with prostitution of the public Revenue
and Ornaments to sale, and the same cause would infallibly have produced the
ruin of both Universities, with demolition of the Colleges, and alienation of
their Lands, and many other destructions of that nature, so as to have deprived
the Nation of all excellence in the way of beauty and splendour. That this was
done, the Power once raised, is not strange, but how so great a part of the
people (nay even of that remainder of Parliament) should be drawn to consent to
it, carries much wonder; and certainly there was much art used, to win their
consent to so great a devastation. The Historical part of this business being
too heavy a burden for my shoulders; I shall only (for the satisfaction of some
friends) set down in writing my observations, of the carriage of that business
at Westminster, where I was then resident as a Member of the House of Commons,
wherein perhaps there may be found some particulars, not so obvious to others,
and in that respect likely to be omitted.

In matters Political it is seldom found* that events depend upon causes
necessarily producing them, and when they do, there must be some great
imperfection in the original constitution of a State, as writers in Politics
affirm, of Civil War arising in an Oligarchy, by reason of many dependences
upon great persons possessed of the Sovereign power, whose private and differing
interests distract the forces of such Commonwealths; but this cannot be our
case, who live in an extraordinary well-tempered Monarchy, where the perfect
constitution is sufficiently proved by an esflux of very much time, without the
least appearance of any visible defect. We must therefore search out other
causes. It cannot be doubted, that there is a Divine Providence, which orders
and governs all things; but as this is above us, and altogether out of our
sight, so we must rather submit cheerfully, than make any inquisition about it.
As for second causes in disturbance of States, none can justify an armed
opposition by Subjects against their Sovereign; and unless there be some
plausible title to the Supreme power, there is seldom any that become
considerable, but discontents upon conceit of misgovernment; and in this case
the justness of discontent is not so dangerous, as the generality of it, and in
that respect designs grounded upon right reason, and with certainty of public
advantage, if effected, are yet well laid aside, when liable to a general
misconstruction, in the way either of danger or oppression. Never Parliament
was assembled, when the people were in a higher discontent, than at this time:
such a general diffidence there was, as they thought themselves sure of
nothing. The increase of Ceremonies had made them fear the approach of a
Religion hateful to them. The late business of Ship Money, together with some
other impositions without consent of Parliament, caused them to apprehend the
loss of property in their estates, and they had little hope of redress by
Parliament, because his then Majesty had been so unhappy, as to be put upon a
sudden dissolution of all Parliaments formerly by him called. There wanted not
persons ill-disposed, and seditious, to trumpet these things in the ears of the
generality, whereby they incensed them so far, as thereby they found means to
raise a power against their Sovereign, which how it was done, and by what
degrees, and how improved is the chief intent of our business to set forth.

At the time of assembling this unhappy Parliament there were two armies on
foot in England, whereof one was that of the Scots, and another consisting of
Englishmen to oppose them, if occasion were; and the King to remove all
jealousy of a wilful continuance of the war, by engaging them to a fresh
hostility, had made the Earl of Holland (a person then standing gracious with
the Parliament and People) General of the English army. The persons who knew
themselves faulty in holding intelligence with the Scots, were then so
apprehensive of a complete agreement between his Majesty and Them, and of their
being won to a compliance with him in all things, as the Earl of Holland in a
private Letter to Mr. Pym, writ somewhat to this effect; That the sky was
horridly black in those Northern parts, and that all things there seemed, as
tending to an universal judgment. The Earl being then General, could not intend
this other than a private advertisement, but Mr. Pym finding the publication of
it a sit means to increase the general apprehensions, presently imparted that
Letter to the House of Commons, and from thence the substance of it was
divulged over all the City of London. This served to keep the people in a heat
and jealousy concerning the Kings intentions, but that fear proved vain, for
the pacification was effected wholly by interposition of the
English-Commissioners, who were persons approved of by the Parliament as to
that employment. But this business of satisfying the Scots, and of disbanding
of the Armies, requiring vast sums of money, there were were great Taxes laid
upon the people by Act of Parliament, which money was not likely to be levied
in much time, and therefore there needed a present supply by the City of
London, who (as was pretended) would not part with their money, lest a
dissolution of the Parliament should come before payment; thereupon the King
was pressed to pass the Act of Continuance, whereby the Parliament could not be
dissolved, but by their own consent. This Act had the Royal assent, and gave to
the Crown the greatest blow that it had yet received; for so the King
established against himself a Power, which he could not extinguish. This
pacification being free from all secret agreements with the Scots, gave a great
strength and confidence to our Cinistones, or kindlers of Sedition: for though
the Presbyterian discipline, was now again consimed, as to Scotland, yet it was
impossible, that the Scots could think themselves secure to hold it, as long as
Episcopacy stood firm in England, in which respect they could not but be
willing to assist those, whose design it was to abolish it. Before this time,
it was thought sit to deprive the King of two prime Counselors, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford, (whose names were delivered in by the
Scottish-Commissioners, as incendiaries between the two Nations) which was done
in the way of an impeachment by the House of Commons at the Lords Bar for High
Treason. Upon this Impeachment it was found requisite to commit them presently
to the Tower, so as the King was immediately deprived of their advice in
Council; and the Earl of Strafford was speedily brought to Trial in
Westminster Hall with much solemnity, which had continuance for many days, and
at last was broken up with heat and violence by the House of Commons, such as
ill became the gravity of that Assembly; and they did it, conceiving that the
Lords carried themselves partially in relation to the person impeached; but his
condemnation was finished afterward by the Legislative power in a Bill of
Attainder, which could not pass the Lords, till many of them were so terrified
by tumults, as they found it for their safety to be absent at the last Reading.
And this business of the Bill was carried on with such violence, as there was a
kind of proscription of such persons, as in the House ^f Commons had Voted
against the Bill; for their names were posted up in London by the care of some
malicious body. The Archbishop was reserved to a Trial, less legal as to the
form, but no less fatal to his ruin; being some few years after condemned by a
Bill passed in both Houses, but wanting the Royal assent. At or about the time
of Straffords Trial, there was a general licentiousness used. The
Parliament-houses were daily haunted with a rabble of tumultuating people,
crying out for that which they called justice. There was also a Liberty
assumed, and connived at, to Print and publish what every man thought fit,
which for the most part was in defamation of the Governors Ecclesiastical and
Temporal. Within the City of London the Pulpits were almost wholly possessed by
Presbyterian-Ministers, whose eloquence was altogether employed the same way.
In the Country (or at least in diverse parts) there was such encouragement given
underhand, as the common people fell upon Popish Recusants, and plundered
their houses with all severity: And the House of Commons being made acquainted
with the inconvenience and terror of these Tumults, as well by their own
members, as by a Message from the house of Lords, would not be drawn to
discountenance, much to declare against them. It was not long after the
Pacification, that the Scots much urged the King to go into Scotland to be
crowned, whereunto his Majesty assented at the last, which gave great jealousy
again at Westmirster, in so much as the Parliament made some addresses to the
King, desiring that he would not depart out of the Kingdom at that time, but
those addresses became altogether fruitless, the King declaring his absolute
and peremptory engagement to go. And the apprehensions of this journey were so
powerful, as a very active Member of the house of Commons, standing at the door
of the Lords House, upon occasion of a Message, having fetched a great sigh,
made a profession, he thought we were all undone; but the Presbyterian Scots
continued true to their own interest, with a respect also to their profit, and
expecting to be called again into England, as it came to pass afterward. The
Scottish Coronation being past, the King returned to London, and then the
exasperations grew higher than ever. It seems, his Majesty was willing to
impute the disorders in Parliament to some particular persons Members of both
Houses, whom he had found to have held intelligence with his enemies, and
therefore he directed his Atturny General, to accuse the five members (whose
names are well known) in Parliament of high Treason, which was so ill resented
in both Houses, as the Impeachment was refused, whereupon his Majesty fell upon
that unhappy resolution, of coming personally into the House of Commons, which
gave so great offense, as both Houses, pretending they could not sit securely
at Westminster without a guard, adjourned themselves for some days, and
appointed to meet during the vacancy in London as grand Committies, to consider
what was to be done upon the pretended breach of Privilege. This gave a great
advantage against the King, for by this means, they had opportunity to fix
their correspondence with the Citizens, and to engage them in their defense.
Between this time and the Kings return out of Scotland, the Court had been
annoyed with a confluence of unruly people; so as it was thought fit to have a
Corpse de guard (or a Court of guard as they call it) kept in the passage before
Whitehal to keep the rabble at a distance. But during this Adjournment the
Citizens of London became so engaged, as upon the day of the Houses meeting
again at Westminster; they sent a little army with some field pieces for their
security: these passed by land and by water on each side of Whitehal, and the
noise of their coming was so loud, as it was concluded fit for the guard of
Middlesex trained bands to withdraw, and so their passage became free. This was
interpreted at Court, as the beginning of a war, and thereupon his Majesty
thought good to retire to Hampton Court. After this, there were many addresses
to the King by the Parliament, but not any, that could be in the least measure
pleasing to him. It happened that Mr. Pim had newly and publicly (at a
conference between the House, as I take it) used some words of disrespect to
the King, wherewith his Majesty expressed himself to be offended, and thereupon
the House of Commons, having notice of the Kings resentment, took a resolution
to send his Majesty a paper, in full justification of that which Mr. Pim had
said, I my self was present at this resolution, and appearing dissatisfied with
it, immediately went out of doors, which being observed by a back friend of
mine, he named me one of the four to carry it. This unwelcome news was brought
to me to my own house by one of our Sergeants, with a copy of the order, which
must not be disobeyed, and so we went and delivered the paper to his Majesty at
Hampton Court, which being read, he began to discourse upon it, as if he
expected reason from us, and seemed to address his Speech more particularly to
me (perhaps having heard of my dislike) but Sir John Culpepper then Chancellor
of the Exchequer and chief of the four, told his Majesty, we had not power to
speak one word, whereupon we were dismissed, and returned to London. After this
the King left Hampton Court and went to Theobalds, whither the Parliament sent
a Committie of Lords and Commons, but with a message either so unreasonable, or
unseasonable, as the King thought fit to dismiss them with an absolute
negative, and there passed something then, which perhaps may be fit to be
inserted herein, as containing that which is something extraordinary. I
received the relation from a noble person, who was one of the Commoners then
sent, and this it is. After having received his Majesty's answer, the Committy
being still at Theobalds, retired it self to take into consideration the terms
of it, that there might be no difference in reporting to the several Houses of
Parliament. As soon as the Committy was set, the Earl of Warwick was called
out, to speak with his brother the Earl of Newport. He went out, and speedily
returned with this account of the business; that the Earl of Newport had
acquainted him, that the King was even then so pressed to give a more
satisfactory answer, as he was confident they should have such an answer, if
they would but defer their departure for a small season: To this the whole
company seemed to assent with much cheerfulness, when suddenly young Sir Henry
Vain declared himself to mervail at it, for said he, is there any person here,
who can undertake to know the Parliaments mind, that is, whether this which we
have, or that which is called a more satisfactory answer, will be more pleasing
to the Houses? For my part I cannot, and if there be any that can, let him
speak; to this no man made any answer, and so having agreed upon the report to
be made, they departed. I have related this, to show how easily one subtle
ill-disposed person may overthrow a general good intention. Now were the well
affected party (as it was then termed) stirred up in all parts, to give
encouragement to the House of Commons in the way of pretended Reformation, by
petitions, whereof some were delivered daily at the bar, and the deliverers had
thanks given by the Speaker, which was a thing altogether new. And as a general
return to these, and to keep the people in perfect heat, it was resolved, that
a general and public declaration of the State of the kingdom should be made to
the Nation. In time of former Princes the House of Commons had some times (but
very rarely) made remonstrances of that nature to the King, which were never
pleasing to him, yet not justly to be excepted against, because it is expressed
in the writs of Summons, that they are to advise his Majesty, but for any
advising (or treating with) the people, it was always held illegal, and of
mischievous consequence. Upon these grounds the declaration, being brought into
the House, caused a very long debate, but was at last passed, with the dissent
of very many of the most considerable Members. Our Nation being in such
disorder, the rebellion broke out in Ireland, and the Lords of the Council
being yet in London, imparted their new received intelligence to the House of
Commons, who seemed cheerfully to embrace the business of reducing that Kingdom
to obedience, and thereupon endeavored the raising of a stock of money by
adventure, upon security of the living Bearsskin, which was the Estates of such
persons as were in Rebellion. Upon this the King made offer of going in person
to suppress the rebellion, if he might be supplied with money, and other
necessaries for the work; which offer was so far from being hearkened unto at
Westminster, as it created new jealousy. But the Parliament made good use of
the Irish business; for by that means they listed Officers, and made full
enquiry concerning their inclinations, which succeeded happily with them
afterward. Every day produced new differences between the King and Parliament;
for that unsatiable Monster of public security caused the making of a
proposition to his Majesty, which was, that the Parliament might govern the
Militia, (or Trained-bands) for some time at least, which was rejected by the
King, as a power not to be parted withal, no not for an hour; whereupon the
Parliament made new Lieutenants for each County, who assumed the exercise of
that power by Parliamentary authority in many parts of the Kingdom. And upon
the same ground of public security, Sir John Hotham seized upon the Town of
Kingston upon Hull, with the Kings Magazin there, which his Majesty cried out
upon, not only as rebellious, but as a robbing him of his Arms and Ammunition;
being personal Goods bought with his money; and this before any the least act
of hostility showed on his part. The King was then retired to the City of York,
as a place of more safety, than nearer to London: And there first of all the
Warrants of Parliament being sent by express Messengers for Delinquents (by
them so styled) were flatly disobeyed, which was no unwelcome news to the great
managers of affairs at Westminister; for they pretended such obstruction of
Justice, to be a justifiable and sufficient ground for the raising of forces.
When the opposition was grown to this height, his Majesty judged it fit, that
such Members of both Houses as had resolved to engage against the Parliament
should withdraw themselves; and one of the last that continued sitting in the
House of Commons was Mr. Sidney Godolphin, who for a farewell declared, That by
a War the Parliament would expose it self to unknown dangers: for (said he)
when the Cards are once shuffled, no man knows what the Game will be, which was
afterward found by the Parliament too true, when their own Army became their
Masters: But in the mean time, this Secession of Members did very much
facilitate the entry into, and continuance of the War; all dispute being taken
away within the Houses, and the House of Commons would not lose this
convenience, and therefore they soon excluded the withdrawn Members by special
Votes. This abscission or cutting off of Members had been formerly used in this
and other Parliaments, but very rarely, and for offenses extraordinary, and
such an offense was this obedience to his Majesty then adjudged to be, so
unfitting a time for Judgment is the heat of a Civil War in matters relating to
that War. This War first began in Paper, by Manifestoes and Declarations on
both parts, which brings to remembrance a pleasant passage in the House of
Commons upon this account. One of the Members brought with him into the House a
Declaration of his Majesty's, which he had newly bought, and complained much of
those, who were so insolent, as freely to sell such papers of the Kings: At
this a young Gentleman (of those who were accounted Fanatics in those days;
but one who never spoke publicly in the House) grew into a seeming impatience,
and said with much earnestness, Why not his papers as well as every man's else?
Which though loudly, yet being spoken, without standing up, was answered only
with looks and smiles. This passage is scarcely worthy of a place in any
serious discourse, yet it seems naturally to express the small ingenuity of
those times, which allowed not to a Sovereign Prince in his own Dominions that
freedom, which every petty fellow assumed without exception. At this time both
parties were employed in raising of forces: The Earl of Essex being made
Captain General for the King and Parliament, (as the style of the War was then)
with full power to nominate Officers; and I can affirm, that the Army was
raised with great difficulty; there being immediately upon grant of that
Commission, the greatest solitude at Westminster that I had seen, whereof I my
self taking notice before a Member, who was designed to a principal command in
the Army, as a thing of small encouragement, he made this answer, That he
thought the people of England were mad, being so blind to the discerning of
their own interest; but the Parliaments business was more and more facilitated
every day, there being a Committy erected of Lords and Commons, called the
Committy of Safety, in the nature of a Privy Council; and Money or Plate coming
in freely (upon the propositions for contribution) in London beyond any man's
expectation. But that which most advanced the Levies, was a Liberty declared
for Apprentices to forsake their Masters service at this time, without loss of
freedom: and the nomination of Colonels, Members of both Houses, being persons
eminent for popularity, so as the Army consisted very much of boys at the
first, but there being great scarcity of experienced Commanders, the General
thought it necessary to accept the service of diverse Scottish-men, whom the
assurance of good pay had invited to offer themselves, being not only able
persons for Command, but also better hardened in the way of Military opposition
to the Royal power, than our English. Now there passed every day Acts of
hostility, for the King appearing in person before Hull, and entrance being
denied, raised a battery against the Town, and laid a kind of siege to it. On
the other side the Parliaments forces seized every day, upon such places, as
they found necessary in the way of advantage for War; so as Mars began to
exercise his power in several parts of the Kingdom, even to blood, by
wrestlings between the respective Partisans, when they met, as also by the
siege of Warwick-Castle by the Earl of Northampton, who soon after lost his
life in the Kings service; and the Parliament it self then seemed to have
assumed a new nature, according to the businesses there agitated, which were
only relating to the War. After several skirmishes between parties, the Armies
came to face one another at Edgehill, in the year 1642, whereupon ensued a
battle, and notice being given at Westminster, we were in continual expectation
of the issue; and the House being set in an afternoon, there came a Messenger,
who brought word, that the Parliaments Army was so worsted, as he his self saw
the Earl of Essex's Cannon seized upon by the Kings forces. This gave so great
a terror, as the Speaker Lentall addressed himself to some of us, and used
these terms. Gentlemen, you shall do well to send to his Majesty betimes to ask
conditions, lest by delaying you come too late to effect your security: Such a
terror did the present apprehension strike into him, and many others; but it
was not long before an express Messenger came from the General himself,
signifying that he was Master of the field, and had been once possessed of the
Royal Standard. This gave fresh courage, yet the intelligence brought by the
first person was true; for the Parliaments left wing had been routed, and their
Cannon possessed, but for want of discipline the prevailers applied themselves
to plunder the baggage, and so the other part of his Majesty's Army was born
down, and the Earl of Essex remained possessed of the field, (or Champ de
bataigle, as the French call it) but with his Forces so broken, as the Kings
Army, having done their business in forcing a passage, pursued their design,
and marched forwards, which Essex in his Letters termed a flight, and said,
that for want of horse, he could not prosecute his victory, without a fresh
supply from London. And thus the victory is pretended to on both sides, and not
without a fair color. Not long after this, the King having refreshed his army
at Oxford, marched with it toward London, yet could not do this with such
expedition, but that General Essex was gotten thither before him, and the
Citizens of London were so fearful of being plundered, as they came out
unanimously for defense, and so his Majesty thought good to retreat to Oxford,
which gave a period to action for that year. Somewhat before the late encounter
near Brainford, the house of Commons ordered me to go into the Country for
which I served, where I found all full of terror, the common people generally
apprehending, that the Cavaliers (as the Royallists were then called) were
coming to plunder them. This fear was artificially put into them, as I could
easily perceive: for the Country was full of strange fictions of their
inhumane carriage in other countries, and being at my usual Mansion, we had
scarcely any rest (no not in the night) for Messengers giving the allarm, and
the manner was to bring a paper of intelligence without any subscription, and
this must be taken for truth, without any farther proof. These allarms
generated strange, wild, and indigested propositions, such as were not to be
hearkened unto by any person of Judgment and experience, yet they were some way
tending to the great design of raising the terror to a height, and putting arms
into the hands of Schismatical people under the name of Volunteers, and by
those means to form a new power to be disposed of upon occasion in any part of
the Kingdom, without the limits of their own Counties, as it came to pass
afterward, when Majors General were established. But since the Kings forces
did not really make any approach toward us, and since I had not accepted of
any Command to oblige my stay in the Country, I made my return to London, and
applied my self to my constant course of attending in Parliament, where I found
the state of business somewhat altered: for General Essex began now to appear
to the private Caballists somewhat wresty, so as they found it necessary to
raise new forces to be commanded less immediately by him. Upon this there was a
kind of army put under command of Sir William Waller and Sir Arthur Hasellrigg,
whose actions were afterward as much cried up, as the Generals were cried
down. And then there were also Ordinances of Parliament (which kind of law grew
now in fashion) framed, and past for constituting associations, whereof the
Eastern was chief, and much promoted by Cromwell, who founded his greatness
there, though for the present he was commanded by the Lord Gray of Warke,
chosen Major General of that association, and placed in that Command, as a
person less active, and more to be wrought upon, than he afterward proved to
be, which made Essex who had yet power sufficient to crush him; cause him
(after about a years service in that Command) to be summoned to his attendance
in the Lords house, with a substitution of the Earl of Manchester in his place
of Major General, being one of his own near relations. The House of Commons was
employed in providing money, without which they could have no good effect of
their armies. Several ways were found, but no one (nor all of them together)
answerable to their occasions. One was by Sequestration of Delinquents estates,
not excepting the King's own revenue, which last yielded the best supply, being
managed by a Committy of Parliament, whereas they were enforced to use ravenous
people in the Sequestration of private estates, making a very slender account
to the public, and converting most of the profits to their own use, whereof
the Parliament was not in condition to take much notice at that time. Another
way of raising money there was, by requiring a twentieth part of goods and a
fifth part of every man's revenue. This began upon persons disaffected to the
Parliament, but came at last to be a calling dance, being made general, and
herein both parties did good service, by giving complete information concerning
one another estates. But the last and surest, was a monthly tax for the army,
which was the first of that kind, and likeliest to continue in being. And now
the case is wholly altered, for every demand must be answered, there being
armies on foot, very well disposed to constrain payment in case of refusal.
About this time, those persons who had been nominated Committies in each County
for money matters, held meetings (in imitation of the Covenanters tables in
Scotland) and took upon them the decision of businesses relating to the County
in general, but especially as to the war, which comprised the suppression of
the Royallists, and by this means they exercised an unlimited power, being
assured of Indemnity at Westminster for all things done in the way of advantage
to their military affairs. While the asperities of war lay thus frozen up in
winter quarters, it pleased his Majesty to send the Earl of Southhampton, and
Sir John Culpepper with a proposition for a treaty of peace, and a considerable
member of our House made this relation to me, of Mr. Pims opinion concerning
it. This Gentleman said, he met Mr. Pim going into the Committy of Safety, and
desiring a word with him asked, if he knew the substance of Southhampton's
message, and what he thought of it? Mr. Pim's answer was, that he knew the
particulars, and praised God in his heart, hoping that the issue of it would be
happy for the Kingdom. But it seems, that being entered into the Committy his
mind soon changed, for the General (with other Lords there) were absolutely for
the refusal of it, which was the event of it also in Parliament, and not
without some harshness in the manner, for Southhampton and Culpepper would have
delivered their message in the respective Houses within the Bar, as Members,
which was refused to them, and so their message being made known, and
unanimously concluded unseasonable, by reason of the Generals standing yet
(together with diverse other eminent persons) declared Traitor, they both
returned to Oxford. This may appear strange, since the General was conceived to
wish and labor for peace, which may the better be believed, because after this
time, he sent a letter to the Parliament, to express his sense of the Nations
miserable condition under a war, and to desire that there might be propositions
of peace sent to his Majesty (a fault never to be forgiven by the private
Caballists) which desire of restoring peace continued with him even to his end,
as was hinted in his funeral Sermon, wherein he was compared to Abner, who
perished being in such a design, but it is usual for such persons to dislike
all pacification, saving what is procured by themselves, wherein their own
interests are fully provided for, and it is very likely, that Essex would have
had the business to pass chiefly through his own hands, whereby we may see, how
far a poor Nation may suffer by the on of some principal persons. But howsoever
it was with others, it is not to be doubted, but some of the close Cabal,
rather than to yield to any pacification, were disposed to make use of the
pious intimation, delivered by a Minister in a Fast Sermon preached before the
House of Commons, which was this. That if they could not effect the desired
reformation, yet it would be in their power, to break the pillars, and as
Sampson did, to pull down the house over the heads of their enemies. Yet for
public satisfaction (the people being wearied with a war) it was always in
agitation, to bring the business to a treaty, though not without much jealousy
on the Parliaments side, which might be much increased, by a letter from a Lord
at Oxford to a Commander in that army, which became public being intercepted,
and contained these words. Do but cudgel them into a Treaty, and we shall do
well enough with them. Before drawing the armies out in the year 1643. there
had been a hopeful treaty of peace, both parties having tendered propositions,
and Commissioners being sent to Oxford to treat, but this was soon rendered
fruitless by the Parliament, who too far straightned the time of treaty, and
bound up their Commissioners by instructions, obliging them in the first place,
to treat upon and conclude the proposition for disbanding of the armies, which
could not be consented to by his Majesty, without assurance first had, that the
other most important articles would be agreed upon. And so at this time the
poor people were defeated of their hopes, it being one of our Cabals greatest
arts, to give way to a treaty of peace for public satisfaction, and then to
bring it to a rupture in some plausible way, as here it was upon the article of
disbanding, which was a thing so much desired by the people. This year 1643.
businesses were transacted at Westminster with greater height than ever; for
the Queen being returned to the King's quarters with some assistance, the House
of Commons assumed the boldness to impeach her of high treason at the Lord's
bar, and about the same time, both Houses voted a new great Seal to be made,
which is the instrument of Royal power far above all others, and the doing of
these two things, could not but much exasperate his Majesty, yet their military
affairs were never less succesful, for the West of England was wholly lost by
defeat of the Earl of Stamford's army, and Bristow forced by Prince Rupert. In
the Northern parts the Earl of Newcastle was prevalent almost wholly: And
certainly had the King (instead of besieging Gloucester) marched to London, and
the Earl of Newcastle (instead of besieging Hull) forced his way into the
Eastern association, the war had come to a period, but Divine Providence had
designed a more gentle end, and disposed the minds of the Northern and Western
armies, so as they would not forsake their own Countries till they saw them
cleared from all opposition. The Parliaments business being in this evil
condition, it was easily judged fit to call in the Scots, which matter being
moved in the House of Commons, and it being objected, that it would be
fruitless to call them, without proposing to them at the same time something of
great advantage by it, there stood up presently that great Patriot Henry
Martin, and desired with much confidence, that an offer might be made them, of
the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland, and in case they were not
therewith contented, to add two such other Counties in the North, as should be
most convenient for them. So little care had he in that conjuncture, of the
honor, and advantage of the English Nation. This was justly thought
extravagant, yet that business of calling in the Scotts being communicated to
the Lords, there was a Committy of Lords and Commons nominated to go into
Scotland, and matters were so transacted with the Scots, as they entered into
England with an army the February following. I should have related how in the
former year, after the King's retiring from Parliament, there was set up at
Westminster an assembly of Divines, being an Ecclesiastical body of strange
constitution, and composed of persons nominated by the Knights and Burgesses of
each County, to which were added a small number, named by the Lords, and some
few Commissioners deputed by the Kirk of Scotland. This assembly being so
extraordinary in the constitution, was certainly designed to produce great
effects, but the success was not answerable, for they could never perfect their
model of Church Government, not well agreeing among themselves, by reason of
the Independent members, who approved of no Church discipline, other than
Parochial, and even that part of the model, which was concluded upon with
approbation of Parliament could never be put in execution, the Presbyterian
discipline being so strict, as made it unpleasing to most of the people; and
especially to those of the Gentry, who found themselves likely to be
overpowered by the Clergy, even in the places of their habitation: But the
Army, after it became new modelled, was wholly averse to it. I conceive, the
intentions of calling an Assembly to have been these two: First to have a Synod
of Divines concurring in the subversion of the Bishops, and their Hierarchy;
and in this the Parliament had their end fully, for the matter very well
pleased all such persons as were earnestly of their party: And secondly, to
agree upon some uniformity in Divine Service, which was the ground of their
Directory; but all Uniformity (or color of it) was distasteful to the
Independents, which became the growing opinion, and at last so overspread the
Army, as the sight of a black-coat grew hateful to them; and so the Directory
fell to ground of it self. These Assembly-men might well be discouraged, since
hopes were given at first, that the Lands of Bishops and of Collegiate Churches
should be settled in some way, for the raising of all Parochial Churches a
competency of means for the Ministers, but the necessities belonging to War
exposed these to sale, and frustrated that hope. I should have related how the
House of Commons finding the Pulpits filled with persons disaffected to them,
made a breach upon the Lords in point of Judicature, and erected a Committy
called of plundered Ministers, and by this Committy they ejected the old
Ministers, and placed new at pleasure, but because the ejected had been possessed
of a Freehold, the Committy ordered to his Wife and Children a fifth part of
the profits, if cause were not showed to the contrary, which must be this, That
the person displaced was otherwise possessed of temporal means sufficient; and to
my observation, there was scarcely any of the new-placed, who did not dispute
that provision at the Committy. But it seems that this Committy could not
dispatch that business fast enough; for the Earl of Manchester was afterward
invested with a power by both Houses, to do the same thing within his
association, as also to reform the University of Cambridge, where he had the
like arbitrary power of ejection. But the Parliament had a way of cementing
their fluctuating faction by religious bands of union, which certainly they
found very effectual, though upon differing grounds, or else they would never
have had three of them in three or four years time, which I think is not to be
paralelled in any other revolt. The first of these was a protestation in the
year 1641, which being before the War began, took into it the defense of his
Majesty's Royal person, Estate and Dignity. The second was termed a Vow and
Covenant, set on foot in the year 1642, and this contains no mention of the
King, but in the way of forcible opposition to him by prosecuting the War. And
the third was, the Scottish-Covenant, which again takes in the defense of his
Majesty's Royal person, but in so perplexed and complicated a way, as it
signified little. And in this was also contained, a total abrogation of the
Government Ecclesiastical by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. with the whole
Hierarchy; so as this Covenant may be said, to have spoken perfect Scottish.
The taking of the first and last of these in their proper time, was pressed
upon the people in general with all terror; and the Vow and Covenant (which
related much to a particular conspiracy) only upon the Members of both Houses;
and certainly it was a very useful policy, to engage the most considerable
persons in these oaths, and in other things rendering them odious to their
Prince, and exposing them to confiscation of their Estates upon conquest, which
could not but make them stick the more closely to common defense. All the time
of this Parliament it was the design of our Caballists, to abate the power of
the Lords House, and in pursuance of that design, at the very beginning in
Straffords business, they prevailed to have the Recusant Lords deprived of
Voting there; and afterward they had not patience to stay till the Bishops
were excluded by the Ordinance, but took advantage of a protestation made by
such Bishops, as then sat in the House of Lords, being about half their
number, and to my best remembrance, thus it was. Those Bishops having taken a
resolution, not to continue sitting long after his Majesty's forsaking the
Southern parts, yet finding that there was an Ordinance coming for abolition of
their Order, which must pass the Lords House, they used their endeavors to
enervate that, which might be done in their absence; and upon that ground they
entered a Protestation, subscribed with their names, against all such
determinations to their prejudice. This being become matter of record, the
House of Commons took notice of it, and came up presently with an impeachment
of those Bishops by name, as guilty of a Praemunire, in assuming to themselves
a power, to invalidate that which is otherwise the Law of the Land, viz. the
Jurisdiction of Parliament; and upon this ground (how justly I know not, for
the matter was never brought to Judgment) those Bishops unhappily formed to
themselves a deprivation, instead of a withdrawing. By this means, and by the
absence of those Lords, who withdrew themselves to serve his Majesty, the House
of Peers was grown so empty, as their Authority became little considerable,
which was not much regarded by our Leaders in the House of Commons, who (in
likelihood) had at that time a resolution to dissolve that House, as it came to
pass afterward. As great assertors of privilege of Parliament, as that House
of Commons pretended to be, yet they cared not how far they encroached upon the
Lords, nor how they violated their privileges, as may appear by a message
delivered at their Bar near the beginning of the Parliament, which was to this
effect; That the Commons found in that House, so great an obstruction of
matters tending to the good of the Commonwealth, as they desired their
Lordships to make known the names of such Lords, as were the causes of it, that
they might be dealt with as enemies to the State: So as in those days, the
House of Commons might properly use the French proverbial saying: Je n'ayme pas
le bruit, si je ne le faits, I love no noise, but what I make my self. But
their own House began to be almost as much cried out upon for paucity of
Members; and for this they had provided a remedy sufficient by the new great
Seal; and there was little danger of bringing in evil Members, for no writ of
election could be issued, but by Warrant from the Speaker, and consent of the
House, who would not grant it for places, where the people were known to be
disaffected to the Parliament. By this means the House became pretty well
filled, and many of the new Members were Officers of the Army, who had been so
used to command, as at the last they found a way to command, even the House it
self. Besides this, the new Great Seal enabled the Parliament to constitute
Judges, and to set up again the Courts at Common Law, as also to make what
Justices of the Peace they thought sit, whereof there was very great want in
the Parliament Quarters till then; so as now there were complete judicial
proceedings, both Criminal and Civil, which gave great satisfaction to the
people, and would have deserved high applause, but that all men knew this
convenience to be raised upon a most unjust, and insolent foundation. Before
this recruiting of the House of Commons (as it was then called) the Military
affairs of Parliament were much advanced; for by the help and countenance of
the Scottish Army, his Majesty's strength in the North was so broken, as the
Parliament had first besieged Newark, and then the City of York, but both these
Towns were very bravely relieved by Prince Rupert; and could that Prince have
been contented, with the honor of having effected his business in the
dissolution of those sieges, it had been happy, but he as a Soldier, knew what
a fear usually is attendant upon Armies in a retreat, having been forced to
forsake a siege; and thereupon he gave the Parliament Forces Battle at
Marston-Moor, and was defeated wholly, yet with such a confusion on both parts,
as six Generals present in that sight, were said to take wing at the same time,
conceiving their party to be utterly overthrown, whereof General Lesly of the
Scottish was one. This set the Parliaments reputation very high in point of
strength, and gave opportunity to our Caballists, of abating (or rather
dissolving) Essex his power, who, as they conceived (and perhaps grounding
their conceit upon his Letter for propositions to his Majesty, in which Letter
he also expressed much care that the Royal person might be preserved in safety)
had no mind to an utter overthrow of the Regal Authority: So as when the Armies
were withdrawn into their Winter Quarters, our grand Politicians set themselves
upon the effecting of this great work, which must have influence, as well upon
Essex his chief adherents, as upon himself. The manner of this critical
business was thus. It was affirmed in the House of Commons as impossible, that
the War could be brought to an end, by an Army that had totally lost its
discipline; whereupon it was moved, and assented to, that a Committy should be
nominated, for examination of corruptions and abuses in the Army. This Committy
sat many days, and was very full of employment, till at last a Report was
called for. Then arose up Mr. Tate the Chairman, with a great bundle of papers
in his hand, being a very great Presbyterian, and little suspecting, that his
business would become the ruin of his party, as it did in conclusion. He
appeared unwilling to make the Report, but being pressed to do it, he desired,
that the House would first give him leave to speak a few words; And then he
uttered his parable, concerning a man much troubled with Botches and Boiles, in
several parts of his body, who had recourse to a Physician for cure; his Doctor
told him, that he could give him plasters to cure any part of his body so
disaffected, but that whatsoever was healed in one member would break out again
in another, for the whole habit of his body was corrupted, and that if he would
have perfect health, he must procure for himself a better habit of body, by
much purgation with a new diet, and so the Ulcers would be healed of
themselves. This, says Mr. Tate, is so applicable to the business in hand, as
I hope the House will find no need of a Report, and yet upon command I am ready
to make it. Hereupon other Members, who had prepared themselves, spoke against
the Report, and said, that abroad out of doors, all our ill successes were
imputed to the absence of Members from Parliament; and then a motion was made,
that there might be a self-denying Ordinance, by which all the Members of
either House might be deprived of other employments, that diverted them from
their service in Parliament. This was very hard of digestion to many Members,
who had profitable Offices, yet for public satisfaction, and for better
reforming of the Army, it was consented to, that there should be such an
Ordinance, which was afterward brought in, and passed both Houses. By this
means Essex, Denbigh, Manchester, Gray of Groby, Sir William Waller, Haselrig,
Brereton, Cromwell, and diverse others were deprived of Command, though the last
was never intended to suffer by this Ordinance, as it appeared afterward. But
notwithstanding all this, Essex had not surrendered his Commission, and
therefore something must be done to show him a perfect necessity. So the House
of Commons proceeded in nomination of Colonels for their new Army, whereof Sir
Thomas Fairfax was one, and at last he was Voted to be General of it. He was a
person eminent for valor, (vaillant comme son espee, fearless as his sword)
but of a temper more flexible than Essex; and very many others, which pleased
Cromwell, who meant to be the chief Steersman. Not long after this, Essex
finding himself imperatorem sine exercitu, a General without Command surrendered
his Commission, with many expressions of good affection to the Parliament; and
wholly bent himself to a retirement, being the first person, and last of the
Nobility employed by the Parliament in Military affairs, which soon brought him
to the period of his life; and he may be an example to all future Ages, to
deter all persons of like dignity; from being instrumental in setting up a
Democratical power, whose interest it is, to keep down all persons of his
condition. Yet they did him all possible honor, in his Funerals at the public
charge, so acceptable is an opportune death. In pursuance of the great design,
all the old Commanders were wormed out by little and little, and none admitted
to Commands, but those persons who were known, not only to be of an
Antimonarchical spirit, but purely disposed to the Armies interests, which the
Army found very useful afterward, when it began to contend with the House of
Commons for the Sovereign power. By this it may appear, how supinely negligent
the Parliament was, in forbearing to mould the army, with surer dependence upon
it self, which might have been effected in the nomination of Colonels and chief
Officers at first, if care had been taken for choice of many persons, who were
resolved to stand and fall with their interest, such as were Colonel Harley and
Sir Robert Pie, who forsook the army, when it opposed it self to the
Parliament, and for want of associates could effect nothing, but their own
prejudice. As soon as this new army began to move, it was thought necessary by
the House of Commons to send Cromwell to them, who was there not only received,
but entrusted with command of all the cavalry by the title of Lieutenant
General, there being then no General of the horse. This army had but ill
success at first, having laid siege to Oxford, and failed, when in the mean
time the King with a brave army had taken Leicester town, and struck a great
terror into all the parts adjacent. But all this was useful only to bring on a
greater misfortune, for General Fairefax drew his army that way, and the
opposing of his passage brought on that fatal battle of Naseby, where there
was so absolute a defeat of his Majesty's forces, as the after strivings were
but as laboring for breath, by a person not long before his decease. After
this Oxford was besieged again, and yielded by treaty, which was followed by a
total dissolution of all his Majesty's military power. Yet the King assayed to
engage a powerful army for him, which was that of the Scots at Newark, and that
he might the more endear himself to these, he put his Royal person wholly into
their power. At first the Scots carried themselves, as if they intended to
appear worthy of so great confidence, for they presently marched Northwards.
The Parliament gave no time to consider, but made a peremptory demand, to have
the King's person delivered to them, and had the help of Themistocles his two
great gods Vis and Suada, the terror of a victorious army ready to fall upon
them in case of refusal, and by way of persuasion a representation of their
duty, that army being then in the Parliaments pay, and obliged to act only in
their service, to which with many other reasons, was added a promise of their
arrears by very ready payment. The first of these was more likely to give
offense, than terror, to so powerful a body, and as to that pretended duty of
the army, it could not extend it self to the extinguishing of natural
allegiance, which is a duty personal. But whatsoever arguments were used, the
Scots consented to deliver him, and performed it to their eternal infamy, which
infamy is much increased by a breach of trust (for having received his Majesty
they ought to have set him in a state of freedom, as good as he had when he
came) and because the contracting for money makes the business appear, as a sale
of their Sovereign Prince. Soon after the King's forces were wholly dispersed,
the army being without employment made business for it self, by interposing in
public matters appertaining to the Government, which was begun by a mutinous
accusation of Mr. Hollis, with other members to the number of eleven, and a
drawing up of the army Southwards, whereupon the Parliament sent Commissioners
to them to expostulate about their remove Southwards, and to promise all
reasonable satisfaction in general terms, but nothing would serve, without the
exclusion of those Members from the House of Commons. But I should have
related, how upon delivery of the King's person, the Parliament placed him at
Holdenby-house, with a guard of Soldiers, and a Committy of Lords and Commons
to attend him, and to order matters there for his security. At this the army
seemed to take offense, disliking the choice of Commanders for his guard, but
surely their main intention was (since now an opposition to the Parliament was
designed) to have the Royal person only in the power of the army, and thereupon
they sent a party to take him from Holdenby, which was effected without the
least opposition, and so they held his Majesty with (or near) the army, till
being at Hampton Court the chief Officers grew jealous, that his residence with
the Soldiery might have an influence, endangering the power of them the
Commanders. At this time Cromwell who was the chief manager of affairs in the
army, carried himself with such respect to his Majesty, as his party grew
highly jealous of him, insomuch, as John Lilborn, the great Leveller, offered a
kind of (...) against him at the bar in the House of Commons, whereunto there
was little car given by the house in general, but those, who abhorred all
reconciliation with his Majesty, remained unsatisfied, and began to complain
bitterly of him one to another, as a person persidious; but their fear was
causless, for he never intended to be an instrument of so much good to the
nation, and therefore his courtship must be thought to have had some other
intention, which may be guessed at by that which follows. While the army lay
about Hampton Court, the Houses were informed, that the King had made an escape
from thence, and that the chief Commanders were very much distracted with the
thought of it. This was very well dissembled, since it soon (...) that the King
had been persuaded to withdraw himself, and was never fully out of power, for
being quickly seized upon again, they placed him (according to their hearts
desire) in the Isle of Wight, where there could be no addresses made to him,
but by their permission. Yet here the army was content the Parliament should
have the honor, that his Majesty's perseemed to be in their custody, for the
guard and care of him was referred to a person nominated (or at least approved
of) by them, who was Colonel Hammond. And now the English Nation (though all
too late) was grown so generally sensible of their Prince his distressed
estate, as it drew on a treaty at Caris-brook Castle in the Isle of Wight,
where the King had his forced residence, called the personal treaty, because
none were admitted to be present at the debate, but the King his self, and the
Commissioners of Parliament. It is true, that the King might retire at any time
into another room to advise with Divines and others, being persons of his own
choice, but they were not admitted to be present with him for assistance in the
debate. There were terms of very great disadvantage, yet the King carried
himself even to admiration of the Commissioners. I remember, that it happened
after the report had been made in the House of Commons, as we passed through
Westminster Hall, that one of us was speaking of his Majesty's great abilities
in the hearing of one of our Grandees, who turning his face to him who spoke,
used these words: perceive, you take notice of the King's great abilities, and
you may thence conclude with your self, that you have the more cause to take
heed of him, which speech I could not but find very strange, as if it were
dangerous to a Nation to be governed by a Prince of parts extraordinary. But
this treaty had the like issue with others, though the unsatisfactoriness of
the King's concessions could not be voted in the House, as it was then
constituted, which caused a new purgation of it by the army. Before this
personal treaty, the Parliament for a long time was enforced to take for
payment, whatsoever reasons the army Officers were pleased to tender for their
justification, but in the year 1647. the army was grown to that insolence, as
the Presbiterian party in Parliament thought it unsufferable, and thereupon
they took heart, and having made some resolute votes, sent a Committy of both
Houses to the City of London, to engage them in an opposition to the army
together with the Parliament, but there was then as great a Schism (or rent)
in the City, as in the Parliament, and the Borough of Southwork siding wholly
with the army, it was impossible for the City to stand out against it, so as
that ill grounded opposition fell wholly to ground, and the Speakers of both
Houses (who easily foresaw the issue, and together with many other Members had
made an escape to the army) returned triumphantly to Westminster, and the army
with much greater triumph marched in body quite through London, and by means of
this opposition became more eminently powerful than ever. And thus the great
City of London was made to stoop, and it may be observed in this business
(taking it wholly from the beginning to its happy conclusion) that all other
persons and parties, which had been much cried up for eminent power, were
brought low, as the great favorites in Church and State, the Scottish armies,
the Houses of Parliament, and the Royal Sovereign his self, whom it pleased God
to humble even unto violent death, as it was with his (and our) Blessed
Savior. And as for this triumphant army, with its brave and politic
Commanders, Divine Providence reserved it and them, to an utter dissolution,
(as to that great power wherewith they so afflicted the world) which came upon
them at last, though with leaden feet. And to show unto those insolent
Commanders of the army the unstableness of their condition, it pleased God
before this personal treaty, that there was a strong design laid, to draw on a
total change of affairs, by insurrections in diverse Counties, and a fresh
coming in of the Scots, who now began to understand themselves better. Yet as is
usual in matters, wherein several and distant parties undertake together, these
could not hold time one with another, so as some were overthrown, before others
appeared to stir. But as preparatory to these troubles, the Parliament by a
just judgment of God (as a return for their own miscarriage in the same kind)
was much disquieted with tumultuating Petitioners from Surrey, Kent, and other
Counties, who carried themselves with such violence, as some of the Petitioners
lost their lives by the guard which attended in the new Palace-yard, and the
loss of these persons was so ill resented abroad, as Kent suddenly arose in a
great body for the King, and had Essex held time with them, it might have
somewhat distracted the army, but Essex men stayed, till the Kentish strength
was broken at Maidstone, and then began to stir, whereupon the remainder of
Kentish men crossed the Thames, and came into Essex, where not being able to
resist a complete army, the whole party of both Counties was constrained to
retire into Colchester town, and was there besieged by General Fairesax, and
enforced to surrender for want of provisions. About the same time, the Earl of
Holland made a party, and took arms on the other side of London, but finding no
assistance from the Country, he retired Northwards, after some damage
received, and being pursued by forces sent by the army, his party was routed at
St. Neots in Huntington shire, and he his self there taken prisoner. Neither
had the Scots under Duke Hamilton any better success, for Cromwell having
gathered together a competent force, fell upon them in their quarters, when
they had scarcely heard of him, and he cannot be said to have routed them, for
they were never suffered to gather themselves into a body, so as all that great
army fell to nothing, without making the least opposition in any considerable
number, and in the pursuit the Duke their General was also taken prisoner. Now
the army having once more cleared the coast, had good leisure to fall into
mutiny again, but it was against the Parliament, and not against their
Officers, who made use of the common Soldiers, to demand Justice (as they
called it) against the King, and for whatsoever else they the Officers had in
their desires; and for this they found out a new and unheard of way, giving the
Soldiers leave to choose agitators, being substitutes, receiving denomination
from agitating their businesses, which then consisted only in meddling with
affairs concerning the public. These persons were busie-headed fellows,
pointed out by the Officers, but elected by the Soldiery, and held their
assemblies, wherein they questioned all parts of the Government, and proposed
what new models they thought fit. This made the people in general almost mad,
fearing that all would fall into absolute confusion, but the army Officers
meant no such thing, as parting at this time with their old Masters, who had
not yet done all their work, and who would be governed; as they knew by
experience, which perhaps a new and more numerous representive body would not
have endured, and therefore they resolved only upon the seclusion of all those
Members, whom they had found to be principled opposite to their interest; and
so having had good trial upon our great debate concerning the personal Treaty,
and time to make a Catalogue of such persons names, as they intended to
seclude, during one days adjournment made by the House after having spent a
whole night in that debate, they sent their Red-coats early in the morning
before the next sitting, who passed the Streets with great cries, and so
possessed themselves of the House of Commons-door, admitting only those Members,
whose names they found not in their Catalogue, and seizing upon many of the
rest who would have entered. I question not, but upon this occasion (as upon all
others of great importance) they held a solemn fast among the chief Commanders,
to ask counsel of God, for the doing of that which they their selves had
already resolved upon, which (if I deceive not my self) is one of the greatest
hypocrisies that the world has known. The House of Commons being thus molded
according to their desire, they presently fell upon the formalities of that
most hideous (and not to be paralelled) murder of our Royal Sovereign, and
upon the business of putting down the House of Lords, with intention to
establish a perfect Democracy among us. But God has preserved us from so
unhappy a change: As for my self, being one of the secluded Members, I from
that time retired me wholly from public affairs, till a farther call, which by
Gods mercy I lived to see, and had the happiness to be a Member even of that
House of Commons, when all was disposed there for a perfect restitution of the
ancient Government under our most gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, whom
God preserve long in prosperity for his service, and for the happiness of these
Nations. And here I end this Discourse, leaving it to better pens, to set forth
the continuance of that Anarchy, and the miraculous way of Divine providence,
in Restoring us to our Sovereign Prince, and to our fundamental Laws, without
effusion of one drop of blood in the Military way.

A SHORT ADDITAMENT.
SInce the finishing of this Discourse, I have consulted the Histories of
several Nations, to see, if I could meet with any thing running parallel to the
raising and issue of this War; but I have absolutely failed of doing it. It
has been usual for Senates to take part with a power already raised by persons
assuming the Sovereignty; so it was with the Roman Senate, when Galba had
prevailed against Nero; and that Senate went farther than any other within my
reading, for they proceeded to a capital sentence against their Prince, but it
was not till the Imperial dignity was in a manner possessed by Galba, and the
Military power was so far from being raised, or directed by themselves, as they
durst not give the least countenance to it, till Nero was absolutely run down.
That which comes nearer to us, is a levying of War by the Roman Senate against
Julius Maximinus the Emperor; but at the same time they invested Pupienus and
Albinus with the Imperial purple in opposition to him, and claimed no
Sovereignty in themselves; which setting up of Emperor against Emperor was a
thing very frequent among the Romans. In these later times, there have been
diverse Rebellions against Princes, wherein Senates have been concurring, but
have not originally formed the opposition. So in the United Provinces of
Belgia, Arms were first raised by particular persons, or places; and the States
(or Deputies of Provinces) afterward approved, and concurred: And the
Parliament of Paris adjoined it self to the Liguers (or Covenanters) against
the two last Henry's of France; but that Parliaments actions are little to our
purpose; for they are to be looked upon as no more than a standing Court of
Judicature, wherein the Peers of France are privileged to sit at pleasure, and
having jurisdiction only in some part of the French Dominion; (except in cases
of appeal) and besides this, the War was neither begun, nor managed under their
Authority. In Scotland, an Assembly styled Ecclesiastical, (though comprizing
Lay-persons) was Convocated by King Charles the First, and they continued their
Session after his Majesty's Act for their dissolution, assuming to themselves a
power independent upon him; but I never read, that they made any Order for
raising of Military Forces for maintenance of their Decrees, though it was
otherwise done against his Majesty. In our Chronicles, there is mention of
diverse Kings deposed, even by Parliament, but those Parliaments did it in
compliance with a strength already in being; and they no ways either directed
or concurred in raising that power. Thus have I raked together out of several
Histories much filth, but none of so bad savor, as that contracted by our Long
Parliament. There are some particulars of aggravation against that Assembly, (I
mean chiefly the House of Commons, who for the most spurred the Lords into
action as to things irregularly done) which are not applicable to any of those
in foreign Histories: As first, that they levied War against their Prince in
their own name. Secondly, that they were Assembled by the King's Writ to advise
him in his affairs, and therefore ought not to have acted against him. Thirdly,
that they were limited by the terms of that Writ, and in that respect ought not
to have exceeded those limits. Fourthly, that they were representatives of the
Commons, and (though they would be otherwise exorbitant) ought not to have done
things prejudicial to them, and contrary to the mind of their Major part, as
certainly they did, in levying of War, and in those things which ensued
thereupon. And lastly, they assumed a Jurisdiction upon the Kings Royal person,
without the least color of right, by making Substitutes (styled by them a High
Court of Justice) to Arraign him as a Delinquent, and to proceed capitally
against him, even to death it self; whereas he alone was the Fountain of all
Justice within his Dominions; and nothing of that nature could regularly be
done against the meanest person; but by virtue of Authority, or Commission from
him. And all this when he was still acknowledged to be their King; for he was
so styled In Terminis at the Arraignment. This is far beyond what has been
formerly done by any other body of men; and is of so odious a condition, as
pity it is, there cannot be a total obliteration of it, to prevent any
transmission to posterity. It has been hinted herein, that the levying of War
against the King was displeasing to the people in general; yet partly by
terror, and partly by hope of advantage, the most powerful part of the Nation
was made instrumental in it; and this may the better be believed, because many
of the most important businesses transacted in that Parliament were (upon a
weaker consideration) carried on, contrary to the judgment of the Major part of
that House of Commons. (I intend the sense of the House, as it was constituted
at first; for to speak of it otherwise were like making a Coat for the Moon,
which is never of the same dimensions, but either increasing or decreasing.)
This seems a paradox, yet thus much I can say by experience, for the truth of
it, that oftentimes very many Members, of those who sat near me in the House,
gave their voice the same way that I did upon putting the question; and yet
upon division of the House, they were ashamed to own it; for then they
associated themselves with our great managers of business in the way of
opposition to his then Majesty. Of so great force is the desire of popularity
with too many, which could not but have a very great influence upon matters of
greatest consequence, that were usually determined without any great disparity
in the Votes. Yet were not businesses always carried on in the House, according
to the mind, and intended Order of the leading persons; for the business of
that Protestation made in the year 1641 had been taken into consideration at a
private meeting of the Grandees, and was there concluded to be unseasonable.
Yet Henry Martin being unsatisfied with their determination, moved it the next
day in Parliament, and found the House so disposed, as a Vote was presently
passed for a Protestation, which was afterward worded by a select Committy,
and approved of in both Houses. And to this the Leaders would not oppose
themselves, though they conceived it to be improper at that time. Having herein
insinuated the different constitutions and inclinations of that House of
Commons, I may demonstrate it by particular resolutions, in the case of this
Henry Martin, who as well by that of the Protestation, as by some other
successes in the seditious way, being exalted in mind, adventured to cast
himself upon a Rock; and thus it was: When it had been some ways expressed in
the House, that the good and happiness of this Nation depended upon his
Majesty's safety, and continuance of the Royal Line, Henry Martin stood up and
affirmed it to be a mistake; for (as he conceived) this Nation might be very
happy, though the Royal Line were extinct. Upon these words he was presently
questioned, and after some debate, Voted out of the House, and he continued
long under that exclusion: But the War being begun, and carried on, it was
conceived, that Henry Martin might do good service, as a Member, and so his
restitution was moved for, but answer was soon made, that he was a person dead
civilly, and could not be restored to life. Hereupon young Sir Henry Vane (one
of the Oracles of those times) arose and said, That the matter was very easy
to be effected, by expunging out of the Journal Book that Order, whereby he had
been cast out; and that the House was ever understood to be Mistress of her own
Orders. This was found so ready a way, as the matter was presently determined,
and Henry Martin having notice, came into the House again, disposed to do
farther mischief. And that the House was otherwise disposed, before the
Members, who fully embraced the Royal interest had forsaken the Parliament, may
appear by the difficult saving of Sir Henry Ludlow, who thus exposed himself to
danger. The House had newly received a message from his Majesty, which was so
far from being satisfactory, as many persons spoke against it with much
vehemence, and among the rest Sir Henry Ludlow, who very resolutely used these
terms: He who sent this Message is not worthy to be King of England; Upon
saying this, he was immediately interrupted, and the words were agreed upon
preparatory to a Charge; but before his withdrawing, in order to a Censure, Mr.
Pym arose, and said, That those words contained nothing of dishonor to the
King, which being found very strange, he thus cleared his meaning. If these
words be such as a fair conclusion is naturally deducible from them, then they
cannot be evil in themselves, but that a fair conclusion naturally arises from
them, may be proved by this Syllogism. He who sent this Message is not worthy
to be King of England, but King Charles is worthy to be King of England; And
therefore King Charles sent not this Message. Now (says Mr. Pym) I leave it to
judgment, whether or no this Syllogism comprize any thing in it worthy of your
Censure. This argument was so ingenious, as Sir Henry Ludlow (with his ill
meaning) came freely off without punishment; whereas those Members, who were of
the Royal party, found no such effectual intecessions, but were ejected many in
a day, and the House was replenished again with Soldiers and other persons
(most of them) of a Tribunicial spirit and temper; so as no wonder it is, that
a Body so fallen from its Primitive Constitution, having contracted so much
evil habit, and prostituted it self to the embraces of an insolent and
rebellious Army, governed by Commanders highly ambitious, should yield births
of so horrid and prodigious a nature, which (as we hope) shall never be
paralelled in any future Age. And now, it is more than time, to conclude also
this Supplemental Discourse, which is become greater than I my self at first
intended.

Spicas aliquot legi, messem validioribus linquo.

FINIS.

