THE CHARGE OF SCHISM CONTINUED: BEING A Justification of the Author of
Christian Blessedness for his Charging the Separatists with SCHISM,
notwithstanding the Toleration.

In a Letter to a City-Friend.

LICENSED, December. 8. 1690.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Manship at the Black Bull over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1691.

SIR,
THE Information you give me concerning the great Clamor that is made by some
in the City against our Friend the Author of Christian Blessedness, for
continuing the Charge of Schism at this time against the Separatists from the
Church of England, I am the more ready to believe, because I find he meets with
a great deal of the like Treatment in the Country, as far as the Sphere of my
Acquaintance or Intelligence reaches. I can hardly put my Head into any
Company, but where I hear him either Passionately railed at by Popular
uneducated Tongues, or gravely Condemned by those of more sober and improved
Understandings; who, though no Enemies to his Person, have yet but little
Charity for his Cause. Nay, several who know nothing at all of the Book, and so
cannot directly and expressly condemn it, do yet show how ready they would be
upon occasion to do so, by declaring their Judgments against the Proposition
maintained in it.

For I find it is a thing generally taken for granted, that the Dissenters are
now no longer under the guilt of Schism, however they might be charged with it
before. For, say they, the Tables are now turned. They have now an Authentic
Patent for their Separation, and may divide from you by Authority. And
therefore let your Indictment run never so high, and be otherwise never so well
proved, their Liberty will be their immediate Discharge. For, Sir, you must
know that the Toleration is generally supposed to lay all in Common, to put the
Church and the Conventicle upon a square, and to acquit those that Separate not
only from the Penalty, but from the Fault of Nonconformity.

This Notion, I perceive, has found entertainment, not only in Vulgar Heads,
(who seldom think distinctly about any thing, but confound all things, whose
Difference is not to be felt and handled,) but also among those of good Natural
sense, and who have taken a Turn or two of Scholastic Education, and
understand something of the Measures of Reason and Consequence. Particularly I
find this Conceit passes very current among Ladies and Gentlemen, who, for want
either of Leisure, or Ability, or Attention, seldom examine things to the
bottom, but judge according to Outside and Appearance.

But this I do not so much wonder at, when I observe that Men of professed
Study and considerable Learning are carried away with the same Fancy, which I
find gets ground every day; and let me tell you, Sir, among some others,
besides those whose Interest is concerned to have it true. I find some of these
begin to talk very odly and untowardly in this matter, and not according to
their usual Clearness, and accuracy of Judgment, which they still retain in
their other Discourses. But as for the Interested Parties, they catch at this
Popular Plea of the Toleration with all the greediness imaginable, and insist
upon it mightily, (an Argument, by the way, that they distrust their other
Defenses,) and are become downright impatient of the Charge of Schism, and
think themselves not only highly Affronted, but greatly Wronged and Injured
whenever they are taxed with it, and as you know, Sir, are very angry with our
Author for continuing the Charge. What? Charge us with Schism at this time of
day, Now we are in Favor, Now the Government smiles upon us, Now we have the
Law on our Side? etc.

How far they have the Law of their Side, will be better understood from what
is to follow. In the mean time I with that some of those who are so incensed
against our Author, and so free in their Censures upon that part of his Book,
would have took the Courage to appear against him in public, which would have
been a much fairer and more manly way than either to rail at him in Corners,
(which, by the way, are as little sought for by Charity as by Truth,) or to
pester him with Scurrilous and abusive Letters without Names. This argues their
Fear to be as great as their Malice, and that they diffide either to their
Cause, or to their Skill in managing it. The truth is, they ought for their own
Credit, as well as in Justice to the Author, either to have Suppressed their
Resentments, or to have Vented them in Public. Which if they had done, I dare
undertake they should not have been disappointed of an Adversary.

But it seems they have thought fit to make use of another Method, which though
not equally declarative of their Sense, yet with the help of a little Spelling
and Collating things together may serve to pick out enough of their Meaning.
For as far as I can gather from what I observe, and from what I hear, the Sum
of all that they say against our Author (bating impertinent Cavils and
Foul-mouthed Reflections) may be reduced to these three Heads:

1. The Falsness of his Charge. 2. The Uncharitableness of it. 3. The
Unseasonableness of it.
Which Treble Censure is grounded upon one Common Argument, because, say they,
the Dissenters are Now, by Virtue of their Toleration, upon Equal Terms with
the Church.

But, Sir, in the First place, how can that be, when One is Established, and
the Other only Tolerated? Is not Establishment more than Liberty? If by Liberty
here were understood Allowance or Warrant to act (which is the highest Sense of
the word that the Persons concerned stand for) it would yet fall much short of
Establishment, which does not only Allow or Permit, but Enjoin and Require.
Much more then if Liberty here be found (as I believe it will) to ^ignifie only
a Capacity of acting without Punishment. Liberty of Allowance is much short of
Establishment, much more Liberty of Impunity. And how then are the Church and
the Dissenters upon Equal Terms?

Some therefore, who better understand what they say, choose to express
themselves thus, That the Dissenters have as much Authority for their Liberty,
as the Church has for her Establishment. Which implies not Absolute Equality,
but only Equality of Proportion. Now this I readily admit. But what then?
Therefore they are not guilty of Schism in Causelessly dividing from her
Communion. I interpose the Term (Causelefly) not without reason. For if they
say they have sufficient Cause for dividing from us, then they no longer stand
to their Plea of Toleration, but put their Cause upon another Issue, which I
think has been already sufficiently examined and exposed. But that which they
stand for now by the nature of their Appeal, seems to be this, That they are
not guilty of Schism, because of the Liberty they have by the Toleration, which
must therefore be supposed to excuse them from Schism, though they Causelessly
divide from us. For if they had just Cause for their Separation, then they
would be excused from Schism without a Toleration, which then need not be
pleaded. But this is the Plea that is now generally insisted upon for their
discharge from Schism, which must therefore be understood with this Supposal,
though they do Causelessly divide from the Communion of the Church. This
therefore is the true and explicit State of their Plea.

The Dissenters have now as much Authority for their Liberty as the Church has
for her Establishment; And therefore they are not guilty of Schism in
Causelessly Separating from her. Now this Consequence I utterly deny, and Affirm
that such Separatists are as much guilty of Schism now, after the Toleration,
as they were before.

To make this Clear, we must, in the First place, distinguish between the Law
it self, and the Sanction of the Law. By the Law it self here I understand the
bare Simple Proposition, wherein either the doing or the not doing such a thing
is enacted. By the Sanction of the Law I understand those External Motives
which are proposed and solemnly annexed by the Lawgiver to his Law as an
engagement to Obedience, that is, Rewards and Punishments. These Sanctions,
though they are sometimes made a part of the Law, as when we say the Penal Part
by way of Contradistinction to the Preceptive; yet properly speaking, they are
no part of the Law at all, but only Accessories or Appendixes prudentially
added to it, as Expedients for the better inforcement of Obedience. The Law if
self is wholly completed in the Proposition, from which the Sanction is as
much distinct as the Hedge is from the Enclosure, or the Ground which it
incloses.

This Distinction naturally leads us into another, as being dependent upon it.
For if the Sanction be a distinct thing from the Law, then we must also, 2dly,
distinguish between the Abolishing of the Sanction and the Abolishing of the
Law, and between the Suspension of the Sanction and the Suspension of the Law,
and much more yet between the Suspension of the Sanction and the Abolishment of
the Law. If the Law and the Sanction were one and the same thing, yet the
Suspension of the Sanction could not be an Abolishment of the Law, because
Suspension is not Abolishment. Much less then can the Suspension of the
Sanction be an Abolishment of the Law upon the Supposition of their Difference.
These things therefore ought carefully to be distinguished.

From the Distinctions premised, this Conclusion will necessarily arise, That
the Directive or Preceptive part of the Law may still remain in force, though
the Penal part (I speak according to Common use) be removed, whether it be by
Abolishment or by Suspension. For since the Preceptive and the Penal part are
supposed to be wholly distinct, it is impossible that a Change made in the One
should at all affect the Other, unless you could suppose some Connection or
other to intercede between them. As for instance, the Soul and Body being
supposed to be Substances really distinct, it is impossible that a Change in the
One should at all affect the Other, unless there were such a Law of Connection
between them, that Certain Thoughts in the Soul should raise Certain Motions in
the Body, and that Certain Motions in the Body should occasion Certain Thoughts
in the Soul, which is what we call the Vital Union between Soul and Body. In
like manner say I concerning the Preceptive and the Penal part of the Law, that
upon Supposition of their real distinction it is impossible that a Change in the
One should at all affect the Other, unless there should happen to be such a
declared Connection between them by the Will of the Legislative, that upon the
Ceasing of the One, the Other also should Cease; or unless the Nature of the
thing infer the Necessity of it. Neither of which may be pretended in the
present Case, as I shall have Occasion to show in the Process of this Argument.
At present I suppose it, and do therefore say that the Preceptive part of the
Law may, and will still remain in force, though the Penal part (which is
distinct from it) be removed.

Whence it will further follow, that the Preceptive part of the Law does at
present actually remain in full force. For all that a Toleration does or can
do, is only to remove the Penalty, where there is an Established National
Church. It is not there a Liberty of Allowance, but only a Liberty of Impunity.
I say where there is an Established National Church. For indeed where there is
no Legal Establishment for the Public Exercise of Religion, a Toleration would
be a Liberty of Allowance, (I mean as far as the State or Civil Law can give an
Allowance in this matter;) but where there is such an Establishment, there it
can only be a Liberty of Impunity. There it only suspends or takes away for a
time the Penal part, which will not excuse from transgressing against the
Preceptive, which, wherever there is a National Establishment, still Lives,
Breathes, Speaks, Commands, and Obliges too under Sin, though not under Civil
Penalty.

Every one knows, that has either Read or Thought any thing about the Nature of
Laws, that a Toleration is very much short of a Dispensation. But now a
Dispensation does not Abolish the Precept of the Law, much less then may a
Toleration be supposed able to do it. Indeed a Dispensation does some way
affect the Preceptive part of the Law, and that is it whereby it exceeds a
Toleration. It is indeed a present Suspension of it, not an absolute thorough
Suspension, but a Suspension with relation to such a particular Person or
Action, in respect of which, the present Course of the Law is interrupted. But
now a Toleration does not so much as affect the Preceptive part of the Law, it
has no manner of effect upon it, much less can it Abolish it, or Null the the
Obliging force of it. All therefore that it can do is only to remove the
Penalty.

And this is the true Difference, and perhaps the Only one that can be assigned
between a Dispensation and a Toleration. A Dispensation does, for the present,
and to some intents and purposes, bind up or suspend the Preceptive part of the
Law, and interrupts the Authoritative and Obliging Power of it, and thereby
makes it not only consistent with Impunity, but with Innocence to act against
it. For it makes the Law as no Law with respect to the Person or Persons
dispensed with, and for the time while they are dispensed with. But now a
Toleration does not pass any such Effect (indeed not any at all) upon the
Preceptive part of the Law. It neither strikes it, nor is levelled at it. All
the Execution that it does, or is designed to do, is upon the Penal part, which
indeed for the time is wholly removed by it. So that a Dispensation does as
much exceed a Toleration, as an Abrogation does a Dispensation. In that a
Dispensation does do no more than Suspend the Preceptive part, it falls short
of an Abrogation, which Absolutely and Universally removes it. And in that it
does so much, it exceeds a Toleration, which only takes off the Penalty,
without so much as touching either the Substance or the Virtue of the Law.

And though this be clear and plain enough by the Evidence of its own Light;
yet, I confess, it is some satisfaction to me, and it may be more so to others
who set a greater value upon Authorities than I do, to find so great and so
well-approv'd a Judge of the Abstract and general Reason of Law as the
Celebrated Suarez to be of the same Judgment with me in this matter. For, says
he, in Lib. 6. cap. 11. p. 386.
his Book De Legibus, speaking of the Effects of a Dispensation of a Humane
Law, Dispensation plus est quam Permissio, and Permissio proprie sumpta and
secundum Communem usum, non est Dispensatio. Aliquando enim permittere non
aliud significat quam voluntary non impedire, quod non est Dispensare. Nam
Deus permittit Peccatum, in quo non Dispensat. Aliter vero permittere
significat idem quod sinere impune operari malum, ut in Republica dicuntur
aliqua peccata permitti; Et quando id fit ex decreto Legis, dicitur permissio
esse Legis effectus. Illa vero non relaxat Legem, quandoquidem non excusat
Culpam, quam propria Dispensatio tollit. Et ideo neque illa dicetur
Dispensatio. A Dispensation is more than a Permission or Toleration (for it is
all one, both as to the import of the word, and Suarez's constant way of using
it) and a Permission properly taken, and according to Common use is not a
Dispensation. For sometimes to permit signifies no other than voluntarily not
to hinder, which is not to Dispense. For God does permit Sin in which he does
not Dispense. Sometimes again to permit signifies the same as to suffer the
doing of an Evil with Impunity, as some Sins are said to be permitted in a
Commonwealth. And when this is done by virtue of a legal Decree, then such a
Permission is said to be the Effect of the Law. But this does not relax the
Law, in as much as it does not excuse the Fault, which a proper Dispensation
takes away. And therefore neither may this be said to be a Dispensation.

Suarez here distinguishes of a twofold Sufferance or Toleration; the Suffering
an Evil to be done, or the bare not hindering the doing of it, and the
Suffering it to be done with Impunity. And both these he sets below a
Dispensation. The former kind of Toleration is the least that can be imagined,
and indeed is so little as to be consistent with the strictest Kind or State of
Government that is. All Governors do Tolerate at this rate, even God himself,
who, as He says, does permit or not hinder the committing of Sin. The latter
kind of Toleration is a degree above the former, as adding to it the doing with
Impunity. And this indeed is too much to consist with the Strictness of
Government, and therefore is not used in every Kind or State of it. Neither God
nor Man do always Tolerate after this manner. For indeed it is a Relaxation of
the Government, not as to the Legislative, but only as to the Executive part of
it. But though it be so much greater than the former sort of Toleration, yet it
is also at the same time as much less than a Dispensation, in that a
Dispensation does, in some respects, wholly suspend even the very Obligation of
the Law, which a Toleration does not so much as Relax, or any way Affect, but
only Suspends the Penalty annexed to the Transgression of it. So that though it
be some Mitigation of the Government, and thereby exceeds a bare simple
Permission, yet it is no Abatement of the Law, and therein falls short of a
Dispensation.

The short of this matter is, All Permission may be considered either as of
Right, or of Fact. Permission of Right is the same with a Dispensation, which
disarms the Law of its present Authority and Obligation, and makes it no Fault
to do otherwise than is Commanded. Permission of Fact is twofold, either the
bare suffering or not hindering the doing of an Evil, which may be called a
Simple Permission. Or the suffering it to be done without Punishment, which is
a Toleration. This Latter Permission, though it be greater than the immediately
preceding, yet it is as much less than the First, as reaching no higher than the
Sanction, whereas that puts a present restraint upon the very Power of the Law.

This I take to be a true and distinct Idea of a Toleration, both as it is in
its own proper nature, and as it stands in relation to other Changes that
concern the Administration of the Law. From whose Authority and Obligation it
does not in the least diminish, but only lays a restraint upon the Execution of
it. It does not divest the Law of any part of her Sovereignty, but only Sheaths
up her Sword of Discipline; it does not Silence her Voice, but only Stays her
Hand. In short, there is nothing more nor less in it, than a Suspension of the
Penal part of the Law.

This is all that it can do, and perhaps more than it ought. For I believe
there ought to be no such thing as a Toleration, and that it is more than either
the Church or the State can rightfully grant. For not to insist upon that Trust
which seems to be reposed in them, to defend and secure both Unity of Faith and
Unity of Worship; if there ought to be a Toleration, then there ought to be no
Establishment, (for to what purpose is an Establishment, whose Order must never
be executed?) But it is a strange thing if Human Laws may not be allowed to
oblige to the same thing to which the Divine Law is acknowledged to Oblige,
that is, to Ecclesiastic Unity. Which because required by the Divine Law,
ought also to be required by Human Laws, and consequently there ought to be no
such thing as a Toleration. And besides, those that say there ought, seem to me
to be guilty of a Contradictory, Self-inconsistent Proposal, and not rightly to
understand what they would have. For if they will have Liberty of Conscience
granted to any, then certainly the Supreme Authority of the Nation must be
allowed this Liberty. And then let us suppose (as well we may) that he thinks
himself Obliged in Duty and Conscience to use the Power that is in his hands to
suppress all Religions but the true one, that is, all but that which he himself
conceives to be true. And what then will become of the Toleration? Nor ought
the Magistrate to be blamed for so doing. For having once allowed in general
that every Man ought to have Liberty of Conscience, you ought not to think it
hard that the Magistrate assumes this Liberty of acting according to his
Conscience, though by doing so he restrains and hinders yours, as he certainly
will in case he make use of the same Liberty. So that Absolute and Universal
Liberty of Conscience is a downright, contradictory, inconsistent Supposition;
which one Consideration, by the way, is sufficient to overthrow all that a Late
Author has pleaded in its behalf.

But I shall pursue this no further, as being only a Digression from my Present
Concern. What I stand for now, is this, That a Toleration, when it is granted,
implies no more than only a Removal of such Penalties as the Law would
otherwise inflict upon those who Disobey it. That it does not either Abrogate,
or Suspend, or Dispense with the Law, but only bridles and reins up the
Execution of it. All which is to be understood with the forementioned
Condition, where there is an Established National Church.

And this (notwithstanding the Toleration) is the present Case in England,
where there is a Church Established by the Law of the Land, and invested with
several Temporal as well as Ecclesiastic Rights and Privileges, where the
Public Liturgy stands Authorized by several Acts of Parliament, where Articles
of Religion and Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical are also Confirmed by
the same Authority, where the Acts of Uniformity remain unrepeal'd as before,
and where even the Dissenters themselves are all required to pay Tithes to the
Public and Legallyappointed Ministry. Which is also a plain and certain
Argument that they are required to attend upon it, and conform to it. For is it
imaginable that the Laws should Oblige them to Contribute their part to the
Support and Maintenance of that Worship, to which they do not enjoin them to
Conform? This would be against the very Supposition of an Establishment, and
would place the Church and the Conventicle upon an equal ground indeed, that
is, it would make neither of them Established, but both only Tolerated. But they
confess the Church to be Established, and so indeed she is as much as ever; and
therefore the only Change made by the Toleration is, that the Penal part of the
Law is, for the present, laid aside. As for the Preceptive, that stands where
it did, and Obliges under Sin, though not under Civil Penalty.

And if so, then those who now divide from this Church Established by Law, which
Law does also require their Communion with it, are true and proper
Transgressors against the Law; and if they do it Causelessly, are also guilty of
the Breach of Church-Unity, that is of Schism, notwithstanding any Public
Order for the not inflicting the Punishment otherwise due to them for so
transgressing. This cannot excuse them either from Disobedience to the State,
or from Schism in the Church, with whose Establishment they are still Obliged
to Conform as far as Lawfully they may, though not accountable to the Law for
their Nonconformity. Thus the Jews were justly taxable with disobedience to
their Law in the matter of Arbitrary Divorce, though for some Prudential
Reasons tolerated in the Practice of it by Moses their Chief Magistrate. The
Effect of which Toleration (as our Savior himself expounds it) was not
Innocence, but only Impunity.

Against what has been hitherto discoursed, I know but of one Objection that a
Man would not be Ashamed to Urge, or Impertinent to Answer, or that deserves
the Expense of Ink and Paper. But there is another which I must first take in
my way, because it is thrown upon me, and is very loud and importunate for
Satisfaction, which must therefore, I think, be given it for quietness sake.

In the first place then it is pleaded, that this is no Ordinary Toleration.
That it is not a bare Supine Neglect to animadvert, a kind of Drowise fit, or
Nodding of the Government, no, nor a designed and deliberate Connivance only,
nor yet a Private act of Indulgence declared by the Will and in the Name of the
Prince alone; But that it is an Indulgence granted and settled by an Act of the
whole Legislative, by the joint Concurrence of King and Parliament, that it is a
Toleration by Law, by the same Law upon which the Church it self is erected,
and by which it stands. This is the Common Popular Objection, and there is not
a Woman, or a Shopkeeper, but what is Big with it.

Now I grant the Dissenters that they have a Toleration settled by Law, and that
therefore this is no Ordinary Toleration, and I know they are not a little
puffed up with it. And by the way, Sir, 'twould make even a very grave Man
smile to see how those Men who have been hitherto such Despisers and Vilifiers
of a National Establishment, are now lifted up with the Conceit of a National
Liberty. Of what advantage this may prove either to themselves, or to the
Nation, or to the general Interest of Religion, I leave to wiser Heads to
Conjecture, and to Time to show; but in the mean while I fancy this their Plea,
from the Extraordinariness of the Toleration, will do 'em but little service.
For it is the unhappiness of this Objection that it proceeds upon a wrong State
of the Question. The Question is not concerning either the Kind or the Degree
of the Authority, but concerning the Nature and the Extent of the Grant; not by
what they are Authorized, but to what, whether to act Allowedly and with
Innocence, or only Unrestrainedly and with Impunity? And to what purpose then
do they insist upon the Greatness of the Authority?

If it be said, that this is no Mistaking the State of the Question, but an
Inferring the thing denied, viz. Liberty of Allowance, from the Greatness of
that Authority whereby this Solemn Toleration is granted: I Answer, that then
the Inference is grossly False and Illogical. It Is certainly a very pleasant way
of Arguing, to infer the greater extent of the Grant from the Greatness of the
Authority whereby it is made, as if a Lesser Grant might not be the Effect of a
Greater Authority.

Suppose that instead of Moses, God himself had been the Author of the
Toleration concerning Arbitrary Divorce among the Jews. This Toleration was
indeed given by Moses without any Divine Commission for it, as far as appears.
But suppose it had been given by God himself. It will be readily granted that
such a Toleration as this would have been of much greater Authority than the
other, indeed of the greatest in the World. But would it therefore have been to
any higher Purpose or greater Effect? No, that does not follow. Moses his
Toleration reached as far as Impunity, and a Divine one would have reached no
further. It would not have produced any other Effect, though perhaps it might
have been a further Security and Establishment of the same. Though the
Authority it self be Greater, yet the thing granted by that Authority may be
the same that is otherwise granted by a Lesser; and if there be nothing else in
the Business but only a greater Degree of Authority, it must and will be so.
And thus it is in the Case before us. Though a Toleration by Act of Parliament
be of greater Authority than a Toleration by the sole Will and Pleasure of the
Prince, yet it is not to a greater Effect. And though the Diffenters have now
as much Authority for their Liberty, as the Church has for her Establishment,
yet it is only for Liberty, that is, (as appears by what has been said) Impunity.

When therefore it is pleaded that this is no Ordinary Toleration, it is plain
that there is a double meaning in the Proposition. It may be understood either
as to the Authority of it, or as to the Effect of it. If as to the Authority,
that indeed is true, but nothing at all to the purpose, as being beside the
State of the Question. If as to the Effect, that I affirm and have shown to be
false. The Effect of this Toleration reaches not an Inch further than that of a
less Solemn One would have done; perhaps, considering some particular
Restrictions whereby it is qualified, not so far. But to be sure it can extend
no further, the greatest Effect of both being only Exemption from Punishment.
So that you see this Objection is quite disarmed, and indeed is too weak and
empty to abide any longer Trial.

The truth is, I should not have kept it so long under Examination, were it not
for the Popularity of it, and that great Noise that is made about it. It Is not
its Moment, but its Importunity that has procured it so full a Hearing. For
indeed in it self it is weak and silly enough. Though yet I think it is the
Best by much that is used, or that the Men I am dealing with have Invention
enough to urge. But I will be so kind to them, for once, as to put a Better
Objection into their hands; and if they think I do not propose it enough to
their advantage, let them take it and manage it themselves.

You may please to remember, Sir, that a little further backward, speaking of
the Distinction that is between the Sanction of the Law, and the Law it self; I
said 'twas impossible that a Change in the One should at all affect the Other,
unless there were a Connection between them, arising either from the declared
Will of the Legislative, or from the Nature of the thing it self.

Now in this I may seem to have laid a Foundation for a very strong Objection.
For it may be pleaded that there is such a Connection, not from the Will of the
Legislative declaring such a dependence between the Law and the Sanction, that
upon the Ceasing of one, the other also shall Cease: This, I suppose, will not
be pretended, nor do I see any room for such a Pretense. But from the very
Nature of the thing it self so requiring.

For it may be said, that although the Sanction of the Law be, as we have
shown, a Distinct thing from the Law it self, that is, the Penal part from the
Preceptive, yet it is Essential and Necessary to the Obligation of it. And
therefore that which removes the Sanction, does also by Consequence remove the
Obligation of the Law; And consequently since a Toleration (as is acknowledged)
removes the Sanction of the Law, it does also by Virtue of that remove the
Obligation of it, the Latter not being able to stand without the Former, any
more than the Body is to live without the Soul.

I confess if the Sanction of the Law were necessary to the Obligation of it,
then notwithstanding all the real Difference that is between them, that which
takes away the Sanction, would also unhinge the Obligation, as that which takes
away the Soul destroys also the Life of the Body; and consequently the
Toleration, by taking away the Sanction, must of necessity be allowed to take
away the Obligation too. In this there can be no great Difficulty, or Dispute.
All the Question will be concerning the Leading Proposition, whether the
Sanction of the Law be necessary to the Life and Obligation of it. Here will be
the last Pinch of the Difficulty, as will be better discerned, if we Analyze
the Argument, by Casting it into a Logical Form and Order; wherein it will
appear thus:

If the Toleration takes away the Sanction of the Law, it also takes away the
Obligation of it.

But according to you it takes away the Sanction of the Law;

Therefore it takes away the Obligation.

The Consequence is denied, and thus proved;

That which takes away the Sanction, takes away the Obligation:

Therefore if the Toleration takes away the Sanction, it also takes away the
Obligation.

The Antecedent is denied, and thus proved:

If the Sanction of the Law be Necessary to the Obligation of it, then that
which takes away the Sanction, takes away the Obligation.

But the Sanction is Necessary, etc.

Here the Consequence is granted, but the Minor is denied;

Which was the Head and Knot of the Objection, and whose Truth comes now to be
Examined.

It is a Common Question among Moralists, Civilians, and Casuistical Divines,
Vtrum Sanctio Paenalis sit de Essentia sive de Ratione Legis? Whether a Penal
Sanction be of the Essence or Reason of the Law? By which, I suppose, they do
not mean, as the terms seem to import, whether it be of the inward Form and
Constitution of the Law, (for it is plain that it is not;) but whether it be a
Necessary Condition to the Obligation of it, the same thing that is now under
Consideration.

I do not remember that Suarez takes any notice of this matter, which I cannot
but wonder at in a Person that undertakes a just and adequate Account of the
Nature of Laws, and who often descends to the discussion of Points of much
lesser moment. Though what his Judgment was in the Case, may be sufficiently
Collected from what he discourses Lib. 1. c. 20. p. 53.
concerning the several ways whereby Laws may suffer a Change. Among which I do
not find that he has any Mention of the Removal of the Penalty, which he could
not have omitted, if he had thought that the Sanction of the Law was necessary
to its Obligation. For then the Removal of it would have caused either an
Abrogation or a Suspension in the Law, as is urged in the Objection. But the
Question is not so overlookt by Others; and they generally answer in the
Negative, that the Sanction is not Necessary to the Obligation of the Law. I
say generally. For I know there are some few that say that it is Necessary, and
that the Law is but a mere dead Letter, a Body without a Soul, if it have no
Sanction. Nay there are some that advance one step higher, and say that the
Sanction is not only necessary to the Obligation of a Law, but that it derives
its whole Obligation from the Sanction.

That the Latter of these Assertions is not true, is, I think, as certain as I
would desire any thing to be. For I consider, that if the Law derived its whole
Obligation from the Sanction, then these grand Absurdities (not to mention any
other) would unavoidably follow.

First, That any Law would Oblige, let the Matter of it be never so wicked and
unjust, or the Authority whereby it is made never so incompetent, provided it
were armed with a sufficient Sanction. For the Sanction being supposed to be
the only Fountain of Obligation, that being present, and in such measure as is
requisite, the Obligation must needs follow, as every Effect does upon the
Being of its entire and adequate Cause.

Secondly, It would also follow, that no Law could oblige constantly, unless it
were backed with the greatest Penalty that is absolutely possible. For since the
Law is supposed to have all its Obligation from the Penalty, then where there
is the greater Penalty, there will be the greater Obligation; and consequently
if the Case should so happen, that a Man should threaten me if I do not
transgress the Law, with a greater Punishment than the Law does in case I do, I
am then discharged from the Obligation of the Law, (as being under a greater
Obligation) and may innocently transgress it, though it were the Law even of
God himself. Which at one blow would strike off the constant Obligation of the
whole Jewish Law. For the Law of the Jews being ratified and confirmed to them
only by Temporal Penalties, and those not always the greatest, even of the same
Kind and Order; if a Jew should happen to be tempted to transgress the Law (as
he easily might) by a greater Punishment than the Law would inflict upon him
for transgressing it, upon this supposition, that the Law receives its
Obligation from the Penalty, it would follow, that he would be released from
the Obligation of his Law, which I think is Absurd enough. But to this I
further add:

Thirdly, If the Law be to receive its Obligation from the Sanction, then we
must suppose it therefore to Oblige, because it makes it Reasonable or Eligible
for a Man to do so or so that he may avoid such a Punishment, for that is all
the engagement to action that the Sanction can be supposed to add. But if this
be all, this is not to Oblige in Duty, but only in Point of Prudence, which
indeed is not properly to Oblige at all, since otherwise all rational
Inducements would be Laws. Indeed the Proposal of a Penalty may be a good
Ground of Persuasion why a Man should do so as the Law directs. But it can be
no more, it cannot lay an Obligation upon the Conscience, or make it Sin to do
otherwise. It may move, determine, and in some Cases secure the Choice, but it
cannot Oblige the Will.

To say therefore that the Law Obliges by and from the Sanction, is in effect
to say that it does not Oblige at all, since then it could Oblige only by way
of Persuasion and rational Inducement, which indeed is not strictly and
properly to Oblige. The truth is, upon this Supposition the most Excellent Law
of the most Sacred Authority in the World would Oblige no otherwise than the
Demand of a Thief upon the Highway. The Thief bids me Deliver, or he will Pistol
me. The Law bids me do thus, or I shall be Punished. I yield up my Money to the
Thief, to avoid being Pistol'd; and I yield my Obedience to the Law, to avoid
being Punished. It Is possible here that the Motive of Action in both Cases may
be the same, viz. the avoiding of Evil. But I hope nobody will be so Gross as
to say, that the Obligation in both Cases is alike too; that the Law Obliges no
otherwise than the Command of a Thief when he comes to Rob me. And yet this
must be said, if it be true, that the Law has its Obligation from the Sanction;
for then it is plain, that all its Obligation comes to this, That it makes it
reasonable and eligible for me to do such an Action to avoid such an Evil, and
so does the Thief.

Fourthly, If the Law Obliges purely in Virtue of the Sanction, then 'twill
follow, that the Law will Oblige no further, than the Sanction reaches;
Consequently it will not Oblige the Supreme Magistrate, who is acknowledged not
to be subject to the Sanction of the Law. But this is more than the greatest
Sticklers for Prerogative will allow, and indeed is against the general Sense
of the greatest Masters of Law, whether Common or Civil, who generally yield
the Supreme Magistrate to be under the Directive, though not under the Coercive
Power of the Law. And if so, then the Preceptive does not Oblige by Virtue of
the Coercive, since it is allowed to Oblige where the Coercive does not reach.

Fifthly, This Hypothesis of the Law's receiving its Obligation from the
Sanction, will, in the Consequence of it, make all Laws purely Penal, that is,
such as do not oblige Absolutely, to the Fact, but only Conditionally, either
to the Fact or to the Penalty; and which therefore are equally satisfied either
by doing what is Expressed, or by suffering what is Entailed upon the Omission
of it. For if the Law be supposed to Oblige by Virtue of the Penalty which it
proposes, then its Obligation comes to this, That I must do such a thing,
because otherwise I must suffer such a Punishment; which is as much as to say,
that if I do not such a thing, I must suffer such a Punishment; which will
again at last be resolved into this, that either I must do so, or suffer so;
which though it Obliges me Disjunctively, leaves me at full Liberty as to the
Determination of my Choice. Which expresses the true Form and Nature of a pure
Penal Law. But I suppose it will not be said that all Laws are purely Penal.
For then there would be no Sin but only where the Penalty is declined or
resisted; the Consequence of which again would be, that all the Sin that is in
the World would only be against Human Laws; and that there would be no such
thing as Sinning against God, because the Divine Justice can neither be evaded
nor resisted. Which is a Consequence that would make strange Alterations, and
introduce as strange Confusions in the System of the Moral and Intellectual
World.

Sixthly and Lastly, If the Obligation of the Law proceeded from the Sanction,
then 'twould follow, that I am therefore Obliged to do, because I must Suffer
for not doing: But this is so far from being true, that the Reverse of it is
so. For I must therefore Suffer for not doing, because I was Obliged to do. For
I must Suffer, because I Sinned, otherwise my Suffering would be unjust. And I
could not Sin if I were not under an Obligation; which being thus Pre-supposed
and Antecedent to the Necessity of undergoing the Penalty, (which is what I
call the Sanction,) cannot possibly be founded upon it, or proceed from it.

This last Argument proves not only that the Law does not derive its whole
Obligation from the Sanction, but also that no Part or Degree of it is thence
derived. For if the whole Obligation be (as is supposed) Antecedent to the
Penalty, then it is plain that no part of it is or can be derived from it. To
which I further add, That the End of the Sanction is to move and engage Men to
pay that Obedience to the Law which they owe. It Is indeed one of the forcible
and violent ways of recovering a Debt, a Debt which Men owe to the Law, and
which, if they did not owe it, could not be justly exacted from them under a
Penalty. Here then is Duty and Obligation supposed (in Order of Nature at
least) as Antecedent to the Sanction, and to which the Sanction is to serve as
a Means to the End. And therefore it is most certain (if there be any thing so
in the Measures of Reasoning) that the Law does not derive its Obligation, nor
any Part or Degree of it from the Sanction. And this I take to be Vertually at
least contained in those well-known Words of the Apostle, Wherefore ye must
needs Romans 13.
be Subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. There is, I
know, some Dispute concerning the Meaning, and concerning the Extent of the
former Clause; but whatever be meant by Subjection here, and how far soever it
is to extend, this in the mean time is certain, that this Subjection, whatever
it be, is by the Apostle pressed from a double Principle, Wrath and Conscience,
which he plainly distinguishes one from another, as two different Grounds and
Inducements to Subjection. Ye must needs be subject not only for Wrath, but
also for Conscience; that is, not only to avoid Punishment, but also out of a
Sense of Duty and Obligation. Which being here made not only a distinct, but a
further degree of Argument for Subjection, it is plain that in the judgment of
the Apostle the Obligation of the Law is not from the Sanction; because if so,
he need only have said, Ye must be subject for Wrath, which would have been
sufficient as including the other. But whereas he makes a Contradistinction
between them, it is evident that he that is subject only for Wrath, is not
subject for Conscience; and consequently that Obligation in Conscience does not
proceed from Wrath, but from some other Principle.

If it be then demanded, Whence does the Law receive its Obligation? I answer
first, that it is enough for my present purpose to have shown that it does not
receive it from the Sanction. But if a more positive Answer must be given, I
say that the Law has its Obligation from the Authority of the Lawgiver, who by
virtue of his Authority has a Right to be Obeyed, and to exact Obedience by
Punishments in all his just Commands.

And this they will at length be driven to acknowledge, who derive the
Obligation of the Law from the Sanction. For when they say that the Law obliges
by and from the Sanction, they must be understood to mean if their Sense be
drawn out more at length, that the Law obliges me to do so, because it obliges
me to suffer for not doing so: But pray how comes the Law to oblige me to the
Latter, to suffer for not doing so? Is this by virtue of any other Sanction?
But so we might run on to Infinity. It must be therefore by something else. And
what should that be but the Authority of the Lawgiver? And if this be thought
sufficient to Authorize the Sanction, why should it not also Authorize the Law?

If it be further asked, whence has the Lawgiver his Authority? I answer, If he
be a Creature, he has it from God, whom I suppose to be the sole Fountain of
all Power. But if the Lawgiver be God, he has it Originally and Independently
in himself. But whether it be by the more Super-eminency of his Nature, as some
say, or by the Benefit of Creation, as others, let them dispute that abound
with more leisure than I do, and want better employment.

But though the Sanction does not give the Law its Obligation, or any part of
it, may it not however be necessary to it? Yes, if made so by the Will of the
Legislator (as I said before) Establishing such a Connection between them, that
upon the Ceasing of the One, the Other also shall cease. But not in any wise
from the Nature of the thing. For if it be of it self Necessary, it must either
be as a Cause, or as a Condition. That it is not Necessary as a Cause, we have
sufficiently proved already, by showing that it has no part in effecting or
producing the Obligation of the Law. If therefore it be Necessary, it must be
Necessary as a Condition. But that it is not, I will now briefly show.

By a Condition I understand that, which though it has no Causal influence upon
the Effect, yet it so determines the Efficient Cause to act, as that without it
it will not act. As for instance, the opening of a Window, though it be not the
Cause of inlightning the Room, (for it does not Efficiently inlighten it,) yet
it is the Condition of it, as being that without which the Sun will not
inlighten it. Or to come somewhat nearer home, the Promulgation of a Law,
though it be not the Efficient Cause of its Obligation, yet it is the Condition
of it, as being that without which the Law will not oblige. Now the Question
is, Whether the Sanction of the Law be in this sense necessary to the
Obligation of it?

To which I answer, By no means For since the Obligation of the Law is supposed
to owe its Birth not to the Sanction of it, but to other Causes (which has been
proved already) there can be no manner of reason pretended why the Sanction
would be a Condition necessary to the actual obliging of it, but only as it may
be esteemed a Sign that such a Proposition is the Will of the Legislator. For
the Law having its whole and full Authority within its self independently on
the Sanction, needs only a public Sign that it is indeed the Will of such a
Power to make it actually Obliging. If therefore the Sanction be necessary, it
must be necessary as a Sign. But that end being already sufficiently answered
and satisfied by the Promulgation of the Law, it cannot pretend to any such
necessity, and therefore to none at all. And accordingly we see, that even a
solemn Promulgation it self, when it ceases to be necessary as a Sign, ceases
absolutely to be necessary, as appears in the Instance of the Law of Nature;
which because it may be and is otherwise known, than by a solemn Publication of
it, renders that Circumstance wholly unnecessary.

The sum is, if the Sanction be necessary, it is necessary as a Public Sign,
that being the only thing supposed to be further wanting, where the Law is
otherwise sufficiently Authentic. But it is not necessary on that Account,
because of the Promulgation, which fully and directly serves to that End. And
therefore it is not at all necessary.

But may not the Sanction be necessary as a Sign, where the Law is not
promulgated? To this I answer, First, That the Fate of the present Cause is not
concerned in the issue of this Question, our Laws being sufficiently
promulgated. But suppose it were concerned, it need fear no danger from it. For
the Question proceeds upon a contradictory Supposition. It supposes the Law to
be promulgated and not promulgated at the same time. For if the Sanction be
necessary as a Sign, then it must make the first discovery of the Law, which
till then must not be supposed to be known. And yet it must too, and that
before the Sanction can pretend to be a Sign. For the Sanction cannot pretend
to that Office till it is known; and it cannot be known till after the Law is
known. For to know the Sanction, is to know that such a Penalty is by the Law
annexed to such an Action, which presupposes the Law to be known. And how then
can the Sanction be necessary as a Sign, where the Law is not promulgated? The
very Supposition implies a Contradiction. Whence I further conclude, That it is
impossible that a Sanction should ever be necessary as a Sign to the Obligation
of the Law; which as it received not its Obligation from it, so it may and will
oblige without it, since from what has been discoursed, it clearly appears that
it is no way necessary to the Obligation of the Law, either as a Cause, or as a
Condition.

I say, to the Obligation of it. For I do not deny but that a Sanction is very
necessary to the Inforcement, and better Success of the Law; and that therefore
it is very expedient that all Laws should have their Sanctions; partly that by
them the greatness of the Obligation may be rated and estimated (it being the
general Prudence of Lawgivers to annex greater Penalties to more concerning
and important Precepts) and partly that by them Men might be the more easily
and securely contained within the Limits of their Duty; which without some
Penal Restraint every little appearance of Interest would tempt them to
transgress.

And yet even this is only an Accidental Necessity, introduced by the badness
of the World. For were Men as they should be, Wise and Good (which till the
Millennium I despair to see) they would discern and be satisfied of the Reason
and Equity of the Law; and that alone would be a sufficient motive to Order and
Obedience. But when they are either so stupid as not to see the good end of the
Law, or so profligate as not to regard it, then comes in this Expedient of the
Sanction, arming the Laws with Penalties whereby they may be enabled to revenge
themselves upon those unconsidering disingenuous Persons that do them violence.

And indeed, considering the great and general Bruitishness and Degeneracy of
Men, how very alienated they are not only from the Life of God, but even from
that of Natural Reason too, it is very fit it should always be thus; and that
all Laws, as well as those of Mount Sinai, should have their Thundrings and
Lightnings to awake and alarm the Passions of such Men, who having lost their
Reasons, have now nothing else to be taken hold by. But this, I say, only
proves a Sanction necessary to the better Inforcement, and not to the
Obligation of the Law.

To which if any one shall yet think it necessary, I shall only further press
him with one sensible Absurdity, which perhaps may signify more with some
Apprehensions, than an abstracter way of reasoning. It is this, That upon this
Supposition it would follow, that if God himself should impose any Command upon
a Creature, without annexing a Penalty in case of Disobedience, he would not be
able with all his Authority and Divine Supremacy, to oblige that Creature. And
will any Man, can any Man have the Impudence or Impiety to say so?

Suppose that when God gave that Command to Adam, concerning the not eating of
the Tree of Knowledge, he had not added that other Clause (which was the
Sanction of the Law) In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
Will any Man presume to say that Adam would not have been obliged by that
Divine Command, but might have tasted of the forbidden Fruit without Sin? He
must have but very little reverence for the Majesty of God, and as little sense
of the sacredness of his Authority who would adventure to say so. And yet thus
he must say if it be true (what is contended for by some) that the Sanction is
necessary to the Obligation of the Law. For whatever is necessary to the Law as
such, is necessary to every Law, whether Human or Divine. He therefore that
holds the necessity of the Sanction to the Obligation of the Law, must say (if
he will be consistent with himself) that the Command of the Great God would not
have obliged Adam in case there had not been a Penalty annexed to it. If he
does not say so, I should smile at his Inconsistency; and if he does, I should
tremble for his Impudence and Irreverence.

But from a Supposition to descend to a Matter of Fact, what will such a one
say to the Tenth Commandment, to which (as the Author of the Christian
Blessedness has rightly observed) there was no Sanction annexed. Will he say,
that this Precept stood as a Cipher in the Decalogue, without passing any
Obligation upon the Jews? This indeed would make much to the honor of the
Divine Wisdom; and represent God as a very notable Lawgiver, to Usher in a Law
with so great Solemnity, and afterward write it with his own fingers upon
Tables of Stone, when it could signify nothing but only the filling up of a
Number. And yet this, as absurd as it is, he must say, that will make the
Sanction necessary to the Obligation of the Law. If this be true, then the
Tenth Commandment did not oblige. But it seems the great Apostle was of another
Judgment, when he Romans 7. 7.
said, I had not known Sin but by the Law: For I had not known Lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not Covet. It seems then that Lust was a Sin, and that
by virtue of the Tenth Commandment, which is here alleged by the Apostle to
prove it so, which therefore did oblige, since without Obligation, as well as
where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression. If it be said, that
although the Tenth Commandment had no Temporal Sanction or Civil Penalty
annexed to it, like the other Nine, yet it had an Eternal Sanction, namely the
Rewards and Punishments of a future Life, and that 'twas by virtue of that
Sanction that it became Obligatory. I answer, that this could not be any
Sanction to the Jews, to whom it was not plainly revealed, though, it be now to
us Christians who have a full and express Revelation of it. A Sanction not
Published is no Sanction, as much as a Law not published is no Law; that is, to
any real Effect or Purpose of Government. Indeed of the two, Publication seems
more necessary to the Sanction than to the Law. For oftentimes the natural and
inward Reasonableness of the thing may in a great measure supply the place of
an Express Law, as it did for a long time before there was any Express Law
given; but now Punishment is a more Arbitrary thing, and that depends more upon
the Will of the Governor; and therefore unless there be an Express Declaration
of it, as there will be no certain ground of expecting it, so there will be
little or no influence derived upon Men from it. Which makes it absolutely
necessary that the Sanction should be expressly declared and published,
otherwise it will neither have the Nature nor the Effect of a Sanction.

It may indeed be the secret intent and purpose of the Lawgiver to inflict
such a Punishment for such an Offense; and perhaps in some Cases this may be
justly done without declaring beforehand that he will do so; and this may be
said to be the Sanction of the Lawgiver; but unless this be openly and plainly
declared, it can be no Sanction of the Law, nor can it be a Sanction to those
that are to be governed by it.

If God in his first solemn intercourse with Adam, after the Precept given him,
had reserved that other Clause to himself, In the day that thou eatest thou
shall die; or had communicated this his Will and Purpose to an Angel, or to any
other Being, but not to Adam himself, could this have been said to have been in
any respect a Sanction to Adam? No certainly, because not manifested to him
whose concern it was. Nor for the same reason could the other be said to be a
Sanction to the Jews.

It must therefore either be said that the Tenth Commandment did not oblige the
Jews (which I think would be an intolerable Assertion, and withal expressly
against the sense of the Apostle, declaring Lust to have been a Sin by virtue
of that Commandment) or that it obliged them without any Sanction, and
consequently that the Sanction is not necessary to the Obligation of the Law:
Which is the thing that I plead for.

If it be said, that though the Sanction be not necessary to the Obligation of
the Law in general, nor consequently to the Obligation of all Laws; yet it must
be necessary to the Obligation of Human Laws, because Human Laws do not oblige
under Sin, and therefore must oblige only under Penalty, and that therefore
such Laws without a Sanction will not oblige. I answer, first, That this
Objection proves a great deal too much; for upon this Supposition the Law would
not oblige to Action even with a Sanction, for it would not so oblige at all.
But we suppose here the Law to have such an Obligation, and say that the
Sanction is not necessary to it, and consequently that the removal of the
Sanction does not remove the Obligation. Our present Argument therefore is not
concerned in this Objection. We are here enquiring what Alteration the
Toleration has made in the state of things, by removing the Sanction of the
Law, whether it has thereby removed the Obligation too? We say it has not, but
that if the Law had any Obligation before, it has so still, because the
Sanction is not necessary to it. But whether it had or no, belongs not to our
present Consideration (which is only concerning the Effects of the Toleration)
but to the Absolute Merits of the Cause.

But however, since it happens to come in my way, this I say further, That it
is not at all necessary that Human Laws should be purely Penal, because they
are Human, and consequently that it is not necessary that all Human Laws should
be so. For whenever they are purely Penal, it is acknowledged that they oblige
to Punishment, otherwise they would oblige to nothing; which is the same as not
to oblige at all, and consequently would be no Laws. But how come they to
oblige to Punishment, but only by the Will and Intention of the Lawgiver
invested with competent Authority? And if by that he could oblige to
Punishment, then by the same, had he so pleased, he might have obliged to
Action. For this is a most unquestionable Rule, That he who can oblige to
Punishment, can also, if he pleases, oblige to Action; nay much rather, it
being a much greater thing to oblige to Suffer, than to oblige to Do.

Human Laws therefore are not necessarily to be supposed purely Penal as they
are Human, nor consequently ought all Human Laws to be so esteemed. It Is not
from the different Authority of the Law, but from the different Intention of
the Lawgiver, that any Law becomes purely Penal. It Is therefore by mere
Accident that Human Laws are any of them purely Penal, and not from the
Specific Nature of the Laws themselves, which for any thing that is in their
proper Natures may oblige in Conscience, as well as any other Laws. And that
they do so oblige (unless where it is otherwise expressed or insinuated in the
Form of the Law) is most certain, the Law of God requiring us to obey the Laws
of Men, where they are not contrary to the Law of God. But I need prosecute
this no further, since the Excellent Bishop Sanderson has given the World
sufficient Satisfaction in this Point, in those judicious Discourses of his, de
Legum Humanarum Obligatione in Conscientia.

If it be further urged (which I think is the last Reserve of this Objection)
That the Removal of the Law does involve the Removal of the Sanction; and why
then will it not hold as much the other way, that the removal of the Sanction
should remove the Law? To this I answer, That there is a great Disparity in the
Case: The Sanction is made purely for the sake of the Law, whom it is to guard
and defend, and so serves to it as the Means does to the End; and consequently
if the Law be abolished or suspended, etc. the Sanction must needs fall in
proportion with it. But now the Law is not made for the sake of the Sanction,
but for the good of those who are to be governed by it. And therefore though
the removal of the Law removes the Sanction, yet it does not therefore follow
that the removal of the Sanction should in like manner carry with it the
removal of the Law. To which, after all I might add, That it is impossible that
the whole Sanction of Human Laws should ever be removed. For since the Law of
God requires Obedience to the Laws of Men wherever it may be lawfully paid,
and threatens those with the Punishments of another Life, who are disobedient
to public Order and Government in this, though the Human Sanction should be
taken away, yet the Divine Sanction would still remain; and as long as that
does remain, the whole Sanction cannot be said to be removed. This I might say
for a Reserve, and I do not see what Answer can be made to it; but I think my
Cause is otherwise so well grounded, that I need not insist upon this Plea.

From the whole course of this Argument (which I believe has received no damage
by the management) it fully and clearly appears, that the Sanction of the Law
is not only a thing really distinct from it, but also no way necessary to its
Obligation; and therefore that the removing of the Sanction does not imply or
involve the removal of the Law, and consequently that the Toleration by
removing the Sanction does not remove, no nor so much as interrupt the
Obligation of the Law, to which the Sanction has been shown to be not at all
necessary. Which I think breaks the Neck of the Objection, and he had need be a
very skilful Artist that shall set it again.

Well, but suppose (which you see is not the Case) that the Law which enjoins
Conformity to the Religion and Church established, were by the Toleration
perfectly removed, and the Preceptive part of it taken away as well as the
Penal; yet neither upon this Supposition (which is indeed a very great
Concession and Abatement) would a Toleration excuse those from Schism who would
be guilty of it without it.

For Sir, these Men are to consider, if they have not already considered it,
that we do not derive the Grounds of Obligation to Ecclesiastic Communion only
from the Authority of the Civil Law (though that must be allowed to add a
considerable weight to the Obligation) but also and chiefly from that of the
Divine Law; which I conceive to be as Positive and as Express in requiring
Unity and Conformity of Worship, as in requiring any Religious Worship at all.

The necessity of this is by S. Paul pressed upon the Ephesians, from the Unity
of that Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Body whereof they were Members, from the Unity of that Spirit which was to
them the Common Principle of Life and Action, from the Unity of that Hope to
which they were called, from the Unity of that Lord to whose Service they were
all devoted, from the Unity of that Faith which they all professed, from the
Unity of that Baptism whereby they were grafted into the Church of Christ; and
lastly, from the Unity of that God who was the Father of them all, who was
above all, and in them all. Every one of which Heads of Argument might justly
deserve the Consideration of a particular Discourse, but that I am willing to
suppose my Reader so apprehensive, as not to want to have things laid out to
him more at large.

Accordingly the Christian Church is always represented by Figures that express
the greatest Unity, not only between that and Christ, but also between
Fellow Christians. This is said to be that One Body into which we are all
Baptized by One Spirit, and which is said to be fitly joined together and
compacted. This is that Spiritual House built upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone, in
whom all the Building, fitly framed together, grows into an Holy Temple in the
Lord. It Is represented also as one Flock, under one Shepherd Jesus Christ,
whose last and most Solemn Prayer was for the Unity of the Church; which must
therefore be supposed to be highly agreeable to the Mind and Will of God,
otherwise our Savior would not have prayed for it so earnestly and with such
Solemnity. Though I question very much whether this Solemn Prayer of Christ
will be fully heard and answered till the Glorious State of his Millennial
Reign upon Earth. However, in the mean time it is most certain that it is the
Great Duty of us all to endeavor after that State of Unity which our Savior
prayed might be among his Disciples. Hence it is that Schism is Condemned as a
Work of the Flesh, and those that Separate are said to be Sensual, not having
the Spirit; and Christians are admonished to mark and shun them that cause
Divisions, and are withal Commanded to mind or think one and the same thing,
(...) to stand fast in one Spirit with one Mind, to walk by the same Rule, to
be joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, and with one
Mind and Mouth to glorify God the Father, with a World of Precepts and
Exhortations to the same purpose, which every one may find that does but open
the Bible.

Now what can all this signify? Nothing certainly less than this, That the
Unity of the Church is so Sacred a thing, that it ought to be preserved by all
Lawful means, and that no Separation ought to be made in it without absolute
and evident Necessity. In one word; that where it is Lawful to Communicate,
there it is Sinful to Separate. Which is more expressly delivered in that
Apostolical Canon taken notice of by the Author of Christian Blessedness; If it
be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men. This takes in
the whole Latitude and Capacity of Society, the State as well as the Church; in
both which, by virtue of this Precept, Peace and Unity is to be maintained as
far as is Possible, and therefore without question on as far as is Lawful. And
if the Peace of the State is to be preserved as far as is possible, then
certainly much more the Peace of the Church.

Since then the Scripture is both so frequent and so express, I might say also
so earnest and passionate in inculcating the Necessity of preserving the Unity
of the Church, and in Condemning all unnecessary disturbances of it; it is most
certain that the Divine Law, without the Confirmation of the Civil, is a
sufficient Obligation to Church-Unity, wherever it may Lawfully be held.
Every Christian Church that proposes Lawful terms of Communication has, by the
Law of God (though the Civil Law be silent in the case) an undoubted Right to
the Conformity of all that are within the Pale of her Establishment, who cannot
withold it from her without incurring the Guilt of Schism, which, according
to the general sense of the Christian World, is nothing else but an unnecessary
Separation; and then is Separation unnecessary, when Communion is lawful. The
Argument in Form is,

Whoever separates unnecessarily, is guilty of Schism:

But whoever separates where he may lawfully Communicate, separates
unnecessarily;

Therefore whoever separates where he may lawfully Communicate, is guilty of
Schism.

The Minor Proposition is plain by its omn Light, since there can no Moral
necessity be pretended for not doing what may Lawfully be done. And the Major
Proposition is clear by the Light of Scripture, which presses and injoyns the
Peace and Unity of the Church to the very utmost degree of strictness, even as
far as is possible. Whence the Conclusion necessarily follows, That whoever
separates where he may lawfully Communicate, is guilty of Schism.

This is so clear and evident, that the most moderately affected in Point of
Church-Unity and Conformity could never shut their Eyes against the Light of
it, though they endeavored to wink never so hard. Particularly Mr. Hales, a
very Free, and for the most part, Judicious Writer, and one very remarkable for
his Moderation, especially as to all Church Matters, and who writes of Schism
with all the tenderness imaginable, handling it as if he were feeling the Edge
of a Razor: And yet after all his Endeavors to reduce it into as narrow a
compass as he could, by making as few guilty of it as might be, he could find
nothing to justify Separation but only Sinfulness of Communion. As may appear
from several Passages that occur in his Tract of Schism. For, says he, Page
195. For the further opening the Nature of Schism, something must be added by
way of difference to distinguish it from necessary Separation; and that is,
that the Causes upon which Division is attempted, proceed not from Passion, or
Distemper, or Ambition, or Avarice, or such other Ends as Human Folly is apt to
pursue, but from wellweigh'd and necessary Reasons; and that, when all other
Means having been tried, nothing will serve to save us from guilt of
Conscience, but open Separation. So that Schism, if we would define it, is
nothing else but an unnecessary Separation of Christians from that part of the
visible Church of which they were once Members. Again, says he, Page 198.
Unadvisedly and upon Fancy to break the Knot of Union between Man and Man,
especially among Christians, upon whom, above all other kind of men, the tie of
Love and Communion does most especially rest, is a Crime hardly pardonable; and
that nothing Absolves a man from the guilt of it, but true and unpretended
Conscience. Again, says he, Page 209. What if those to whose care the execution
of the Public Service is committed do something unlawful, etc. yet for all
this we may not separate, except we be constrained personally to bear a part
our selves. The Priests under Eli had so ill demeaned themselves about the
daily Sacrifice, that the Scriptures tell us, they made it stink; yet the
People refused not to come to the Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifice to
the Priest. For in these Schisms which concern Fact, nothing can be a just
Cause of refusal of Communion, but only to require the execution of some
unlawful or suspected Act. Again, says he, Page 215. Why may I not go, if
occasion require, to an Arian Church, so there be no Arianism expressed in their
Liturgy? And again, Lastly, Page 227. speaking of Conventicles, says he, It
evidently appears that all Meetings upon unnecessary occasions of Separation
are to be so styled; so that, in this sense, a Conventicle is nothing else but
a Congregation of Schismatics.

From these and other like Passages any one may be satisfied that Mr. Hales,
with all his Moderation, could not but see, that where Separation is not
necessary, there Communion is; and that to depart from the Communion of a
visible Established Church, with whom you may lawfully Communicate, is to be
guilty of Schism. And so much seems to be granted even by the Author of the
Letter of Toleration, who defines Schism to be an ill grounded Page 86.
Separation in Ecclesiastical Communion, made about things not necessary.

It Is true indeed, by things not necessary, this Author means (as he afterward
explains himself) things not expressly contained in the Rule, making him a
Schismatic that separates from a Church, because that Church does not require
what the Scripture does not. But this will come to one and the same thing. For
why is he a Schismatic that makes a Separation from a Church for not requiring
more than is expressly contained in Scripture, but only because he might
Communicate with that Church notwithstanding this her frugality and
reservedness, and consequently his Separation was unnecessary? This is the
thing into which the Schism of such a Separatist must be at last resolved. And
then for the same reason, why is not he as much a Schismatic that separates
from a Church, that does require more than the Scripture expressly contains,
provided it be not contrary to the Rule of Scripture, since with this Church he
may also lawfully Communicate, and therefore has no Necessity for his
Separation? It Is the unnecessity of the Separation that in both Cases makes the
Schism. So that this Notion of our Author, though at first sight it seems to
offer somewhat New, resolves it self, at long run, into the Old Common Notion
of Schism, which has all along obtained in the Christian World.

Wherever therefore there is no necessity of separating, there the Church has
a Right to Communion, which to withold from her is Schism, or else there is
no such thing as Schism in the World. This Right the Church of Rome had before
her falling into her gross Corruptions, and this Right the Church of England
and all other Churches have that are Reformed from them. And this Right every
Lawfully Constituted Church has by virtue of the Divine Law, which is her
Original Charta, and which of it self lays upon all Christians a sufficient
Obligation to Church-Unity, though there should be no Civil Authority to back
and enforce it.

For indeed, unless it were so, how could there be such a thing as the Sign of
Schism in the Apostles Times, and in the more Primitive Ages of the Church?
There was then no Civil Law to Oblige Christians to Church Communion; so far
from this, that the Edge and Point of the Civil Sword was turned directly
against it. The State and the Church then not only moved in two Different, but
in two Opposite Spheres. And yet we find that in those early times the Sin of
Schism was as much condemned, and Schismatical Persons as deeply branded as in
any of the after Ages. Nay more indeed, because of the singularity and
strangeness of the Crime. Punished indeed they could not so well be, for want
of the Concurrence of the Civil Sword; which was not then in a Christian hand,
but they were censured and condemned, and according to the Apostle's
Admonition, those were marked and avoided that caused Divisions.

And therefore though we should allow the Present Toleration to Silence the
Civil Law, whereby Conformity is enjoined, (which yet from the Premises appears
to be far otherwise,) yet since the Divine Law requiring all possible Unity,
stands uncancell'd, (for sure the Toleration will not be pretended to reach that;)
those that make Caufeless and unnecessary Divisions, will still be guilty of
Schism, notwithstanding the favor of the Toleration, which I am afraid will
prove but an indifferent Plea for Separation at the Last day to those that have
no better.

What then, you will say, is the Effect of a Toleration? Or what can be supposed
to be the just and reasonable intent of it? I answer; As to the Effect, it
cannot release at all from any preceding Obligation. It does not release so
much as from the Obligation of the Civil Law, whose Penalty it only suspends,
much less does it release from Obligation to the Divine Law, with which it has
nothing to do, and upon which it has no manner of Effect. It does not therefore
discharge any from Obligation to Conformity, who would not be discharged
without it. All indeed are actually eased by it; that is an universal and
indifferent Effect, but none are discharged or unobliged.

Then as to the Intent of it, all that it can be reasonably intended for is to
ease those few from Penalties, (for I doubt they are not many,) who are so
unhappy as really and sincerely to be persuaded in their Consciences that it is
not Lawful for them to join in Communion with the Church of England. Though the
Toleration does actually Ease all indifferently, yet it is for the Ease of such
only that a Toleration can be justly or reasonably intended, whose Condition
indeed would be as pitiable, as I am afraid it is rare.

But even here the Toleration has no other Effect than barely to Ease them. If
they are withal released from any Obligation, it is not by Virtue of the
Toleration, but by Reason of something else, namely their unhappy Judgment and
Persuasion in thinking our Communion unlawful; which however in it self false
and erroneous, must be allowed to bind in Conscience while it is their
Misfortune to be under it. This is the thing that releases from Obligation,
whenever there is any Releasement; The Toleration only Eases them from
suffering the Penalty of Nonconformity. And it is for their Ease only that it
can be reasonably intended.

But as for those who are satisfied of the Lawfulness of Communicating with the
Established Church, (who I fear make the greatest part of those that separate
from it,) they are still obliged under pain of Sin, though not of Civil
Chastisement, to Communicate with it. And if they do not, it is not a
Toleration, or Act of Indulgence, though granted by the highest Power upon
Earth, that can excuse them from the Sin of Schism, at least before God. Nor do
such Men deserve the favor of a Toleration.

And now, Sir, from the Measures laid down, it plainly appears, that if the
Separatists from the Church of England were guilty of Schism before the
Toleration, (which, whether they were or no, depends upon other Grounds, and is
not now to be disputed over again,) they are as much guilty of it now, there
being no Change made by the Toleration as to the Preceptive, but only as to the
Penal part of the Law. Which may suffice to clear the Author of Christian
Blessedness of the first Imputation laid against him, that of a false Charge.

The two others will be more easily, and more briefly dispatched.

The next thing therefore for which our Author is blamed is the
Uncharitableness of his Charge. This indeed is a heavy Censure, and ought to be
well-grounded, or else it will recoil upon those that make it. But I think
there has been that said upon the former Objection, that will scarce allow any
room for this.

For if the Author's Charge was uncharitable, it must be either because of the
Matter of it, or because of the End and Design of it. Not certainly upon the
account of its Matter, because that appears to be true; for the proof of which,
I appeal to the Reason and Argument of the preceding Discourse. And if they fix
the Uncharitableness of it upon its End and Design, they themselves will bring
their own Charity in question by judging so severely of the Intentions of the
Author, which they cannot be supposed to be privy to.

For how can they pretend to know the Author's Thoughts and Designs? Did he
ever Communicate his Intentions to them? Or will they Judge by Inspiration, and
pretend to the Gift of Divining and Conjecturing, as well as of Praying by the
Spirit?

I that am intimately acquainted with the Author, and know more of his
Principles and Sentiments, Thoughts and Intentions, than any of those that take
the Liberty of Censuring and Condemning them, do verily believe that in his
continuing the Charge of Schism upon the Separatists, he intended nothing
against Charity, but rather the greatest Charity and Good Will.

I know it is his most deliberate and well-assured Sense, that if ever there was
or can be such a Sin as Schism in the Church of Christ, they of the Present
Separation are truly and deeply guilty of it. And since it came fairly in his
way, he thought himself obliged in Charity to reprehend them from it, not
knowing what good effect a Candid and Rational Admonition might have upon those
(for he had Charity enough to hope there might be some such) who were not quite
overrun with the Humor of Opposition, nor armed Cap-a-pee with Prejudice. And
being withal in the mean time assured of the Duty of Fraternal Correption; and
how much that concerns every Christian (as being the Duty even of Lev. 19. 17.
a Jew) in any-wise to rebuke his Brother, and not to suffer Sin to lie upon
him.

And if I may have leave to divert a little from the Defense of my Friend to my
own Justification, I think I may safely say that I am now in Prosecution of the
very same Charitable Design. For though I acknowledge my self to have had some
regard to the Reputation of my Friend, which I think has suffered without
Cause; and which to Assert and Vindicate, I take to be a very Innocent Design;
yet I can say (as far as I know the inward Springs of my own Actions) that the
Principal End and aim of this Undertaking was to further that great and dear
Interest of Christianity, for which our departing Savior so earnestly and so
solemnly prayed to his Father, the Interest of Ecclesiastic Unity. To further
this, I say, is my main Design, both by awakening the Consciences of those who
by the Favor of the Government striking in with their own Natural humor of
Contradiction, may be tempted against the inward Sense and Light of their Minds
to transgress against the great Christian Obligation to Public Order and Unity
of Worship, and by undeceiving and disabusing others, who by the Impunity of
the present Toleration may be so far imposed upon as to fancy themselves
released from any such Obligation. Both which, I think, are very Good, very
Charitable, and very Christian Designs.

But to return: I think, Sir, there appears now to be as little reason for
taxing our Author with Uncharity as with Error. For his own part, I believe he
is Conscious to himself of neither. But if he is Guilty, I dare say he would be
glad to be Convinced, that so he might Rectify the One, and Repent of the
Other. For the present he thinks there is so little occasion for either, that
if he had not only Charged our Separatists with Schism, but with the most
unjust and unreasonable Schism that ever was made in the Christian Church, he
thinks it would have been no Slander. And he has Commissioned me to say that he
is ready against any Opposer to make it good.

But though the Author's Charge was neither False, nor Uncharitable, yet was it
not something Unseasonable? So indeed some say, who say neither of the other.
Nor is this an inconsiderable Exception, if true. For as every thing is
Beautiful in its Season, so is Season the Beauty of every thing, and there is
nothing Beautiful out of it. Actions Materially good, and wherein we mean well,
are oftentimes utterly spoiled merely by being Mistimed. But why, I pray, was
this Charge so unseasonable? What, because the Separation was grown very wide,
and by reason of the relaxation of the Government growing still every day
wider; because some were invited to it (as they are to other Sins) by Impunity,
and others began to make that a Plea for its Lawfulness; because it began to
set up for one of the Court-fashions, and was growing to be not only a
Privilege of the Saint, but the Accomplishment of the Gentleman; because some
used their Liberty as a Cloak for their Maliciousness, and almost all as an
Opportunity to serve the Interest of their Cause; because, lastly, that Church
and State which were so lately rescued from the Jaws of Popery, were now in as
Critical a Point of Danger from the Encroachments of the Separation; was it
therefore out of season to Charge the Separatists with Schism? Now I always
thought that the most proper Season to admonish Men of their faults was when
they were most Rife and Epidemical, and when they had most Temptations and
Opportunities of committing them; and when the Commission of them would
threaten the greatest Danger and Mischief.

This has been generally thought the most proper Season of Admonition by all
wise Men in all other Matters, and why not in this? It Is the necessity of
Admonition that at any time makes it seasonable; and then there is most need of
it, when the Manners and Ways of Men are most disorderly and irregular. The
more corrupt therefore and degenerate the Age, the more seasonable is the
Reproof, And indeed, if the general prevalency and fashionableness of Vice be
enough to make Admonition unseasonable, it is now high time, considering the
Moral state of the World, that not only all Writing, but all Preaching too were
laid aside. But this I suppose is a consequence which those that blame our
Author's Charge as unseasonable will not admit; whence it follows (whatever in
partiality to their own concern they may be induced to say) that even by their
own measure it was not really unseasonable.

But it is further said, that this was a Treatment altogether unexpected and
unlooked for. They expected now as much favor from the Pulpit and the Press,
as they found from the Government; and that there should now be no other
Discourses about them, but such as were Healing, Complying, and tending to
Moderation, and not to have the old business of Schism revived again. This was
as much contrary to Expectation, as to Inclination and Humor; and was it not
enough to vex any body to be so disappointed? That it was enough, the Event
shows; but whether it ought to be, may admit more question. But I Will tell you a
Story.

While Thcodora poffess'd the Empire of Constantinople with her Son, who was
Causin's Holy Court, part 3. page 435.
yet in minority, one named Methodius, an excellent Painter, an Italian by
Nation, and Religious by Profession, went to the Court of the Bulgarian King,
named Bogoris, where he was entertained with much favor. This Prince way yet a
Pagan, and though trial had been made to Convert him to the Faith, it succeeded
not, because his Mind was so set upon Pleasures, that Reason could find but
little access. He was excessively pleased with Hunting; and as some delight in
Pictures to behold what they love, so he appointed Methodius to paint him a
piece of Hunting in a Palace which he had newly built. The Painter, seeing he
had a fair Occasion to take his opportunity for the Conversion of this Infidel,
instead of Painting an Hunting piece for him, made an exquisite Table of the
Day of Judgment. Wherein he represented that great Solemnity with all its
Circumstances of Terror.

In the end, the day assigned being come, he drew aside the Curtain, and showed
his Work. It Is said, the King at first stood some while pensive, not being able
to wonder enough at the strange Sight. Then turning toward Methodius, What is
this? said he. The Religious Man took Occasion thereupon to tell him of the
Judgments of God, of Punishments and Rewards in the other Life; wherewith he
was so moved, that in a short time he yielded himself to God by a happy
Conversion. Now whether this Device of the Painter was unseasonable or no, or
whether the advantage of the Design and of the Event would excuse the
Disappointment, I leave to the Reader to judge.

And thus, Sir, having fully cleared my Friend from the treble Indictment laid
in against him, by showing his Charge of Schism to have been neither false, nor
uncharitable, nor unseasonable, I shall now, for a Conclusion of all, address
my self to the Dissenters in a word or two, concerning their Behavior under
the present Toleration. Not what it is, or has been (for that is well enough
known) but what it ought to be.

Some, it may be, who are not all over Argument-Proof, moved with the Reason of
the foregoing Considerations, may be ready to ask of me, What would you then
have us to do, or how shall we behave our selves under the present state of
Things? It seems indeed to be as you say, That the Relaxation of the Government
makes no Change in the Obligations to Conformity; but if we should lay down the
Separation, and come over to the Church, what are we the better for the
Toleration? And is it reasonable that there should be a Toleration, and we not
the better for it? What, was the Toleration granted, not to be enjoyed? Is it
like the Tree of Paradise, good for Food, and pleasant to the Eye, and withal
planted within our reach, and yet not to be meddled with? Shall we be so unkind
to our selves, as not to embrace an opportunity of Ease and Liberty? Or so
ungrateful to the Government, as not to make use of that Privilege of
Indulgence which the kindness of our Superiors has vouchsafed us? What would
you have us do?

I answer in one word, Do now as you ought to do before. For since the
Toleration (as has been proved) makes not any the least Alteration in those
Obligations to Church-Unity that are derived either from the Law of the State,
or from the Law of God, but all things as to that stand now in the same posture
as they did, it is plain that your Behavior also ought to be the very same now
that it ought to have been before the Toleration. If the Points of the Compass
stand now as they did then, without any Declension or Variation, it is plain
that you ought to steer the same Course now, as you ought then. If you ask what
that is? I answer,

First, Lay aside as much as possibly you can all manner of Prejudice that may
arise either from Natural Temper and Complexion, or from Education, or from
long Custom to a contrary way; or from blind Regard to the Authority of some
Men, for whom, perhaps, you have had a more early than just Veneration; or from
Humor, or from Passion, or from Interest, or from whatever else may bride and
corrupt the genuine native Sense of our Minds. For unless the Scale hang even,
it is to no purpose to weigh any thing in it.

Secondly, When you have thus truly divested your selves of all Prejudice, and
reduced your Judgments to an even poise, then apply your selves seriously and
deliberately, impartially and sincerely, soberly and in the fear of God to
consider and examine the State and Constitution of our Church, and the Terms of
her Communion, whether they are lawful or no. But be sure you do not this by
advising only with Books of your own way, or by consulting only with Guides of
your own Party and Persuasion (for this would be to fall back into your old
Prejudice again) but by a free and indifferent recourse to the Writers and
Leaders of both Sides, by considering and weighing what is offered by the
learned and excellent Defenders of the Church, as well as what is said by the
Advocates for the Separation, and by trying and judging all according to the
infallible Rule of Scripture, and the Eternal Truth of God shining forth in
your own Souls. And if,

Thirdly, After your most impartial and sincere Endeavors rightly to inform
your selves according to the best use of your Faculties and Opportunities, it
be still your unhappiness verily to be persuaded in your Consciences, that the
Communion of the Church of England is unlawful (which though I cannot deny to
be absolutely possible, seems yet as hard to me for a considerate Man really to
believe, as to believe Transubstantiation) yet I say, if you should be
invincibly determined to such a Persuasion, in the Name of God abide where you
are, and make use of the Toleration, and enjoy the Benefit of it with Peace and
Satisfaction of Mind. I would not for a World persuade you to Communicate with
the Church of England (as excellent as she is) against the real Sense and
Persuasion of your Consciences. For the following of which you can never be
accountable, provided it be not your fault that you are of that Persuasion. But
if,

Fourthly and Lastly, You are Convinced of the Lawfulness of holding Communion
with the Church; (and to be free with you, I cannot but think that most of you
are, if you would confess the truth;) then I pray consider seriously with your
selves what tolerable Account you will be able to render either to God or Man
for continuing a Separation in that Church where even according to your own
Judgment and Confession you might lawfully Communicate. Or how you can be said
to preserve the Unity of the Catholic Church, or that Communion of Saints
which you profess to believe, if you separate from the Communion of a Visible,
Established, National Church, of whose Lawfulness you are satisfied, and from
whom therefore you need not separate. Consider whether this be not a Causeless
dividing, dis-uniting, and dismembring of the Body of Christ, a high Violation
of that Public Order and Decency which he has required in his Church, and as
great a Breach of the Christian Peace, as you can possibly be guilty of in the
Peace of the State: In one word, consider whether this be not all that which
both Scripture and the best Antiquity represent, and so severely condemn under
that one Emphatical word, Schism.

And do not think to salve all at last, by taking Sanctuary in the Toleration.
This, you see, stands Neuter, leaves the State of the Question as it found it;
and does not at all interpose for your relief, but leaves you to stand or fall
by the Absolute Merits of your Cause.

These therefore alone you ought to consider and enquire into, viz. Whether you
can honestly and safely Communicate with us or no? And if you find you can,
then it is most certain that you ought. The Law of God and the Law of Man (for
the Toleration you see evacuates neither) do still oblige you to it; and if you
do not, though the Government excuses you from the Penalty, yet neither that
nor any thing else will excuse you from the Sin of Schism. The short is, that
which will justify such a Separation as this, will justify any, and then
there will be no such thing as an Obligation to Church-Unity, and consequently
no such thing as Schism in the World. And I desire never to reduce an Adversary
to a greater Extremity than when he is forced to deny the very Being and
Possibility of the Sin of Schism, that he may prove himself to be no
Schismatic.

This, Sir, is all I think necessary to say upon this Occasion; and I think I
have said nothing but what I have well thought and considered, and what is my
real Judgment, and what will stand the Test, whether of Charity or of Truth. I
have viewed and reviewed what I have written; and I must needs declare, that I
cannot discern the least flaw in the Argument of this Discourse, nor do I fear
the Severity of the most Critical Eye or Hand. However, if any one of the
Learned among the Diffenting Party thinks the Argument of this Discourse may be
Answered, and withal thinks himself sufficiently qualified for the
Undertaking, (for I declare beforehand that I shall not think my self
concerned to take notice of every impertinent Scribler,) I fairly and freely
invite him to it; and withal do promise him, for his better encouragement,
that he shall find me either Able to Defend what I have written, or Willing to
Submit.

Farewell. POSTSCRIPT Concerning MODERATION.
I Think it very proper and seasonable, in a word or two, to rectify another
very Popular Mistake, wherewith I find most Common Persons, and some others are
imposed upon. It is concerning Moderation, whose Notion I perceive to be
generally as much abused as that of Toleration, and to as ill a purpose.

Moderation, without question if rightly understood, is a most excellent thing,
as signifying,

I. In general, such a temper of Soul, and such a government of all a Man's
Thoughts and Desires, Words and Actions, as may steer the course of Life in the
middle way between the Extremes of Defect and Excess, so as to be always
affected in Proportion to the Greatness or Goodness of the End, and to the
Necessity or Usefulness of the Means.

Or as signifying more particularly with relation to the Body, such a due and
wellproportion'd conduct of it, and regard to it, as becomes a Creature that is
neither a mere Animal, nor a pure Spirit, but partakes of both Natures, and
therefore ought not so to be addicted to the interest of the Body, as to
neglect the Spiritual Life; nor yet so devoted to the Life of the Spirit, as to
forget he is in the Body. This way being as much too High, as the other is too
Low, and the way of Man lying in the Middle.

Thus understood, without all doubt Moderation is a most excellent thing, and
will have an universal and uncontested Approbation. And thus it is generally
understood in all other Cases, but only when it relates to Church-Conformity.
And then by Moderation is usually meant either an Indifferency of doing what
the Church prescribes, or a doing it by Halves, or a total Omission of it.

And accordingly he is accounted a Moderate Man, who either is indifferently
affected to the Constitutions of the Church, and is little concerned whether he
Conforms to them or no, and accordingly stands ready and disposed with or
without reasonable Occasion to admit of Alterations, or who Conforms by halves,
or who does not Conform at all.

All these in their several orders and degrees, go commonly for Men of
Moderation; and I believe many for the procurement of that specious Title, are
tempted to appear so disposed, designing nothing at all worse by it, than only
the Reputation of Moderate Men.

But let such as run away with this Notion, take this Consideration along with
them, if they are not in too much haste, That it is not all manner of Moderation
that is justly to be commended, nor this of theirs in particular. For the right
Estimation of which matter, I desire the following measures may be considered.

If the Object of our Moderation be not already either by Nature or
Constitution fixed and stated in a due measure, but is to receive its measure
from our Moderation, then Moderation, as it signifies an indifferency of Mind,
may have both Place and Commendation. As suppose in the instance of Pleasure,
which because an indeterminate Object, and of indefinite Latitude, capable
either of Excess or Defect, leaves room for the Exercise of Moderation in us,
which is then a good and laudable thing.

But if the Object be already either by Nature, or by positive Constitution
fixed and stated in a due measure, and is not to receive that measure from our
Moderation, then our Moderation has neither Place nor Commendation: As in the
Instance suppose of Virtue; which being already supposed to be in the Mean,
leaves no room for Moderation in us, nor would Moderation then be a good or
laudable thing. Nor was it ever thought a Commendation of the love of Virtue to
say it was Moderate or Indifferent.

Now to apply this to the present Case. If the Order of the Church of England
were not already constituted in a state and temper of Moderation, then indeed
Moderation in Conformity might pretend to some Excellency and Commendation; but
if it be already in such a state and temper, then there is neither Room for it,
nor Excellency in it. But rather on the contrary, to be moderately affected to
Conformity, will then be as great a Commendation as to be a moderate Lover of
Order and Reason, and all that is good. And they that like this Commendation,
it is fit they should have it.

Before therefore Moderation in Conformity be made a commendable Character, and
before Men of this Character be so much cried up and sought after as the
fittest Persons to be employed both in State and in Churchconcerns, it ought to
be made appear, that the Constitution of the Church is in it self Immoderate.

This indeed is slily and indirectly insinuated by all those that raise such
Clamours about Moderation. But they ought, if they would deal fairly, directly
to prove it; and indeed wholly to insist upon it, and not impose upon the
Prejudice and the Ignorance of the People by the specious and plausible Name of
Moderation. For unless it be first proved, that the Church in her Constitution
is Immoderate; it is plain, that Moderation on our parts has no room; and that
all the Noise and Stir that is made about it, is but mere Sophistry with ill
Design.

But now whether the Constitution of the Church be really Immoderate, I refer
those that desire to be satisfied to what has been from time to time written in
her Defense and Justification, particularly to an excellent Book very Honestly,
and, as I think, very Learnedly written by Doctor Puller, called, The
Moderation of the Church of England.



FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for S. Manship, Bookseller, at the Black Bull in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange.
THE Christian Monitor: containing an Earnest Exhortation to an Holy Life, with
some Directions in order thereto. Written in a plain and easy Style, for all
sorts of People: The Thirteenth Edition. Price 3 d. Thirty Thousand having been
already sold off.

A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ: showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenant, and Calling
them (not to a Profanation of this Holy Ordinance, but) to an understanding,
serious, entire Dedication of themselves to God in the Sacramental Covenant,
and a Believing Commemoration of the Death of Christ, in Octavo: by J. Rawlet,
B. D. The Fourth Edition. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

An Explication of the Creed, the Ten Commandments and the Lord's-Prayer; with
the Addition of some Forms of Prayer, in Twelves: The Third Edition: with some
Prayers added: by J. Rawlet. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Dialogue betwixt Two Protestants, in Answer to a Popish Catechism, called, A
short Catechism against all Sectaries: plainly showing, That the Members of the
Church of England are no Sectaries, but true Catholics; and that our Church is
a sound part of Christ's Holy Catholic Church, in whose Communion therefore
the People of this Nation are more strictly bound in Conscience to remain: In
Two Parts: by J. R. B. D. The Fourth Edition corrected. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

Poetic Miscellanies of Mr. J. Rawlet, B.D. and late Lecturer of S. Nicholas
Church in the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, in Octavo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Odes, Satyrs and Epistles of Horace, done into English: The Second Edition, in
Octavo. Price 4 s.

Lives of the most famous English Poets, or the Honor of Parnassus, in a brief
Essay of the Works and Writings of above Two Hundred of them, from the Time of
King William the Conqueror, to the Reign of the late King James the Second.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

Cap of Gray Hairs for a Green Head, or the Father's Counsel to his Son, an
Apprentice in London: containing wholesome Instructions for the Management of a
Man's whole Life. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves. Price 1 s.

The Gallant Hermophrodite: an Amorous Novel. Price 1 s.

Injured Lovers, or the Ambitious Father; a Tragedy: Acted by Their Majesty's
Servants at the Theater Royal: by William Mounfort, Com.

Comical Revenge, or Love in a Tub, as it is now Acted at Their Majesty's
Theater: by Sir G. Etherege.

BOOKS Written by the Reverend Mr. J. Norris, M. A.
A Collection of Miscellanies; consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters, in Octavo, large: Price 4 s.

Theory and Regulation of Love; a Moral Essay, in Two Parts: to which are
added, Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and More, in Octavo.
Price 2 s.

Reason and Religion, or the Grounds and Measures of Devotion considered, from
the Nature of God and the Nature of Man, in several Contemplations; with
Exercise of Devotion applied to every Contemplation, in Octavo. Price 2 s.

Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life, with Reference to the Study of
Learning and Knowledge: in a Letter to the Excellent Lady, the Lady Masham: To
which is annexed a Visitation-Sermon, by the same Author. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Christian Blessedness, or Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: written by Jo. Norris, M. A. and late Fellow of All Souls
College in Oxford: To which are added, Reflections upon a late Essay
concerning Human Understanding: by the same Author, in Octavo. Price 3 s.

Artificial Versifying: Or, A new way to make Latin Verses; whereby any one of
ordinary Capacity, that only knows the A, B, C, and can count Nine (though he
understands not one word of Latin, or what a Verse means) may be plainly taught
(in as little time as this is reading over) how to make thousands of Hexameter
and Pentameter Verses, which shall be true Latin, true Verse, and good Sense;
the Third Edition, wherein the old Structure of Hexameters is quite taken down,
and in its place a more compact one raised. To which is adjoined a new model of
Pentameters, never before published, by the same Hand of Jo. Peter. Price 6d.

A Discourse of Courage; wherein it is made known, according to Truth, and the
real Nature thereof. In 4 to Price 4d.


