The true Effigies of M. James Nalton
portrait of James Nalton

Twenty SERMONS Preached upon Several TEXTS, BY That late Reverend, Pious, and
Painful Preacher, Mr. James Nalton, Minister of St. Leonard Foster Lane, in the
City of London.

Published for Public good.

Say unto the Righteous, it shall be well with him; Woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him, Isa. 3.10. But if you will not hear, my Soul shall weep
in secret for your Pride, Jer. 13.17. He was a burning and a spining Light,
John 5.35. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultrey. 1677.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Religious Lady Mary Vere, Baroness of
Tilbury; and to her virtuous Daughters, the Right Honorable Lady Fairfax, and
the Honorable Lady Wolstenholm.
My most Honored Ladies, May it please your Honors,
THese Sermons, though they have not the honor of their Authors Pen, either in
transcribing, or in correcting of them; yet they breathe so much of his Spirit,
that whosoever was not a stranger to his Ministry, may easily perceive whose
labors they are, without an Interpreter. They are now come forth, by the
labor and diligence of them that prized his Person, and honored his Ministry;
whereunto, although I was not in a Capacity of contributing any furtherance,
yet I could not in Conscience let them pass into the World without doing this
right to the Author, Publishers, and to the Papers themselves, as to give in my
poor Testimony, That they are the genuine issue of him whose Name they bear;
whereby, though dead, he yet speaks. My humble Prayer to God shall be, That
into what hand soever Providence may put them, the same Blessing which
accompanied the hearing of them, may go along with the reading of them also;
for the rendering of them effectual to their spiritual and everlasting good.

As to my presumption in Dedicating of them to Your Honors: I am not ignorant
to how much censure I am liable in the Opinion of Standers-by; neither can I
suffer more prejudice abroad, than I have suffered conflict in my own Spirit at
home.

But the deserved Honor I bear to the Name of my Dear Husband (now with the
Lord) and the deep sense of my Duty to Your Honors, has prevailed against all
discouragements.

May Your Honors be pleased to accept of this solemn acknowledgment of the
various Obligations which your Ladyships have laid upon me, and to pardon this
boldness, it shall not at all trouble me what censures others may pass upon me.

The Father of Mercies abundantly recompense all the kindness you have showed
to the Dead and to the Living; and may the Golden Oil of Grace, which he has
abundantly poured out upon your Heads, descend upon all the Branches of Your
Noble Families, and render them truly Honorable to many Generations. I cease
further to trouble Your Honors, and humbly beg leave to subscribe my self, in
all sincerity,

Your Honors most Obliged Servant, Mary Nalton.

TO THE READER.
ALthough these Sermons, (besides the common inconvenience of being Posthumous
works) had the unhappiness to want the Authors own polishing (for which cause
it is but justice, that if any mistake should possibly be discerned in them, it
may not be laid at the Authors door) yet I am informed they were taken by the
Pen of a ready Writer, and a worthy friend of the Authors, as appears. And
having perused most of them, I cannot deny them this just Testimony, That I
find in them the Spirit and Lineaments of that worthy Person, whose name they
bear; a Person, whose name needs no imbalming, having so many immortal Tombs in
the hearts of those who were either eye or ear-witnesses of his great
worthiness; especially in them, in whom he left such impressions of true Piety,
as doubtless will abide with them for ever, and carry his blessed memory into
the other World. And amongst the rest of his Excellencies, this was not the
least, that like precious Diamonds they were deep set in a profound Humility
and unexampled Modesty, whereby he ever was most contemptible in his own eyes:
a great respecter of any worth in his Brethren, but a great despiser and
peremptory denier of it in himself (the only thing wherein he might be taxed
for false and unjust dealing). And that which concealed his Virtues, did most
higly commend them, whilst like the Sun breaking through a Cloud, it appeared
more glorious, in spite of that Vail which his transcendent humbleness of mind
threw upon it. I might say much of his fervent Love and tender Compassion to
the Souls of men, his forwardness to spend and to be spent for the good of his
people (notwithstanding all the frowardness and unkindness of diverse of them);
his indefatigableness in serving the spiritual necessities of any who make
known their desires to him; his great ingenuity and candor toward his
Brethren. What the Jesuit says of Bellarmine in his Life (how truly I know
not, since Jesuits allow themselves the liberty of Equivocation) is much more
true of him, that he was Candidus erga alios, severus erga seipsum, He was a
most candid Interpreter of other men's actions, but excessively severe to
himself.

But I must remember, I am not now writing a Panegyric in praise of the
Author, but a short introduction to a more profitable work: And therefore I
shall conclude the Readers trouble with this only intimation; That the Subjects
here treated of are practical and profitable: the manner of handling them plain
and powerful, and such as, coming so evidently from the heart of the Speaker,
are most likely to make impression upon the heart of the Reader: and the time
(I am sure) is not unseasonable, seeing the Reverend Author is gone to the
place of silence, whence you will hear him no more.

The Lord who was pleased often to accompany his Word when it was by him
preached viva voce to the Hearers, continue the powerful presence of his Grace
in the reading of it. And let such as read these Sermons, get another Edition
of them Printed in their hearts, so as they may be read in their lives, whereby
they will answer the design and desire of the Preacher and Publishers.

Thy Servant in the work of the Ministry, so far as he may, MATTHEW POOL.

The Texts of the following SERMONS.
Man's Petition, and Gods Compassion, showed on Psalm 138.3, In the day that I
cried unto thee, thou answeredst me, and strengthened me with strength in my
soul. Page 1 Light discovered, and man recovered, on 2 Timothy 1.10, -- And has
brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel. p. 27 Christ's
Provision, for man's Direction, on Isa. 40.11, He shall feed his Flock like a
Shepherd, he shall gather his Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with Young. p. 48 Walking in Christ a sign
of our right receiving of Christ, on Col. 26, As you have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, so walk ye in him. p. 94 Christ's Temptation, the Saints supportation,
on Heb. 2, and last verse: For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted. p. 116 Fear of losing Salvation,
the way to obtain it, on Heb. 4.1, Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being
left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
p. 139 The persevering Saint shall be the Crowned Saint, on Rev. 3.11, Behold,
I come quickly; hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. p.
185 Mercy despised, and God provokd thereby, on Psalm. 106.24, Yea, They
despised the pleasant Land, and believed not his Word. p. 218 Christ's
Preciousness, on 1 Pet. 2.7, Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious.
p. 269 The Necessity of Humiliation, on Acts 16.29, 30, Then he called for a
Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,
etc. p. 330 Christ the Bread of Life, on John 6.35, I am the Bread of Life,
etc. p. 360 Christ's true Disciples, Doers of Gods Will, etc. on John 7.17, If
any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of my self. p. 383
These two Books of Mr. Tho. Brooks, are lately Printed for, and to be sold by
Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey.
A Golden Key to open hidden Treasures: or several great Points which refer to
the Saints Blessedness, and their future Happiness: with the Resolution of
several important Questions, etc.

Paradise opened: or the Secret Mysteries, and Rarities of Divine Love, of
infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel, laid open for Public View: Also the
Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious Transactions of the Father and the
Son in the Covenant of Redemption: Opened and improved at large, etc.

Believers Mortification of sin by the Spirit, or Gospel-Holiness advanced by
the Power of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of the Faithful: Whereunto is added
the Authors three last Sermons on Genesis 3.5. By the Learned and Pious Mr.
Alexander Carmichael, formerly of Scotland, and late Preacher of the Gospel in
London: Published by his own Copy.

The Crown and Glory of a Christian, consisting of a sound Conversion, and a
Well-ordered Conversion.

Mr. Wadsworth's Legacy: being his serious Exhortation to a Holy Life. Also his
Funeral Sermon, Sayings, and Elogy.

MAN'S PETITION, AND GODS COMPASSION.
A SERMON Preached September. 6. 1657.
Psalm CXXXVIII. 3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me; and
strengthened me with strength in my soul.


THis Psalm, for the kind of it, is Eucharistical, a Thanksgiving-Psalm. The
occasion of penning this Psalm in the judgment of Interpreters was this, David's
establishment in the Kingdom, after that he had been hunted like a Partridg
upon the Mountains, driven from his own Country, and banished into a
Wilderness, and pursued like a Traitor; when after all these dangers, and
fears, and snares, and opposition that he met with from Saul, and from his
bloody and implacable enemies, God had now settled him in the Kingdom, and
brought his hope into his hand, and had lifted up his head above his
adversaries, and had trodden his enemies under his feet: now what he had won by
prayer, he wears with thankfulness, I will praise thee (says he in the
foregoing verses) with my whole heart: I will worship toward thy holy Temple,
and praise thy name for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth: (for thy
loving kindness in promising, and for thy truth in performing) for thou have
magnified thy word above all thy name. In the 2d verse, it is a dark sentence
at the first view; but as a judicious Expositor upon the place well observes,
the words may be thus read, and will better agree with the Hebrew, Thou have
magnified thy name above all things in thy word: that is, in fulfilling thy
word: thou have magnified thy name above all things, in that thou have
fulfilled thy word; what thou freely promisedst, thou have faithfully
performed; what thou have spoken with thy mouth, thou have fulfilled with thy
hand; for which thy name is wonderfully to be magnified. The name of God is
that whereby God is known: thy name is wonderfully magnified in fulfilling thy
word; nay, thy name is magnified above all things, that is the meaning of the
phrase. For the proof and evidence of this truth, That God is wonderfully to be
magnified for fulfilling his promise, for making good his word to his Servant:
for the proof of this, David brings in his own experience to set seal thereto
in the words of the Text, for, says he, In the day when I cried to thee, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. So then in this
verse you may take notice of these two particulars: First, You have Gods free
favor and gracious dealing with David in the day of his fears, and of his
straits, in these words, In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me. Secondly,
You have the evidence or proof of this free favor of God toward him, in an
experience that he had of it; for says he, Thou strengthenedst me with strength
in my soul: and accordingly there are these two points of doctrine that may be
fairly deduced from this Text.


Doct. 1. That the Lord is ready to answer the Prayers of his poor servants
when they cry unto him.

Doct. 2. It is one gracious way of answering our Prayers, when God does
strengthen us with spiritual strength, when he gives us strength in our souls.
I begin with the first.

The Lord is very ready to hear and answer the prayers of his poor servants
when they cry unto him. For the proof of this point, I could bring you a whole
cloud of witnesses out of the book of God: but I will content my self with
three or four: That in the 107 Psalm, Then they cried unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses: and it is four times
repeated in that one Psalm, for the confirmation of our faith, because we are
so backward to believe the truth of it: and he gives four instances of men that
were brought into great straits, and still when they cried unto the Lord, the
Lord delivered them out of their distresses: and remarkable is that Scripture,
Isa. 30.19, For the people shall dwell in Zion, at Jerusalem thou shall weep no
more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry: when he shall
hear it he shall answer thee: Mark, he will be very gracious to thee at the
voice of thy cry: you shall see the experience of it in two of Gods Saints and
Servants, that had tasted of Gods goodness in this particular, and have set it
down for our encouragement: one was the Prophet Jeremy in the Dungeon, Lam.
3.55, 56, I called upon thy name, O Lord: out of the low Dungeon thou have
heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry: God had an ear
for his very breathing. The other example is that of the Prophet Jonah in the
Whales belly, in that remarkable place, Jonah 2.2, Then Jonah prayed unto the
Lord his God out of the fishes belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine
affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me: out of the belly of hell cried I,
and thou heardst my voice. If you would know a reason why God is thus ready to
hear and answer the prayers of his Servants when they cry, take these three or
four reasons briefly.

First, Because of Gods faithfulness: He is very faithful that has promised:
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear and answer, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. So in Isa. 65.24, And it shall come to pass, that
before they call, I will answer: and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear.
God is faithful to his promises, All his promises in Jesus Christ are yea, and
in him they are amen. Our unfaithfulness cannot make him unfaithful: if we
believe not, he remains faithful, he cannot deny himself.

Secondly, God hears his Servants prayers, Because of that compassion that is
in him toward them; as he is very faithful, so he is very pitiful: as he has
beams of Majesty, so has he also bowels of mercy; and his bowels yearn toward
his poor children when they cry to him: Can a mother forget her sucking-child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may
forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa. 49.15. A tenderhearted mother, if she
hear her little child whimper in the cradle, that does not move her; but if the
child cry to purpose, then her bowels yearn toward it: she can stay no longer
from it, but runs in all haste to it: so here, when we do but whimper, pray
coldly, God may be, is not ready to hear; but if we cry in prayer, if we follow
God with our supplications, then his bowels cannot but yearn toward us.

Third reason, Because Gods servants have Jesus Christ to pray for them: We
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: he is pleading
our cause, 1 John 2.1. And he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb.
7.25. Nay, his very presence with the Father, is our intercession: he appears
in the presence of God for us: he appears as our advocate, in our stead, for
our good, Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with
hands, which are the figures of the true: but into heaven it self, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.

The fourth reason is this, Because the servants of God have not only Christ to
pray for them, but they have the Spirit of Christ to pray in them, Romans 8.26.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the spirit it self makes intercession for us,
with groans which cannot be uttered. If you ask me, But how does the spirit of
God help our infirmities? I answer, These four or five ways.

First, The spirit of God helps our infirmities, by affecting us with them,
with our wants and weaknesses; that being humbled and lying low at the feet of
God, we may be vessels more capable of mercy. God will not pour in the oil of
his mercy, but into the vessels of a broken heart; now the spirit of God by a
sight and sense of our manifold infirmities, does empty us, and work in us some
kind of brokenness of heart, and so fits us for mercy.

Secondly, Again, the spirit of God helps our infirmities likewise, by acting
his own graces in us, by acting those beginnings of faith, and love, and
humility, and self-denial, which he himself has wrought in us.

Thirdly, By stirring up in us holy motions, holy desires, and pantings, and
breathings after our heavenly Father, even such breathings as these, Psalm.
42.1, 2. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after
thee, O God: my soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come
and appear before God? when will thou come to me? when shall I come to thee?
And, my soul follows hard after God.

Fourthly, The spirit of God helps our infirmimities, by working in us a
childlike-boldness, enabling us to cry Abba Father: we can come to God as a
child to a Father; Father, I want this, I want that: God is delighted to hear
the moan-makings of his poor children.

Fifthly, By restraining Satan, that he may not interrupt us and distract us in
holy services; for this is certain, we seldom go to duty, but Satan still
stands at our right hand: When Joshua the high Priest stood before the Angel of
the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zach. 3.2. But now,
Jesus Christ he is stronger than Satan, and he by his spirit does rebuke him.
But there is one great objection I know will be ready to arise in every one of
your hearts: You say, God is ready to hear and answer the prayers of his poor
servants when they cry to him; but some will say, Experience seems to deny
this: Gods own servants pray often, and yet they have no answer; nay, God is
sometimes angry with the prayers of his servants, Psalm. 80.4, O Lord God of
Hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? the
prophet Jeremy he professes he cried to God and shouted, and yet God shut out
his prayers, and wrapped himself in a cloud, that his prayers should not pass
through, Lam. 3.44, Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers
should not pass through. It may be some will say, I have been praying for such
a grace twenty, thirty years together, and yet have not got it; for strength
against such a corruption, and yet have not got it. For answer to this
objection you must know,

First, Gods people sometimes pray not when they seem to pray.

Secondly, God hears his people, when sometimes he seems not to hear.

First, Gods people pray not when they seem to pray, as when they pray coldly
and carelessly, this is as no prayer; as the Apostle said in the like case, When
ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 11.20. as if he should say, irregular, unprepared receiving, is not
receiving at all: as good never a whit, as never the better; so here, cold,
careless, formal, customary prayer, is as no prayer, Dan. 9.13. All this evil
is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that me
might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth; for these seventy
years has thine hand been heavy upon us, yet we have not made our prayers
before the Lord our God: we made a show of praying, but our careless praying
may be said to be no praying.

Again, Gods people in praying may be said not to pray at all, when they
exercise only gifts in prayer, and have not the grace of prayer: for you must
know, the power and prevalency of prayer does not consist in the neatness of
the phrase, nor in the redundancy of rhetoric, nor in curious oratory; it
consists not in outward expressions; but it consists in the humility of a
spirit wounded, and looking up to God; it consists in this, God looks at this,
the frame of the spirit, not at the outward expressions in prayer: a man may by
the strength of parts have an excellent gift in prayer, and yet not the grace
thereof: If you ask me, How may a man know the difference between the gift of
prayer, and the grace of prayer? I answer (briefly), you may know it by these
particulars.

First, The gift of prayer vents it self in public more than in private; but
now the grace of prayer vents it self more in private than in public: it will
enable a man in his private closet, to pour out his soul before God, when there
is no witness but his heavenly Father and his own conscience. Secondly, You
shall observe the gift of prayer puffs a man up with pride; but now the grace
of prayer makes a man very lowly and base in his own eyes; the more grace a man
has in his heart, the more base he will be in his own account, even in his
greatest enlargements. Thirdly, The gift of prayer makes a man pray in the
strength of his parts; but now the grace of prayer makes a man pray in the
strength of Jesus Christ. Fourthly, The gift of prayer expects an echo of
commendation from men; but now the grace of prayer that expects only an
approbation from God. Fifthly, The gift of prayer vents it self in outward
expressions: but the grace of prayer consists in the inward impressions upon
the heart, not the outward expressions of the mouth. Sixthly, The gift of
prayer will quiet the heart for the present, but it does not purify the heart:
it will quiet the heart, it will stop the mouth of a chiding conscience, which
otherwise would be rating at us: if a man neglect prayer as a gift, his
conscience will be unquiet; but now the grace of prayer will not only quiet,
but purify the conscience.
The second part of the answer to the objection is this: The objection was
this: Experience seems to deny this truth, that God is ready to hear and answer
the prayers of his people. I have a second answer, and that is this: God may be
said to hear and answer the prayers of his people when he seems not to hear: as
we may seem to pray, when we do not pray; so God may be said to hear, when he
seems not to hear: for example,

First, God seems not to hear when he hears, when he puts our prayers into his
book, and our tears into his bottle; when he has a book of remembrance for our
prayers, when our prayers are upon the file, though for the present we do not
see them answered, Acts 10.4. God speaks to Cornelius there, Thy prayers and
alms are come up for a memorial before me: Cornelius was ready to think, I have
prayed thus long, I have lost all my labor, I see no fruit, no benefit of
them; but says God to him, Thy prayers are in remembrance, they are upon the
file for all that.

Secondly, God hears when he seems not to hear; namely, when he is fitting us
for the mercy he intends to bestow upon us: God makes his people wait for a
mercy, as appears out of those words, Isa. 8.17, I will wait upon the Lord that
hides away his face from the house of Jacob, and will look up: And God says,
that he will wait that he may be gracious, Isa. 30.18. God waits opportunities
to bestow mercies when they are most seasonable, when his people are fitted for
mercy. A man that is about to pour in some precious oil into a glass, if he see
some dirt at the bottom of the glass, he stops his hand for the present, says
he, Let the glass be washed first, then I will pour in the oil: so if our hearts
be once washed and fit to receive the mercy we beg, then God will bestow it,
Jer. 4.14, Oh Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved: when we wash away our sins by repentance, and are fit for mercy, then
God bestows it on us; in the mean time he hears, though he seems not to hear.

Thirdly, God hears when he seems not to hear: when he hears according to our
wants though not according to our wills: when he bestows upon us that which is
better than that we pray for, Psalm 34.10, The greedy Lions shall lack and
suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing: if
it be good for them, they shall not want it: if peace and plenty, and
prosperity were good for them, they shall not want it, but God would bestow it
upon them: but if they would abuse their peace, and plenty, and prosperity, to
pride and presumption, then the denial of them would be a great mercy: God
sometimes denies that in mercy to his children, which he grants in anger to
wicked and ungodly men: it is better a thousand times to be under the frowns of
Gods favor, than under the smiles of his vengeance; it is better to weep with
Christ, than sport with Satan; its better to be a corrected child, than a
cockered bastard; If we want chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are
we bastards and not sons, Heb. 12.8. its better to be chastised of the Lord,
that we may not be condemned with the world, than spared with the world and
condemned to all eternity. A man at the first view would wonder at Gods dealing
with Paul, and his dealing with Satan; Satan begged that he might have liberty
to tempt Job: God answered Satan, and gives him leave, Job 1, Go thy way and
tempt him. Paul on the other side, he earnestly begged to be free from the
buffetings of Satan, he begged thrice that God would remove the thorn in the
flesh: and this was all the answer he could have for the present, 2 Cor. 12, My
grace is sufficient for thee: Why, may some say, does God answer Satan in his
request about Jobs sufferings, and not Paul in his request about the Devils
buffeting him? why was God more ready to gratify Satan in his request, than
Paul in his, who was a chosen vessel? A man would wonder at this; but if you
observe it well, Paul was heard in that he was not heard, and the Devil was not
heard in that he was heard,

First, Paul was heard in that he was not heard: for he was heard to his
advantage, though he was not heard in the letter of his request: he begged that
the thorn in the flesh might be removed: Gods answer was, My grace is
sufficient for thee: God in giving him supporting grace under the temptation,
gave a fitter mercy for Paul than the removal of the temptation; because God
saw that Paul by reason of the multitude of his Revelations, had need to be
kept humble; therefore my suppoting-grace is better for thee, than the
deliverance thou beggest. Paul was heard in that he was not heard: though he
was not heard in the letter of his request, yet he was heard for the better,
for his advantage.

On the contrary; The Devil was not heard in that he was heard: he begged
liberty to tempt Job, God gave him leave, Job 1, Lo, he is in thy hand, all he
has is in thy power; but what did the Devil get by it? he was baffled, and
fooled, and proved a liar to his face; for Job, notwithstanding all the losses
upon his estate, kept his integrity, and sinned not; but says the Devil, Put
forth thine hand and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to
thy face: and the Lord said, Lo, he is in thy hand, but save his life: then the
Devil used all his art he could to make him blaspheme God, but he could not
prevail; so the Devil was proved a liar to his face.

Now the use I shall make is this, This doctrine may be like Aaron and Hur to
hold up Moses hands: it is a great encouragement to every one of us to pray
still, to seek the face of God still; though he seem to delay us, or deny our
importunities, or to turn from us; yet follow God still: though he seem to deny
our prayers, yet give not over praying: for you see God will at one time or
other, in one kind or other, answer all the prayers that are put up to him: In
the day when I cried, thou answeredst me. Let me tell you, We shall never have
cause to repent of our praying: could we pray an hundred times more than we do,
we should never have cause to repent of our praying, except it be for this,
That we have prayed no more frequently and fervently. And so much for the first
point of doctrine.

The second point of doctrine is this, It is one gracious way of answering our
prayers, when God does bestow upon us some spiritual strength: When he bestows
strength in our souls, that is one way of Gods answering our prayers
graciously; if he do not give the thing we desire, yet if he gives us strength
in our souls, he graciously answers our prayers. For the better clearing of
this point it may be demanded, What is this spiritual strength? I answer, it is
a work of the spirit of God, enabling a man to do and suffer what God would
have him, without fainting or backsliding.

I call it a work of the spirit of God, because indeed it is the spirit of God
that does corroborate and strengthen the soul: Ephesians. 3.16, That he would grant
you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inner man. Alas, we of our selves, if we have not the spirit of
God to help us, are as weak as water; we are no more able to stand in a day of
trial, or withstand any temptation, than a little child is able to withstand a
giant; but now when Sampson was clothed with the spirit, then he could grapple
with a Lion; so when once we are clothed with the spirit of God, we shall be
able to encounter with Lion-like corruptions and temptations.

Secondly, Whereby a man is able to do and suffer what God would have him to do
and suffer: there is strength, considerable strength required in doing the will
of God, Joshua 1.7, Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may
observe to do according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand, or the left, that thou may prosper
whither soever thou go; but there is a great deal more strength required in
suffering. Paul had attained a great deal of strength, when he said, For the
Lord Christ his sake I have suffered the loss of all things, Phil. 3.8.

Thirdly, I say, whereby a man is enabled to do and suffer what God requires
without fainting, and backsliding: there is strength required in doing the will
of God, but there is much strength required in suffering; I, but yet more
strength is required in perseverance; for if we faint in the day of adversity,
our strength is but small, Prove. 24.10. and therefore says the Apostle, We must
often look upon Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith; and consider
him who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest we be weary
and faint in our minds, Heb. 12.3.

Secondly, It may be demanded, how does God strengthen a man with strength in
his soul? I answer, these three ways:

First, God strengthens a Christian with spiritual strengths, when he does
comfort him in the assurance of his love shed abroad in his heart by the Holy
Ghost; Oh, this will enable a man to bear any burden! Smite Lord (will such a
one say) I will bear any thing willingly; because my sins are forgiven.

Secondly, God strengthens us with strength in our souls, by encouraging us in
our sufferings, by cheering up our hearts with some inward cordial. Look how
God cheered up Saint Paul when he was in danger, when forty men swore his
death, in Acts 23.11, And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said,
Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou have testified for me in Jerusalem, so
must thou bear witness also at Rome. So when God comes and cheers up the heart,
and brings some of his best cordials in our worst fainting fits: when in our
strongest afflictions he brings in his sweetest consolations: when we are able
to say with David, Psalm. 94.19, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
Comforts delight my soul: when God brings in his divine comforts, then he
strengthens us with strength in our souls. As I remember when Philip
Landsgrave, being long prisoner under Charles the fifth, being demanded what
cheered him up in that condition; made this answer, I feel, says he, the divine
comforts of the martyrs. God has divine comforts for his people in their
fainting fits: as their afflictions abound: so he makes his comforts to abound.

Thirdly, God strengthens with strength in the soul, when he does support and
keep up the spirit from sinking: says David in Psalm 94.17, 18, Unless the Lord
had been my helper, my soul had almost dwelt in silence: but when I said, my
foot slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. That is an excellent Scripture,
Isa. 41.10, Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed for I am thy
God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness. And observe, when God does support a man,
though the affliction be never so heavy; yet it shall not sink him, but he
shall be able to stand under it: see it in David, 1 Samuel 30.4, when he was at
Ziglag, when there was such a load of afflictions upon him, he wept that he
could weep no longer: his own soldiers mutinied, his wives were taken and
carried captive, yet God supported him in that great distress. On the contrary,
under less temptations and troubles, if God do not support a man, he will fall;
see it in Ahitophel; because his counsel was not accepted, God not supporting
him under this light trouble, he goes and hangs himself.

For the use of this: If this be one way of Gods hearing our prayers, when he
strengthens us with strength in our souls; Then call your selves to an account,
whether God has strengthened your souls yea or no: here is diverse of you that
have been made partakers of a strengthening Ordinance this day, namely, the
Lords Supper, which the Lord Jesus has appointed for your spiritual
confirmation and corroboration. Now will it not nearly concern you to ask your
own souls this question, Has God strengthened you with strength in your souls?
It may be you will say to me, how shall we do to know it? Answer me but these
four or five questions, and you may know it.

First, tell me, What are you in the time of troubles and temptations? for what
a man is in trials, that is the man: Can you live in a time of straits, fears,
doubts and dangers? as the strength of a ship is tried in the time of a storm;
if she can live in a storm, then you may say she is a strong ship: the strength
of a Castle, is tried in the time of battle; if it can endure the roaring
Cannon, then its a strong Castle: now if you can keep your standing in a time
of danger, this argues you have received spiritual strength in your souls.
Secondly, Can you bear variety of conditions without fainting? can you pass
through good report and ill report, through honor and dishonor, through a
prosperous estate and decayed estate? can you pass through these with an equal
temper and frame of spirit? as you are not puffed up with prosperity, so you are
not too much cast down with adversity. Saint Paul had this strength, I have
learnt, says he, in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content. Thirdly,
Can you cleave close to Jesus Christ without weariness constantly? if you be
off and on, if your way be uneven, it is a token you have little strength.
Fourthly, Are you able to do duties in a spiritual manner? the spiritual
performance of holy duties, argues the receiving of some spiritual strength. By
these and the like questions you may know, whether you have received some of
this spiritual strength, yea or no.
A second use I shall make, it is by way of Exhortation: Oh labor to read this
Text experimentally: read it, I say, so as your own hearts may make a
commentary on it: Oh Lord, thou have answered me; Lord, I can speak by
experience: I was as weak as water, but thou have strengthened me with strength
in my soul: Whatever was written aforetime, was written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. This
instance of David was written for your imitation and consolation. O labor for
this spiritual strength. To press you to attain it, I shall use but this one
motive:

Consider the great need you have of this spiritual strength at all times, but
especially in times of general fears and dangers, then you have special need of
it: In what regard, may be you will say, do we need so much strength in our
souls? I will tell you in these four respects especially, or on this fourfold
account: First, In regard of Duties that are to be performed. Secondly, In
regard of Afflictions that are to be endured. Thirdly, In regard of the Enemies
that are to be encountered. Fourthly, In regard of the danger of Apostasy that
is to be prevented.


First, You have great need of this spiritual strength in regard of the Duties
that are to be performed: Oh, a Christian has much work lying upon his hands
in reference to eternity! a great work it is to provide oil in your Lamps,
grace in your hearts; a great work it is to get the hazard of eternity over,
to get an interest in Jesus Christ, and to get an assurance of that interest. A
great work it is for you to make your calling and election sure, sure to your
own souls; to be working out your salvation with fear and trembling; a great
work it is for you to be pondering the paths of your feet, to keep your hearts
above all keepings; to be building up your selves in your most holy faith:
These are very great works. It is the language of the Apostle Saint Jude, verse
20 of his Epistle: But ye beloved, building up your selves in your most holy
faith, praying in the holy Ghost; and to be pressing forward toward the mark,
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. Nay, a
Christian has yet a harder work than this to do: for a Christian is to do that
work that crosses his own carnal and corrupt will. There are some difficult
duties of Christianity that are to be performed, as denying of our selves, a
hard duty; the crossing of our carnal and corrupt Affections, a hard duty; the
mortifying of a beloved Lust, a very hard duty; the plucking out of a right
eye: the cutting off of a right hand: a parting with a sin that is as dear as
our right hand, and our right eye, a difficult duty; so for a man to be
crucifying the flesh with the Affections and Lusts thereof, to be contemning
the world: to trample upon the pleasures, the flatteries, the blandishments of
it; for a man to love his enemies, to pray for them that persecute him, to do
good to them that despitefully use him; How is it possible for a man to do all
this work, a difficult work, this work which so much crosses his own carnal and
corrupt frame, if he have not a considerable portion of spiritual strength? A
weak Christian, alas, is offended with every thing, he is ready to stumble at
every straw: every duty is a burden to him, every command of Christ seems
grievous to him, every yoke of Christ he is not able to take upon his neck: it
may be he may have some flashes of good desires now and then, as Baalam had, Oh
that I might die the death of the righteous: It may be he may have some good
purposes and resolutions, as Saul had, 1 Samuel 26.21, Return my son David, for I
will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this days
But all his purposes came to nothing. Nay, may be sometimes he may have some
endeavors, faint feeble endeavors, in the way of grace, just like the third
ground in the Parable which wanted root; it brought forth indeed a blade, but
it brought forth (the Text says) nothing to perfection. If a man be a weak
Christian, alas, it is very little that he can do in the business of Eternity.
You have great need of strength therefore in this regard.

Secondly, You have great need of strength in regard of the Afflictions,
Temptations, Troubles, and Trials that are to be endured. You have often heard,
(and you will know it at one time or other; you will not believe us, but you
will believe one day your own experience) That through many Afflictions you
must enter into the kingdom of God. And 2 Timothy 3.12, Yea, and all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. They must look for
persecution in one kind or other: And in the world you shall have tribulation,
says our Savior: You must look for it, says he, if you be my disciples, John
16.33. And says Luther, If thou be not a Cross-bearing Christian, thou art
no Christian indeed: How is it possible now for a man to climb this rocky way,
if he has not strength? for the way to Heaven, is like the way that Jonathan
and his Armor-bearer had, in climbing up a great Rock: a sharp rock was on the
one side, and a sharp rock was on the other side, 1 Samuel 14.4. How is it
possible for a man to climb up this rocky way, if he have not some considerable
strength? If Stephen, for example, had not had a great measure of strength, how
could he have looked upon his persecutors so cheerfully in the midst of all
their threatenings, when they were ready to stone him? yet then they beheld his
face, as if it had been the face of an Angel, Acts 6.15. And if Saint Paul had
not had considerable strength, how could he have have said, True, the holy
Ghost witnesses that bonds and afflictions wait for me in every place, in
every City where ever I go: but none of these things move me: neither count I
my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the
Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God, Acts 20.23, 24. What a gallant answer was that which one made to
Valentinian the Arrian Emperor, that threatened him with Bonds, Imprisonment,
Banishment, and death? Tush, says he, Let him scare children with such
Bug-bears as these, he cannot scare me with them: he may take away my life, but
he cannot take away my love to the truth; Here was a strong Christian. Now, I
say, if a man have not a considerable strength, how can he be able to bear all
the afflictions that he may meet with? Can you drink of the cup (says our
Savior) that I shall drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with? Matthew. 20.22. He speaks there of the baptism of blood: Can you
be baptized with this bloody baptism? can you be content to suffer for my sake?

Thirdly, You have need of a great deal of strength in your souls, in regard of
the enemies that are to be encountered with: spiritual enemies, dangerous
enemies, deadly implacable enemies. For example now: One of the greatest
Enemies you have to encounter with, is an invisible enemy, namely, that Judas
which you and I have in our hearts, the cursed corruption in our Natures, that
works us more mischief than either the World or the Devil: nay, then all the
Devils in Hell can do. You see the whole world in a manner is subdued by this
cursed enemy called Sin: the whole World almost is brought into bondage to it:
and it is an enemy that you and I can never be rid of, until our bodies drop
down into the dust.

Then you have a flattering and bewitching World, and the lusts and pleasures
of it are its baits: those baits and allurements of it do so Lime-twigg the
soul, it is not able to mount up: oh, how many are bewitched by it to their own
destruction! Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present World: and he
loves it, because it is present What is the reason of all the Apostasy, and
Backsliding, and falling from the Profession, and Principles, and Practice of
Godliness, but only the love of this present world: Men love the world because
it is present: they prefer a present possession, before a future expectation:
Christ's promise is for the future, You shall be happy hereafter: but say they,
the world pays down upon the nail: You shall have it in hand, not in hope, says
the world; If you can but lie, swear, and cog, and flatter, and temporize, and
turn with every wind, says the world, you shall have this preserment. Now this
is that which takes with many men: the World is such an enemy, while it kisses,
it kills: the World, like Dalilah, while it dandles you upon its lap, it
betrays you to Satan. How many are there at this day, that will sacrifice the
peace of a good conscience? they will forsake, and lose God and Christ, and
heaven, and happiness, and all, rather than they will part with their present
enjoyments? Oh, that such would consider the pleasures of sin are but for a
season, but the punishments for sin are for ever.

Again, You have Satan to encounter with, who is an implacable enemy, a roaring
Lion, that walks about seeking whom he may devour: and the dint of all his
malice is against those that desire to walk most strictly, most uprightly
before God: for the greater part of the world, I mean them that are
unregenerate, those that are rockt asleep in the Cradle of security, he never
troubles them. When the strong man armed keeps his Palace, all his goods are in
peace. Satan never molests them: these are his own household, under his own
power: but the dint of all his malice is against those that have given up their
names to Jesus Christ; and the more holy and heavenly-minded, and unblameable
you desire to be in your Conversations, the greater will be his rage and enmity
against you.

Fourthly, Another Enemy you have to encounter with, and that is Death, the
last enemy that shall be destroyed, which is called the King of fears, and the
fear of Kings: of all terribles the most terrible, as the Philosopher calls it.
Now you have all these enemies to conquer: and how can you look the King of
terrors in the face, if you have not this spiritual strength?

Fifthly, You have need of a great deal of strength, in regard of the danger of
Apostasy that must be prevented: Oh great, exceeding great, greater than I am
able to tell you, is the danger of Apostasy! Oh that I could speak it with all
earnestness, that if it might be, you might take heed of it; Those that turn
aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity. Oh, they are lost and undone for ever! Psalm 125.5, And if any man
draws back (says God) my soul shall have no pleasure in him. A dreadful
Scripture! which may make Apostates quake and tremble. God takes no pleasure in
such as draw back; and it had been better for a man never to have known the
ways of God, than having known them, to turn aside from the holy commandment.
Its better to be an Atheist, a Pagan, a Turk, an Insidel, any thing, rather
than an Apostate? and they that shall put their hands to the Plow, and look
back, are not fit for the Kingdom of God. Oh great is the danger of Apostasy!
but now without some considerable strength, you will not be kept from failing:
and those failings will turn to fallings: and those fallings to fallings away,
and at last falling into everlasting destruction. Now these fallings, and
fallings away, do usually follow this want of spiritual strength; not being
strengthened with strength in our souls.

But may be, you will say to me, What course must we take, that we may get this
spiritual strength in our souls? I answer briefly, make use of these rules and
helps:

First, Be very sensible of your weakness and infirmity: be humble, be base in
your own eyes: be nothing in your selves, that you may be able to say, In Jesus
Christ have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45.24, It was a sweet Meditation
of Saint Augustine, Lord, I will be weak in my self, that I may be strong in
thee. And the Apostle has such a phrase: For when I am weak, then am I strong,
2 Cor. 12.10, that is, when I am most weak in my self, then am I most strong in
a Savior.

Secondly, If you would have this strength in your souls: be acting the Grace
which you have received already; for action increases strength, and strength
will help action forwards: the more you are doing duty, the more will you
gather strength to do duty. It was the Motto of an eminent Divine in this
Nation, now with God, The way to Holiness, lies in the works of Holiness; so
the way to get spiritual strength, lies in doing the work you have to do, with
that strength you have: use strength, and you shall have more strength.

Thirdly, If you would have strength in your souls, grow especially in
corroborating and strengthening Graces. What are those strengthening Graces? 1.
Faith, that is a very strengthening Grace: you read of the strength of Faith:
Abraham was strong in Faith, and that made him do great things: that he could
against hope, believe in hope; that is, against hope of sense, believe in hope
of a promise, Romans 4.18. so be strong in Love, Love to Jesus Christ. Love is a
very strengthening Grace, Love is strong as death, Cant. 8.6, 7, Death, you
know, is so strong, that it has conquered all men that ever were in the World:
never was there any Giant so strong, but could be conquered by Death; there is
no discharge in that War: the meaning is this: never any man encountered with
Death that came off: but Love is stronger than Death. If thy heart be fired
with Love to Jesus Christ, it will carry you with a great deal of strength
through all difficulties, and sufferings, with patience and perseverance. 3.
Again, Get more sincerity; Job 17.9, The righteous also shall hold on his way,
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger: Oh, the more
sincere you are, the more strong you are: For example, Wherein consists the
strenth of a Pillar? it is in the uprightness of it: if it begins to bow and
bend, and be crooked, then it falls; but the uprightness of it is the strength
of it. 4. Joy; Joy, that is another strengthening Grace, Nehem. 8.10, Neither
be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord shall be your strength. Oh, the more
inward joy in the Holy Ghost you have, the more cheerful you are; the more
strong you are: grow in these strengthening Graces.

Fourthly, Would you have this strength in your souls? then take heed of
rushing into any known sin: for sin, as it wounds the conscience, it weakens
the soul also; sins against conscience, are like a thief in the Candle, which
weakens our strength, and wastes our joy. Nothing weakened Sampson so much, as
his sporting with his Dalilah; Never had he lost his strength, had it not been
for his running into that sin: take heed therefore of sins against conscience.

Fifthly, If you would have strength in your souls, take heed of evil company,
shun them as a Pesthouse: for many times evil company weakens the soul more
than any outward temptation, Psalm. 119.115, Depart from me ye wicked, for I
will keep the Commandments of my God. It is, as if he should say, he could
never set about the work of Obedience, so long as he kept company with the
wicked.

Sixthly, If you would have strength in your souls, then get more intimate and
bosom-communion with Jesus Christ every day: for the truth is, all our strength
is from him; I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me,
Phil. 4.13. The more you are acquainted with Christ, the more will you have of
this strength which David here in the Text speaks of.

Lastly, If you would have this strength, be much in prayer: that is an
excellent Scripture, Psalm. 119.28, My soul melts away for heaviness,
strengthen thou me according to thy word. Oh, the more we are in Prayer, and
Care, and Watchfulness, and Humility, and Self-denial, and in the exercise of
Grace; the more we shall find our spiritual strength increased: then we shall
experimentally say with David, Thou have strengthened me with strength in my
soul.

LIGHT DISCOVERED, AND MAN RECOVERED.
A SERMON Preached Augst 17. 1656.
2 Timothy 1.10, the latter part of the Verse. And has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel.


THE Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter, exhorting Timothy to a faithful
discharge of his Ministerial Calling, puts in this weighty caution, in the 8
verse, Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me
his prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according
to the power of God: that is, be not ashamed of the Gospel, that he calls there
the Testimony of our Lord Jesus: Though it may be thou may meet with
afflictions, and oppositions in the profession of it, yet seeing these
afflictions are but sufferings for the Gospel-sake, therefore bear them
patiently: it is better that thou should suffer, than that the Gospel should
suffer. This Caution, or Exhortation the Apostle presses from an Argument drawn
from the unspeakable benefit and advantage that comes streaming to us by the
Gospel, namely, Eternal life; and that the Apostle might be rightly understood,
he lays down the three causes of this Eternal life or Salvation.

First, The principal and moving cause of this Salvation, that is, the Grace of
God, in the foregoing verse, ver. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with a
holy calling: not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.

Secondly, He lays down the meritorious cause of our salvation, that is, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has merited this salvation by dying for us: in the
middle part of the 10th verse, who has abolished death, that is, who has
taken away the sting and curse of Death.

Thirdly, He lays down the instrumental cause of our salvation, that is the
Gospel, in the words that I have now read to you: And has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel. Let me first unlock the Cabinet of the
Text, and then show you what treasure is laid up in it: Briefly, He has
brought life.] As Calvin well observes upon the Text, It is an eminent and
memorable Encomium of the Gospel, that it brings life? and what life? not a
temporal life, but an eternal life; therefore there is another weighty word
added to express it, life and immortality, or an immortal life; a life that is
not capable of corruption; an incorruptible life, that never shall have end;
after as many millions of years as there are drops of water in the Ocean, this
eternal life and immortality shall be the same still. He has brought this life
to light, the Text says; that is, He has revealed it, and discovered it,
although before it was, as it were, in the dark; it was a mystery unknown to
us: but now he has revealed this mystery, he has revealed the way to eternal
life, and he has revealed the unconceiveable joy and happiness that is wrapped
up in it; and all this is done by the Gospel, the Text says: that is, by the
preaching of the Gospel; as is in the words following the Text, ver. 11,
Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the
Gentiles. Now Gospel, according to the acceptance of the word (...), Gospel;
that is, as if one should say, a Goodspel, that is, good news; that was the old
ancient word for good news. The glad tidings of salvation was such a welcome
message, that it was fit for the mouth of an Angel to publish, Luke 2.10, And
the Angel said unto them, Fear not: Behold, I do Gospel you good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all Nations: or I do preach the Gospel, the
welcome message of a Savior being come into the World, by whom eternal
salvation may be obtained. So then the words being thus opened, the Doctrine I
shall commend to you from them, shall be this.

Doct. The knowledge of eternal life and salvation is discovered to the sons of
men by the preaching of the Gospel. God bring life and immortality to light: he
discovers it, reveals it; he makes it known: but how? says the Apostle, it is
by the preaching of the Gospel. I shall not need to travel far to fetch in
proof for this plain Doctrine: that Scripture is very remarkable, Romans 16.25,
26, Now to him that is of power to stablish you, according to my Gospel, and
the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which
was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest; and by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of faith The Apostle says, The
mystery; that is, the mystery of man's salvation: the mystery of our redemption
by Jesus Christ, it was kept secret from the beginning of the World: but was
now at last, says he, revealed by the Gospel: the mystery of man's salvation and
redemption had been a clasped book for ever, if the Gospel had not been a key
to open it. What does the Apostle mean by that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4? But if
our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are losi, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them: As
if he should say, Whence it it men perish in death and destruction? Whence is
it they are lost, quite lost, and perish without hope? surely, it is because
the Gospel is hidden from them: either they want light, or else want sight:
though the Gospel shines about them, it shines not unto them, into their
hearts, to give them the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ: If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: a sad speech! Again, Whence is
it so many glorious Titles are given to the Gospel? for example, it is called
the word of life, Phil. 2.16, Holding forth the word of life, that I may
rejoice in the day of Jesus Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither
labored in vain. It is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 24.14, And this
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached to all the world for a witness unto all
Nations, and then shall the end come. It is called the word of Gods grace:Acts
14.3, Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave
testimony to the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by
their hands. And it is called the word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit,
that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation.
Yea, it is called the word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. Men and Brethren, Children
of the Stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God: to you is the
word of this salvation sent. And it is called the Grace of God that brings
salvation, Tit 2.11. Nay, yet more, it is called Salvation it self: there
cannot be a higher title given to it, than to call it Salvation it self: In
Acts 28.28, Be it known therefore unto you (says the Apostle, speaking to those
stubborn Jews), That the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that
they will hear it. The Salvation of God, that is the Gospel, called there the
Salvation of God, is sent unto the Gentiles. All these titles sufficiently
clear this truth, That the knowledge of eternal Salvation is discovered by the
Gospel. Now for the better explication of this point, there are two Quaeries
would be satisfied: First, How, or in what respect the knowledge of Salvation
may be said to be discovered by the Gospel? Secondly, Whether the knowledge of
Salvation be discovered only by the Gospel?


First, How, or in what respect the knowledge of Salvation may be said to be
discovered by the Gospel? I answer in these three or four regards:

First, the Gospel is said to reveal the knowledge of salvation, because it
reveals to us the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Author of this eternal
salvation, as he is called, Heb. 5.9, And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. And he is called the
rock of salvatiom, 1 Cor. 10.4. Deuteronomy. 32.15. And he is called a Horn of
Salvation, Luke 1.69, And has raised up an Horn of salvation for us in the
house of his servamt David. In this regard the Gospel may well be compared to
the Star that led the wise men to Jesus Christ: The Gospel is that Star that
leads us to the Dayspring from on high, to him that is the Morning Star
indeed, to him that is salvation it self, clothed in our flesh.

Secondly, The Gospel may be said to reveal salvation in this regard, because
it is a means of conveying the spirit of grace into the soul, who is the
applier of this Salvation. Hence it is, the Gospel is called the Ministration
of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8, How shall not the ministration of the spirit be
rather glorious? And you read in Acts 10.44, that while Peter was preaching to
Cornelius and his Company, the Holy Ghost fell upon them: While Peter yet spoke
these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word: so that the
Holy Ghost was dispensed to them in the preaching of the Gospel.

Thirdly, The Gospel may be said to reveal salvation, in that it is an
Instrument of begetting faith in the soul, which is the hand whereby we lay
hold on this salvation: Faith comes by hearing of the Gospel, Romans 10.17.

Fourthly, The Gospel is ordained by God to be an Instrument of Regeneration,
and Sanctification, and of Edification.

Of Regeneration, 1 Cor. 4.15, For though you have ten thousand Instructors in
Christ, yet have you not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the Gospel.

And then it is the Instrument of our Sanctification too, in John 17.17,
Sanctify them by thy truth, (says our Savior), for thy word is truth.

And it is the Instrument of our Edification, or building us up in our most
holy faith, Acts 20.32, And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the
word of his grace (that is, the Gospel) which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Now then, if the Gospel be the Instrument both of our Regeneration,
Sanctification, and Edification, it must needs be also the Instrument of our
Salvation: that is for the first Quaery, How the Gospel may be said to reveal
Salvation? Because it reveals Jesus Christ, who is the Author of this
Salvation; and it is an Instrument of conveying the spirit of Grace into the
heart, who is the applier of this Salvation, and works faith, which is the hand
whereby we lay hold on this Salvation: and it is the Instrument of working
Regeneration, Sanctification, and Edification in us: and therefore must be the
Instrument of our Salvation.

The second Quaery is this: But is the knowledge of Salvation revealed only by
the Gospel, may some say? Does not the Law also reveal Salvation? Does not the
Law say, Do this, and live? To this I answer, Though the Law may be said in
some sense to reveal the knowledge of Salvation: Yet there is a very great
difference between the Laws revealing, and the Gospels revealing it; and that
in these two respects especially: First, the Law does not reveal the knowledge
of salvation so clearly. Secondly, The Law does not reveal the knowledge of
Salvation so effectually.

First, The Law does not reveal the knowledge of salvarion so clearly: for it
reveals it only in types, and shadows, and resemblances: therefore the Apostle
says, Heb. 10.1, The Law having the shadow of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things. He compares the Law to a shadow; it had a shadow of
good things to come: For example, The Law told us indeed of a Savior that was
to come into the World, and the Law told us of the blood of Jesus Christ; but
it was typified in the multitude of those bloody Sacrifices that were offered
from day to day: and it told us of heaven, and the heavenly inheritance: but it
was but obscurely, it was shadowed out by an earthly Canaan, or the Land of
promise: whereas now the Gospel brings in Jesus Christ fully and clearly
exhibited; it brings in Jesus Christ as the Day Star from on high, which does
enlighten us, and the Son of Righteousness that does dispel all those clouds
and shadows that were in the Ceremonial Law: The Gospel does, as it were, draw
the Curtain, that now we may with open face behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. last verse: therefore the Law does not discover the
knowledge of salvation so clearly.

Secondly, The Law does not discover the knowledge of Salvation so effectually:
True, the Law has told us of Salvation, but it does not show us the means
whereby we may attain it: the Law shows us the way, but it does not help us to
walk in the way; the Law has commanded us to obey, but it gives us no strength
to perform: therefore the Apostle says, The Law was weak because of our flesh,
Romans 8.3, For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh. Again, The Apostle tells us expressly, Heb. 7.19, The Law made
nothing perfect. The Law could never bring Man to Heaven; never was mortal man
saved by the Law: It is true, indeed, it required obedience, but it gave us no
strength to perform that obedience: it exacted obedience upon the penalty of a
dreadful curse, but it did not enable us to avoid that curse; for its said,
Cursed be he that continues not in all the words of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy.
27.26. And it is said, the man that does them, shall live in them, Gal. 3.12.
Lev. 18.5. I, but the Law gave no strength to do what it did enjoin: I, but now
the Gospel reveals the knowledge of Salvation more effectually: because, as it
commands us to obey, so it gives us strength to perform: the Law commands, but
it is the Gospel that helps us: How does it help us? it helps us thus, Because
it directs us to Jesus Christ by whom we may have strength: Surely shall one
say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45.24. And says the
Apostle, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

I, but here it may be objected: Does not the Apostle say, That the Gospel is
the savor of death unto death, as well as the savor of life unto life? 2 Cor.
2.16. Now, if the Gospel be the savor of death unto death, then how can it be
said to bring Eternal Salvation? To this I answer:

When the Gospel is said to be the savor of death unto death, it is not spoken
because the Gospel does kill and condemn simply. and in its own nature; but
through the corruption of men's hearts that do not obey it, but do reject it,
that do resist it. A Kings pardon, you know, does not kill any by it self, but
by the contempt of a Malefactor that does reject it; and so the pardon may
double the Malefactors guilt, and bring upon him a more speedy and fearful
execution. So here, the Gracious pardon of God that is tendered in the Gospel,
does not kill, or condemn any in it self, or in is own nature, but through the
contempt of those that do disregard it: in this regard, not simply, but
accidentally, through the corruptions of men's Hearts, and Natures; in this
regard, the Gospel may be said to increase a man's curse and condemnation:
Whereas now the Law in its own nature is said to be a killing Letter, because
it leaves a man in a state of death, and leaves him under a curse, and does not
show him the way at all ^ow to avoid that curse, as the Gospel does: therefore
the Apostle says, The Law is a killing Letter of it self, but the Spirit gives
life, 2 Cor. 3.6. because in the preaching of the Gospel, the Spirit of God is
conveyed into our souls, which enables us in some acceptable manner to perform
what the Gospel enjoins: and thus you have the Point opened to you, That the
knowledge of Life and Immortality, that Eternal Salvation that is laid up for
the Saints in light, is discovered and revealed by the Preaching of the Gospel.
For the Use of the Point now.

And the first is by way of Information; and there are four Doctrinal
Inferences, or Lessons, that we may learn fron this point thus opened.

1. See how infinitely we stand indebted and engaged to our gracious God, that
has looked upon us here in this Nation, and in this City; who has brought us
into the fellowship of th Gospel, and has kept us in that fellowship for so
many years together. Oh, that we should live under the showers and Sunshine of
the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, for almost a hundred years together
without interruption! What a singular mercy is this, if we did but know how to
prize it? He has scarce dealt so with any Nation under Heaven as he has dealt
with us: What did God see more in us than in Turks, Indians, and Pagans, that
never heard of God nor Gospel? He foresaw how we would despise this precious
Pearl, and how we would be ready to trample it under foot: God foresaw how
weary we would be of those glorious Gospel-mysteries that are discovered to us
from day to day: yet it did not hinder him from bestowing this precious Jewel
upon us; therefore, not to us, not to us, but to his own Name be the Glory.

2. A second Lesson we may learn by way of inference, is this: If the knowledge
of eternal life be discovered in the Gospel, then it follows, Wherever God
has a Church planted, or a Church to be planted, there will still be need of a
powerful, quickening, soul-searching Ministry, for the discovery and making
known the Mysteries of Salvation: The public preaching Ministry of the Gospel,
is that standing Ordinance that must continue in the Church of Jesus Christ, so
long as he has a Church here upon earth: and this appears by that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors; and Teachers, for the prefecting of the
Saints. for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
(How long? till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ: That is, to the end of the World: God will have a standing
Ministry, wherever he has a Church planted, or to be planted: God will have
a Gospel standing Ministry, till all the Saints be gathered. If this be so,
then how justly are they to be reproved, that think that a Gospel Ministry, of
all other things, may be best spared? if there be any such here, mark what I
say, You could ill want any of the four Elements, Earth, Air, Fire, or Water:
You could ill want Salt, Bread, Drink, Clothing: let me tell you, a
Gospel Ministry is as needful as any of these I have named: as Earth, Air,
Fire, Water: as Salt, Bread, Drink, Clothing: for does not Solomon say, Prove.
29.18, Where there is no vision, the people perish? and would you have your
souls perish everlastingly? Is not our soul worth a whole World? It was a noble
speech of Luther, It were better that the whole World were in a Combustion and
Confusion, than that the Gospel should not be preached, or that any one soul
that belongs to Jesus Christ should be neglected. And it was spoken concerning
Chrysostom, who was a famous Light in the Church, It was better that the Sun
should not shine, than that Chrysostom should not preach: and it was a witty
observation of a Father, speaking concerning the beheading of John Baptist;
Herod took off John Baptists head, because of the promise he made to the
Damosel, Whatever she asked him, to the half of his Kingdom, should be granted;
says that Father, speaking of this passage, Herod might have kept his promise,
though he had not taken off John Baptists head: for he promised the Damosel, to
give her to the half of his Kingdom; But now, says he, John Baptists head was
worth a whole Kingdom. Pray tell me, you that have slight thoughts of the
Gospel, or of a Gospel Ministry, Does not the Scripture compare Ministers to
Planters, to Builders, to Fathers, to Remembrancers, to Stars, to spiritual
Guides, and to a City upon a Hill, and the like? If ever you be trees of
Righteousness in Gods Garden, it is a Ministry that has planted you: and if
ever you be spiritual stones in Gods everlasting Building, it must be the
Ministry must build you: if ever you be Sons and Daughters begotten to eternal
Life, it is the Ministry must beget you, For in Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15, says the Apostle; and if ever your seet be
guided into the way that leads into everlasting life, it is a Gospel Ministry
must guide you: and if ever you be led to Jesus Christ, as the Wisemen were by
the Star in the East, when Christ was born in Betlehem, it must be these
spiritual Stars that are in the firmament of Gods Church that must lead you.
Now judge in your selves therefore, whether a Gospel Ministry can be spared?

3. The third Doctrinal inference is this; If the knowledge of eternal Salvation
comes by the Gospel, then it teaches us this Lesson also; How infinitely it
does concern us to prize, and fruitfully to improve our Gospel-seasons, those
opportunities God puts into our hands for the enriching of our souls: but
especially, we should improve our Sabbath Day opportunities, because Sabbaths
are the Market-days of Eternity, the Markets wherein we must make provision for
Eternity: Oh, how careful should we be to improve these Gospel-seasons! Let me
tell you, Gospel-seasons are very precious seasons, because mavelous precious
things are tendered to you in the preaching of the Gospel; more precious than
all the Gold of Ophir, more precious than all the Kingdoms of the World, if
they were in your own power: for in the preaching of the Gospel, a precious
Christ, who is the Pearl of price, worth ten thousand thousand Worlds, and more
worth: this precious Christ, this Pearl of Price may now be obtained: and a
precious Covenant, a Covenant made between God and the soul, this precious
Covenant may now be confirmed, and precious Evidences of Eternal Salvation may
be now gained; and likewise precious Graces, and precious Faith, and precious
Hope, and precious Love, Humility, Repentance, and Self-denial: these precious
Graces may be now procured; a precious soul may be saved, a precious pardon may
be sealed: Oh, what precious things then are tendered to you in the preaching of
the Gospel! these opportunities therefore are exceeding precious: if Christ be
thine now, he is thine for ever; Oh, that you you did but know the price of
these things that are tendered to you in the preaching of the Gospel! if a
condemned prisoner did know how precious the pardon that was brought to him
was, would he slight it? Here is a precious Pardon, Grace, Mercy, Peace, all
tendered to you in the preaching of the Gospel. How infinitely then does it
concern us to improve our Gospel-seasons?

4. The fourth Lesson by way of inference, is this, It lets us see the
contempt, nay, the neglect of the Gospel, is a very dangerous sin; for if the
knowledge of Salvation be brought to the soul by the Gospel, then certainly he
that neglect the Gospel, neglects Salvation, and Salvation it self shall not
save that man that despises the remedy, yea, that neglects Salvation; says the
Apostle, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3, As if
he had said, It is impossible to escape eternal Damnation, if we do but neglect
this eternal Salvation: These are the Lessons from this Doctrine, and that is
the first Use, of Information.

The second Use I shall make of this Doctrine, it is for Examination: If so be
the knowledge of eternal Life be brought by the Gospel, be discovered, and
revealed by the Gospel: then take occasion to call your selves to an account,
and see whether this eternal Salvation be so discovered to you, that you may be
partakers of it; otherwise, what advantage will it be to you, to hear that Life
and Immortality is brought to light, unless this Light do shine into your
souls? But may be you will say to me, How may we do to know that the Dayspring
from on High, has shined into my soul? that God has called me out of darkness
into his mavelous Light? that he has discovered the Mysteries of Salvation
to me, even to me?

I answer, You may know it briefly thus: If the Light of Life be revealed to
thy Soul, then certainly thy knowledge will not be a Notional knowledge only, but
an Experimental knowledge; thou will not have a knowledge swimming in thy head
only, but a soaking, and sinking knowledge in thy heart: thou will not only know
Christ, but taste Christ; thou will taste that hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17, To him
that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. Thou will not only
know, but taste the bitterness of sin: and thou will say, Jer. 2.19, It is an
evil and bitter thing that I have for saken the Lord, and that his fear is not
in me. A blind man may talk of Colors that never saw them, and a hungry man
may talk of a full dinner that never tasted it: so a carnal man may have a
great deal of knowledge in his head, and never relish nor taste it: but he that
has the knowledge of Salvation revealed to his soul, he has a Light shining in
his heart, Jer. 31.34, And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall know me from
the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; that is, they
shall not need to be taught those experimental truths that are written in their
own hearts, by the finger of the Spirit of God. A man that has this Life and
Immortality brought to light by the Gospel, will say, You need not tell me that
sin is a bitter thing, I have tasted the bitterness of it; You need not tell
me, the favor of God is sweet and lovely; Oh, it is sweeter to me than life it
self; You need not tell me that Jesus Christ is very Amiable and Beautiful, I
see him to be so with my eye of faith; You need not tell me, there is a
mavelous power in the death of Christ for the crucifying of sin, I do
experimentally know it: when a man has this experimental knowledge, he will say
as the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.13, I was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and
injurious, but I obtained Mercy because I did it ignorantly. When a man has
the feeling and experience of spiritual Truths in his own soul, then may he be
sure that Life and Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel unto him.

A third Use I shall make of this Doctrine, it is of Reproof: Two sorts there
are, that are justly liable to the reproof of this Doctrine. First, It condemns
and cries down that Hellish practice of the whore of Rome, and the Popish
Clergy, who lock up the Scriptures, and keep Millions of souls from the
knowledge of Gospel, from the knowledge of the mysteries of Salvation; this is
all one, as if they should lock them up in the pit of Infernal darkness: for if
so be Salvation, or Eternal Life be brought to light by the Gospel, and this
Gospel be to them but as a Light in a dark Lanthorn, must not they needs
inevitably perish? Oh cruel bloody Butchers! Oh merciless mischievous
Souldestroyers! may we say of the Romish Synagogue: well may the whore of Rome
be said to be drunk with blood, because she is drunk not only with the blood of
the bodies of Men, but with the blood of the Souls of men. Oh, the tender
Mercies of God that has opened our eyes to see better things, and to free us
from the bondage and slavery of that Antichristian yoke: this is a great mercy
to be delivered from the poison of those serpents, and a greater mercy than
ever we can be thankful for. But take this withal, I beseech you, Take heed
that Popery do not creep in at a back-dore of Toleration: let us bless God for
that liberty that we have; but take heed that you do not hanker after those
Popish Doctrines that may poison the soul, and that will provoke God to remove
his Candlestick from amongst us.

A second sort to be reproved, are those that grow weary of the Gospel: I, but
may be you will say, Are there any so bad in our days, as to be weary of the
Gospel? yea, my brethren, many there are that are weary of the Truths of it:
many that are weary of the Profession of it, many that are weary of the Power
and Practice of it.

First, Many there are that are weary of the Truths of the Gospel, that choose
rather to be raking in the stinking puddles of Popery, Arminianism,
Socinianism, and other damnable heresies, as the Apostle calls them; they choose
these rather than the clear fountain of truth revealed in the Gospel: Oh, these
are in a very dangerous condition, when men choose rather to be Masters of new
opinions, than to be disciples of old Truths: these men may be said to be weary
of the Gospel.

Secondly, Are there not some that are weary of the Profession of the Gospel?
such as are Atheists, and profane Libertines, Swearers, Drunkards, and others
of that Gang, that could be contented that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should be extinguished, that the Candle might be put out, so they may
but sin more freely: but our Savior has read their doom, John 3.19, This is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

Thirdly, Are there not some weary of the Power and Practice of the Gospel?
such are Hypocrites, Apostates, lukewarm Professors, and carnal Gospellers,
that have (it is true) a form of godliness, but are as far from the power and
practice of it, as Pagans are from the profession of it: Are not these worthy
think you to be reproved? yea, God reproves them, and his Word reproves them,
and their own consciences will one day reprove them: nay, that Gospel which now
they despise and undervalue, will then arraign, indict, and condemn them, at
that great day: for if the Lord Jesus Christ will come in flames of fire, to
take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not his Gospel, as it
is 2 These. 1.8, What will become of them that are weary of it, that despise it,
that do undervalue it?

The fourth and last Use (to shut up this point), is this, If the knowledge of
salvation be discovered by the preaching of the Gospel; then let me press upon
you three very necessary and seasonable Duties.

First, Learn to prize the Gospel while you have it: labor to know the worth
of it now you have it, lest God let you see the worth of it in the want of it,
when it is too late: God will never hang a Jewel upon a swines snout; God will
never long continue the Gospel in mercy to a People that do not value it. True
indeed, some there are that are ready to say of the Gospel, as Naaman the
Assyrian in like case; Are not Abana and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better
than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them to be clean? So some will
say, Are not the doctrines of Popery, and other corrupt doctrines, better than
all the doctrines of the Gospel? But I hope you have not so learnt Christ: Oh,
learn to prize the Gospel as the doctrine of your salvation, as the evidence of
your inheritance; Do you learn to prize it as the tree of life, which is for
the healing of the Nations, as the pledge of the hope you have of eternal life?
Labor for such an esteem of the Gospel as David had, Psalm. 119.111, Thy
testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of
my heart: Oh, do you now learn to prize the Gospel as the greatest privilege
that ever God did bestow upon you next to Jesus Christ, and his Spirit.

A second Duty I would press upon you, is this, not only to prize the Gospel,
but to make use of it, and improve it for your own spiritual advantage: Yet a
little while (says our Savior) is the light with you: walk while you have the
light, lest darkness come upon you; for he that walks in darkness, knows
not whither he goes, John 12.35. Oh, that you and I could learn to make hay
while the Sun shines! Oh, that we could improve these opportunities while we do
enjoy them! If so be the Gospel should be taken away from you, before your
peace is made with God, before you have gotten Jesus Christ into your hearts;
before the Covenant between God and your Souls be sealed; Oh, how sad and
doleful would your conditions be! sure I am, we were never in so much danger of
losing the Gospel as at this day, for our barrenness, and unfruitfulness, and
wearness of the Gospel. We are ready to say, Mal. 1.13, What a weariness is it
to serve the Lord? and for our contempt of the means of grace. Now if such a
day should come as God threatens, Micah 3.6, Therefore night shall be unto you,
that ye shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall
not divine: and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
dark over them. If such a day should come as God threatens, Amos 8.11, Behold,
the days come says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land; not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:
And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East:
they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it:
Oh, what a black, doleful, dismal day would this be!

Thirdly, It should teach us to walk worthy of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27, Only let
your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Oh, let us learn to lead
Gospel-lives under Gospel Light; let it never be said to us, that the Gospel is
a grace to us, but we are a disgrace to the Gospel; I beseech you, my brethren,
study to live up to your light: seeing God has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light, walk as children of the light: follow that golden Rule of
the Apostle, Phil. 4.8, Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things, speak
of these things: Oh, could we but once learn to cast off the works of darkness,
and to put on the armor of light; could we once be brought to this, to repent
of our Gospel-sins, may be the Lord may lengthen our tranquillity: may be God
may revive his work in the midst of our days: may be glory may yet dwell in our
Land, and make us a name and praise throughout the whole earth: But if we go on
in a course of Rebellion; if we rebel against the light; if we despise the
means of grace; if we undervalue those precious seasons of Salvation that are
tendered to us; if we grieve the holy Spirit of God from day to day, and cause
him to withdraw from us; what a black and doleful day may seize upon us! The
Lord work these things upon every one or our hearts, that still the Gospel in
its power and purity may be continued to us.

CHRIST'S PROVISION FOR MAN'S DIRECTION.
Isaiah XL. 11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather his
Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young.


THE first verse of this Chapter will tell you what the scope of the Chapter
is; namely, to speak comfort to the poor captive Jews in their return from
Babylon: and the comfort that is here proclaimed, it is derived from a double
Spring: 1. From the Promulgation of the Gospel. 2. From the coming of Jesus
Christ in the Flesh, who is the Marrow of the Gospel. 1. From the Promulgation
of the Gospel, and that is amplified two ways: from the Herald that Proclaims
it, and by the Place where it was proclaimed. 1. By the Herald that proclaimed
it: namely, John the Baptist, called the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a way for our God.
2. It is amplified by the place where it should be proclaimed, namely, in Sion,
or Jerusalem: in the 9th verse, O Sion that bring good tidings, get thee up
into the high Mountain: O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy
voice with strength: lift it up, be not afraid; say to the Cities of Judah,
behold your God. Then Christ's coming in the flesh, that is described two ways:
1. By his Terror to his Enemies. 2. By his mild carriage and behavior toward
his own People. By his Terror toward his Enemies, in the foregoing verse, the
10th ver. Behold, the Lord will come with a strong hand, and his Arm shall rule
for him: behold his reward is with him, and his work before him. Then he is
described here by his meek and mild carriage toward his People, in the words I
have read unto you, He shall feed his flock like, etc.

Let me first open the terms of the Text, and then come to some points of
Instruction: He shall feed. The Government of the Lord Jesus Christ in his
Church, and toward his Chosen, is expressed by three names: He is called a
Ruler, a Leader, and a Shepherd. He is called a Ruler (...) in the Hebrew, in
Micah 5.2, But thou Beth-leem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be
Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.
Now Jesus Christ rules three ways: 1. By his Commanding-power. 2. By his
Compelling-power. 3. By his Perswading-power. He has a Commanding-power, All
power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 18.35. He has a
Compellingpower, Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.27. Then he has likewise a
Perswading-power, Genesis 9.27, God shall persuade Japhet, and he shall dwell in
the Tents of Shem. 2dly, His Government is expressed by this Name, He is a Leader
to his people. Now Christ is a Leader to his People three ways: 1. By teaching
of his people: his very enemies did acknowledge it, Mar. 12.14, We know thou
teach the way of God in truth. He teaches them by going before them in a
way of good example, John 13.15, I have given you an example, that you should
do as I have done. He leads them likewise by drawing of them, Cant. 1.4, Draw
me, we will run after thee. Then, as he is a Ruler, and a Leader, so he is a
Shepherd: his Government is comprised under this Name, He shall feed his Flock
like a Shepherd. And here in the Text, where under the name of Feeding, is
comprised all the necessary attendances and accommodations that conduce to the
safety and welfare of the Flock; such as providing of them Pasture, and
protecting of them from the danger and mischief of Wolves and Lions, and Beasts
of Prey; and likewise in preventing their straggling and wandering in the
Wilderness: And in curing of those Diseases that are incident to Sheep: All
these are meant by Feeding. Oh, the Richness, and Compleatness of this precious
Redeemer! well may the Apostle say, He is able to save to the utmost those that
come to God by him. And well may the Apostle say, Christ is all and in all,
because he is both the Ruler, Leader, and Shepherd; the Prince and Captain of
our Salvation, and Savior, and all.

He shall gather his Lambs with his Arms. The Lord Jesus Christ has a tender
care of all his Sheep, that none of them be lost, as he says in that Heavenly
Prayer, John 17.11, While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy
Name: those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the
Son of Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. I, but he has the
most tender and pitiful compassion toward those that are his Lambs, that is,
young Beginners, Babes in Christ, those he gathers in his Arms: so the Text
tells us, those he carries in his bosom; that is, he deals favorably with
them; those he cherishes with all indulgence; He does not quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised read, Matthew. 12.20.

Then he gently leads those that are with young, or those that give suck; the
Hebrew word (...) sigfies both. either those that are with young, or those that
give suck. The Prophet here in the Text alludes to the manner of Jacobs dealing
with his Flocks; See what a compassionate man that good man was, as you may
read, Genesis 33.13, The flocks and the herds that are with young, they are with
me: and if men should over-drive them but one day, all the flocks would dye.
What a care had Jacob of all his flocks, especially of those that were with
young! so the Lord Christ he gently leads those that are with young; that is,
weak Christians, such as are easily offended, such as are dejected, and
discouraged; such as are full of infirmities and imperfections, he gently leads
them; that is, he exercises a great deal of pity, and patience, and compassion,
and tenderness toward them; In all their afflictions he is afflicted with
them, Isa. 63.9. He has Sympathizing Bowels toward those that are full of
Infirmities: his Bowels are troubled as it were for them; Jer. 31.20, Is
Ephraim a dear Son? is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord: So that here is gentleness in
bearing with them, and patience in suffering of them: In a word, the Lord Jesus
Christ, he is a meek, a gentle, a mild, a compassionate Savior, that is the
sum of the whole verse; he is of a very sweet, amiable, pliable disposition: As
God has fitted him with a Body, so he has fitted him with a Heart to be a
merciful and compassionate Redeemer. The words being thus opened, there are two
things in them especially presented to your view: 1. Christ's relation to his
People. 2dly, His mild carriage toward them in that relation.

1. Christ's relation to his People, that you have in these words, He shall feed
his flock like a Shepherd.

2dly, You have his Meek, Mild, and Gracious carriage toward them; he does
both Protect them, and Feed them, and Pity them, and gathers them in his Arms,
and carries them in his Bosom, and gently Leads them; and accordingly there are
these two Points of Doctrine that are most eminently and clearly held forth in
the Text.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ is that Blessed Shepherd, that is able both to feed
and protect his People here, and to give them eternal Life hereafter.

Doct. 2. That the Lord Jesus Christ in his carriage toward his People, has a
tender respect to their Infirmities.

I begin with the first Doctrine: The Lord Jesus Christ is that blessed
Shepherd that is abundantly able to feed and protect his People here, and to
give them eternal life hereafter.

For the proof of this Doctrine, take two or three Scriptures, in Joh. 10.11, I
am the good Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep: and in
Heb. 13.20, He is called the great Shepherd of the Sheep, Now the God of peace
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, etc. And he is called the
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, in 1 Pet. 2.20, For ye were as sheep going
astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: so that
doubtless, Jesus Christ is the most blessed, the best, the greatest, the
sweetest Shepherd that ever was, as will appear by these four reasons.

First, Because he has the greatest care over them. Secondly, Because he has
the greatest love to his Sheep. Thirdly, Beeause he has the greatest power
that ever Shepherd had. Fourthly, Because he has the greatest reward for them
that can possibly be bestowed.


First, Jesus Christ has the greatest care over his Sheep; for he seeks them
when they are lost: I come, says he, to seek and to save those which were lost.
Luke 1.9, 20, For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost. And he gathers them from the ends of the world, he fetches them from all
corners of the earth; there is not one of his sheep, that is, not one that
belongs to the election of grace, but in what place soever he be, though among
Pagans, Heathens, and Infidels; of what condition soever he be, whether high or
low, rich or poor, noble or ignoble, of what calling or employment soever: As
some will be ready to complain and say, I am locked up under a Calling, I would
be better if my Calling would let me: I, but there is not one of Christ's sheep
that belongs to the election of Grace, though he be locked up under a Calling,
but the Lord Jesus Christ will seek him out in what condition or Calling soever
he be. That Is the first reason, He has the greatest care over his sheep, to
gather them into his Fold.

2dly, Because he has the greatest love to his sheep, such love as the like
was never heard of: Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his
life for his friend, John 15.13. There cannot be greater love manifested than
this: but such love has the Lord Jesus Christ, he has laid down his life,
that good Shepherd laid down his life for his sheep, as in the forenamed place,
John 10.11, I am the good Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his life for the
sheep. You know Jacob shows a great deal of love to his sheep, in that (as he
tells you) he was in the daytime parched with heat, the drought consumed him:
and in the nighttime pinched with frost: and he broke his sleep many times to
watch his sheep, Genesis 31.40, My sleep, says he, departed from mine eyes. That
was great love; but David showed greater love to his Flocks, Psalm. 78.70, he
followed the Ewes great with young, when God took him from the Sheepfolds to
wield the Scepter. And he showed yet greater love to his Flock, as he tells you
in 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his Fathers
sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, and took a Lamb out of the stock, and
I went out after him, and smote him, delivered it out of his mouth; and when he
arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him; thy
servant slew both the Lion and the Bear: David ventured very far, he ventured
his life for one Lamb of the Flock; but Jesus Christ, that blessed Shepherd,
did not only venture his life, but he laid down his life for his sheep; and he
did not venture to grapple with an ordinary Lion, but with that roaring Lion
that walks about seeking whom he may devour: Nay, he did not only wrestle with
that roaring Lion, but with all the powers of darkness, he wrestled with
principalities and powers; Nay, he wrestled with the wrath of a sin-revenging
God, and all that he might save his poor sheep: therefore never was there such
a loving Shepherd as the Lord Jesus Christ. That Is the second reason.

Thirdly, He has the greatest power and ability that ever Shepherd had; for
this is extraordinary, that he makes all the sheep he has: all his sheep are
the workmanship of his hands, Psalm 100.3, Know ye that the Lord he is God, it
is he that has made us, and not we our selves: we are his people, and the
sheep of his pasture. He has that power that he can do whatsoever pleases him
in heaven and in earth: All power in heaven and carth is given to him, Matthew.
26.18. He has that power that he is able to deliver his sheep from the gates
of hell; He has said, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them,
Matthew. 16.18. He has that power that he can do that for his sheep that all the
world, and all the Princes in the world cannot do for them; and therefore he
must needs be the best Shepherd That Is the third reason.

Fourthly, He has the greatest reward also to bestow upon every one of his
sheep: Alas! his sheep give nothing to him: My goodness does not extend to
thee, Psalm 16.2. We can bestow nothing upon this blessed Shepherd, he has no
need of any thing we have; I, but he bestows a very rich portion upon his
sheep, a glorious reward: he feeds them, he clothes them, he protects them here
in this world, and gives them eternal life hereafter.

First, This blessed Shepherd feeds all his sheep; he feeds them first by his
Word, and then by his Sacraments.

He feeds them by his Word, by sending his Messengers as under-Shepherds to
feed his Flock: It is a Gospel-promise, that in Jer. 3.15, I will give you
Pastors according to my own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. And it was one end of our Saviors ascension into Heaven, and a
great blessing we have by it; he ascended into heaven that he might give gists
unto men, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13 verses; Wherefore he says, when he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; and he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. He gave gifts to men: he did not only give
extraordinary gifts, such as Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists; but
ordinary gifts to Pastors and Teachers, for the building up of his own body.

And as he feeds his sheep with his Word, so with his Sacraments: and here is
such feeding as you did never hear the like; for this blessed Shepherd feeds
his sheep with his own flesh and blood, his own flesh that was crucified to
satisfy Divine Justice; and his own blood that was shed to quench the fire of
Gods wrath that was kindled against them: this is that our Savior tells you of
in John 6.51, I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread which I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And in Revel. 1.5, He has
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. As they say of the Pelican,
when her young ones are ready to die, she opens her breast with her bill, and
feeds them with her blood; so the Lord Jesus Christ feeds every one of his
sheep with his flesh and blood.

Again, He feeds the souls of his sheep with the graces of his own blessed
Spirit: as Faith, Repentance, Love, Humility, Sincerity, and the like, which
are spiritual food, suitable to the spiritual nature of the soul.

So he feeds his sheep with the Promises, which are said to be breasts of
consolation, Isa. 66.11, That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of
consolation: that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her
glory. With the breasts of consolation, that is, with the precious promises.
And this is that which that good King Hezekiah intended in that speech of his,
Isa. 38.16, Oh Lord, by these things men live: and in all these things is the
life of my spirit: so will thou recover me, and make me to live. These precious
promises made good to my soul, by these do men live, and these are the life of
my Spirit. Thus you see, how this blessed Shepherd feeds his Sheep. But yet
more: He does not only feed his Sheep, but he gives them Stomachs also; look as
it is in point of knowledge, we are not able to see him of our selves, we cannot
see him without him, for he is our Light: and as in point of performance, we
are not able to believe on him, nor come unto him without him, for he is our
strength: so here, neither can we feed on Jesus Christ, nor the promises, nor
the graces of his Spirit, until he gives us a mouth to taste these things;
therefore the Apostle exhorts us, as newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of
the word that we may grow thereby; if so be we have tasted that the Lord is
gracious; as if he should have said, You cannot feed, unless you have tasted of
this blessed Savior, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.

Secondly, As he feeds, so he clothes his Sheep; here amongst men the Sheep
clothes the Shepherd, the Fleece of the sheep clothes the Shepherd: But here,
this blessed Shepherd clothes every one of his Sheep; he clothes them with
costly raiment indeed, Ezck. 16.10, 11, 12, I clothed thee also with broidered
work, and shod thee with Badgers skin, and I girded thee about with fine
linen, and I covered thee with Silk; I decked thee also with ornaments, and I
put bracelets upon thy hands, and a Chain upon thy neck, and I put a Jewel on
thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful Crown upon thy head;
thus wast thou decked with Gold and Silver, and thy raiment was of fine Linen,
and Silk; and broidred work. Therefore it is that you read that the Apostle
bids us to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14. He clothes us with the
Robe of his own Righteousness: He covers us with the garments of Salvation; as
a Brridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with her Jewels, Isa. 61.10.

Thirdly, He does protect his Sheep, and watches over them from Morning to
Evening: he has his eye continually upon them: therefore David speaking of the
Lord being his Shepherd; then says he, Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy
Staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23.4.

Fourthly and lastly, He gives to his Sheep Eternal Life, John 10.28, And I
give unto my Sheep Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand.

Thus you have the Point opened, That Jesus Christ is that Blessed Shepherd,
who is abundantly able to feed and protect his People here, and to give them
Eternal Life hereafter, because he has the greatest Care over them, the
greatest Love to them, the greatest Power that ever Shepherd had, and the
greatest Reward to give them that can possibly be bestowed.

Now for the Uses of this Point, and they are three, by way of Instruction,
Examination or Trial, and Exhortation.

First, By way of Instruction: Oh, see the Blessed, the Happy, the Comfortable
Condition of all those that have a part and interest in the Lord Jesus Christ,
this Blessed Shepherd! what tongue of Men or Angels is able to express the
happy and blessed condition of that man that has gotten Jesus Christ for his
Portion! such a one shall be sure of Food, of Clothing, of Protection, of Joy,
of Comfort, of Happiness, of Eternal Life, and what not? Oh, how may that soul
dance for joy, that has gotten Jesus Christ to be his Shepherd! surely it is a
comfortable and heart-chearing meditation in these turbulent and stormy times,
when the Church of God has so many enemies, and so sew friends; when the
Antichristian Faction roars against the little Flock of this blessed Shepherd,
like so many Bears to devour them; here is the comfort, Jesus Christ sticks as
close to his Flock, as ever David did to his Flock, when the Lion and the Bear
came to make a prey of them: Fear not little Flock (says our Savior) it is
your Fashers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. As he said when
he was sailing in the Boat with Caesar, the Boatman beginning to be afraid
because of the tempestuousness of the waters, Fear not man, thou carriest Caesar
and all his Fortunes with him; so may it be said of every one that has Jesus
Christ in the Boat with him, Let him not fear: true indeed, the Ship wherein
Christ and his Sheep are, may be tossed, but it can never be over-turned,
because the Shepherd and Pilot are in it; therefore, happy is the condition of
all those that have an interest in this Blessed Shepherd. But on the contrary,
Oh, the deplorable and desperate condition of all those that have not Jesus
Christ for their Shepherd! what are they think you? they are just in such a
case as God threatens Babylon shall be, Isa. 13.14, God says, that Babylon
shall be as the chased Roe, and as a Sheep that no man takes up. This is the
case of every one that is yet out of Christ, exposed to be a prey to that
roaring Lion that walks about seeking whom he may devour; those that have not
an interest in Christ, God threatens them, Hos. 4.16, I will feed them as a
Lamb in a large place: I will feed them, the same Hebrew word (...) that
signifies to feed, signifies to let them wander, Number. 14.33, God let the
children of Israel wander in the wilderness for forty years together: So God
lets those that have not an interest in Christ, to wander in the Wilderness to
their own destruction. Oh, that God would open the eyes of those that have not
yet secured their interest in Jesus Christ, that they may see what they are,
and where they are, and what danger they are exposed to! So much of the first
Use of Instruction.

The second Use is by way of Examination; How nearly does it concern every one
of us, to call our selves to an account, whether we be in the number of Christ's
Sheep, or no? otherwise, we can have no comfort by this Doctrine. But may be
you will say to me, How shall we do certainly to know that we are the Sheep of
Christ, and that Christ is that Shepherd that feeds us like a Flock? For answer
to this; We cannot curiously pry into Gods decree, to tell you who are not his
Sheep; for it may be there are many that belong to the Election of Grace, that
is, many are the Sheep of Christ, that are not yet called, nor converted, that
are wandering in the Wilderness; yet; and though the Lord will not suffer them to
wander to Destruction, yet for the present they are not brought into the Folds;
therefore we cannot say, who are not his Sheep, we cannot say who are
Reprobate; we may know who are Elected, but we cannot know who are Reprobated;
we can tell who are his Sheep, but we cannot tell who are not his Sheep: Now
they that are his Sheep, that are Converted and brought home to the Folds of
Christ, they may be known by these four signs:

First, If thou art a Sheep of Jesus Christ, certainly the Shepherd has set
his mark upon thee, whereby he does know thee, and will own thee at the great
day of his appearing, John 10.14, I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep,
and am known of mine: I know every one of my Sheep, 2 Timothy 2. 19, The Lord
knows them that are his: he knows them with a distinguishing knowledge. There
are, and will be, at the great and dreadful day of Jesus Christ, abundance that
will claim acquaintance with Jesus Christ; Oh, what seeking will there be to
find his favor at that great day! seeking, and suing, and crying with tears of
blood, for his favor at that day! many will claim acquaintance, and say, Lord,
Lord, Matt. 7.22, 23, Have not we prophesied in thy name? have not we heard
thee teach in our Synagogues? have not we heard thy Messengers which thou have
sent in thy name, teaching on the Lords day, and on the weekday? nay, have not
we sat at thy Table with thee in the use of the Sacrament of thy Body and
Blood? to whom the Lord Christ will say, I know you not, Why? because he does
not see his Mark upon them: nay, they themselves, when their consciences are
once awakened, and they begin to look and search for the Mark, they cannot find
it upon themselves, and therefore they will hear that dreadful sentence, Matthew.
25, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

But you will say, What is this mark whereby Jesus Christ knows his sheep, and
whereby they may know that they are his? I answer, This mark is the holy Spirit
of God, which he bestows upon every true believer, 1 Cor. 6.17, He that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; that is, he that is united to Christ, has
the same spirit that Christ has, has one and the same spirit that Christ
has, Romans 8.9, Now if any man has not the spirit of Christ, he is none of
his: If any man have not this mark upon him, the spirit of Christ, our Savior
will never own that man for his. Hence it is the Spirit of God is compared to a
Seal or Mark, Ephesians. 1.13, After ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise. If thou have received this mark, this seal of the Spirit of
God upon thy soul, thou may be as sure that thou art one of Christ's sheep, as
if thou did see thy name written in the Book of Life. I, but here it may be
demanded, But may not this Seal, or this mark be counterfeited? may not a man
be mistaken, and deceived, in thinking he has this mark, the Spirit of God,
when indeed he has it not? To this I answer; Yes, it is possible for a man to
be mistaken; and therefore the Apostle so often presses this duty of
Examination, 2 Cor. 13.5, Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith;
prove your own selves: know ye not your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you
except you be reprobates? And let every man prove his own works: the work of
grace in his heart, let him prove it, Gal. 6.4, Then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another: he shall have rejoicing in the testimony of
his own conscience, and not in the witness of another tongue: therefore we
should be examining our hearts, what operations the Spirit of God has had upon
our spirits, whether it has been an enlightening, a quickening, a convincing, a
heart-warming, a sealing, and a healing spirit: certainly the healing and
sealingwork of the Spirit goes together, as I have formerly showed you. Many
boast of the Spirit of God; they question not but they have the Spirit of God;
but I told you the Spirit of God never sets his feal to a blank; there is first
some work of the Spirit of God upon the soul, enlightening, convincing,
quickening and drawing the heart to Jesus Christ.

So we should examine the fruits and effects of the Spirit of God upon our
souls. Now there are four fruits especially whereby a man may know he has
received, not the spirit that is of the world, but the spirit that is of God, 1
Cor. 2.12, by these four effects:

First, An unseigned love to the servants of Jesus Christ, that is one effect
of the Spirit of God, that proves Jesus Christ has set his mark upon him that
has it, John 13.35, By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another. This is a mark I set upon my sheep. So 1 John 4.7, 8,
12, Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God: and every one that
loves, is born of God, and knows God: He that loves not, knows not God.
for God is love; And in ver. 12, If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his love is perfected in us.

2. We may know the Spirit of God is bestowed upon us, by constancy in our
profession, and stedfastness in the ways of truth: this is one certain mark of
the Spirit of God, when a man can hold fast his profession, and that without
wavering; can keep close to the truth. How did Job approve himself to be one
that belonged to God? My foot has held his steps (says he), his way have I
kept, and not declined, Job 23.11. And how did David prove himself to be one of
his sheep? I have chosen the way of truth, and I have stuck unto thy
testimonies, Psalm. 119.30, 31. That is a dreadful Scripture in John 2.9,
Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God. He speaks of transgression in Judgment, in running into corrupt Opinions;
and he that abides not in the Doctrine of God, but falls from the Truths of
Christ, he has no part in God.

3. By a zeal for Gods Glory, his Cause, his Truth, especially in evil times.
That man that can stand up for God, when others forsake him, and sin
againsthim: that man that can be most zealous in maintaining of Gods Truth, and
can say with David in Psalm 69.9, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up: and
the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. And Psalm
119.158, I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy
word. By this may we know the Spirit of God is in us.

4. By sympathy and compassion toward our Brethren that are in afflictions and
misery: if one member suffer, all the rest of the members suffer with it: when
we can sigh in their sorrows, and bleed in their wounds, and be affected with
their miseries and calamities, as if they were our own. By these effects we may
know whether we have received the mark of Christ, that is, the Spirit of
Christ. That is the first sign, if you have received the Mark of Christ.

Secondly, If thou be a Sheep of Christ, thou art returned from thy former
wanderings, 1 Pet. 2.25, Ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. Can thou say, there has been a work of
Conversion wrought on thy soul? Once thou wast unprofitable, but now art
profitable; once thou were wandering in the wilderness of sin, but now thou art
brought home to Jesus Christ: Is there a work of Conversion wrought in thy
soul? can not thou say now, I am not the same man I was, the same woman I
was? Certainly if there be a returning from your ways of wandering, and walking
in paths of new obedience, and keeping in the Fold of Christ, then you are the
Sheep of Christ.

Thirdly, If thou be a Sheep of Jesus Christ, thou may know it by thy
carriage toward thy Shepherd; if thou art a Sheep of Christ, thou will know
thy Shepherd, thou will know and see so much sweetness, fullness, and
all sufficiency in him, that thou will say, None but Christ, none but Christ:
thou will count all things but dross and dung in comparison of Christ.

Thirdly, Thou will hear his voice: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me, John 10.27. Now to hear the voice of Christ, is to be able
to discern his voice from the voice of strangers. The Spouse was able to
discern the voice of her Beloved, Cant. 2.8, The voice of my Beloved. The great
work he was to do, was to work out redemption for me; he was to do and suffer
much, but all could not daunt him; But he comes leaping on the mountains, and
skipping on the hills. Then they follow him: Christ sheep have not only the
Ear-mark to hear his voice, but also the foot-mark, they follow him
whithersoever he goes: when Christ calls them, they say, Lo, here we are. They
follow him, by imitating him in his Patience, Meekness, Humility, etc. And if
thou will study how to be like him, that thou may be made more and more
conformable to his Image; by thy carriage toward thy Shepherd, thou may know
if thou art his Sheep, thou will know him, hear his voice, follow him, and
labor to be made conformable to him,

A fourth mark whereby thou may know whether thou art a Sheep of Jesus
Christ, is this, Thou may know it by thy carriage toward the Flock; that is,
toward thy fellow Servants, toward those that are the members of Jesus
Christ: It is observed of Sheep, that they are the most profitable creatures
you can name; so, if thou be a sheep of Jesus Christ, thou will not be an
unprofitable burden in thy station, but thou will be fruitful in thy place,
and profitable to others: 1 Cor. 10.33, Even as I please all men in all things,
not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved. And
sheep, as they are profitable, so they are innocent, and harmless creatures,
they wrong, they injure none; so if thou be one of the sheep of Christ, thou will be harmless, Phil. 2.15, That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons
of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation. The Greek
word for Harmless is there, (...), which signifies without Horns, not pushing
one another: if you be the sheep of Christ, you will dearly love one another:
but if you bite and devour one another, you are Dogs and not Sheep.

Fifthly, Sheep are contented with their Pasture; Oh! if thou be a sheep of
Jesus Christ, thou will bless God in any state and condition whatsoever thou
art in: thou will say, If I have gotten Jesus Christ, no matter how poor, and
low, and despicable my condition on earth be.

Sixthly, Sheep usually are united one to another, they go in Flocks and Herds,
they do not willingly forsake one another: If thou be a sheep of Christ, thou will keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Thou will
not forsake the assembly of Gods Saints, Heb. 10.25. Oh my Brethren, you should
labor to find these sneepmarks upon your souls.

A third Use, it is for Exhortation: If Jesus Christ be the blessed Shepherd,
as you have heard him described, that has the greatest care, and love, and
power, and reward; Oh! what an invitation might this be to every one to come to
Jesus Christ, and to stand out no longer! many persuasions have been tendered
to you many hundred times, and yet some of you never brought home to Jesus
Christ to this day: Oh, that this might be that blessed day wherein Jesus
Christ and some wandering sheep may be brought together! Consider who calls
thee, it is not a Judge, but a Shepherd; and consider why he calls, not to hurt,
but to heal thee? not to kill, but to cure thee; not to punish, but to pity
thee; Oh, think therefore with thy self, that thou hear the Lord Jesus
Christ to use a homely Phrase) as it were, whistling after thee, as he does in
the ministry of his word; sometimes he comes with secret whisperings: sometimes
he comes openly, whistling, speaking, calling, crying in the ears of sinners:
Oh, do but think that thou heardst the Lord Jesus Christ calling, and crying
after thee, Why will thou die, and perish? Why will thou be lost when thou
may have a Savior? Oh, but says the poor soul, I fear, I fear, that I am so
diseased, and that the Lord Jesus Christ will not look upon me: Remember, that
this Shepherd is compared to a Shepherd that has healing under his wings, Mal.
4.2,

But says the soul, I am afraid I have so displeased him, he will never own me:
Remember, he is a meek, gentle, and compassionate Savior. There are two things
that make men afraid: and they are, Pride and Fury; these are not in Christ, I
am meek and lowly, says he, Matthew. 11.29, and fury is not in me. But I am lost,
says the poor sheep; Jesus Christ will seek that that is lost; but if I do
come, will he certainly own me, and look upon me? I answer, Look upon that
comfortable Scripture, Luke 15.4, 5, 6, What man of you having a hundred sheep,
if he lose one of them, does not leave the Ninety and nine in the Wilderness,
and go after that which is lost until he find it? and when he has found it, he
lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing; and when he comes home, he calls
together his friends and neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I
have found my sheep which was lost. There are three or four things very
observable in that Parable, which I would have every poor sinner that is afraid
to come to Christ, to look upon.

First, Observe, the Shepherd he leaves ninety and nine in the Wilderness, and
goes and seeks after that one sheep that is lost. Observe, if there be but one
sheep lost or missing, the Lord Jesus Christ bestows as much pains and care in
seeking that one sheep, as if that all the sheep were lost: there was but one
sheep missing, yet he has so much care of that one, that he leaves all the
ninety and nine to seek that. The Lord Jesus Christ has so much care of every
one of his sheep, as if he had but one sheep to care for: as the Sun for
example would shine upon the world, though there were but one man in it to
shine upon: so this blessed Son of righteousness, if but one sheep be lost, he
seeks after that one.

Secondly, Observe, the Shepherd there seeks the sheep before ever the sheep
seek the Shepherd. The Lord Jesus prevents us with his mercies; we cannot seek
him till he first seeks us, Psalm 119. v. last, you have David's Prayer, I have
gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy
commandments.

Thirdly, Observe, when he has found this sheep, he carries it upon his
shoulders, or as the Text tells you, he carries his lambs in his arms, and
gathers them in his bosom. Mark this, and let it sink into your hearts: never
did any man upon earth go to heaven any other way but upon the shoulders of
Jesus Christ: never was sheep saved, but only by being embraced in the arms of
this blessed Shepherd.

Fourthly, Observe, the Shepherd rejoices when he has found the sheep; he
rejoices to find this one lost sheep; observe this for thy comfort, thou that
art a poor wandering sheep, discouraged from coming to Jesus Christ: observe,
the Lord Jesus Christ will be more glad in receiving and entertaining thee,
than thou can be in receiving him. You see he rejoices that he has found
this one lost sheep. Oh therefore be exhorted in Gods fear, to stand out no
longer, but you that have not yet closed with Jesus Christ, come to this
Shepherd, that whatsoever your diseases and maladies may be, they may be all
removed, and your souls saved. But may be you will say, how shall we do to come
to this Shepherd, that so we may be saved by him? I answer briefly, That man
that would come to Christ, he must resolve:

First, That he will fly out of himself, and renounce all self-confidence, and
self-excellency, and self-righteousness: he that would come to Christ, he must
come poor, come in the sense of his own poverty, come like a poor distressed
sheep without a Shepherd; he must come in the sense and feeling of his own
wants and weakness: The Son of man came to seek and to save that which was
lost, Matthew. 18.1^. Luke 19.10. Lost! we are lost by nature; therefore Christ
came to save all? no, that is not the meaning; but he came to save those that
feel themselves lost: thou must be sensible of thine own spiritual want; thou
must be spiritually poor, or poor in spirit.

Secondly, Learn to see so much beauty and excellency in him, that thou can
be content to part with any thing for him, any thing that stands in competition
with him, or opposition against him; let all go, and say, I would have Jesus
Christ whatever I part with for his sake.

Again, Be sure you hearken to the voice of Christ, if thou would have him
for thy Shepherd, John 10.4, 5, And when he puts forth his own sheep, he
goes before them, and his own sheep follow him, for they know his voice, and a
stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the
voice of strangers. If thou art a sheep of Jesus Christ, thou will learn the
voice of Christ, and not be seduced and led away with the error of the wicked,
to fall from your own stedfastness. When Theodosius the Emperor desired to
have some conference with Arius the Heretic, the Empress persuaded him not to
talk and confer with such a Heretic that was so envious; for, says she, by
hearing of him, you may be perverted by his words, and so ensnared in his
cursed opinion. This was excellent counsel!

Lastly, You must come to Christ in a way of Obedience; you must take up a
resolution to obey this blessed Shepherd. The same Hebrew word, that signifies
to feed, signifies to rule; if Christ feed thee in his Pastures, he must rule
thee. Unite my heart to thee, that I may fear thy name, Psalm. 86.11. But what
would you have me do? Come with a full purpose, and cleave to this Shepherd,
and never to leave him. Do as the Disciples of Christ, in John 6.67, 68, Then
said Jesus unto the Twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered
him, Lord, to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life. Oh that we
had such a resolution as Peter had, not only to say so, but to do so, Matt.
26.33, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended: Master, though all forsake thee, yet will we believe in thy name.
Thus if you follow this Shepherd, hear, and obey him, then all the sweetness
and marrow of this Doctrine belongs to you: The Lord write these things upon
our hearts, and draw us nearer and nearer to him, that we may say he feeds us,
and clothes us, and gives us eternal life. So much for the first point of
Doctrine drawn from the first part of that, Christ's Relation to his People.

CHRIST'S PROVISION FOR MAN'S DIRECTION.
Isaiah XL. 11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather his
Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young.


2. Doct. JEsus Christ in his carriage to his People has a tender respect to
their infirmities. For the proof of this Point, I shall give you but one place
of Scripture, and it is so full, that I shall need no more, Ezekiel. 34.19. It is
spoken of our blessed Savior; says our Savior, I will seek that which was
lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which
was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick, There are four sorts of
Persons mentioned there, that have a great deal of need of Christ's care and
compassion, and of his tender indulgence toward them.

First, Some there are that are lost Sheep, not finally, or totally lost, but
lost in their own apprehension, in their own sense and feeling, as David
complains in Psalm 119.176, I have gone astray like a lost sheep. Now these,
our Blessed Savior will seek, he will recover them by his Word and Spirit,
though in their own apprehensions they think themselves lost, dead, damned, and
undone: yet notwithstanding he will seek them, and bring them into his Fold
again.

Secondly, Others there are that are driven away, and that is a further degree
of Misery; Satan has not only gotten them out of the Fold, but when they are
got out, they wander more and more, they are driven more and more from Jesus
Christ, by Satan's subtilty, and his temptations. Now says our Savior, those
which are driven away, I will bring them again.

Thirdly, Some are in a further degree of Misery, they are broken, broken with
discouragements: they are ready to say, There is no hope, no mercy belongs to
such sinners as they are, and these are in a worse condition than the former;
for a sheep may be lost, and driven from the Fold, but if that be all, he may
return; but if the sheep have broken a Leg, though he hear the voice of the
Shepherd, he cannot help himself, his Leg is broken, and he cannot come at the
call of the Shepherd: So some are so broken with discouragements, that though
they hear the voice of Christ, they are ready to say, No mercy belongs to us.
Now says Christ, these will I bind up again, and restore that Comfort that will
quiet their hearts, and speak peace to them.

Fourthly, Others are sick, and that is yet a further degree of misery; when a
poor sheep does not only wander, and is driven away, and has a broken leg,
discouraged with temptations, but has some kind of sickness of spirit seized
on him, so that he says, his soul abhors all manner of meat, as David
describes a man in such a condition: says he, his soul abhors all manner of
meat, and they are brought to the very gates of death, Psalm 107, 18. This is
the saddest condition of all; but says Christ, these are such that I will
strengthen. If you would know the reason why Christ has such a tender respect
to his Peoples infirmities, I will give you these Three:

The First is drawn from that gracious Disposition that is in him: He is a
Savior of a very meek, mild, tender, and compassionate heart; this appears by
those Names and Titles that sets forth the sweetness of our Saviors
disposition in Scripture; he compares himself to a Father, to a Physician, to a
Husband.

To a Father, Heb. 2.13, it is the speech of Christ, Behold, I, and the
Children which God has given me.

And again, he compares him to a Physician, Matthew. 9.12, But when Jesus heard
that, he said unto them, They that be whole, need not a Physician, but they
that be sick.

So likewise to a Husband, Isa. 54.5, For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of
Hosts is his name.

Now, of whom should Children expect pity and compassion, but of their Father?
as a Father pitieth his own Children, so is the Lord merciful to them that fear
him, Psalm 103.13. And of whom should a Patient expect help, but of the
Physician? And of whom should a Wife expect pity, but of her Husband? band? who
knows how to give the Wife the honor of a mild Usage, because he knows she is
the weaker Vessel. All these Relations of a Father, a Physician, a Husband, and
of a Shepherd, they are most eminently in the Lord Jesus Christ. That is one
reason.

Secondly, He has a tender respect to our infirmities, because he is a
Merciful High Priest, touched with the sense of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15, For
we have not a high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
Heb. 2.18, For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted. As God speaks to the Jews, Exodus 23.9, Also thou
shall not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye
were strangers in the Land of Egypt. So the Lord Christ, he knows the hearts of
poor, tempted, broken, bruised souls, because he himself was tempted. A Father,
you know, because he is acquainted with the distempers of his Child more than a
stranger is, pities his Child more than a stranger does: So the Lord Christ he
knows our frame, he considers our temper, Psalm 103.13, 24, therefore he pities
us more than strangers do, that do not know our tempers; he considers we are
but dust, and as the wind that passes away, therefore he suffers not his whole
displeasure to fall upon us, Psalm. 78.38, 39. That Is the second reason: he
pities us, and has a tender respect to our infirmities, because he is a
merciful High Priest, touched with the sense of our infirmities.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus Christ has a tender respect to the infirmities of his
people, because he loves and likes, and means to cherish the beginings of grace
in any one of his poor children: he loves grace, and he likes it, and
cherishes it: he looks more at the good in us, which he means to cherish, than
at the bad in us, which he means to abolish: the Lord Christ looks at the very
buddings and blossoms of grace in the soul; those beginnings of grace are
precious unto him: therefore he says of a little grace, as a man says of a tree
that has but one cluster upon it, Do not cut the tree, it has a blessing in
it, Isa. 65.8. The Lord Christ will not destroy a cluster of grapes, if there
be but one cluster. If there be but one Cherry on a tree, it shows there is
some life in the tree; one Cherry upon a tree, it shows there is life as well
as if there was twenty Pounds upon it; one Cherry shows that it is a living
tree, and a man will not cut down that tree. The Lord Christ will cherish the
least beginnings of grace; if there be but a spark of grace in the soul, he
will not quench it, but blow it up into a flame. Look as Physicians deal with
diseased Patients, they do not administer purging Potions according to the
greatness of their distempers, but according to the strength of their Patients:
So the Lord Jesus Christ deals with his own children, not according to the
diseases and distempers that are in them, not according to the distempers of
their sins, but according to the measure of their strength; he will not lay on
them more than he will give them strength to bear. These are the reasons of the
point.

Before I come to the Application of the point, Because this is Childrens
bread, and Dogs are ready to snatch at it, that yet have no right to it:
therefore for the explication of the point, there are these three Quaeries that
would be satisfied: First, What an Infirmity is. Secondly, What are the causes
of those Infirmities. Thirdly, What are the signs and symptoms of those
Infirmities.

First, What an Infirmity is. An infirmity (briefly) in the soul, is this; Some
sickness or indisposition of the soul, that arises from the weakness of grace.
Or an Infirmity is this, When the purpose and inclination of the heart is
upright, but a man wants strength to perform that purpose; when the spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. when a man can say with the
Apostle, To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I
find not, Romans 7.18. When the bent and inclination of the soul is right; but
either through some violence of corruption, or strength of temptation, a man is
diverted and turned out of the way. As the needle in the Seamans Compass, you
know if it be right, it will stand always Northward, and the bent of it will be
toward the North Pole; being jogged and troubled, it may sometimes be put out
of frame and order, yet the bent and inclination of it is still Northward. This
is an infirmity. That Is the first.

Secondly, What are the causes of these Infirmities? there are diverse causes
you must know of our infirmities: as,

First, An infirmity may arise from want of age, for want of time to gather
strength. The Lord Christ you must know has Lambs in his Fold as well as
Sheep, and he has plants in his Orchard as well as stronger Trees, and Babes
as well as strong Men. Now says the Apostle, I write to you Babes and little
Children, because your sins are pardoned for his namesake, 1 John 2.12.
Observe there, that remission of sin is bestowed not only upon young men, that
are strong to resist temptations, not only upon aged men, that are well
experienced in the ways of grace, but it is bestowed even upon Babes: I write
unto you little Children, because your sins are pardoned for his namesake.

Secondly, Our infirmities may arise also from a want of the means of grace,
either when men want milk, or the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2, or have
but little of it.

Thirdly, Infirmities may arise from some secret corruption that was
undiscovered in our first conversion: This may be an occasion of an infirmity;
for that may both weaken the soul, and exceedingly distemper and disquiet it.

Fourthly, Our infirmities may arise from forsaking sound and solid truths, and
disquieting our thoughts with doubtful disputations, as the Apostle calls them,
Romans 14.1, when men trouble their heads with trifles, or with matters of less
moment, and in the mean while neglect the marrow of Religion; even as little
Children, that forsake wholesome food, and feed on green apples, and so put
their bodies into distempers.

Fifthly, Our infirmities may arise from this, when our affections are too much
carried out after the World, and the things of the World; for certain it is,
look how much the soul is carried out after the world, so much the weaker it
is: the stronger our love to the world is, the weaker is our love to Jesus
Christ, and to grace, and spiritual things.

Sixthly, Our infirmities may arise from the not right ordering of our company;
dead company, dead and barren company many times make dead and barren hearts.

Seventhly, Our infirmities may arise from our losing our first love, remitting
of the zeal, and intention, and forwardness, that once we had in the ways of
grace: when we grow loose and slothful in the service of our God, and do not
stir up the grace of God that is in us, 2 Timothy 1.6. Exercise you know
increases strength; but want of exercise many times occasions weakness: When a
man prays coldly, hears the word of God coldly, communicates at the Lords Table
coldly: The more coldness there is in the performance of the Duties of
Religion, the more weakness there will be in the soul. These are the causes of
our infirmities.

Thirdly, It may be demanded, What are the signs and symptoms of an Infirmity?
(briefly) I shall give you these four.

First, Where there are infirmities, there is spiritual life, though there be
want of spiritual strength: this is a certain sign of an infirmity. You know
there is a great deal of difference between a dead man and a weak man; a dead
man that has not life, and a weak man that has life, and wants strength. It
cannot be said of any wicked man that he is a weak man, but he is a dead man:
neither can it be said that he does any thing weakly, but he does it wickedly.
Observe what our Savior speaks of a bruised reed, he speaks of it as a thing
that yet has some life in it: for a reed, though it be exceeding weak, that it
is shaken with every wind, yet by the side of the water it grows, it has life
in it. Make this sure to thy self, that thou have life in thee, or else the
comfort of this Doctrine cannot belong to thee; if so be thou have life in
thee, though thy Grace be weak, yet if thou have life, it is but an infirmity.
But you will say, How may I know I have life in me? I answer, You may know it
thus.

First, Thou may know it by thy spiritual feeling; thou will feel what hurts
thee; thou will feel sin to be a great burden, and thou will groan under it,
and thou will bemoan thy self like Ephraim, Jer. 31.18, I have surely heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as
a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for
thou art the Lord my God: surely after that I was turned, I repented: and after
that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

Secondly, Thou may know it by that spiritual strife, and combat, and
conflict that is in thee: certainly there will be a conflict in thy soul,
because there are two contrary principles there; put water to water, or fire to
fire, and there is no conflict; but put water and fire together, and there will
be a great conflict: So corruption will not strive with corruption; but where
there is Grace and corruption in one soul, there will be a combat and conflict,
the Flesh will lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal.
5.17.

Thirdly, Thou may know thou have life in thee by thy spiritual crying; thou will cry out for deliverance from danger and evil: O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Thou will make this the chief
subject of thy suit and supplication to God, from day to day: O, that once I
might be freed from a base whorish, backsliding-heart, that continually is
departing from God.

Fourthly, If thou have life, certainly that grace thou have, though it be but
weak, though it be but little, though it be but as a spark, yet it shall
prevail against corruption; for wherever the Lord Christ enters into the soul
to dwell, there he comes like a Conqueror, and he brings forth Judgment unto
victory, Matthew. 12.20. That is, his Government shall be victorious over all the
opposition of sin and Satan: Grace, like oil, will be uppermost: if there be
but a spark of Grace in thy heart, it shall not be quenched, but it shall
rather increase more and more, and at last shall grow up into a flame, as the
fire of the Lord that came upon Elijahs offering, 1 Kings 18.38, consumed the
burntsacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the
water that was in the trench. Grace is a fire that comes down from Heaven;
though there be but a little spark of it at first, yet by little and little it
will lick up all the water of our corruptions, and consume our sins; Grace will
grow stronger and stronger, and corruption weaker and weaker. That is the first
symptom of an infirmity. If there be spiritual life in the soul; but if there
be not spiritual life, there is no infirmity.

Secondly, The second Sign or Symptom of an infirmity, is this, That may be
said to be an infirmity, when some particular action crosses the main intention
of the heart; If thine eye be single, if thy heart be upright, if the Byas and
bent of thy soul be toward God, then all the obliquity, or all the swervings
in thy life, are but looked upon as infirmities: For example, A good Archer that
is handling his Bow, may-be his eye is right, and his aim is right, but through
the weakness of his hand, or the distemper of his Bow, he may miss the Mark,
that is an infirmity; So here, if thy eye be right toward Gods Commandments:
if thy intention be to please God, if the bent and byas of thy soul be
Godward, not sin-ward, then all the rest of the obliquity, or swervings that
are in thy actions, are looked upon but as infirmities: As a Traveller, for
example, in his journey; if he set his face the right way, and he be enquiring
the way, and willing to follow the way; or if, when he goes out of the way, he
check himself, though he may miss of the way through ignorance, or may be
seduced by some that told him wrong; yet that may be said to be but an
infirmity: So here, when thou can set thy face toward Heaven, as the
children of Israel and Judah are described, Jer. 50.5, They shall ask the way
to Zion with their faces thitherward; saying, Come let us join our selves to
the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. When a man thus
sets his face toward Heaven, then his wanderings out of the way (if they be
beside the intention of his purpose and mind) are looked upon but as
infirmities; David was out of his way, when in a fury he would be avenged on
Nabal for his churlishness; when he said, God do so to me, and more also, if I
cut not off Nabal, and every one that belongs to his Family; yet when Abigail,
a wise Woman, comes and tells him, he was out of his way, how glad was he? and
stops his course, and said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee
this day to meet me; and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have
kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with my
own hand, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. See the difference between the sin of Judas, and
the sin of Peter; Judas you know, he sinned with deliberation, and his
intention was stark naught; his intention and purpose of betraying his Master,
was to enrich himself; he was a Thief, and nibled money out of his Masters Bag,
therefore his intention was naught. But on the contrary, look on Peter, when he
thrice denied his Master, it was a great sin too, but it was without his
intention or purpose; certainly Peter had no intention at all to deny his
Master; but it fared with him, as a man that is writing with his Pen in his
hand, and writing a straight Line, but it may be some body comes and joggs him
on the Elbow, so he makes a crooked line against his will: Or as a man that is
shooting at a Mark, but some body comes and joggs his Elbow, and makes his
Arrow to go awry; thus was it with Peter: This is the second Sign or Symptom
of an infirmity.

Thirdly, That is an Infirmity, when a man's judgment is kept sound and upright,
that he does not approve of any sin, when no sin has any allowance or
approbation in his heart; this was the fruit of John Baptist his Preaching,
Isa. 40.4, Every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be
made low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain:
that is, those that are converted by John Baptists preaching, they would not
look on crooked things as plain, or plain things as crooked; that is, they
would not defend, or justify themselves in sin, but look upon sin as sin, and
duty as duty; and they would not look upon the ways of God as crooked, but
straight: they were indeed crooked to them before, because their judgment was
not sound; but now they look upon them as straight, and all his ways to be
equal ways. A child of God will be sure to commend that duty which yet he
cannot practice; and he will be sure to condemn that sin into which yet he
often slips and falls, and that because his judgment is right; duty will be
duty in his eye, and sin will be sin in his eye, though through infirmity he
may fail in the one, and fall into the other.

Fourthly, He that sins through infirmity, will still keep his conjugal love to
Jesus Christ; and although some failings in him may work a kind of estrangement
between Christ and his soul; yet notwithstanding his heart will still cleave to
the Lord Jesus Christ; and this appears thus: Because he will choose no other
Husband, he will choose no other Savior for all this; but he would rejoice with
all his heart, if he might be but reconciled to Jesus Christ; though there has
been some unkindness between Christ and him, He says, I will return to my first
Husband, for then was it better with me than now, Hos. 2.7. and he is grieved
for the unevenness of his carriage toward so sweet a Husband us he has been
to him. If there be such a disposition in you, to hold fast your conjugal love
to Jesus Christ, and still keep close to him, though there may be some
unkindness, yet thou pitchest on no other Husband; certainly, this is but an
infirmity. But says the poor soul, Can that be an infirmity, that cleaves to me
all my days? that I have been vexed and perplexed with, twenty, thirty years
together?

I answer, Possibly there may be such infirmities cleave to Gods children: As
for example, some deadness in duties, dullness and deadness in hearing the Word;
it may be slipperiness of memory, or forgetfulness of the words we have heard;
or it may be some strong corruption, which is like a thorn in the flesh, which
the Lord Jesus has left in thee, to humble thee, and to make thee base in thy
own eyes, all thy days: But it may be then you will object, and say, How then
will this stand with the Doctrine you delivered even now? you made it a mark or
token of spiritual life, That Grace will prevail against corruption; that the
Government of the Lord Jesus Christ would be victorious?

I answer, True Grace will be victorious at last, but I do not say, it will be
all at once, but it will be by degrees; and it is some kind of victory and
conquest over corruption, when it is subdued, though it be not quite
extinguished; if it be weakened and abated, though it be not destroyed; when a
man can feelingly cry out of it, as the Apostle did, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death! and he breaks out, and says,
thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, Romans 7.25.

Secondly, I answer: God sometimes works by contraries; God is carrying on the
work of Grace in his Children, when corruptions seem to be thriving and
growing; when God means to give his Children victory, he suffers them to be
foiled first; the work of Grace in the heart sometimes goes backwards, that it
may go forwards: As the Seed that is sown in the Field, it rots in the ground
before it springs and grows: Sometimes you must know, that God will strengthen
us by our very slippings; he will have us learn to stand by our very falls and
bruises; he will have us to be strengthened by our weaknesses and infirmities;
he will have us to be deep-rooted by our shakings: Our infirmities are the
keepers of our Graces; it makes us look more carefully to our own standings; it
is good therefore to observe the methods and manner of Gods dealing with our
souls, and to learn to live by faith; be acting of faith in the business of our
infirmities; for as I have often told you, The life of faith is in the use of
faith; so much as we use faith, so much we live by it; it is good for a man to
live by faith in point of his infirmities; and to say, when I am foiled, I
shall have victory, when I fall, I shall arise; when I am weak, I am strong, as
the Church said, Micah 7.8, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall,
I shall arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. Thus
you have the explication of the point, what an Infirmity is, and what are the
causes of it, and what are the signs and symptoms of it. For the use of the
point: 1. For Consolation. 2. For Caution. 3. For Exhortation.

First, For Consolation, because that is the principal use of the Text: And O,
that I could speak not only to the ears, but to the heart of any poor doubting,
drooping, dejected soul: O that this Doctrine might be as a box of ointment, to
comfort such an one, to refresh him; O that I eould but drop in some
Consolation into any poor bruised soul that hears me this day, that such an one
might lift up those hands that hang down, and feeble knees that tremble, Isa.
35.3.

And this is the comfort I have to tender to thee, That the Lord will not
reject thee for an infirmity: He carries his Lambs in his Arms, and gathers
them in his bosom; poor weak ones, he carries them in his bosom, when it may be
the Leg is broken, and they are not able to go; he gently leads those with
young, in all their fears, doubts, and disquietments about their Condition; he
has a tender care of his Lambs, of his weak ones: If thou art but one of
Christ, Lambs, know thus much for thy comfort, that he has a care of the
poorest Lamb that is in his Flock; if thou art a Plant in his Vineyard, know,
that he has a care of the tenderest Plant; never was it known, that a merciful
and compassionate Father, cast off a child because of his weakness: many times,
it may be, when the child is so sick and weak, that it is not able to speak,
but only to say, Father; it may be it cannot speak out; then the Bowels of the
Father yearns toward him the more; the weaker the child is, and unable to
speak, the more his compassions are rolling toward him; O let not our unbelief
make Jesus Christ unnatural; Do we think that Jesus Christ has less compassion
toward his Lambs than Jacob had? Jacob was such a Shepherd that he had such a
tender care of his Lambs, that, says he, if you over-drive the flocks, the
lambs will die: and do you think that Jesus Christ is less sollicitous for the
good of his? But alas! says the poor soul, my infirmities discourage me, they
weaken my assurance, and rob me of my peace and comfort. I answer: true it is,
infirmities do so, but they should not do so; and that they may not do so, take
these three or four Considerations.

First, Consider, in every infirmity, as there is something against God, so
there is something also from God: There is something against God, that is true,
because our infirmities are not suitable to the holiness and strictness of his
Law; and therefore we should strive against them with prayer, and care and
watchfulness. But as there is something against God, so there is something also
from God: It may be he lets loose those infirmities upon thee, even like a
Messenger of Satan, to buffet thee, to humble thee, to prove thee, and to teach
thee to prise Jesus Christ so much the more. It may be God lets loose these
infirmities, as the avenger of blood was let loose upon the man slayer, to
force the man slayer to fly to the City of Refuge, Numb. 35; so these
infirmities are let loose to force thee to fly to Jesus Christ the Refuge of
thy soul. Some there are, that was it not for strong infirmities cleaving to
them, strong temptations meeting with them, would never be beholding to Jesus
Christ at all: Look therefore in every infirmity, not only at the evil of it,
but at the good God intends by it; it may be God intends good to thy soul by
them: Whereas we, as he said once, many times make plasters to become a
poison, the Lord is able on the contrary to make a plaster of poison: We many
times bring sin out of Grace: God can bring grace out of sin: he can bring
Heaven out of Hell: therefore as there is something against God, so there is
something from God in our infirmities: therefore we should not be discouraged
because of them.

Secondly, Consider the great difference between thy self when thou wast in a
state of nature, and now when thou art a weak Christian, and subject to
infirmities; did not God reject thee at that time, and cast thee off, when thou
wast an open Traitor and Rebel, marching on in a course of rebellion against
him? did he not cast thee off, but had compassion on thee, and did pity thee,
and spare thee? then certainly he will not now cast thee off for some
unvoluntary error, which thou bewailest, and mournest for in his presence: Did
the Lord seek thee at that time when thou despisedst him? certainly then, he
will not despise thee when thou feekest him. That is a good argument of the
Apostle, to strengthen, and support, and comfort drooping spirits, Romans 5.10,
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: Certainly therefore
God will not reject thee for an infirmity, if he was so gracious to thee in thy
state of sin and enmity to him: there is as great a difference between a state
of grace and a state of nature, as there is between Heaven and Hell, though
grace be never so weak, and imperfect.

Thirdly, Consider the great danger of being plucked away from Jesus Christ, by
giving too much way to despondency: Satan's main drift, and great plot is, to
drive thee away from Jesus Christ by thy infirmities; he labors to bring thee
to despond and despair, and to say there is no hope for thee; because Satan
knows, the more he draws thee from Jesus Christ, the weaker thou will be: Thy
infirmities should not drive thee from Christ, but they should drive thee to
Christ, to improve and make use of his gracious disposition, in helping and
healing thee in thy miseries and distresses.

Fourthly, Consider what may be the causes of thy infirmities; those
infirmities will be cured in the causes. For example, if thy infirmities arise
from want of age, or time to gather strength, that will be cured; because the
path of the just is as a shining light, that shines more and more to the
perfect day, Prove. 4.18. Or if from want of the means of grace, or because the
means of grace thou enjoyest are not such as others enjoy; the Lord in such
cases will have a tender respect to thee, and measure to thee, not according to
what thou have, but according to what thou would have. Again, if thy
infirmities arise from some corruption, that was not discovered to thee at thy
first conversion, thou must then pray, and beg, that the Lord would discover
thy self to thy self more and more. Again, if thou have forsaken some old
truths of God, and art grown weary of them, and hankerest after Novelties, and
new Opinions; then return from thy wanderings, and prize solid meat above
kickshaws; beg that thy soul may taste once again the sweetness of
Gospel Truths. In a word, what ever the cause of your infirmities be, get the
disease healed in the cause, get thy heart more weaned from the World, and stir
up thy self to take hold of God; remember thy former zeal, and repent and do
thy first works; and this is the way to get thy infirmities healed. That Is the
first Use, a Use of Comfort and Consolation.

The second Use, is a Use of Caution; The Lord Jesus Christ, as you have heard,
has a tender respect to his people, a tender care of his people, in respect of
their infirmities: let not a wicked man then apply this to himself, and say,
the Lord Christ will have a tender respect to me that go on in the course of
sin, that live in sin, and lie in sin, and sleep in sin, and wallow in sin: No,
for there is a great deal of difference between the weakness of a Lamb, and the
wickedness of a Wolf; the Lord Jesus Christ pities his Lambs for their
weakness, but he does not pity a Wolf for his wickedness; that is, that man who
is resolved to go on in a course of sin, say a Minister what he can to the
contrary, if he is dead in trespasses and sins, if he has no spiritual life in
him, if there be no work of grace begun in him, all that I have said concerning
Christ's tender care of his peoples infirmities, does not belong to him, he has
no part in this Inheritance; if thou be a Wolf, and not a Lamb, the Lord
Christ that has a tender care of his Lambs, will be sure to meet thee, not as
a Shepherd that carries his Lambs in his Arms, but he will meet thee as a Lion,
Hosea 13.7, 8, Therefore I will be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way
will I observe them: I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps,
and I will rent the caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a
Lion, the wild beasts shall tear them. The same Christ that is a Shepherd to
his People, he knows how to be a Lion, a Leopard, and a Bear to his Enemies.
That is an awakening Scripture, Psalm 68.21, But God shall wound the head of
his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
trespasses. If therefore thou art one that go on in thy trespasses, in an
unreformed course; if thou live in sin, and set thy heart on wickedness,
and take pleasure therein, this doctrine does not belong to thee, thou art
not a Lamb in Christ's account, he will not deal tenderly with thee; nay, he
will deal most roughly with thee, his wrath and fury will be powered out upon
thee, as the Prophet speaks. That Is the second Use, of Caution.

Lastly, A word of Exhortation: If the Lord Jesus Christ has such a tender
respect in his carriage to the infirmities of his People; O then resolve to
have no other Master but the Lord Jesus Christ; be under the conduct of no
other Shepherd, but only this; O hear him, fear him, and follow him; follow him
whithersoever he goes; follow him, how? by depending on him for direction, by
cleaving to him in heart, and life; follow him by imitation; follow him by
harkening to his voice; follow him by being ruled by him, as before you are
directed; seeing he is the Lord over his own House, let him Rule in his House,
let thy soul be his Temple, wherein he may delight to dwell; say, Lord, Rule in
me as thou please, so I may but be thine. Happy are they that are under the
Government of Jesus Christ; happy are they that submit themselves to his
Guidance and Direction, to his Law, and his Spirit; certainly, such shall find
him a merciful, a meek, a compassionate, a tenderhearted Savior, who gathers
his Lambs in his Arms, and carries them in his Bosom, and gently leads those
that are with young.

Walking in Christ, the Mark of our Receiving of Christ.
Coloss. II. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him.


THE holy Apostle having instructed these Colossians in the Doctrine of Christ
in the foregoing Chapter, arms them against Seducers, and false Teachers, that
would have corrupted that Doctrine, in this second Chapter: It is not enough
for Ministers to give wholesome food unto their people, but they must also give
them Antidotes against the poison of corrupt Doctrines: It is not enough for
Ministers to feed their people, but they must also fence their people against
Wolves that would devour the flock. Thus does the holy Apostle here, he
forewarns these Colossians, and so fore-arms them against those Seducers that
would beguile them with Philosophy, with legal Ceremonies, and worshipping of
Angels, and other such corrupt Doctrines mentioned here in this second Chapter.
To that end he lays down this weighty rule for them to observe, As ye have
therefore received the Lord Christ, so walk ye in him.

In the Text you may take notice of two things: First, You have here a holy
Rule prescribed in these words, As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord:
Secondly, a Practice answering that Rule here enjoined; so also walk ye in him.

As ye have. The words will admit of a twofold interpretation: Either take the
sense thus; As you have received the Doctrine of Christ by Epaphras, who was a
faithful Minister of Christ, Chap. 1, 7; so do you persevere in that Doctrine,
and live according to it: this is the usual interpretation given of the words.
Or else they may be taken in this sense; As you have received the Lord Christ,
that is, as you have received him into your hearts by faith, who is the way to
eternal life; so walk ye in him: And as you have received grace from Christ, so
accordingly act that grace that you have received: this is the interpretation
that some give; I shall stick rather to this latter interpretation in the
handling of this Text. Many Doctrines may be gathered from this verse; but
because my purpose is to dispatch it in one Sermon, as looking upon it as a
seasonable Text, a suitable Subject for a day wherein we have been partakers of
the precious Ordinance of the Lords Supper, I will name but two or three
Doctrines, and pitch upon the principal.

First, As you have received Christ Jesus.

Observe: Where the Gospel is rightly received, Jesus Christ is also received
with it. Mark, the Apostle does not say, As you have received the Doctrine of
Christ, but Christ himself; he that rightly receives the Doctrine of Christ,
receives Christ himself. Oh then, in how high reverence and esteem should we
have the Gospel! and what a prodigious sin are they guilty of, that tread the
precious Gospel under foot! what a dreadful account have they to give! 2 These.
1.7, 8, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord.

Mark: It is not enough to receive Jesus Christ as a Savior, but he must be
received as a Lord, as a Ruler also; according to the tenor of my last Text,
Acts 5.31, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: Jesus Christ
will be a Savior to none but those to whom he is a Prince. Bishop Davenant in
his Commentary upon the Colossians, says, the false Apostles preached Christ,
and their Disciples likewise received Christ; but neither did the false
Apostles preach him, nor their Disciples receive him as Lord; but they received
him as a Fellow Servants with Moses: therefore says the Apostle, if you receive
Christ rightly, you must receive him as a Lord.

Thirdly, Here I might observe, (Walk ye in him) That Christ is the way, the
living way, the only way wherein we should walk.

The fourth and last Doctrine is that which will comprise the marrow of the
Text, and it is this; That it is not enough for a Christian to receive Christ,
but he must also walk in Christ.

That you may understand the Doctrine aright, let me open the terms to you.
There is a twofold receiving of Christ, an habitual and a gradual receiving of
him.

First, There is an habitual receiving of Christ; of this speaks the Apostle, 1 John 12, To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God, even to them that believe in his name.

But then secondly, There is a gradual receiving of him; and of this speaks the
Apostle in this Chapter, Col. 2.19, And not holding the head, from which all
the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together,
increases with the increase of God. The whole body, that is the Church of God,
and every Member; being knit to the head, that is, to Jesus Christ; having
nourishment supplied from the head, so the Members of Christ being supplied
with nourishment from God, increase with the increase of God. Observe, There is
never a Member of Christ but is a growing Member: there is a gradual receiving
of Christ, a receiving him more and more, by degrees; as well as an habitual
receiving of him. If you ask me, What is the difference between these two
receivings of Christ, the habitual and gradual? I answer, the difference lies
in two things:

First, The habitual receiving of Christ, is done but once; the gradual is done
often. The habitual receiving of Christ is done but once, as the Child is born
into the World but once; but it must be nourished and fed every day: so we are
spiritually born, or regenerated but once; but we must be nourished, and we
must likewise increase and grow in and up to Christ daily; we must grow up to
him, as the Apostle phrases it, grow up into him more and more, Ephesians. 4.15.

Secondly, In the habitual receiving of Christ, we are merely passive; a man
does no more to his own regeneration, than a dead man can do to his own
resurrection. But in the gradual receiving of Christ, we are active, we are
co-workers with God, 2 Cor. 6.1, as the Apostle speaks; we move toward him,
when we are moved by him. The child before it is born, has no nourishment but
what it receives from the Mother; but when the child is born, then it has a
nutritive faculty, and is able to feed and nourish it self. So in the first
work of conversion, we are merely passive, and do nothing at all, but receive
all from Christ, and do nothing in the carrying on the work of our salvation:
But when once we have received a life from Christ, then we may act and exercise
that life for our own good, and the glory of God. Now of both these receivings
of Jesus Christ, does the Apostle speak, both of the habitual and gradual
receiving of him: As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.
Walking is an active motion; and when the Apostle says, Walk in him, it is as
if he should say, As you have received the truth of grace, so also be acting of
your grace to the glory of Christ. So then, this is the meaning of the
Doctrine; when I say, it is not enough for a Christian to receive Christ, but
he must also walk in Christ: the meaning of the Doctrine is this. It is not
enough for a Christian to receive grace from Christ, but he must be also acting
his grace. For the proof of this truth, let me give you two remarkable
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 1.6, Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up
the gift of God that is in thee. I know the Apostle speaks of the Ministerial
gift; but it is as true of the work of grace; for the Greek word (...),
signifies grace, as well as gift; Stir up the grace of God in thee. Mark the
phrase, it is a remarkable phrase; for in the original it is to blow up thy
grace, (...), just as a man blows up a fire that grows dull, or is hid under
the ashes; blow up the grace of God in thee. The other Scripture which is
parallel to this, is that Text, Gal. 5.25, If we live in the Spirit, let us
also walk in the Spirit; that is, if we have received a spiritual life, or
influence from Christ, let us walk in the spirit, that is, let us act that
spiritual life that we have received by the operation of grace: If we have
received the life of grace, let us also act the life of grace. For the better
explication of this point, two things are to be briefly unfolded.

First, What is required of a Christian that he may act his grace, that he may
walk in Christ? Secondly, Why must a Christian that has received grace, be
acting his grace?
First, What is required of a Christian, that he may be acting of his grace? In
answer to this, I shall lay down these five Propositions:

First, No man can act that grace he has received, by his own strength,
without the help and assistance of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10, But by the grace
of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in
vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me: He does not say, the grace of God which was in me, that
habitual grace which I had; but the grace of God which was with me. So then, it
is not the strength of habitual grace that carries a man through any duty, but
the auxiliary, the assisting, the concurring grace of Jesus Christ; it is his
grace with us, more than his grace in us: And says our Savior, speaking to his
Disciples, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.5. Ye that are my Disciples,
ye that have the spirit of grace, without me ye can do nothing. The habit of
grace, the acting of grace, and the perfecting of grace, are all from Jesus
Christ: If we cannot put forth a natural action without him, for in him we
live, move, and have our being, Acts 17.28, how much more can we perform a
spiritual act in a spiritual manner without him? Phil. 2.13, says the Apostle,
For it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
Yet take this caution with you, When I say a man cannot act his own grace, by
his own strength; you must not therefore be lazy, and say, I can do nothing
without Christ; for you must know, the Lord Christ works grace in us, by
setting those faculties that are in us on work; though we cannot work by our
own strength, yet we must be co-workers with Christ: says the Apostle, Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you both
to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. That which some
persons make an argument of laziness, We will do nothing, say they, in the
business of Salvation, for it is God that works in us both to will and to do:
The Apostle makes it rather an argument of diligence; Nay therefore, be you
working as well as God; though it is God that works in you both to will and to
do, yet do you work out your salvation; if you put forth your strength to the
utmost, he will help you: That Is the first Proposition.

Secondly, Another Proposition is this, It is not enough to act one Grace, but
Christians must be acting every grace; for all graces proceed from the same
fountain: We receive from Christ's fullness, and grace for grace, John 1.16.
Jesus Christ is the fountain of all grace, Col. 1.19, It pleases the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell. We must draw water from no other
Fountain: you must not look on Faith as a distinct habit; or Love, or
Repentance, as a distinct habit; as if these were several branches, proceeding
from several roots, they all proceed from one and the same root: Faith is a
habit of grace closing with Christ, Repentance is a habit of grace, receiving
Christ; Love is a habit of grace renewing and fitting the soul to receive
Christ; they all proceed therefore from one and the same root, and every grace
must be acted.

Thirdly, The third Proposition is this; It is not enough to act grace one way;
but Christians must act grace every way: we must not only act grace invisibly,
and inwardly, in reference to God; but we must act grace outwardly, and
visibly, in reference to men. This is that our Savior speaks of, Let your
light so shine before men; he speaks of the light of grace, Mat. 5.16, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven: and says the Apostle, James 2.18, Show me thy faith
by thy works.

Fourthly, There are certain seasons wherein grace must be especially acted, as
there are certain seasons of the year; in Spring you have buds and blossoms: in
Summer you have fruits green, and growing: in the Autumn you have the same
fruits ripe, and ready to be eaten; Every thing is beautiful in its season,
Eccles. 3.11, He has made every thing beautiful in his time; so every grace is
beautifully acted, when it is seasonably acted.

Fifthly, He that has the least measure of grace, must not be discouraged, but
must be acting it still, that in the exercise of it it may be increased; nay
certainly, a man that has but one Talent, Mat. 25.15, that is, but a little
measure of grace, and does act it well, he shall have more comfort a great
deal, than he that has five Talents, and does not wisely act them. Thus you
see the first thing opened, what is required of a Christian that he may rightly
act his grace?

The second thing for explication, is; But why must Christians thus be acting
of their graces? Let me give you these four reasons.

First, The acting of grace will be a certain evidence of the truth of grace:
there is no more certain evidence of the truth of grace, than the acting of
grace: it may be there are some poor souls that hear me, that will be ready to
say, O what would I give, that I might but have a certain and infallible
evidence of the truth of grace, though it were but as a grain of Mustard Seed;
that I could but say, that I have true faith, and true repentance, and true
love to Jesus Christ; had I an assurance that it were in truth, what would I
give! I will tell thee for thy comfort, Here is a rule in the Text, If thou
walk in Jesus Christ, that is, if thou be acting that little grace thou have
received, it is a certain token of the truth of it. A painted fire will not
warm a man: a painted Cow will give no milk, a painted Horse will not move, a
painted Tree will not grow; so here, a painted Christian, a counterfeit
Christian, a Hypocrite, counterfeit grace will never grow; a counterfeit
Christian is always a dead and barren Christian; but if thou art a fruitful
Christian, it is a token that grace that thou have, is grace in truth, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, And besides this, giving all diligence,
add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness
brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness charity; for if these things be
in you, and abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: when a man is acting of
his grace, he is adding to his grace: add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, etc. When a man is acting of his grace, then he is not barren, nor
unfruitful: when these two go together, then may a man be confident that he is
a real Christian, a Disciple indeed, and not a Disciple in name only. There are
these two special properties of grace, the acting of grace, and the growth of
grace; and you have them both in that place, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8: the activity
of grace, when a man is not barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And the growth of grace, when a man adds to his faith virtue, to
virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, etc. Compare
these two places of Scripture together, Gal. 6.15, with Gal. 5.6. In Gal. 6.15,
says the Apostle, For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature: compare that with Gal. 5.6, For in
Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
faith which works by love. In the former place, namely Gal. 6.15, but a new
creature: there the Apostle speaks of the habit of grace, in the latter, namely
Gal. 5.6, but faith which works by love, there he speaks of the activity of
grace: when the habit of grace is turned into the activity of grace, when faith
works by love, that is a token of true graceindeed.

A second reason is this, The more you act your graces the more you shall
increase them. Tradesmen know, the more they trade with their Stock, the more
they increase their Stock: Grace is like the Windows oil, the more it is poured
out, the more it is increased, 2 Kings 4.6. Nay, there is a promise made to
that man that does well use his grace, Matthew. 25.29, For unto every one that
has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance; which place must be rightly
understood; our Savior speaks there of gifts of the same kind, and same order;
otherwise we will run into the Pelagian and Arminian opinion, which is, That
the well-using of the gifts of nature, will merit the gifts of grace; so the
Arminian would have the meaning of the words to be; he that well uses the gifts
of nature, to him shall be given the gifts of grace. Our Savior there ^peaks
no such matter; but he speaks thus, he that has saving-grace, shall have more
saving-grace: that man that has saving-grace, by well-using of it, shall have
more saving-grace: as a man, the more he plays upon an Instrument, the more
dextrous he grows, the more cunning and skilful he will be: So here, the more
you act your graces, the more a great deal shall you increase them: to him that
has, shall be given; and he shall have abundance.

Thirdly, A third reason is this, Because God has given grace for that very
end, that it may be acted: If God has given thee grace, it is not that thou
should hide it, like a Candle under a Bushel; nor for thee to put in a dark
Lanthorn; but that thou should set it upon a Table for the advantage and
benefit of others: But the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.17. And in 1 Pet. 4.10, As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. And why are we said to be Stewards of the manifold grace
of God? because we should be dispensing them, as Stewards that have their
Masters goods, not to put them in their own purses, or to convert them to their
own advantage; but to be dispensing of them, and diffusing them for their
Masters advantage; we are Stewards of the manifold grace of God: look, as God
gives to some more riches than to others, because he would have them to be more
rich in good works than others: so he gives to some more grace than he gives to
others, because he would have them diffusive of grace, making others rich in
grace. He gives to some more comforts than he gives to others, because he would
have them to comfort others with the same comforts wherewith they themselves
are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. The grace of God is given for this end, to
dispense to others.

Fourtly, A fourth reason is this; If you do not act your graces, God shall
lose his glory; and his glory should be dearer to you than your liberty, and
all your outward comforts. It is a true speech of him that said, the truth of
grace does save my soul, but the acting of grace makes for the honor of God;
the truth of Grace makes for my safety, but the acting of grace makes for the
service of God, in the place I am in. Now a child of God has the glory of God
lying near his heart: says a child of God, I would lose my life rather than the
end of my life: I would be usefully spent for God, for the honor of God, for
the name of God, in living, in suffering, in dying, rather than to enjoy all
the honors, or pleasures, or treasures that the world can afford. Thus you see
the point opened and made good to you.

Now for the Use of it, and there are three Uses I shall make of it.

First, By way of Information: If they that have grace, must be acting, and
increasing of it, then certainly it follows, That they that have no grace, had
need to get it: If they that have received Christ Jesus, must walk in him; then
they that have not received him, certainly they have great need, infinite need,
to close with him. O the miserable, and doleful, and damnable condition of all
those that for the present are in a Christless condition, in a graceless
condition! no tongue of men or Angels is able sufficiently to express it; no
tears of blood can sufficiently bewail it. If any of you die in such a
condition, you must resolve to die everlastingly, and to suffer the vengeance
of eternal fire, Jude 7. you must resolve to be satisfying of a sin-revenging
God in hell, and yet never be able to satisfy him; you must be always dying,
and yet never die, Rev. 6, And in those days shall men seek death, and shall
not find it: and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them: This will
be the condition of all those that die Christless, that die graceless, that
have not received Christ into their hearts, and that have not got grace into
their hearts, oil into their lamps; they shall be always dying, and yet never
die: O with what weeping, and wailing, and wringing of their hands, and tearing
of their hair, and renting of the cawl of their hearts, shall they cry out, O
that I might dye, and dye, and never have a being more! O that I might dye the
most cursed, the most tormenting, the most painful death that ever creature on
earth dyed, so I may but dye: But this is the misery of all misery, I live to
dye, and must live eternally! This is the condition of all those that have not
got Christ in their hearts: O then! why do you rest in such a condition one
week, nay, one day! O, if ever there were any love to your souls kindled in
your breasts, any desire of salvation wrought in you, any care of escaping
those unconceivable tortures and torments, resolve to receive Jesus Christ upon
his own terms, and say, O Lord, rule in me as thou please, so I may be but
thine; resolve to receive him as a Prince, as well as a Savior. It was a point
I pressed upon you with all my might, from Acts 5.31, Receive Jesus Christ to
give you repentance, as well as remission of sins: He is a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins: He gives repentance,
before he gives remission; if he gives nor repentance for sin, he never gives
remission of sin: O resolve to trade for him; some of you know no other trade,
but to tread in the world, to be tumbling up and down in dirt, and clay, and
to provide for your Families: a Heathen man may do as much as you do: O that
you would be persuaded to drive a Trade for heaven, for grace, for
saving-grace. That which Solomon speaks of wisdom, I may say of every grace,
Prove. 4.7, Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and with all
thy getting, get understanding. So say I, grace is the principal thing,
therefore with all thy getting, get grace: It is no matter, though thou be poor
in the World, if thou be rich in grace; If thou should be rich in the
World, and get thy Coffers full of gold and silver, yet if thou get no grace in
thy heart, it had been better that thou had never been born.

Secondly, By way of reproof; Here is a just and sharp reproof, even of Gods
own children, that have received Christ, and yet do not walk in him, do not
walk worthy of him in all well-pleasing; that have received grace, and yet do
not act grace, but rather wrap it up like a Talent in a Napkin: I cannot speak
it without indignation, How many Christians are there, some of whom I am really
persuaded they are the Servants of Jesus Christ, yet they are sick of a
spiritual Lethargy, Appoplexy: they are in a spiritual slumber; a man in an
Appoplex has his reason, he is a reasonable man, but he cannot make use of his
reason: what is man the better for his wealth, if he does not make use of his
wealth? so, what am I the better for grace, if I do not make use of it for the
glory of God, and the good of others? In Matthew. 25, you read, the five wise
Virgins slumbered, as well as the five foolish: It is a sad thing, when even
Gods own children, true Professors, shall be slumbering; yet the five wise
Virgins slumbered, as well as the five foolish. Yet this is the condition of
the Servants of God at this day; I can hardly meet with any, but their grace is
suspended, they are fallen asleep: their activity for for God, and their acting
of grace, is lulled asleep. I pray God he do not thunder against us, as once
the Mariners did to Jonah; What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy
God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not, Jonah 1.6. When
the wind roars, and the waters rage, and the storms arise, and there is but a
step between thee and death, and thou asleep, is it not a shame for thee to be
snorting when the ship is in danger of sinking? so may it be said of all us who
are asleep in security; I pray God that he do not awake us with a rushing wind.
It may be the rod may come sooner on us than we are aware, and a sharper rod
than we are aware of. Oh that I could but awaken my own soul, then I might hope
to help to awaken you out of this spiritual slumber; then you would say to me
as David did to Abigail, Blessed be God, and blessed be thou, that have given
me this counsel this day, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Blessed be God that thou have
awakened me out of my sloth and security.

The third and last Use it is for Exhortation: If so be it is not enough for
Christians to receive Christ, and to receive grace, but they must be walking in
Christ, and they must be acting of their grace; then I beseech you to hearken
to the counsel of the Apostle here: I cannot give you the exhortation in better
words than these in the Text, As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk ye in him. Oh be walking in Christ; Oh be acting of your grace, Oh be
stirring up your selves to take hold of God; Oh be stirring up the grace of God
that is in you; Oh be active Christians, be not sleepy Christians, be not dull,
drowsy, dead-hearted in matters of everlasting salvation: You have but little
time to spend, and you have need to spend it well; every day brings you nearer
your graves, Oh that every day might bring you nearer to God; God is
continually acting for you; he is an overflowing, and an ever-flowing Fountain
of goodness; God is continually renewing his mercy upon you; Jesus Christ is
continually interceding for you; the Spirit of God is continually knocking at
the door of your hearts: And is God acting for you, and will you act nothing
for God?

Secondly, consider, Wicked men they are continually acting for Satan,
continually doing the Devils drudgery: what a shame is it, that wicked men
should take more pains to go to hell, than Gods children should take to go to
heaven? Judas was as busy as could be that night to betray his Master,
plotting and contriving how to betray Christ into the hands of the Jews: when
the rest of his Disciples were sleeping, Judas was waking to do the Devils
work. I beseech you, let not wicked men rise up in judgment against you; let
not them be more vigorous and active in the work of sin, than you are in the
work of grace and holiness.

Thirdly, consider, If you be not acting your graces, God may justly leave you
to be acting your corruptions; if you be not acting one way, you will be acting
another way: if you be not acting grace, be sure the Devil will set you on work
to be grinding of his grist. The mind of man is like a Mill, it is always
grinding Chaff, or Wheat: if you be not doing Gods work, you will be doing
Satan's work. On the contrary; see what the Apostle says, Gal, 5.16, This I say
then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. Be
walking in the spirit, be acting the grace you have received, then you shall
not fulfill the lust of the flesh; though it is true, those lusts of the flesh,
and cursed corruptions, will be stirring in you; yet you will never fulfill the
lusts of the flesh: It may be you may be drawn to act them, to be sold under
sin; as the poor captive is carried into captivity against his mind and will,
so you may be held under sin, and carried captive by it; but you will never
willingly fulfill the lust of the flesh. But then, may be you will say, What
means, or helps, or directions can you prescribe to this end, that we may act
grace? Briefly in answer to this, and so I have done.

First, I will show you in whose strength you must act grace. Secondly, In what
manner you must act grace. Thirdly, In what seasons you must act grace.
First, in whose strength you must act grace; I told you before, no man can do
it in his own strength; therefore you must go out of your selves, and run to
the Lord Jesus Christ, Hos. 11.3, I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by
their Arm. God does not only give us spiritual life, but he also gives us
strength: He did not only give Ephraim life, but he gave him strength; I taught
Ephraim to go, leading them by the arm. I remember the speech of Sampson,
Judges 16.20, when his locks were cut off, the Text says, And he awoke out of
his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake my self,
and he wist not that the Lord was departed from him. I may apply it thus, Many
times we set about duty in our own strength, and we think to do such and such
duties, as before; but alas! when the spirit of God is withdrawn, we are as
weak as Sampson was when his locks were cut off. On the contrary, Let the King
sit but at his table, then our Spicknard sends forth the smell thereof, Cant.
1.12; that is, let Jesus Christ be but with us, then our graces, which are
compared to Spicknard, send forth a sweet smell. If the wind blow upon our
Garden, that is, the spirit of God working in the soul, ( Awake O North Wind,
and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out,
Cant. 4.16.) then the spices will flow forth. If the Sun shine upon the
Marygold, how soon does the Mary-gold open: Oh make sure of the presence of
Jesus Christ with you; say, Lord, let me have thy grace with me, as well as thy
grace in me.

Secondly, I will show you how, or in what manner you must act Grace.

First, You must act your Graces evenly, not by girds and starts; Walking, we
say, is an equal, and even Motion: some there are, that are very forward, that
will run for a quarter of a mile, then they sit down, having run themselves out
of breath; this is the case of many forward Professors; Oh, they seem for a
while to be very zealous Godward, and Grace-ward, but then they faint, and
flag, and grow weary of the ways of God. See what the Prophet David says, Psalm.
119.112, I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto
the end: That is a right acting of Grace indeed, a man that resolves to keep
Gods statutes always to the end; Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and
I shall keep it unto the end, in verse 33 of the same Psalm.

Secondly, As you must act Grace evenly, so you must act it orderly: that is,
you must not turn aside either to the right hand, or to the left: This is one
of Gods own commands, Deuteronomy. 5.32, Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord
your God has commanded you; you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to
the left.

Thirdly, You must act your Grace Evangellically, to do all your duties from
Christ, by Christ, and to Christ; from Christ as the Root, by Christ as the
Rule, and to Christ as the end: Let Christ be the Spring, let him be the Guide,
and let him be the Center of all your actings.

Fourthly, See that you act all your Graces likewise courageously, that you may
say, Nothing shall daunt me, or discourage me in the way that I have
undertaken. As David in the business of his dancing before the Lord, which was
an evidence of his exceeding great zeal, when Michal scoft at him, sav^ he, I
will yet be more vile than thus, and be more base in my own sight, 2 Samuel 6.27.
Lastly, Act Grace humbly; when you have done all that you can do, say you are
unprofitable servants, and say with St. Paul, It was not I, but the grace of
God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10.

Lastly, I shall show you in what seasons you must act Grace; certainly Grace
must be acted at all times, but there are some special seasons wherein we must
especially act Grace.

First, Upon the receipt of some special Mercy, then we should act Thankfulness
more than ordinarily, and say, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me! Psalm. 116.12. Is Gods hand enlarged in bounty? then let my
heart be enlarged with thankfulness.

Secondly, When you lie under a smarting Rod, a piercing Affliction, then act
Faith and Patience: A man usually never acts Grace better, than when he is
under some abasement; a soul can better manage a state of adversity, than it
can a state of prosperity; for when it is in a state of abasement, then it is
at a less distance from God; as Roses, they are never so sweet, as when they
are in a Still, and fire is under them; never does our Graces usually send
forth a sweeter favor, than when God is pleased to exercise us with
Afflictions: David was never better than when he was under the Rod; then he
made those heavenly soul ravishing Psalms, that you meet with in the book of
Psalms; The best Psalms, the most heavenly and spiritual Psalms were made when
David was in a low condition; witness the 34 Psalm, its one of the sweetest
Psalms you meet with: when was it made? when David was in the lowest condition
that ever he was in; when he was in that straight, he was forced to feign
himself mad, 1 Samuel 21.13. See how David's heart was enlarged in the making of
this Psalm.

Thirdly, Another fit season to act Grace in, is, when you receive the seals of
the Covenant of Grace in the use of the holy Ordinance of the Lords Supper;
that is a time for you to act Grace in; then should you be acting brokenness of
heart: for, can you look upon a broken Savior without a broken heart? upon a
bleeding Savior without a bleeding heart? then should you be acting Humility,
and say as Mephibosheth, What is thy servant, that thou should look upon such
a dead dog as I am? 2 Samuel 9.8. Nay, but here is more, that thou should not
only look on me, but set me at thy Table! what, a beggar, a loathsome leprous
beggar, to sit at the Table of the King of Glory!

Then act Love to Jesus Christ: what, has he loved me so dearly! Oh, how
should I love him above all expressions of love, and be sick of love to him!

Then act Faith especially, for that is a grace you have most need of when you
come to the Lords Table; as now, faith is the very eye whereby we look upon
him; it is the hand whereby we receive him; it is the mouth whereby we feed on
him: says Christ, except you eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you have no life
in you. Joh. 6.52, 53. He does not here speak of a Corporal eating of him; far
be it from us to have such a thought as they of Capernaum had; how can this man
give us his flesh to eat? that man that believes in Christ, he feeds on Christ.

Then be acting of Thankfulness, after you have received the Lords Supper: Oh,
what thanks shall I return to the Lord my God! Oh! my whole course of life
should be nothing but a continual gratulation to my Father, for that
never-sufficiently admired gift of the Lord Jesus Christ; If I had ten thousand
thousand tongues, I could never praise him sufficiently!

Then act holy Resignation of your selves up to Christ; what, did the Lord give
himself for me! I will give my self up to him: was he crucified for my sins! I
will crucify my sins for him. Study conformity to him, and that will evidence
that you have Communion with him: There is no more certain evidence of our
Communion with Christ in his Graces, Comforts, Merits, and Spirit, etc. than in
our conformity to him: when we resemble him in Grace here, it is a certain
evidence that we shall resemble him in Glory hereafter. In one word, do but
make it your business to be acting your Grace, and you may trust God for the
bringing in of your Comforts; the more you are active in Grace, the more shall
be your Comfort: If we had more activity of Grace, we should have more evidence
of Christ's dwelling in our hearts here; and God would have more Glory, our
souls would have more peace, and we should have abundance of more rejoicing in
the day of our Lord Jesus.

CHRIST'S TEMPTATION, THE SAINTS SUPPORTATION.
A SERMON Preached December. 9. 1657.
Heb. II. 13. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able
to succor them that are tempted.


THE scope of the Apostle in the former Chapter is to prove that Jesus Christ
is truly God, therefore far above the Angels; for says he in the fifth verse of
that Chapter, Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? In this Chapter the Apostle proves that Jesus
Christ is truly man, and therefore in that respect inferior to the Angels,
Verse 9, But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor. And because it might be
demanded, But why is it needful that Jesus Christ should be man? why did he not
take on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham? Verse
16. The Apostle give us four reasons, why our blessed Savior would be man, why
he took our human nature upon him.

First, He did it for the sanctification of our nature, and that reason is set
down in v. 11, For both be that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are
all of one; that is, they are all of one and the same nature: we come all from
one common root; Christ came from the same root that we did, namely from Adam;
and this he did, that he might sanctify our nature.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ became man, that he might in our nature, and
for our benefit, destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil:
that is set down in Verse 14, Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil.

Thirdly, He became man, that he might deliver us not only from the hurt of
death, but deliver us also from the fear of death; and that is set down in Verse
15, And deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject
to bondage.

Fourthly, He became man, that by the experience of his sufferings in our
nature, he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people; and that is set down in
Verse 17. And the ground of this Assertion the Apostle lays down in the words
of the Text, which I have now read unto you, For in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. So then
the Text contains in it a singular benefit and advantage that believers have by
Christ's temptations, namely, a sanctified use of temptations, and a gracious
support under temptations. For the clearing of this, you must know, all that
ever our Lord and Savior did here upon earth as Mediator, was done not for
himself alone; but was done for us, and for our good. For example, He took our
flesh in the womb of a Virgin, that he might sanctify our nature: He was born
of a woman, that he might sanctify our birth: He suffered in the flesh, that
he might sanctify our sufferings; He was buried in a grave, that he might
sweeten and perfume the grave, that he might make the grave as a bed of spices;
He rose again from the dead, that he might assure us that we shall be raised by
his power, 1 Cor. 6.14, And God has both raised up the Lord, and will also
raise up us by his own power: And he was tempted, that he might be able to
succor us when we are tempted. Let me first open the words to you, and then
draw out the Doctrine I intend to pitch upon. I shall dispatch this Text in one
Sermon.

For in that he himself has suffered. The Lord Jesus Christ suffered indeed;
He was a great sufferer; nay, the greatest sufferer that you read of in the
whole book of God: He suffered in his Circumcision: when he was but eight days
old, he cond^scended to that painful Ceremony, that painful Sacrament: He
suffered a painful pilgrimage for three and thirty years together; and although
he was. heir of all things, all the Kingdoms of the world were his, yet he had
not a house to hide his head in; The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head Mat. 8.20. He
suffered by Satan when he was led into the Wilderness to be tempted for forty
days together, which was a greater abasement to the Son of God, than if the
greatest Empress in the world should be solicited in her chastity by the basest
Scullion that ever was. Oh how did Satan hurry the body of our dear Lord and
Savior, first to the pinnacle of the Temple, then he hurried it to a Mountain,
and carried it from one place to another! Oh that the precious body of Jesus
Christ should be thus basely used, by a Vassal, by a cursed Fiend, by a cursed
creature! So he suffered by Satan.

And he suffered by men; he suffered the contradiction of sinners; he suffered
himself to be reviled, scorned, reproached, blasphemeed, when they said, Say we
not well, Thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Joh. 8.48, And he is mad, and
has a Devil, why hear ye him? Joh. 10.20. He suffered on the Cross a shameful,
painful, and cursed death; He suffered in his body, but most of all he suffered
in his soul, when he said, My soul is heavy unto death, is girt about with
death, Joh. 12.27, Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? He speaks as
if he had been non-plust; My soul is so troubled, says he, that I know not what
to say, I know not what to do. So you see the Lord Jesus Christ he suffered.
Further, the Text says he suffered being tempted: Jesus Christ you know was
tempted by Satan for forty days together, and he was tempted by his Enemies:
the Pharisees they required a sign of him, tempting of him, Luke 11.16. Then he
was tempted by the Herodians, when they came with that captious question, Shall
we give tribute to Caesar, or shall we not? Mat. 22.17, 18. Christ answered
them, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? He was temptted by one of his Disciples,
Peter; says he to him, Master; spare thy self, and do not go up to Jerusalem;
insomuch that Christ sharply reproved him, and said to him, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be
of God, but those that be of men, Mat. 16.22, 23. And he was tempted even by
his own dear Father when his Father hid his face from him, when he seemingly
did forsake him, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Mat. 27.46, So you see, that our Savior suffered, and our Savior was tempted:
And why was he tempted? that he might succor them that are tempted, say the
Text. Why, may some say, did the sufferings and temptations of Jesus Christ add
any thing to his ability to succor his tempted Servants, which he had not
before? To this I answer, You must know he had an ability of Power, which was
irresistible; he had an ability of Power, as he was God: but the Apostle speaks
here, of an ability of Compassion, or of an ability of Experience, as he was
man; as he says in the like case, Heb. 5.8, He learned obedience by the things
which he suffered: How did he learn it? he learnt it experimentally: So here,
by his suffering, and temptations, he learnt to succor them that are tempted;
he learnt compassion by his temptations: How did he learn compassion? he learnt
it experimentally; for now he has learned by experience, to know the kinds of
temptations, to know the wounds that temptations make in the soul of a poor
sinner, and to know the proper means and medicines for the curing of
temptations: so that if you ask, But why was the Lord Jesus Christ tempted? I
answer, he was tempted for these three ends especially.

First, That he might teach us this Lesson: If Satan was so bold with him that
was the dear Son of God, he will be much more bold in tempting us poor
creatures; If he was so bold with the Master, much more will he be bold with
the Servants; If he were so bold with the Captain of our salvation, much more
will he be bold with his Soldiers; If he were so bold in tempting him who was
the King of glory, a pure and spotless Savior, a Lamb without spot and
blemish, in whose mouth could be found no guile, 1 Pet. 2.22. Oh, he will be
much more bold with us, that are poor sinful creatures, that have such impure
and defiled natures: How abominable and filthy is man! Job 15.16. When the
Devil came to tempt our Lord and Savior, he found nothing in him, he found no
matter to work upon, he found no corruption on which he might fasten his
temptation, Joh. 14.30, The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in
me. All the temptations of Satan upon our Savior were but like the jogging of
pure and clean water in a Crystal glass, where is no mud at all: but now Satan
never comes to us, but he finds matter enough, and ground enough to work upon;
there is a great deal of mud at the bottom, therefore he prevails on us when he
comes. But that is one end, that he may teach us to expect temptations, he
himself was tempted: then certainly much more must we expect to be tempted.

Secondly, Jesus Christ was tempted, that he might know how to compassionate us
in our temptations.

Thirdly, He was tempted, that he might take out the sting, the poison, the
venom of every temptation, that though we be sorely assaulted by Satan, yet we
may not be conquered by Satan. That that David speaks to Saul, Psalm. 188.13,
Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall, but the Lord helped me. The
like may Believers say of Satan, Thou have thrust sore at me, if it were
possible to thrust me into hell, but the Lord is my helper; nay, God can so
order it, when Satan thrusts his forest darts at us, he can ward off the blow,
or at least so order the temptation, that it shall kill our sins, and not hurt
our souls. As I have read a story of one Pareus Jason, who was conflicting with
his adversary, when his adversary thought to have run him through with his
sword, God did so order it, that it did open an imposthumation, which all
Physicians could not heal, so that instead of killing of him, he preserved his
life; so God can so order it, when Satan is thrusting sorely at us with his
temptations, they shall kill our sins, but shall not hurt our souls. So then
the words being opened to you, the way to the Doctrine is made plain, which is
this:

Doct. Christ's temptations and his sufferings for us, stir up in his heart a
tender compassion to succor us in our temptations, and in our fufferings.

That which God commands Israel, is suitable to this, Exodus 23.9, Also thou
shall not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt. So the Lord Jesus Christ knows the hearts
of tempted ones, and knows how to pity tempted ones, because he himself was
tempted. That which the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1.4, God comfort us in all
our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. I may apply it
thus: The Lord Jesus Christ knows how to succor us, to comfort us, to support
us in our temptations, with the same spirit that he had in his sufferings, and
in his temptations, though his temptations were so great, that he himself
needed an Angel to come and comfort him. For the better explication of this
point, there are two Quaeries that would be satisfied.

First, Why Christ's sufferings and temptations stir up in his heart such tender
compassion toward us, to succor and relieve us in our temptations and
sufferings? Secondly, How the Lord Jesus Christ does succor and relieve poor
tempted ones, in their distrsses and sufferings?
For the first, Why does Christ's sufferings and temptations, stir up in his
heart such tender compassions toward us? I answer, The reason is plainly this;
because the Lord Jesus Christ his suffering in our Nature, makes him not only a
merciful God, but a merciful Man also; the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is God
equal with the Father to all Eternity, so his mercies are from everlasting to
everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. But now his sufferings in our flesh, makes him not
only a merciful God, but a merciful man also, a merciful Mediator between God
and man; so he has not only beams of Majesty, but bowels of mercy; his
sufferings made him a merciful Highpriest, that is touched with the sense of
our infirmities, as you read Heb. 4.15, for (says he) We have not an High
priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. The Lord Jesus Christ
suffered all our natural infirmities, though he did not suffer our sinful
infirmities; He was tempted in all things like unto us, yet without sin: a
merciful High Priest he is: and this is that, that makes him so tenderhearted
to the sufferings and infirmities of his People: Oh, what bowels of compassion
has Jesus Christ toward the souls of poor People, Mat. 9.36, the Text says,
When he saw the multitude, he was moved with compassion on them, because they
fainted and were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd; His bowels did
earn toward them, as the word (...) signifies; he had compassion on their
souls, because they wanted those that might instruct them in the way of life
and happiness. And what compassion had he on the bodies of poor ones, that
waited on his Doctrine? Mat. 15.32, Then Jesus called his disciples to him, and
said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they have continued with me
now three days, and have nothing to eat, and I will not send them away sasting,
lest they faint in the way. And what compassion had he toward the poor Widow,
that had lost her only son, and they were now carrying him to the Grave; the
Text says, he had compassion on her, his Bowels did earn toward the poor
Widow; therefore he touched the Coffin and raised him up again, Luke 7.13. Look
as a Childbearing woman, that has felt the bitter pangs and pains of
Childbirth, has more compassion toward a woman in that distress, than a
barren woman that never felt those pangs and sorrows; or, as a man that has
been sorely afflicted with the Gout or Stone, pitianother man that is afflicted
with the same disease, more than one that never felt the torment of that
disease; and as it is storied of Queen Elizabeth, when she past once through an
Hospital where she saw many poor Orphans, and Fatherless, and helpless
Children; Oh, says she, I was once an Orphan, a poor helpless creature when I
was shut up in prison, therefore, says she, I have tasted of the sufferings of
Orphans, and I cannot but be merciful to Orphans: and as it is said of Luther,
That he was a rare and and excellent man in comforting afflicted consciences,
those that were tempted and afflicted, why? because he himself was exercised
with temptations for three years together; so here, the Lord Jesus Christ is a
most rare and excellent Comforter, a Physician good at all diseases, especially
at binding up broken hearts, and comforting tempted souls; why, because he
himself had experience of the sting and venom of temptations: but some may say,
the Lord Jesus Christ is now in heaven: has he not left the bowels that he had
on earth? I answer, No, the Text says, Isa. 63.9, In all their afflictions he
was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love, and in
his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of
old. Act. 9.4, the Lord Christ cries out, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
when a man treads upon another man's little toe, the tongue complains, why do
you hurt me? Jesus Christ when he is now in heaven, he complains of himself
being persecuted in his Members, he has such a simpathy with them, That Is the
first Quaery.

Secondly, It may be demanded, How does Jesus Christ succor and relieve his
servants in their temptations? I answer, he succors and relieves them these
five ways.

First, By discovering to them that it is a temptation: for many there are that
misliste their temptations; some take temptations for the impulsess, or
impresses of Gods spirit, not considering that there are tempting providence,
as well as approving providence: such a providence was that which you read of,
when David had Saul at an advantage, 1 Samuel 26.8, When Saul lay sleeping in his
trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster, then said Abishai to
David, God has delivered thine enemy into thy hand this day: now therefore let
me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear, even to the earth at once, and I
will not smite him the second time: Abishai thought that this was an approving
medicine, that God had delivered Saul into the hands of David, and now he may
be avenged upon him, and cut his throat, and smite him presently; nay, nay,
says David to Abishai, destroy him not; for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? David saw it was a
tempting-providence, not an approving-providence; he would not have a hand in
his blood; he would not slay the Lords anointed, though his enemy, though a
wicked man, though a man guilty of blood, for he had slain Fourscore of the
Lords Priests at one time, commanding Doeg to fall upon them and destroy them:
But says David, I will not have a hand in the blood of the Lords anointed,
though he has delivered him into my hand: this was but a tempting-providence,
not an approving-providence: this is a certain Rule, that there are tempting
providence as well as approving-providences; to follow providence without the
Word, is dangerous; to follow providence against the Word, is damnable; but to
follow providence with the Word, that only is safe and comfortable: now David
he had a providence here, but he had not the Word of God going along with that
providence, and therefore he looks upon it as a tempting-providence. Now Jesus
Christ succors his people by discovering to them which is a
tempting-providence, and which is an approving-providence.

Secondly, The Lord Christ succors and relieves them by his Gracious
Supportation; he does support them under their trials; that is a precious
Scripture, that tempted ones should be continually meditating upon, 1 Cor.
10.13, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able,
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it. God sometimes draws the Bow to the Arrow head, but he will not break
the Bow; if God lays heavy loads on poor tempted ones, then he will make their
shoulders so much the stronger by his Gracious Manutency, or holding them by
the hand, Psalm. 73.23, Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thou have
holden me by my right hand: And when God holds a poor tempted soul by the right
hand, though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down, because the Lord
upholds him, Psalm. 37.24.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ relieves and succors tempted ones by his gracious
intercession; for he sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for
them, Heb. 7.25, and if so be thou art but one that does but desire to believe
in Jesus Christ, and take hold of him, though it be but with a trembling hand,
know thus much for thy comfort, in every temptation that thou meetest with,
Jesus Christ does nominate thee to his Father, he nominates thee in particular,
and he says to thee as he did to Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not, Luke 22.32.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ does succor and relieve tempted ones by making a
diversion some way or other of them; by a less temptation sometimes he prevents
a greater, that would even crush a poor soul to pieces; sometimes by an outward
affliction upon the body, he prevents a greater affliction and trouble that
would lie upon the spirit: It is better a thousand times to be afflicted in the
body, than afflicted in the mind.

Fifthly, The Lord Christ does succor tempted ones by a gracious Abolition, as
I may call it; by a total removal of the temptation, when he treads Satan under
our feet, as he has promised, Romans 16.20, And the God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly. And when he gives Charge to Satan, as he did to
him concerning the poor Child that was possessed with a dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee that thou come out of him, and that thou enter into him no more,
Mark. 9.25. Thus you have the point opened: Now briefly to apply it, two Uses I
shall make of it. Frist for Information. Secondly for Consolation.

First, For information: you may learn this Lesson by way of Inference, That
Gods own people, his Elect, true Believers, must look for temptations, nay they
must look for diverse temptations, Jam. 1.12, My brethren, count it all joy when
ye fall into diverse temptations: in 1 Pet. 6, Wherein ye greatly rejoice,
though now for a season if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations. They must look for temptations of all sorts; as the Apostle says
in the like case, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution: so all that will live godly, must look for temptations. Gods
People may be tempted these four ways:

First, Sometimes they may be tempted by their godly friends; so was St. Paul,
Acts 11.12, when the Prophet Agabus foretold, that Paul should be bound at
Jerusalem, and suffer so many things of the Jews: Paul's godly friends dissuaded
him from going thither: but Paul looked upon it as a temptation; for, says he in
the next verse, What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart? for I am ready,
not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus, Acts 21.13.

Secondly, Gods people are sometimes tempted by wicked men, as Joseph was by
his wanton and lascivious Mistress.

Thirdly, Gods people are tempted sometimes by Satan, they are tempted to
presumption on the one hand, and to desperation on the other hand: For these
are two great Rocks upon which thousands of souls suffer shipwreck; but there
are more that perish on the rock of Presumption, than of Desperation.

Fourthly, Gods Children are sometimes tempted by God himself: it is said, God
tempted Abraham to try him, Genesis 22.1, And it came to pass after these things,
that God did tempt Abraham: and said unto him, Abraham; and he said, behold,
here I am: But yet remember this withal, God tempts only by way of probation,
God does not tempt by way of seduction: God tempts none but by way of
probation. If it be so, then Christians should be expecting temptations: when
you foresee a dart that is shot against you, you may the more easily avoid it;
if you be forewarned, you may the more easily be fore-armed.

The second Use, it is for Confolation; Here is matter of unspeakable comfort
to all tempted ones: It may be I speak to some such in this Congregation this
day. We find every Lords day some that send their Bills to be prayed for, that
are battered and bruised with temptations. Now I do not know one portion of
Scripture in the whole Book of God, that affords more sweet Soul-supporting
comfort, than this Text: though you see matter of discouragement to you from
your temptations, yet you may look for matter of encouragement from Christ's
temptations. Art thou tempted to distrust thy adoption, whether thou art a
child of God, or no? so was Jesus Christ; If thou be the Son of God. If thou
art tempted to distrust the Providence of God, so was Jesus Christ; If thou be
the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread, when he was led into
the Wilderness, and was there forty days, and had nothing to eat. Art thou
tempted to presumption? so was Jesus Christ, that he should cast himself down
headlong from the pinnacle of the Temple. Art thou tempted to self-murder? so
was the Lord Jesus Christ, when Satan would have had him cast himself down from
the pinnacle of the Temple to destroy himself. Art thou tempted to blasphemy? so
was Jesus Christ; for it was the most horrid blasphemy that could be named,
that the Lord Jesus Christ should fall down and worship a cursed Vassal, Satan:
that he shonld give that honor to that cursed wretch that was due only to God:
there was no sin so horrid, nor heinous, nor hellish, to which Christ was not
tempted: he was tempted to the vilest sin that is, but he yielded not. Hence
you may observe, that it is not sin to be tempted to sin, but it is sin to
yield to temptations; therefore do not yield to temptations. Art thou tempted
either to Presumption, or Desperation, Atheism, or Blaspemy? do not yield to
that temptation, but run to Jesus Christ under that temptation, even as the
chickens run under the Hens wing, when they see the Kite coming: and say, O
Lord Jesus, thou wast tempted, that thou mighteft fuccour me when I am tempted.
O do not lead me into temptation, but deliver me from the evil, that I do not
faint under them, nor be foiled by them: Lead me not into temptation: that is,
leave me not in temptations, but lead me out of them: for I fly to thee.

But may be you will say to me, What means or helps may we use, that we may be
strengthened against temptations, those temptations wherewith Satan assaults us?
For answer to this, let me briefly give these seven or eight practical Rules.
which I earnestly beg of you that you would make use of.

The first practical Rule is this: Let not Satan know all that is in thy heart,
for thereby Satan may get a great advantage against you; do not speak all that
thou think: if thou be one inclined (for example) to the sin of Pride, do
not show it in thy gayish Apparel; if thou be one inclined to the sin of
uncleanness, do not show it in thy wanton gestures; if thou be one inclined to
covetousness; do not show it in thy earthly, greedy, gaping after riches; let
not Satan know what is in thy heart.

2dly, Do not tempt the Tempter to tempt thee; my meaning is this, be not bold
with those sins for which thou have before smarted: for by fostering any
unmortified lust, thou put a weapon into Satan's hand to wound thee with: be
not bold with the occasions of sin; do not venture into the Devils quarters, as
St. Peter did you know; when he went into the Highpriests hall, there he met
with an occasion to sin: he tempted Satan to tempt him.

Thirdly, Do not think by yielding to one temptation, thou shall be freed from
all the rest; for if thou yield but to one temptation, Satan will be more
violent in tempting thee, than he was before. I have read of a young man that
was tempted to three grofs sins: to kill his Father, to abuse his Mother, and
to be Drunk; the Devil told him, if he would yield to one of these, he should
be tempted no more; at last he yielded to that which was the least of them,
namely to be drunk: but when he had yielded to one, the Devil prevailed with
him after to do the two other: so that he killed his Father, abused his Mother;
so that by yielding to one temptation, thou do strengthen Satan, but it
weakens thy own hands. As they say of the French in their fighting, at the
first onset they are like Lions: but if they be strongly resisted at the first,
then they are very Cowards: So it is here, the Devil at his first Assault is
violent; the second Assault, if he be resisted, is weaker: If he be resisted in
his third Assault, he is a very Coward; therefore, resist the Devil, and he
will fly from you, James 4.7. hold thy weapon in thy hand, though it be beaten
to thy head. As they observe of the Crocadile in Nilus, if you run away from
the Crocadile, then he will follow you; but if you come up to follow him
manfully, then he will run away from you: So if Satan be resisted, he is a very
Coward.

Fourthly, The fourth practical Rule is this: Do not lay all the blame upon
Satan for thy temptations, but lay the blame in a great measure upon thy self,
upon thy own receptive tinder-like disposition; Oh complain to God, and say,
true Lord, the Devil is continually striking fire, but my heart is too ready to
take the fire: I have a tinder-like heart, more ready to take fire, than the
Devil is to strike; and therefore thou should wet thy tinder with thy tears,
that the fire of temptation may not take hold of thy heart. You may read of our
Grandmother Eve, she laid all the blame upon the Serpent, The Serpent
deceived me, and I did eat. But David on the contrary, having a holy frame of
heart, laid the blame upon himself: when Satan tempted him to number the
People, 2 Samuel last: he complains not of Satan, but himself; says he, Lo I have
sinned, I have sinned, I have done wickedly; as for these sheep, what have they
done? So I say, lay the blame on thy Tinder-like heart.

Fifthly, Observe, Satan in his first temptations is more modest than he is
usually afterward: his first temptations are usually of a finer-spun thread,
that so he may draw into greater sins: for Example, When he tempted our
Savior, his first temptation was this: says he, Matthew. 4, Cause these stones
to be made bread: thou may as well turn stones into bread, as water into
wine; but then afterward, he comes to more gross and grievous temptations, to
cast himself down headlong, to murder himself, and commit the horridest
Idolatry that can be named. So Satan is modest at the first: he will persuade
thee to tell a merry jocond lie, to tell a lie in jest, that is no great
matter; from a jesting lie, he persuades thee to tell an officious lie, for an
advantage to thy self, or neighbor; from an officious lie, he will tempt thee
to a pernicious lie, to tell a lie for thy neighbors ruin; for the ruin of
thy neighbors Name, or Goods, or Life. Oh, observe the wiles of Satan, his
temptations are at fist more modest.

The sixth Rule is this: Do not think when one temptation is conquered, or
resisted, that therefore thy corruption is mortified: or, that the Devil is
quite vanquisned, or quite has left thee: no, for Satan lest our Savior but
for a season, Luke 4.13, after he was shamefully vanquished and foiled, he left
him for a season; he came to him again, as he did in John 4.30, The Prince of
this world comes, and has nothing in me. The Devil, like a Ram, sometimes
retires, that he may come forwards with the greater violence.

Seventhly, Would you be strengthened against temptations? then above all, take
the Shield of Faith, that is the Apostles Rule, Ephesians. 6.16, Above all take the
shield of faith, whereby you may quench all, the fiery darts of the devil;
Faith is the eye of the soul. Now as a cunning Fencer, when he is striving with
his Adversary, the first thing that he aims at, is to strike out the eye of him
with whom he is contesting; if he can but strike out the eye, then he knows he
has a great advantage: so the Devil this cunning Fencer, he strikes at the eye
of Faith; if he can but conquer thy Fath, he knows he shall conquer thy soul;
therefore, says he, I fight neither against small nor great, but against this
King-Grace; I fight against Faith; therefore our Savor prays that Peter's Faith
should not fail; so long as his faith did not fail, though his other Graces be
routed, and broken, yet Faith will recover all. That was an admirable Captain,
who when the Battle was lost, recovered it again himself when all his Soldiers
fled and left him; namely, Shammah, 2 Samuel 23.12, He alone stood to the battle,
and conquered a whole Troop, and slew many of the Philistines: Faith may be
compared to Shammah; when other Graces are foiled, and routed, our Faith will
recover all again; Now how should we strengthen Faith? Faith is compared to a
Shield; now this Shield is composed of four or five plates:

First, The gracious Promises that God has made; this is one plate that makes
the shield of Faith: you cannot be cast into such a condition, wherein you may
not meet with some Promise; therefore study the Promises, such as these: When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee: and through the Rivers,
they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.2. So that is
an excellent Scripture, Isa. 42.19, And I will bring the blind by a way that
they know not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make
darkness light before them, and crooked things straight; these things will I do
unto them, and not forsake them. What a precious Promise is that! though God
leads his people through a dark Wilderness, as I may say, and they see not one
beam of light; yet notwithstanding, if they lean upon the Lord, he will cause
darkness to be light before them.

A second Plate that the shield of Faith is composed of, and made up of, is,
the glorious Attributes of God: Gods Wisdom, Power, Mercy, Goodness, Truth; all
these put together, do spell All Sufficiency: the wisdom of God to guide us,
the power of God to protect us, the mercy of God to pity us, and the like.

Thirdly, Another Plate is this: the triumphant victory of Jesus Christ; he
has conquered our Enemy, blessed be his Name; our Savior he has crushed the
head of the Serpent, as Luther said excellently, Why should we fear a conquered
world, when the Conqueror himself is on our side? so, why should we fear a
conquered Enemy, a cursed Enemy, when the Conqueror himself is on our side?

The fourth Plate is this: The former Experiments we have had of Gods goodness,
2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom
we trust that he will yet deliver us. And when the Prophet David was in those
straits, when he cried out, Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be
favorable no more? has God forgotten to be gracious, has he in anger shut up
his tender mercy? Oh, says he, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the
years of the right hand of the most high. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10, I will remember
thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Nizar; there
I had a deliverance, and there I had a deliverance; and when my soul is cast
down within me, I will remember thee at such a place, and at such a place,
where thou did work a great deliverance for me, Psalm. 42.

Fifthly, The last Plate the shield of Faith is made up of, is, Gods infinite
love in giving of Jesus Christ; He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all; how shall he not with him freely give us all things? If God
has given us Jesus Christ, he will give us supportation under trouble, and he
will give us deliverance out of trouble.

The last Direction is this; Give not over praying: Although for the present
thou see not the fruit of thy prayers, give not over praying; but remember,
he that was tempted for thee on earth, is now interceding for thee in heaven:
Satan cannot be more ready to assault thee, than Jesus Christ to assist thee;
Satan cannot be so busy on earth to hurt thee, as Jesus Christ is busy in
heaven to help thee; and prayer through the intercession of Jesus Christ can
cast out Devils. Mr. Fox in his book of Martyrs in the second Volume, speaking
of Luther in the life of King Henry the eighth, mentions a story of a man that
was possessed with the Devil, that had sold his soul to the Devil at
Wittenburg: But Luther got a company of praying Christians together, to seek
God on his behalf, and would not give over seeking, till they had received an
Answer: So at last, the Devil in a great wind threw the Indenture in at the
window. Sometimes Prayer casts out the Devil; God sometimes gives such signal
testimonies of hearing Prayer, for the enocuragement of his Servants; therefore
do not give over resisting Satan's temptations, nor praying against him. Do as
that blessed Saint Katharine Bretter, when she was continually haunted with
Satan's temptations: said she, Satan, I am but a weak woman, I am not able to
answer all thy cavils and objections, but I will turn thee over to my Advocate;
I have an Advocate in Heaven to plead my cause; and after that, she was never
solicited by him. So do you, turn over thy case to thy Advocate, as a poor
Client does that has got a learned and faithful Advocate, leaves his cause with
him: turn over all to thy Advocate, that appears in the presence of God
continually for thee, Heb. 9.24, For Christ is not entered into the holy places
made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven it self,
now to appear in the presence of God for us: he appears as our Advocate. And if
God do not answer thee speedily, or if he do not answer thee in the Letter of
thy request, yet if thou can but get such a frame of heart as those three
Worthies had, Dan. 3.17.18, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery-furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King: But
if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship thy golden-image which thou have set up. So do thou say to Satan, God
is able to deliver me out of thy hands; but yet, if he do not, I am resolved I
will not yield unto thee, Satan; but I will lie at the feet of God, and look
up. If God do but give such a gracious frame of spirit as this, thou may be
confident this Text shall be fulfilled to thee; and that heaven and earth shall
pass away, before this truth shall pass away, held forth in this Doctrine, That
Christ's sufferings and temptations stir up in his heart a compassion to succor
and relieve us in our sufferings and Temptations.

Fear of missing Salvation: or, the way to obtain Salvation.
HEB. IV. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering
into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.


IN the last Text that I opened unto you, out of 2 Timothy 1.10, And has brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel: I showed you, That the
Salvation of God, or eternal Life and Salvation, was revealed to the sons of
men by the preaching of the Gospel; and how infinitely we stand indebted and
engaged to our God for our Gospel-mercies and Privileges; that we are in a
capacity of getting our souls saved; that we sit not in darkness and in the
shadow of death as others do: that we are not aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel (the Church of God, as other are): that we are not strangers to the
Covenant of Grace, Ephesians. 2.12: and strangers to the mysteries of Salvation,
and the way of Salvation revealed in the Gospel.

Certainly, Brethren, we shall never know how much we are indebted unto God,
nor can ever praise him enough for our Gospel-mercies, until we come to Heaven.
That I aim at in the choice of this Text, is to show you, and (if it be
possible) to make you sensible of the infinite and unconceiveable danger of
missing this Salvation, this eternal Life that is held forth in the Gospel; Let
us therefore fear, lest, etc. For, as I shall show you by Gods assistance, if
any of us who have the means of Salvation tendered to us in the Gospel, and
that hope of Salvation, and the way to Salvation; if any of us should come
short of Salvation, it were better a thousand times that we had never known the
Gospel; for none shall have a deeper place in Hell, than they that have had
Gospel-opportunities, and have not known in that their day the things that
belong to their peace: And certainly the tears of Hell are not sufficient to
bewail the loss of Heaven, the loss of Salvation; Let us therefore fear, lest a
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it.

For the connection of this, or the coherence of these words with the former
Chapter, take it thus briefly: If you look upon this Epistle to the Hebrews
with a discerning eye, you shall see that the scope of the Apostle is, to lift
up the Lord Jesus Christ in his three glorious Offices, of a King, of a Priest,
and of a Prophet; and to show his Dignity and Pre-eminence above the Angels, in
Chap. 1, above Moses, in Chap. 3, above Aaron, in Chap. 7.

Now the Apostle proving in Chap. 3, the Dignity of the Lord Jesus Christ above
Moses, although Moses was the most eminent man that ever lived upon the earth
(there was none that ever had more acquaintance with God, talking with him
familiarly, as a man talks with his friend; and therefore he was said to be a
King in Jesurun); yet the Apostle proves the Dignity and Pre-eminence of Jesus
Christ above Moses; in Chap. 3.5, 6, says the Apostle, And Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, that is in the Church of God, as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but Jesus Christ as a
Son over his own house; and therefore Christ is far above Moses. And he takes
occasion from hence to lay down this serious Exhortation to these Hebrews, and
in them to all succeeding Christians, that they should take heed that they do
not harden their hearts against the voice of Jesus Christ; in ver. 15, of the
foregoing Chapter, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as
in the provocation. Harden not your hearts against Christ, against the voice of
Christ in his Word; that this Exhortation might take the deeper impression, the
Apostle puts them in mind of a dreadful example of Gods wrath and indignation,
executed upon the stubborn Israelites in the Wilderness; they hardened their
hearts, they believed not his Word; and therefore God was so offended with
them, that their carcasses perish in the Wilderness; yea, the Lord took an
Oath, he swear that they should never enter into his Rest. Having laid down
this dreadful example of Gods wrath, in ver. 17.18, of the foregoing Chapter;
thereupon he infers this serious admonition, That all Christians should take
heed that they run not into the same danger that they did? and that they do not
deprive themselves of that eternal Rest that is laid up in Heaven, as the
Israelites deprived themselves of the Rest of Canaan; Let us therefore (says
the Apostle) fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any
of you should seem to come short of it. So then in the Text you may take notice
of these three particulars: 1. You have a serious Premonition or forewarning,
in these words, Let us therefore fear. 2. You have the ground or foundation of
this Premonition, in these words, Lest a promise being left us of entering into
his Rest. 3. A dreadful danger discovered, in case this warning be neglected,
in these words, Any of you seem to come short of it; that is, short of that
Eternal Rest that is promised.


In the first, the serious Premonition or forewarning, you have these two
particulars: First, the occasion of this Premonition, in this word Therefore;
Now this word therefore, has reference to something that went before in the
foregoing Chapter; the Apostle had told us of a generation of sinners in the
Wilderness, that had provoked the Lord to anger for forty years together:
insomuch, that the Lord swear that they should not enter into his Rest; and so
it came to pass, for of six hundred thousand that came out of Egypt, there were
but two, namely, Caleb and Joshua, that entered into the Land of Canaan; I say,
not above two (of those that were above twenty years old) that entered into the
Land of Canaan, but their carcasses fell in the Wilderness, the Wilderness was
their grave; therefore, says he, because of this dreadful example of Gods
wrath upon these stubborn Israelites, Let us fear; it is as if he should say,
let their woe be our warning, their destruction should be our instruction: from
hence you may take this point of Doctrine.

The examples of Gods wrath upon other sinnners,
should make us very careful to shun their sins.
And then secondly, You have the Premonition it self, in these words, Let us
therefore fear; and from thence you may take this Observation: The life of a
Christian must be a life of fear;
The whole course of a Christians life, must be a course of godly and watchful
fear.


And then you have the ground or foundation of this Premonition, in these
words, Lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest; wherein you have
three particulars.

1. That there is a heavenly Rest, an eternal Rest prepared; this the Apostle
takes for granted. He speaks here of entering into this Rest; therefore there is
a Rest prepared; from whence you may take this Observation: That there is a
Rest prepared in Heaven for Gods people.

2. This Rest is not only prepared, but it is also promised. Observe here,
says the Apostle, Lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest; from
hence you may observe, That the Rest prepared in Heaven for Gods People, is not
only prepared, but also promised to all them that do believe.

3. Take notice, This Rest, though it be prepared and promised, may yet be left
and forsaken by those to whom the promise is tendered, (...),
for so the word here in the original signifies, lest the promise be forsaken;
I know our translation reads the word thus, lest a promise being left us: as if
so be this were the sense of it, lest a promise being given us, lest a promise
being left us as a Legacy, lest a promise being bestowed upon us; but the word
Us is not in the Original; nor in the old Translation, as a late Learned
Eminent Writer, in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews observes; Dr.
Gouge.
the old Translation seems to come nearest the sense, which reads it thus, Lest
by forsaking the promise, we be deprived of that rest; so that although the
promise be made, though the promise of entering into rest be tendered to many;
yet notwithstanding this Promise may be left, may be forsaken: the words being
taken in this sense, you may observe this Proposition or Doctrine from them.

Though God be infinitely gracious in making a promise of eternal Rest: yet
many there are that do shamefully forsake this Promise. The third and last
branch of the Text, is the dreadful danger discovered, in case this Premonition
be neglected, that is in these words, Lest any of you should seem to come short
of it; you have three particulars:

First, The Persons that must avoid this dreadful danger, in these words, Any
of you; It is very observable here, how jealous the Apostle is of these
Hebrews, lest any of them should prove Apostates and Backsliders, and fall off
from their profession and principles, and so forsake the Promise, and by
forsaking the Promise, should come short of eternal Rest; from whence you may
take this Observation, or point of Doctrine: In matters of soul-concernment,
Christians should be very jealous, not only of themselves, but of others also.

Secondly, Observe the manner or extent of avoiding this dreadful danger, in
this phrase, seem, lest any seem to come short of it; it is as if the Apostle
should say, It is not enough for you to abstain from Apostasy and Backsliding,
which will cause your coming short of Heaven, but you must avoid the very
seeming and appearance of it; it is not enough that you do not utterly fall
away, but you must likewise take heed that you give no occasion to others to
think that you are fallen away, or like to fall away; from whence you may
observe this Doctrine: That it is not enough for Christians to abstain from
evil, but they must also abstain from the appearance of evil, and avoid the
occasions of danger.

But I come to the third and last particular, in the last branch of the Text,
which is indeed the most awakening and soul-shaking truth that you meet with in
the whole Book of God; that is, the unconceivable damage, or unvaluable loss,
that will fall upon them that do neglect the Apostles Premonition here, that
is, that the shall come short of eternal life: lest any of you (says he)
should seem to come short of it; or lest any of you should be deprived of that
eternal Rest that is prepared for, and promised to all those that do believe;
so then, in this last particular, in the last branch of the Text, there is
something employed, and something expressed: that which is employed, is this,
That it is possible for those that do profess the truth, to come short of
heaven, or else the Apostle would not have set down this Premonition here: and
then that which is expressed, is this, That it is a most unvaluable and
unconceivable loss, to come short of Heaven; so then from hence, there are
these two points of Doctrine I shall commend to you; and truly, they are two
very startling and awakening Truths, as by Gods assistance you shall hear in
the prosecution of them; And the first Doctrine is this:

Doct. 1. That it is possible for many that profess the truth, and are
confident that they are in a state of grace, and seem to come very near to
Heaven; yet for all that to come short of Heaven.

Doct. 2. To come short of Heaven, or that eternal happiness which is prepared
for the Saints in light, is a most dreadful, unconceivable, unvaluable,
irrecoverable loss; a loss that should be trembled at by all sorts of persons
whatsoever.

I begin with the first Doctrine, That it is possible for many that do profess
the truth, or true Religion, and are confident that they do belong to God, and
are in a state of Grace, and do seem to come very near to Heaven, yet for all
that to come short of Heaven. This is a very awakening Truth; but I shall by
Gods assistance make it clear to you, and confirm it in the three Branches of
it: First, That it is possible for many Professors of the Truth, or true
Religion, to come short of Heaven. Secondly, That it is possible for many that
are confident that they are in a state of Grace, to come short of Heaven.
Thirdly, That it is possible for many that come very near to Heaven, yet to
come short of Heaven.


I shall prove these three, and let your hearts go along with me; and oh, that
you and I could follow the counsel of the Prophet Isaiah, To hear the word of
the Lord with trembling.

For the first, That it is possible for many that profess the Truth and true
Religion, to come short of Heaven: I shall give you two instances for this: the
Scribes and Pharisees were those that professed the truth and true Religon,
they sat in Moses Chair; our Savior commanded his Disciples to hear them,
because they opened the Law, they were Expounders of the Law: and our Savior
commanded his Disciples to hear them, although they should not do as they did:
they professed the Truth and true Religion; and in the outward acts of Piety,
these Scribes and Pharisees went exceeding far. I will show you how far they
went, in these six particulars: First, They searched the Scriptures: they were
very diligent in reading the Law of Moses: they gave themselves so much to the
study of the Law, that they could tell exactly almost every verse in the five
books of Moses: nay, they could tell you how often every letter in the Hebrew
Alphabet was repeated in the Law of Moses: for example, the Letter Aleph was
repeated Three-hundred seventy-seven times in the five books of Moses.
Secondly, They were frequent in prayer; they prayed in the Streets, and in the
Synagogue, and made long prayers for a pretense to devour Widows houses, Matthew.
23.14. Thirdly, To Prayer, they added Fasting also: hear what one of them
says, Luke 18.12, I fast twice in the week: and this he did for the taming of
the body. Fourthly, They were very strict in the observation of the Sabbath,
insomuch that they quarrelled with our Savior because his Disciples did but
pluck the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day; nay, they were so superstitious in
the observation of the Sabbath, that if one had got a thorn in his foot, they
would not pull it out upon the Sabbath Day, for fear of breaking the Sabbath.
Fifthly, They were very industrious in teaching of others: they compassed Sea
and Land to make a Proselyte, Matthew. 23.15: they would have taken any pains to
win others to the same Sect or Religion with themselves. Sixthly, They were
very exact and unblameable in their outward conversation; for,


1. They were free from more gross and scandalous sins which stare a man in the
face: God, I thank thee (says the Pharisee) that I am not as other men are:
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, Luke 18.11: Nay,
they separated themselves from notorious sinners; they would not come into the
company of Drunkards and Sabbath Breakers: they were of the strictest Religion
amongst the Jews: their Religion was the most strait Sect, Acts 26.5, which
knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most strait
Sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisee; insomuch that it was generally
conceived among the Jews, that if there were but two men in all the world that
should go to Heaven, a Scribe was one, and a Pharisee the other; and yet those
Professors for all that, fell short of Heaven; and our Savior says, That
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.20.

Let me give you another example of the five foolish Virgins which you read of
in Matthew. 25: Our Savior tells us, That five Virgins were wise, and five were
foolish; By Virgins there, are meant Professors, and they are called
Virgin-Professors, because they were not tainted or defiled with any gross or
scandalous sin; even those five foolish Virgins, they notwithstanding in their
own opinion, and in the opinion of others, were waiting for the coming of the
Bridegroom Christ; and yet for all this, those Virgin-professors fell short of
Heaven, Matthew. 25.10, And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they
that were ready went in with him to the Marriage, and the door was shut; the
door of Heaven, the door of Mercy was shut against them; so you see the first
Branch proved.

2. Let me prove the second Branch, That it is possible for many that are
confident that they are in a state of Grace, and that they have an interest in,
and belong to the Lord Jesus Christ, to come short of Heaven; in Matthew. 7.22,
23, Many will say to me in that day, (at the great day of Judgment) Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesied in thy name; and in thy name have cast out Devils, and
in thy name have done many wonderful works? and then will I profess unto them,
I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. Mark, how confident
they are; have we not prophesied in thy name, and cast out Devils in thy name?
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, Luke 13.26: To whom Jesus Christ will
say, Depart from me ye that work iniquity: get you out of my sight, I cannot
abide to look upon you; these were confident, What a deal of confidence express
they! as if they had been as really acquainted with Jesus Christ, as any were;
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, etc? Again, in Romans 2.17, 18,
19, the Apostle speaks there to that boasting Jew, Thou restest in the Law, and
make thy boast of God, and know his will, and approvest the things that
are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law, and art confident that
thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness;
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes: which have the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the Law; thou therefore which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Such a one as teaches others, and teaches not
himself, such a one is stark naught; so that it is possible for a man to be a
teacher of others, and confident of coming to Heaven, and yet for all that come
short of it; that is the second Branch.

3. Let me prove the third branch of the Doctrine, That it is possible for men
to come very near to Heaven, and yet for all that to come short of Heaven. Let
me give you some Examples for that: This was the case of the young man in the
Gospel, which you read of, Matthew. 19 20, 21, when our Savior bid him to keep
the Commandments: says he, Lord, all these things I have kept from my youth
up; the meaning is this, as to his outward conversation he was unblameable: he
came so near Heaven, that as St. Mark relates the story, Mar. 10.21, Jesus
beholding him, loved him; that is, he looked upon him in a very friendly
manner, and pitied him, that such a one should come so near to Heaven, and yet
come short of it, by resting on his own self-righteousness; he came near
Heaven, but yet he came short of it: so Herod came near Heaven, Mar. 6.20, he
heard John Baptist gladly, and he did many things that John Baptist bid him,
and yet he came short of it. So you read of a Scribe, Mar. 12.34, that answered
very discreetly to our Savior; our Savior tells him, Thou art not far from
the Kingdom of God, and yet he came short of it; What a sad thing was that! So
Agrippa, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian, Act. 26.28; but yet he
was not a whole Christian; so he came near to Heaven, but yet he came short of
Heaven. But here it may be demanded:

Quest. But how far then may a man go on in the profession of the truth and
true Religion, and yet come short of Heaven?

To this I answer, Truly a Professor may go so far, that the hearing of it may
make some of you tremble, and to say, What will become of me! Now I shall show
you that in three particulars: A man may have,
1. A very glorious show of grace and holiness, and yet have no true grace at
all. 2. Admirable gifts, and parts, and qualifications, and yet have no true
grace at all. 3. Some superficial beginnings, and tastes of Grace and Holiness,
and yet have no truth of Grace, but come short of Heaven.


First, A man may have a very glorious show of holiness, and yet have no true
grace, and so come short of Heaven; he may have something like grace; as in a
Garden, Weeds may be so like good Herbs, that it may be hard to know one from
the other: a man may have such a show of grace, that he may be thought to have
grace in truth: Let me give you instances in these four particulars:

First, A man may be a fair civil carriaged man, very innocent and inoffensive
in his conversation: one that does not oppose the Gospel, nor oppose the Truth;
this is something. Some there are that are Lions, of whom David complains,
Psalm 57.4, My soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on
fire. Some there are that have Lion-like Spirits, whose hearts are all set on
fire: that would overthrow Magistrates and Ministers, and Sabbaths, and
Ordinances, and all; it is something for a man to be civil and inoffensive in
his carriage, that he is no Enemy to the Gospel.

Secondly, A man may be a frequenter of Ordinances: and a man may be a
countenancer of Religion, and an owner of Magistracy and Ministry, and yet all
this while have but a show of grace, and no true grace at all. In Luke 13.26,
27, there you have some that will say to our Savior, Lord, we have eaten and
drunk in thy presence, and we have heard thee teach in our streets. There are
many that frequent Ordinances, that come to the Assemblies of Gods people day
after day, and wait upon God in the use of his Ordinances: some that honor the
Ministers of God, and yet for all that come short of Heaven.

Thirdly, They may go farther; they may be maintainers and supporter of
Ministers, both by their Persons and Purses: and thus it was with Ananias and
Sapphira: they went and sold their possessions, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet, and yet come short of Heaven.

Fourthly, They may go so far, not only to have a good opinion of themselves,
but they may gain the good opinion of others: Nay, they may be well thought of
by those that are men of judgment; those that are godly may think well of them,
that they are real Saints, and that their names are written in the book of
life, as is meant by that Scripture, in Psalm 69.28, where David says, Let
them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the
righteous; It cannot so be understood, that a man that has once his name
written in the book of Life, can have it blotted out: but the meaning is this,
Blot them out of the book of Life, that is, discover their names were never
written in that book; discover them to be but Hypocrites, though they carry
themselves so fairly, that for the present others do think that their names are
written in the book of Life; Judas carried the matter so fair, that the rest of
the Disciples questioned themselves, rather than Judas: Master, is it I? says
one of them; Master, is it I? says another; they never dreamed that Judas
should betray their Master. Simon Magus carried the matter so fair, that
Philip, that was one of the Deacons, reckoned him to be a true Believer, and
was baptized, and continued with Philip. This is the first particular, That a
man may have glorious shows of grace and holiness, and yet have no true grace
at all.

Secondly, The second thing is to show, that a man may have admirable gifts and
parts, and qualifications that are like to grace, and yet are not true grace.
For example:

A man may have an admirable gift in Preaching; he may be a very able Preacher,
having a very acute and quick Invention: a profound Judgment, a retentive
Memory, a clear Elocution: Judas, I make no question, was as good a Preacher as
the rest of the eleven Apostles; a man may preach to others, and yet he himself
in the mean while be a castaway; Oh we that are Preachers, we may preach
against Pride with proud hearts: against Covetousness with covetous hearts:
press Self-denial with self-seeking hearts: press Repentance with impenitent
hearts: we may preach these things, and yet not feel them at all in our own
hearts: So, a man may have an admirable gift in Prayer (I do not say the grace
of Prayer), there is a great deal of difference between the gift and the grace
of Prayer; the gift of Prayer makes a man proud, the grace of Prayer makes a
man humble: the gift of Prayer abounds in outward expressions, the grace of
Prayer consists in inward impressions upon the heart; the gift of Prayer vents
its self in public, but the grace of Prayer is most enlarged in private; the
gift of Prayer makes a man pray in his own strength, but the grace of Prayer
makes a man pray in the strength of Jesus Christ; the gift of Prayer makes a
man expect an echo of praise from men, but the grace of Prayer expects only
the approbation of God; the gift of prayer that may be lost, but the grace of
Prayer is never lost; I say, a man may have admirable gifts in Prayer,
excellent Expressions, and seeming-impressions upon the heart: some may pray
like Saints, and in the mean time live like Devils. I am confident this
deceives many: Some there are that have fine voluble Tongues in Prayer, that a
man would think them to be Angels in prayer: but look into their lives, and O
how crooked are they in their paths and conversation?

So, A man may have the gift of Government, so much prudence and policy: a man
may be such a deep Politician, that he may be able to balance the affairs of a
Kingdom, and yet have no grace at all; that was the case of Achitophel: he was
so prudent and politic in his counsels, that he was esteemed as an Oracle of
God, 2 Samuel 16.23. And yet for all this, such a one may come short of Heaven;
and that may be said to those men that have those parts, and gifts, and
qualifications, and are not sanctified; that have the gifts of preaching, and
praying, and Government, which was said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with
thee; so they and their gifts, and parts, and qualifications perish with them.

Thirdly, Again, you shall see in another particular, how far Professors may
go, and yet come short of Heaven; namely, he may have some superficial
beginnings and tastes of grace and holiness, and yet have no truth of grace, and
so come short of Heaven; let me show you this in these four particulars:

1. He may be able to give his assent to the truth; he may consent to this
truth, That the Bible is the word of God, and that he believes it is so; so
Simon Magus did, Acts 8.13, the Text says, that he believed.

2. He may have so much knowledge as may move his affections with joy, that he
may rejoice in the word that he knows: thus the Pharisees, They rejoiced in
John Baptists light for a season, John 5.35. And it is said of the second
ground in the Parable, that they received the word with joy, Luke 8.13. And God
speaks of the Hypocrites, Isa. 58.2, Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a Nation that did rigteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance
of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in
approaching to God; and yet all this, it was but like a Land-flood that is
quickly dried up: or like a flash of lightning which quickly passes away.

3. He may have such a taste and superficial beginning of grace, that he may be
moved so much at a Sermon, as to have some kind of purpose and resolution of
amendment of life, 1 Samuel 26.21, you may read there that wicked wretch and
Hypocrite Saul had sometimes good purposes and resolutions: Then said Saul, I
have sinned; Return my son David, for I will no more do the harm; he was
convinced in his conscience, that it was out of malice that he did persecute
that innocent Servant of God; so it may be you may have some Drunkard, when he
lies under the smarting Rod of Gods displeasure, to vow that he will never be
drunk more.

4. A man may have this taste and superficial beginning of grace, that he may
attain to some external reformation; he may escape the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2.20. A
natural carnal man, an Hypocrite, may get so much soap out of the Word of God,
as may wash his outside, but yet he may return to the mire again, because he is
a Swine still: he may be washed like a Hog on the outside, but yet he is a
Swine still: Hypocrites may abstain from many sins out of a slavish fear, and
perform duties out of by-respects; Jezzabel fasted, the Pharisees prayed, and
gave alms; Felix feared and trembled, here was the beginnings and tastes of
grace; these tasted of the heavenly gift: Heb. 6.4; they had a taste of the
water of life, but they spit it out again.

But then it may be demanded, What is the reason that a Professor may go so far
in the ways of Christianity, and yet come short of Heaven?

For answer, I shall give you reasons for all these three particulars:

First, A Professor may go thus far in the way to Heaven, and yet come short of
Heaven, for these two reasons:

1. Because there is some failing in his profession; his profession wants
either root or sincerity, or love to Jesus Christ.

It may be his profession wants root: he has taken up the profession of
Religion, but he was never yet humbled; the Plow of humiliation never went deep
enough: he was never convinced of the indispensible need that he has of
Christ, to say, Give me Christ, or I dye; he was never convinced of the evil of
sin, of the burden of sin, of the loathsome nature of sin, of the Hell that is
in every sin.

Or it may be he wants Sincerity, he takes up Religion for by-ends, or for
self-interest, or it may be he follows Christ for the Loaves: for indeed there
are but few that follow Christ for Christ's sake. It was the complaint of
Austin, Jesus is seldom sought for Jesus sake. And as God complains, Zech. 7.5,
When ye fasted and mourned, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? Ephraim
is an empty Vine, bringing forth fruit unto himself, Hos. 10.1.

Or it may be, his profession wants love; now love is an inward principle; and
where the inward principle of love is in the heart, there profession never
fails, Ephesians. 6.24, Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. But now, it may be outwardly he has some love to Jesus Christ, as
the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of his Hearers, or God to him concerning them: Son
of Man, the children of thy people come unto thee as the people comes, and
they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but will not do
them: for with their mouths they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31. And the Lord Christ may say to them, just
as Dalilah said to Sampson, How can thou say thou love me, when thy heart
is not with me? Judge. 16.15. That is one Reason.

2. A second is this: Men may go so far in the way to Heaven, and yet come
short of it; because though they have an outward lamp of profession, yet they
have no oil in their lamps: that is, no reality; they have not that faith that
works by love: they have not that repentance which teaches them more
mortification, which crucifieth the flesh; these are the Reasons of the first
Branch.

Secondly, It may be demanded, How comes it to pass, that men may be so
confident that they are in a state of grace, and yet come short of Heaven?

The reason is this, because of their own self-flattery, and self-delusion:
They think themselves something when they are nothing, and so deceive
themselves: they think themselves rich, and increased in goods, and stand in
need of nothing; whereas they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. They think they have grace, when indeed they have none; they think
their Grace is true, when it is but counterfeit; they think their faith is true
Faith, when it is but Fancy; they think their Repentance is true Repentance,
when it is but Worldly-sorrow; they think their obedience is true Obedience,
when it is but Hypocrisy. It may be they take Civility for Sanctity, and
natural parts for true Piety: it may be they take Restraining-grace for
Renewinggrace, and so they are deceived in their spiritual Estates. Thousands
there are that deceive themselves in this particular.

Thirdly, It may be demanded: But how comes it to pass that it is possible for
men to come near to Heaven, and yet come short of Heaven?

For answer to this, I shall give you but two Reasons:

First, Men come near Heaven, and yet come short of Heaven, because they will
not come up to the price; I do not mean the price of merit; I abhor that
opinion, to think that we can merit Heaven; but my meaning is this, they do not
come up to the price of means: though nothing can be done by way of merit, yet
much must be done in the use of means: my meaning is, they will not do that
which Jesus Christ would have them do: they will not suffer that which must be
suffered; they will not forsake that which must be forsaken.

1. They will not do that which Jesus Christ would have them do; for Example,
they will not walk exactly, they will not renew their repentance; they will not
set about the work of God with all their might, and mind, and strength; they
will not work out their salvation with fear and trembling; there is much to be
done, many duties to be done from a right principle, in a right manner, and to
a right end. 2. They will not suffer that which is to be suffered; our Savior
says, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross
and follow me: You must be content to bear his Cross, as well as to wear his
Crown; Now this they will not do.
Again, They will not forsake that which must be forsaken; our Savior says, a
man must part with his right-eye, and right hand, any thing that stands in
opposition to, or that comes in competition with him. Now men will not do, they
will not suffer, they will not forsake what Christ would have them: It fares
with them as with a pedling Chapman, who likes a Commodity well, but he will
not come up to the price of it; men are willing to do something, but they will
not do so much as is required: they will not proportion their labor according
to their work, they will not make up the hedge according to the breach. This is
certain, many there are that come short of Heaven, because they do not use the
utmost of their endeavors, for the prosecution of the end; many come short of
Heaven, because of their slight endeavors in the way of heaven, Luke 13,
Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able; What is the reason? they only seek, but do not
strive; It is not enough for you to seek to enter in at the strait gate, unless
you strive, and you must strive as in an Agony; so the word (...), signifies
the Original.

Secondly, A second reason is this, Why some men come so near Heaven, and yet
come short of Heaven, Because of their Apostasy: they begin in the spirit, and
end in the flesh: they put their hands to the Plow, and look back; you did run
well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth? Gal. 5.7. You do
not obey it constantly, you are not steady and firm in the truth, but you are
starting aside like a broken bow; falling from the truth in their profession,
and in their practice of Religion: These are the reasons why men come near
Heaven, and yet come short of Heaven. And thus I have proved the Point in the
three Branches of it. Now what use shall we make of it?

The Use is this, by way of Conviction; Oh what terror may this strike into
the hearts of all those who are only Nominal Christians, that have a name only
to live, and in the mean time are dead; that have a form of Godliness, but are
as great strangers to the power of it, as Pagans are to the profession of it!
Oh what terror may this strike into the hearts of all you that come short of
those that come short of Heaven! and if you come short of those that come short
of heaven, what will become of you? For example, May a man be a frequenter of
the Word of God? May a man make conscience of keeping the Sabbath? I mean, for
the external observation of it: May a man be a countenancer of Religion, and
yet come short of Heaven? then what will become of them that neglect
Ordinances? What will become of them to whom the Word of the Lord is a burden?
The word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it, Jer.
16.10. And what will become of them that say of the service of the Lord, What a
weariness is it? Mal. 1.13. What a weariness is it to wait on God, and to hear
Sermons? If a man may be a Believer, and yet come short of Heaven, I mean, a
temporary Believer, to believe for a while; then what will become of them that
believe not at all? believe none of the Precepts of God to obey them? nor the
promises, to embrace them, nor the threatenings to tremble at them; If a man
have outward reformation, and yet come short of Heaven; What then will become
of them that have no reformation at all, that wallow in the mire of their sins?
What will become of Liars, and Swearers, and Drunkards. The Pharisees were no
friends to those gross sins, and yet they came short of Heaven. Oh that this
might awaken all those that are yet asleep in their sins, that are rockt in the
Devils Cradle, and that do not understand their own condition! May a man have
natural parts and qualifications, and yet come short of Heaven? What will
become of them that are Sots in matters of Religion, that have not obtained to
their A B C in Religion, but are ignorant of the fundamentals of Religion? May
a man have some superficial tastes and beginnings of grace, and give his assent
to the truths of the Gospel? May he receive the word of God with joy? May he be
moved at a Sermon, and have a resolution to obey, and reform many things, and
yet come short of Heaven? then how doleful and dreadful is their condition,
that have no affection to, nor no delight in the Word of the Lord? that have no
purposes of new and better obedience; but they come to hear the Word out of
Formality and Custom, and not to get any spiritual advantage to their own
souls: Oh! if this were seriously thought upon, it would make Sinners to look
about them, and to fall down at the feet of God, and say, Lord, what will
become of me! Lord, what will become of me!

Use 2. Of Exhortation. I shall close this Point with a word of Exhortation. If
it is possible for many that profess the Truth and true Religion, and are
confident that they are in a state of grace, and seem to come very near to
Heaven, and yet for all that to come short of it; then as you love your God, as
you love your Souls, as you love your Peace, as you desire to appear with
comfort before your Judge, rest not in any bare outward profession; rest not in
a naked name of Religion: Be not contented that you have the Lamps of
Profession, unless you have the Oil of saving Grace. Consider, what advantage
will it be for you to come near to heaven, to come to the brow of the hill, as
it were, and afterward to drop down into hell! What advantage will it be for a
man to be lifted up to heaven, and not lifted up into heaven! it is the
greatest curse that can possibly be expressed. Oh what a cutting Corrosive,
what a gnawing Worm will this be to all Eternity, for a man to say, I came near
to Heaven, to the top of the Hill, and yet I fell short of those glorious hopes
that are laid up for the Saints in light: O what a stinking Cockatrice will
this be to them that have but a bare naked name of Religion, an outward
profession only.

It may be thou art no Swearer, nor Liar, nor Sabbath-breaker, but it may be
thou art a covetous wretch, over head and ears in the world, tumbling up and
down in dirt and clay, as if there were no other happiness but here below: It
may be thou art but a formal Christian; it may be thou art but a picture that
has hands and eyes, but no legs: it may be thou have eyes, but no feet to run
the ways of Gods Commandments: It may be, it may be said of some of you young
men that hear me this day, what was said of the young man in the Gospel, You
are not far from the Kingdom of God; what will this advantage you, if you do
not follow Jesus Christ fully, and obey him sincerely, that you may enjoy him
eternally! O that my counsel this day were accepted by you; in the fear of the
Lord give no rest to your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids, until you can
say, Blessed be God, I am more than the best Hypocrite in the world; though he
can outstrip me in show, yet for the inside I outstrip him. But it may be you
will say, What is this inside of Christianity, this essential Religion, wherein
you would have us outstrip Hypocrites, and those that come short of Heaven?

I will tell you in three words: To the Essentials of Christianity, there are
these three things required: 1. Union with Christ. 2. Renewing Grace. 3. A
Compliance with the Will of Christ.


First, Union with Christ: Till you are united to him, you have no interest in
him, nor benefit by him; therefore look this, that you have the Spirit of God
to unite you to the Lord Jesus Christ: Our Savior says, John 15.4, As the
branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, so neither
can you bring forth fruit, unless you abide in me. O labor for this Union:
when the Soul is once united to him, then it has communion with him, in his
life, in his death, in his resurrection, in his intercession, in his graces,
and comforts, and all. What is that which knits the Cistern to the Fountain?
You know it is the Leaden Pipe, that is it that is the conveyance from the
Conduit-head to the Cistern: so here; What is it that knits thy Soul to Jesus
Christ, that thou may be continually partaking of him, who is the Fountain of
light, and life, and peace, and consolation? What is it but this Pipe, the
Union that is between Christ and the soul? Now a Hypocrite has not this Union,
he is not united to Christ: it may be he bears the name of Christ, but never
was ingrafted into him: it may be he is tied to Christ by the thread of an
outward profession, as the Seions is tied to the stock, but yet he is not
ingrafted into the stock.

Secondly, It consists in renewing Grace: If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. An Hypocrite may have many trinkets and bables, as we
say; I, but a Regenerate man, he brings forth one Jewel worth ten thousand of
them: An Hypocrite may have restraining grace; but a truly Regenerate man, he
is renewed in the spirit of his mind: he has a new name, which I spoke of in
so many Sermons, the white Stone, and the new Name, Rev. 3.

Thirdly, This Essence of Christianity, consists in a total compliance with the
Will of Christ; he that is a true Believer, a true Regenerate man, an inside
Christian, he can say, Lord, not my will, but thy will be done; Lord, Rule in
me as thou please, so I may be but thine; take possession of my heart, and
dispossess sin and Satan: he will say, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

But now an Hypocrite, it may be he gives up his name to Jesus Christ in
profession, but he does not give up his heart to Christ in subjection and
submission: it is one thing to give up the name to Christ, and another thing to
give up the heart to Christ; when you give up the key of the Castle to Christ,
then you will say, Lord, I will do what thou would have me do, and suffer
what thou would have me suffer, and forsake what thou would have me
forsake, there is nothing I have, though it be as dear to me as my right hand,
and right-eye, but I will part with it at thy command.

To shut up all, If you would not come short of them that come short of Heaven,
then rest not in a bare profession, in a bare naked name of Christianity;
labor to be united to Christ, labor for renewing Grace: labor to give up
your selves to Jesus Christ; let there be a compliance in your will to the will
of Christ.

Again, If many may be confident that they are in a state of Grace, and yet
come short of Heaven; O then take heed of self-delusion, and self-flattery, to
think your selves something when you are nothing, and so deceive your own
souls: It is better a thousand times for a man to think himself nothing when he
is something, than to think himself something when he is nothing; says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.10, I have labored more abundantly than they all, and yet
not I, but the grace of God which was with me. Beg earnestly of God that you
may know the worst of your selves, and the best of Jesus Christ; and pray, O
Lord, let me not be deceived in this great business of Eternity; let me not go
to hell with vain hopes of Heaven.

Thirdly, May a man come near to Heaven, and yet come short of it? O then take
heed of these two sins, Slothfulness and Apostasy.

Take heed of Slothfulness: Be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. Give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure; set to the work with all your might, put your whole strength
to the work: shake off all drowsiness and dullness.

And then take heed of Apotacy: this makes many that come near to Heaven, to
come short of Heaven, because they do not hold out to the end: He that endures
to the (...) shall be saved; blessed are they who notwithstanding all
difficulties and discouragements that they meet with in Heavens way, are
resolved to hold out to the end, and in the end. Thus I have dispatched the
first Doctrine, That it is possible for many that profess the Truth, and are
confident that they are in a State of Grace, and seem to come near to Heaven,
and yet for all that to come short of Heaven.

Now I come to the second Doctrine in this last Branch of my Text, from these
words; Come short of it. And the Doctrine is this: To come short of eternal
Rest, is such an unvaluable and unconceivable, and irrecover able loss, that it
is to be trembled at, by all sorts of persons whatsoever.

It is a loss to be trembled at by all those that have not quite lost their
sense and feeling. For the confirmation of this truth, there are these two
Queries I shall speak to: First, What it is to come short of this eternal Rest.
Secondly, How it may appear that this coming short of Heaven, is such an
unvaluable, irrecoverable, and unconceivable loss.


For the first, What it is to come short of this eternal rest; What is it? Oh!
God grant that neither you, nor I, nor any soul here present, may ever
experimentally know what it is to come short of Gods eternal rest; let me show
you what it is, that you may avoid this dreadful danger; The Original word here
used, is (...), and it signifies to come too late, just as those five foolish
Virgins that had no oil in their Lamps, they came and knocked, Lord, Lord, said
they, open to us: but the door of Mercy was shut, they came too late; Matthew.
25.10, 11. It signifies likewise to fail of that which a man expects, Heb.
12.15, Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God. Or it
signifies this, for a man to miss the Gole or Prize that he runs for, and so it
is a Metaphor from runners in a Race: if they be heavy, or lumpish, or
careless, they lose the Prize, they miss the Gole; So Christians that are
secure. and careless, and slothful, and mind every thing more than that one
thing that is necessary; they come too late, they fail of Grace and Glory, they
miss the Gole, they lose the Prize, they are deprived of that eternal happiness
they expected: this is to come short of this eternal Rest.

Second, It may be demanded, How will it appear that this coming short of
eternal Rest, is such an unvaluable, unconceivable, and irrevocable loss, that
it is to be trembled at?

I answer, It will appear by these three reasons: They that come short of
Heaven, they lose, 1. The Presence Of God in eternal happiness. They that come
short of Heaven, they lose, 2. The Favor Of God in eternal happiness. They
that come short of Heaven, they lose, 3. The Fruition Of God in eternal
happiness.


First, They that come short of this Eternal Rest, they lose the presence of
God; how great, how unconceivably great this loss is, it passes my skill to
tell you: But conceive it thus: David tells us, in Psalm 16. ult. In his
presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore.
Now, if in the presence of God be the fullness of joy, then certainly in the
want of his presence, is the fullness of misery? If at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore, then certainly at his left hand is woe, and misery, and
calamity for evermore: even such misery as the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of, Ezekiel.
2. ult. A roll of a book was written within and without, lamentations, and
mourning, and woe: And it stands with reason it should be so; for, if God be
light, then a separation from God must needs be darkness; If God be life, then
a separation from God must needs be death; If God be the fountain of Bliss,
then the separation from him must needs be the possession of all misery, and
woe, and calamity, and distress, that can possibly be expressed or conceived.
This punishment of loss, in the opinion of all Divines, does incomparably
torment the soul, more than all the punishment, and tortures, and torments of
Hellfire: Nay, the loss of that heavenly and unconceivable Joy, the loss of one
hours communion with the crowned Saints in glory, the loss of one glimpse of
the glorified Body of Jesus Christ, is a greater and far more and considerable
loss, than the loss of all the Kingdoms of the World besides: I know that
carnal men have very carnal conceits of Heaven and happiness, because they look
usually upon heaven and spiritual things with carnal eyes: but if they did but
look upon them with such an eye as Moses did, Heb. 11.27, By the eye of Faith
he saw him that was invisible: if they would not look upon things that are
seen, but upon things that are not seen; For, the things that arn seen are
themporal, but the things that are not seen are spiritual and eternal, as says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.18. If they could but look upon them with spiritual eyes,
then they would acknowledge, that a thousand thousand rendings of the body from
the soul, are far less than one rending of the soul from God. It was the speech
of one Nicostratus, a curious Painter, to one that admired at him for looking
so wishfully upon a curious Picture; Oh, said he, if thou had but my eyes,
thou would admire what I admire; so may I say to men that will not now
believe that the loss of Gods presence is such a loss; had thou but spiritual
eyes, thou would acknowledge the truth of what I now say, That the loss of
Gods presence is such a loss as can never, never, be sufficiently bewailed, no
not with tears of blood. It was the speech of Chrysostom, and it was a savoury
speech; I had rather endure a thousand Hells, than to hear that one dreadful
sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: And suitable to this was the speech of Augustine, I could be
contented to endure the torments of Hell for a while, so I might but see the
glorified body of Jesus Christ in Heaven; for you know what our Savior says,
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, John 17.24. The sight
of Christ's glory in heaven, is that which makes heaven to be Heaven. It was a
good speech of Luther, Heaven without Gods presence, would be but as a Box
without a Jewel. Now if this Beatifical Vision, as it is called, the beholding
of the glory of Christ in Heaven, be such a happiness; Oh what is it to be
excluded and thrust out from the glorified presence of Christ, never to see his
face! You know when Saint Paul told the Disciples at Ephesus, Acts 20.25, 38,
And now behold, that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of
God, shall see my face no more. This cut them to the heart, this occasioned so
much sorrowing and sadness, because he said, You shall see my face no more: Now
if that were matter of so much sadness, never to see the Apostles face more;
Oh, what will it be, when Jesus Christ shall say to such an one, Thou shall
never see my face; Go thou cursed wretch, get thee away from me: go to Hell, to
the Devil and damned spirits: there, there, shall be thy portion for ever and
ever! This is the first Reason, to show how unvaluable, how unconceivable this
loss is; the coming short of Heaven is the loss of Gods presence.

2. The second Reason is this: They that come short of Heaven, as they lose the
presence of God, so they lose the favor, love, mercy and compassion of God;
the favor of God is better than life, Psalm 63.3, Because thy loving kindness
is better than life, my lips shall praise thee; because when this life is gone,
the favor of God toward his Elect will last to all eternity, therefore it is
better than life; but they that come short of Heaven, lose this favor of God;
all pity, all mercy, all compassion, all hope of favor shall then be utterly
taken away; God will be so far from showing favor to them, that he will laugh
at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes as desolation, and their
destruction as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon them, as it
is Prove. 1.26, 27: They shall lose not only the favor of God, but the favor
of all their Friends that they have enjoyed here upon earth: they shall lose
the favor of their Fathers and Mothers, of Husbands and Wives, and Children
and bosom-Friends: for although they were nearly related to them, yet if they
come to heaven, and themselves excluded, those glorified Saints that are in
heaven, will abandon them with detestation and derision; nay, they will rejoice
in their destruction, and in the execution of Gods justice and vengeance upon
them, Psalm. 58.10, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance; a
glorified Father in Heaven shall rejoice in the destruction and condemnation of
a damned Son; a glorified Yoke Fellow in Heaven shall rejoice in the
destruction and damnation of such a Yoke Fellow as is condemned: No prayers, no
tears, no sobs nor supplications, no cryings to the mountains to fall upon
them, shall one whit avail: there shall be no Mediator, none in heaven or earth
to plead for them, or to speak one word on their behalf. This is the second
Reason, They that come short of Heaven, lose the favor of God.

3. They that come short of Heaven, as they lose the presence of God, and the
favor of God; so they lose the fruition of God, the enjoyment of God in
eternal happiness; they lose a Crown that is incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not away, that is reserved for the Saints in light: they lose an
inheritance, an everlasting inheritance: If the loss of an earthly comfort
(suppose it be of a dear Wife, or hopeful Child, or a bosom Friend, or an
outward Estate of an Inheritance of a thousand pounds a year: if the loss of a
stately House, or the loss of a rich Ship at Sea) does many times so affect a
man, that it goes to his very heart; you know what Jacob said, If Benjamin be
taken away, my dearly beloved son Benjamin, then said he, shall I go to my
grave mourning; my gray hairs will be brought with sorrow to the grave, Genesis
42.38. If an earthly loss, the loss of an earthly comfort, do so affect and
afflict a man, O what will the loss of an everlasting Kingdom, of everlasting
Glory, of everlasting Happiness, of those everlasting Pleasures that are at the
right hand of God, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive; O how will this loss torture and
torment the soul, and make such a one cry out in anguish and extreme
bitterness, Oh cursed beast that I was, to me was the Gospel preached in power
and purity; I lived in a City where heavenly Manna was dropping down every day,
on the weekday as well as on the Lords day; to me was Jesus Christ proffered
in all his beauty and imbroidery: nay, the Ministers of the Gospel did woe me,
entreat me, invite me, and beseech me, as if Jesus Christ himself had been upon
his knees, beseeching me to be reconciled; to me was Salvation tendered, but I
neglected all, I slighted all, and now must I for ever endure those torments
that might have been escaped, and must for ever be deprived of those joys that
might have been gained: I might have been what now I am not; O that I might be
any thing rather than what I now am: O that I might be a Toad, or a Serpent, or
any thing, or nothing! The consideration therefore of this loss, the loss of
happiness, the loss of such a happiness, the loss of an eternal happiness, will
rend the caul of their hearts in a thousand thousand pieces: the tears of hell
will not be sufficient to bewail the loss of Heaven, especially if you take in
but these three aggravations of this loss.

1. They that lose this eternal happiness, shall look upon others that have
gained it; they shall look upon the Saints and Servants of Christ that are now
in joy in that unconceivable Glory, whereof themselves come short, and this
will be an eternal Corrosive to their consciences; so says our Savior, Luke
13.28, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out; All the blessed Saints and Servants of God, received into
Heaven, and themselves shut out: that is one aggravation.

2. Take in this aggravation also, That this loss of eternal happiness, is ever
accompanied with the punishment of sense; if it were only a punishment of loss,
it was a dreadful punishment, but the punishment of loss never goes alone: they
that lose Heaven, must have Hell for their portion: they must have those
unconceivable tortures and torments, which infinitely surpass the capacity and
comprehension of such poor creatures as we are: Alas! we know not what it is to
lie under the burden of Gods wrath: when Mountains and Milstones of wrath are
thrown upon the soul, and the Lord will so far enable the soul, that it shall
be bearing that wrath, and bearing, and bearing it to all Eternity.

3. Take in this aggravation also: This loss it is irrecoverable, once lost,
and ever lost: Heaven once lost will never, never be recovered; after as many
millions of years as there are drops in the Ocean, that loss will still be
bewailed, and bewailed, and bewailed to all Eternity. If you put all these
together, I believe you will assent to me now, and acknowledge the truth of this
point; That to come short of Heaven, is such an unvaluable, and unconceivable,
and irrecoverable loss, that it is to be trembled at by all sorts of persons
whatsoever: For the use of this point, First, By way of Information. Secondly,
By way of Exhortation:


First, By way of Information: It shows us the extreme folly and madness of all
impenitent Sinners, who will venture the loss of God, and the favor of God;
the loss of Christ, and the presence of Christ; the loss of heaven and
happiness, and the loss of their own souls, rather than they will lose the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season: it is such a madness, that heaven
and earth may stand amazed at it! Consider, and befool your selves, O you
carnal and careless ones, if you have not sinned away your very sense and
reason also: Consider, blush, and be ashamed, and be confounded in the presence
of the Lord this day; you that never yet set your faces toward Heaven, you
that never made it your business to look out for a Christ; you that never shed
a penitential tear from a broken heart; you that cannot abide to think of
Humiliation and Repentance; you that never sought for eternal happiness by
patient continuance in well-doing; you that know not what it is to mortify a
lust: you that know not what it is to deny your own hearts any thing, to cross
your own wills in any thing: you that are so far from working out your own
salvation with fear and trembling, that you work out your own damnation without
fear and trembling, without horror and astonishment: that never once think of
it, that never once lay to heart this loss, this coming short; I cannot, if I
had the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able to express the evil of coming
short of eternal happiness; you can now sell Glory for vanity; Heaven for
Earth; the pleasures that are at the right hand of God, for the pleasures of
sin that are but for a season: But the time will come, when with heart-rending
complaints, you will tear off your own hair, and rend your own hearts in
pieces, and cry out, O fools, beastly fools, senseless sots that we were, to
bereave our selves of eternal happiness, for a little momentany pleasures, for
the satisfaction of a base lust! O what Bedlams, O what humane beasts were we,
that would deprive our selves of mansions in the New Jerusalem, for a few
brutish carnal sensual delights! O what madmen were we, that would venture
the loss of an eternal habitation in that place, where to be, and to be most
happy, is all one! rather than we would cross our own carnal and corrupt wills
in any thing, we would fulfill the flesh, and the mind: O how will you then
exceedingly befool your selves? It is storied of Lysimachus a King, being
pursued by his Enemies, and being very thirsty, he sold his Kingdom for a
draught of drink: but afterward he cried out, Alas, What a bargain have I made,
to sell my Kingdom for a draught of drink! O this, even this, is the condition
of all you that sell Heaven for Earth, that sell Pearls for Pebles, that sell
your immortal Souls, that sell the hopes of eternal happiness, for the
satisfaction of a base lust: O how will you cry out, What a Bedlambeast have I
been, that have run such a hazard, the loss of such a Crown, an incorruptible
Crown, such a Crown of eternal Glory! O what a beast have I been, that have
ventured the loss of Heaven, and the favor of God, and the presence of God,
and the loss of my own Soul, and that for nothing, for toys and trifles, for
dross and trash! You can now complain of the Service of God, and say, It is an
unprofitable Service; What profit is it to wait upon the Lord? what profit is
it that we kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the
Lord of Hosts? Mal. 3.14. But a time will come, when you will wish that a
thousand years had been spent in fasting, and ten thousand thousand years had
been spent in the strictest Exercise of Religion, rather than you should have
come short of that eternal happiness; you now are ready to say, when the
Ministers press you to pray in your Families, and catechize your Families, and
read the Scriptures in your Families, and to drive a Trade for Heaven: when we
press you to these things, you are ready to say, We have no leisure: alas, we
cannot look after these things, we have no time to seek heaven and happiness:
No time! Well, well, you that can find no time to look after those things that
are of infinite concernment; you that have no time to seek for Heaven, you will
have time enough to bewail the loss of Heaven, when a thousand years are gone,
and ten thousand years are gone, and a thousand, thousand, thousand years are
gone in bewailing your loss, bewailing this unconceivable damage and detriment:
when as many millions of years are gone as there are drops of water in the
Ocean, there will be time enough to bewail it to all eternity; O the folly and
madness of all those that will live in sin, and lie in sin; and for the
pleasures of sin, will venture the loss of those pleasures that are at the
right hand of God for evermore! it is such madness as cannot be expressed or
conceived. That is one Use.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation: And I have two Exhortations to tender to you,
if God would give you but hearts to hearken: and the Lord of his infinite mercy
bow and incline your hearts to consider what I say.

First, If the coming short of this eternal Rest, be such an unconceivable
loss: Then, foresee this danger, and tremble at it, tremble at the apprehension
of it; if you be flesh and blood, tremble at it: Think with your selves,
certainly there will come a day, when a final Sentence must pass upon my soul,
either a sentence of Absolution, or a sentence of Condemnation: if the sentence
of Condemnation, Depart from me thou cursed wretch, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. If that should be the
final Sentence that should pass upon me, what would become of me! As God speaks
to the unrighteous Judge, Isa. 10.3, And what will you do in the day of
visitation, and in the desolation which will come from far? to whom will ye
flee for help? So say I to thee: What will thou do in the day when that
sentence passes upon thee? Whither will thou flee for help? O the weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, that this coming short of Heaven will produce;
especially when thou shall consider, that God was every day dealing with thee,
stretching out his hand to have gathered thee, and to have converted thee, and
to have brought thee home, but thou would not! Jesus Christ offered me a
plaster of his own heart-blood to heal me, but I trampled it under-foot; the
Spirit of God was knocking at the door of my heart, sometimes by the Hammer of
the Law, and sometimes by the Hammer of the Gospel; the Spirit of God was
hindering me from sin, and was stirring up holy motions in my heart, and those
I quenched; the Ministers of the Gospel they pressed hard upon me to yield to
those warnings, frequent warnings that were tendered to me: but the Ministers I
despifed; and I mocked the Messengers of God, which he sent to me to warn me not
to come into this place of torment: O the horrible, hellish, hideous cries, the
fearful and doleful screetches, roarings and yellings, that these
considerations will fetch from thee, when thou shall consider that thou have
not obeyed the Gospel, thou have not known in this thy day the things that
belong to thy peace; but thou have wilfully lost such a Crown, such a Kingdom,
such happiness, as will be matter of heart-tormenting sorrow and mourning to
all eternity; if the loss of the Ark, which was but a type of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 4.18, 19, 20, was so terrible to that good old man Eli, that he fell down
and brake his neck, when he heard of the loss of it; and to that good woman,
Phinehas, in her Travel, when the Ark was lost, that she cried out, The glory
is departed from Israel! O what then think you will be the loss of Gods
presence, the loss of his Favor, the loss of eternal Happiness, the loss of
this Crown and Kingdom which I have been speaking of! Oh, how will this make
such damned wretches cry out in extreme bitterness, The Glory, the Kingdom, the
happiness: the Glory, the everlasting Glory is departed from me, and I must
never see the face of God any more! This is the first Exhortation; Foresee this
evil, and tremble at it.

My second Exhortation is this: Do not only foresee this danger, but study with
the utmost endeavors of your souls to prevent it: Prevent it, you will say,
How must I do that? I will tell you that, if God will but give you hearts to
follow my counsel.

First, Be sure to avoid those sins that clog, and hamper, and fetter thee as
it were in the way to Heaven; so that thou can not with any patience run the
Race that is set before thee; such as these: Pride, Presumption, Unbelief,
Apostasy, Earthliness, Selfishness, Security and Sensuality: O these are the
sins that fetter thee, and hamper thee, away with them therefore.

Secondly, Pluck up thy feet, and resolve to run the ways of Gods Commandments:
pray with David, that God would enlarge your hearts that you may run in the way
of his Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. He does not beg that the way may be made
large, but that his heart may be enlarged: I will walk in the way of thy
Commandments, though it be never so narrow, though there be never so many
crosses in it, or thorns, or difficulties, or discouragements: if thou will but
enlarge my heart, I will run in the ways of thy Commandments.

Thirdly, Take heed of delays and procrastination, of putting it off from day
to day, by saying, there will be time enough hereafter; it will be time enough
for me to look after Heaven, when I have got enough of the World; If I do it
the last year of my life, in the last month of the last year, in the last week
of the last month, it will serve; O take heed of delays, this putting off of
Repentance has ruined thousands of Souls; shun that Pit whereinto many have
fallen: shun that Rock upon which many have suffered shipwreck; say with
David, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.60.

Fourthly, Look upon the Crown of Glory set before thee; have the Goal in thy
Eye, just as Moses had: he endured the frowns of Pharaoh on the one hand, and
he scorned the flatteries and Riches of Egypt on the other hand: Why? because
he had an Eye to the recompense of Reward; O look upon the Crown and white
Robe, and let this quicken you.

Fifthly, Be sure thou hold out unto the end: if thou would not come short of
Heaven, be not like many runners in a Race, that sit down in the midst of the
way; Be thou faithful unto the death, says our Savior to the Church of
Smyrna, Revel. 2.10, and I will give thee a crown of life; He that endures to
the end shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13. Therefore, be steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord; abhor Apostasy as much as thou would abhor Hell it self.

Now to press this Exhortation upon you, take these Motives:

First, If you have but willing minds, it is accepted of God, so says the
Apostle; for if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that
a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. If thou usest
the utmost endeavor of thy Soul, the Lord will help thee; if thou faint, he
will support thee; if thou overcome, he will Crown thee.

Secondly, Consider, that among runners in a Race here on Earth, there is but
one that will get the Goal; I, but here in the Race of Christianity, if thou do
but so run, thou may obtain: If thou do not sit down, if thou art not weary
of well-doing; If thou by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and
immortality, there is eternal life for thee, thou shall have a Crown of glory;
Nay, there are ten thousand, thousand Crowns in Heaven. The Lord Christ will
give every one a Crown, that holds out to the end, 2 Timothy 4.8, Henceforth there
is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day.

But, why does he call it a Crown of Righteousness?

Answer, It is called a Crown of Righteousness, because it is a Crown purchased
by the blood of Christ, and a Crown that is promised. Now says the Apostle,
This righteous Crown, or this Crown of Righteousness, is laid up for me, and
not only for me; there is not only one Crown and one Kingdom for me, but it is
laid up for all those that love the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. O this
glorious Master! He makes every one of his Servants to be crowned Kings: He
has made us Kings unto God, Rev. 1.6.

Thirdly, Consider the time of running is but short, but the time of your
Reward will be eternal; if you do not come short of this eternal Rest, but hold
out, and run to the end of the Race: If you can but say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.7, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have been
faithful unto the death; I have not wickedly departed from my God, as David
speaks, Psalm. 18.21. If you be not Apostates, but hold out to the end, know
that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. O the unconceivable Reward!
O the invaluable and unconceiveable Bliss of all those that come to this
eternal Rest! The tongue of Men and Angels is not able to express it. I beseech
you on the one side, fear the loss of it: and on the other side, let the
consideration of that eternal happiness, quicken you to do the utmost of your
endeavors to attain it; If you had ten thousand lives to spend in the service
of God; if you had ten thousand Estates to lay down at his feet; if you could
do as much as all the Apostles did, and all the Martyrs did or suffered; let me
tell you, the fruition of Jesus Christ one day in glory, will recompense it
all. The Lord work these things upon our hearts, that every one of us here
present may fear exceedingly and continually; lest a Promise being left of
entering into his Rest, we should forsake the Promise, and by forsa ing the
Promise, should come short of eternal Happiness.

The persevering Saint, shall be the Crowned Saint.
REV. III. 11. Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no
man take thy Crown.


THE seven famous Churches of Asia, mentioned in the three first Chapters of
this Book of Revelations, had this honor put upon them, to have seven Epistles
sent unto them immediately from the Lord Jesus Christ himself; and as they were
the glory of the World, while they stood fast to God and to his Truth, so were
they after their declining from God and his Truth, made the Monuments of his
anger and indignation. The words I have now read unto you, are part of the
sixth Epistle, written from the Lord Jesus Christ to the Church of
Philadelphia; wherein, as he was a faithful Witness, and one that knew their
spiritual Estate better than they knew it themselves: therefore he sets down in
his Epistle something by way of Commendation, Consolation, Exhortation.


Something is set down here by way of Commendation, in ver. 8, I know thy
works, behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; By
open door may be meant, either a free and full liberty and opportunity of
spreading the Gospel, as the Apostle uses that phrase, 1 Cor. 16.9, For a great
door and effectual is opened to me, and there are many adversaries; or else by
open door may be meant a door of Hope, in reference to Eternity; that door of
Heaven that sin had shut against us, is by the merit of Jesus Christ opened to
us: Oh, blessed are they that have this door opened to them by Jesus Christ,
who is the Door, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; but says he, Thou have a
little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my name. This is by
way of Commendation; though she had but a little strength, yet because she
improved it, and did not deny the name of Christ, was not an Apostate Church,
this our Savior puts upon her account of Commendation.

2. Here is something also by way of Consolation, in ver. 9.10, Behold, I will
make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not; (that
is, I will discover their Hypocrisy, I will make them known to be what they
are, and reveal to whom they do belong) I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee; that is, I will subdue thy
Enemies under thy feet, and let them know that I have loved thee; and in ver.
10, Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth: Here is mavelous comfort; Jesus Christ never brings his
Children into a Wilderness, but he goes with them: when they go through the
fire, and through the water, he will be with them: I will keep thee, and I will
uphold thee, says he.

Then in the third place, Here is something by way of Exhortation in the words
of the Text: Behold, I come quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no
man take thy Crown: In which words there are two things considerable: 1. A Duty
pressed. 2. Motives expressed.


The Duty pressed, is Constancy and Perseverance, Hold fast that which thou
have. The Motives expressed are two: the one is drawn from the suddenness of
Christ's coming to Judgment, Behold I come quickly; the other is taken from the
danger of losing their Crown set before them, That no man take thy Crown.

1. For the Duty pressed, Hold fast that thou have; keep it with might and
main, use thy utmost endeavor to keep what thou have: What was that this
Church had which Christ exhorts to hold fast? It had both the profession and
possession of true Religion: Now this true Religion consisted in two things, in
purity of Doctrine, and in holiness of Life and Conversation; both these this
Church had: she had purity of Doctrine, as I showed you out of ver. 8, Thou
have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name; thou have kept my Word. Then
for holiness of Conversation; she had not denied Christ's Name in the midst of
Persecution, Thou have kept theword of my patience; Now says our Savior, that
which thou have, that true Religion thou profesest, maintain and keep, and hold
fast against all opposition, both in profession and practice; hold fast the
truth thou have embraced, and hold fast the grace that thou have received: So
then the Doctrine I shall commend to you hence, is this:

Doct. That Christians must hold fast, both the Truth and the grace they have
received, with Constancy and Perseverance.

There are two branches in this Doctrine, which we might make two Propositions:
The first this, That Christians must hold fast the truths they have received,
with Constancy and Perseverance. The second this: That Christians must hold
fast the grace they have received, with Constancy and Perseverance.


I begin with the first, That Christians must hold fast the truths they have
received, with Constancy and Perseverance. For the proof of this, consider that
place, 2 Timothy 1.13, Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of
me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus; the word is (...), that Model,
or that Platform of Gospel Truths, those fundamental Truths which the Apostle
had wrapped up in a bundle to be received and embraced; so Tit. 1.9, Holding fast
the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound
Doctrine, both to exhort and convince gainsayers: holding fast the faithful
word; as Adversasaries pluck one way, so do you pluck another way, striving
earnestly for the faith of the Gospel. So Heb. 10.23, Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised:
Prove. 4.13, Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go: keep her, for she is
thy life. Prove. 23.23, Buy the truth, and sell it not; buy it at any rate, sell
it at no rate: thus you see this Duty commanded; see it commended in one
Example most remarkable and imitable, because it was in the purest times, the
Primitive-time of the Church, Acts 2.42, And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

For the better explication of this Point, it may be demanded.

1. How must Christians hold fast the truth they have received?

2. Why must Christians hold fast the truth they have received?

1. How must Christians hold fast the truth they ave received?

I answer: They must hold it fast these three ways:

In their Memories, Affections, Practice and Conversations.


1. They must hold fast the truth in their Memories, Heb. 2.1, Therefore we
ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at
any time we should let them slip: We should learn of the blessed Virgin Mary,
of whom it is said, That she kept all these things, and pondered them in her
heart, Luke 2.19. It is not the great getter, but the great saver that becomes
the rich man; it is not the hearing, but the keeping of Truths that will make
us spiritually Rich.

2. We must hold fast the truth in our Affections, we must cleave to the truth
in love and liking; thus did David, Psalm. 119.31, I have stuck unto thy
testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame; and in ver. 20, My soul breaks for
the longing that it has unto thy Judgments at all time; O how love I thy Law!
it is my meditation all the day, Ver. 97, and ver. 167 of the same Psalm: My
soul has kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly. On the contrary,
when men have not a sincere love to the Truth, they lose both the Truth and
their own Souls too, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, Because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned
who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. This is the
case of many Papists and Atheists at this day: they are drawn away to believe
lies, lying miracles, lying doctrines; when God sees men careless and remiss in
their love to the Truth, he says to such careless wretches, Take him Jesuit,
take him Satan; bind him and blind him, and lead him to destruction. Hence are
all those frequent Exhortations which are fcattered up and down in the
Scripture, to love Wisdom, Understanding and Instruction, Prove. 3.3, My son,
forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments; let not mercy and
truth forsake thee, bind them about thy neck, write them upon the table of
thine heart. Prove. 4.6, Forsake not wisdom, and she shall preserve thee; love
her, and she shall keep thee. Prove. 7.4, Say unto Wisdom thou art my sister,
and call Understanding thy kinswoman. What a man loves, that he will keep
carefully: if he loves a Jewel he will be careful to preserve it; if he loves a
Picture, he will be careful not to deface it; a man will part with that last,
which he loves best.

3. Hold fast the Truth, not only in Memory and Affection, but likewise hold
fast the truth in Practice and Conversation; you should yield conscionable
subjection to every known Truth, without holding any one part of the Truth in
unrighteousness: the more a man practices what he knows, the more he shall
know what to practice, John 7.17, If any man will do his Will, he shall know of
the Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. True knowledge
is the mother of Obedience, but obedience is thenurse of Knowledge: when a
Scholar has taken out one Lesson well, it is an encouragement to a Master to
teach him another; certainly if we would practice more, we should know more:
The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant, Psalm. 25.14. Look as the Widows oil by laying it out was increased,
so knowledge laid out in practice is put forth to advantage; therefore put forth
every known truth into practice: This is the way to hold fast the Truth you
have received.

The second Quaery by way of Explication is this; But why must Christians hold
fast the truth they have received, with Constaney and Perseverance?

The Reasons are these:

First, Because the Truth has many Enemies to oppose it, corrupt it, gainsay
it, malign it, deface it, and disgrace it; though Truth cannot be ashamed, yet
it is many times blamed; Jesus Christ himself had not more Enemies upon Earth,
than his Truth has at this day; yea, our blessed Savior had the more Enemies,
because he did bear witness to the Truth: John 8.40, But now you seek to kill
me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God; this did not
Abraham. That was the great quarrel they had against our Savior, because he
told them the truth. Now as Jesus Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, was
opposed, so will his Truth be opposed to the end of the World.

First, The Devil is a grand Enemy to the Truth; that Prince of darkness would
not willingly have one Lamp of the Sanctuary unblown out: the most of his rage
is against the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who hold forth the word of
Truth to Gods people.

Secondly, Ignorant, Unbelieving, Atheistical wretches, that count Preaching
foolishness, that will be ready to undervalue it.

Thirdly, Subtle and undermining Priests and Jesuits: those Frogs out of the
bottomless pit, they will endeavor to corrupt it.

Fourthly. Scandalous Protestants, which bring not forth fruit, these will cast
an aspersion and scandal upon the Truth; therefore because of these Enemies,
Christians should hold forth the truth they have received; That Is the first
Reason.

Secondly, The second reason is this: Truth is worth the holding fast, because
we have many blessed privileges by it, as for Example:

1. The truth of the Gospel is our Cap of Maintenance; it is the Charter of our
Privileges, it is the evidence of our everlasting Inheritance: Thy Testimonies
have I claimed for my heritage, says David; And will you not keep your
evidences for a good Inheritance?

2. Here is another Privilege: If you will keep the Truth, you may be sure the
Truth will keep you; as we say of a Tradesman, If he will keep his Shop, his
Shop will keep him. The truth will be your Shield and Buckler, if you keep it,
to defend you against all gainsayers, Psalm. 91.4, He shall cover her with his
feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust, his truth shall be thy Shield
and Buckler; hold fast the Faith, and that will hold you up; the Apostle bids
us in one place, to stand fast in the faith, Romans 11.20, and in another place,
by faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1.24. From both those places together, you may gather
thus much: when we stand in it, then we stand by it: when we stand fast in the
Faith, then we shall be sure to be established by the Faith against all
oppositions.

Thirdly, The holding fast the Truth, will yield and afford you the sweetest
joy and comfort upon your Deathbeds: What was that made Saint Paul rejoice at
death? 2 Timothy 4.7, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith; He had not let go his hold; this was the ground of his joy
and hope, when he was ready to be offered, and his departure was at hand.

Fourthly, The truth of the Gospel is a Testament sealed with the blood of
Jesus Christ, wherein so many precious, rich, and royal Legacies are bequeathed
unto us, by the Testator our blessed Mediator, our dearest Friend, that has
redeemed us with his own precious blood. Now, shall we not look after the
proving of the Will of this blessed Testator? So much for the Explication.

Now for the Application of this Point; And the first Use is by way of Reproof;
does not this Doctrine justly and sharply reprove the unconstancy and
unsetledness of many Professors at this day? Does it not meet them as the Angel
did Balaam, with a drawn Sword of a sharp reproof? O that this Reproof might
take hold on those that are concerned this day; you know we read that Passage
this day, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the
wind? No, John Baptist was not a Reed, but a Rock; But alas, look upon
Professors at this day, and we have more Reeds than Rocks, we have more falling
than fixed Stars: More Children that are carried about with every wind of
Doctrine ( Ephesians. 4.14.) than men settled, rooted, and stablished in the present
truth, that are constant in nothing but unconstancy: are there not some that
can be content to part with Religion, and let Truth go, and Gospel-priviledges
go, and all go, so they may but enjoy their Trades and Professions, their
places and preferments: (though I hope better things of many of you that hear
me this day): will not the Lord, think you, sharply rebuke such in his anger?
will he not speak to them in his hot displeasure? What, have I given you the
Gospel, such precious Truths, and do you slight them! do you trample them under
feet! do you prefer the puddles of Popery, before these wholesome streams and
clear fountain of Truth? Well, if the Gospel be a burden to you, I will ease
you of your burden; and how doleful would this be, if God should say, the
privileges you are weary of, shall be taken from you, you shall be eased of
them!

Use 2. Therefore give me leave in the Name of Christ, and in the cause of the
Gospel, to beseech you to hold fast that which you have received: hold fast the
Truth against Error, hold fast the truth of the Protestant Religion against
Popery, and Popish Innovations and Superstitions: this I forewarn you of, the
rather upon this account, because there are some among us which are well
conceited of that cursed Religion, because they never have smarted under the
Antichristian tyranny, as our forefathers have done: they have forgotten the
blood of our Martyrs that was shed in Queen Mary's days: Nay, that blood that
was spilt in Ireland but twenty one years ago; therefore that you may be fenced
against the flatteries and insinuations of Popish Doctrine, take notice that
Popish Religion is an Idolatrous Religion; they are guilty of as gross Idolatry
as every was practiced among the Heathens: for,

1. They worship the Saints with a religious worship, which is proper to God
only; they pray to Saints departed, which is a dishonor to God the Father, and
Jesus Christ the only Mediator between God and man: They pray to the Virgin
Mary, and make her their Redeemer, by praying to her, saying, Save us, O
Savioress, and redeem us, and in the hour of death receive us. This is a great
dishonor to the Lord Jesus Christ; What can be greater Idolatry than this, to
attribute that to a creature, which is proper only to the Creator?

2. They set up Images to be worshipped contrary to the second Commandment,
which says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor how down to
it, nor worship it, etc. But they will object and say, They do not worship the
Image, but God in the Image. I answer, Neither did the children of Israel
worship the golden Calf, but they thought they worshipped God, in or under the
Image of the golden Calf, Exodus 32.4, yet it was gross Idolatry, as appears, 1
Cor. 10.7, Neither be ye idolaters as were some of them; as it is written, the
people sat down to eat and to drink and rose up to play.

3. Their Idolatry exceeds the Idolatry of the Heathen, in that they worship a
piece of Bread, or the bread Transubstantiated (as they call it) into the body
of Christ. Now, if the body of Christ be in Heaven, as we are sure it is, as
appears by that of the Apostle, Acts 3.21, Whom the heaven must receive until
the time of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets since the world began; The Apostle says, the heaven must
receive him until the time of the restitution of all things, that is, until the
day of Judgment: It Christ's body be in Heaven, then certainly they worship not
the body of Christ, but a piece of Bread; and what more abominable Idolatry
than this? One of their own Religion, Costerus, confesses, It is more tolerable
to worship a Dog, or a Cat, or a Crocodile, than to worship a piece of Bread:
This their Idolatry is a great stumbling block both to the Jews and Heathens:
Therefore Averroes, a great Philosopher, being asked why he would not be a
Christian? because, says he, The Christians eat the God they worship;
therefore, says he, Let my Soul be among the Philosophers.

Again, As they are Idolaters in their worship, so they are erroneous in their
Doctrines; witness their doctrine of Justification, denying the righteousness
of Christ, and trusting to their own righteousness: witness their doctrine of
Merits by Works, yea, their doing works of supererogation: witness their Popish
pardons, and Purgatory-satisfaction, as if the satisfaction of Jesus Christ
were imperfect: witness their robbing of Jesus Christ of all his Offices, both
as King, Priest, and Prophet, as might easily be proved. In brief, the Popish
Religion is a loose and licentious Religion, a Sintolerating Religion; for the
Pope can dispense with murdering of Princes, and the like, if it will promote
his interest; forbidding Priests marriage, and yet suffering at the same time
Stews and Brothel-houses. It was a saying of Sir Walter Raleigh, Were I to
choose a Religion for liberty and wickedness, I would choose the Popish Religion;
therefore in Gods fear, hold fast the truth against Popery: And hold it fast
likewise against the error of Arminianism, which advances man's Free Will above
Gods Free Grace: And hold fast the Truth against Socinians, that deny the
Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ. In brief, be rooted, settled and established
in the present truth; stick close unto the Word of God, as David did: stand for
it, plead for it; choose to lose Liberty, Estates, Comforts, Life and all,
rather than to part with the Truth. David made the Truth his Inheritance: Now
as Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the
Inheritance of my Fathers unto thee, 1 Kings 21.3. Could he say so of a
temporal Inheritance, and shall not we say so of a spiritual Inheritance, which
is transmitted to us by the blood of Martyrs? Shall the Ministers of the Gospel
have cause to complain, as in Jer. 9.3, And they bend their tongue like their
bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth? Shall we
deal with the truth as the Priest and Levite did with the man that went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among Thieves, left him wounded, and half
dead, nay, dying in the streets? Has God said, Buy the truth, and sell it not,
Prove 23, and shall we sell it for our lusts and profits? God forbid. Consider
who it was that abode not in the truth: it was Satan, a Liar, who has no truth
in him, John 8.44. Even so all wicked men are said to be destitute of the
truth, and to hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18: that is, they
strive against the light of truth in their hearts: those common principles of
truth which they had in their understandings, they suppressed and choked, that
so they might sin more freely; but God forbid that we should do so. Will not
this make the Spirit of truth to forsake us, when we forsake the truth? What an
heroical resolution was that in holy Paul, 2 Cor. 13.8, For we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth? Oh what an honor is it to a Christian,
when truth has such sovereignty in his heart, that it is dearer to him than
his own life! Tit. 1.9, Holding fast the faithful Word: Hold forth the word of
Life, and hold fast the word of Truth: hold forth the word of Life by a true
profession and conversation, and hold fast the word of truth by courage,
constancy and resolution.

1. But may be you will ask me, What means may we use thus to hold fast the
truth?

I answer briefly:

1. Embrace the truth, not only in the light of it, but in the love of it; what
you love, you will be sure not to part with: Oh, get your hearts fired with
love to the truths of the Gospel, that you may say, Lord, I love thy truth
exceedingly!

2. Love not the truth for the person's sake, but love the person for the
truths sake; love no man's parts or person to admire him, and be a follower of
him farther than he follows Christ, Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1, says the Apostle. It was a great fault in Barnabas, Gal.
2.13, that he was carried away by Peter's dissimulation; by his admiring Peter's
person so much; by his resting and relying too much upon Peter, he fell into
Peter's error.

3. Be ever jealous of your own strength, and trust not too much to your own
ability; this will provoke God to leave you to your selves, and then you will
fall fearfully, 2 Cor. 12.10, For when I am weak, then am I strong; when I am
weakest in my self, then am I strongest in a Savior; but when I am strongest
in my self, in my own opinion, then am I weakest in a Savior; no man stands by
his own strength, for by humane strength can none prevail.

4. And lastly, Get your hearts established with grace, Heb. 13.9, It is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace; be ballasted with grace, as the
word (...) signifies: A Ship that is well balasted, is not so ready and apt to
reel, as one that is not; and when the Apostle puts in a caveat against
unsetledness and falling from grace, what means does he prescribe? 2 Pet. 3.17,
18, Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, says he: O that you and I could grow more in grace; O that we
could grow more in the practical part of Religion, in our hearts and houses, in
our lives and conversations: I beseech you therefore, hearken to this first
Exhortation and Duty here pressed upon you, namely, to hold fast the truth you
have received: hold it fast in your memories, in your affections, and in your
conversations: so much for the first branch of the doctrine, That Christians
must hold fast the truth they have received, with constancy and perseverance.

I come now to the second Proposition, or second branch of the Doctrine, that
is this, Christians must hold fast that Grace that they have received, with
constancy and perseverance.

For the proof of this, the Scripture is abundantly plain and pregnant: in
Psalm. 119.23, Teach me the way of thy Statutes, O Lord, and I will keep it to
the end. Matthew. 24.13, He that endures to the end, he shall be saved; it is not
setting our feet in the way of Christianity, but it is a continuance in that
course that will bring you to the end of your hopes, the salvation of your
souls: So in Heb. 3.14, We are made partakers of Christ (says the Apostle) if
we hold the beginning of our confidence firm unto the end: this will be an
evidence that we are partakers of Christ indeed, if we persevere and continue
in the grace we have received, to the end of our days: so we are commanded to
serve the Lord, not some few days, but all the days of our lives: Luke 1.75, He
that puts his hands to the Plow, and looks back (says our Savior) is not fit
for the kingdom of God, Luke 9. ult. and in John 8.31, If you continue in my
words, then are you my disciples indeed; without this perseverance, we are but
nominal, not real Disciples. But if you ask me, Why must Christians continue in
grace, and hold fast the grace they have received? Hear but some Scripture
Arguments, strongly pleading for this truth.

First, Unless Christians hold fast the grace and holiness they have received,
they lose all they have, and all they hope for: All they have, viz. Their
present endeavors; and all they hope for, their future Reward.

1. They lofe all they have: all their praying, reading, hearing, and
communicating, and humbling themselves before God; all this will be lost if
they do not persevere; does not God himself say so; Ezekiel. 18.24, When the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, (he does not speak there of one
truly and really righteous in a state of grace, one that is savingly righteous)
when he turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all
the righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass
that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he
die. So that a man loses all he has done in the business of Religion. Says
Hierom, We must be judged, not by our past, but by our present condition. As
the Tree falls, so it lies: as death leaves us, so shall judgment find us.

2. He loses all he hopes for too, for the Crown is promised to none but to
those that do hold out: Be thou faithful to the death, and thou shall receive a
Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. Christianity is compared to a Race: Let us run the
race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1. Now as in a Race, it is not enough for a
man to begin well, but he must hold out, else he loses the Gole; so is it in
the Race of Christianity; therefore says the Apostle, so run that you may
obtain; not only run, but so run, that you may not lose the Gole, 1 Cor. 9.24.

2. Such as Christ's love is to us, such must our love to Christ be. Christ's
love to us is a constant and unchangeable love: whom he loves, he loves to the
end, John 13.1. The Lord Christ is not only the beginner, but the finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12.2. He did not leave the work of our Redemption imperfect,
but he held out until he came to consummatum est, till he cried out upon the
Cross, it is finished.

Reason Third, may be this: Christians must hold fast the grace they have
received, because Apostatizing and turning our backs upon God is a most
dangerous, damnable, soul-destroying sin.

1. It is dangerous in the Original of it: it springs from four bitter roots.

1. It springs from Infidenlity, or Unbelief: take heed, says the Apostle,
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelies, in departing from the
living God, Heb. 3.12. Unbelief is a damnable sin, where it is not bemoaned,
bewailed, and striven against; but reigning unbelief is a damnable sin; so
says our Savior, Mark 16. ult. He that believes not, shall be damned: And he
that believes not, the wrath of God abides upon him for ever, John 3. ult. Now
this Infidelity makes the soul depart from God, and it makes God depart from
the soul; It was a great observation of an eminent Divine, now with God; Look
as the first return of the soul to God is by Faith, (for Faith sets the Soul in
joint, it brings Christ and the Soul together) so the first departing of the
Soul from God is by unbelief; for from thence comes a departing to other sins;
and this departing to other sins, increases our unbelief; and unbelief being
increased, the rent or breach between God and the Soul is made wider and wider,
till at last the Soul comes to a total departing from God, and then God totally
departs from the Soul; and says, Depart from me thou cursed wretch, I know thee
not. Now this same Apostasy it springs from Unbelief.

2. This Apostasy springs from Hypocrisy; for usually Hypocrisy ends in
Apostasy, as I have told you often: Judas the Hypocrite, proved Judas the
Apostate; Amaziah did that that was right in the eyes of the Lord, but not with
a perfect heart, 2 Chr. 25.2. therefore Amaziah the Hypocrite, proved Amaziah
the Apostate. In Psalm. 78.37, it is said there, Their hearts were not upright,
neither remained they steadfast in his Covenant. Why were they not steadfast? why
did not they keep constant to the ways of God, to the Vows and Covenants made
with God? their hearts were not upright; where grace is sincere, it will be
lasting; but that which is counterfeit will be lost; whatever is counterfeit,
is fading.

3. It springs from Pride and Presumption: when men think they have grace
enough, and holiness enough, and have gone far enough in the way to Heaven,
this is the root of Apostasy; there is a gradual as well as a total Apostasy;
the Saints and Servants of God may be guilty of gradual Apostasy; so Peter was,
though not of total Apostasy; it was Peter's presumption that was one principal
cause of his fall; lofty Cedars are thrown down with a Tempest, when the lower
Trees in the Valley stand firm and fast: So likewise lofty Christians, high in
their own conceits, many times nestle themselves on high, and their fall is
great: whereas Christians that walk humbly, are supported and preserved. Look
as a man that gazeth at the Stars, looks up on high, quickly catches a fall,
because he looks not to his feet: So a man that is highly conceited in his own
opinion, lifts up his head on high, many times catches a feaful fall; it is
just with God to leave such men to try them. Hezekiah, though a very gracious
King, yet when his heart was listed up with Pride, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, the Text
says, God left him to himself, to try what was in his heart, in ver. 31. That
Solomon speaks of falling into misery, is as true of falling and declining in
grace, Prove. 16.18, Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty Spirit before
a fall.

4. Apostasy springs from Covetousness and worldliness; look as the seed in the
thorny ground, it brought nothing to perfection, because it was choked with
the cares, riches and pleasures of this world, as you may read in the Parable
of the Sower, Luke 8.14. So it is here, where the heart is stuffed with
covetousness, and the cares of this life, that is usually a forerunner of a
fearful fall; Demas has forsaken me, having embraced this present world; what
was the ground of his Apostasy, but his worldliness and selfishness? so that
Apostasy is dangerous in the Original of it.

Secondly, It is damnable in the effects of it; for,

1. This puts Jesus Christ to open shame; in Heb. 6.6. Apostates crucify
Christ afresh, and put him to open shame; for by falling away from him, we do
as much as tell the world, we have found his service that it was an
unprofitable service; the service of the world is better than his service, and
that we have not found in Christ what we expected: when we turn our backs on
Christ and go to the world, we do as much as openly proclaim, the world is a
better Master than Christ is. When Soldiers forsake their General, it is a
dishonor to him.

2. Then it is damnable in the effects of it, because it puts Religion to open
shame: it makes the Name of God to be blasphemed, Romans 2.24. It is a scandal to
the weak: it staves men off from the profession of Religion, and it opens the
mouth of Adversaries to speak evil of the ways of God; thus it is damnable in
the effects.

Thirdly, It is destructive in the end and issue of it: for,

First, God will reckon Apostates amongst Reprobates; God will lead them forth
with the workers of iniquity, those that turn aside to their crooked ways,
Psalm. 125. ult. Lead them forth, that is, put them in the same condition with
the most profligate and scandalous sinner that is.

2. Their latter end shall be worse than their beginning, as our Savior shows
in the Parable, Mat. 12.43, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, and
returns again, he brings seven Devils more, and the end of that man is worse
than his beginning: The Apostle tells us, in 2 Pet. 2, and the two last Verses,
It had been better men had never known the way of holiness, than having known
it, to turn aside from the holy commandment: it fares with them according to
the Proverb, the Dog is turned to his vomit again, and the Sow that was washed,
to her wallowing in the mire.

Before I come to make Application of this truth, there is one doubt to be
resolved.

You say, Christians must hold fast the grace they have received: Why, may some
say, Can a man that has received saving grace, lose that grace he has
received?

To this I answer, No: He cannot lose saving-grace totally or finally; this is
Mary's part, which cannot be taken away: Mary has chose that good part which
cannot be taken away, Luke 10.42, The Apostle says, he that is born of God,
sins not, cannot sin to death, because the seed of God, as a principle of
spiritual life, abides in him, 1 John 3.9. therefore he cannot sin unto death;
the righteous are said to be built on an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25:
that is, he abides unmovable in grace, till grace be turned into glory: and the
reason of this is, saving-grace bestowed upon the Elect, is built on four
immutable and unmovable Pillars.

1. The love that God bares to his people, it is an everlasting love, Jer.
31.3, I have loved thee with an everlasting love; we are very fickle and
unconstant in our love to God: but God is not fickle or unconstant in his love
to us.

2. The Covenant of grace is a steadfast Covenant, so says David in the last
words of that sweet Singer of Israel, when he was to leave the world, He has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, sure and steadfast, and ordered in all
things, 2 Samuel 23.5. It is a Covenant sealed with the blood of Christ,
therefore it is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. this
everlasting Covenant cannot be broken: True indeed, sin may break the peace of
the Covenant, but it cannot break the bond of the Covenant of Grace; it may
break the peace of the Covenant, Psalm. 89.31, If thy children break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with a red, and their iniquities with stripes: but I will not suffer my
faithfulness to fail, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my mouth.

3. The third Pillar is this, the Power of God, which is irresistible and
unconquerable: on this Pillar our blessed Savior builds the salvation of his
Elect, John 10.29, My father that gave me these sheep, is greater than all, and
none can take them out of my fathers hand: and on this Pillar St. Paul built
his hope of Salvation; He is able to keep that I have committed to him: he is
able to keep my depositum, 2 Timothy 1.12.

4. The fourth Pillar is the Intercession of Christ: and his intercession is a
prevailing intercession, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able to save to the
uttermost those that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Whence was it that Peter, though he fell fearfully, yet
he did not fall finally? because our Savior prayed for Peter, I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not, Luke 22.31. But mark, though this be true,
That saving grace once wrought in the heart cannot be lost, for it is built on
these four immutable Pillars: the Love of God, the Covenant of Grace, the Power
of God, and the intercession of Christ; yet it is possible for a man in the
state of grace to have his declinings (as I showed you not long ago), he may
have his declinings in regard of the measure of grace, and the comfortable
feeling of grace, and in the operations and vigor of his grace.

First, A child of God may lose the former heat and fervency that he had. The
Church of Ephesus fell from her first love.

Secondly, He may lose the comfortable feeling of Grace: David prays, Restore
to me the joy of thy salvation.

3. Grace may be as a spark of fire covered over with a heap of ashes, that
yields neither light nor heat, and so he may lose the vigor of his grace;
therefore Christians should take heed of these declinings, and should hold fast
the grace they have received.

Now to make some Application.

1. By way of Reproof: How justly taxable and reprovable are they that do not
hold fast the grace they have received, but fall from their first love? Oh, how
many back-sliders are there, many that did begin well, but they are weary of
well-doing! the Lord awaken them out of their drowsiness; know you not it will
be bitterness in the latter end? will you lose all you have, and all you hope
for? God forbid.

Therefore to close up this Point with a word of Exhortation:

I beseech and exhort you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, That you will
hold fast the grace you have received, the savor of Religion that you have
got, the principles of Religion, and the practice of a holy Conversation; hold
fast these. Take heed of Apostasy, as you love your God, as you love your
Souls, as you tender your own everlasting Salvation; be not found in the number
of those that draw back to perdition: but be steadfast and immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know your labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult. That you may persevere and not be
weary, Let me give you these three or four helps.

1. Be not content with a notional and traditional Faith; for such a Faith will
change as the time changes; but labor for a divine, well-grounded, lively,
working, effectual Faith, experimental Faith, such as the Samaritans had: Now
do we believe, say they, not because thou toldst us this is the Christ, but
because we have heard him our selves, and we know indeed this is the Christ the
Savior of the world.

2. Be much in Duty; if you would not be weary of well-doing, be much in
well-doing; It is a Paradox in other things, to say, He that would not be weary
of running, let him run the more; and if you would be weary of working, work
the more: I, but here in Divinity it is a truth; the more you are doing, the
better you will be able to do: be acting grace, and in the acting of it, your
grace will be increased: grace acted, intends the habit; and the habit
intended, does increase strength; therefore up and be doing, and God shall be
with you.

3. Walk in the spirit, and then you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh:
if the Spirit of God help you, you shall run and not be weary; walk, and not
faint, Isa. 40. ult. Remember what I have told you, It is not the strength of
habitual grace, but it is the auxiliary, the assisting-grace of the Spirit that
carries you through every duty: Though you do duty, yet the Spirit of Christ is
the moving and working-cause; for without him you can do nothing.

4. Set before you the example of the Saints, that is another help to
perseverance: it is said of Moses, he held out, though he met with temptations
on the right hand and on the left, he held out; why? because he saw him that
was invisible, Heb. 11.27. So Job, Job 23.11, My feet has held his path, his
way have I kept, and not declined: So David, I was almost consumed on earth, by
trouble and persecution that he met with, yet have I not forgotten thy Law,
Psalm. 119.87. So Daniel, when he knew the Writing was sealed, and his Religion
would cost him not only his liberty, but his life; Daniel was Daniel still, he
went on his course as he was wont to do, Dan. 6.10. The blessed Martyrs that
went through imprisonment, bonds, reproaches, persecution, yet with what
courage did they press toward the Mark? and so with courage they held out to
the end, and in the end.

5. Be often meditating on the rich and royal Reward, those rich and glorious
hopes laid up for those that persevere; this, if any thing will bear up your
hearts and hopes when they are ready to faint: What made the Apostle hold out
in the midst of all temptations? 2 Cor. 4.16, For this cause we faint not; Why?
because, says he, our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; Ver. 17. Moses he held out,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; Why? he had an eye to the recompense of reward,
Heb. 11.26.

A Traveller after a long journey, when he is weary and faint, and sits down,
if he see the Town before him, it puts life into him, and he plucks up his
feet, and resolves not to be weary till he be at his journeys end. O look at
the Crown and white Robe set before you, and faint if you can: get on the top
of Mount Nebo, look on the Land of Promise, those good things set before you:
taste the grapes of Canaan before you come to Canaan. Consider two things: from
what you are delivered, and to what you are appointed: You are delivered from
wrath, and appointed to mercy; delivered from Hell, and appointed to Heaven;
delivered from a hopeless condition, to a most hopeful and happy condition,
that the heart can conceive or tongue express. If these things were soundly
digested, and seriously considered, they would awaken your drooping drowsy
spirits, and set the wheels a going, and make us redouble our endeavor, and
increase our diligence, that the Kingdom of Heaven might even suffer violence;
yea, these things will constrain us in the midst of all afflictions,
temptations, and trials, to press toward the Mark: therefore awake thou that
sleep; the Apostle speaks of a sleep of drowsiness, Romans 13.11, For, says
the Apostle, your salvation is nearer than when you believed. A stone, the
nearer it comes to the Center, the swifter the motion will be: Redeem and
recover lost time by double diligence: set on Heaven by a new resolution; set
thy face toward Sion, as one that looks on all these creature comforts as
vanishing into smoke, and as one that resolves to have Heaven or nothing: do
much, and suffer much, thou will never repent; Be steadfast and unmovable,
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord.

To set home this Exhortation of holding fast what you have received, there are
two Motives in the Text which I will dispatch with a quick hand.

First, Behold, I come quickly; What coming does our Savior here speak of? I
Answer, This coming of our Savior may be understood three ways: He comes
either in a way of Trial, or in a way of Mercy, or in a way of Judicature. He
comes in a way of Trial, so he foretells the heavy temptations and persecutions
that came upon his Church in the time of Trajanus the Emperor, as Mr. Brightman
well observes: This lasted fourteen years, yet our Savior calls it but an hour
of temptation, in ver. 10. Likewise Strabo the Geographer, writes, That the
Church of Philadelphia was often shaken with Earthquakes, both she and other
Cities were shaken with Political Earthquakes, as well as Natural: with
Adversaries that sought their ruin. Hence you may take this Observation, That
God has sore and shaking Trials to exercise his Church withal.

Through many Afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; And they
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, In one kind or
other, in one measure or other. God sees shaking is needful to awaken us; to
shake us out of our security, and to purify, and reform, and refine us:
therefore let us not settle upon our Lees, and promise our selves security from
Trials. The hand of God has been heavy upon the Protestant Churches in
Piedmont, in Poland; Oh, the dreadful things that they have suffered! Why
should we expect exemption? are we better than they? Be forewarned, that you
may be fore-armed: lay in provision against the day of Trial: lay in a stock of
Faith, and Patience, and Self-denial, etc. Gird on the whole armor of God,
that you may be able to stand.

2. It may be understood in a way of mercy; I come quickly in a way of mercy: I
come to moderate the trials, and to deliver thee from temptations. God will not
suffer the Rod of the wicked to lie on the back of his righteous servants,
Psalm. 125.3. So then the Doctrine is this:

Doct. The troubles and trials of Gods Church and Chosen, though they may be
sharp, yet they shall be but short.

I come quickly, I come to deliver my Church quickly; Nero's Tribulation was
but for ten days, Rev. 2.10, For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee; in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for
a moment, but (...) everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, (...) Lord
thy redeemer, Isa. 54.7, 8.

Application.
Therefore it serves exceedingly for the encouragement of the godly, our
afflictions are but for a moment: do but set against your present Affliction,
the glory that it brings after, and against light afflictions, a weight of
glory; and against momentary affliction eternal glory; and what comparison is
there between them? none at all: but,

3. I come quickly, It may be taken in a way of Judicature; I come to call men
to account, to return to every man according to their works: therefore see that
you hold fast what you have received, and continue constant to the end, and you
shall be sure to receive a rich and Royal Reward. Behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give to every one according as his works shall be, Rev.
22.12. Heb. 10.37, Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry: Be patient therefore, brethren, stablish your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. 5.8.

But here it may be objected, Our Savior spoke this above sixteen hundred
years ago, The coming of the Lord draws nigh, And yet he is not come to
Judgment. To this I Answer, A thousand years in Gods account, is but as one
day: we count moments long, because we are but poor short spirited creatures;
But God that is of an eternal duration, he counts a thousand years but a very
small moment; all that space of time should be small to them that know the
greatness of Eternity; Do but think of Eternity, and alas, a thousand of years
are but as a moment. But observe here, when our Savior speaks of coming to
Judgment, he fixes a Behold before it: Behold I come quickly; it teaches us
this Doctrine, Doct. Christ's coming to judgment is a matter of infinite
concernment, and requires our most serious consideration.

Behold, Consider what I say, I am coming to judgment; There will therefore be
a day of Judgment, that is certain: this is called the great day in ver. 6, of
the Epistle of Saint Jude, and in 2 Timothy 4.8, That day, (...), by way of
eminency; and it is called a day of Judgment, because then every one shall
receive a final sentence, either of absolution or condemnation: But why is this
a matter of so great concernment? I answer, because Eternity depends upon it:
it will be a final determination to every soul, to an everlasting and
unchangeable condition of endless bliss or woe; O this Eternity! it swallows up
all our thoughts: if it were seriously considered, it were enough to make the
most profane and profligate sinner to turn the strictest Saint that ever trod
upon earth: Therefore to make some Use of this.

Live in a continual expectation of Christ's coming. But some will say, This day
of Judgment cannot be so sudden, for the Jews are not yet called, and
Antichrist is not yet come down. I answer, and O that this Answer might sink
into your hearts: Though the world should continue a thousand years, yet there
is a particular Judgment as well as a general: every man's deaths-day, is every
man's doomsday: It is appointed for all men once to die, and after that the
judgment. As soon as the Soul departs out of the body, then it is judged: the
Soul is judged then, either to Heaven or Hell; therefore thy day of death will
be the Judgment-day to thee, when ever it falls, though it falls this week
before the next. Oh that you and I could be affected as Jerome was, Whether I
eat or drink, or whatever I do, methinks I hear the Trumpet sound in my ears,
Arise ye dead and come to Judgment. Therefore let your whole lives be a
continual Preparation for that great day; get those graces that may present you
without spot or blot before Gods Tribunal. Get,

1. The precious grace of Faith, for that puts on the Royal Robe of Christ's
righteousness; and in that Robe you will stand undaunted.

2. Get Repentance from dead works, be purifying your selves more and more, as
he is pure; Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the day of refreshing shall come, Act. 3.19.

3. Get a Christian and constant care and diligence in your general and
particular callings: Blessed is the man whom his Lord shall find so doing. This
is the first Motive drawn from the suddenness of our Saviors coming: I come
quickly. Another Motive (and of that a few words, and I have done) That no man
take thy Crown. The danger of losing the Crown: But here it may be demanded,
What is meant by Crown? I answer, Either the Crown of Gospel Ministry, or else
the Crown of eternal Life. First, God honored this Church with a very glorious
Ministry, so that the very Adversaries, the seeming Jews did worship, that is,
did submit themselves to this Church, and acknowledge Her to be beloved of God;
God honored this Church with a very glorious Ministry. Then it may be meant of
the Crown of life: as Mr Perkins well observes upon the Text, Rev. 2.10, I will
give thee a Crown of life.

But here it may be demanded, Can the Crown of Life be lost? To this I Answer:

In the visible Church there are Hypocrites as well as sincere Christians: Now
Hypocrites may lose the Crown, because they never had a title to it, they never
had a title to the Crown of Glory; a man must have an interest in grace, before
he can have a title to the Crown of glory: For others that have grace begun in
their hearts, you must know such cautions as these are, are to quicken them: 2
John 8, Look well to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward, Heb. 12.15, Beware, lest any of you
fall short of the grace of God: Or it may be such cautions are put in to let
you see, that if you are left to your selves, you would let go grace, and lose
glory and all.

To shut up all, If a Gospel Ministry be a Crown, Oh that you and I would learn
to prize a Gospel Ministry more than we have done: it may be God will teach you
to know the worth of it by the want of it; hold it fast; remember, God can give
the Gospel to another Nation, that may be will bring forth better fruit than we
have done; and when the Gospel is gone, our glory is gone: then we may say, The
Glory, the Glory is departed from England; But then,

2. If there be a Crown of glory laid up for them that do hold out, then
receive that Exhortation, a Text I opened in many Sermons, on Heb. 4.1, Let us
therefore fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it; Therefore take hold of God by Faith: Be
much in prayer, be much in wrestling with God; be much in treasuring up grace
against the day of glory, as wicked men treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath. Study to be better acquainted, not only with the principles of Religion,
but with the power of godliness. Get more Communion with Christ, and influence
of grace from him, get more conformity to him; O mind this business of
Eternity, of getting this Crown that is laid up for those that hold out and
persevere. I conclude this Text with that in Romans 2.7, To them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, Eternal
life.

MERCY DESPISED, AND GOD PROVOKED thereby.
PSALM. CVI. 24. Yea, they despised the pleasant Land, and believed not his Word.


IN the last Sermons which I gave you out of Heb. 4.1, Let us therefore fear,
lest a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it; I showed you, what a dreadful, invaluable, unconceivable
and irrecoverable loss it was to come short of that eternal Rest that God has
prepared for the Saints in Light. In losing of Heaven you shall lose the
presence of God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
are pleasures for evermore: In losing of Heaven, you shall lose the favor of
God; never, never to enjoy a smile of his Face, never, to lie under the hope of
one drop of mercy: In losing Heaven, you shall lose fellowship and communion
with God, that eternal happiness which is the portion of the Saints: such an
invaluable loss, that Eternity it self will be little enough to deplore it and
bewail it.

My Design in the choice of this Text, is, to show you from it, what one main
cause is why men come short of that eternal happiness: namely, their despising
and undervaluing those glorious hopes that are laid up in Heaven: as the
despising the Land of Canaan was the main reason why so many thousands of the
Israelites were excluded from the Land of Canaan, as the Text here tells you:
Yea, they despised the pleasant Land, they believed not his Word. Many were the
provoking-sins that the people of Israel stood guilty of, after that the Lord
had wrought that glorious deliverance for them, in bringing them out of the
Land of Egypt: as the Psalmist reckons up a whole Catalogue of them in this
excellent Psalm wherein my Text lies: As,

First, Their Rebellion at the Red sea, in the 7 verse, Our Fathers understood
not thy Wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies: but
provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea, where God had wrought that
glorious deliverance for them; for you know they were ready to distrust the
Power of God, and they murmured against Moses the Servant of God, Exodus 14.11,
And they said unto Moses, Because there were no Graves in Egypt, have thou
taken us away to die in the Wilderness? Wherefore have thou dealt thus with us,
to carry us forth out of Egypt?

Secondly, Another sin was their murmuring for want of flesh, in the 14 ver. of
this Psalm, But lusted exceedingly, or they lusted with a very great lust:
Nothing but flesh forsooth, would serve their turn; they would not be contented
with the provision that God made for them, of Manna, which was Angels Food,
which was called Angels food, because that if so be the glorious Angels in
Heaven should want bread for their entertainment and provision, if they stood
in need of bread, they could not have better bread than that which God fed the
Israelites with from Heaven, every day: but this would not content them, they
murmured, and lusted exceedingly after flesh.

Thirdly, Another sin was their Sedition, and their Conspiracy against Moses
and against Aaron, in the 16 verse, They envyed Moses also in the Camp, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord; You take too much upon you, you sons of Levi: why
should you be more holy than we? are not all the Congregation holy? This was a
horrible provocation, that made the Lord to cause the earth to open and swallow
up Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

The fourth sin they were guilty of, was their despising or undervaluing the
pleasant Land that God gave them, in the words of the Text: Yea, they despised
the Pleasant Land, they believed not his Word. So then, in the Text you may
take notice of these two Particulars: First, Isreal's horrible ingratitude, in
this Phrase, They despised the Pleasant Land. Secondly, The ground of that
Ingratitude, in these words, They believed not his Word: For the first,


First, Isreal's horrible Ingratitude, They despised the Pleasant Land. By a
pleasant Land here, is meant the Land of Canaan, that Land of Promise, that God
had promised to Abraham four hundred and thirty years before ever they did
enjoy it, and it is called in the Hebrew, a Land of Desires, or a desirable
Land; as dainty food is called Meat of Desires (Job 33.20.) in the Hebrew: So
that his Life abhors bread, and his Soul dainty meat, or meat of Desires.
This same dainty Land, this same desirable Land, this same pleasant Land, this
Land of Promise, they despised, they rejected, they contemptuously scorned: so
the Original word properly signifies. Now consider this Land of Canaan here,
which they despised, in a twofold Notion: First, As it was an earthly
Possession. Secondly, As it was a Type, or Pledge, or Earnest-penny of that
heavenly Inheritance laid up for the Saints in Light: And you shall see in both
these respects, their despising this Land was horrible Ingratitude.


First, Consider it in the first Notion: namely, as it was an earthly
Possession, it was very great Ingratitude. But consider it in the second
Notion: namely, as it was a Pledge and earnest-penny of the heavenly
Inheritance, so it was a far greater Ingratitude. Take it in the first Notion,
for an earthly Possession: so the Doctrine you may observe from thence, is this,

Doct. That despising or undervaluing of those outward blessings and favors
that God bestows upon a people, is a God-provoking sin, a sin of great
Ingratitude.

This you see was the sin of Israel, after they came out of the Land of Egypt,
to despise any Land that God should bestow upon them: but especially
considering that they had been bondmen in Egypt, that they that had undergone
such a base servitude, that they had undergone-such burdens of Tyranny, for
God to bring them out of such a condition, into a Land, this had been a great
mercy; but to bring them into such a Land, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey,
to bring them into a Land so desirable: This certainly was a grievous
provocation, especially if you consider what Land this was; for,

First, It was very delightful in regard of the Situation of it; Canaan being
situated (as Geographers observe) in the midst or Center of the whole Earth:
for it had Asia upon the East, and Europe upon the West, and Africa upon the
South, and America, and Scythia, and Persia upon the North; it was very
pleasant therefore in the situation of it.

Secondly, It was pleasant in regard of the Air; though it is true, it was a
hotter Climate than ours is, yet it was a very temperate Climate; it was a
Climate of that temper, that they were free from all noisome vapors: so it was
a healthful Land in that regard.

Thirdly, It was a very fruitful Land; a Land that did abound with Corn, and
Cattle, and Vines, and Fig Trees, and Pomgranates, as you may find Deuteronomy. 8.7,
8, 9, For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good Land; a Land of Brooks of
waters of Fountains, and depths that spring out of valley, and hills: a Land of
Wheat, and Barley, and Vines, and Fig Trees, and Pomgranates: a Land of Oil,
Olives and Honey; A Land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou
shall not lack any thing in it: a Land whose stones are iron, and out of whose
Hills thou may dig brass. It Is a Land, says the Lord, wherein thou shall not
lack any thing, any thing that may be desirable, any thing that may be
comfortable for their subsistence: for them therefore to despise such a Land as
this was, it could not but provoke the Lord to anger. You know there is no
juster provocation among men, than kindness churlishly refused. Now for the
Israelites to despife this Land, a free gift, a gift of bounty and favor, such
a gift as they could not in the least merit at the hand of God; you find God
himself beating them off from that, Deuteronomy. 9.4, Speak not then in thine heart,
after the Lord thy God has cast them out before thee, saying, for my
righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this Land. It was not for
thy righteousness-sake, but it was for his own Namesake, and his Promise-sake,
that he made to Abraham for them to possess this Land; therefore it was a gift
of favor, and free bounty, doubtless; and it was a very great sin, because
ingratitude is hateful both to God and man. Unthankfulness (as one calls it) is
the hellish bar or stop to all future mercies. A man that is about to pour in
some precious Oil or Liquor into a Glass, if he see the Glass be cracked, or
there be a hole in it, you know he will pour in no Oil or Liquor in that Glass:
So here, an unthankful man is a broken Glafs, and God will not bestow his
favors upon those that are unthankful, at least he will not bestow them in
mercy; he sometimes gives these outward blessings in anger, I gave thee a King
in mine anger, Hos. 13.11, but he never gives mercies in love and favor to
unthankful wretches. This sin of unthankfulness sometimes provokes the Lord to
strain for his Rent, when men will not give him the quit-Rent of thankfulness.
Therefore says God, Hos. 2.8, 9, Because she did not know that I gave her Corn,
and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which was prepared for
Baal; therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my
Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool and my Flax, given to
cover her nakedness: says God, I will strip her naked, and leave her bare.
Unthankfulness provokes the Lord you see, to take away all his mercies, and to
strain for his Rent: but that is not all, for it provokes the Lord to inflict
some spiritual judgment, when men are unthankful, Romans 1.21, and 24 verses,
compared together: it is said, Because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish hearts were darkened. Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves. So that you see, despising or undervaluing those
outward blessings or mercies that God bestows upon a People, is a God-provoking
sin, a sin of ingratitude.

Let me briefly apply this; for this is not the Point I intend principally to
handle, but only to touch at it:

I beseech you my Brethren, Let every one of us enter into our own hearts, and
by some serious, self-reflecting thoughts, call our selves to an account,
whether we be not in the number of those that despise and undervalue those
National mercies wherewith God has enriched us. We live in a pleasant Land, in
a Goshen for light, in a Canaan for plenty: We live here in a City that is
lifted up to Heaven in Mercies, in the use of Ordinances: I believe there is
not such a place under the Heavens of God, not such a City that has such
plentiful provisions both for Soul and Body, as we have; But, have we walked
worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing? Have we lived up to our light, under
our means, under our mercies? Have we thankfully prized and improved these
National privileges and blessings that we enjoy? No, no, God knows, and our
own hearts know, that it is not so. Alas, it may be said of these Nations, as
it was said of the Land of Canaan, Ezra 9.11, The Land to which ye go to
possess it, it is an unclean Land, with the filthiness of the People of the
Lands, with their abominations which have filled it, from one end to another
with their uncleanness. So may it be said of this pleasant Land; this goodly
Land, this goodly City that we live in; it is an unclean City, through the
filthiness and abomination of many that live therein: and therefore that which
God threatens, Levit. 18.25, And the Land it self vomiteth out her Inhabitants:
even so justly might our God deal with us, because we have defiled the Land
with our abominations and uncleanness; therefore the Land should spew us out.
We have swallowed down his mercies without regarding him that bestowed those
mercies upon us: just like the Hog under the Acorn-tree that swallows down the
Mast, but does not look unto the Tree. We have been a murmuring and
discontented people, so looking upon one cross, as to forget a thousand
mercies: We have no way walked worthy of all the good things that our God has
given us to enjoy: therefore it were just that God should deal with us as he
threatens, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48, Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness, and with gladness of heart for the abundance of all things:
therefore shall thou serve thine enemy which the Lord shall send against thee
in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he
shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee, etc. Our
unthankfulness is intolerable, the Lord awaken us to repentance: but I will not
insist longer upon that Point.

I eome therefore to the second Notion: Consider the Land of Canaan, as it was
a Type, or Figure, or Pledge, or Earnest-penny of that same Heavenly Inheritance
that God has laid up for the Saints in Light; and so their ingratitude was far
greater; they despised that pleasant Land, this was a grievous provocation
indeed; so the Doctrine I shall give you from the words, considered in this
notion or sense, is this:

Doct. That despising, or undervaluing that Heavenly Inheritance that God has
prepared for the Saints in light, is a very grievous God-provoking sin: it is a
sin of the first magnitude.

For the proof of this Point, that one place of Scriptue will be sufficient,
Heb. 2.2, 3, For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation: which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? By Salvation there, he means the
Gospel, which is the cause of our Salvation: for it is observable, that both
the Gospel of Grace, and Grace wrought by the Gospel, and Glory, which is the
perfection of Grace, they all come under one name: The Kingdom of God, in
Scripture; because those whom God by the Gospel brings to Grace, he will by
Grace bring to Glory; now, says the Apostle, How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation? It is a marvelous strong Negation: he does not say, We
shall not escape, or hardly escape, if we neglect so great salvation; but, How
shall we escape? It includes the strongest Negation that can be; as if he
should say, It is impossible for us to escape eternal Condemnation, if we do
neglect so great Salvation; not only if we do despise this eternal Salvation,
but if we neglect it. Salvation it self will not save that man that despises or
neglects it.

But for the clearing of this Point, that you may a little better understand
it: there are these three Queries I will endeavor to speak to, in opening of
the Doctrine.

First, When may a man be said to despise or undervalue that Heavenly
Inheritance that is prepared for the Saints in light. Secondly, How comes it to
pafs, that men so lightly regard, and undervalue that eternal Salvation?
Thirdly, How may it appear that this despising or undervaluing of this Heavenly
Inheritance, is such a God-provoking sin?
First, When may a man be said to despise, or undervalue the Heavenly
Inheritance that is prepared for the Saints in light?

I shall answer this Query, and show it you in these four Particulars:

First, Then does a man despise and undervalue this Heavenly Inheritance, when
he is an Earthly-minded man: when he does overvalue earthly things, and
under-value Heavenly things: when he does set his affections so much on things
below, that he cannot set his affections on things above: for these two are
inconsistent, they cannot stand together, as appears by that in 1 John 2.15,
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him: As if he should say, The love
of God, and the love of the world, are inconsistent. So, in Col. 3.2, Set your
affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth: as if he had said,
If you set your affections on things below, you cannot set them on things
above. Now when a man prefers a present possession, before a future
expectation: when he says, Give me a Bird in hand, rather than two in the Bush:
give me the pleasures and profits, and honors, and contentments of this life,
let me have prefent pay: but as for that glorious Inheritance you speak of, for
the time to come, let them look after it that will; as he said, Let me have my
part in Paris, let who will look after a part in Paradise. This is an
undervaluing of this Heavenly Inheritance.

Secondly, Then may a man be said to despise and undervalue this Heavenly
Inheritance, when he is sluggish and sloathful, and will not stir up himself to
take hold of God: when he will not set about those means that God has
appointed for the attaining of those glorious hopes that are laid up in Heeven.
True, nothing is to be done by us in a way of merit; but much is to be done in
the use of means for the attaining of this Eternal Happiness, ( Phil. 2.12,)
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: Mark, it is not said, Work
out your salvation; Christ has wrought out our salvation for us by way of
merit, but we must work out our salvation in the use of means: Orig, (...),
Work it out, as it were out of the fire. Now when a man will not be contented
to take that pains that the Lord requires, in this working out of his
salvation; when he sits still and is idle, or when he is sloathful or negligent
in Duty: when he does either neglect Duty, or sleepily and carelessly perform
every Duty, this is a despising and undervaluing this Salvation. For you must
know, the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Race, 1 Cor. 9.24: and he that
would win the Crown by first coming to the Goal, must run for it. It is
compared to a Kingdom, Luke 13.24, and he that would win it, must strive for
it; Strive to enter in at the strait gate, (...), Strive as in an Agony. And
it is compared to a Crown, 1 Cor. 9.25: and he that would obtain it, must fight
for it; I have fought a good fight (says the Apostle) I have finished my
course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8. The Crown of Glory there, is called a Crown of Righteousness; not
because it was merited by Paul's righteousness, you must not understand it so;
but it is called a Crown of Righteousness, because it was promised, and because
it was purchased; it was freely promised by the Father, and it was fully
purchased by the precious blood of Jesus Christ: says he, Henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. But says he, I have fought a good fight first, and I
have finished my course. Now, when men will neither so run as that they may
obtain, nor so strive as that they may gain a Kingdom, nor so fight that they
may get a Crown that is laid up in Heaven for the Saints: then they may be said
to despise and undervalue the Heavenly Inheritance. That is the second.

Thirdly, Then may a man be said to despise this Heavenly Inheritance, when he
is a self-seeking Christian, or rather a pelting Chapman (as I may so call him)
that will not come up to the price of Salvation, that will not be contented to
take the pains that must be taken; if so be he may be the master of his own
desires, then he would be content to enjoy those glorious hopes. But when a man
will not with the wise Merchant, sell all, that he may buy the Pearl; for as
Jesus Christ may be called A Pearl of Price, so may this Heavenly Inheritance
be called A Pearl; though not of that price that Jesus Christ is of, yet a
Pearl of price too. Now when men will not part with all, in cafe it come to
that point, to get this Pearl, they despise and undervalue this blessed
Inheritance. Every man would be contented to come to Heaven, so he might come
in his own way, on his own terms, and in his own time. If he may come to Heaven
in his own way, that is Heaven and the World, Heaven and his lusts, Heaven and
his own ends and interests together: Or if he may have Heaven upon his own
terms: namely, to live as he list, to take Jesus Christ as a Savior, but not
as a Prince; to take him as a Redeemer, but not as a Ruler: Or if he may have
Heaven in his own time; namely, when he lies upon his Deathbed, when his sick
Bed is ready to deliver him over to his cold Grave; but all his life long he
would prosecute his own ends, and interest, and live to himself more than to
Jesus Christ; every man on Earth would be contented to have Heaven on these
terms. But now, when it comes to this, that a man that will have this Heavenly
Inheritance, must have it in Christ's way, in a way of Holiness: Be ye holy, for
I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. And without holiness none shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. And when it comes to this, that if a man will have Heaven, he must have
it on Christ's own terms: which is, that thou must be contented to serve me, as
well as to be saved by me; and to be contented to be ruled by me, as well as to
be redeemed by me; thou must be contented to bear my Cross, as well as to wear
my Crown. And when it comes to this, that a man must have Heaven in Christ's own
time, what time is that? To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, Heb. 3.7. Put not off your repentance from day to day: set about the
work with all your might; set about it without any further procrastination, or
delay. Now here it sticks: rather than men will have Heaven on these terms,
they resolve they will never have Heaven, they will let it go.

Fourthly, Then men may be accounted, or said to despise Heaven, when Heaven is
not accounted worthy those difficulties or discouragements that they must
fustain in the pursuit of those glorious hopes. Thus with the Israelites, when
the Spies came from Canaan, and told them; True, the Land is an excellent Land;
but let us tell you, there are Giants, Anakims, walled Towns, there will be a
great deal of difficulty before you get possession; and if you will possess the
Land, you must fight for it, it will cost you the lives of many of you, before
you obtain it. Oh now, upon this report they were ready to stone Caleb and
Joshua, those two that told them, that they were able to conquer the
Inhabitants: and that they were but as bread for them, and their strength was
departed; they were ready (I say) to stone them, when they heard of the
difficulties of obtaining the Land of Canaan, and they would rather go back
again into Egypt, than fight for Canaan; we will rather go back to our Leeks,
and Onions, and Garlic, than have this pleasant Land, if we must fight and
adventure our lives for it. So here, when fainthearted cowardly Christians
hear, that through much tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God,
Acts 14.22: Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. And when they hear that truth which our Savior tells
them, Mark 8 34, If you will be my Disciples, you must take up your Cross and
follow me: As good Soldiers that follow their Captain, through dirt, and mire,
and blood. And that they must be hated of all men for the sake of Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 10.22. And that they must endure hardship in the World, Matthew. 5. Though
their sorrow shall be turned into joy: Say they, If we cannot have Heaven but
upon these terms, we will have none of it, we will rather have the pleasure of
sin for a season; we will lie, and swear, and cozen, and cog, and flatter, and
temporize, and swim with every stream, and lose the peace of our Consciences;
we will rather choose to sleep in a whole skin, though with gauled Consciences:
before we will have Heaven upon such terms, we will have our ease, we cannot
abide difficulties and discouragements, which are in the way that leads to
Heaven; this is a despising of the pleasant Land. That is the first Query, When
may a man be said to despise this heavenly Inheritance. But in the second place.

Secondly, For Explication. How comes it to pass, that men are so ready to
despise and to undervalue such a glorious Inheritance, an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the heavens, 1
Pet. 1.4. A Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28? To despise those
glorious and unconceivable joys that are at the right hand of God for evermore?
Psalm 16.11. I profess a man would wonder that any, unless they were bereaved
of their reason, unless they had lost their senses and feeling, that ever any
man should part with such glorious hopes, hopes of such a glorious Inheritance,
that surpasses what eye has seen, or ear heard, or whatever the heart of man
can conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. But I will tell you the reason; the Reasons briefly
are these:

First, Men despise this glorious Inheritance, because they know not the worth
of it, John 4.10, Jesus answered, and said unto her, If thou knew the gift
of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink; thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. So, if men did but
know what this heavenly Inheritance is, Oh were they but with Moses (Deuteronomy.
32.49.) to stand upon Mount Nebo, to see this Land afar off, to see but a
glimpse of it: Or if they were with Paul (2 Cor. 12.) wrapped up into Heaven one
day, nay, but a few hours, they would adventure to get through the narrow
Wicker, the narrow Door, though an Angel with a drawn Sword kept the passage,
as you read, an Angel did keep the Gate of Paradise, Genesis 3.24. If a man saw
but one glimpse of that eternal glory, he would cry out as that Father, Dominus
hic affligas, hic corrigas, corpus maximis doloribus afficias, etc. modo in
eternum parcas. Oh Lord, Cut me here, wound me here, burn me here, let all the
pains of Hell come upon my body, so my poor Soul may be saved, so I may come to
that eternal Inheritance. But men are ignorant, and know not the worth of it,
therefore they do not prize it.

Secondly, Men undervalue this heavenly Inheritance, because they were never
yet sufficiently humbled for their sins, they never had Soul-shaking
humiliation and conviction upon their Spirits: they never yet feelingly groaned
under the burden of sin: they never tasted the bitterness of sin, they never
yet considered the woeful wages of sin. But if God now should but take such a
one by the neck, as he did Job, and shake him to pieces, and set him up for a
mark, and his Archers should compass him round about, and cleave his Reins
asunder, and not spare him: and pour out his Gaul upon the ground, and break
him with breach upon breach, and run upon him like a Giant, as Job complains,
Chap. 16. ver. 12, 13, 14: Oh, Christ now would be Christ indeed. Heaven now
would be Heaven indeed; such a one would say, Oh Lord, Do with me what thou
please, so I may be but thine. But because men were never yet thoroughly
humbled, therefore they never prize this glorious Inheritance.

Thirdly, Because men are bewitched with the pleasures of sin, which are but
for a season; and why are they bewitched with them? because of the present
enjoyment of them. Demas has for saken me, having loved this present world (2 Timothy 4.10); and he loved it, because it was present.

Fourthly, Because men are rockt asleep in the Cradle of security, the Devils
Cradle: Satan makes them believe Heaven may be got with a wet Finger; and that
they may come thither, whatsoever their course and conversation be; and that
they may put off their repentance to the last Year of their lives: nay, to the
last Month of the last Year; nay, to the last day of the last Month: and that
one day is as good as five thousand, to make their peace with God in; and that
it is a small matter to repent, and that a Lord have mercy upon thee, will
serve thy turn to bring thee to Heaven. That Is the second Query.

But thirdly, The third Query is this: But how will it appear, that this
despising and undervaluing this heavenly Inheritance, is such a grievous
Godprovoking sin? I will tell you, it will appear thus; There are two reasons I
shall give you for it:

First, Because this despising of that heavenly Inheritance, speaks men to be
Atheists, it proves men to be Atheists, to look at nothing but at things
present: that look upon things that are seen, but never look upon things that
are not seen: Things that are seen, are temporal; but things that are not seen,
are spiritual and eternal. So I say, they look only at things present: and they
measure their joy only by outward prosperity, and they measure their sorrow
only by the want of it. Now what a dreadful thing it is for men to be Atheists!

Secondly, This despising or undervaluing of the heavenly Inheritance, it
provokes the Lord so to anger, that he swear in his wrath, such despisers shall
never, never taste of that Inheritance, never enjoy that they have despised.
Thus did God deal with those despising Israelites, those scornful Israelites in
the Wilderness, that despised that pleasant Land. You may read the sad story,
Numb. 14.28, 29, 30: Says God, being exceedingly provoked to anger; Say unto
them, As truly as I live, says the Lord as you have spoken in mine ear, so
will I do unto you; your carcasses shall fall in the Wilderness, and all that
were numbered of you according to your whole number, from twenty years old and
upward, which have murmured against me; doubtless, ye shall not come into the
Land, concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of
Jephunch, and Joshua the son of Nun. Not one of those thousands that I brought
out of the Land of Egypt, not one of them shall see the Land they despised.
Just so will God deal with those that despise and undervalue this heavenly
Inheritance. Says the Lord, Have I prepared a Kingdom, an Everlasting Kingdom,
a Kingdom of Glory? Have I prepared such things as eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive? Have I
prepared a place of infinite and unspeakable happiness, such happiness as all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the beauty, and glory, and splendour, and
pleasures of them, are not worthy to be a Picture of it? what, have I provided
such a Crown, such a Kingdom? and do you undervalue it? Do you not regard it?
Will you not tread in the way that leads to it? As I live, says the Lord, You
shall never enter into my Rest, you shall never enjoy the Land, nor possess it.
Thus I have opened the Point to you, and showed you, that despising or
undervaluing that heavenly Inheritance that God has prepared for the Saints in
Light, is a very grievous God provoking sin. Now briefly to apply it.

First Use, by way of Examination. Would it no be a very necessary enquiry, a
very neeedful enquiry for you and me, and every one of us, in some serious
self-reflecting thoughts, to call our selves to an account, whether we be in
the number of those that despise and undervalue this heavenly Inheritance, yea
or no? But it may be you will say, We hope we are not such as despise, or
undervalue this heavenly Inheritance: God forbid we should be such Atheists.
But for answer, Pray tell me, Art thou one that overvaluest Earth, and
undervaluest Heaven? Art thou one that say, I am so much taken up with the
World, so over head and ears in the World: I drive a Trade to provide for my
Family, but to drive a Trade for Heaven, I have no leisure, no leisure; thou
that say thou have no leisure to look after Heaven, thou will have leisure
enough to bewail the loss of Heaven, when thousands of years are gone, and ten
thousand to that, and a hundred thousand to that: all this while thou shall be
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of thy teeth, for the loss of it. When thou
preferrest a present possession before a future expectation, do you not despise
Heaven, and undervalue it? Commune with your own hearts: is it not as I speak?
Do I not speak the hearts of some of you?

Again, Are you not sloathful and secure? and do you not neglect those means
that God has appointed? Do you work out your Salvation? Do you so run that you
may obtain? Do you fight the good fight of Faith? Examine your hearts, and see
if you are not secure, and neglectful of the means God has ordained, for the
obtaining of this glorious and heavenly Inheritance. Remember the speech of the
Spies, Judge. 18.9, For we have seen the Land, and behold it is very good; and
are ye still? Be not sloathful to go, and to enter to possess the Land. The
Land is an exceeding good Land, all things that can be desired are there: and
do you sit still? So may I say, Here is a pleasant Land, a glorious Land, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey; here are pleasures at Gods right hand for
evermore, and do you sit still? will you not run? do you not strive to enter?

Again, You say, you do not undervalue Heaven; I beseech you consider, What,
are you content to part with for Heaven? will you sell all to buy this Pearl?
Will you part with any thing that stands in opposition to your hopes? Will you
take Christ in his own way, and on his own terms, and in his own time? Can you
be content to swallow down some discouragements, and difficulties, and
temptations, and bless God for them: and say, One smile of thy face will
recompense a thousand years of adversity? If I have Christ for my portion, and
Heaven in reversion, though I carry a Rod of affliction at my back every day:
though I am fed with the water of affliction, and with the bread of adversity,
Heaven will make amends for all. But alas! How many have weak hands, and feeble
knees, and are not able to go on in the way of Salvation, and will not come up
to the price of Salvation! Do not deceive your felves. These are plain
downright Truths, bottomed upon Scripture; if I speak not the truth, believe
me not; but if I do, some of you have cause with serious self-reflection, to
smite upon your Thighs, and you have cause greatly to fear this despising and
undervaluing this heavenly Inheritance, is your sin; and Oh that it might be
your sorrow and shame.

Secondly, This Doctrine may justly serve for to reprove (and I profess, I know
no reproof sharp enough for) such persons as despise and undervalue that
heavenly Inheritance that God has prepared for the Saints in Light. Let me say
to some of you, as God speaks, Acts 15.41, Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish. So say I, Hearken ye despisers: hearken ye secure, careless, senseless,
sottish Atheists (I can call you no better); Oh, you that have such slight
thoughts of Heaven, you that look upon this heavenly Inheritance but as
imaginary, a Fools Paradise, or as a mere conceit, rather than any real
existent thing: you that never yet set your hearts and souls to seek the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom; you whose hearts are buried in Earth and Earthly
things, who mind nothing but Earth, nothing in the World but raising great
Estates, and satisfying the brutish part of your selves: Tell me, Do you think
that ever you shall enjoy this external Inheritance which you have despised?
Shall you ever taste of that everlasting happiness which you have so much
undervalued? Will the Lord cast Pearls before Swine? Will he hang such a Jewel,
such an unvaluable Jewel, which is better worth than ten thousand Worlds? will
be hang such a Jewel on a Swines snout? No, no, you deceive your selves, if you
think so. Do you think that Heaven will drop into your mouths as you lie
a-dying? Do you think our Savior speaks in vain, when he says, Matthew. 11.12,
And from the days of John the Baptist, until now, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. If Heaven could be
purchased with a Lord have mercy upon us: if it could be procured in such a
cold, lazy, lukewarm way as you walk in, then certainly our blessed Savior
did not know what he said; his exhorting to strive to enter in at the strait
gate, was to no purpose. But if prizing of this Salvation, and striving or this
Salvation to the end of your lives: if these must go before enjoying, then as
sure as the Lord lives, you careless, secure, sottish Sinners, that mind
nothing less than that one thing necessary: assure your selves, you shall never
have a portion in that Inheritance which is prepared for the Saints in Light;
no, there is another place prepared for such Dogs and Swine (as they are
called), that place without, Rev. 22.15, For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers,
and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and
makes a lie. You all cry out of Esau a profane wretch, the Spirit of God
brands him for it, a profane Atheist, that sold his Birth right for a Mess of
Pottage: he sold his Birthright, which was a Type of Heaven; he sold this for
an old Song (as we say). And you that neglect, and undervalue, and despise
Heaven; you are guilty of the same sin, and have you not as profane spirits as
he? You cry out of Judas, because he sold his Master for thirty pieces of
silver. Oh hearken, impenitent sottish Sinner! It may be thou sellest Christ,
and Heaven, and Glory, and all, may be, for a base lust, a base lie: thou
sellest it for some considerable advantage, as thou conceivest for the present,
though at last it will be like Gravel in the Throat. Take home this reproof
with you: the Lord set it home upon your Souls, you that never set your hearts
and souls to seek the Lord.

I have done with a word of Exhortation: That is, I beseech you, and exhort
you, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would take heed of this
God-provoking, Soul-damning sin; take heed of undervaluing this heavenly
Inheritance: Let it not be said of any of you, that you despised the pleasant
Land; instead of despising it, do you highly prise it: and say as David, Psalm
119.174, I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord, and thy Law is my delight.
And what a kind of longing was it? Not a cold wish, such a wish as Balaam had,
O that I might die the death of the Righteous: that Heaven might drop into my
mouth then, but I would live as I list; it was not such a desire: no, says
David, I have longed for thy salvation: what then? Thy Law is my delight. That
is a right longing that is accompanied with an endeavor; he rightly longs for
the Salvation of God, that delights in the Commands of God. In the 123 ver. of
the same Psalm, Mine eyes fail in waiting for thy Salvation. Look as the Lord
Jesus Christ will never bestow himself upon that Soul that does not pant, and
breathe, and break, with longing desires after him. So likewise, he will never
bestow this heavenly Inheritance upon that Soul that does not most earnestly,
wishfully, and industriously pant after him; and long for him, and seek him,
that you may prize him. Take heed, in the fear of God, of those four causes of
undervaluing this Salvation.

First, Take heed of Earthly-mindedness; beg that you may be dug out of the
thick Mire and Clay: say, Give me not my portion here, O Lord: How sad will it
be with me, if thou put me off only with these outward things!

Secondly, Take heed of sloathfulness and sluggishness in the service of God,
and in seeking this Salvation, Romans 12.11, Not sloathful in business, servent
in Spirit, serving the Lord. Seek the Lord, and seek his Salvation, with all
your might, mind and strength.

Thirdly, Be content to part with any thing for Christ; take heed of placing
your love upon the Creature; be content to part with any thing that stands in
opposition to, or in competition with those glorious hopes that are laid up for
the Saints in Light.

Fourthly, Be contented to endure some hardship in the way; Heaven will make
amends for all: all the costs, discouragements, and difficulties that you meet
with in the pursuit of your hopes, will be abundantly recompensed by one hours
fruition of that eternal happiness.

Secondly, If you would not despise or undervalue that heavenly Inheritance,
learn to live by Faith, and not by sight and sense; if you live by sight and
sense, you will look on the things that are seen, and not on the things that
are not seen: the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are
not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. If you live by Faith, you will fetch your
comforts from Christ, more than from any thing in the Creature.

Thirdly, If you would not despise this pleasant Land, then beg of Jesus
Christ, that he would draw your Souls, that you may run after him. Quicken me
with thy quickning-grace, for thy Name sake; Lord, bestow thy quickning-grace
upon me, that I may mind the business of Eternity seriously. Lord, help me to
set about the work vigorously, that I may not trifle with thee in matters that
are of infinite Concernment. I remember the speech of a Martyr, a good woman,
at that time when profession of the Gospel was enough to bring to the stake;
says she, I hear there are Crowns and Kingdoms to be disposed of this day;
here, take my child, I will put in for one Crown, for one Kingdom. Oh that
every one of us had hearts to do as she did; let us be contented to suffer
hardship for a while, that we may enjoy the pleasant Land for ever and ever.

So much for the first Branch of the Text, that is the horrible ingratitude of
this people: They despised the pleasant Land. The ground of that ingratitude
you have in the next words of the Text, And believed not his Word. But so much
for this time.

PSALM. CVI. 24. -- And believed not his Word.


I Have spoken to this Text in one Sermon already, as you may remember; in it I
took notice of two Branches:

First, Isreal's horrible ingratitude, in these words, They despised the
pleasant Land; and that I finished last day.

Now I come to the second Branch of the Text, that is the ground of their
ingratitude, in these words, They believed not his Word. What word? They
believed not the Promise that God had made unto them, that he would bestow the
Land of Canaan upon them; nay, God did not only promise it, but he swear unto
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Genesis 50.24, And Joseph said unto his Brethren, I die,
and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this Land, to the Land
which he swear to Abraham, to Isaac, and Jacob. But because the Spies forsooth
came and told them: Oh, there are walled Cities, and Giants, and Anakims to
fight with, and it is impossible for you to get possession of the Land;
therefore they believed the Spies, but they would not believe God; they
believed the report of those that told them of the Giants, but they would not
believe Gods Report, they would not believe Gods Promise. So the Doctrine I
shall commend to you from this second Branch of the Text, is this:

Doct. One main Reason why men do undervalue the Heavenly Canaan, and so come
short of it, is their Unbelief.

Look as it was with the Children of Israel, here spoken of in the Text; the
sin that made them despise and undervalue the Land of Canaan, and so were
debarred and shut out of the Land of Canaan, was their Unbelief: as the Apostle
shows expressly, Heb. 3. ult. So we see they could not enter in, because of
unbelief. So here, One main reason why men undervalue the Heavenly Canaan, and
so come short, or are deprived of the Heavenly Canaan: it is their Unbelief.
Men believe lies, but they will not believe the Truth; they believe the Devil,
who is a liar, and tells them they may come to Heaven with a wet-finger, and
therefore they may live as they list; but they will not believe the Lord Jesus
Christ, that tells them, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
to life, and few there be that find it, Matthew. 7.14. They believe the father of
lies, but they will not believe him that is the God of Truth; who says, Strive
to enter in at the strait gate; for many I say unto you, shall seek to enter
in, but shall not be able, Luke 13.24. They believe the report of Satan, but
they will not believe the report of the word of God, which tells us expressly, 1
Pet. 4.18, And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinners appear? They will not believe that Doctrine (which you may remember)
proved out of Heb. 4.1, Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Where I
showed you, that the life of a Christian is a life of fear: and that in matters
of Soul-concernment, Christians should not only be very jealous of themselves,
but of others also. I also showed you, that it is possible for many that are
professors of the Truth, or true Religion, to come short of Heaven; and that it
is possible for many that are confident that they are in a state of grace, to
come short of Heaven; and that it is possible for many to come very near to
Heaven, and yet to come short of Heaven. But men will not believe these Truths:
now their Unbelief is the cause why they slight Heaven, and shall be deprived
of Heaven. For the better Explication of this Doctrine, there are two things I
shall open to you: First, What this Unbelief is, that makes men so undervalue
the Heavenly Canaan. Secondly, Why this Unbelief is such a great and grievous
sin, so dangerous and destructive, that it deprives men of that Heavenly Canaan.


First, What this Unbelief is that makes men slight the Heavenly Canaan: For
answer to this, you must know there is a twofold Unbelief: There is a Negative
And There is a Positive
Unbelief.

First, There is a Negative Unbelief; and that is the sin of Pagans and
Heathens, that never heard of God, nor of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; they
believe not, because they know not: they know not God, Romans 10.14, How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? This is the sin of Pagans:
this ignorance it excuses in part, though not in whole; their sin is not so
great by far, as the sin of those that do profess the Gospel; yet their
Negative unbelief is a sin, because Gods Commandment is, That we should believe
on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23, And this is his commandment,
that we believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. But this is the Negative
unbelief: this concerns not us, but it concerns those that know not God.

Secondly, There is a Positive Unbelief; and this is, when men are ready to
distrust Gods Power, and his Providence, and his Promises; or, when we do not
so fiducially rest upon them, as to obey the Gospel. This is a Positive
unbelief; this is the sin which is so dangerous. Now you must know this
Positive Unbelief is twofold: First, Temporary. Secondly, Total, or Final.


First, There is a Temporary unbelief; and this is that which may befall even
Gods own Elect, they may be under unbelief for a while. True, it is possible
for an Elect Child of God, to be under an act of unbelief, though he cannot be
brought into a state of unbelief; for you must distinguish between these two:
between a state of unbelief, and an act of unbelief. A Child of God may be
under an act of unbelief: so you know was Godly Zachariah ( Elizabeth's
husband), he was under an act of unbelief: And behold, thou shall be dumb, and
not able to speak until the day that these things shall be performed, because
thou believedst not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season, Luke
1.20. And Thomas, one of the twelve Apostles, he was under an act of unbelief,
when he said, Unless I shall see in his hands the print of the Nails, and put
my finger into the print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his fide, I will
not believe, Joh. 20.25. So were all the rest of the Apostles under an act of
unbelief for a while; therefore our Savior when he was risen again, he
upbraided them (the Text says) with their unbelief, Mark 16.14, After he
appeared to the Eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their
unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen
him after he was risen. This is a Temporary Unbelief.

Secondly, There is a Total or Final unbelief, and that is the sin of those
that live in a state of impenitency, and abide in that condition; those that
abide in their unbelief, until the wrath of God abides upon them. You see what
this unbelief is: a distrusting of Gods Power, and Providence, and Promises;
and that not for a time, which may be the condition of a Child of God; but when
it is a Total and Final unbelief. That Is the first thing for Explication.

Secondly, By way of Explication; it may be demanded, Why is this such a
dangerous and destructive sin, that it does debar men of this Heavenly Canaan?
I shall give you these three Reasons of it.

First, Because you must know it is a sin that robs God of his Glory. Look, as
by believing we do most of all honor God; for by this we set to our Seal that
he is true, John 3.33, He that has received his Testimony, has set to his
Seal that God is true. By believing, we give him the honor of his Truth, and
Faithfulness, and Mercy, and Goodness, and Power. Thus Abraham by believing,
gave glory to God, in Romans 4.20, He staggered not at the Promise of God through
unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. So on the contrary, by
unbelief we dishonor him in a high degree: nay, in the highest degree that can
be named, because we make him a Liar, 1 John 5.10, He that believes on the Son
of God, has the witness in himself; he that believes not God, has made him a
Liar, because he believes not the Record that God gave him of his Son. Now
what greater reproach or dishonor can be cast upon a man of worth, than to
give him the lie? Unbelief therefore is a bold sin; it steps into Gods Cabinet,
as I may say, and it robs him of the choicest Jewel that he has; namely, his
Glory: which he has said, He will not give to another, Isa. 42.8, I am the
Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my
praise to the graven Images. The glory of God, it is nothing else but the
reputation that God has in the World. Take away Gods glory, and the reputation
that he has among the Sons of men, then (with reverence be it spoken) he is
little worth in the eyes of men. Now Unbelief is that that robs God of his
Glory.

Secondly, Unbelief is such a dangerous destructive sin, because it is the
first sin that ever was in the World. As it is the mother of all other sins, so
it was the first sin whereby the Devil got entrance into the heart of man. I
know there is a dispute amongst Divines, What was the first sin our first
Parents were guilty of, whether Pride, or Unbelief? without all doubt it was
Unbelief; for God told our first Parents expressly, Whenever they did eat of the
Tree of life, they should die the death: as sure as they lived, they should
die; but the Devil he goes and tells them, You shall not die. Now mark: they
believed the Devil, more than they believed God; Unbelief therefore was the
first sin that ever was committed in the World: and as it was the first sin
whereby the Devil got entrance into the heart of man, so may it be said to be
the root and mother of all other sins; therefore says the Apostle, Take heed,
Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Look as Faith may be said to be the Mother of
all other Graces, because Faith lets in Jesus Christ into the Soul, and so
purifies the heart: Act. 15.9, And put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by Faith: it applies the purifying-blood of Jesus
Christ: So on the other side, Unbelief may be said to be the mother of all
other sins, because it keeps out Christ, and keeps out Grace, and polutes the
heart, and defiles it, and makes it no better than a Den for Satan to lodge in.
It is a good observation of an eminent Divine, whom for honor sake I mention,
namely, Doctor Sibs: Look as the first return of the Soul to God, is by Faith;
so the first departing of the Soul from God, is by Unbelief; for, from thence
comes a departing to other sins; and so unbelief being increased, the rent that
is made between God and the Soul, the estrangement between God and the Soul, is
still made wider and wider; and so the Soul departs further and further, and is
still departing, and departing from one sin to another, till at last it comes
to hear that fatal and final sentence, Matthew. 25, Depart thou cursed wretch
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Well therefore
may Unbelief be said to be the Mother of all other sins. Unbelief and Apostasy
are very near akin: Unbelief may in some sense be said to be all disobedience.
The same Greek word that signifies unbelief, signifies also disobedience, Col.
3.6, For these things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of
unbelief, or children of disobedience. And well may it be said to be the Mother
of disobedience: for what sin is there so gross and grievous, that an
unbeliever will not run into? If a man believe not the threatenings, he will
practice no good: For example, if a man do but believe that terrble Scripture,
Rev. 21.8, But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers,
and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second
Death. If a man did believe that Scripture, durst he be a Coward to betray the
Truths of God? God speaks of the fearful ones in that sense, to be cowardly
Christians: did he believe this? durst he be such an abominable wretch, to run
into such abominable blasphemies (which are not to be named) which are belched
out against God in these days? Durst he be an Idolater, a Liar, a Swearer?
certainly he durst not; but he does not believe the Threatenings of God. If a
Tyrant should threaten any of you with the Rack, or Strapado, which would break
your bones: Oh, what terror and trembling would take hold of you! how would you
fall down at his feet, and seek his face and favor! yet that Tyrant could take
away nothing but a poor, miserable, mortal life: But the great God of Heaven,
he threatens Sinners with the punishment of loss: the loss of his presence, of
his favor, of fellowship with him in Glory; nay, he threatens with the
punishment of Sense, those unconceivable tortures and torments in Hell for
ever, to all Eternity; and yet Sinners do not tremble at this great God, they
do not fall down and seek his face and savor; What is the reason? because they
believe not. If so be a faithful man, that was never yet known to break his
word, and a man of a great Estate, that was able to make good his promise; if
he should promise any of you an Inheritance of two or three hundred by the
year, you would believe that man on his word, and you would seek to please him,
you would prize his favor; but now the great God of Heaven and Earth, that was
never yet known to break his Word: he tells you of an heavenly Inheritance,
incorruptible, undefiled, reserved in Heaven; and yet do you not seek to please
him, or prize his favor or obey him? what is the reason? Because you believe
not his Word. So the truth is, unbelief is the Mother of all disobedience.
That Is the second Reason.

Thirdly, Unbelief is a sin thus dangerous and destructive to the Soul, because
God has provided more Antidotes and Remedies against this sin of unbelief,
than against any other sin, to cure this sin of Unbelief.

First, God has given us his Word, which is a most faithful Word: Heaven and
Earth shall pass away (says our Savior) but my words shall not pass away,
Matthew. 24.35.

Secondly, God has given us his Promises. Now all his Promises are sure and
certain, Yea and Amen; God is faithful, and will make good his promises, 2 Cor.
1.20, For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him are Amen, unto the
glory of God by us.

Thirdly, He has given us his Covenant: and this Covenant is sure and
steadfast, and ordered in all things, an everlasting Covenant, sealed with the
blood of Jesus Christ, and cannot be altered, 2 Samuel 23.5, Although my House be
not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in
all things, and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, although
he make it not to grow.

Fourthly, He has given us his Oath, Ezekiel. 16.8, Yea, I swear unto thee, and
entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.
Now an Oath you know is the strongest bond of assurance between man and man.
And the Apostle speaking of the Word of God, and of the Oath of God: that they
are two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.17,
18, Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of the Promise,
the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us.
As it is impossible for God to die, because he is life it self; so it is
impossible for God to lie, because he is Truth it self.

Fifthly, Because he has given us his Seal also: he has given us his outward
Seal, which is the Sacrament, both the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper; he has given us also his inward Seal, which is the
Witness and Testimony of his own blessed Spirit, sealing us up to the day of
Redemption.

Sixthly, He has given us Experiences; former Experiences, and latter
Experiences: the Experience of all the Saints that have gone before us, Psalm
22.4, Our Fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did deliver them.
So in Psalm 34.6, This poor man cried (speaking of himself) when he was in as
low a condition as ever he was in: (scrabling on the ground, and feigning
himself mad, 1 Samuel 21.13,) says he, This poor man cried, and the Lord heard
him, and saved him out of all his trouble; Therefore others will be exceeding
glad, when they hear how graciously he has dealt with them. So in Psalm 9.10,
They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee; for thou Lord have not
forsaken them that seek thee. Now God has given us experiences, he has given
us all these Antidotes and Preservatives against unbelief; hearken therefore, O
Unbeliever! Well, If thou do not believe, thou must perish everlastingly; God
remains faithful, and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13, If we believe not, yet
he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. But if thou do believe and perish;
if thou do believe, and yet art damned: then God has broken his Word, and
broken his Promise, and broken his Covenants, and broken his Oath, and broken
the Seals of his Covenant; which is as impossible, as for God to cease to be
God. You see God has provided so many Remedies and Antidotes against Unbelief,
therefore unbelief is such a dangerous and destructive sin. It is observable,
when our Savior came to his own Country, that was Nazareth, and preached to
his own Countrymen, and did Miracles among them, they believed not; The Text
says, Mark 6.6, He marvelled because of their unbelief. You do not read he
marvelled at other sins: as Ignorance, Hypocrisy, Pride, Covetousness, etc.
but our Savior marvelled at their unbelief. Oh, when men shall sin against the
Word of God, and the Promise of God, and the Covenant of God, and the Oath of
God, and the Seal of God: Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at their incredible
incredulity. Thus you see the Point opened.

For the Use and Application of the Point.

First, By way of Examination: I beseech you to bring your hearts to the
Touchstone, and see whether you be guilty of this sin of unbelief, yea, or no.
I know every one of you will be ready to plead, Not guilty; Oh, we do believe
the Word of God, and pity we should live, if we did not believe the Word: But
let me tell you, This is an inward, secret, lurking sin, therefore not easily
discerned. But that you may know whether you be guilty of this sin or no, I
will give you these four plain undeniable Scripture-Evidences; the Lord make
you your own Judges in this particular.

First, When men do slight the invitations of Jesus Christ, slight the proffers
of his Grace, it is a token there is unbelief in the bottom: for where Faith is
once wrought in the heart, there is instantly and readily a closing between
Christ and the Soul: there is a ready closure, as there is between the
Lodestone and the Iron: When Jesus Christ says to a poor sinner, Come to me,
though thou art weary and heavy laden; the Believing Soul closes presently with
Christ, and answers, Come thee, Lord; I, I will creep to thee upon my hands and
feet: When Christ says to it again: Do this, or Do that; the Soul says again, O
Lord, give me strength to do what thou command, and command what thou will.
But now, when you find in you a backwardness to entertain Jesus Christ in your
hearts, this is a certain and undeniable evidence of your unbelief; and is not
this your sin? Alas, alas, let Jesus Christ be tendered in the Ministry of the
Word from day to day; let him be proffered in the sweetest anst softest terms
of Persuasions and Exhortations; let Ministers use their best Art and Arguments
to woo, entreat, invite, and beseech you to accept of the Lord Jesus Christ, as
he is tendered to you in the Gospel; and yet alas, we poor Ministers can get no
audience; I speak of the most of you, not of all: scarce one of ten, scarce one
of a hundred, will hearken to this Gospel-invitation, to come unto Jesus
Christ, and to submit to him, and to take him upon Gospelterms. Our Savior
complains, in John 5.40, And ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life.
Though I would give you life, a life of Righteousness, a life of Grace, a life
of Glory, Yet you will not come to me; that is, You will not believe in me: you
will not embrace me; you will not submit to me; you will not solace your Souls
in me. Let the World call, and you run straight: let the flesh call, and you
obey it straight in the lusts of it; nay, let Satan call, and you readily
hearken to him; but you will not hearken to me. Just so may the Ministers of
the Gospel at this day complain, Lord, Thou sendest us upon this Errand, to
bring Sinners in to thee: thou sendest us upon the same Message Abraham sent
his Servant, to get a Wife for his Son Isaac: Abraham gave his Servant Rings,
and Jewels, and Bracelets, to bestow upon her that would be Wife to Isaac. So
our Lord sends us with Rings, and Jewels, and Bracelets: we have many Motives
and Arguments to invite Sinners, and to persuade and draw them: But Lord, we
can do no good in our Ministry; we tell men of the unsearchable Riches of Jesus
Christ; and what an unvaluable portion they shall have in him, but they will
not believe; Lord, Who has believed our Report? Now, when there is a slighting
of those invitations and proffers of Gospel Grace, it is a certain token of
Unbelief. And that is the first Sign or Character of Unbelief.

Secondly, When men undervalue Christ's Person, and Portion; this is a token of
unbelief. We tell men of the Beauty of Christ's Person, that he is white and
ruddy; white in his Innocence, and ruddy in his Passion, the choicest of ten
thousand, Cant. 5.10: and that there is nothing in him but brightness, and
sweetness, and beauty, and fullness, and all sufficiency, yet men believe it
not; They see no beauty in him, why they should desire him, Isa. 53.3. Nay,
What is thy beloved more than other Beloveds? say they, Cant. 5.9. So when we
tell men of the invaluable portion they shall have by the Lord Jesus Christ,
those unsearchable Riches, the riches of his Merits, and the riches of his
Spirit, and that rich and royal Redemption, and that they shall have whatever
their hearts can desire; we tell them of this, they shall have a portion of
grace, Jesus Christ will give them grace for grace; for every grace in himself,
he will give them part of it: by his Wisdom, they shall be made wise; by his
Holiness, they shall be made holy; he will give them a portion of Glory, a
Crown of Eternal glory to them that love him: but because they see not this
Portion, this Crown of glory, they will not believe it, they will not believe
further than they see, they are all for present pay: Demas has forsaken me,
having embraced this present world: They will have good things for the present:
as for future expectations, they regard them not. Where there is an
undervaluing of Christ's person, or portion, there is a great deal of unbelief.

Thirdly, When men are secure and fearless, it is a certain effect, and sign,
and symptom of unbelief: for Faith breeds fear, Heb. 11.7, By Faith Noah being
wanned of God, of things not seen, as yet moved with fear, prepared an Ark, to
the saving of his house: by the which he condemned the World, and became heir
of the righteousness which is by Faith. Faith makes men fear: But now when men
do nto stand in awe of God, of the great God, that is within us, without us,
above us, about us: when we do not walk as in his eye, nor walk as in his
presence; when men do not stand in awe of the Word of God, and say with David,
Psalm 119, 161, Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart
stands in awe of thy Word: As if he should say, I more stand in awe of thy
Word, than of all the Princes of the World. When men are so overawed by the
Word of God, as that they dare not sin against God; for the Word of God stands
as a Schoolmaster stands with a Rod in his hands over a Boy, so that he dare
not act any untowardness. When men are not overawed by the Word, but they sin
and spare not, they sin and grieve not, this is a token of their unbelief: they
do not believe God is Omniscient, Omnipresent; they do not believe his Justice,
they do not believe his Truth. Where men are thus fearless and secure, it is a
plain token of their exceeding great unbelief.

Fourthly, A fourth Sign of unbelief, is this: when men profess one thing, and
practice another thing: when their practice crosses their Profession, this is a
certain token of reigning unbelief. Let me give you some instances: For
example, You profess God to be your Sovereign Lord, and King, and Lawgiver,
and that you have but one Lawgiver, which is God; and that he has power to
save and to destroy, James 4.12, There is one Lawgiver, who has power to save
and to destroy. And you profess, That he can do whatsoever he pleases in
Heaven and in Earth, and among all the Inhabitants of the Earth: and that none
can stay his hand, none can say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. You
profess this God to be your Sovereign, yet for all this you make no bones of
flighting his Authority: you dare flight the Authority of this Lawgiver, and
make no bones of breaking his Commandments. You can break the first Commandment
by Atheism, impenitency, hardness of heart, lukewarmness, unthankfulness: You
can break the second Commandment, by neglecting, or mis-performing the duties
of Gods Worship and Service: You can break the third Commandment, by not
honoring God, by not glorifying God; you do not sanctify and honor his Name,
in his Word, in his Works, in his Providence, in his Ordinances, in his
Mercies. You make no bones, I say, of breaking his Commands. Thus you profess
one thing: you say, that the Lord is your Lord, your Lawgiver; but you
practice another, when you slight his Authority, and break his Commands. See
how angrily our Savior speaks, Luke 6.46, And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and
do not the things which I command you? -- Again, You profess you believe the
threatenings of God, such dreadful threatenings as these: Upon the wicked he
shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be
the portion of their Cup, Psalm 11.6. So Psalm 68.21, God shall wound the head
of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his
trespasses. You profess you believe these threatenings, but yet notwithstanding
your practice crosses your Profession: for, let a Minister come and thunder
these threatenings in your ears: yea, let a Minister come and spit fire and
vengeance in the face of Sinners, yet notwithstanding, they do no more tremble
than the seat they sit on. It were well if some Snners had but as much fear as
the Devils have ( James 2.19.) for they believe the threatenings of God, and
fear them, and know they shall be accomplished to the uttermost.

Thirdly, You profess that you believe the Promises: I, that you do: I, but
what Promises do you believe? You believe the Promise of Eternal life, because
you believe Jesus Christ will be your Savior: I, but do you believe the
Promises (for example) for this life: Do you believe, if you seek the Kingdom
of God, and his Righteousness in the first place, all other things shall be
cast into the Bargain? Matthew. 6.33. Again, Do you believe that Promise, Psalm
34.10, The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall not want any good thing. Do you believe the Promises for this life? let
that be judged by your Covetousness, by your carking carefulness: that
distracting, dividing care, that divides the mind from it self. See what the
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 28.16, He that believes, shall not make haste: He
therefore that does make haste to be rich, does not believe; He that makes
haste to be rich, shall not be innocent, says Solomon, Prove. 28.20. You
therefore that make so much haste to be rich: you that make so much busling in
the World: wherefore is this craving, carking, whining after the things of this
life? It is a certain undeniable evidence of your distrusting Gods Providence
and Promises: and let me tell you, You that will not believe him for the Body,
you will never believe him for the Soul; You that will not believe him for your
Estates and Children, you will never believe him for your Eternal Salvation;
You that will not believe him for a Crust, you will never believe him for a
Crown: And yet you say, you believe his Promises, that you do.

Fourthly, You say, you believe in the mercy of God for pardon: I, but when
once Satan comes to shake your confidence but a little, when you lie but under
any temptation; when God seems to hide away his face from you, though never so
little, in the day of your fears and straits: then you are ready to question,
whether you are the Children of God, or no? whether there be any thing of God
in you, or no? you are ready to say then as Sion did, Isa. 49.14, The Lord has
forsaken me, my Lord has forgotten me; my way is hidden from the Lord, and my
judgment from the Almighty. It may be you may come to that condition, to say
with Cain, My punishment is greater than I can bear, my sin is greater than can
be forgiven, Genesis 4. God will never forgive such great sins as mine are. You
say, that you believe in the mercy of God; but when it comes to the trial, it
will be found no such matter.

Fifthly, Again, You say you believe a day of Judgment, this is one thing you
profess; I, but your practice is quite contrary: for, did you believe it
seriously, then you would pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet.
1.17. Did you believe it seriously, then you would be affected with it, as that
ancient Father was: Whether I eat, or drink, or whatever I do, methinks I hear
the Trumpet sounding in mine ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. If you
did believe the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11, certainly then you would
exercise your selves to have Consciences void of offense, both toward God and
men, Acts 24.16.

Sixthly, You say, you believe that there will be a Resurrection of the Body:
and yet notwithstanding you carry your selves here upon the Earth, as if so be
there was no account or reckoning to come. Some may be can live, (I am even
ashamed to speak it), they can live as if they had no God to serve, and no
Souls to save; as if there would never come a day wherein they must appear
before their Judge. I remember the speech of Saint Paul to King Agrippa, Acts
26.27, King Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I know (says he) that thou
believe. But I may say to many an impenitent, unregenerate, obstinate,
perverse Sinner (Oh that there were none such in this Congregation; I may say
to many such Sinners) Believe thou the Word of God? Believe thou the
Threatenings of God? I know thou believe them not. If thou did believe the
Commands of God, Oh then thou would say with Saint Paul, What would thou
have me to do, Lord? Acts 9.6, Teach me the way of thy Statutes, O Lord, and I
will walk in it, and I will keep it to the end, Psalm 119.33. If thou did
believe the Threatenings of God, then thou would be in the same condition that
David was in, Psalm 119.12, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments. If thou did believe those dreadful Threatenings, thou
would be in the same condition with the Prophet Habakkuk; My belly trembled,
my lips quivered, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self,
Hab. 3.16. -- If so be thou did believe the Promises, Oh, thou would
embrace them, thou would suck and be satisfied with those Breasts of
Consolation, Isa. 66.11. It is said of the Patriarchs, They saw the Promises
after off, and embraced them, Heb. 11.13. But now, when thou say, thou
believe the Commands of God, and yet never obeyest his Commands: thou say,
thou believe his Threatenings, and yet never tremblest at any Threatening; thou
say, thou belivest the Promises, and yet art no way thereby encouraged to a
more active, and fruitful, and cheerful walking with God: then thy Belief
crosses thy Profession. And this is a certain and undeniable Evidence of
Unbelief: the Lord awaken some of you, and convince you, and send you home to
your own hearts, to see how deeply you stand guilty of this sin my Text speaks
of: for if there be not reigning unbelief in many of you, for my part I do not
understand the Scripture.

I shall close with a word of Exhortation.

Is it so, That Unbelief is one main cause why so many men despise and
undervalue that Heavenly Canaan, and are debarred from that Heavenly Canaan?
Then I have a twofold Exhortation to tender to you: The First is to those that
are Regenerate. Secondly: To those that are Unregenerate.


First, To those that are Regenerate: And my Counsel to you, is this, Oh do not
mourn for the dregs of this sin that yet remain in you: there are dregs of
Unbelief, even in those that are true Believers. That man or woman that is not
sensible of the dregs of this sin in him, I say, then he is a stranger to his
own heart. In Heb. 13.5, says the Apostle, Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. There you have a Promise, He has
said; Who is it that has said it? The Great God of Heaven and Earth, that can
make it good; How has he said it? how? with the greatest earnestness or
asseveration that ever Promise was made; for he that has skill in the Greek
Tongue, shall find there five Negatives in that one Promise, (...), I will not
forsake thee; that is not enough: but says God, Be assured, I will not forsake
thee: no, no, no, no, I will not forsake thee; so many No's, therefore be
assured. As if the Lord should say it as the greatest Asseveration, and with
the greatest earnestness, that ever we read of any Promise made with. Yet, let
me tell you (and it is what you will find by your own experience), Though in
time of prosperity it is an easy matter to presume: yet in time of adversity,
it is a hard matter to believe this Promise; when we come into straitness, to
say, God will not leave me nor forsake me, he will not leave me in the Briars:
nay, though you and I have had experience of Gods faithfulness to this day, we
had experience of his faithfulness when we were in our Mothers womb. As a
learned man once said, If a man should live to the days of Methuselah: if he
should live a thousand years, he could never have that experience of Gods
power, and tender mercy to him, as he had when God preserved him in his mothers
womb, and took him out of his mothers belly. We have had experience of Gods
preserving us then: and we have lived upon him ever since, some twenty, some
thirty, some forty, some fifty years; all this time God did never leave us, nor
forsake us: yet if we be in straits, we find it a very hard matter to believe
that one Promise, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Oh therefore
bewail, and bemoan the dregs of Unbelief: cry out with that good man, Lord, I
believe; I would believe, help my unbelief. That is the first Exhortation.

Secondly, I have an Exhortation to those that are in a state of unbelief,
unregenerate, impenitent wretches that go on in sin, and will not be reclaimed,
that slight the invitations of Jesus Christ, and the proffers of his Grace. My
Counsel to you is this, and I have but two words of Counsel to tender to you:
First, Be sensible of this sin. Secondly, Labor to get this sin removed.


First, Be sensible of this sin; be sensible of the greatness of it, be
sensible of the heinous nature of it: what? to turn the Truth of God into a
Lie: what? to make the great God of Heaven and Earth a Liar: what? to rob him
of his Glory: what? to go into his Cabinet, and steal away his chiefest Jewel:
Can there be a greater sin? -- Be sensible of the danger of this sin, it brings
imminent and unavoidable destruction along with it. Tremble at that Scripture,
John 3.18, He that believes not, is condemn^d already, because he has not
believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God; he is condemned: a
sentence of death is past upon thee, if thou be in a state of Unbelief.

Secondly, My other word of Counsel is this: Oh labor, labor to get this
cursed sin of unbelief destroyed in you: O let this sin be destroyed, or else
thou must be destroyed: But you will say, How shall we get this sin of unbelief
cured? I will tell you, Will you hearken to me in four or five Rules? and then
I have done.

First, Take heed of Atheism; for I profess, we are fallen into days of
Atheism, and all our Religion (if the Lord be not merciful to us) will end in
Atheism; Infidelism and Athesm, there is but one step between them: what is
Atheism but when men will not believe there is a God? all Insidelity springs
from Aheism. But you will say, What, do you think we are Atheists? Do you think
that we believe there is not a God? Let me tell you, There are Atheists in
Opinion, as well as Atheists in Language: The Fool has said in his heart,
there is no God; there are Atheists in practice, as well as Atheists in
profession; They profess they know God, but in works they deny him. Take heed
therefore of this cursed sin of Atheism.

Secondly, Would you have Unbelief removed, then learn to know more of God: to
know more of his Goodness, Wisdom, Holiness, Purity, Perfection, and other of
his glorious Attributes: They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee.
I am sure, did you but know him, you would believe in him; you would obey him,
you would fear before him. I know whom I have believed, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy
1.12.

Thirdly, Resolve to practice what you do know, if you would be Believers: you
must know that there are many things a man may believe notionally, which he
does not believe practically: I shall give you an instance. There is never a
one of you that hears me this day, but believes you are mortal: you believe you
shall die, you verily believe that, as you believe there is a Sun in the
Firmament: yet notwithstanding, though you do believe this; yet many of you can
live as securely, as merrily and madly, as if so be you should never drop down
into the dust; here now indeed is a notional Faith; I, but there is not a
practical Faith: it is one thing to believe a Truth notionally, and another
thing to believe it practically.

Fourthly, Would you have Unbelief removed? then, Oh beg, and beg earnestly,
that God would take away your hearts of stone, and give you hearts of flesh:
let this be your Prayer every day. Do you not remember how I opened that Text
to you, A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26? What is a stony-heart, but a senseless
heart, a heart senseless of sin, and a heart fearless of wrath? Now, do but
observe, that unbelief and hardness of heart, they still go together. In Mark
16.14, Afterward he appeared unto the eleven, as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart. Our Savior upbraids
them for their unbelief and hardness of heart; Why are you so backward to
believe? it is because of the hardness of your hearts.

Fifthly, I beseech you to meditate often of the danger of Unbelief; meditate
often what will be the woeful Effects and Issues of your Unbelief: consider the
Threatenings, the Precepts, and the Promises of the Almighty. In John 8.24, I
said therefore unto you, that you shall die in your sins: for if you believe
not that I am he, you shall die in your sins. What? die in sin! Oh, what
greater curse can possibly be uttered! To die in sin, to rot in sin, to come
out of your graves in sin, to be presented before your Judge in your sins! John
3. ult. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
The wrath of God abides on him: If it were only for a few days, it might be
born; I, but it will be abiding, and abiding, and abiding to all Eternity: the
wrath of God will abide upon that Soul that does not believe. In a word, and so
I have done: As God speaks to the Prophet in another case, They will not see,
but they shall see: I apply it thus, You that will not believe, I promise you,
you shall believe; you that will not believe savingly, you shall believe
desperately; you that will not believe that God is so just, so strict; so
severe; you shall believe when you feel the wrath of the Almighty seizing upon
you, never to be removed; you that will not believe now to the saving of your
Souls, you shall believe as the Devils, to believe and tremble: you then will
believe the torments of Hell in that day, when you feel them in that place
where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: It is better to
believe these things now, than believe them when you feel them. The Lord work
these things upon our hearts, that this Soul-destroying sin may not be our ruin.

CHRISTS'S PRECIOUSNESS.
1 PET. II. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious; but unto them
which are disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is
made the Head of the Corner.


THE holy Apostle, that he might the better draw Christians to believe in Jesus
Christ; to love him, embrace him, and obey him as the Captain of their
Salvation: in the beginning of this Chapter commends to them both the Word of
Christ, and Christ himself, who is the Kirnel and Substance of the Word: he
commends the Word of Christ to them, in the first and second verses of this
Chapter. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies, and evil speakings, as newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby. And he commends Jesus Christ himself to them
two ways: First, By showing what he is in himself. Secondly, By showing what
benefits Believers have by him.


First, He shows what the Lord Jesus Christ is in himself; in ver. 4, To whom
coming as to a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and
precious. He is a living stone, a stone that has life in himself, and a stone
that gives life unto others: For he that has the Son, has life; and he that
has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. -- And not only a living stone,
but he is chosen of God, and very precious; the Pearl of the Gospel, that
precious only excellent one, in comparison of whom all the Kingdoms of the
World are but as a heap of dung: -- But then, as the Apostle commends him for
what he is in himself, so he commends Jesus Christ, by what he has done for
all those that believe in him. In the 5th ver. Ye also as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. This invaluable benefit you
shall have by him; you shall not only be justified by him, but you shall be
sanctified: you shall be made a holy Priesthood, and all your services shall be
made acceptable through him. To confirm this weighty Truth, the Apostle
produces a Testimony out of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 28.16, Therefore says the
Lord God; Behold, I lay in Sion for a Foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation; he that believes, shall not make
haste. Having thus confirmed this Doctrine, he makes Application of it in this
Verse: and this Application is by way of Comfort to Believers, and discomfort
to those that believe not. -- First, It is a Doctrine that affords a great deal
of comfort to Believers: For, says he, to you that believe, Jesus Christ is
precious: But it administers a great deal of discomfort to Unbelievers, To them
that are disobedient, to them that hearken not to the voice of Christ; for,
says the Apostle, Though this Christ be despised by them, yet he shall be
infinitely advanced: he is become the Head, the Cornerstone: and they,
notwithstanding their despising of him, shall be everlastingly ruined; for he
will be to them a stumbling-stone, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient. This is the Connection, or Context of
these words with the former. It is the first Branch of the Text here that I
principally aim at, in these words, To you therefore that believe, he is
precious. The words (therefore) has reference unto the foregoing verse:
wherein the Apostle tells us, that the Lord Jesus Christ is such a
Foundation-stone, such a Cornerstone, such a rock of Salvation, that whosoever
believes in him, shall not be confounded, shall not be condemned; For there is
no condemnation to them that have a part and interest in him, Romans 8.1.
Therefore says the Apostle, Certainly to you he must needs be very precious:
As if he should say, You have an infinite, and an invaluable benefit by him,
therefore you have great reason so highly to prize him; Unto you that do
believe: that is, that can rest and rely upon this Rock of Salvation, that can
pawn your Souls upon him, that can close with him, and cleave to him, and obey
him as your Prince and your Savior; Unto you, says the Apostle, he is
precious; or, he is a price and an honor, for so the Original word (...)
signifies: he is not only precious, but of infinite price; he is not only
honorable, but honor it self in the Abstract: for the word (...), signifies
both price and honor. The words being thus opended, afford these two Points of
Doctrine, which lie clear in the Text.

Doct. 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely precious in himself.

Doct. 2. As Jesus Christ is precious in himself, so he is exceeding precious
in the eyes of all Believers: and most highly prized by them.

Doct. 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely precious in himself.

He is called in the 4th verse of this Chapter, A living-stone, chosen of God,
and precious. And in Isa. 28.16, Therefore thus says the Lord God; behold, I
lay in Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious Cornerstone,
a sure Foundation. For the better understanding of this Point, two things are
to be opened: First, What it is to be Precious, or what may be included in this
Phrase, precious. Secondly, How this may be applied to Jesus Christ; or wherein
the preciousness of Jesus Christ consists.


First, What is it to be precious? What is included in this Phrase, precious?
The Hebrew word signifies diverse things: I will name you but these five or six;
and every one of those significations, are rightly applicable to the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Sometimes the word precious, is taken for bright and glorious. Thus the Sun
and the Moon are said to walk in brightness, Job 31.26, If I beheld the Sun
when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness. Job there speaking of the
Moon, says, it walks in brightness. it walks as it were through the Heavens
honorably, it walks in a great deal of brightness and glory. Thus the Lord
Jesus Christ in this sense is precious, because he is the glorious sun of
Righteousness; as he is called, Mal. 4.2, Unto you that fear my Name, shall the
sun of Righteousness arise with healing under his wings. And he calls himself
the bright Morning Star, in Rev. 22.16, I am the bright Morning Star. Again,

Secondly, The word precious, is taken sometimes for that that is scarce and
rare to be had; for that which is not bestowed upon all, but upon some few
persons. Thus the Word of God in Samuel's time, was said to be precious, 1 Samuel
3.1, And the Word of the Lord was precious in those days: there was no open
Vision; it was communicated but to a few. And in this sense also the Lord Jesus
Christ may be said to be precious, because he is communicated but to a very
few; A little Flock, Luke 12.32, A little little Flock, as the word signifies,
a very little Flock in comparison of those that have no interest in him, nor
any benefit by him: For not many wise men after the flesh, not many Mighty, not
many Noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. There are but few, very few in comparison
of the great multitude that have an interest in him: in that regard he is
precious.

Thirdly, Sometimes the word precious is taken for that which is dear and
costly. So the Lord Jesus Christ is very dear to his Father; the dearly beloved
Son of his bosom, and his blood is very costly; it is called, precious blood.
If the blood of all the Princes upon Earth had been spilt: nay, if all the
Angels in Heaven had lost their lives, it had not been comparable to one drop
of the precious blood of Jesus Christ, which is called the blood of God, Acts
20.28, Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over which
the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood.

Fourthly, The word precious, sometimes is taken for that which is pleasant and
delightful, Jer. 31.20, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant Child? There
is the same word for precious, called pleasant. In this regard the Lord Jesus
Christ may be called precious, because he is so delightful to the Father, Isa.
42.1, Behold my servant whom I uphold: mine Elect, in whom my soul delights.

Fifthly, That may be said to be precious, that is of very great and invaluable
use, or that whereof we have an indispensable necessity. Now in this sense also
Jesus Christ is precious, he is of infinite use to a Believer; such
indispensable need have we of him, that without him we must perish
everlastingly; Except ye eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you, John 6.53.

Lastly, That is said to be precious, which is honorable; Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee;
therefore I will give men for thee, and people for thy life, Isa. 43.4. And as
I told you even now, the Original word (...), siguifieth honor, as well as
price. So the Lord Jesus Christ he is infinitely honorable, honorable in
himself; all the Angels honor and admire him: and he is an Honor to his
Church and Chosen, to all those that have a part and interest in him; therefore
he is said to be The glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.32, A light to lighten
the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. You see the first thing
opened, What it is to be precious.

Now the second thing for Explication, is this: How this Title precious may be
applied to Jesus Christ? or wherein does the preciousness of Jesus Christ so
much appear? -- For answer to this, You must know, the preciousness of Jesus
Christ, does appear in these six Particulars:

First, He is exceeding, infinitely, unconceivably precious in his Person, God
and Man united in one Person, Co-essential with the Father: that is, having the
same Essence and Substance with him; in John 10.30, I and my Father are one.
And he is Coequal with the Father: He thought it no robery to be equal with
God, Pbil. 2.6, Being the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express
Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. Therefore he is infinitely precious in his
Person.

Secondly, As he is precious in his Person, so is he precious in his Titles:
those rich and glorious Titles that are attributed to him. For Example, Isa.
9.6, This is the name wherewith the Lord Jesus Christ is called, Wonderful
Counsellonr; El, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.
Pray mark with what a glorious Title he is called there, The Mighty God; How
dare then any blasphemous Arrian, or Atheist, deny the Divinity of the Lord
Jesus Christ, deny that he is God; when this is one of the Titles wherewith he
is called, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace? What
glorious Titles are here? So you shall read he is called his Fathers delight,
Isa. 42.1, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my sul
delights. -- And the Fathers bosom-friend, John 1.18, No man has seen God at
any time, save the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him. If the love of all the Parents in the World were concentred
in one, it were but as a drop of that infinite Ocean of Love, that is between
the Father and the Son: -- Nay more, he is called the Fathers Fellow, Zech.
13.7, Awake O Sword, against my Shepherd, and against the man that is my
Fellow, says the Lord of Hosts. So likewise he is called The Head of the
Church, Ephesians. 5.23: and the Judge both of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. In a word,
such is the Dignity of his Person: such is the Excellency of his Merits: such
is the sweetness of his Graces; such is the fullness of his Perfection, that the
Scripture does abundantly put those terms of honor upon the Lord Christ; as
sometimes comparing him to a Cornerstone, because he does support us, Ephesians.
2.20. Sometimes to A Vine, because he does refresh us, John 15.1. Sometimes
unto a Physician, because he does heal us, Matthew. 9.12. Sometimes to a Daystar,
because he does enlighten us, Rev. 22.16. Sometimes to A Shepherd, because he
does lead us, John 10. Sometimes to Manna, or the Bread of life, because he
does feed us; What glorious Titles are these that are given to Christ?
therefore he is precious in his Titles.

Thirdly, As he is precious in his Titles, so he is precious in his Offices; in
his Kingly Office, in his Priestly Office, and in his Prophetical Office.

First, He is precious in his Kingly Office, he calls himself The King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev: 19.16, The King of Kings: He is such a King that
conquers the enemies of our Salvation: as Sin, and Satan, and Death, and Hell,
and the World; other Kings Rule over us, but this King can only Rule in us: My
Kingdom is not of this world, says he; The Kingdom of God is within you, Lnke
17.21. This King can make Laws that can bind the Conscience; he is such a King
as has all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him, Matthew. 28.18.

Again, He is such a Priest as has reconeiled us to God the Father, and ever
lives to make intercession for us, who is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Col. 1.21. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 4.15. And he is such a Prophet, as can
perfectly instruct his Church; others may preach to the ear, but he has his
Pulpit in Heaven only, that can preach to the heart; other Preachers can open
the Scriptures, but it is Jesus Christ only that can open our understandings,
that we may understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45, Then opened he their
underderstandings, that they might understand the Scriptures. O what glorious
Offices are these?

Fourthly, He is precious in his Ordinances: For Example, His Word is exceeding
precious to all those that have tasted the sweetness of it; how precious was it
to David, Psalm 119.72, The Law of thy Mouth is better unto me than thousands
of gold and silver. How precious are Sabbaths to those that know how much of
Heaven is wrapped up in the Sabbath! Certainly, these Sabbath Days are
Market-days for our Souls, wherein we may make provision for Eternity; days
wherein the Lord Jesus Christ many times communicates himself, and much of his
sweetness to those that wait upon him in holy Duties. And how precious is the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper! wherein the Lord Christ makes us a feast of fat
things, a feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things, full of Marrow, Wines on
the Lees well refined, Isa. 25. Wherein he gives his own flesh to eat, his
flesh that was crucified to satisfy Divine Justice; and his own blood to
drink, that blood which only can quench the fire of Hell, quench the fire of
Gods anger, which otherwise would have been burning, and burning against us to
all Eternity.

Fifthly, As he is precious in his Ordinances, so he is precious in his
Prerogatives; for he, and he only is the Savior of the World, and besides him
there was no other Savior, Acts 4.12, Neither is there salvation in any other,
for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved: That is, there is nothing can be named, for it is but a Hebraism; there
is nothing can be named under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but only the Name
of Jesus Christ; he had no Coadjutor, or Helper in the work of our Redemption,
Isa. 63.3, I have trodden the Winepress alone, and of the People there was none
with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and
their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my
raiment. And as he is the only Savior, so he is the only Mediator too; For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. So he is the only Head of his Church, Ephesians. 1.22, And has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the
Church. He only has the Supremacy and Authority, as being Omnipotent, and
Omnipresent, one that is able to protect his people from all injuries, one that
is able to prevent all the plots and projects that are hatched and invented
against them: he has these Prerogatives that cannot be given to any Creature
in Heaven or Earth, but only unto him; therefore he is precious in his
Prerogatives.

Sixthly, The Lord Christ is precious also in the purchase of his blood: the
purchase he made for us by his blood, is a very precious purchase; and the
portion that he bestows on his Elect, that he has purchased for them, is a
precious portion; so he is precious, not only in regard of his Person, but in
regard of his Portion. For Example, the Redemption that he has wrought for us
by his blood, is a precious Redemption; a Redemption from Sin, and Satan, and
Death, and Hell; In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins, Ephesians. 1.7.

Secondly, The donation or bestowing of his Spirit; it is a very precious gift,
that the Spirit of God should in his Name, that is for his Merit, be bestowed
upon all those that do believe: But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you, John 14.26. O
what a precious, invaluable gift is it, to have the Spirit of God given us, to
quicken us, to draw us to Jesus Christ, and to carry on the work of Grace in us!

Thirdly, The Graces of the Spirit, which likewise are purchased by him, are
precious Graces: Faith is a precious Grace, as it is called, 2 Pet. 1.2, Simon
Peter, a Servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained
like precious Faith with us, through the righteousness of God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ; that the trial of your Faith being much more precious than of
gold that perishes. The trial of Gold is the worst thing that belongs to Gold:
and the trial of Faith is the worst thing that belongs to Faith: yet says the
Apostle, The trial of your Faith is much more precious than that of Gold, 1
Pet. 1.7. So Repentance, that is a precious Grace, because it is Repentance
unto life, as the Apostle calls it, Acts 11.18, When they heard these things,
they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the
Gentiles granted Repentance unto life. -- And Hope, that is a steadfast Grace,
it is the Anchor of the Soul. And Love, that is a lovely Grace; it brings the
Soul into nearer Communion with God. -- Then Wisdom, that is a precious Grace,
a shining Grace: A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, says Solomon, Eccles.
8.1. And Job speaking of Wisdom, says he, Job 28.12, 13, But where shall
Wisdom be sound, and where is the place of Understanding? Man knows not the
price thereof, neither is it found in the Land of the Living; it is of more
price than Rubies: it is of an invaluable price. And Humility, that is an
honorable Grace. And Fear, that is a preserving Grace. And Patience, that is a
supporting Grace. And Perseverance, that is a Crowning Grace. All these Graces
are precious Graces, and they are all of them bestowed upon us, merely upon the
account of Christ's merits.

Fourthly, The Privileges that we have by Jesus Christ, they are precious
Privileges: U-union with him, and Communion in his Life and Death, and
Resurrection, and Comforts: access to God the Father, and that with boldness.

Fifthly, The Promises that are sealed by his blood, they are precious
Promises: promises for this life, and promises for the life to come; that
Promise, That all shall work together fer good to them that love God; a
big-bellied promise, as I may so say. All things work together for good: and
our prayers and our persons shall be accepted.

Lastly, The Inheritance that he has purchased for us, is a precious
Inheritance; An incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven. In brief, Such is the preciousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that compare him with the most precious things that can be named, and
you shall see they are but vile and base in comparison of him: For Example, 1.
The Souls of men and women, they are said to be precious; but Oh, how
infinitely precious is Jesus Christ, whose blood is a valuable and equivalent
price for the Souls of all the men and women in the world. -- 2. Light is said
to be precious; Christ said of himself, I am the light of the world, John 8.12.
Light is precious to those that are in a Dungeon of darkness: Now, says Jesus
Christ, I am the light of the world. -- 3. Truth is precious, so precious that
we are to buy it at any rate, and sell it at no rate; Jesus Christ says of
himself, I am the Truth, John 14.6. -- 4. Fountains and Springs of water are
precious in hot and dry Countries: Oh the Lord Jesus Christ, he is the Well of
Salvation, Isa. 12.3, Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the Wells
of Salvation. -- 5. Bread is precious to those that are ready to perish: a man
will venture the getting of bread with the hazard of his life, Lam. 5.9, We get
our bread with the peril of our lives. Now Jesus Christ is the Bread of Life,
John 6.48. -- 6. Balm and Balsom is precious. His blood is the only Balm that
can cure wounded Souls: so precious is the Lord Jesus Christ, that all the
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, are but a picture of that beauty and
preciousness that is in him; he is the Abstract and Epitome of all perfections:
how precious must he needs be, to whom all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth do
contribute all their Excellencies, to make him excellent and glorious! Thus you
see the Point opened. Now for the Uses of it.

First, By way of Information. Is the Lord Jesus Christ so infinitely precious?
you may see then, why the Souls of men and women are so precious, because they
are purchased by a precious Savior, purchased by his precious blood. Hearken O
sons of men! why are you tumbling up and down in dirt and clay? why do you not
raise your hearts and thoughts higher and higher, seeing that you have such
precious Souls, that are capable of a precious Inheritance? why do you not look
after a precious Covenant of Grace, ^ealed to you, and precious Promises
confirmed to you by the blood of Christ? why do you not look after that
precious Pearl, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is worth more than ten thousand
worlds? Oh the baseness of the heart of man, that should prefer dirt, and
dross, and dung, before him who is so infinitely precious; that they should so
undervalue their precious Souls, that cost such an invaluable rate for their
Redemption.

Secondly, By way of Information; see the horrible greatness of the sin of
Unbelief, that makes the Sinner undervalue this precious Redeemer. Says Jesus
Christ, You will not come to me, that you might have life, John 5.40. Oh bewail
your Unbelief, that keeps Christ and your Souls, a precious Christ and your
poor Souls at such a distance.

Thirdly, By way of Information; take notice what a blessed condition they are
in, that have gotten the Lord Jesus Christ into their Souls! If the Lord
bestows this gift of all gifts, this precious Christ upon you, Oh it is more
than if he had given thee the World: nay, then if he had given thee ten
thousand Worlds for thy portion; O rejoice in thy portion; for as soon as ever
thou art a Believer, thy heart is made a Cabinet for this precious Pearl, the
Lord Christ; for, He dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Oh, manifest
to the World the brightness of this Pearl; let some luster of Jesus Christ
shine in thy Conversation, shine through this Cabinet, as Light shines through
a Lanthorn.

The second Use is by way of Exhortation: And here I must but name some few
particulars, answerable to the Explication of the Doctrine I insisted on more
largely; and there are several Duties I would briefly commend to you, and the
Lord give you hearts, and me a heart, and every one a heart to close with this
precious Truth tendered to you, in reference to this precious Redeemer.

First, If Jesus Christ be so precious in his person, as being God and Man:
then learn to honor him, admire and adore him; for, This is the will of God
the Father, that all should honor Jesus Christ, even as they honor the
Father. See it exprefly commanded, in John 5.23, That all men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father: He that honors not the Son, honors
not the Father which has sent him. Why should they honor the Son, as they
honor the Father? because he is so precious in his person, being God and Man
united together in one person: therefore see that you honor him; therefore
kiss the Son with a kiss of Reverence, of Love, and of Obidience, lest his
anger be kindled against you.

Secondly, Is the Lord Jesus Christ so precious in his Titles, as being the
Delight of the Father, the Fathers Fellow, the Judge of the World, the Judge of
quick and dead; O then, never give rest to your eyes, nor slumber to your
eyelids: never rest satisfied with any condition, with any portion, with any
parts, privileges whatsoever here below, till you have got an interest in him
that is every way so precious; get him and get all, want him and want all. A
man that catches at the shadow, you know loses the substance; but get the
substance, and you get the shadow with it. So long as you look after other
things besides Christ, you lose him; but if you get him, you get the shadow of
all: you get life, and peace, and comfort, and all that your hearts can desire;
be content to lose all to get him, who when you have got, you shall be sure
never to lose.

Thirdly, Is Jesus Christ so precious in his Offices, as King, Priest, and
Prophet? then do you labor to be experimentally partakers of all those
Offices, that you also may be Kings: And has made us to be Kings and Priests
to God and his Father, Rev. 1.6. Labor to be Kings, in Ruling over your own
lusts, over your own distempers, and passions: as he said excellently. Do but
conquer thy self, and the world is conquered to thy hand. A greater victory it
is for a man to conquer himself, than to conquer a Kingdom. Labor in this
sense to be Kings, that your iniquities may not have dominion over you, but
that you may at length get victory over your lusts, which fight against your
Souls. Again, labor to be spiritual Priests, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices
to God, acceptable through Jesus Christ; and do you labor to be Prophets: that
is, endued with such wisdom, and spiritual knowledge, that you may be able to
admonish, and instruct one another. This is that which the Apostle speaks of,
to the great commendation of the Romans, in Romans 15.14, And I my self also am
persuaded of you my Brethren, that ye also are full of goodness: filled with
all knowledge, able to admonish one another. Do you, my Brethren, labor to be
like Jesus Christ, in all his Offices.

Fourthly, Is Jesus Christ so precious in his Ordinances? O then, do you labor
to taste the sweetness of every Ordinance; taste the sweetness of the Word of
God, that you may say, How sweet is thy Word to my taste! yea, sweeter than
Honey to my mouth, Psalm 119.103. Taste the sweetness of Jesus Christ in the
precious Ordinance of the Lords Supper: that you may say, I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, Cant. 2.3. And
in Cant. 5. ult. His mouth is most sweet; His mouth is sweetnesses, as the
Hebrew phrase carries it; and he is altogether lovely: He is most sweet fn his
Ordinances; O say, one hours Communion with him, is better than all the
pleasures of the World: one taste of that spiced Wine, and of the juice of the
Pomgranate, spoken of in Cant. 8.2, I would lead thee, and bring thee into my
mothers house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced
Wine, of the juice of my Pomgranate. One draught of that generous Wine, that
spiced Wine, how pleasant and delightful would it be to my Soul! Is Jesus
Christ so sweet in his Ordinances: Oh then labor to taste the sweetness of
Jesus Christ in his Ordinances.

Fifthly, Is Jesus Christ so precious in his Prerogatives: he is the only
Savior, the only Mediator: then subject your selves to him, and to none but
him; be subject to him as your only Prince and Savior: and say, O Lord our
God, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over us; but by thee only will
we make mention of thy Name, Isa. 26.13.

Lastly, Is the Lord Jesus Christ so exceeding precious in the purchase of his
blood? then do you labor to have an interest in his purchase; what is it for
you to hear of the purchase of Christ's blood, if this purchase be not yours, if
you have not a share and part in it? What is Christ, if he be not my Christ?
What is his purchase, if it be not my purchase? For Example, If he has
purchased an Eternal Redemption by his own blood: O do you labor every day to
get an assurance that you are in the number of his Redeemed ones.

But how may we know that?

I answer, If you be the Redeemed of Jesus Christ, then you will walk in the
way of the Redeemed of Christ: and that way is called Holy, Isa. 35.8, And an
highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness;
the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those; the wayfaring
men, though fools, shall not err therein. Has he purchased, not only
Redemption, but the Donation of his Spirit? Oh, do you beg the Spirit of God:
that, that Gift, that great Gift, may be bestowed on you, according to that
Promise (a Text I opened to you in many Sermons) And I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes: and ye shall keep my
Judgments and do them; Ezekiel. 36.27, If any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, Romans 8.9. And do you put the Lord in mind of all those
gracious Promises that he has made: I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thine offspring, Isa. 44.3.

Again, Has he purchased such precious Graces to be bestowed upon all his
Children, upon all those that have an interest in him? O then, do you labor to
be truly gracious: not only to have restraining grace, but renewing grace; not
only common grace, but sanctifying grace, sound faith, sincere love, unfeigned
obedience, that you may have the graces of Humility, meekness, patience, that
you may have the Image of Jesus Christ stamped upon your Souls, that you may
receive of his fullness, grace for grace: that you may in every grace of Christ
have a part, that by his Wisdom you may be made wise; by his Holiness, we may
be made holy.

Again, Has he purchased likewise such precious Privileges for his Children?
O then, do you labor to be made partakers of those precious Privileges, to be
united to Christ, and to have Communion with him, in his life: and because he
lives, you may live also; I mean, the life of Grace, and life more abundantly:
and communion in his Death, because he died for sin, you may die to sin; and
communion in his Resurrection, because he rose from the Grave, you may rise to
holiness and newness of life: And the like.

Again, Has he purchased such precious Promises, and all those Promises are
sealed in his blood, 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God are in him, Yea,
and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. O then, do you labor to be made
partakers of those Promises, that you may know that you are Heirs of those
Promises, that you may look upon them as Legacies, bequeathed to you by your
dear Lord and Master; by your Husband Jesus Christ, who left these Legacies to
you.

Lastly, Has he purchased a precious Inheritance, that is incorruptible and
undefiled? then I beseech you in the fear of Almighty God, that you take heed
that it fares not with you, as it did with that unbelieving Prince, that saw
the plenty in Samaria, but did not taste of it, but died for all that; so you
to hear of a glorious Inheritance, but to come short of it, and so be undone to
all Eternity, according to my Afternoon Text: Let us therefore fear, lest a
promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it, Heb. 4.1. Oh, has he purchased this Inheritance? and do not you
long to be with him, where you shall sin no more, nor sorrow no more? Thus you
see what use may be made of the preciousness of Jesus Christ in all these
respects: as he is precious in his Person, in his Titles, in his Offices, in
his Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Offices, in his Ordinances, in his
Prerogatives, in the purchases of his Blood: those precious Privileges and
Inheritance he has purchased for us. The Lord help us seriously to think on
these things, and to meditate upon them, and to lay them up in our hearts, as
Cordials against a day wherein we may stand in need of them. And so I have done
with the first Point of Doctrine, That Jesus Christ is infinitely precious in
himself. The other Doctrine is, That the Lord Jesus Christ is exceeding
precious to all Believers, and is highly prized by them.

1 Pet. II. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious. --


I Made entrance into this Text the last time that we had this solemn occasion
of drawing near to God, in the use of this precious Ordinance of the Lords
Supper; I showed you the Coherence, Sense, and scope of the words: and there
were two Points of Doctrine that I drew from them. The first was this: That
Jesus Christ is infinitely precious in himself.

I now come to the second Doctrine drawn from these words: and that is this, As
Jesus Christ is precious in himself; so is he exceeding precious to all
Believers, and highly prized by them.

For the proof, or settling of this Point, before I come to open it to you, I
shall give you but two Testimonies for the Confirmation of it: the one out of
the Old Testament, the other out of the New; that out of the Old Testament, is
in Cant. 5.9, 10: where you shall read, the strangers enquiring of the Spouse,
that is the Church of Christ, saying, What is thy Beloved more than another
Beloved, O thou fairest among women? What is thy Beloved more than another
Beloved, that thou do so charge us? The Church makes this answer, My Beloved
is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, etc. My Beloved is white
and ruddy; Jesus Christ he is white in respect of his Divine Nature; Being the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3.
And yet he is red in his Humane Nature, being of the same substance with the
first Adam, that was made of red Earth; He was white in his Holiness, but yet
he is red also in that bloody passion, which he was contented to undertake for
our sakes: he was white in his unspotted Innocence, but yet he is red withal by
the imputation of our sins, which are said to be Crimson and Scarlet sins, Isa.
1.18, Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be
as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool. Thus Jesus Christ is white and ruddy: I, but says the
Church withal, He is the chiefest among ten thousand: or he is the
Standard Bearer among ten thousand, as the Hebrew word may be interpreted, the
Standard Bearer; he is higher than the Kings of the Earth, therefore called the
Standard Bearer, Psalm 89.27. Also, I will make my firstborn higher than the
Kings of the Earth. He guides and leads his people, as being the Captain of
their Salvation; he leads them as a Standard Bearer leads an Army by his
Colors. Oh what a high price and value did the Church set upon Jesus Christ
here; He is white and ruddy, the choicest among ten thousand: Christ was very
precious you see in her eyes. The other testimony which I shall give you, is in
the New Testament, Phil. 3.8, Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss,
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ. I count all things but loss; whatever I esteemed gain before, all my
outward Privileges that I stood upon before, I count them but as loss: but
that is not all, I count all things, says he, dung, dross and dung: or as the
Greek phrase there sigsignifies, (...), such things as we cast out to Dogs: I
account them but as scrapings, as skins, as parings, as nothing worth, in
comparison of the Lord Jesus Christ. If there had been presented to Paul a
whole Mountain of Gold and Silver, and precious Pearls, in comparison of Jesus
Christ, it would have been but as a heap of dung to him: I count all things
(says he) but loss and dung, in comparison of Christ. Consider but what things
they were that he did undervalue, in comparison of Christ, and consider who did
undervalue them. Consider what it was that Paul did undervalue, all the
Privileges that he had: for example, He tells you in the 5th and 6th verses,
Circumcised the eighth day (so outwardly in covenant with God, bearing the
Covenant of God in his flesh: this was nothing in his esteem) of the stook of
Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Of the Stock of
Abraham; this was his Birth-priviledg, but this was nothing: He was a man of
Parts and Learning, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; but all his natural
parts, abilities and endowments, all these he esteemed nothing: yea, he was a
man of a civil and unblameable conversation; touching the righteousness which
is in the Law, blameless. As to his outward man, he was blameless, none could
say that black was his eye: yet all these Privileges he esteemed loss and
dung, in comparison of Jesus Christ. -- And then consider, who it was that did
undervalue them; it was Paul, a Scholar, a man of Parts, a man of no mean City,
but of the City of Tarsus in Cilicia, Acts 21.39. It was Paul, that was not a
Novice in Religion, that knew not what he said; but Paul the Aged, that was
well experienced in such things, that knew very well what he said; it is he
that passes this account of all things, in comparison of Jesus Christ; I, says
he, esteem all these Privileges: and if I had a thousand times as many more, I
would esteem them but loss, and dross, and dung, as nothing in comparison of
Christ. Oh, how invaluable was Jesus Christ to holy Paul, that was a Believer!
--

But for the better understanding of this Point, that we may see how excellent
and precious Christ is to a Believer, how highly he is prized by him: First, It
may be demanded, Who are those Believers to whom Christ is precious? Secondly,
Why is Christ so precious to them?


First, Who are those Believers to whom Christ is precious?

I answer, Not they that have only an Historical Faith of Christ, to know that
there was such a Savior that came into the World, and that he was God and Man;
and that he is able to save to the uttermost those that come to him. Nor they
that have only a temporary Faith: such a Faith as they had, which you read of
in the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13, They that received the seed into stony
places, the same are they which hear the Word, and anon with joy receive it;
but they have no root; and for a while believe, but in time of temptation and
persecution, they fall away, Luke 8.13. Not they, I say, that thus have only an
historical Faith, or only a temporary Faith; but they are said to be Believers,
that are contented to take Jesus Christ upon his own terms: to receive him as
their King, and Priest, and Prophet: they that can be content to close with
him, and to cleave to him, as to the work of their Salvation, and that can say
with Job, Though thou kill me, I will put my trust in thee, Job 13.15. In a
word, They are said to be Believers, that can rest and rely upon Jesus Christ;
that can cast their Souls into his Arms, to sink or swim with him, to live or
die with him, to be saved or damned with him: it is the true Believer the Text
here speaks of: when the Apostle says here, To you that believe he is precious;
you must not understand it of a formal believer, neither must you understand it
of a hypocritical believer: you must not understand it of those that have a
false Faith, but of those that have a true Faith. I told you not long ago,
which some of you may remember, out of that Text, Heb. 10.22, Let us draw near
with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith; That there was a false and
counterfeit Faith, as well as a true Faith; for example, I told you, --

First, That that is an easy Faith that is easily let into the Soul, without
any work of conviction, contrition, and humiliation. That Faith that has no
tears, nor prayers, nor earnest endeavors paid for the purchase of it, is
cheap ware: and not worth a farthing. --

Secondly, That Faith that is an idle, and an ineffectual Faith, that is never
working upon the precepts of God, to obey them: nor on the Promises of God, to
embrace them: nor on the Threatenings of God, to tremble at them. --

Thirdly, That Faith that is an unthriving Faith, that never grows under the
means of Grace. True Faith is a growing Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, says the Apostle,
We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet: because that
your Faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward
each other abounds. --

Fourthly, That Faith that is a loose and licentious Faith, that Faith that
has room for Christ, and room for any reigning lust also: room for Christ, and
room for the World, and the things of it: when a man can pretend love to Jesus
Christ, and yet live in a known sin: whereas the true Faith purifies the heart,
Acts 15.9, And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
faith. To them that have such a Faith, this false counterfeit Faith, this
easy, idle, unthriving, loose and licentious Faith, to them Christ is not at
all precious, they see no beauty at all in him. But they that have this true
Faith, that is ushered in by conviction and humiliation, that is a growing
Faith, an operative and working Faith; this holy Faith, as it is called in the
26 verse of the Epistle of Saint Jude; But ye, Beloved, building up your selves
in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; To them that have this true
Faith, to them Jesus Christ is precious, and they are the Believers the Text
here speaks of. So much of the first, who are those Believers to whom Jesus
Christ is precious?

Secondly, Why is Jesus Christ so precious to such Believers? You see who they
are: but why is he so precious to them, so highly prized by them? Diverse
reasons might be rendered: I shall give you these five or or six.

First, Jesus Christ is so highly prized by Believers, because they see the
indispensable need that they have of him: that without him they are lost, dead,
damned, and undone for ever; therefore they prize him, because they know they
cannot live without him; They know that a condemned Prisoner has not more need
of a pardon: a poor beggar that is ready to starve in the streets has not more
need of food: nor a naked man more need of clothes: nor a sick man, more need
of a Physician, than they have of Jesus Christ; and therefore they prize him.
They know they are foolish, yea, folly it self, therefore they have need of him
to be their wisdom to guide them: they know they are guilty Sinners, therefore
they know they have need of his Righteousness to clear them; they know they are
poluted and defiled Sinners, therefore they have need of his blood to purify
them; they know they are exposed to the wrath of a Sin-revenging God, and the
curse of the condemning Law, and the condemnation of the second Death,
therefore they have need of him to be their Redemption; They know that they are
infinitely indebted, that they owe to God a debt of ten thousand Talents, which
they are never able to discharge, and therefore they have need of Christ to be
their Surety; they know they are weak, and able to do nothing without him; (
without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing), and they know Christ is their
strength, as well as Redeemer, and that through Christ they can do all things,
Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. In a
word, They know that Jesus Christ is their Rock, their Refuge, their Redeemer,
their Peace, their Portion, their All, and therefore they see the infinite need
they have of him, and that without him they are nothing: they can do nothing,
they are worse than nothing, therefore they prize him. Here is one Reason why
Jesus Christ is so precious to true Believers, because they see the infinite
need they have of him.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is thus precious to true Believers, because they see an
invaluable and unconceivable beauty in him. It is true indeed, to Unbelievers,
Jesus Christ has no beauty in him that they should desire him; as it is Isa.
53.2, For be shall grow up before him as a tender Plant, and as a root out of a
dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty, that we should desire him. A carnal earthly minded man, he says
concerning Christ, as they did in the place before named, Cant. 5.9, What is
thy Beloved more than another Beloved? What is there of so much beauty in
Christ, that we should either eye him, observe him, prize him, or seek him, or
look after him? Acts 4.11, This is the Stone which was set at naught by you
builders. Jesus Christ is as a thing of nothing in an Unbelievers eye: such a
one makes no more reckoning of him (with reverence be it spoken) than the dirt
under foot: Whereas Faith, you must know, has an Eagles eye, it can see things
afar off, it sees a great deal of beauty in the Lord Jesus Christ; though in
respect of any of these outward accommodations, there is no beauty at all in
him; yet discerning things with a Spiritual eye, a Believer sees Christ afar
off, as it is said of Abraham, John 8.56, Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see
my day, and he saw it, and was glad. There was an eye of Faith in Abraham; He
saw my day, and rejoiced. Hence it is, that believing in Christ is sometimes
expressed by this Phrase of seeing Christ, Act. 22.14, Ananias speaking to
Paul, said, The God of our Fathers has chosen thee, that thou should know
his will, and see that just one, and should hear the voice of his mouth. See
him, that is, that thou should believe in him. Faith therefore sees Christ;
sees him afar off, sees him, though clothed with our flesh, with our
infirmities. Faith looks upon Jesus Christ, and does see him evidently
crucified, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.1, O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth crucified among you? Nay, Faith sees a
great deal of beauty in his sufferings, how much more in his glory! for
Example, Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11.26. Why? for he had respect unto the recompense of
reward; he had the quicksighted eye of Faith. You read in Mark 2, when the Wise
men came from the East to Jerusalem, to enquire after him that was born King of
the Jews, that is, after Jesus Christ; when they came to enquire of him, they
first came to Jerusalem; and they saw Herod (it may be) arrayed in all his
glorious Robes: but we do not read, that they fell down and worshipped Herod;
then they came to Bethlehem, where they saw the Babe Jesus wrapped in
Swadling-cloaths, in a poor Garb (it may be little better than rags) yet they
fall down and worship him. Now, what is the reason that they did not worship a
magnificent glorious Herod, in all his Robes, but they worship a poor
contemptible Babe in Swadling-cloaths? surely this was, because they had a
spiritual eye of Faith, they looked on Christ with an eye of Faith, therefore
in his Infancy they saw greatness; in his meanness they saw Majesty; and more
Glory in Christ in his Rags, than in Herod in his Robes.

Thirdly, Christ is thus precious to true Believers, because they do not only
see the need they have of him, and a great deal of beauty in him: but they do
receive very rich and invaluable benefits by him for the present.

First, They receive many temporal mercies by him: all their temporal comforts
come streaming to them in the blood of Jesus Christ. Christ is the Heir of all
things, and all things are Believers by Christ; All things are yours, says the
Apostle, so far as you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22.

Secondly, As they receive temporal mercies, so they receive many spiritual
Privileges, Graces, and comforts by him: They receive spiritual Privileges,
as Justification, Sanctification, and Adoption.

First, Justification. Oh what a Privilege is this, that through Jesus Christ
God should look upon Believers, not as Sinners, but as Saints! for God to say
of them, Thou art all fair my Beloved, there is no spot in thee; in respect of
Justification there is no spot in thee, though their Sanctification be
imperfect, Cant. 4.7. Believers have the blood of Jesus Christ to take away all
their guilt: not only the guilt contracted in their unregenerate estate, but
the guilt contracted in the estate of grace. Alas, says a Believer, when I have
done a Duty, used a comfort, filled my Relations in the best manner I can, what
would become of me if I had not a Savior, a Mediator, to take away the
iniquity of my holy Offerings? But now, this is a privilege better worth than
the Gold of Ophir, nay better worth than the whole World; namely, by Jesus
Christ, and believing in him, We are justified from all things from which we
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.39.

Secondly, And as they receive the privilege of Justification, so Believers
receive the privilege of Sanctification by him; for Christ is not only made to
us Wisdom by his Word, and Righteousness by his Merit, but Sanctification also
by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made not only a pattern of holiness to
us, but the principle of holiness; Believers are strong in his Strength, and
wise by his Wisdom, and holy by his Holiness, and meek by his Meekness; they
have the Image of Jesus Christ stamped upon their Souls: they know him in some
measure, in the power of his death, killing and crucifying the old man,
together with the affections and lusts thereof: they know him in the power of
his Resurrection, raising them up to a holy and Heavenly Conversation. Thus I
say, they receive the privilege of Sanctification by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, And then they receive the Privilege of Adoption too; as he is the
Natural Son of God, Believers being united to him, they are partakers of his
Sonship, they are made the Sons and Daughters of God by Adoption: And I will
be a Father to you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. ult.

Secondly, And so Believers receive spiritual grace from him. Look as the Oil
that was poured upon Aarons head, run down to the skirts of his clothing; so
from that fullness of Grace which is in Jesus Christ, Believers receive, and
grace for grace: a continual supply of grace from him, he is the Author of all
their graces, he is the Author of their Faith; he is called The Author and
Finisher of their Faith, Heb. 12.2. He is the Author of their Love; Christ
first warms their hearts with a sense of his Love, before they can love him; We
love him, because he first loved us, 1 John 4.19. He is the Author of their
Repentance: God has exalted him to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins to his people, Acts 5.31.

Thirdly, And then they receive spiritual comforts by him too; My peace I give
unto you, my peace I leave with you: not as the world gives, give I unto yon;
let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid, John 14.27. He gives
Believers that peace that the World can neither give, nor take away from them;
that peace and comfort, that can hold up their heads in all outward storms: In
the world (says he) you shall have tribulation, but in me you shall have peace,
John 16. ult. At the same time, when they have tribulation in the world, they
may have peace in Christ; at the same time when there is rattling upon the
Tiles, there may be Music in the Chamber; outward tribulations, and inward
consolations, they may stand together at the very same time: In the multitude
of my thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul, Psalm 94.19. So, though
there may be multitude of troubles within, yet there may be comforts to refresh
the Soul. This is the third Reason, why Jesus Christ is so precious to
Believers, Because they have much in hand from Christ: they have Temporal
Mercies, and Spiritual Mercies, Spiritual Privileges, Justification,
Sanctification, and Adoption; and Spiritual Graces, and Spiritual Comforts.

Reas. 4. Jesus Christ is very precious to Believers, because they expect much
from him. As they have much in hand by him, so they have more in hope from him;
they have much for the present, but more for the future; for, what do they
expect from him but an Inheritance incorrupted, undefiled, reserved in Heaven
for them: an everlasting Kingdom, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, everlasting
Communion with himself, bosom-Communion with himself in Glory; to have their
Souls bathed in those Rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand for
evermore: yea, the following the Lamb. wheresoever he goes, to be triumphing in
his Praises, to be sounding forth those Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the
Throne for ever, to live and lie in his continual embraces: Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
God has laid up for them that love him. Now, because with the eye of Faith
they look upon these things, and they fully expect to enjoy them: therefore
hence it is they do so highly prize Jesus Christ.

Reas. 5. Jesus Christ is very precious to Believers: they do most highly prize
him, Because Faith you must know, is a uniting grace, an espousing grace; it is
the Wedding-Ring. as I have sometimes told you, that makes up the Match between
Jesus Christ and the poor Soul: as soon as ever a man comes to be a Believer,
to take Jesus Christ to be his Head, his Husband, his Portion, then is the
Match made up between them: Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
Now then, Believers being thus espoused to him, thus united to him, they cannot
but dearly love him. As a Wife that has pitched her affections upon a Husband,
and forsaken all others: and has vowed to cleave to him, and him only, while
they both shall live, therefore she does prize him above all the men in the
World: so when the Soul is once united to Christ, married to him (Thy Maker is
thy Husband); when the Soul is espoused to Christ, it cannot but dearly love
him, and forsake all others in comparison of him.

Reas. 6. Jesus Christ is very precious to Believers, Because true Faith ever
works by Love, Gal. 5.6, For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love. True Faith will
make a man dearly love the Lord Jesus Christ; now, if we love him, we cannot
but prize him whom we love so dearly.

The Use I shall make of this Point briefly:

First, For Examination. And, O that you and I could engage our own hearts a
while, and call our selves to account in sad and serious thoughts, whether
Jesus Christ be precious to us, yea or no; Is he highly prized by you, even by
you that hear me this day? Can you say with the Church, My Beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand? And with St. Paul, I esteem all things but
dross and dung, in comparison of Jesus Christ; the whole World, the glory, the
beauty, and treasures, and pleasures of it, but as a heap of dung, in
comparison of him? this pitch and frame you must come unto, or else you can
never have any assurance that Christ is yours, and that you are his; for, as
our Savior says in the like case, He that loves Father or Mother more than
me, is not worthy of me, etc. Matthew. 10.37. So here, if any thing be more
prized than Jesus Christ, you can have no assurance that Christ is your
portion; if any thing be preferred before him, or prized more highly than he:
is there not great need then, that you should enquire whether Jesus Christ be
precious to you, yea or no? That I may press you to this enquiry, consider but
this one Motive: this is one of the surest Characters to distingnish between a
sincere-hearted Christian, and an Hypocrite: For, he that is sincere, and
upright-hearted, does lay Jesus Christ the nearest to his heart, and says, None
but Christ, nothing but Christ; whereas ever observe it, and you shall see a
Hypocrite has always something that lies nearer to his heart than Jesus Christ
does; however he may show much love to Christ with his mouth, yet his heart
goes after his covetousness, or after some base lust or other; as God told the
Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.31, And they come unto thee as my People, and they sit before
thee as my People, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness. So that Jesus Christ has not the heart of a Hypocrite; he may
have the mouth of a Hypocrite, a show of love, but there is something still
that does lie nearer his heart than Christ does. Look into the parable of the
Sower; and you will find that Seed that was sown in the stony-ground, it sprung
up and made a fair show for a while, but there was something that lay between
the seed and the Soil; so there is something that lies between Jesus Christ and
the Soul of a Hypocrite. You know the story of the young man in Matthew. 19.22.
When Jesus Christ made him a fair proffer, Go and sell that thou have (says he)
and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come and
follow me. He made a fair show, but the world lay nearer his heart than Jesus
Christ did; therefore, when he bid them sell all, and give to the poor: he went
away very sorrowful. And you know the story of Orpah and Ruth, Ruth 1. Orpah,
she gave her Mother-in-Law a kiss, and bid her Farewell, but Ruth clave to her
Mother Naomi. So it is here, It may be an Hypocrite can complement with the
Lord Jesus Christ, can give him some outward Ceremonial observance; but, when
it comes to this, that he must part with any thing for Christ; when Christ
tells him, If thou will be mine, thou must take me on my own terms: thou must
look to bear my Cross, as well as to wear my Crown; thou must look for Hatred,
Persecution, a Cross, a Prison for my sake, then he begins to shrink and draw
back; I love Jesus Christ well, says he, but I love pleasures better, the World
better, Liberty better, still there is something that a Hypocrite prizes before
Jesus Christ.

But then you will say, How may I do to know that Jesus Christ is precious to
me indeed? I will tell you briefly:

First, See whether your desires be strongly carried out after the Lord Jesus
Christ; whether they be vehement, constant, and industrious desires, or no;
for, if your desires after Jesus Christ be right, they will be very vehement
desires, like hunger and thirst, that are commanding: The appetite hunger it
has this property, not only to be violent in its desires, but to be terminated
to one object; I must have food, says an hungry man, and nothing but food will
please him; offer him Music, no, that will not content him; offer him Gold and
Silver, that will not content him; he must have food, and nothing in the World
but food will content and satisfy him. So that Soul that has a true desire
after Christ, says, I must have Christ, and none but Christ will content me;
Riches, Pleasures, Honors will not satisfy my Soul: I must have Christ, none
but Christ.

Secondly, And are your desires constant, and continued desires? It may be some
men may have flashes of desires, when their Consciences are awakened, when they
lie tumbling upon a sickbed, or when the wrath of God begins to be kindled
against them: But tell me, Are thy desires constant? Can thou say with David,
My soul breaks for the longing it has unto thy Judgments at all times? Psalm
119.20. I know there may be an intermission of the act of desire, but then the
constant bent of the Soul is Chrisward. As a Tradesman, that makes it his T^^^^
to buy and sell, though he does not always buy and sell; so the Soul will be
always trading in desire for Christ, though there may be an intermission of
desires.

Thirdly, Are they industrious desires, that make you not only to desire him,
but to seek him? The desire of our Soul is to thy Name, O Lord, and to the
remembrance of thee. And then, With my soul have I desired thee in the night;
yea, with my Spirit will I seek thee early, Isa. 26.8, 9. If so be your desires
after Christ be right, they will put you upon all means of Grace, and the using
of them carefully, and conscientiously enquiring after him, and following of
him in the use of every Ordinance. This is the first way, whereby you may know
whether Christ be precious to you; See what your desires are: if they be
strongly carried out after Christ, if they be vehement, constant and
industrious desires.

Secondly, Would you know whether Jesus Christ be precious to your Souls, yea
or no? then see whether your love to Jesus Christ be a true love, unfeigned
love; whether you love him in sincerity, or no? Grace be with all them that
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Amen, Ephesians. 6. ult. Implying, many
love him not in sincerity. Thus you may know, whether you love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity.

First, You will remember Christ, your hearts will be much taken up with him;
When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches,
Psalm. 63.6. Are your thoughts taken up with him?

Secondly, If you love him in sincerity, you will hold no correspondency with
sin: you will hate sin, and hate every sin.

Thirdly, If your love to Christ be sincere, it will be accompanied with
smarting sorrow for your former unkindnesses to him; as Mary Magdalen, because
she loved much, she wept much. Thus will such a Soul say, Against thee have I
sinned, thee have I offended; with Judas I have betrayed thee, though thou
did never shed thy blood for him, as thou did for me; therefore my sins are
the greater, because against thee I have sinned.

Thirdly, Would you know whether Christ be precious to you, or no? let me then
propound to you these three Soul-searching Questions: First, Tell me, What are
you willing to give for Christ? Secondly, What are you willing to lose for
Christ? Thirdly, What pains are you willing to take that you may obtain him?


First, If you would know whether Christ be precious to you, then answer this
Question, What are you willing to give for Christ? I know nothing can be given
by way of merit, do not understand me so; but what are you willing to give in
the use of means?

First, Are you willing to give as much for Christ now, as you would give in a
time of sickness, when you are lying upon your Deathbeds: when the Soul sits
upon the lips, and is ready to take its leave? Are you willing to give as much
now in health, as you would give in a time of sickness? Oh, when a man lies on
his sickbed, and Death knocks at his door, Christ then, it may be, would be
very precious to him: Oh what would he then give for a Christ? Those in Noah's
time, that never regarded the Ark all the while it was a building: yet when the
Flood came, what would they have given for an Ark then? What would you give for
Christ at that time when you are upon a Deathbed, ready to be delivered by your
Deathbed, to your cold Grave? Certainly, Christ is as precious now, as he will
be when you lie upon a sickbed, when you shall look Death in the face.

Again, Are you willing to give as much for Christ now, as at the day of
Judgment? Oh what seeking and suing will there be to Christ at that day! Lord,
pity me; Lord, own me, I am undone for ever without thee. Oh what seeking and
suing will there be to Christ at that day! Certainly, Christ is as precious now
as he will be at that day, when he shall come in Flames of fire, taking
vengeance on them that know him not, and obey not his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Can
you be content to give as much for him now, as you would give in that day for
him? Can you be contented to give as much for him, as a damned Soul would give
for him, if it were possible he could purchase him? Certainly he is as precious
now, as he would be to a damned soul, if he could be made partaker of him.

In a word, Tell me, Are you willing to give up your selves to him, wholly to
be ruled by him? to give up your Understandings to him, to desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified? To give up your Will to him: to
say, Rule in me as thou please, so I may be but thine? to give up your
Affections to him, to love him, to delight in him, to rejoice in him; to say
with the Apostle, God sorbid I should rejoice in any thing, save in the Cross
of Christ, Gal. 6.14. If you can do thus, then you have answered the first
Question, and you may know certainly, Jesus Christ is precious to you.

Secondly, Tell me, What are you willing to lose for Christ, to part with for a
precious Redeemer?

First, Are you willing to part with your sins, though they may be never so
near and dear to you, though they be as your right hand and right eye? can you
throw them away from you with detestation? Isa. 30.22, Ye shall defile also the
covering of your graven Image, and the Ornament of thy molten Image of gold;
thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get
thee hence; they shall cast away their Idols with detestation.

Again, Can you be content to part with the World, your Estates, your
Liberties, your Comforts, any thing for Christ? Understand me thus: First, If
they come in competition with him. Secondly, If they stand in opposition to him.


First, If they come in competition with him: Tell me, can you hate Father,
Mother, Wife, children, any thing that is near and dear to you, if it stand in
competition with Christ? or any thing that stands in opposition to him? If any
thing hinders the meeting of Christ and your Souls, though never so near and
dear to you, can you cast it away? can you be content to part with it?

Thirdly, Answer me this Question, What pains can you be contented to take for
the gaining of the Lord Jesus Christ? can you be as industrious and unwearied
in the pursuit of those unsearchable riches that are laid up in Christ, as you
are after these temporary and transitory riches, that oftentimes take to
themselves wings and fly away? can you be as unsatiable, in seeking to gain
Jesus Christ on the Lords Day, as you are unwearied in your Callings on the
Week day? certain it is, if Jesus Christ be precious to you, you will think no
pains too great: you will think no cost too much, you will think no industry
can be great enough for the purchasing this Pearl of Price; you will, with the
Wise Merchant in the Gospel, sell all to purchase him; you will seek him in the
Streets, as the Spouse did; you will seek him in the Assemblies: you will be
driving a Trade still, that you may get more of him: more influences of Grace
from him, and more conformity unto him. This is the first Use of Examination,
to discover whether Jesus Christ be precious to you, or no; if your desires be
strongly carried out after him, if your love be a servent and sincere love; if
you can be content to give any thing for him, and to lose or part with any
thing for his sake: and if you can be content to take any pains, and think no
pains too great to gain him, who is the Pearl of great Price. The Lord make
your own hearts your Judges in this particular. And so much for the first Use
of Examination. There are three other Uses: a Use of Conviction, a Use of
Information, and a Use of Exhortation: But I must refer them to another
opportunity.

1 Pet. II. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious. --


I Have spoken to this Text in two Sermons already, upon the like occasion of
our solemn approaching to the Table of the Lord; and there are two Points of
Doctrine I have drawn from these words: the first is this, That Jesus Christ is
infinitely precious in himself. The second is this, As Jesus Christ is
infinitely precious in himself, so is he also precious to all Believers, and
highly prized by them. This Point I spoke to upon the last Occasion, and opened
it to you, and made one Use of Examination.

I now come to a second Use: that is, of Conviction: If it be so, that Jesus
Christ is thus precious to all Believers: then it follows, few, yea very few
Believers there are in the World; nay, very few of those that do profess the
Name of Christ; because there are very few that do prize him, very few that
make that high account of him, as becomes so rich, so precious, so invaluable a
Redeemer.

But it may be you will say to me, Who are they then that do not prize Jesus
Christ? who are they that do not value him? I shall instance in four or five
sorts of Persons:

First, They do not prize the Lord Jesus Christ, that see no beauty in him that
they should desire him; that see no beauty in spiritual things, no beauty in
Grace, no beauty in the peace of a good conscience, no beauty in Joy in the
Holy Ghost, in righteousness and holiness: for in these things consists the
Kingdom of God, Romans 14.17, For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Now those that see no
beauty in those things that lead the Soul to Christ, in those things wherein
the Kingdom of Christ consists: certainly they do not prize Christ. This is the
great fault of the Jews, for which they were rejected, as the Prophet Isaiah
foretold, Isa. 53.2, 3, He shall grow up before him as a tender Plant, and as a
Root out of a day ground; he has no form, nor comeliness; and when we shall
see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it
were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. The Jews
look upon Christ with a carnal eye, they look upon his Humanity, the meanness
of his Birth; born in a Stable, the lowness of his Parentage: the House of
David being at that time but like the stump of a Tree, a dry Root: he coming
from the Root of Jesse; they look upon his attendance, a company of poor
Fishermen: they look upon his condition, not having a House to lay his Head in,
therefore they slight him, reject him, and despise him. Just thus it is at this
day; many there are that value not at all spiritual things, neither value they
the Kingdom of God; The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, (Luke
17.20.) it comes not with outward Pomp and Splendor; it comes not with
observation, because it is a hidden Kingdom, a spiritual Kingdom: inward Faith,
and Love, and self-denial, and other inward Graces, because these are the
things belonging to the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; and being not obvious
to carnal eyes, therefore they see no beauty in them. Therefore this is a plain
token they see no beauty in Christ; they that see no beauty in Christ's Kingdom,
in his Ordinances, and in his Spiritual comforts, certainly they see no beauty
in Christ: There wants no beauty in him, but carnal men want eyes to behold
him: certainly, spiritual things they are the most precious and invaluable
Commodities that are; therefore because thou feast no beauty in Heaven, and in
heavenly things, spiritual things, the graces of the Spirit, and the comsorts
of the Spirit, thou art one that do not prize the Lord Christ.

Secondly, They do not prize the Lord Jesus Christ, that prefer their lusts
before him, that prefer the wills of the Flesh, and of the Mind, as the Greek
word signifies, before him, in Ephesians. 2.3. Those that say in their hearts,
though it may be they will not speak it with their mouths, but it is the
language of their hearts, We will not have this man to reign over us: we will
walk in our own crooked ways, and not in the ways of Christ, in the ways of
holiness. Certainly, they that prefer their lusts before him, they do not prize
him.

Thirdly, They that do not prize the Messengers of Jesus Christ, they do not
prize Jesus Christ himself: So says our Savior himself expressly, Luke 10.16,
speaking to his Disciples, and in them to his succeding Ministers: He that
hears you, bears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. When Hannun the King of the children
of Ammon, cast contempt on the Messengers and Ambassadors of David, and so
wickedly entreated them, by cutting off their Garments in the middle to their
buttocks, and shaving off the one half of their Beards, 2 Samuel 10; it was a
plain token that he despised David also, because he despised his Ambassadors.

Fourthly, They do not prize the Lord Christ, that can keep the best room they
have, I mean their hearts, for creature comforts, but the Lord Jesus Christ, as
I may say with reverence, is thrust into the Stable. But you will say, How does
that appear? Thus; when a man's Liberty, or Estate, or Friends, or outward
reputation come to be hazarded, if Christ be owned: that man now that can
prefer any of his creature-accommodations, rather than run any hazard for the
Lord Jesus Christ, certainly that man does not prize Christ. When it comes to a
point, that a man must part with some, or all of his comforts and
accommodation, rather than part with his Savior; that man that can part with
his Savior rather than his comforts, certainly that man does not prize Christ.
Thus was it with the Gadarens: when it came to the Point, that they must part
with their Swine, or with Jesus Christ, they would part with Christ, rather
than with their Swine.

Fifthly, They that do not prize his Ordinances, that do not keep close to him,
and to his way of worship; those that do not set their hearts and souls to seek
him, to seek his Truth, to seek his Face, to rejoice in his Love, to content
and satisfy themselves in him; to say, If I have but Jesus Christ, though I be
as poor as Job upon the Dunghill, yet I am rich enough; certainly, these do
prize the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh that we could learn to be true to our own
Souls, and to love our selves so well, as not to beguile our own Souls in the
latter end. That Is the second Use of Conviction.

Thirdly, A third Use is this: If Christ be thus precious to all true
Believers, then there are these three or four Lessons, or Doctrinal Inferences
that may be gathered from this conclusion, or point of Doctrine.

First, If Jesus Christ be so precious to Believers, then it follows, that
Faith is an exceeding rich and precious Grace: it is called precious Faith, 2
Pet. 1.1, Simon Peter, a Servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that
have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the righteousness of God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ. But why is Faith so precious a Grace? because it
makes Christ so precious to our Souls, it makes a man look upon Christ with an
admiring eye, it ravishes the Soul with the love of this precious Redeemer; and
it makes him break out and say, There is no Beloved like my Beloved; Oh the
Dignity of his Person! Oh the Virtue of his Blood! Oh the value of his
Sufferings! Oh the sweetness of his Graces! Oh the Comforts of his Spirit! Oh
the excellency of those glorious and transcendent Hopes that are laid up in
him! You read of Moses, that he scorned all the Treasures of Egypt; Why?
because by Faith he beheld him that was invisible, Heb. 11.26, 27. By the eye
of Faith he looked upon Jesus Christ, and he saw more beauty in him, than in all
the Treasures of Egypt; more sweetness in one smile of his Face, than in ten
thousand Worlds: Oh therefore that you and I could learn to trade for Faith
more a great deal than for the World: Oh let us trade for this rich and
precious Grace; look out for Faith, and long for Faith, and strive to believe;
for until this Grace of Faith be planted in your hearts, Jesus Christ and you
are strangers, Christ and you stand at a very great distance: but as soon as
ever Faith is planted in the Soul, then there is instantly a closing with
Christ, as quick a closing between Christ and the Soul, as there is between the
Loadstone and the Iron: the Soul presently closes with him, and cleaves to him,
as soon as ever it begins to believe.

Secondly, If Jesus Christ be so prrcious to Believers, then learn this Lesson,
by way of Inference, That Believers are rich and honorable Persons: Why?
because Jesus Christ is to them both Riches and Honor. I gather this from the
signification of the word in the Greek Text: Jesus Christ is both a Price and
an Honor to his, for the word (...) signifies both a Price and Honor: Jesus
Christ therefore is a Price to Believers, he is a Pearl to them.

First, He is a Pearl of inestimable Price to all those that have got an
interest in him; this Pearl of Price is better worth than ten thousand worlds:
by him we are enriched in all things, 1 Cor. 1.5, I thank my God always on your
behalf, for the Grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in every
thing ye are enriched by him. And you read of the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.8, Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this
Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the usearchable Riches of
Christ. O when a man once is gotten into Christ, his Riches cannot be told: he
has the Riches of Redemption, the Riches of Christ's Merits, the Riches of
Christ's Spirit, and he has the rich and glorious Purchase of Christ's blood; he
has all these for his portion, he may say all these are mine: and can you name
such Riches as these are? they are called unsearchable Riches: Eye has not
seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man to
conceive, what those unsearchable Riches are which a Believer receives by
Christ; therefore a Believer is infinitely Rich.

And then, A Believer is truly honorable by him: the Lord Christ is not only a
Price, but an Honor to him; he is a most glorious Redeemer; Nay, Christ is not
only glorious, but he is called Glory it self, Isa. 40.5, And the Glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it: that is, Christ shall be revealed. The Prophet
declares, that John Baptist, speaking of the coming of Christ, says, The Glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: Jesus
Christ is called there the Glory of the Lord. So in the New Testament he is
called the glory of his People; Luke 2.32, A light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the Glory of thy people Israel. Indeed, no Glory can be put upon any one like
this, to be a Member of Christ, to be the Spouse of Christ, to be the Servant
of Christ. Theodosius, that good Emperor, esteemed it a greater honor to be
Servus Christi, than Caput Regni; a greater honor to be a Servant to Christ,
than to be Head of the Empire.

Thirdly, Learn this Lesson, by way of Inference, If Jesus Christ be so
precious to Believers, then certainly, Unbelief is a most dangerous, a most
damnable, a Soul-destroyiug sin; why? because Unbelief makes Jesus Christ to be
of no worth, no value, no price, no advantage at all. To you that do believe,
he is precious: I, but says the Apostle, in the next words to the Text, To them
which be disobedient: that is, to them that do not believe, he is a Stone of
stumbling, a Rock of Offense; to unbelievers, the Lord Jesus Christ is as a
thing of naught; it is the Apostles own expression; Saint Peter speaking of the
Pharisees, and the Rulers, Acts 4.11, This is the Stone which was set at naught
by you builders, which is become the Head of the Corner. They made nothing of
Christ. To an Unbeliever Christ is of no more worth, than the dirt under his
foot, with Reverence be it spoken. An Unbeliever, he would sell Christ for
thirty pieces of Silver, with Judas: nay, he will prefer five shillings before
him. Of all sins, take heed of this sin: for this is the evil heart that is
departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12, Take heed Brethren, lest there be in
any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. Hereby
the Soul begins to depart, to depart, to depart, till at last it hears that
dreadful Sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels As Faith is the first return of the Soul to God, so
Unbelief is the first departing of the Soul from God; take heed therefore of
Unbelief.

Fourthly, Another Lesson by way of Inference, is this, If Jesus Christ be so
precious to those that do believe in him, O how infinitely precious will he be
to them that do enjoy him? If he be so precious to them that see him by the eye
of Faith, how infinitely precious will he be to them that see him face to face,
when our Faith is brought into fruition, and our hope into our hand! Abraham
saw Jesus Christ afar off: he faw him when he was to come, two thousand years
before he came into the World; Abraham by an eye of Faith faw him, and he
rejoiced; the Text says, John 8.56, Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day,
and he saw it, and was glad. If he saw him when he was at such a distance, and
rejoiced; how does Abraham rejoice now, when he sees him face to face! Long for
that time, when you shall have a full sight of him, which is called The
Beatifical Vision; that is the Vision that will make you everlastingly blessed.
One sight of Jesus Christ in Glory, will so satisfy the Soul, so beautify it,
so rejoice it, that (it is an expression that Austin used) if so be a man were
in Hell, if you could suppose such a thing to be, and had but one glimpse of
the Beatifical Vision, it would swallow up all the bitterness of Hell it self.
And this is that which Christ has both promised and prayed for; he has
promised, We shall see him as he is: and he has prayed for it too, John 17.24,
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world. Oh long for that day when you shall see
Jesus Christ as he is, see him in his Glory; then he will be infinitely and
unconceivably precious indeed, and that to all Eternity. That Is the third Use
of Information, in these four Lessons, That Faith is a most precious Grace;
That Believers are rich and Honorable Persons; That Unbelief is a dangerous,
and damnable, and Soul-destroying sin; and that the sight of Jesus Christ face
to face in Glory, will be infinitely and unconceivably precious and glorious
indeed.

A fourth Use it is for Exhortation. If Jesus Christ be so precious to
Believers: then let me beseech you, and persuade you, and prevail with you, and
the Lord bow your hearts to hearken to this Exhortation this day. As ever you
desire to have a certain proof and evidence that you are true Believers, and
that you are true Members of Jesus Christ, and that you are real Saints (for
there are many nominal, but there are but few true Saints) that you are true
Servants of Jesus Christ, and truly united to him, and have communion with him,
and have infinite precious privileges by him; O then do you learn to prize
Jesus Christ at a high rate, set a high price upon this precious Redeemer; let
him be highest in your esteem; do your labor every day, that he may be more
and more precious, and amiable, and beautiful in your eyes: Remember but that
speech of our Savior, Luke 14.26, If any man come to me, and hate not his
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. He that does not hate Father, etc
These words must not be understood simply, as if our Savior would have us to
hate our Relations, as Father, Mother, Wife, Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, and our own lives: certainly that is not the meaning of the words of
our Savior, that he would have us to offer violation to the Law of Nature; it
is not spoken therefore simply, but comparatively: he that does not love me so
much, so as to hate all other in comparison of me: he that does not prize me
before Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Brethren, House, Lands, yea, life it
self, and all things that are desirable, such a one has no interest in me, and
shall have no benefit by me. Now because it is an Exhortation of such infinite
concernment, therefore I shall divide it into three Branches.

First, I shall show you the manner how you should prize Christ. Secondly, The
Motives which may persuade you to it. Thirdly, The means that may help you in
it.
First, For the manner how you must prize Christ. It may be you will say, In
what manner must we prize Christ? In what manner must Christ be precious to us?
Prize him in your Understandings, in your Choice, in your Affections, and in
his Ordinances.

First, In your Understandings, desiring to know nothing but Jesus Christ and
him crucified. 1 Cor. 2.2, And count all things but dross and dung, in
comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Indeed, there is
a thousand times more worth, and beauty, and sweetness, and excellency in Jesus
Christ, than you can know; as he said, That man that knows Jesus Christ well,
although he be ignorant of all other things, he is the right knowing man. If a
man had all the learning of both Universities concentred in himself, and yet
ignorant of Jesus Christ, he were but a poor simple Sot.

Secondly, Prize Jesus Christ in your Choice, to pitch upon him as the adequate
Object, satisfying Object of your Souls; pitch upon him as the only excellent
one. As a woman that selects and singles out one man from amongst all the rest,
upon whom she places all her Affections for her Husband; so do you select and
choose out Jesus Christ for your Beloved, and say, Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire in comparison of thee.

Thirdly, Prize Jesus Christ in your Affections; love him above all expressions
of love: labor to be sick of love toward so sweet and precious a Savior, as
the Spouse was, Cant. 2.5, Stay me with Flaggons, Comfort me with Apples, for I
am sick of love: saying as David did, in that mournful Elegy which he made for
Saul and Jonathan; speaking of Jonathan, says he, Thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women, 2 Samuel 1.26, I am distressed for thee my brother
Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto me, thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women. -- Then trust in him as the Rock of your Salvation:
trust to his Wisdom to lead you, in his Power to support you; trust in his
Mercy and Merit to save you. -- Again, Do you rejoice in him? to say as the
Virgin Mary did, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God
my Savior. -- And cleave to him, as to that Rock that only can deliver you,
both from the raging Ocean of Gods everlasting displeasure, and from the
leaking boat of your own graces: prize him in your Affections.

Fourthly, Prize him in his Ordinances, in his Word; Oh how sweet is thy Word,
O Lord, that brings me good tidings of a blessed Redeemer! The Word of God is
as a Letter sent from a dear and precious Husband to his Wife. And prize him in
the Sacraments, which is as a Love token or Ring sent to you from the Beloved
of your Souls: Oh how should you prize these Ordinances! In the Sacrament, by
an eye of Faith, you may see him bleeding, and pouring out his Soul an offering
for sin; in the Sacrament, you may see him crying and dying for your sakes: in
a word, esteem one hours communion with him, better worth than all the
pleasures in the World, as that Noble Marquess of Italy did; who said, He was
not worthy of Christ, that did not esteem one hours Communion with him, better
than all the treasures in the World. So much for the manner, how we must prize
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, For the Motives that may persuade you to it; and Oh, that I knew
what Motives might raise up your esteem of this precious Redeemer; I will name
but these three:

Will either worth, or beauty or excellency, or sweetness, or
Soul-satisfaction, win upon your hearts? all these are to be found in him: He
is an All-sufficient-Saviour, All-sufficient for Justification, his blood can
pardon; All-sufficient for Sanctification also, for his blood can purify;
All-sufficient for Redemption, his blood can deliver from wrath to come. Do but
consider how precious this Christ is in himself, as I showed you in the former
Doctrine; precious in his Person, precious in his Titles, precious in his
Offices, being a King, Priest and Prophet, precious in the purchase of his
blood.

Secondly, I beseech you to consider, that Jesus Christ is the only desirable
good. The common vote and voice of the World, is this, Who will show us any
good? Psalm 4.6. But why do you not say, Who will show us Jesus Christ, who is
indeed the only needful good, the All-sufficient good, the Soul-satisfying
good? assure your selves, nothing under Heaven can do you good without him,
nothing under Heaven can be good if you want him; what are Riches without Jesus
Christ? what is Gold and Silver without Jesus Christ, but rotten stinking dung?
what are the most Royal Robes that ever were put on by the greatest Emperor,
without Jesus Christ? what are they but poluted clouts? what is the most
Princely Palace without Jesus Christ, but a Pesthouse? what is Birth,
Endowments, Education, without Jesus Christ, but glittering sins? So your
choicest comforts and accommodations without Jesus Christ, they are no better
than gilded damnation: what are all your outward Blessings without Christ? no
better than curses. And as nothing is good without him, so nothing can do you
good without him; there is no creature in Heaven or Earth that can do you good
without Christ, neither Men nor Angels: if you had all the Angels in Heaven to
speak for you, they could do you no good without Christ; God himself will do
you no good without Christ, he will not (if I may use such an expression) truck
or trade with you, he will not exchange one word in the business of Salvation,
but by Christ, John 14.6, Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and
the life; no man comes to the Father but by me. You cannot have any access to
God, approach to him, to stand up for your lives, or the life of your Souls,
without him who is the life of your lives, and the Soul of your Souls: Pray
tell me therefore, Are you contented to perish for ever in your sins? Are you
contented that the curses and threatenings of the Law, those Treasures of wrath,
that they should be your portion? Are you contented to be banished from the
presence of God, and to be sent into a dungeon of darkness; there to be, and to
be most miserable is all one? Are you contented to be sent to that blackness of
darkness for ever? as the Apostle calls it, Jude 12. I know you are not: Oh
then, why do you not prize Jesus Christ, by whom alone it is that you may
escape eternal wrath and vengeance? Isa. 55. Why do you spend your money for
that which is not bread, and your labor for that which will not satisfy? Why
do you trifle away your time in impertinencies, in things that will not profit?
why do you pour out your hearts on every lust and vanity, and in the mean time
neglect him who only can give you remission of sin, and a right to the
Promises, and reconciliation with God, and Eternal Salvation?

Thirdly, Let me use one Motive more. Do but consider how infinitely precious
the Lord Jesus Christ is to God the Father! O what account does he make of him!
He esteem him the Son of his Love, the Son of his Bosom, the Delight of his
Soul, My Servant in whom my Soul delights. Jesus Christ was both a Son and a
Servant in our flesh, when he took our Nature, and became our Surety, Isa.
42.1, Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights; I
have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles.
What account do the Saints in Heaven make of Christ? they look upon him as the
life of their lives, and the Soul of their Souls: as the heaven of their
Happiness, as the joy of their Joy; the Heaven that the Saints now enjoy, it is
the beholding of Jesus Christ now in Glory. Nay, do but consider what account
Sinners will make of him; they that now slight him, that prefer every base lust
before him, that mind the getting of every thing but Christ; Oh what account
will they make at that great day, when they shall call to the Mountains fall on
them, and the Hills to cover them! Oh what would they give for a smile of his
face at that day: when, if they had ten thousand Worlds in their possession,
they would give it for a smile of his face! Will Christ be so precious
hereafter, and shall he not be precious now? will not these Motives work upon
you? are they jests and fables? If, my Brethren, such Arguments will not
prevail, for my part I am out of hope to prevail with you.

Thirdly, Let me but show you some Means that may help you to prize the Lord
Christ, to make him precious to your Souls. The Means or Helps, briefly, are
these four or five:

First, The Soul must be convinced of the indispensable need that it has of
Jesus Christ; it is necessity that does inhance the price: for till the Soul be
convinced of this, all the Arguments and Motives that we can use, are but like
water that runs besides the Bottle, because the Bottle is stopped: all our
Arguments prevail nothing, they take no impression upon the heart at all: but
when a Soul once sees, either I must have Christ, or I must perish for ever, I
am lost, damned, and undone for ever, I am a firebrand of Hell for ever; O
Christ is now Christ indeed to such a Soul. If ever therefore you desire to
prize him according to his worth, be much in the duty of self-examination: turn
your eyes inward, to see the vileness of your Natures, the sinfulness of your
hearts, and the manifold transgressions of your lives; reason thus with thy own
Soul: What am I by Nature, but a child of Wrath, and an heir of Hell, and a
bondslave to Satan: a stranger to God, and an enemy to him, without God, and
without Hope? the number of my sins are more than the hairs of my head, my
heart fails me in the remembrance of them: and one sin is enough to sink me
into Hell, because it is committed against an infinite Majesty, and therefore
it deserves an infinite punishment: for, where God does punish, he does punish
infinitely, his Justice must have an infinite satisfaction: and there is no
satisfaction can be given to God without blood, Heb. 9.22, For without blood
there is no remission, says the Apostle; and no blood can expiate sin, can
take away the guilt of sin, but the blood of an infinite value; and no blood is
of an infinite value, but the blood of this precious Redeemer, that is that
blood that is of invaluable and unconceivable worth; for, for the Son of God to
shed his blood, it is more than if all the Angels in Heaven, and Potentates of
the Earth had laid down their lives to purchase one of our Souls: therefore I
must have this blood sprinkled on my Soul, or else I must resolve to perish
everlastingly; consider therefore of the need that you have of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Do you desire to prize Jesus Christ? then labor to eat this blessed
Passover with bitter herbs: I mean, labor to partake of this Sacrament with
the bitter remembrance of all your former unkindnesses: all your miscarriages,
failings, wanderings, and backslidings; Oh let the remembrance of these be as
bitter to you as Gall and Wormwood: Oh labor to say feelingly, It is an evil
and bitter thing that thou have provoked the Lord, (Jer. 2.19.) that thou have
grieved his Spirit, that thou have forfeited his Love, that thou have abused
his kindness, that thou have turned his grace into wantonness; O say, I have
done enough a thousand, and a thousand times to damn my Soul, if the mercy of
God were one jot less than infinite; if the blood of Jesus Christ should not
quench the fire of his anger, it would be burning, and burning, and burning
against me to all Eternity, even as long as God shall be God; it is a bitter
thing that I have provoked my God. You should in this Sacrament look upon him
whom you have pierced, and mourn over him, as one that mourns for the loss of
his only Son; and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for
his firstborn (Zech. 12.10.) that is the Image of his Person, and is as it
were the prop and stay of his Family. This is certain, my Brethren, there are
none that do prize Jesus Christ so much, as they that are stung with the sense
of their own sinfulness, of their own vileness; none prize the Lord Jesus
Christ so much, as they that most of all feel the burden of their own sins.
Let me give you two remarkable examples: the one of a man, the other of a
woman. Did ever man prize Jesus Christ more than St. Paul, that counted all his
Excellencies but as dirt under his feet, in comparison of Christ? he did esteem
them as things that we cast to Dogs, as the word (...) signifies? Did ever
woman prize Jesus Christ more than Mary Magdalen; who you know, washed his feet
with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head? What is the reason
that St. Paul and Mary Magdalen prized Jesus Christ so much? the reason is,
Because they were so exceeding sensible of the bitterness of sin. Paul he cries
out, I am of all sinners the greatest. And Mary Magdalen you know was one out
of whom was cast seven Devils, a notorious Sinner; now she being sensible of
her sins, this made her love much, because much was forgiven her, Luke 7.47.
Take it for a Rule, they that slight their sin, will quickly slight a Savior;
where sin is slighted, a Savior will be slighted also; where sin is a burden,
and where it is bitter, there Jesus Christ will be very sweet; the bitterness
of sin adds a relish to the sweetness of Christ. O therefore eat this Passover
with bitter herbs.

Thirdly, Then get your hearts unglewed from the World: I do not say, quite
cast off your care of Earthly things: but this I say, the world should not have
so much of your hearts: set your feet upon the World, set your hearts upon
Jesus Christ. Carnal men are so glewed to the World, and glutted with it, that
it is as hard a matter for them to be pulled from it, as you find a sucking
child is unwilling to part with a full Breast: O therefore use the World as if
so be you used it not.

Fourthly, Then study his Excellency, his Beauty, his Perfection: study the
unsearchableness of the Promises, All the promises of God are in him Yea, and
in him Amen; Study the unsearchable Riches of the covenant of Grace: as
Justification, Sanctification, and Adoption, which all come streaming in his
blood; Oh that you would study these more than you do. What is the reason we
prize Christ so little? it is because we know so little of him; if we knew him
more, we should love him more, and prize him more, and cleave to him more.

Therefore in the fifth and last place: Do you desire to prize Jesus Christ?
beg earnestly that God would open your eyes to see more of his beauty, and give
you hearts to taste more of his sweetness: that you may say, Lord show me thy
Glory, and it suffices; Oh, one glimpse of thy favor, how sweet and precious
will it be to me! Says our Savior to the woman of Canaan, John 4.10, If thou
knew the gift of God, if thou did but know me, the greatest gift that ever
God did bestow upon the sons of men: then, if thou knew me, Thou would
have asked of me living water. If you did but know Jesus Christ, you would open
your eyes to see more of him, and love him, and prize him more and more.

The last Use it is for Consolation; If Jesus Christ be so precious to all
Believers: then here is a word of Consolation and Encouragement to all you that
do prize him, to all you that do set your hearts upon him, to all you that do
resolve to make him your Portion, your Husband, your Head, your Rock, your
Redeemer, your All.

First, Can you say with the Apostle, Phil. 3.3, I rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh? I can rejoice in nothing in comparison of him:
neither Riches, nor Honors, nor Parts, nor Parentage, nor in any of these
outward possessions: O they are nothing to me in comparison of Jesus Christ?

Secondly, Art thou one that can say, I can be contented to beg with him, to
die with him, to die for him, to be under any reproach, or disgrace, to suffer
any loss, so I may but gain him for my Portion?

Thirdly, Art thou one that do study more conformity to him, as well as
Communion with him: desiring to be holy, as he is holy; to have his Image
stamped more and more upon thy Soul?

Fourthly, Art thou one that desire to be Ruled by him, as well as to be
Redeemed by him? O Lord, Rule in me as thou please, so I may be but thine; I
would be under thy Dominion, under thy Government; Lord, show me the way thou
would have me to walk in: Then know this for thy Comfort: it is a sign that
thou have a Spouse-like affection in thee to Jesus Christ, it is a token that
Christ is dear to thee, that Christ lies near thy Soul indeed; and know this
for thy Comfort, thou that prizest Christ here, thou shall enjoy him for thy
Portion to all Eternity hereafter, where he shall be Light to thine eyes, and
Music to thine ears, and Comfort to thy soul, unspeakable Comfort to thy
heart: and thou shall be satisfied with his fullness, when thou shall have thy
Soul bathed in those Rivers of pleasure that are at the right hand of God to
all Eternity. O that you would think of these things, and lay them up in your
hearts, and be careful to walk according to these Rules!

Consider what has been spoken, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

THE NECESSITY OF HUMILIATION,
ACTS XVI. 29, 30. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas;

And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?


THE Lord knows who are his, says the Apostle, (2 Timothy 2.19.) Namely, they
whom he has chosen to life Eternal; and when once God has set his Privy Seal
upon them, he will call them, and bring them home to himself, in what place
soever they be, though scattered amongst the Heathen: in what condition soever
they be; whether high, or low, rich or poor, learned or unlearned; nay, though
they be locked up under a Calling that may seem to be a bar from coming home to
God: You shall sometimes hear a man say, My calling hinders me from God and
Goodness; but I would say to such a one, if thou belongest to Christ, though
thy calling be never so base and unsuitable to God, and the ways of God, yet
thou shall be fetched home, and brought home to Jesus Christ at one time or
other: witness the Jailer here the Text speaks of, that had a calling bad
enough; for instead of professing Christ and his Gospel, he was a persecutor of
Christ and his People; a rough-hewen Fellow, that dealt hardly with these
precious Servants of Christ, beating them, and putting them in the inward
Prison, and made fast their feet in the Stocks, as you may read in the 24
verse; but Paul and Silas sang in Prison, verse 25. And take notice by the way,
That God can sometimes make a Prison a Palace to those that fear him. And as
they were praying, and singing Praises to God, the Lord shook the Prison where
they were: and with his shaking the Prison, he did shake the Jaylors heart; he
had an Earthquake within him, as well as without him: whereupon, being greatly
perplexed and amazed, the Text tells you here, He calls for a light, and sprang
in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them
out, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? So that this Text tells you,
and describes to you the Jaylors carriage when God first struck his heart, and
gave him a sight of himself, and of his sins: and in this carriage of the
Jailer, there are these three things very observable:

His Perplexity, his Courtesy, his Question: his Perplexity, in verse 29. His
Courtesy and Question, in verse 30.

First, His Perplexity, He called for a light, and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas. Secondly, His Courtesy; the
Text says, He brought them out. Thirdly, His Question; Sirs, What must I do to
be saved?
It is the first of these I principally aim at, namely, the Jaylors Perplexity,
Then he called for a light; darkness now was a terror to him, because he was a
terror to himself, He was a Magor Missabib, a terror round about, Jer. 20.3.
And he sprang in, that is, he rushed hastily into the Prison, and like a man
distracted, knew not what to do, nor which way to turn himself; he came
trembling, being stricken with inward horror, and terror of Conscience; and
pray observe it well: There is not the stoutest man breathing upon Earth, but
if God set his Conscience against him, like a Dog to fly in his face, it will
pull him down, and lay him flat, and fill him with that inward horror and
terror, and perplexity, that he will be more afraid of himself, than of all the
world besides. Thus it was with the Jailer here: when God came nigh him, and
awakened his conscience, he fell down before Paul and Silas; God had given him
a sight of his sins, and of the invisible Majesty of Christ, that was in those
his precious Servants Paul and Silas, whom before he looked upon as a couple of
Rogues, and that the Whip and the Stocks were good enough for them: but now he
reverenceth them, and respects them, and falls down at their feet. Thus you see
what his Perplexity was.

My purpose is not to insist upon every particular, but to pitch upon that
which is principally held forth in the words: observe therefore, when God was
about to work the great work of saving Faith, and sound Conversion in the heart
of this Jailer, and by Faith in Jesus Christ to bring him to Salvation, what is
the first thing that he does? First, he humbles him, and strikes him down, and
lays him flat, he does awaken and shake his conscience: this unbroken Sinner is
now amazed, and perplexed, and astonished, and he knows not which way to turn
himself. So then the observation I would commend to you from the words, is this:

Doct. Sound Humiliation is a necessary Antecedent, or Forerunner to Faith and
Salvation.

Would you have it plainer? then take it thus: Those whom God intends to make
true Believers, and Heirs of his Everlasting Kingdom: they are first soundly
humbled, and made sensible of their own dangerous and damnable condition.

Look as a Timber-tree, that a man intends for building, first he hews it down,
and then he fits it, and squares it for the building; so that Sinner whom God
intends to frame for himself, and build up by Faith to Salvation; God first
casts down to the ground, and lays him flat, and makes him sensible of his own
lost, and dangerous, and damnable estate: Look into the Scripture, and you
shall find that this is Gods Method, and Jesus Christ's, and the Holy Ghosts
Method.

First, This is Gods Method, and this course he took with our first Parents: he
arraigned them, and past a sentence upon them, and pronounced a curse against
them, before ever he brings them to the knowledge of a Savior, before ever he
made that Promise, that The seed of the woman should break the Serpents head.
Remarkable is that Scripture, Job 33.21, 22; it describes the manner of Gods
converting a Sinner, verse 14, God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives
it not. God calls, and cries, and knocks, and tries this way, and that way, and
the other way to bring the Sinner in, to bring him home by Conversion, but all
will not do; what does he then? Read verse 21, 22. God humbles the Sinner to
the very dust, His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his bones
that were not seen stick out: his soul draws near unto the Grave, and his
life to the destroyers. His meaning is this, He is made a very Anatomy, and God
brings him to the very gates of Hell: and what follows, Then he is gracious
unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a
ransom.

So this was the Method of Jesus Christ; this course he took with St. Paul
before he was converted: he unhorst him, and humbled him, and struck him blind;
and all this while St. Paul must steep himself in sorrow, before Ananias comes
to him, and speak words of comfort, Acts 9. Christ would have us weary and
heavy laden, Matthew. 11: weary with the work of sin, and heavy laden with the
weight of sin, before he will give us ease; he will have the Soul thirsty,
before he gives it the water of life, Isa 55, Ho, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters: that is, to be sensible of the want of Christ, and the
worth of Christ, before he gives the Soul to taste of the water of life; and he
will have the Soul sick of sin, before the Physician comes to it, The whole
have no need of a Physician, but they that are sick, Matthew. 9.12. He will have
the Sinner sick of his sin, before he will cure him.

And this is the Holy Ghosts Method too: for you shall read, the Spirit of God
first convinces of sin, before he convinces of righteousness, John 16.8.
First, The Spirit of God convinces of sin for humiliation, before he
convinces of righteousness for Justification.

And this has been the Method of all Masterbuilders. John Baptist he comes
levelling of Mountains, and casting down proud Sinners before they come to
Christ; and St. Peter, he pricked his Hearers to the heart, before he gave them
any hope or comfort by a Savior, Acts 2. He let them blood at the heart before
he directed them how to be saved. But now, because this is a weighty Truth, and
it may please God to do good to some of you all the days of your lives, to know
the Method and manner of bringing Jesus Christ and the Soul together (for this
is all the work we Ministers have to do); let me speak to it by way of
Explication, and show you three things.

First, What this Humiliation is? Secondly, Whether the like measure of
Humiliation be wrought in all that are brought home to Jesus Christ, or no?
Thirdly, Why God is pleased to take this course to fit men for Faith and
Salvation, thus first to humble them?
First, What this Humiliation is? Divines describe a twofold Humiliation: 1. A
Passive Humiliation. 2. An Active Humiliation.


The Passive humiliation, is that whereby God humbles the Sinner, in the first
work of his Conversion, and it is called A Passive Humiliation, because the
Sinner is wholly Passive, and does nothing at all conducing to his Conversion;
and of this the Text speaks of.

Secondly, There is An Active Humiliation; and this is that whereby a Sinner
humbles himself before God: of this you read 2 Chronicles. 12.7, They have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them. Now it is not this latter I am
to speak of: this, to speak properly, is nothing but the act of renewed
Repentance; but I am to speak of the first, namely, that whereby God in the
first work of Conversion lets a man see the need that he has of Jesus Christ,
and it may be thus described: Passive humiliation is a work of the Spirit of
God, whereby a poor Sinner being stricken with a sense of his sin, and fear of
wrath, does fly out of himself and closes with Jesus Christ; I say, It is a
work of the Spirit of God, because it is the Spirit that convinces of sin, and
by convincing of sin, he humbles the Soul; and hence it is the Spirit of God in
the first work of Conversion, is called the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15, For
ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Why is it called the spirit
of bondage? not because the Spirit of God brings the Soul into bondage: for the
Spirit of God is a free Spirit, Psalm 51.12, Uphold me with thy free Spirit;
and where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty. But he is called a Spirit of
bondage, because he discovers to us our bondage, and lets the Sinner see the
bondage and slavery wherein he is miserably captivated under sin and Satan. A
man, before the work of Conversion is wrought, thinks himself a Freeman; We
are Abraham's Seed, and were never in bondage to any, how say thou we shall
be made free? John 8.33. But now the Spirit of God comes, and lets a man see
himself in the glass of Gods Law, whereby he discovers sin to be out of measure
sinful; and it lets him see himself in the glass of Conscience, and so comes to
the Sinner, and says to him, just as Nathan did to David, Thou art the man;
thou art he that lies under the guilt of sin, and under the wrath of God, and
under the condemnation of the second death: therefore look to it. When the
Spirit of God lets a man see himself, and his bondage, and that state of woe and
misery in which he is, then he confesses he is in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity. Again, I say in the description of it, that the poor
Sinner is stricken with the sense of his sin, and with the fear of wrath.
Before a man is humbled, he is just like a man in a dead sleep, in a drunken
sleep: he hears not, he fears not, he feels not: like the Drunkard that Solomon
speaks of, Prove. 23.34, 35, Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the
midst of the Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast; they have
stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I
felt it not: when I shall awake, I will seek it yet again. But when once the
Spirit of God comes to strike the Sinner to the purpose: now sin is revived,
and Conscience awakened and convicted: as the Apostle Paul says, I was alive
once without the Law; alive in my own apprehension, alive without the spiritual
knowledge of the Law; but sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9. Then the Law showed
me I was but a dead man: O Conscience now began to be awakened, and convicted.
Sense of sin brings with it a fear of wrath: and hence it is, that the spirit
of bondage is called a Spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1.7, For God has not given us
the spirit of fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a sound mind. And this fear
does awaken a man, and leave some kind of impression upon the spirit of a man:
so that he is awakened, and looks out for help out of himself. Again, I say, A
Sinner thus stricken with the sense of his sin, flies out of himself, and flies
to Jesus Christ; That is, he despairs of all hope, and help in himself: I dare
say, he was never a true Believing Sinner, that was not a despairing Sinner:
understand me thus, There is a Religious desperation, as well as a
damning-desperation; I say, a Sinner that is stricken with the sense of his
sins, despairs of help in himself; this is an holy despair, whereby a man
renounceth all hope of help in himself, and flies to Jesus Christ. This is a
certain Rule, The less a man trusts in himself, the more he trusts in a
Savior. That Is the first thing, What this Humiliation is?

A second Question to be satisfied is this, Whether the like measure of
humiliation be wrought in all those that are brought home to Jesus Christ?

I answer, No; some have more, and some have less, according to the different
tempers of men's spirits: some men are more froward, and some are more
ingenious; those that are openly profane, stout, stubborn Sinners, they
usually have a great measure of humiliation: but now those that are more
flexible, have a less measure of humiliation; to the first, God comes like a
mighty rushing wind; to the second sort, he comes like a still wind, in a more
mild and melting way; sometimes God breaks in upon the Sinners heart with open
violence, as he did upon St. Paul, when he was smitten down to the ground, Acts
9. Sometimes again God opens the heart without any noise, as he did the heart
of Lydia, Acts 16. Sometimes God suffers a Sinner to lie long under the spirit
of bondage, those especially that he has appointed for some special use and
service to himself; as the Timber that is appointed for some special service,
lies long a soaking before it be made use of. Sometimes again, Sinners are set
free from Legal terrors suddenly; now this is the least measure of Humiliation,
wrought in those that are brought home to Jesus Christ, to make sin odious and
loathsome to a man, and to make a man fly out of himself to Jesus Christ. There
is a twofold Passive humiliation: 1. A Legal Humiliation. 2. An Evangelical
Humiliation.


The Legal humiliation, is that which consists in Legal terror, and fear of
wrath, and the sense of Gods wrath, and horror of Conscience, and fear of
Hellfire.

Secondly, There is an Evangelical humiliation, and that consists in the
operation of Gods blessed Spirit, convincing a man of sin; when the Spirit of
God convinces the Sinner, and by convincing him, empties him of himself; and
by emptying him, fits him for a Savior. Legal humiliation, (Pray mark) though
it makes a greater noise, yet it is not always absolutely needful for all
persons, which I prove thus: It is not a grace, because a man can never have
too much grace, and a man may have too much Legal humiliation. Again, some
Reprobates have had a great measure of Legal humiliation, and yet have
perished; and some that have been converted, have had but a little measue of
Legal humiliation, and yet have been saved. I say, Legal humiliation, though it
makes a great noise, is not absolutely needful: But Evangelical humiliation,
though ir makes a less noise, this is absolutely needful to every person:
because this drives a Sinner out of himself, and causes him to fly to Jesus
Christ in a mild and melting way, making him to look on him whom he has
pierced, and to mourn for his sin, as he that mourns for the loss of his only
Son that serves him.

The third thing to be opened, is this: But why does God take this course in
bringing men to Faith and Salvation? The reasons are these three: First, It is
Equal. Secondly, It is Fitting. Thirdly, It is Necessary.


First, It is Equal, because it is Gods way; and there is all the reason in the
World, that God should bring us to Heaven in his own way; that it is Gods way,
appears Isa. 61.1, 2, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me (says Jesus
Christ) because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek;
he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives: and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort
all that mourn. So you see they are to be comforted that mourn, and they are to
be bound up that are brokenhearted; so that, till a man be meek and humble,
and have a broken heart, he is out of Christ's Cnmmission to comfort; Christ
will say to such, I have nothing to do with thee, I am sent to those that are
meek, and humble, and brokenhearted, Luke 19.10. In Matthew. 18.11, The Son of
man came to seek, and to save that which was lost. -- Then (may some say) he
came to seek and to save all, for all were lost in Adam: but that is not the
meaning; but the meaning is, All that feel themselves lost: a man may be in a
lost condition, and yet never feel himself in a lost condition; but when a man
sees himself to be in a lost estate, and in a damned and undone condition
without Christ, Christ came to seek and to save such.

Secondly, It is Fitting that God should bring us to Faith and Salvation this
way: fitting, you will say, But how? In reference to God. In reference to Our
selves. In reference to Others.


First, In reference to God: because by this humiliation, the Justice of God is
acknowledged, and the Mercy of God is magnified: these are the two great
Attributes that God will have magnified in the conversion of a Sinner. The
Justice of God is acknowledged, when the Sinner falls down at the feet of God,
and says, Lord, against thee, against thee have I sinned, and done this evil
in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear
when thou judge, Psalm. 51.4. And the Mercy of God is wonderfully magnified,
when he hangs out a white Flag of Pardon, after all the Sinners rebellions and
provocations: O now, mercy is mercy indeed! As a King, when he is about to
pardon a Traitor, he suffers him to be brought to the place of Execution, to
have the Rope about his neck, and the Handkerchief drawn over his face: O how
welcome is a pardon then to that Traitor! So an humbled Sinner will say, Mercy
is mercy indeed, when he is convinced of his desperate, and undone estate and
condition.

Secondly, It is fitting in respect of our selves: that we may know our selves,
know the plague of our hearts, 1 Kings 8.38. God will have us to see and to
feel, that it is an evil and bitter thing, that we have sinned against him.
Jer. 2 19, Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back slidings shall
reprove thee; know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing, and bitter,
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee,
says the Lord God of Hosts. God would have the Sinner see his polution, and to
cry out with the Leper under the Law: I am unclean, I am unclean, Levit. 13.45.
As Miriam for her miscarriage toward Moses, was smitten with a Leprosy; Moses
cried to the Lord to heal her; No, stay, says God; If her Father had but spit
in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? She must know her self
before she be healed, Numb. 12.10, 13, 14.

Thirdly, It is fitting in respect of Others: that they may not speak
reproachfully of God, and the ways of God. If so be a Sinner could instantly
step out of an Alehouse to Christ, or out of a Whorehouse to Christ; if there
were no more required to get to Christ, than the putting of meat out of one
Dish into another, carnal men would be ready to have very low thoughts of God,
that he is such a one as themselves, that he does patronize and approve their
wicked courses: but God will have the mouth of iniquity stopped, and carnal men
themselves acknowledge, that the ways of God are equal.

Thirdly, It is necessary that the Soul be humbled; I shall give you these five
Reasons of the necessity of it:

First, Because without this humiliation, the Sinner can never highly prize
God. To an unhumbled Sinner, Christ is no more esteemed (with reverence be it
spoken) than the dirt under his feet, Acts 4.11, This is the stone which was
set at naught by you Builders: they made no reckoning of Christ at all. Tell an
unhumbled Sinner of Justification, of Sanctification, of Adoption, of the hope
of Glory, and the like: he makes no more reckoning of them, than the children
of Israel did of the Manna, who loathed it: but now when a Sinner is smitten
with the sense of sin, and fear of wrath, and knows the burden of guilt upon
his Conscience, now Christ is Christ indeed; and he looks upon him with an
admiring eye, and cries out, O the dignity of his Person! the preciousness of
his Blood! the value of his Merits! the efficacy of his Intercession! the
comforts of his Spirit! Oh the comforts and excellencies that are in this sweet
and precious Savior! My Beloved (says such a Soul) is the choicest of ten
thousand. The poor (says our Savior) receive the Gospel; that is, those that
are poor in Spirit, they like the wise Merchant, will be contented to sell all
to buy him who is the Pearl of invaluable Price; an humbled Sinner will say,
Give me Christ though I have a Cross with him, though I have a Prison with him;
nay, though I die with him, though I die for him.

Secondly, Without humiliation, the Sinner can never duly and diligently seek
Christ. You know, The Law is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal.
3.24. The truth is, the Soul will never run to Christ to the purpose, until he
be whipped by this Schoolmaster. You know the story of the City of Refuge; the
Manslayer never fled thither, until the Avenger of blood pursued him. The City
of Refuge is Jesus Christ, and the Sinner never flies to Jesus Christ to
purpose, until the vengeance of a sin-revengieg God, and the curse of a
condemning Law, and the horror of a self-accusing Conscience, pursue the Soul
like a chased Deer; now it flies to Jesus Christ to purpose.

Thirdly, Without humiliation the Sinner will never obey Christ; an unbroken
Sinner is like an unbroken Colt that is not tamed, or like an unbroken Heifer
that will not submit to the yoke: Jesus Christ may command what he will, but he
will do what he list. But when a Sinner comes to be humbled and unhors'd, as
St. Paul was, then he says, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Though it be
never so cross to my carnal and corrupt Nature, yet I will do it. Before the
Sinner is humbled, he is ever complaining of the unkindness of Gods dealing
with him; but after he is humbled, he is ever complaining how unkindly he deals
with God. As all disobedience springs from pride, so all obedience springs from
humility.

Fourthly, Without humiliation the Sinner will never constantly cleave to Jesus
Christ. There are many that seemingly close with Christ for a while, just like
those that rejoiced in John Baptists Doctrine for a while, John 5.35, He was a
burning and a shining light, and ye were willing to rejoice in his light for a
season. And you read of some that followed Christ for a while, but they were
offended, and went back, and walked no more with him, John 6.66. There are many
Professors just like the Corn cast into the second ground in the Parable: It
sprang up for a while, but in time of temptation it withered; why? because it
wanted root: and why did it not root? because the Plough of humiliation went
not deep enough: so there are many Professors that prove Apostates, and
disloyal to the Lord Jesus Christ; but what is the reason? because they were
never thoroughly humbled; they are weary of Christ's yoke, because ehey never
felt the burden of the Devils yoke, and of sins yoke: that Soul that has felt
the burden of Satan's yoke, will say, that Christ's yoke is a sweet and easy
yoke; they that are truly humbled, will never forsake Christ, but will cling
and cleave to him, as a ship-wrack'd Mariner does to a Rock: he will not part
with it, because he knows it is for his life.

Fifthly, This humiliation is necessary, because without it we can never be
conformable to Christ; for Christ was first humbled before he was exalted; He
drank of the brook in the way, before he lift up his head, Psalm 110.7. Thus
you have the Doctrine opened, now let us see what Application we can make of
this Point; and the Uses are but two: the one of Instruction, and the other of
Exhortation. I shall give you two Instructions, and two Exhortations.

The first Instruction or Lesson by way of Inference, is this: If sound
humiliation be such a necessary Antecedent to Faith and Salvation, then it
justifies the practice of those Ministers, that take this course in convincing,
and humbling, and wounding, and awakening sleepy Sinners: you see what we
Ministers may do; nay, you see what we must do if with care and conscience we
would discharge our duty: we must sometimes thunder and lighten, as St. Paul
did when he made Felix to tremble, Acts 24.25. We must strike the Sinners heart
with an Arrow of Conviction, as the Arrow that was shot at Ahab, entered in at
the joints of his Armor, and pierced his heart, 1 Kings 22.34. We must hedge in
the Sinner with inevitable Conviction, and meet him with a drawn Sword, as the
Angel did Balaam, Numb. 22.23. We must sometimes knock at the door of their
hearts, and say to them, O thou unregenerate man, I have sad news to tell thee!
Thou can never, so long as thou art in this condition, see the face of God
with comfort, or enter into his Kingdom; thou may see the face of God indeed,
but it will be with frowns in his Forehead, and indignation in his Countenance
to thee, when he shall sentence thee to that (...), that blackness of darkness
for ever, Jude 13. O Drunkard, I have sad news to tell thee! Thou must drink of
the Cup of Gods wrath and indignation, which will cause thee to spew and fall,
and never rise again. O Swearer, I have sad news to tell thee! That the wrath
of God is like a flying Roll, hangs over the house of ever Swearer, Zech. 5. O
ignorant and disobedient Sinner, I have sad news to tell thee, Jesus Christ
will come in flames of fire to take vengeance on them that know him not, and
obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. In a word, we must take any course to
awaken Sinners out of their sloth and security.

Two sorts of persons there are that oppose this kind of Preaching: but most do
not love it, but dislike it.

First, the openly profane and scandalous Sinner, that would fain sleep in
sin, and go to Hell in a slumber: and therefore he looks upon such awakening
Sermons, as tormenting Sermons, Rev. 11.10, The two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt upon the Earth. Oh this convincing, quickening and awakening
Doctrine, this is but a torment to many carnal men: who cry out, What ado is
there with these Ministers? they will not let me be quiet, they torment me
before my time. Ah poor wretch! Art thou afraid to be tormented before thy
time? and art thou not afraid to be tormented time without end? There are some
Beasts so furious, that there is nothing but the fire will tame them: so there
are some men so brutish that they are mad upon their evil ways: as it is said
of the Chaldeans, They are mad upon their Idols, Jer. 50.38. So, some are mad
upon sinful ways and courses, that a Minister must spit fire in their faces to
rouse them out of their security and spiritual Lethargy: Art thou angry with a
Minister, who in tender compassion to thy Soul, would pluck thy Soul as a
firebrand out of the fire, and save it from eternal misery and burnings? if one
of you have a leg broken, you will send for a Chyrurgion to set it, and you
will be contented that he shall put you to great pain for the recovering of
your Limb, and restoring you to your former state again; and will you not allow
your Ministers to put you to some pain, and grief, and trouble, for the
recovering of your Souls from that wound and breach that sin has made upon you?

A second sort that oppose convincing Preaching, are Antinomians, that tell us
there is no use of the Law under the Gospel: and that Ministers must preach
nothing but Christ, and Grace, and Peace, and Comfort, and Mercy, and lead men
to Heaven in a mild, and meek, and gentle way.

To this I Reply: What, would you have us apply a Plaster where there is no
sore? Would you have us apply a Cordial where they are not sick? Would you have
us pour in the Oil, where there is no wound? God himself pours not in the Oil
of Mercy, but into a broken Vessel, Isa. 61.1. The Lord knows, we delight not
in preaching any terrible Doctrines to you, if you were but fitted for mercy;
but if you are not fitted for Mercy, then, as the pricking Needle makes way for
the sewing of the Cloth together: so this kind of Preaching, convincing, and
humbling the Sinner, makes way for the bringing of Christ and the Soul
together: and therefore you may well bear with it.

A second Instruction that we may learn from hence, is this: It serves to let
us see what the reason is, that there are so few Believers, so few converted
and convinced; O, Ministers cannot speak of this scarce without watery eyes.
Truly heretofore, three thousand were converted at one Sermon: but now there is
scarce one that is converted with three thousand Sermons. O whence is it that
the work of Conversion is almost at an end in England, in London? It is rare to
hear of a Soul converted; we hear of many that are perverted, that are led into
bypath of Error, and Heresy, and Blasphemy, and Schism, but it is a rare
matter to hear of one converted; they are but few that see the need they have
of Christ; that prize him, that believe in him, that obey him, that constantly
cleave to him: but most men are very well contented to be in a natural
condition, they are secure and quiet without Christ; but what is the Reason?
Because they do not see the need they have of Christ; for if they did but see
the need they have of him, they would say, They may better want light, than
want Jesus Christ, who is the Light, and by whom they may have the Light of
Life, John 8.12: They may better want Bread for their bodies, than the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the bread and spiritual food of the Soul: I am the Bread
of Life, John 6. If they did but see the need they have of him, doubtless they
would close with him: but why do not they see the need that they have of him?
The Reason is, Because they are not humbled, they were never yet stricken with
the sense of sin, they never yet saw the inside of themselves: they never with
the Jailer in the Text, were afrighted, amazed, stricken down in the sense of
sin. Oh, this is the misery of all miseries, which Ministers have most cause to
complain of, that men are not fitted enough for Jesus Christ; they are not lost
enough in themselves for a Savior, Hos. 14.3, With thee the fatherless find
mercy. Were we more hopeless, helpless and fatherless, we should find more
mercy from the hand of Jesus Christ. O that God would awaken and shake some
sin-sleeping Soul this day. Oh that this Doctrine thus opened, might be as a
Thunderbolt to let some of you see the inside of your selves. O poor Sinner,
thou have an insupportable burden of sin and guilt lying on thy Soul, ready to
press thee down to Hell, and yet thou feel it not; thou have the wrath of
God hanging over thy head by the twined thread of a short life, which it may be
thou may not be free from one year: nay, perhaps not one month, but thou
see it not; if thou did but see it, then thou would cry out as he did in
Bosworth field, A Horse, a Horse, a Kingdom for a Horse; so thou would cry
out, None but Christ, nothing but Christ, ten thousand Worlds for Christ.

The second Use of Exhortation; And I have but two Exhortations to tender to
you:

First, I beseech you, and exhort you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
(whose poor Messenger I am) that you would labor to be convinced of the
necessity of humiliation; believe it, be persuaded of it, be convinced of it,
that thou must be broken, if ever thou would have Jesus Christ to bind thee
up; thou must be sick of sin, if ever thou would have Jesus Christ to heal
thee; thou must be dejected and cast down, if ever thou would have Jesus
Christ to comfort thee; if God therefore do not open thine eyes, and awaken thy
Conscience, and touch thy heart, I do pronounce against thee, that there is no
Christ, no Heaven, no Pardon, no Peace, no Comfort, no Salvation for thee. Oh
the miserable, deplorable condition of all you that were never yet humbled, you
that never yet were convinced of sin, you that never tasted the bitterness of
sin, you that never felt the burden of sin, that never yet complained with the
Apostle, Romans 7, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? Some derive the word from a man that is troubled with the stone
in the bladder, O wretched man that I am! O miserable is the condition that you
are in: you that never yet felt sin to be sin, that have not felt the burden of
it, nor tasted the bitterness of it, you are not fit to come to Jesus Christ;
you are out of his Commission; for he is sent to the humble and broken hearted
Sinner, Isa. 61. It may be thou know what sin is, and Christ is, and Grace
is, notionally; but there is a great deal of difference between knowing and
inward feeling: wretched was thy condition if thou did but feel it; but a
thousand times more wretched it is, because thou feel it not.

My second Exhortation to you, is this: If so be sound humiliation be a
necessary Antecedent to Faith and Salvation; then use the utmost of your
endeavors, that you may be humbled, broken, and bruised Sinners, that you may
be put into a capacity to close with a Savior. Now because I know this is but
a harsh Exhortation; give me leave to sweeten it with these three
Considerations:

First, Remember that the promises of Grace and Mercy are made to all humbled
Sinners, Levit. 26.41, If then their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and
they accept of the punishment of their iniquities; then will I remember my
Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac; and also my Covenant with
Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the Land.

Secondly, Consider, God never looks with so much mercy and compassion on any,
as those that are most humbled, Jer. 31.18, 20, When Ephraim bemoaned himself
thus: Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the yoke: I have been proud, and stout, and stubborn under all thy Rods: Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned. Surely after I was turned, I repented; after I
was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded. Now
in the 20 verse, you have God bemoaning Ephraim; Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he
a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord.

Thirdly, Do but consider, That this is the ordinary way that God leads men to
mercy by; God usually condemns before he justifies, he breaks before he binds
up, he pulls down before he builds: There is a time to pull down, and a time to
build up, Eccles. 3. That may be applied to this purpose: This is, I say, Gods
ordinary way; and would you have him to go out of his usual course and way? If
one of you should say to your Neighbor, Let me come in at your window, or
break down your wall, and then I will come in and visit you: what answer (think
you) would he make? If you do not come in at the door, the ordinary way, do not
come in to me.

I, but some may say, What will you have us to do? Are we able to humble our
selves? True indeed, when God has first humbled us, then we are able to humble
our selves; but you told us even now, In the first work of Conversion, we are
merely Passive, we can do nothing toward our humiliation, it is the work of
the Spirit of God; you have now preached Free Will to us?

To this I answer: True indeed, in a state of Nature, we can do nothing that
may please God, we cannot set one foot forwards in the way to Heaven; but yet
let me tell you, There is never an unconverted Sinner but may do a great deal
more than he does, therefore I put you upon doing no more than you your selves
can do, and that in these five Particulars: which I shall speak a little to,
and then have done.

First, Though you cannot humble your selves in a state of unregeneracy, yet
you may suffer another to do it for you, you may suffer it to be done. A man,
for example, that is to be cut of the stone, though he cannot cut himself, he
may suffer another to cut him; so a man that is sick of this desperate stony
disease, of the stone in the heart, though he cannot take it away himself, he
may suffer it to be done; when the Word of God ploughs up the Fallow-ground of
your hearts, you may hold up the Plough, Heb. 13.22. You may suffer the Word of
Exhortation which is tendered to you; when God wounds you by the Word, you may
keep the wound open: Carnal men, when the Word has wounded them, they lick
themselves whole by carnal counsels, and carnal company, and carnal reasonings;
O what a stir do men make to shake out the Arrow of Conviction, resisting the
Spirit of God that is stirring in the Ministry of the Word upon their hearts!
how many are there that come in Armor to Church? they come in their Coat of
Male! how many harden their necks, that the Word cannot pierce them! Now this
you must not do: you must suffer the Word to rifle and ransack your hearts: Let
the Word smite you, as he said, Psalm 141.5, Let the Righteous smite me: Let the
Word break my head, or heart, so it may but work upon my Soul. When God rouzeth
you, suppose in any sickness or cutting-cross, you may join with God in rouzing
your selves: when God smites you, may not you smite upon your thighs as
Ephraim did, and say, I am ashamed; yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth? Jer. 31. In a word, when God humbles you, may not you
humble your selves? therefore in tire fear of the Lord, resolve to wait upon an
awakning searching, Soul-piercing Ministry, and bless God for that Sermon that
stabs sin at the heart: bless God for that Ministry that speaks most to thy
Conscience; you may suffer such a thing to be done, though usually such a
Ministry is looked upon as a Bugbear, who preaches nothing but fire and
wrath, and vengeance, and damnation. O blessed is that Word that wounds
corruption, says the Soul. I have hewed them by my Prophets, and slain them by
the words of my mouth, Hos. 6.5. God would have his Word a saving Word.

Secondly, There is never a one of you but can ponder and weigh things in your
thoughts, that you can do; For example, If you have a good price proffered for
such a Commodity, or such a bargain propounded to you, or such a match for your
Daughters, you can weigh it, and consider it, you can consider which is the
best Commodity, and which is the best Match; so here, when the world comes and
offers you present pay, if you will but part with the peace of a good
Conscience, and comply and swim with the stream, you shall never see the inside
of a Prison: you may have this Office, and that Office, this Preferment, and
that Preferment: but now says Jesus Christ, Do but keep thy integrity, do but
keep a good Conscience, though thou suffer imprisonment, the loss of all
things, thou shall never lose by it; for, for temporal loss, thou shall have
everlasting gain, the Kingdom of Heaven; now you can ponder and weigh things in
your minds: you can consider whether it is best to enjoy the World for a while,
to be free from Prisons and troubles, so as to part with the peace of a good
Conscience, and lose God for ever; or whether it is best to endure troubles, to
enjoy God and the peace of a good Conscience, and to enjoy an Eternity of
Blessedness; it is better to endure a thousand Prisons, than to lose the peace
of a good Conscience, and the favor of God; this, upon your considering and
pondering, you will conclude: for the Devil he offers the pleasures of sin that
are but for a season: but says Jesus Christ, You shall have pleasures at my
right hand for evermore; no man in his wits but would say, it is better to have
the pleasures that are at Gods right hand for ever, than the pleasures of sin,
which it may be I may not enjoy one year, not one month, not one day. So
likewise, there is none of you but can consider where you will lie when you are
dead; O says one, I will lie in such a Church, or in such a Church yard; and
cannot you consider, O but where shall my Soul lie? shall the Angels carry it
into Abraham's bosom? or shall the Devils carry it into darkness, that blackness
of darkness for ever? Jude 13. And you can meditate on the things that concern
this life; every one can ponder on the things that concern his own temporal
estate and concernment; and certainly, you may as well meditate upon the things
that concern a future life: you may meditate on the joys of Heaven, and on the
sorrows and torments of Hell, and the precious blood of Jesus Christ. There is
a story of a man that read in a Book every day that had three Leaves: a white
leaf, a red leaf, a black leaf; the white leaf of the Book, that was the joys
of Heaven; the red leaf, that was the blood of Jesus Christ; the black leaf,
that was the torments of Hell. You may look into Hell by contemplation and
meditation, that you may prevent Hell to all Eternity; you may meditate upon
the blood of Christ, and steep as it were your souls in it by meditation, it
may be it may soften them. It is said of the Goats blood, when nothing can
soften an Adamant, the blood of Goats can; the blood of Christ, that can soften
your hard hearts, when nothing else can.

Thirdly, A third thing you can do, you can sorrow more, and mourn more than
you do; there is none of you but can sorrow and mourn for outward losses: loss
of Friends, as Husband and Wife, or Child, perhaps for the loss of a Horse;
what can thou mourn for the loss of a Child, and can thou not mourn for the
loss of a Soul, when one Soul is worth all the Kingdoms in the World? If any of
you have lost a good Bargain, or mist a good Market, you can grieve for this; O
methinks you should mourn for this, how many Market days have I lost for my
Soul? I have burnt out many a precious light, and spent out my precious time;
and can you not mourn for the loss of such a Bargain as this is? Suppose one of
you should be sent for before a mighty Monarch, and should be impeached of high
Treason before him; how would you tremble to appear before so mighty a King,
that has power in his hands to cut you off instantly! O you and I must appear
before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, that knows all
the sins and Treasons that ever we have committed; and you should bless God if
you are cast into fear, and thereby be brought to mourn, and grieve, and sorrow
for your sins, Job 23.16, For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty
troubles me; that is, soft by troubling of me.

Fourthly, There is never a one of you but may leave gross and scandalous sins,
which I prove thus: you can do it for fear of men, and you may do it much more
for fear of God. A profane Swearer, if he be in the company of a Godly grave
Minister. he can refrain his mouth from vile talk: he can forbear his Oaths,
and blasphemous Speeches, and obscene expressions. An Adulterer, if a boy be
but in the Room of seven years old, he will forbear to act his uncleanness,
until the boy be out of the Room. If you can forbear gross sins for fear of
men, much more can you do it for fear of God. If a boy can say his Lesson with
a Rod, certainly he can do it without a Rod: if you can abstain from gross sins
for fear, certainly you can do it without. You read of the hypocritical
Pharisee, he abstained from gross sins, Luke 18, God, I thank thee (says he) I
am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc.

Fifthly, Though it is true, a man in a state of Nature, is dead in trespasses
and sin: yet then, at that time he may do many good works, works morally good,
works materially good: he may fast, and pray, and give Alms; therefore it is
that Daniel speaks to Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.27. Certainly the Prophet
Daniel would never have spoken so to him, if it had not been in his power to do
it. The Apostle speaking of the Gentiles, though they wanted the knowledge of
the Law, and had not the Law, (says he) Yet they did by Nature the things
contained in the Law, they were a Law to themselves, which shows that the works
of the Law are written in their hearts, Romans 2.13, 14. They that are in an
unregenerate estate, they may pray, they may make Conscience of praying in
their Families; though they cannot pray as they should, yet they may pray as
they are able: they may fall down at the feet of God, and say, Lord, I am a
poor sinful wretch, I cannot please thee, praying, or not praying; thou have
promised to give the spirit of prayer to them that ask it, Luke 11.13, If ye
then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Say, Lord
give me thy Spirit to break my hard heart: take any way with me, so my proud
heart may be humbled, and hard heart broken, that I may welcome Jesus Christ to
my Soul, that I may believe in him, and cast my Soul upon him. So that Beloved,
I put you upon no more than you are able to do: you may suffer the word of
Exhortation, you can ponder and weigh the Word in your own hearts, you may
sorrow and mourn for sin: you may abstain from gross sins, and you may do those
works that are morally good: do what you can do; men are not damned because
they can do no better, but because they will do no better, Matthew. 23, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, I would have gathered thee as a Hen her Chickens under
her wings, but ye would not. If there were no will, there would be no Hell,
says St. Austin. Do what you can, set upon works of Holiness and Piety: strive
and put forth your strength to the uttermost endeavor of your Souls, to get
your hearts humbled, to see sin, and to sigh for it, to grieve and groan for
it; lay your conditions to heart, be feelingly apprehensive of that wrath that
sin has kindled, of that Justice that sin has provoked, of that Mercy that
sin has abused, of that vengeance and anger that sin has deserved to be
inflicted. O were we but thus humbled, we should have cause to bless God to all
Eternity. I shall close with one word to those that have been under a spirit of
bondage, that have been convinced, awakened as this Jailer was, that have had
their broken bones, that have felt the burden of sin, and it may be lie under
that burden at this day: O be you comforted, its better to be broken here, than
hereafter; it is better to be convinced here than convinced hereafter; it is
better to be humbled here, than for God to humble the Soul in Hell to all
Eternity; God will make thy Valley of Achor, a Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15. Thou
that art humbled now, shall be exalted: and thou that mournest now, shall be
comforted.

CHRIST THE Bread of Life.
John VI. 35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life; he that comes
unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst.


THis Chapter contains in it that admirable and Heavenly Sermon of our Savior,
concerning the Bread of Life; wherein you may take notice of three parts:
First, The occasion of this Sermon, that was the Peoples following of him,
because they did eat of the Loaves, and were filled, Verse 26. Secondly, The
Sermon it self: and that is from verse. 27, to ver. 59. Thirdly, You have the
issue or consequence of the Sermon: some believed, and some revolted: some
murmured, and some marvelled.


The Text that I have now read unto you, is part of the Sermon it self, wherein
our Lord and Savior, because of the stupidity and incredulity of his Auditors,
does again and again, both press and prove this Heavenly Doctrine, that he
himself was the Bread of Life; I am (says he) the Bread of Life: he that comes
to me shall not hunger, and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. In
which Text, you may take notice of these two parts: First, An undeniable
Proposition, I am the Bread of Life. Secondly, A comfortable Inference upon
that Proposition, He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me shall nevtr thirst.


I shall begin with the first, the evident and undeniable Proposition, I am the
Bread of Life: which words must not be understood literally, as if our Savior
was such Corporal Bread as could be chewed in the mouth, and digested in the
stomach, as the Capernaites did fondly conceive, when they said, How can this
man give us his flesh to eat? this was as gross a conceit, as Nicodemus's, who
asked, If he should go into his Mothers womb again, and be born. But the words
must be understood in a Metaphorical sense; That as Bread strengthens the body,
and revives the spirit, and supports the nature of a man, and enables him to
perform natural actions with more vigor and vivacity; so likewise the Lord
Jesus Christ strengthens the Soul, and revives the spirit, and supports us in
our spiritual life, and helps us to perform spiritual duties in a spiritual
manner: therefore he says, I am the Bread of Life. He is not only bread, but
the bread of life, because it is he that gives us spiritual life here, and
preserves that life, and will hereafter give to us Eternal lise in Glory; and
therefore he is called The Bread of Life. So then the Doctrine I would commend
to you from hence, is this:

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ is that living bread, that gives Spiritual and
Eternal life to all those that have a part and interest in him.

This is a Truth so unquestionable, that it is no less than six times repeated
in this one Chapter: And for the better Confirmation of it, it may be demanded:
First, Wherein does our Savior resemble bread? Secondly, And how does it
appear that our Savior is better than bread?


I shall speak briefly to them both:

First, Wherein does our Savior resemble bread? I will name but three
particulars, though I know more might be reckoned up.

First, Bread you know it is prepared food: the Corn must be threshed, and
winnowed, and ground in a Mill, and baked in an Oven, before it can be bread
for us to eat. So the Lord Jesus Christ, he was threshed, as I may say, by
afflictions and tribulations, He was a man of sorrows: and he was winnowed by
temptations: he was baked, and scorched, as it were, in the Oven of his Fathers
wrath: for, it was he that trod the Winepress of his Fathers wrath alone for
us; and all this was done before he could be made fit Bread, that is a fit
Savior for our Souls.

Secondly, Bread you hnow it is common food, it is common to the poor, as well
as to the rich; for the foolish, as well as the wise; the poor have bread if
they have any thing; so the Lord Jesus Christ he is a common Savior, common
for all ranks and conditions of men; for high and low, and rich and poor, noble
and ignoble; all are beholding to Jesus Christ here: There is neither Greek,
nor Jew, Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free,
but Christ is all and in all, Col. 3.11.

Thirdly, Bread you know it is the principal food, it is the stay and support
of a man's life, therefore it is called The staff of bread, Isa. 3.1. So the
Lord Jesus Christ he is the principal portion of the Souls of all Believers: He
is the choicest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. We may better want any thing than
bread: The Lord Jesus Christ is as I may say, not only the food of our Souls,
but the Soul of our Souls, and the Life of our Lives.

Secondly, It may be demanded: But wherein does Jesus Christ excel this
corporal bread? I answer in these four respects:

First, Corporal bread, though it does help to preserve life, yet it cannot
give life; but now the Lord Jesus Christ is he that gives spiritual Life; he
begins it, and begets it in his People, Ephesians. 2.1, You has he quickened who
were dead in trespasses and sins. And hence it is that the Lord Jesus Christ is
called the second Adam: The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the last
Adam was made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. And in John 5.21, For as the
Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom
be will.

Secondly, Bread does satisfy but one appetite, namely, hunger; never was it
known that bread could satisfy thirst: but now the Lord Jesus Christ he can
satisfy all the desires of the Soul, and supply all the wants of the Soul, he
is both the bread of life, and the water of life: nay, not only bread and
water, but he is clothing to the Soul; as it is in Romans 13. ult. Put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ; So that he is both Food and Spiritual Clothing.

Thirdly, Bread, though it satisfy your hunger for the present, yet it cannot
so take away your hunger that you shall hunger no more; if it satisfy hunger
to day, you will be hungry again to morrow. But now the Lord Jesus Christ does
so satisfy the hunger of our Souls, that we shall never hunger nor thirst
more: for so the Text tells you, He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me shall never thirst.

Fourthly, Corporal bread you know is perishing, and does but nourish a
perishing life, John 6.27, Labor not for the meat that perishes. But now the
Lord Jesus Christ is not perishing bread, but that bread that endures for ever;
and that life that he gives, is not a perishing life neither, John 6.51, I am
the living bread which came down from Heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever; and the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world. So you see the Point opened. Let me briefly
apply it, because I principally aim at the second part of the Text, the
comfortable-Inference. But for the improvement of this Point:

First, By way of Information; and then by way of Exhortation.

First, By way of Information: there are three Doctrinal Inferences from the
Point thus opened, that may be thence deduced:

First, If the Lord Jesus Christ be that living bread that gives Spiritual and
Eternal life to them that believe in him, then you may learn this Lesson, That
such, and so great is the indispensable need that we have of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that without him we are undone for ever. In the 53d verse of this
exeellent Chapter: Verily, verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. He speaks there
of eating of his flesh, and drinking his blood, in a spiritual manner. You know
there are many desires of the Soul that may be dispensed with, but hunger is a
desire that must be satisfied; unless you have bread for your sustenance, the
body dies: so unless you have Jesus Christ for your spiritual sustenance, your
Souls die, and drop down into Hell for ever: for, look as the union of the Body
with the Soul, is the life of the Body; so the union of the Soul with Jesus
Christ, is the life of the Soul. O hearken to this, thou that art yet in a
natural and unregenerate estate, uncalled, unconverted, that never was yet
transplanted from off the old rotten stock of Adam, and replanted into the true
Vine, the Lord Jesus Christ; if thou live in this estate, and die in this
estate, thou art undone for ever; the poorest worm that crawls upon the ground,
is in a better condition than thou art in, Acts 26.27, Believe thou the
Prophets? (said St. Paul to King Agrippa) I know that thou believe. Believe
thou this Doctrine? say I to thee, that art yet uncalled, unconverted, I know
thou believe it not: for, if thou did believe it, thou could not rest
contented in a Christless condition for one week, no, not for one day: but
would by prayers and tears, and supplications, cry out, Lord Jesus give me
thy self, whatever thou denyest me: give me thy self, though I be as poor as
Job upon the Dunghill. But we cannot persuade men that the danger of a natural
estate and condition is so great as indeed it is; but the Lord convince you and
persuade you of it.

A second Doctrinal Inference that may be hence deduced, is this: If Jesus
Christ be the living bread, then it follows, the vanity and emptiness, and
insufficiency of all Creature-accommodations is exceeding great: name what you
will of these outward accommodations that the World do so greedily gape after:
whether Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures, or goodly brave Buildings, this and
that: alas, we may say of them, they are not bread, Isa. 55.2, Wherefore do you
spend your money for that which is not bread? Your money, that is, your
precious opportunities: your time, that is your money to make your Markets for
Eternity with, for Moments are the Markets for Eternity; Wherefore do you spend
your money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Alas, alas, these outward things they are neither satisfactory,
nor permanent: they are not satisfactory: for Solomon tells us, that He that
loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase, Eccles. 5.10. As soom may you hope to fill a Chest
with Wisdom and Knowledge, as to fill a Soul, which is a spiritual substance,
with temporal things. And as these outward things are are satisfactory, so
neither are they permanent or lasting, 1 Cor. 6.13, Meats for the belly, and
the belly for meats, but God shall deslroy both it and them. Look as the belly
devours the meat, so the worms at last shall devour the belly, and so both meat
and belly perish together. But if you can but once get this spiritual bread,
the Lord Christ, you shall never perish. Alas, alas, consider your own folly
and brutishness, in seeking for satisfaction here below, where none is to be
found: your bread without Christ, is but gravel in your throats; your moral
Virtues without Christ, are but glittering sins: your bodies without Christ,
are but dust and ashes: dust that will drop down into the Grave, and ashes that
are fitted for the Furnace of Hellfire; your Souls without Christ, are but the
Devils Palace: your lives without Christ, is but the service of sin; and your
deaths without Christ, will be nothing else but the wages of sin. Oh, who would
rest then in a Christless condition! Who would sit down contented with these
poor, transitory, shadowy comforts!

A third Lesson we may learn by way of Inference, is this: If Jesus Christ be
the living bread, then our main end and errand in coming to the Lords Table, is
not to feed the Body, but to feed the Soul, 1 Cor. 11.21, What, have you not
Houses to eat and to drink in? says the Apostle. So that it is not the end of
your coming to the Lords Table, therefore you eat but a little piece of Bread,
and drink but a little draught of Wine, to put you in mind that it is not the
Body that you come to feed, but you come to feed the Soul; and therefore you
should labor to get a preparation suitable to that spiritual bread that you
are to taste of; But what is that? you will say. I answer, There should be
something done before your coming, and something done in the Administration of
the Elements, and something done after the receiving of the Elements.

First, There should be something done before you come: Oh beg a blessing upon
your spiritual bread; Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God, Matthew. 4.4. I may apply it thus: Your Souls
will not live by this Sacramental Bread, but by the Word of Gods blessing; If
God will bless this spiritual food to you, your Souls shall live. On therefore
beg the Blessing of God upon this Heavenly Bread.

Secondly, And then there is something to be done while you are eating this
Bread; you should get your hearts all on fire with love to this blessed
Redeemer that was contented to be made bread, to be prepared food, as I told
you even now: to be threshed, and winnowed, and ground, and baked, and scorched
in the Oven of his Fathers Wrath; Oh, how should your hearts be all on a flame
with Love, as the two Disciples were, going to Emaus; As Jesus Christ brake
bread, and gave it to them, and opened to them the Scriptures, their hearts did
burn within them, (Luke 24.32.) they were as it were all on a fire. So should
it be with you when you come to the Lords Table: you should have your
meditations wholly taken up with that which is the life of the Sacrament, even
the death of our Savior; let not your hearts be roving, and wandering about,
watch them narrowly: you will hardly keep them close to a duty two Minutes
without great watching.

Thirdly, There is something to be done after, when you have eaten of this
living bread: that is, to be exceeding thankful: study to walk worthy of the
Lord unto all well-pleasing. That Is the first Use, of Information.

The second Use is of Exhortation. Is Jesus Christ that living bread that gives
eternal life to all those that have a part and interest in him? Then let my
counsel be accepted with you: give no rest to your Eyes, no satisfaction to
your Souls in any condition, with any portion or privilege whatsoever, until
you have gotten this bread, until you have gotten Jesus Christ to be your
portion, to be the food of your Souls. That which Solomon speaks of Wisdom,
Prove. 4.7, Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom; and with all
thy gettings, get understanding. So say I, this is the principal Bread:
therefore get Christ, and above all thy gettings, get Christ. I, but may be you
will say, How shall we get him? I answer,

First, You must highly prize him, esteeming all things but dross in comparison
of him: you must esteem all outward things but as Dogs meat in comparison of
that bread which is in your Fathers House.

Secondly, You must earnestly beg him; you must pray as the Capernaites did,
Lord, evermore give us this bread, ver. 34, of this Chapter.

Thirdly, You must labor for him; Labor not for that meat that perishes, but
for that bread hat endures to eternal life, John 6.27. But how must we labor
for him? You must labor for him in the use of his Ordinances: as Praying,
Reading, Hearing, Communicating at the Lords Table, and the like.

Fourthly, When you have found him, or know where this bread is to be had, you
must hunger and thirst for him; for the Lord Christ will never bestow himself
upon that Soul that does not breathe and break with longing desires for him.

Fifthly, You must be sure by Faith to apply him to your own Souls. Bread, when
it stands upon the Table, is common bread; but when I have eaten it, then it is
my bread: then it turns to my nourishment, to my substance; so you must make
Application of Christ to your Souls.

Sixthly, If you would have Christ, you must learn to live upon him: As a man
lives upon bread, so you must live upon Christ; live upon him in point of
Justification, in point of Sanctification and Salvation: As the living Father
has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he shall
live by me, ver. 57, of this Chapter. If you live in him, and live upon him,
you shall hereafter for ever live with him. And so much of the first Branch of
the Text, the evident Proposition.

I come now to the comfortable Inference that is thence deduced: He that comes
to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. By
coming to Christ, is meant believing in Christ; for the latter Phrase does
expound the former: He that comes to me; that is, he that believes in me.
Coming, you know, is a motion, and in a motion there are two terms: there is
the terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem: something a man comes from, and
something a man comes to; so believing is a motion of the Soul: a man comes
from himself, from his own righteousness, from his own ends: he comes from the
World, and then he comes to Christ; he comes to him, as one that is able to
give him fit and full satisfaction to his Soul; He that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Christ speaks here of a
spiritual hunger, and of a spiritual thirst; the meaning is this, He that
believes in me, says our Savior, he shall have all his wants supplied, all
his desires allayed, and he shall have his Soul fully satisfied. So then the
Doctrine I shall give you from this second Branch of the Text, is this:

Doct. Whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall by Christ have all his
spiritual wants supplied, and all his desires allayed, and his soul fully
satisfied.

Why is Jesus Christ not only compared to Bread, but also to Water, Isa. 55.1,
Ho, every one that thirsteh, come to the waters of life. By water, is meant
Jesus Christ. Why is he compared not to Water, but to Wine and Milk: Come, buy
Wine and Milk, without Money, and without Price; but only to show that he is
able to give the Soul fit and full satisfaction? Here are two Queries I shall
speak to by way of Explication.

First, How, or in what sense this Doctrine is true, He that believes in
Christ, shall have all his desires satisfied. Secondly, How it comes to pass,
or what is the reason, that such a soul as believes in Christ shall have the
spiritual desires of his soul satisfied?
First, How, or in what sense this Doctrine holds true, That he that believes
in Christ, shall by Christ have all his desires answered?

In answer to this, You must know the desires of the Soul are of three sorts:
there are sinful desires, and sensual desires, and spiritual desires.

First, There are sinful desires of the Soul: there is no man but naturally he
does as eagerly desire to sin, as he desires to eat when he is hungry, Prove.
4.17, They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the Wine of violence.
Naturally a man has a Dog-like thirst after sin: some after one lust, some
after another: Do you think the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that is in
us lusts to envy? James 4.5. That which is here spoken of Envy, may be spoken
of any other sin. Some lust after covetousness, some lust after pride, some
after envy: some after one thing, some after another. But mark now, as soon as
the Soul comes to Jesus Christ, and believes in him, these desires and sinful
lusts shall be quenched, because the Lord Jesus Christ will make such a Soul to
be dead to sin: A dead man desires nothing. I know, my Brethren, that this is
to be understood in part, because our mortification is imperfect, therefore all
the sinful desires of the Soul will not be quenched in this life. But thus far
it holds true, He that is born of God sins not, 1 John 3.9: that is, so far
forth as a man is born of God, he sins not; there is a nature in him that
sins not, a Divine Nature, for he is made partaker of the Divine Nature;
there is something in him that does not sin, that does not lust after sin, but
lusts against sin: he has something in him that does not sin; As the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, so the Spirit lusts against the Flesh, Gal. 5.17.
These sensual desires shall be quenched.

Secondly, There are sensual desires, that is, a lusting after the lawful
contentments of this life. Some lust after one dish of the World, and some
after another. Zacheus, a pining Publican, he lusted after the gain of the
World: I, but when he comes to Christ, this lustful desire of his is allayed;
for, said he, Lord, now half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have done
wrong, I will make recompense fourfold. Here is an admirable example for some
to follow, that make haste to be rich, as Solomon has it: He that makes haste
to be rich shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.20. Such a one had need to think of
restitution. So the Disciples in the Primitive time: they sold their
possessions, and brought them and laid them down at the Apostles feet, Acts
4.35. Why at the Apostles feet? because they regarded their outward possessions
(in comparison of Heavenly treasure, which they were made partakers of) no more
than the dirt under their feet. Saint Paul at the first was taken with the
World, it was as a fine Nosegay to him; but afterward, when he was crucified
to the World, and the World to him, he looked upon it but as a withered Flower.

Thirdly, There are some spiritual desires of the Soul, and these shall be
satisfied; those thirsts after Grace shall be satisfied; so that a man that
once believes in Jesus Christ, shall no more thirst for Grace; no more thirst
for Grace, may some say? why none thirst so much for Grace, as they that have
Grace. It is true, and yet I shall make my words good, he shall not thirst for
Grace in two senses or respects:

First, He shall not have a total and painful thirst after Grace; There is a
twofold thirsting, as Divines well observe, after Grace: -- There is a thirst
arising from a total want of Grace; this is a painful and deadly thirst, now
this thirst for Grace shall be quite quenched. -- And then there is a thirst
arising from a sense of the imperfection of the grace we have; and this thirst,
it is true, shall never be fully satisfied until we come to Heaven: but the
painful thirst that shall be taken away; so says our Savior, John 4.14,
Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst,
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water springing
up into everlasting life. Such a one shall never have a painful thirst more.

Secondly, A man that believes in Jesus Christ, shall not have a hopeless, and
helpless thirst; although he may be thirsting after Grace still, yet it is not
a hopeless thirst, because he has a Spring and Storehouse to go to for
satisfaction: What is that Spring and Storehouse? I answer, There is a double
Spring or Storehouse: First, The Lord Jesus Christ himself, he is the Fountain
of living water, and he is that Spring that refreshes the Soul; It pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19 Secondly, The precious
Promises, they are another Spring for the Souls satisfaction. Oh, what
refreshing does often flow into the Soul from those rich and precious Promises!


But it may be you will say to me, When shall a Believer thus have all his
desires satisfied, his sinful desires quenched, his sensual desires allayed,
and his spiritual desires after grace satisfied?

I answer, partly in this life, and partly in the life to come: -- Partly in
this life, his desires shall be satisfied, he shall have a fullness suitable to
his condition, while he lives upon the Earth: as a Child has strength suitable
to a Child; so a Believer shall have a fullness suitable to his condition. The
Prophet David cries out, My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
Psalm 63.5. This was a suitable fullness. -- But then in the life to come, there
shall be a perfect and complete satisfaction given in to the Soul; then shall
this Scripture be fulfilled, In thy presence there is fullness of Joy, and at
thy right hand are Pleasures for evermore, Psalm 16.11. And says he in Psalm
17.15, As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied
when I awake with thy likeness. In that one Verse you have a picture of Heaven,
which consists in Vision of God, I will behold thy face in righteousness: in
Conformity to God, When I awake with thy likeness: in Satisfaction in God, I
shall be satisfied. Vision of God, Conformity to God, and Satisfaction in God,
this makes up Heaven. And that is a most precious Scripture, Matthew. 25.23,
Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. It is as if our Savior should say, This
Joy cannot enter into thee because of thy straitness, but thou may enter into
it because of its largeness. The Sea cannot enter into a Hogshead, because it
is a Vessel that cannot contain it: but the Hogshead may enter into the Sea,
because the Sea can fill it. Every gaping desire of the Soul shall then be
satisfied with as much Grace, and Glory, and Holiness, and Happiness, as it can
be capable of receiving; every Vessel shall then be filled according to its
capacity. A Pint, it is true, does not contain so much as a Pottle, but the
Pint shall be filled, filled as well as the Pottle.

Secondly, But how comes this to pass, that a Believer shall have all his
desires satisfied? I shall give you but two Reasons for it:

First, Because Faith makes Jesus Christ a man's own; it is the espousing Grace,
it is the Wedding Ring that makes up the Match between Christ and the Soul. If
Thomas do but put his finger into his Saviors side, Oh, says he, My Lord, and
my God; now he says, Lord Jesus thou art mine. The woman as soon as she is
married to her Husband, is partaker of an interest in all his Goods: With all
my worldly Goods I thee endow. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ, as soon as by Faith
he is made ours, all his is made ours: He is made of God to us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

Secondly, Faith as it makes Jesus Christ ours, so by making him ours, it makes
God the Father to be ours also: Faith makes God our Father to be our Husband,
Isa. 54.5, For thy Maker is thine Husband; It makes God our Father to be our
Friend, our Portion, our Shield, our Rock, our Refuge, our Redeemer, our All.
Now when Faith has made Christ to be ours, and by Christ has made God to be
ours, then we may say, All is ours. A man that has the Sea, cannot want water;
he that has the Sun, cannot want light; he that has a Golden Mine, cannot
want treasure: So he that has gotten Jesus Christ to be his Portion, he has
all that his heart can desire: he shall have all his Soul-wants satisfied.

Now briefly to make Application, and there are but two Uses I shall speak unto:

First, By way of Consolation, because that is the proper Use of this Doctrine,
and therefore I put it in the first place. Art thou one that art a true
Believer? Have thou cast thy Soul into the arms of Jesus Christ? Have thou
received Jesus Christ? that is, Have thou believed in him? Have thou received
him in all his Offices, as King, as Priest, as Prophet? Art thou as willing to
be ruled by him, as to be redeemed by him? Have thou got Jesus Christ, not only
by outward profession, (so all of you have that hear me this day) but have thou
got Christ by inward possession, so that Christ is thine? Oh, lift up thy head
with joy! O know assuredly, that all thy sinful desires shall by little and
little be quenched; though God do leave some corruptions in thee, to conflict
with, and to teach thee to prize the Righteousness of Jesus Christ at a high
rate, yet all these sinful desires shall by little and little be mortified: and
all thy spiritual desires fully satisfied, though not perfectly in this World,
yet when thou come to enjoy him in Glory; but yet here in this life, thou
shall have so much satisfaction, that thou may say with the Prophet David, My
Soul is satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness. And all thy sensual desires shall
be allayed, though it may be thou have but a poor pittance of these outward
things: for God sees it fit many times that his best and soundest Sheep should
be kept on the shortest Commons: although this be true, that thou have but a
small pittance of these outward things: thou want riches and honors, and
outward accommodations, which are so much admired; yet thou may say with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.10, As having nothing, and yet possessing all things: Though
I have nothing, yet I possess all things: How? Really I possess all things, I
have all things in Capite, in Christ my Head, and really by Faith: Oh what
comfort is this!

Secondly, I might in the second place make this a Touchstone of trial to
discover to you whether you be true Believers, or no. Are thy desires after the
World allayed, that now thou can say with St. Paul, I have learned in every
state therewith to be content? Have thou not a painful thirst arising from the
guilt of a self-accusing Conscience, as thou had heretofore? then it is a
token that thy Faith is a true Faith; and by this thou may know whether thou
art a weak Believer, or a strong Believer; for according to the measure of your
satisfaction in these things, so you may know the measure of your Faith. If thy
Soul has large satisfaction, then thou art a strong Believer; but if thy Soul
has but little satisfaction, then thou art but a weak Believer.

But to close all with a word of Exhortation, and the Exhortation is to two
sorts briefly: First, To those that are not Believers. Secondly, To those that
are true Believers.


First, To those that are not Believers, and my Exhortation to them, is this: O
you that have not yet closed with Jesus Christ; you that have not yet seen so
much beauty in him as to prize him, and insatiably to desire him, O that now
you would begin to close with him: you that have not been persuaded by all
former Exhortations and Invitations of Ministers heretofore; be persuaded now,
O come, come to Jesus Christ, come to the water of life: Come buy Wine and
Milk, without money, and without price, come to this bread of life; thou may
come as freely to Jesus Christ, O Sinner, whoever thou art, as the wounded
Israelites might come to the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness: O consider what
satisfaction is to be found in him! Run through all the courses of the World,
run through all conditions in the World, run through all the delights of the
sons of men, and see whether they can give you satisfaction, yea or no. Can sin
give you satisfaction? Truly, the satisfaction which sin gives, I will tell you
what it is like: it is just like the sprinkling of water upon the Smiths Forge,
that makes the fire to burn so much the hotter: or like the pouring of Oil upon
a flame, that makes it flame so much the fiercer; this is the satisfaction that
you have by sin. Or, can the World give you satisfaction: Alas, the World deals
with you just as Absolom's Mule did with him, leaving his Master hanging in the
Oak, when he had most need of her; so when you have most need of comfort and
relief, Worldly riches and profits they leave you. In a day of wrath can any of
these give you satisfaction? Prove. 11.4, They profit not in a day of wrath. Can
any of these outward things give you satisfaction? alas, the Soul of man has a
kind of infiniteness of desires in it, therefore nothing can give the Soul
satisfaction, but the infinite mercy of a Gracious God, and the infinite merits
of a blessed Redeemer, and the infinite Comforts of the Holy Ghost. As long as
you live without Christ, never look for satisfaction, look for no satisfaction
from the things of this life, Isa. 65.13, Therefore thus says the Lord God,
behold, my Servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: my Servants shall drink,
but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my Servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed. Look for no satisfaction from temporal things, and I am sure in Hell
there will be no satisfaction for you; for there you will be always thirsting,
thirsting with a painful and tormenting thirst. Dives, although he had never so
much wealth to tumble himself up and down in here while he lived, yet when he
came to Hell (though perhaps he might by some flattering Preacher in a Funeral
Sermon be lodged in Abraham's bosom, yet when he came to Hell) he had not a drop
of water to cool his tongue. There is no satisfaction to be had in any
Enjoyment. nor in any condition, or place, until we come to Jesus Christ, and
then we shall hunger no more, nor thirst no more: then all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes, and sorrow and grief from our hearts.

My second Exhortation is to true Believers: Oh labor for further degrees of
Faith; according to your measure of Faith, such will your fullness and
satisfaction be, ( Psalm 81.10) O, could you open your mouths wide: that is,
could the desires of your Souls this day be widened and enlarged, they should
all of them be filled: open thy mouth never so wide, and God will fill it. Oh,
do not content your selves with a small measure of Faith, but labor for a
strong and great Faith; according to your Buckets, so shall your waters be
drawn: Draw water out of the Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. What are the Wells
of Salvation, but God and Jesus Christ, and his Spirit, and the Graces of the
Spirit, and the Ordinances of God? these are the Wells of Salvation. If you
bring but little Buckets, you will get but little water; if you bring large
Buckets, you will get a large deal of water. If you bring but little Faith, you
will receive but little from Christ; but if you bring a strong Faith, a large
and strong Bucket, O how much refreshing and Soul-satisfaction might you
receive! There are three benefits which you shall have by a strong Faith.

First, Faith has this Property, it makes whatever it touches its own;
According to thy Faith be it unto thee, Matthew. 18.13. So if thy Faith do but
touch Jesus Christ, it will make him yours; if it do but touch the Promises, it
makes them yours. The truth is, there has been a great deal of talk of the
Philosophers stone, but I know no other Philosophers stone, but Faith, and this
turns all it touches into Gold: Blessed is the man that by Faith can touch
Jesus Christ; no man ever touched him by Faith, but was healed by Grace.

Secondly, You shall have this benefit: it will yield you abundance of joy and
satisfaction in the expectation of your desires, before you come to the
fruition of your desires. You read of the joy of Faith, Phil. 1.25. And the
Apostle prays for the Romans, that their hearts may be filled with joy and
peace in believing, Romans 15.13. When Hannah had once poured out her Soul before
God, now her heart was quieted by Faith, as if she had enjoyed her desires for
the present, She went away, and did eat, and her Countenance was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.

Thirdly, Faith will reallize all the Promises, Heb. 11.1, It is the substance
of things hoped for; it makes things that are absent, present; that are afar
off, to be near at hand; it will bring you to Heaven, before you come to
Heaven; O what a precious grace is Faith! And this is the grace you will most
stand in need of, in your approaches to the Lords Table. Now the Lord
strengthen this hand of Faith, that by it we may make vigorous applications of
the blood of Jesus Christ to our poor Souls, who is the living bread that is
able to give fit and full satisfaction to our Souls: who is that living water,
whereof whosoever drinks shall thirst no more.

CHRIST'S True Disciples, ARE Doers of Gods Will.
JOHN VII. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.


THese words are the words of our Savior, uttered at that great feast, the
feast of Tabernacles: the occasion of these words was this: The Jews marvelled
at our Savior, as you may read Verse 15, How knows this man Letters, having
never learned? That is, how comes he to be so skilful in the Scriptures, seeing
he was never taught by man? Our blessed Savior to this Query answers two
things:

First, He tells them in the foregoing Verse, the 16th verse, that his Doctrine
was not his own, but was taught him of the Father.

Secondly, He shows them an excellent way or means, whereby they may discern
truth from falsehood, true Doctrine from corrupt Doctrine: namely, by obedience
to the will of God; for, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. So then in the
Text, you may take notice of two particulars: First, An Invitation to a Duty.
Secondly, An Encouragement to that Duty.


First, An Invitation to a Duty, in these words: If any man will do his will,
that is, that will do the will of God my Father.

Secondly, The Encouragement to it, in these words: He shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, that is, he shall
know which is true Doctrine, and which is false; which is the Doctoctrine
according to God and Godliness, or what is spoken for popular applause, and
spoke of a man's own head: and according to these two parts of the Text, there
are these two Doctrines that may be raised from the words: Doct. 1. That the
true Disciples of Christ are Doers of the will of God. Doct. 2. That they that
do the will of God, shall know more of it, and shall be more confirmed in their
knowledge.


I begin with the first, That the true Disciples of Christ, or true Christians,
are such as are Doers of the will of God. For the proof of this Doctrine, take
two or three places of Scripture, Matthew. 7.21, Not every one that says to me,
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will
of my Father which is in Heaven. A true Child of God, a true Professor of the
Gospel, is described by this, he is a Doer of the will of God, Rom 2.13, For
not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall
be justified: that is, shall be owned and accepted of God the Father. So James
1.22, But be ye Doers of the Word, and not Hearers only, deceiving your own
souls: cozening your selves with false Syllogisms, as the word (...) there
signifies. If a man be a Hearer of the Word only, and not a Doer of it, he
cozens himself with false arguments: and the like you have in the 25 verse of
the same Chapter; But whosoever looks into the perfect Law of liberty, and
continues therein, he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Word,
this man shall be blessed in his deed: the man is a blessed Disciple of Jesus
Christ. But for the better Explication of this Point, there are three things I
shall open to you: First, What is meant by the Will of God? Seconly, How the
Will of God must be done by those that are the Disciples of Christ? Thirdly,
Why the Disciples of Christ must be Doers of the Will of God?


First, What the will of God is? Not to trouble you with the various
distinctions of the Schoolmen; briefly, there is a twofold will of God
mentioned in Scripture: the one is called a Secret will, the other is called a
Revealed will; you have them both mentioned in one Verse, Deuteronomy. 29.29, The
secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are
revealed, belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may do all the
words of the Law. Now our Savior speaks here in the Text of the Revealed will
of God, and it is called a Revealed will, because it is made known to us in
three Books: In the Book of Nature. In the Book of the Creature In the Book of
the Scripture.


First, The will of God is made known unto us partly in the Book of Nature.
Thus many of the better sort of Heathens, that had nothing but the light of
Nature, by the dictates of their own Conscience, knew what the will of God was,
as appears by that, Romans 2.14, 15, For when the Gentiles which have not the
Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law,
are a Law to themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. Mark, the Gentiles which had not
the Law; that is, they had not the Law of Scripture, yet did by Nature the
things contained in the Law. The Gentiles which had not the Law of the
Scripture, yet by the Law of Nature did those things that were agreeable to the
will of God, and by the dictates of their own Consciences, did some things that
were agreeable to the will of God; and although this light of Nature was not
sufficient to bring them to Heaven, yet it was sufficient to leave them without
excuse.

Secondly, This will of God is revealed in the Book of the Creature, viz. by
the works of Gods Creation and Providence, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.20,
For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the world, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead; so that they are without excuse. So that the light a man may have by
Gods works in the Creation, and by his works of Providence, which the Heathen
had, this Book of the Creature, is enough to leave him without excuse; much of
Gods will may be read in this Book.

Thirdly, It is called a revealed will, because it is made known to us in the
Book of the Scripture; of this speaks the Apostle, Heb. 13.21. Says he, make
you perfect: he prays that God would make them perfect in every good work to do
his will, that is, his will revealed in the Word of God, for there does the
will of God most clearly appear; therefore when our Savior says here in the
Text, He that does his will: that is, he that obeys his Word, and he that makes
the Word of God to be the Rule of his walking, Gal. 6.16, To as many as walk
according to this Rule, peace be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. The
Word of God, that is the Rule we should walk by; this is the Pattern or
Prescript of Gods revealed will. That Is the first Particular.

Secondly, It may be demanded, How, or in what manner must the will of God be
done?

For answer to this, for the right manner of doing the will of God, there are
these seven things required:

First, The will of God must be done knowingly. Solomon says expressly, Prove.
19.2, Also that the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good. All the Services
that a man does, either out of Will Worship, or out of blind Devotion, it is
but like the cutting off of a Dogs neck, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 66.3 And
therefore the Apostle bids the Romans first to prove, and know, what is that
good and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2.

Secondly, The will of God must be done believingly: By Faith, it is said, that
Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11.4. It may
be Cain offered the very same Sacrifice that Abel did, yet Abel's was accepted,
and Cain's was rejected, because Abel offered in Faith, and Cain did not; For
without Faith it is impossile to please God, Heb. 11.6. You cannot do the will
of God without Faith; because it is Faith that brings Jesus Christ in its arms,
and so makes both our Persons and Prayers accepted: No man can come to the
Father, but by me, says our Savior, John 14.6. And we are said to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, (how?) by Jesus Christ; they are
acceptable only by Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Therefore a man must do the will of God
believingly.

Thirdly, The will of God must be done graciously, from a principle of grace,
from that which is called an inward Principle, as the Apostle shows expressly,
Circumcision avails nothing: no outward privilege can make us acceptable with
God, but a new Creature, Gal. 6.15, The carnal mind is enmity against God, for
it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: so then they that
are in the flesh cannot please Gtd, Romans 8.7, 8. A man that is not yet in the
state of grace, cannot do the will of God acceptably; the will of God must be
done graciously, from a gracious principle.

Fourthly, The will of God must be done cordially, it must be done with the
heart, Prove. 23.26, My Son, give me thy heart. What is not done with the heart,
God reckons as not done at all; therefore the first and great Commandment is
this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy strength; and whatever ye do in word or deed, do it heartily as to
the Lord, Col. 3.16, 17. And the Apostle exciting Servants, he bids them Obey
their Masters, not with eye-service, but as doing the will of God from the
heart, Ephesians. 6.6.

Fifthly, The will of God must be done sincerely, without any sinister or
self-respect; a man must have upright ends and aims in doing the will of God;
for God look at our aims, as well as at our actions, 2 Kings 10: Jehu did the
will of God in destroying the Worshippers of Baal, and destroying the Children
of Ahab, God commended Jehu for doing his will; but yet notwithstanding,
because he aimed at the settling of himself in the Kingdom, more than seeking
the glory of God, therefore God looked upon it but as murder: and said, he
would avenge the blood of Jezerel on the house of Jehu, Hos. 1. A man may do
that thing that God would have him do, and yet be punished for the doing of it,
if his aims and ends be not upright: Whatever ye do, whether ye eat, or drink,
or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. The Pharisees
fasted and prayed, but it was for vainglory, and it was but to cloak their
wickedness and iniquity, by a fair color or pretense of piety; they made long
Prayers, and in the mean time devoured Widows houses, Matthew. 23.14.

Sixthly, The will of God must be done fully, Numb. 14.24, And my Servant
Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and has followed me fully, him
will I bring into the Land.

But may be you will say, When does a man do the will of God fully, or follow
God fully? I answer,

First, When he does not do it with a divided heart, Hosea 10.2, Their heart is
divided, now shall they be found faulty. When a man's heart is divided, partly
for God, and partly for the world, then he does not follow God fully.

Secondly, Then a man follows God fully, when he has respect to every Command
of God, as well as to one Command, Psalm 119.6, Then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

Thirdly, When he does not retain any one sin, in the love, liking, and
approbation of it, but he hates every false way, Psalm 119.104. You read that
God was weary of their New Moons, and their solemn Feasts: My Soul hates them,
says God, Isa. 1.14. Yet these New Moons, and Solemn Feasts were of Gods own
institution and appointment: But why does God hate them then? the reason is
this: says God, Because your hands are full of blood, full of cruelty and
oppression, verse. 15. Therefore they do not do the will of God truly, that
retain the love of sin in their hearts, and this makes their Services rejected.

Seventhly, The will of God must be done constantly, Psalm 119.20, My Soul
breaks for the longing that it has unto thy Judgments at all times. So here,
a man must have respect unto the will of God at all times; but there are three
times especially, wherein God calls us to do his will.

First, In a time of prosperity, when the World with the lusts and vanity of
it, are ready to draw away our hearts to it; O then have a care to do Gods
will, Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12, When thou have eaten and art full, (when thou art in a
prosperous condition) then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, etc. The Apostle Saint Paul had learnt a great
Lesson, when he said, I have learnt in whatsoever state I am in, therewith to
be content: I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound, Phil. 4.11, 12.
There is more danger in prosperity, than in adversity: as in a crowd, a man is
in danger to lose his Purse; so in a crowd of worldly businesses and
prosperity, a man is in greatest danger to lose his God.

Secondly, In a time of danger, then God calls you to do his will, that you
should not decline Duty for danger sake; that you should not break a Hedge, to
miss a foul way. See a singular example of this in Daniel; when he knew the
doing of his duty would be the hazard of his life, when he knew the writing was
sealed, and that snares were laid for his life, yet he would not omit duty for
the saving of his life; he prayed three times a day, as he was wont to do, his
Window being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6.10. So those three
Noble Worthies, who were so highly honored by God, as to be miraculously
preserved, they would not deeline duty for dangers sake; Be it known unto thee,
O King, our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from this burning Furnace:
but if not, we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou
have set up, Dan. 3.17, 18. So singular was the courage of Saint Peter and
Saint John, Acts 4.20, We cannot but speak the things that we have seen, and
heard: Threaten, or not threaten, imprison, or not imprison, we cannot but
speak the things that we have seen and heard.

Thirdly, A third Season when God calls us to do his will, is this: when he
puts an opportunity into our hands of doing some special piece of service for
him; now is a price put into your hands, now a man should do the will of God
especially. This is that which Mordecai told Esther, Esther 4, Who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? It is as if he
should say, It may be, God has put an opportunity into thy hand, to help his
Church at this time.

The third thing by way of Explication, is this: But why must the Disciples of
Christ be Doers of Gods will? The Reasons are these:

First, Because the whole Body of Religion (as I may say (consists in these two
things: namely, in Believing and Obeying; take away one of these, and Religion
is a lame Religion.

Secondly, By doing the will of our Father, we show our selves to be Disciples
of Christ indeed, because we now imitate our Lord and Master, for thus did he;
see that remarkable Scripture, John 6.38, I came from Heaven, not to do my own
will, but the will of him that sent me.

Thirdly, Because if we do not do the will of God, we shall certainly do the
will of a worse Master; if we do not work in Gods service, we shall do the
Devils drudgery; if we be not workers of righteousness, we shall be workers of
iniquity; as appears by that in Matthew. 7.21, 23, He that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven, he shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: compare
it with verse 23, And then will I say unto them, I never knew you, depart from
me ye workers of iniquity. It is as if our Savior should say, Because you
would not be workers of righteousness, to do the will of my Father, therefore
it is that you are workers of iniquity.

Fourthly, Christians must do the will of God, because this is that which makes
for the honor of God, John 15.8, Herein is my Father glorified, if ye bring
forth much fruit. Look as by believing, we give honor to the Truth of God; so
by obeying, we give God the honor of his Sovereignty. As obedient Children, we
shall show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Before I come to the Application, there are two or three Objections that lie
in the way, which I shall endeavor to remove.

Object. 1. It may be, some will say, You do so cry up Duty, and doing the will
of God, that you infringe or eclipse the Free grace of God; this is not
Preaching Free grace.

Answ. I answer, This is not an infringing, or an eclipsing of the free grace
of God. because you must know, Faith and good Works are not opposite one to
another, but they are subordinate, they are consistent, and may stand one with
another very well.

Secondly, I answer, The grace of God does not exclude all works, but it
excludes those works only that are meritorious; Good works therefore (we may
say truly) are Causes, without which we cannot be saved: though they are not
Efficient Causes, nor instrumental Causes, yet they are Causes without which we
cannot be saved; as the Apostle says, Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12.14; So may I say here, Though we be not saved for our good works,
yet we shall never be saved without good works: I would have you to remember
this: Good works, though they are not necessary to our Justification, yet they
are necessary to our Salvation; there is a great deal of difference between
these two; to be saved by faith, and saved for faith: this is certain, we are
not saved for our faith; this is the error of the Socinians, that say, The Act
of believing is our righteousness. Though we are not saved for faith, yet the
Apostle says, We are saved by faith: So here, we are not saved for our good
works, yet we are not saved without good works, as the Apostle says, He that
is a Doer of the Word, shall be blessed in his deed, James 1.25; He does not
say for his deed: so you may be blessed in your good works, though not for your
good works.

Thirdly, I answer; Although faith alone does justify, yet that faith that is
alone does not justify; though no man is justified for his works, yet that
faith that is a justifying faith, is a working faith.

Secondly, It may be objected: But why do you press us to do the will of God,
when of our selves we are not able to do it; we cannot of our selves think a
good thought, nor speak a good word: much less do the will of God in that
manner as you have laid down how it must be done?

To this I answer; Our inability does not nullify or make void the Commands of
God: God (for example) bids you believe, 1 John 3.23, And this is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; and
yet Faith it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8, and you cannot of your selves
believe. So Saint Peter, he bid Simon Magus pray, that his sins may be forgiven
him; and yet notwithstanding, no man is able of himself to pray in an
acceptable manner; says the Apostle, We know not how to pray as we ought, but
the Spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 28.6. But the Arminians they stretch the
Objection yet a little further, and argue thus:

Object. If God commands us to do what we are not able to perform, then this is
cruelty in God; and they give you an instance. For example (say they) If you
tie a man's hands and bid him work, or cut off his legs ard bid him walk, this
is a great deal of cruelty; so say they, If God bid us do his will, and we have
no freedom nor ability to do his will, then this is cruelty in God.

To this I answer, It is true indeed, if God should tie our hands, or cut off
our legs, then this Objection would be of some weight; but God does not do so:
God at first made man upright, he gave us ability to do his will; but if we
have lost that ability, we cannot blame God, but our selves: our destruction is
from our selves, our inability to do Duty, is from our selves.

Secondly, I answer; Natural and unregenerate men, though they cannot work
grace in their own hearts, yet they may do something in a tendency to grace;
they may wait on the means of grace, they may hear as they are able, and pray
as they are able, and do Duties as they are able; they may wait upon God, as
they did in Acts 2, when they cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to
be saved? (1 Cor. 14.24, 25.) They may come to the Assemblies of Gods Saints,
as that ignorant and Unbeliever did, though for the present he was in a state
of ignorance and unbelief, yet by hearing the Word preached, he was convinced
and converted. Men are not damned for Can-nots, but for Will-nots; men are not
damned because they can do no better, but because they will do no better.

Thirdly, I answer; Though we do not work with God, yet God will not work
without us; God saves no man against his will, God carries no man to Heaven as
a Sack is carried to the Market on Horseback; but God saves a man by bowing
and bending his will, and of unwilling, making him willing. Saint Austin says,
Qui sine auxilio tuo te Creavit, contra voluntatem tuam te non salvabit; He
that made thee without thee, will not save thee without thee.

Fourthly, I answer this Objection of the Arminians thus: When our Savior
says, He that does the will of my Father, he shall know of the Doctrine; and
he supposes that such a man has grace in his heart, that does enable him to
do the will of God. Though it is true, an unregenerate man has no freedom of
will to do good; yet this is a certain truth, that the regenerate, so far as
they are regenerate, have freedom of will to do good.

Now for the Use and Application of this Point, briefly.

First, By way of Information: If the Disciples of Christ are, or should be
Doers of Gods will, then it follows, he that would be a true Disciple of
Christ, must be a self-denying Christian; it was that I proved to you at large
in many Sermons, upon Luke 9.23. He that will be a true Christian, must be a
self-denyer; but why so? it appears plainly: If the Disciple of Christ must be
a Doer of Gods will; then

First, He must not do his own will, but he must deny himself in that: he must
not walk in his own way, he must not live by his own rule, he must not
prosecute his own ends, but he must do all according to the will of his Lord
and Master.

Secondly, If he must do Gods will; then he must not fulfill the will of the
flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3, They that are Christ's Disciples, have
crucified the flesh, together with the affections and lusts of it, Gal. 5.24.

Thirdly, If he must do Gods will, then he must not do the will of men, he must
not seek to please men, Gal. 1.10, Or do I seek to please men? for if I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

Fourthly, If he must make the will of God his Rule, then he must not make
Providence his Rule, nor the impulse of the Spirit, as they are usually called.

First, He must not make Providence his Rule, 1 Samuel 26.7, 8, 9: David, he had
opportunity of killing Saul, who was his deadly enemy; Saul was now asleep in
the Cave: he might have said, Surely here is the Providence of God, he has put
my enemy into my hand; but David would not make Providence his Rule, because he
had not a Warrant from the Word of God to do any such thing. I would have you
to remember this Rule; To follow Providence without the Word is dangerous, to
follow it against the Word is damnable; but to follow Providence with the Word,
that is safe and warrantable. -- Neither must the impulse of the Spirit be the
Rule of your walking. David had so strong impulse on his Spirit to destroy
Nabal and his Family, for his churlishness to his Soldiers being in distress,
because he would not spare them necessaries when he sent unto him, that he
said, God do so to me, and more also, if I leave any of Nabals Family and not
cut off all that pisseth against the Wall, 1 Samuel 25. But upon the good counsel
of Abigail, Nabals Wife, he recollected himself, and saw that it was not the
will of God that he should do so; but he blessed God that he had diverted him
from his purpose.

Secondly, Learn another Lesson by way of Inserence, and that is this: The life
of true Religion consists not in saying, but in doing; it consists not in
profession, but in practice: When a man has the Word of life in his mouth, and
the life of the Word in his Conversation, then he is a Christian indeed. It Is
not the talking, but the walking Christian; not he that talks of the way to
Heaven, and that talks of Christianity, but he that walks in the way that leads
to Eternal life. This will prove you to be Christians of a right stamp.

Thirdly, Learn this Lesson, That the will of God is the perfect Rule of
Righteousness. A thing is therefore good because God wills it, for God cannot
will any thing that is not good; all his ways are equal, though our ways are
unequal; all his paths are righteousness: therefore whatever God commands, it
must therefore needs be good, because he wills it.

Fourthly, Learn this Lesson: If Christians must be Doers of Gods will, then it
follows, that whosoever is proud, stubborn, and disobedient, willingly
resisting the Commands of God, such certainly cannot be the Disciples of
Christ: they that fulfill their own wills, and they that walk in their own ways,
and after their own wills, and after the imaginations of their own hearts: and
they that fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and of the eye, those are no Disciples
of Christ: for the Disciples of Christ are Doers of the will of God. O hear,
and fear, all you voluptuous ones, that deny your own hearts nothing: as it was
said of Adoniah, David denied him nothing. You that pamper the flesh, and you
that study more to please men, than to please the great God of Heaven and
Earth; Know assuredly, for the present you are no true Christians, no Disciples
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

A second Use it is by way of Examination: (If time would give leave, I might
press this Use home upon you) You may call your selves to account, whether you
be in the number of those that do the will of God, or no; whether you do it in
a right manner; whether you do it knowingly: there is a great deal of knowledge,
and yet there is but a little knowledge; there is a great deal of confused
knowledge, but there is but little sound, savoury, experimental, distinct
knowledge of God. Do you do the will of God believingly? There is much talking
of the grace of Faith, but little living the life of Faith. -- Do you do the
will of God graciously, from a principle of grace? It is one thing for a Jack
or Clock that has a constrained motion, to go: and another thing, for a man
that walks and moves by a principle of life that is within. Do you duties from
an inward principle of grace? And do you do the will of God cordially from the
heart? And do you do the will of God sincerely, aiming at the honor and glory
of God? And do you do it fully and constantly? Do not these Questions puzzle
many of you? What satisfactory answer can your Consciences give to such
Interrogatories as these are? Happy is the man that with a good Conscience can
give answer to these Questions: that can say, It is the desire of my heart in
sincerity, to do the will of God fully and constantly.

Thirdly, For a close of this first Point, with a word of Exhortation: I
beseech you, as you would be Disciples of Christ, set upon this work of doing
the will of God; and here let me show you some Rules and Directions:

First, Would you do the will of God? then shake off security, and
slothfulness, and formality, and coldness in Religion; formality eats out the
heart of Religion: Strive to enter in at the strait gate, strive as in an
Agony, Luke 13.24. Whatever you do in the service of God, do it with all your
might. It was the great commendation of that good King Hezekiah, That in every
work that he began in the service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in
the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, 2 Chronicles.
31.21.

Secondly, Labor for a strong Faith, for Faith is the Nurse of Obedience, Heb.
11.8, By Faith Abraham obeyed God; and he obeyed him in as hard Commands as
ever you heard of, which was to leave his Country, to leave his own
Habitation, and all that he had, and to go into a strange Land, into a place he
knew not whither: another Command that he obeyed was in the sacrificing of his
dearest and only Son Isaac: By Faith he obeyed God. And you read of the
Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26.

Thirdly, would you do the will of God? then set about it without delay; To
day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3.7. I made
haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Psalm 119.60.

Fourthly, Study Self-denial: cross your own wills, that Gods will may be
fulfilled; all the controversy between God and such poor worms as we are, is
this: Whether Gods will or ours shall be obeyed? Study Self-denial; for, if
Gods will, and your will meet upon a narrow Bridge, and one must give way to the
other, if you be not well ballasted with self-denial, you will cross Gods will,
to do your own.

Now let me lay before you some Motives to quicken you to do the will of God.

First, I beseech you to remember this: This doing of the will of God, will
prove you to be the Children of God, that you have God to be your Father. O
what an honor is it to have God to be your Father! It is more than if you had
all the Kingdoms of the world in your possession for so many thousand years.
This doing of the will of God, will show you to be the true Children of God;
for, how does our Savior prove those stubborn Jews to be the children of the
Devil? John 8.44, You are of your father the Devil, and the will of your father
you will do; You do the Devils will, and therefore you are the Devils children.
So here, if you do the will of your Heavenly Father, it is a plain token that
you are his Children.

Secondly, Consider what a high price and esteem you shall be in with the Lord
Christ himself, by doing the will of God; consider what a high price the Lord
Christ will put upon you; you shall be related to him, Matthew. 12. ult. For
whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Christ looks upon such a one in near relation
to himself.

Thirdly, Consider, this is that which will yield you Honey and sweetness in
all conditions, if you be eareful to do the will of your Heavenly Father, Psalm
63.5, My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness. And that is an
excellent Scripture, Psalm 119.56, This I had because I kept thy Precepts: This
I had, what is that? This comfort I had, this supportation I had in all my
afflictions: this consolation I had, this sweet Communion with God I had; why?
because I kept thy Precepts, I obeyed thy will. Look how much Obedience is
yielded to the Commands of God, so much Comfort does flow into the Soul; God
usually gives in Comforts proportionably to our Obedience. Oh the sweet
Soul-satisfying Consolation a Child of God finds in the ways of God, and in
doing the will of God! especially when he lies on his deathbed, then it will
be sweeter to him than the Honey and the Honeycomb: then will he say with good
King Hezekiah, when he lay upon his deathbed; Lord, Remember how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was
good in thy sight. Oh that sweet satisfaction that a Soul shall find in God,
when he comes to appear before God!

Then here is one Motive more in the Text, and that is the next Point I shall
come unto, the great encouragement that he shall have in doing the will of God;
for, says our Savior, He that does the will of God, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. This is the
Point I shall speak to next time, They that are the Doers of the will of God,
shall know more of his will, and shall be more assured of what his will is.

JOHN VII. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.


NOW I come to the second Doctrine, which is principally and especially held
forth in this Text, and it is this: That he that does the will of God, shall
know more of it, and shall be more assured of what he knows.

For the better handling of this weighty Truth, uttered by our Lord Jesus
Christ, it will not be amiss to divide the Doctrine into two Branches, or into
two Propositions, and to speak distinctly to each of them: The first Branch of
the Doctrine, is this: He that does the will of God shall know more of his
will. The second, is this: He that does the will of God shall be more assured
of what he knows.


For the first Proposition, or the first Branch of the Doctrine: He that does
the will of God, shall know more of his will. God will reveal himself more
fully, more clearly, to such a Soul as is careful to live up to his light, to
walk according to the measure of knowledge he has received; this is that our
Savior promises, in Matthew. 13.12, For whosoever has, to him shall be given,
and he shall have more abundance; but whosoever has not, from him shall be
taken away, even that which he has. Whosoever has, to him shall be given:
What is the meaning of this? That is, as learned Pareus well expounds the
place, He that has the beginning of saving knowledge, and sound Conversion, and
sincere Faith and Obedience, To him shall be given. What shall be given? There
shall be given an increase of that knowledge, an increase of that faith, an
increase of that love, an increase of that obedience: Whosoever has, to him
shall be given. But on the contrary, Whosoever has not, from him shall be
taken away, that he seems to have: that is, from Hypocrites that make a fair
show, as if they had grace, saving knowledge, true repentance, and the like:
from him shall be taken away that he seems to have. This is an excellent
Scripture to prove the perseverance of the Saints, they shall increase in
grace; but then on the contrary, it proves the warping, declining, and
withering condition of Hypocrites, they shall grow worse and worse, and lose
those gifts that they have. The Arminians they make a wicked construction and
interpretation of this place of Scripture: for they say, He that has, and well
improves his natural parts and abilities, he deserves the gift of saving grace.
This is their Exposition, He that well uses the gift of Nature, does deserve
of God the gift of saving grace; this is a false Exposition, and a reasoning
against Reason; for our Saviors words must be understood thus; To him that
has, shall be given. He that well uses the gifts of Nature, true indeed, he
shall have an increase of the gifts of Nature; for example, Aristotle and
Plato, and the better sort of Heathen, well using the gifts of Nature, had the
gifts of Nature increased, and they grew to be excellent men, so far as the
light of nature would carry them, God gave them an increase of the gifts of
Nature; but now, he that well uses the gifts of grace, to him shall be given,
he shall have an increase of those gifts of grace. Hitherto tends that
excellent passage of the Prophet David, Psalm 25.12, What man is he that
fearcth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. Mark this
Scripture well; That man that conscientiously walks in the fear of the Lord,
and in obedience to his Commands, he shall have more light, and more direction
from the God of his Salvation; God will teach him, and God will direct him, and
God will enable him to walk in a way that is well-pleasing in his sight; that
God whom he fears, will guide and direct him to walk in paths of righteousness.
So in verse 14, of the same Psalm, The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. A mavelous sweet and
comfortable Scripture! The secret of the Lord: that is, God will reveal some
secret, some mystery of his, some mysteries of grace, and of the power of
grace, to those that do fear him, and conscientiously practice what they know;
God will (as I may say) make them of his Privy Council: they shall be
acquainted with some secrets of God, that others are not acquainted with: and
the Prophet here instances in one secret, God will show them his Covenant. O
what a sweet Promise is that! God will show them the excellency and sweetness
of the Covenant of grace; that Covenant David speaks of, 2 Samuel 23, Although my
House be not so with God. Alas, I have had many failings, failings in my
Political Relations, and failings in my Domestical Relations, as a King, as a
Master, as a Father; though my House be not so with God, though it has not
been ordered as it should be, yet he has made with me a Covenant, sure and
steadfast, and ordered in all things aright. Never mortal man was saved by a
Covenant of works; all that have been, and all that shall be saved, were and
shall be saved by a Covenant of grace. Now, that man that fears God, God will
show him the Covenant of grace, and God will show that man the unconceivable
beauty, and sweetness, and all sufficiency that is in Jesus Christ! God will
show to such a man the mavelous sweet, and secret contentment that is in the
power of Godliness! God will show such a man the invaluable comforts of his
Spirit, the Sweetmeats of Heaven, those Soul-ravishing, and Soul-satisfying
comforts that delight the Soul. Psalm 94.19, Thy Comforts delight my Soul. God
will show such a man the transcendent excellencies of those glorious hopes that
are laid up in Heaven for the Saints in light. Thus the secrets of the Lord are
with them that fear him. Some secrets and mysteries that are not shown to the
World, God will reveal to all those that fear his Name, that do conscientiously
walk before him, that live up to their light. And what a sweet and precious
Promise is that, which our Savior made in John 14.21, He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and manifest my self to him.
Mark, that man that loves God, and that walks in a way of obedience, that lives
up to his light, that does the will of God, he shall know more of Jesus Christ,
Jesus Christ will more fully manifest himself unto him, I will love him, and I
will manifest my self unto him, he shall have more discoveries of my love. To
name but one Scripture more: 2 Pet. 3.18, But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. These two go together: if you
grow in grace, certainly you shall grow in knowledge; if you grow in obedience,
certainly your obedience shall increase your knowledge in the mysteries of God.

For the Explication of the Doctrine, two Queries there are that would be
satisfied: First, How, or in what respect our obedience shall increase our
knowledge? Secondly, How it comes to pass, or what reason can be rendered, why
the obedient Christian shall know more of Gods will?


For the first, How, or in what respect our obedience shall increase our
knowledge? He that obeys the will of God, shall know more of his will. How shall
he know more?

I answer, The knowledge of an obedient Christian shall be increased in three
respects: First, In regard of its Subject. Secondly, In regard of its Object.
Thirdly, In regard of the Manner of it.


First, The knowledge of an obedient Christian shall be increased in the Subject
of it, or the Seat of it where it is placed, as I may call it; now the Seat of
knowledge is the mind of man, the intellectual part of man: his intellectual
faculty shall be enlarged by his obedience, it shall be made more capable of
receiving Heavenly truths than it was before. God will enlarge that man's
understanding: whereas before he was but a Babe in knowledge and understanding,
now he shall be a grown man; whereas before he could not digest Milk, now he
shall be able to digest strong Meat; whereas before he was but faint and feeble
in knowledge, now he shall be strong like David, Zech. 12.8, In that day shall
the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them
at that day, shall be as David.

Secondly, The knowledge of an obedient Christian shall be increased and
enlarged in the Object of it; the Object I call those matters or things that
are to be known: such a one shall know more truths, more mysteries of
Godliness, more of Gods secrets, he shall have more manifestations of the
Spirit of God revealed to him, more discoveries of Truth from day to day: it is
that which God has promised, Isa. 11.9, The Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. The Prophet speaks of a
larger measure of knowledge, and further discoveries of truths than was wont to
be made.

Thirdly, The knowledge of an obedient Christian shall be increased in regard of
the Manner of knowledge; he shall know the Truths of God in a better manner than
he was wont to do: How is that? you will say. I answer, and shall give you an
instance in five particulars: First, He shall know truths more inwardly.
Secondly, He shall know truths more experimentally. Thirdly, He shall know
truths more transformingly. Fourthly, He shall know truths more powerfully.
Fifthly, He shall know truths more satisfyingly.


First, An obedient Christian shall know truths more inwardly, more feelingly
than he was wont to do; not only have a bare apprehension, but such a knowledge
as shall take an impression upon his heart: and therefore this inward knowledge
is compared to seeing, and to tasting, and to smelling.

First, It is compared to. Seeing, Ephesians. 3.8, 9, Unto me who am less than the
least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the Unsearchable Riches of Christ; and to make all men see (not only
know, but see) what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning
of the world has been hid in God, who Created all things by Jesus Chuist. The
Italian Translation renders it, that all men may see what was the dispensation
of the Mystery which was hid from the beginning of the World, which God was
pleased to hide in himself from the beginning of the World, that all men may
see. I quote that Scripture to prove, that inward Knowledge is compared to
Seeing, and Seeing is more than a bare Report, according to that of Job, Job
42.15, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees
thee, I abhor my self in dust and ashes.

Secondly, This inward Knowledge is compared to Tasting, 1 Pet. 2.3, If so be
that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Tasting is more than Knowing,
and Tasting is more than Seeing. If all the Orators in the World should
describe what the sweetness of Honey is, they could not do it so well as a man
that tastes it. Now the Soul comes to taste the sweetness that is in Jesus
Christ. Notional knowledge is one thing, and Tasting knowledge is another thing;
they have a feeling, experimental knowledge in their own hearts. That is another.

Thirdly, This inward Knowledge is compared, not only to Seeing, and Tasting,
but it is compared to Smelling also, Isa. 11.3, And the Spirit of the Lord
shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: So the words are
read; but the Hebrew phrase carries it thus, and so it is in the Margin of your
Bibles, The Spirit of the Lord shall make him of quick scent, or smell, in the
fear of the Lord: That is, a man that is once taught by the Spirit of God, that
is taught of God, as our Savior uses the Phrase, such a man shall scent, and
smell, and savor, and breathe out nothing but holiness. As our Savior, it is
said of him, All thy garments smell of Myrrh, and Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm
45.8, And because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is as Ointment
poured forth, Cant. 1.3. Look as the Ointment that was poured on our Saviors
head, left such a scent or smell behind it, that the whole house was filled
with the savor of it, John 12.3. So is it in this case; a man that has once
received the Spirit of God, and is taught by the Spirit of God, such a man
shall have such a sweet savor of the knowledge of God, that it shall be able to
diffuse it self to others, 2 Cor. 2.14. The Apostle Saint Paul blesses God for
this, that he caused them to triumph in Christ, and made manifest the savor of
his knowledge by them in every place. And our Latin word for Wisdom, Sapientia,
it has its derivation from this, it is a savoury Knowledge. So that this inward
Knowledge, is more than bare apprehension: it is you see compared to Seeing,
Touching, and to Smelling.

Secondly, He shall know truths more experimentally than he did before; and
this is that you read of, John 4.42: It is the speech of the Samaritans to the
woman that had left her Water-pot, and went into the City of Samaria, and
declared to them of the City, what she had heard and seen concerning Christ;
Now (say they) we believe not for thy sayings, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this indeed is the Christ, the Savior of the world. And
thus likewise did the Disciples make a Confession of Christ, John 6.69, And we
believe, and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God.

Thirdly, An obedient Christian shall know truths more transformingly: that is,
he shall be transformed into the very Image of those truths that he knows, 2
Cor. 3. ult. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord; That is, we are changed from one degree of grace unto
another, by the Spirit of God. That is an excellent knowledge that is a
transforming knowledge, that makes a Christian have a heart framed into the Word
of God: that is cast into the Mould of the Doctrine of the Word of God made
like unto it: as Lead that is melted and cast into a Mould, is of the shape of
the Mould, Romans 6.17, But ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of Doctrine
which was delivered you, or, into which ye were delivered or cast.

Fourthly, An obedient Christian shall know truths more powerfully than he did
before, that those truths which he knows shall overawe his heart, that he dare
do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8, For we can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Acts 4.20, We cannot but speak
the things which we have heard and seen. It was an excellent speech of Saint
Hierom, I can die for the truth, but I cannot deny the truth, nor be silent;
whereas another man, it may be he can oppose the truth, and the ways of truth,
though he knows he ought not to do it; it may be, another man can break his
Vows, and Covenants, and Promises, and Protestations, although he knows the sin
of Covenant Breaking is a grievous sin, and shall be severely punished, as
appears by that remarkable Scripture, Ezekiel. 17.15, 16: Where it is testified of
Zedekiah, that after he had made a Covenant with Nebuchadnezzar, he rebelled
against him; and says God, Shall he prosper, he that does such things as these
are? shall he prolong his days? He has broken his Covenant, says God, shall
he be delivered? As I live, says the Lord, he shall die in that Land for his
Covenantbreaking. So I say, a man may have so much knowledge, that he knows such
and such things are sin, and he may know the Judgment of God, that they that do
such things, are worthy of death: yet they do it, and take pleasure in them
that do it. For example: They know that Whoredom is a sin, and a damnable sin,
that carries thousands to Hell: Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in
secret is pleasant; but he knows not that the dead are there, and that her
Guests are in the depths of Hell, Prove. 9.17, 18. Those works of darkness are
pleasant for a while; but the Devils banquet, shall have the Devils shot.
Though a wicked man knows that whoredom is a sin, yet his knowledge is so weak,
that it has no powerful influence upon his heart and life; but now an obedient
Christian, he shall know truths so powerfully, that they shall have an awe upon
his Soul. Thus was it with the Prophet David, Psalm 119.161, Princes have
persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy Word. That is
the fourth: an obedient Christian knows truths more powerfully.

Fifthly, He that does the will of God for the manner of his Knowledge, shall
know truths more satisfyingly, to oversway all Objections that are made against
him, and all discouragements that he meets with in the way of holiness. Saint
Paul tells us how it was with him in this regard, Gal. 1.15, 16, When it
pleased God to reveal Jesus Christ in me. That phrase [in me] is very
remarkable. A man may have Jesus Christ revealed to him, and yet not revealed
in him; but when God revealed Christ in me, immediately I consulted not with
flesh and blood; but this Knowledge did preponder and outweigh all Objections
that could be made against it. Another man that has but a weak and feeble
knowledge, it may be, he takes check at the ways of holiness: and what says he?
If I walk in a strict way, and am circumspect and careful in ordering my
conversation, I shall be scorned, and opposed, and contemned; and these his
Objections prevails with him. A man now, on the other side, that is taught of
God, is able to answer all these Objections, and to pass through good report,
and ill report. This is the first thing, for Explication.

Secondly, By way of Explication, it may be demanded: But how comes it to pass
that obedient Christians shall know more than others?

For answer to this, I shall give you these four Reasons for it:

First, Because God has promised the Holy Ghost to them that obey him, Acts
5.31, 32, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; and we are
his witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God has
given to them that obey him: You must understand it aright. God does not
promise the Holy Ghost for our obedience, but in a way of obedience; now if God
give his Spirit to them that obey him, then they shall have more knowledge, they
shall know more of his will; for the Spirit of God is a Spirit of light, and
opens our understanding. The Spirit of God is a teaching Spirit, and they that
are taught by the Spirit of God, shall certainly come to Jesus Christ, John
6.45, All thy children shall be taught of God; every man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me, Isa. 54.13. -- And the
Spirit of God is a leading Spirit, The Spirit will lead you into all Truth; the
Spirit will not only take you by the hand, but lead you in the way that you
should walk in. As you lead your children when you teach them to go, so the
Spirit will lead you into all truth; that man to whom the Spirit of God is
given, must certainly needs know more of the Mystery of Salvation.

Secondly, A second Reason is this, Because God has made many Promises to the
obedient: how many precious Promises have you in that one Scripture? Deuteronomy. 28,
If thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and to do all his Commandments; then the Lord thy God will set thee on high,
above all the Nations of the Earth, and all these blessings shall come upon
thee; blessed shall thou be in the City, and in the Field, and in the fruit of
thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and an the fruit of thy Cattle, and thy
Kine, and the Flocks of thy Sheep; and blessed shall be thy basket, and thy
store; blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and when thou go out, etc.
There are blessings of all sorts promised, and among others this is one: for
says our Savior, To him that has, shall be given; and it is twice repeated
in one Evangelist, in Matthew. 13.12, and Matthew. 25.29, To him that has, shall
be given; he that well uses his Talent, shall have more Talents given to him.

Thirdly, Because God does love to reward his Servants. Just as a Master deals
with his Factor beyond the Seas, when he sees that he deals faithfully with him
in smaller matters, he intrusts him with more of his Estate; so when God sees
us faithful in a little, he trusts us with more; when he sees us to use one
talent well, he will give us five talents to trade with.

Fourthly, Because the more grace is acted, the more it grows and is increased.
Remarkable is that Scripture, Heb. 5. ult. But strong meat belongs to them
that are of full age, even those who by reason of use, have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil; By reason of use have their spiritual
senses exercised. Use legs, as we say, and have legs: the more a man sets about
this Heavenly Employment of acting of grace, the more grace he shall have in
his heart.

Now for the Application of this Point, and first by way of Instruction: it
serves to let you see what is the reason of that truth which carnal men will
hardly helieve, That Godly men are the only wise men, and that wicked men
though they are never so knowing, are errant fools: this is a truth plainly set
down in this Scripture: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prove.
9.10. None are wise but those that fear the Lord; none are prudent in Gods
account, but those that are obedient, those that practice what they know:
practical Christians, are the only prudent Christians in Gods account.
Remarkable is that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, Behold, I have taught you Statutes
and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in
the Land whither ye go to possess. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your
wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations, that shall hear these
Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People.
But now on the contrary, wicked men, let them have never so much knowledge, let
them have as much knowledge as the wicked Angels, who are knowing Spirits (the
Devils are intelligent Spirits) if he do not put his knowledge into practice: if
he be a wicked man, he is in Gods account an errant fool, he is but a very Sot:
He is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes,
because darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2.11.

The second Use it is by way of Exhortation: and let it be a powerful
persuasion to every one here present: and Oh that I could leave this
Exhortation warm upon your hearts! Oh that I could put you upon the practice of
what you have heard: I beseech you, as ever you desire that Jesus Christ should
take you by the hand, and kiss you with the kisses of his mouth, and manifest
his love to you; as ever you desire that Jesus Christ should make fuller
discoveries of himself to you, labor to practice what you know: live up to
your light, do not foster or favor any known sin; nor bauk nor decline any
known Duty; but live up to your light. Now that I may press you to it, consider,

First, We live in times of Libertinism and looseness, wherein many hold the
truth in unrighteousness: The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against them
that imprison the Truth, that sin against the light of their knowledge and
Conscience, that blow out the Candle, lest it should discover truth to them:
Light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil, John 3.19, And this is the condemnation to them with a
witness, who shut the light out of their Souls: The wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Let me set on this Consideration with this
Motive.

First, Consider how little it is that we know of God: The very best of Gods
Saints and Servants, how little do they know of him! To use Jobs phrase, Job
26. ult. How little a portion is heard of him! What a little knowledge is it,
that the most knowing men have? There is a thousand times more excellency, and
sulness, and sweetness, and Soul-satisfaction, and beauty, and all sufficiency
in God, in the Lord Jesus Christ, than ever yet was known or discovered; How
little a portion do we know of God! The greatest part of our knowledge, is the
least part of our ignorance: we are ignorant of a thousand times more than we
know. There are unsearchable riches in Jesus Christ, as the Apostle calls them,
Ephesians. 3.8. There is a thousand times more riches in Christ than ever was
discovered: Mines of Wisdom and Knowledge, that you were never yet acquainted
with: now if you would know more, practice what you do know.

Secondly, Consider, the more you know of God, the nearer do you come to
Heaven; for the fullness of the Saints happiness in Heaven will be this, when
they shall see God as he is, and know him as he is, 1 John 3.2, Beloved now are
we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know,
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Heaven consists in the Beatifical Vision of God; a sight of God, seeing of him
as he is in Heaven. David gives you a glimpse of Heaven in one Verse, Psalm 17.
ult. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied
when I awake with thy likeness. Heaven consists in the Vision of God; in
conformity to God, and in satisfaction in God: this is Heaven. Vision of God, I
will behold thy face in righteousness; Conformity to God, When I awake with thy
likeness; Satisfaction in God, I shall be satisfied; then our Knowledge will be
perfected.

Thirdly, Consider, that this experimental Knowledge that springs from
Obedience, will make you sound and solid Christians, that you shall not take up
Religion upon trust: but you shall know upon what grounds you believe, upon
what grounds you have the hope of eternal happiness: you shall not have your
Religion upon trust or Tradition: you shall have a certain evidence of your
interest in Jesus Christ, and your hope of Eternal happiness; you shall be able
to read your names written in Heaven. On the contrary, take away that
experimental Knowledge that springs from Obedience: and a man may be a Turk upon
the same ground that he is a Christian, because he takes his Religion upon
trust. Take away this experimental Knowledge, a man may be of any Religion, as
well as a Christian. O get this Knowledge that springs from Obedience, then you
will know upon what grounds you take up Religion; and your hopes of Heaven and
happiness will be upon good grounds.

Fourthly, Consider, God looks upon all your Knowledge as nothing worth, unless
you practice what you know, and live up to your light; God looks upon all your
Praying, and Reading, and Hearing, and Communicating, as nothing, if so be you
do not live up to what you know, Jer. 32.23, And they came in and possessed it,
but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy Law: they have done
nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do. What, had they done nothing
that God commanded them to do? they had circumcised their Children in obedience
to Gods Command; they offered Sacrifices, they came to the Temple, they did
many specious outward Duties: but says the Prophet, They did nothing of all
that God commanded them: Why? because they did not practice what they knew,
their lives were not answerable to the profession they made; therefore God
esteemed their profession, no profession; God esteemed their Sacrifices, no
Sacrifices: take your Sacrifices to your selves, Ezekiel. 20, Your new Moons, and
your Sabbaths, and solemn Assemblies, I am weary of them, says God; they are
an abomination unto me. All their outward professions were nothing, because
they did not practice what they knew. It is said of the Sons of Eli, that they
were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. It may be thou may
have a great deal of notional knowledge: thy tongue may be so tip'd with
Religion, that thoumayst be able to discourse upon Points of Religion very
judiciously: thou may be able to give an account of thy Faith, thou may to
able to answer an Argument, thou may be able to defend the Truth; yet, if so
be thou do not live according to thy knowledge, in Gods account still thou
know nothing at all; God notwithstanding all thy Knowledge, looks upon thee
but as an ignorant Sot: as it is said of Israel, Jer. 4.22, For my People are
foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and have no
understanding.

Again, Though thou may hear a thousand Sermons, if thou do not frame thy
life according to the Rule and Prescript of the Word of God, in Gods esteem
thou art as one that never heard a Sermon in all thy life: and is not this a
pitiful thing, that a man for want of practice shall lose all that he has
done: all his Prayers, and all his Hearing, and all his Communicating at the
Lords Table? for an unpractical Christian in Gods account, has done nothing at
all; methinks this should work upon your hearts. If ever therefore you desire
that God should look upon you, as upon his Children, that God should own you in
a day when you would give a whole World for a smile of his face; If ever you
desire that Jesus Christ should give this testimony of you, Father, here are
they that have kept thy Word; if ever you would have God to say to you, as he
says of some, These are my Children: then rest not in a bare notional
profession of the Truth; but let Profession and Practice, Science and
Conscience go together. This is the first Branch of the Doctrine, or the first
Proposition, They that obey the will of God, shall know more of his Will.

JOHN VII. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.


I Come now to the second Proposition, which is this: He that does the will of
God, shall be more assured of what he knows.

This is that which our Savior implies, when he says, He shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self; that is, he
shall know it more certainly, know it more assuredly. To this agrees that
speech of our Savior, John 8.23, 32, If you continue in my Word, then are you
my Disciples indeed, and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. Such an assured Knowledge had the Disciples, John 6.69, And we believe,
and are sure, that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. It was not a
conjectural knowledge, but a certain knowledge; say they, We believe and are
sure. And such a knowledge had Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12, I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day; He is able to keep my Soul, my Salvation,
which he calls his Depositum, which he had deposited with God. For the better
Explication of this Truth, That he that does the will of God, shall be more
assured of what he knows; it may be demanded, What is this certainty, or
assurance of knowledge?

First, There are some things to be premised, or Cautions to be observed, for
the finding out the Nature of this sure and certain Knowledge. Secondly, I will
give you some distinctions of Knowledge, whereby you may see what it is I am
speaking of. Thirdly, I will then give you the Description of this sure and
certain Knowledge.
1. That you may know what this certainty of Knowledge is: there are some things
to be premised, some Cautions for the finding out of this sure and certain
Knowledge, and the Cautions are these five:

First, When I speak of sure and certain Knowledge, I do not mean an assurance
of Salvation, neither do I speak of the reflect act of Knowledge, whereby we
know that which we know, 1 John 2.3, Hereby we know that we know; but I speak
of that the Apostle calls the full assurance of understanding, Col. 2.2. When a
man is so rooted, settled, and established in the present truth, (Ephesians. 4.14. 2
Pet. 1.12.) that he is not always doubting, imagining, haesitating, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine.

The second Caution is this, When I speak of full assurance of understanding:
you must remember, that there cannot be such a full assurance attained, that
will be absolute and perfect: certainly, an absolute, perfect certainty of
Knowledge, cannot be attained in this life, that is, free from all doubting; for
our knowledge in this life at the best is but imperfect; We know but in part,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.9. Although it be not absolutely perfect, yet it
is so strong that it will not be overswayed by the opinion of others, though
they be very learned men; and this is that which the Apostle means in that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.15, The spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is
judged of no man: That is, he is able to judge, and discern between Truth and
Error, between Copper and Gold, between Food and Poison; he is able to discern
Error from Truth; He himself is judged of no man; that is, he is so certainly
assured of the truth that he holds, that the contrary judgment of others,
though men of greater parts, and greater Scholars, shall not oversway him, or
make him to stagger. It is true indeed, Thomas staggered a while at the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, yet he recovered himself, and afterward came to
that certainty, that he cried out, My Lord, and my God, John 22.20. A man (for
Example) may meet with some knots in Religion, foam knotty Disputations, he may
meet with some Objections that he does not know how to answer: as Saint Austin
said, That original sin was propagated to the Soul, I know it certainly: but
how it is propagated, I cannot tell. A man may meet with some Objections that
he cannot answer: however, he will not be overswayed so as to forsake the
Truth, because he cannot answer some Objections.

Thirdly, When I speak of this full assurance of understanding or knowledge in
the mysteries of our Salvation; this Caution likewise must be remembered, That
though it is true, that God does bestow it upon those that do his will, yet it
is not gained only by doing the will of God, but it is gained especially by the
gift of the Spirit of God. When Saint Peter made that excellent confession of
Christ, when our Savior asked his Disciples, But whom say ye that I am? he
answered, and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, (Matthew. 16.15,
16, 17:) And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jona,
for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. It is the Spirit of God that leads us into all Truth.

Fourthly, When I speak of a certainty of Knowledge: you must remember, that it
is not a common gift of the Spirit of God, but it is a saving gift of the
Spirit of God: for so says our Savior, Matthew. 13.11, 12, 13, To you it is
given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to others it is not
given; for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he
has; therefore speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing, see not, and
hearing, they heart not, neither do they understand. This same certainty of
Knowledge, therefore, is not attained by any natural qualification: it is not a
Knowledge that can be gotten, or learned in Natures School: it is not gotten by
Art or Industry, or reading of Books, neither is it gotten by Tradition. The
Gentiles had a Natural knowledge of God, Romans 1.21, Because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God. They knew God by a Natural light; but it is
a Knowledge that is revealed by the Spirit of God; and therefore the Spirit of
God is called the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, in the knowledge of him,
Ephesians. 1.17.

Fifthly, Take this Caution, this assurance of Knowledge is gradual: that is, it
has different degrees: in some it is more, and in some it is less; some are
but Babes in Christ, others there are that are strong men: some are weak in the
Faith, Romans 14.1. Others are rooted in Christ, and built up in him, and
stablished in the Faith, Col. 2.7. This certainty of understanding at the first
is but very weak; as the Disciples of Christ in the great Point of the
Resurrection, at the first they were not clear in their knowledge of it, Luke
24.21, We trusted that it had been him which should have redeemed Israel;
beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done; so that
now our hope is almost at an end, in the great business of our Saviors
Resurrection: they were not cleat at the first. A man that has this certainty
of Knowledge, may have but a weak beginning at the first, and yet
notwithstanding it will increase more and more: like the morning light, that
shines more and more to the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. So that a man will at last
come to be grounded, and stablished in the truth; he will be steadfast, and
unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult. He will be
stablished in Christ, and grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savor Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. ult.

Secondly, Let me give you some Distinctions of Knowledge, that you may be the
better able to find it out. Knowledge you must know is twofold: there is a
Natural, and a Supernatural Knowledge. First, Natural Knowledge which is engraven
in the Soul of man by Nature, as the Gentiles by Nature knew God, Romans 1.21.
That is a Natural knowledge that is gotten by Art, and Industry, as the knowledge
of Astronomy is, and the like.

Secondly, Supernatural Knowledge, that is revealed by the Spirit of God. Now
the Supernatural Knowledge is twofold: -- First, It is either common: -- Or
secondly, It is saving. There is a common Supernatural Knowledge, that is common
to the Reprobates, as well as to the Elect; for Reprobates who sin the sin
against the Holy Ghost, they are enlightened with a Supernatural light. Every
thing that is Supernatural, is not Spiritual; the Devils they have a
Supernatural light, and yet it is not a spiritual, nor sanctifying light; and
therefore they that sin the sin against the Holy Ghost, have common light,
which is Supernatural; the Text says, They have received the knowledge of the
truth, Heb. 10.26.

Secondly, There is a saving Supernatural light, viz. that which is infused
into the Souls of the Regenerate, by the saving work of Gods holy Spirit. Now
this supernatural saving light, that is again twofold.

First, It is either mediate, that is, that which is acquired by means: as
Reading, Hearing, and Praying, waiting upon God in the use of his Ordinances,
according as God told Saint Paul in the preaching of the Word, Men's eyes should
be opened, and they should be turned from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God, Acts 26.18.

Secondly, Or else it is immediate: and this is that light which is darted into
the Soul without the use of means. Saint Paul (for example) he was enlightened
miraculously by a Revelation from Heaven, Acts 9. And so in the Conversion of
the Jailer, how wonderfully was he enlightened on a sudden! Acts 16. And the
Conversion of the Thief on the Cross, it was done immediately by the Spirit of
God. Now when I am speaking of this certainty of Knowledge, I speak not of a
Natural, but of a Spiritual Knowledge; neither do I speak of a common
Supernatural Knowledge, but of the sanctifying and saving gift of the Spirit of
God; neither do I speak of the immediate, without the means; but I speak of the
mediate in the use of means; therefore to come to the third thing, that is, to
give you the Description of this certain and assured Knowledge: and the
Description is this.

Certainty of Spiritual Knowledge, it is a saving work of the Spirit of God,
whereby a Believer receives satisfying light, and does give up his
understanding resolvedly to those Truths that are revealed to him. There are
these five things to be noted in this Description.

First, I say it is a saving work of the Spirit of God. It is not the knowledge
of Devils; the Devils have a Supernatural Knowledge; neither is it the knowledge
of Hypocrites, such a knowledge as they that sin the sin against the Holy Ghost
may have: but it is that Knowledge that is darted into the Soul by the Holy
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. The Apostle speaks it of the Kingdom of Grace, as well as of the
Kingdom of Glory; Man does not know the work of the Spirit of Grace upon the
heart: but says he in the words following, God has revealed them unto us by
his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.
And it is the Spirit of God, that is said to guide us into all truth, John
16.13. That is the first thing in the Description, it is a saving work of the
Spirit of God.

Secondly, It is a Knowledge whereby a Believer has received satisfying light.

First, A Believer has received light. The truth is, none does know the Truth
aright, but he that believes it; therefore believing and knowing the Truth, are
joined together: 1 Timothy 4.3, Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving, of them
which believe, and know the Truth.

Thirdly, I note this, whereby a Believer receiving satisfying light; But what
is that light (may be, some of you will say) that may be called satisfying
light?

I answer, and shall give you an account of it in these five particulars:

First, That is a satisfying Light, that is joined with a powerful Conviction
upon the Conscience, when the Spirit of God does eonvince us of sin, and of
Righteousness, and Judgment, John 16.8. That is a satisfying Light, when the
Spirit of God breaks in upon the Soul with such an irresistible Light, that a
man cannot gainsay it, or withstand it; for example, When the Sun is risen in
the morning, a man then knows it is day: and if a thousand should say to the
contrary, he would say, I know it is day. Such is the light of the Spirit of
God; it is an irresistible light, it breaks in upon the heart with that power,
that the heart cannot gainsay it.

Secondly, That is a satisfying Light, which settles and stablisheth a man in
the present Truth, that he will not be removed from it: When a man is rooted in
the Faith, settled and stablished in Jesus Christ, then he has received a
satisfying Light.

Thirdly, That is a fatisfying Light, when a man can act Faith upon that light
he has received, and make bold adventures for the Truth that he has embraced,
when he can act Faith upon it; so did those three Worthies in Daniel. 3.17:
they had received such satisfying Light, that God was the true God, and his
Worship the true Worship, that they ventured a Furnace for it; say they, If it
be so, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King; but if not, be it
known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy
Golden Image which thou have set up.

Fourthly, That is a satisfying Light, which will enable a man to discern
between Truth and falsehood: though Error be masked with never such fair
pretenses, yet notwithstanding a man shall be able to discover that Error, and
abhor it: and though Truth be eclipsed with never so many false Glosses, and
Interpretations, and never so much opposed: yet a man can discern it, and close
with it, and cleave to it.

Fifthly, This is a satisfying Light, that will enable a man to reconcile some
seeming differences that are in the Scriptures. Let me give you an instance in
one or two: those two places compared together, Genesis 6.6, And it repented the
Lord that he had made man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his heart; but in
Numb. 23.19, it is said, God is not as man that he should lie, neither the Son
of man that he should repent. Now a man that has this satisfying Light, he
knows how to reconcile these two places thus: Repentance in God, is not a
change of his Will, but of his Work; God is said to repent after the manner of
men, because he does those things that man does, when he repents. Let me give
you another instance: Saint Paul tells us, Romans 3.28, Therefore we conclude,
that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law: But Saint James
he tells the quite contrary, James 2.25, Ye see then, how by Works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only. Now a man that has satisfying Light, he
reconciles these two thus: Saint Paul he speaks of justification before God;
and Saint James he speaks of Justification before men: We are justified before
God by Faith only, we are justified before men by works. Again, they may be
reconciled thus: Faith does justify our Persons, but good works does justify
our Faith; Good works are no part of our Justification, but only a proof of our
Justification.

Lastly, In the Description I say this: A Believer having received a satisfying
Light, gives up his understanding resolvedly to those Truths that are revealed
to him. But you will say, When does a man give up his understanding resolvedly
to those Truths revealed to him? I will tell you,

First, When he is resolved to part with every sin that the Word of God
disallows and condemns, though it be as dear to him as his right hand, or his
right eye; and when he can practice every Duty that the Word of God commands,
though it be never so difficult. As for Example, the duty of Mortification, and
Self-denial, and contempt of the World, when he can purify his heart by
believing, and obeying the Truth, 1 Pet. 1.22, Seeing you have purified your
Souls in obeying the truth, through the Spirit. And it is said of many of the
Priests, that they were obedient to the Faith, Acts 6.7. And St. Paul said,
Acts 26.19: that he was not disobedient to the Heavenly Vision.

Secondly, A man gives up his understanding resolvedly to the truth, when he
can plead for the truth, and not plead against it. Says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13.8, For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Doctor Tailor
the Martyr in Queen Mary's days, he laid down his life for this truth, That it
was lawful for Ministers to marry; I know (said he) that it is not a
fundamental truth; but because I know it is the truth of God, rather than I
will part with any truth, I will part with my life. So then, when a man can
thus resolvedly give up his understanding to the truth, that he will part with
his life rather than part with the truth, then has he attained to this
certainty of Knowledge indeed. And thus you see the Description of it, and have
the Point opened: now let me make Application of it.

Use 1. If this be a certain truth, That they that do the Will of God, shall
not only know more of Gods Will, but they shall know it more assuredly: they
shall be sure of what they know, and shall attain to this certainty of Knowledge
that I have been speaking of: then it serves to let us see what is the reason
of all the Errors that are broached, and so greedily drunk in, in these days
in which we live; what is the reason of that uncertainty, and unconstancy that
is in Religion; that men are giddy-headed, turned with every wind of Doctrine
and new Opinion; and suck in such strange and corrupt Doctrines, and that there
is so many Sects and Schisms: the reason is, because men never attained to this
full assurance of Understanding, this certainty of Knowledge that the Text
speaks of: If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. All the knowledge that they have of
the Scripture, it may be it is but an Opinion, or a conjecture, or a guess, a
notional knowledge, a knowledge that is taken up upon tradition, or trust, not
that they have any assurance of it in their own hearts and understandings: All
the knowledge of Scepticks, those that you call Seekers, Nullifidians, that
believe nothing, all whose profession is to profess nothing, all their knowledge
is but a mere Opinion; the truth is, they have no knowledge at all; If they did
know the truth, the truth would make them free; If they had known the truth,
they would have been rooted, and fetled, and established in it: they would part
with their lives, rather than part with the truth.

A second Lesson you may learn hence, is this: It lets us see what the reason
is of all that Atheism and looseness, and libertinism that is in the hearts of
men, and practices of men at this day; the reason is, because they never
attained to any certainty of knowledge in the Doctrine of Christ, and Mysteries
of Religion: they never did believe the Precepts and Promises, nor Threatenings
of God cordially: For Example, Did men but believe the threatenings of the Word;
to name two or three: When God says, Upon the wicked he will rain snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup,
Psalm 11.6. Again, when God says, that he will wound the head of his enemies,
and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses, Psalm
^8.21. And God says expressly, that no unrighteous person shall inherit the
Kingdom of God: neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And that Text says expressly, That the fearful, and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and all liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21.8. Did men but know these truths, were they but assured of
them, durst they do as they do? durst they venture their immortal Souls, that
must sink or swim for ever, that are capable of endless bliss, or endless,
remidiless misery in Hell, more days than there are drops of water in the whole
Ocean? Durst they venture their precious Souls for the satisfying of every base
lust, as they do? No, they durst not. Men do not know these truths: and because
they do not know them, therefore it is that they do not believe them; and
because they do not know and believe them, therefore there is in them an evil
heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God. The first step of the Souls
departure from God, is by unbelief: so the first step of the Souls approach to
God, is by Faith; Unbelief is the cause of all other sins. A man that does not
believe the Promises of God to embrace them, nor the Threatenings of God to fear
them, nor the Precepts of God to obey them: when he departs from God by
unbelief, he departs to other sins, and still departs further and further: so
that the breach between God and the Soul, is never made up again: but such a
man departs from God step by step, until at last he comes to hear that
Thunder-striking sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

A second Use is by way of Examination: and I beseech you, my Brethren, to call
your selves to an account, and examine whether you have this certainty of
understanding, this assured Knowledge that I have discoursed of. May be you will
say to me, But how shall we know whether we have it, or no? Answ. I will tell
you how you may know it, these three ways: First, By the names or expressions
that the Spirit of God gives it. Secondly, By the Properties of it. Thirdly, By
the Effects of it.


First, You may know it by the names or Expressions that the Spirit of God
gives it; such Expressions as these now:

First, It is called a Knowledge of those things which are most surely believed,
Luke 1.1: Not barely believed, but certainly believed.

A second Expression is, a being taught of God, John 6.45, And they shall be
all taught of God.

Thirdly, It is known by this Expression, by writing the Law of God in our
hearts, upon the Tables of our hearts, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.

Fourthly, By this Expression, by receiving the anointing that teaches you all
things, 1 John 2.27, But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth.

Fifthly, It is known by this expression, By having the mind of Christ; or
knowing the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. ult.

Sixthly, It is known by this expression, by bringing high thoughts into the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. When there is such a light in a man, that it
can answer those Objections that are made against the truth: when it can
likewise so stifle those reasonings and cavils of his backsliding heart, that
none of them shall be able to beat down the truth, but he shall be able to
stick to the truth notwithstanding; such a man has this certainty of Knowledge.

Lastly, It is known by this expression, the manifestation of the Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.2, But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

Secondly, This certainty of knowledge may be known by the Properties of it, I
shall name but these four Properties:

First, This assuring Knowledge is ever an heart-humbling knowledge. Carnal
knowledge, natural knowledge, unsanctifyed knowledge puffs a man up, it makes him
like a pair of Bellows, as the word (...), in the Original signifies, 1 Cor.
8.1: but this assuring Knowledge, it ever makes a man base and humble in his own
eyes: the more you know of God, and of the truths of God, and of your own
selves, the more vile and base you will be in your own eyes: I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee: wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6.

Secondly, This Knowledge is a reflective knowledge: it makes a man turn in upon
his own heart, it makes a man to be wise for himself, Prove. 9.12, If thou be
wise, thou shall be wise for thy self. There is many a man that knows how to
teach others, but yet he cannot teach himself, Job 5.27, Lo this, we have
searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy good: In the Hebrew it
is, Hear and know it for thy self.

Thirdly, This assured Knowledge is an experimental knowledge: for it will make a
man read some Sculpture or ingraving of the Spirit of God upon his own heart,
that his heart will be Christ's Epistle, written not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.3. The truth is, my Brethren (and I would
have you to remember it) that all the truths of God to a carnal and
unregenerate man, are Mysteries. No man (for example) knows what Repentance is,
but the repenting Sinner; no man knows what Faith is, but the true Believer; no
man knows what Regeneration is, but he that is regenerate; no man knows what
Union with Christ is, but he that is united to Christ; no man knows what it is
to have Communion with Christ in his Life, and Death, and Resurrection, and
Graces, and Comforts, but he that has felt them in his own heart; no man knows
it savingly, until he knows it experimentally. A sick man does better know what
his disease is, than all the Physicians in the World, because he feels it. A
blind man may talk of Colors, that never saw them. A hungry man may talk of a
rich Banquet, that he never tasted of: But now this is sure knowledge, it is an
experimental knowledge.

Fourthly, It is a heart-warming knowledge: other knowledge, a notional knowledge,
is but like the light of the Moon: it enlightens indeed in a dark night, but it
does not warm. But now this assured Knowledge is like the light of the Sun: it
does not only enlighten you, but it heats and warms your hearts, it will make
you in love with Jesus Christ, and to long for more Communion with him in Grace
here, and in Glory hereafter.

Thirdly, You may know this certainty of Knowledge by the Effects of it, and I
shall name but these two:

First, This assured Knowledge will make you to hold fast the Name of God,
notwithstanding all the opposition that you meet with: it will make you stick
to the Truths of God, Psalm 119.31, I have stuck unto thy Testimonies, O Lord,
put me not to shame. In Rev. 2.13. God speaks to the Church of Pergamus, Thou
hold fast my Name, and have not denied my Faith, even in those days where
Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells:
Thou have kept my Name there, in the midst of opposition.

Secondly, It will make a man run any hazard rather than part with the Truth.
See the courage of Saint Paul, Acts 20.24, The Holy Ghost witnesses in every
City, saying, Bonds and afflictions abide me; but none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto my self, so I may finish my course with joy.
The truth is, a little light, if it be spiritual, will make a man to resist
temptations, that the allurements of the Flesh, and the World, and the Devil
shall not biass him, and carry him away. On the contrary, a great light, if it
be not spiritual, will yield to every temptation: and hence it is, that
sometimes you see a man of weak parts stand out in an hour of temptation and
trial, when a man of strong and great parts (if he wants this spiritual Light)
falls foully and fearfully. A man that has once got this assured knowledge of
the Truth, he will say, I will lay down my life, rather than I will part with
the truth: another man that has not received this Light, how will he shift,
and shuffle, and temporize, and part with the truth, and swim with every
stream, and sail with every wind! How will he be a double-minded man in all his
ways: and will be carried about with every wind of Doctrine!

Use 3. Now to shut up all with this one word of Exhortation: I beseech you in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would labor for this full
assurance of Understanding: that you would be rooted, and settled, and
established in the truth: get a settled understanding. Now to press you to this,
let me use but these two Motives:

The first is this; The truth is, there is no proper Knowledge where this
certainty is wanting, it is at the best else, but matter of conjecture. See an
instance in Saint Paul, before he had this spiritual Light, in Acts 26.9, I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things against Jesus of
Nazareth. It was but his thought and conjecture; whereas when a man has once
gotten this certainty of Knowledge, then he understands the Scriptures indeed,
Luke 24.45, Then opened he their understandings, that they might understand the
Scriptures. And you may observe in the Parable of the Sower, and the four
Grounds, three whereof were naught, and one good: of the three first it is not
said, that they received the Word with understanding, but only the fourth
Ground heard the Word, and received it with understanding, Matthew. 13.23.

A second Motive is this, it will be of singular use to you in erroneous and
backsliding times: it will be of singular advantage to your poor Souls, when
you shall have that Knowledge, that you can discern Truth from Error; and Gold
from Copper, and Food from Poison. Our Savior here in the Text speaks of it as
the Privilege of a Believer, or obedient Christian, that he shall be able to
discern true Doctrine from false. Certainly, in such times as we live in,
wherein the Name of God is so much blasphemed, and the Truth is eclipsed, and
the Sun of the Gospel is so much darkened by those fogs and mists of Error: it
is a singular Privilege for a man to have a settled knowledge in the Truth, that
he may not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine. But it may be you will
say, What course must we take to get this certainty of knowledge? I shall tell
you that in three words:

First, If ever you desire to have this full assurance of Knowledge, you must
resolve to walk humbly with your God, Psalm 25.9, The meek will be guide in
Judgment, and the humble will he teach his way.

Secondly, Strive to be growing Christians. That is an excellent Scripture,
Hosea 6.3, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord.

Thirdly, If you would get this full assurance of Understanding, I cannot give
you a better direction than the Text gives you, which our Savior here
prescribes you; do but the Will of God, that is, practice what you know, and
you shall know more: and you shall know in a better manner, and know more
assuredly than you do. I conclude with an excellent Speech of a Reverend Divine
that is now with God; Men, in matters of Religion, do therefore become
Scepticks, because they are not Practicks: that is, men are ever doubting of
Truth; they will be Seekers, Nullifidians, they will believe nothing, because
they do not practice what they know. It is the practical Christian that shall
know much of God: that shall have the mind of God made known to him, shall have
more of the incomes of the Spirit of God; whereas, if you will not be practical
Christians, you shall be always floating, and wavering, and double-minded, and
ready to be seduced, and led into bypath of Error, which will endanger the
Salvation of your immortal Souls. The Lord help us to practice those Truths
that we know, that he may delight in us, and do us good, and lead our feet in
the way of life.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the
Poultrey.
A Golden Key to open hidden Treasures, or several great points that refer to
the Saints Blessedness and future happiness, with the resolution of several
important Questions: the active and passive Obedience of Christ, vindicated and
proved. Eleven serious singular Pleas, which all sincere Christians may fafely
make to those ten Scriptures which speak of the general Judgment, and the
particular Judgment that most certainly must pass on all, etc.

The works of Mr. James Janeway, containing these six following Treatises,
Heaven on Earth, or the best friend in the worst of times: Death unstung, being
a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas Moseley an Apothecary, with a
Narrative of his Life and Death; also the manner of Gods dealing with him
before and after his Conversion.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas Savage.

Invisible Realities, demonstrated in the holy Life and triumphant Death of Mr.
John Janeway.

The Saints encouragement to Diligence in Christ's Service, with Motives and
means to Christian activity: His last Legacy to his Friends, containing 27
Sermons, instances of Gods Providence in and about several dangers and
deliverances, with the names of several who were Eye witnesses to several of
them: Whereunto is added a Sermon on the same Subject.

Mr. Wadsworth's last Legacy; being a serious Exhortation to an Holy Life, or a
Plea for the absolute necessity of Inherent Righteousness, in those that hope
to be saved: with an Elegy on that Author's death.

Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel Remission, or a Treatise showing that true Blessedness consists in the
pardoning of sin; by Jeremy Buroughs.

Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven, being an Exposition of the 4th Chapter
of the 2d Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians, by Thomas Case.

The retired man's Meditations, or the Mystery and power of Godliness,
presenting to view the richness and fullness of Christ's person as the Mediator,
or the Spiritual and Natural man in their proper distinctions, etc. by Sir
Henry Vane, Knight.

The Saints Triumph over the last Enemy; in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
that zealous and painful Minister of Christ Mr. James Janeway; by Nathaniel
Vincent.

A Collection of Sermons, preached at the Morning-Lecture in Southwark and
elsewhere, by N. Blakie.

The Morning-Seeker, showing the benefit of being good betimes, with directions
of making sure work about early Religion; by John Ryther.

A Discourse of Evangelical Love, Church-peace and Unity, with the occasions
and reasons of present differences and divisions about things Sacred and
Religious: by John Owen, D. D.

Saints Memorials, being a Collection of Divine Sayings written and delivered
by the late Reverend and Eminent Ministers of the Gospel, Mr, Edm. Calamy, Mr.
Joseph Caryl, Mr. R. Venning, Mr. James Janeway, etc.

Heaven realized, being some of the Experiences of a famous Christian
Gentlewoman.

The Christians greatest Interest, or a trial of a Saving-interest in Christ,
the way how to attain it: by W. Guthry, late Minister in Scotland.

The Weavers Pocketbook, or Weaving spiritualized, in a Discourse, wherein men
employed in that Occupation may be instructed how to raise heavenly Meditations
from the several parts of their work: by J Collins, D. D.

A Call to Prayer, in two Sermon on that Subject lately preached to a Country
Auditory, with an account of the Principles and practice of the Quakers in the
matter of Prayer.

The Life and Death of the godly Man, exemplified in a Sermon preached at the
Funeral of that Pious and faithful Minister of Christ Mr. Thomas Wadsworth, by
R. Bragg.

The History of the Wars in New England, with an account of the several fights
between the Joint-Forces of the United English Collonies, and the Indians.

A Practical Expositon of the Ten Commandments, with a Resolution of several
Momentous Questions, and Cases of Conscience: by Mr. James Durham, late
Minister at Glasgow.

The Memorial of Gods Judgments Spiritual and Temporal, in some Sermons of Mr.
Nicholas Lockier Minister of the Gospel.

Godly fear, or the Nature and Necessity of fear, and its usefulness, both to
the driving Sinners to Christ, and to the provoking Christians on in a godly
Life through the several parts and duties of it, till they come to Blessedness:
by R. A. Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.


