The manner of finding of the true Sum of the Infinite Secants of an Arch, by
an Infinite Series.
Which being found and compared with the Sum of the Secants found, by adding of
the Secants of whole Minutes, or Centesmes of a Degree, from a Table of Natural
Secants, do plainly demonstrate that Mr. Edward Wright's Nautical Planisphere
is not a true Projection of the Sphere.
By RICHARD NORRIS Mariner.
IN the Year 1599 Mr. Wright's Book Entitled, The Correction of Errors in
Navigation was printed, in which he says and takes for granted, that if a
Spherical Superficies, with Meridians, Parallels, Rumbs, and the whole
Hydrographical Description drawn thereupon, to be inscribed into a Concave
Cylinder (their Diameters being equal) in such manner that the Extension of the
Spherical Superficies may be equal in every part thereof, as much in Latitude
as in Longitude, applying and joining it self to the Concave Superficies of the
Cylinder round about, and all along toward either Pole; each Parallel upon
this Spherical Superficies increasing successively from the Aequinoctial
toward either Pole, until it come to be of equal Diameter with the Cylinder,
and consequently the Meridians, still inclining themselves, until they come to
be as far distant, every where each from the other, as they are at the
Equinoctial: This Cylindriack Sphere being laid open, makes a plain
Parallellogram, on which all places do stand in the same Longitude, Latitude,
Rumb, and Distance, as they were on the Globe.

And because the Spherical Superficies is extended in every part thereof
equally, That is as much in Latitude as in Longitude, until it applied it self
round about the Concavity of the Cylinder; therefore at every point of Latitude
in this Planisphere, a part of the Meridian keeps the same proportion to the
like part of the Parallel, that the like part of the Meridian and Parallel have
each to the other on the Globe. Hence he demonstrates that the Sum of all the
Secants between any two Latitudes, divided by Radius, is the length of the
Meridian Line contained between these two Latitudes, and made his Table of
Meridional parts by the perpetual Addition of the Natural Secants of every
whole minute, beginning with the Secant of one minute, and ending with the
Secant of 89, 59, which being done, he finds fault with it, and says it was
something too great.

Then seeing Mr. Wright found fault with his own Table, that Learned
Mathematician Mr. William Oughtred took it into Examination, and concluded that
the true Sum of the Secants divided by Radius, is the length of the Meridian
line, the finding of which he long endeavored, but never attained it. Then he
thought that if a minute were divided into Ten thousand equal parts, and a
Table of Natural Secants made to all those minute parts, then those Secants
being added together, their Sum (as he concluded) would be so near the true Sum
of the infinite Secants, that no sensible errors could ensue (but never
considered, that though a Table of Natural Secants should be made to the least
imaginable parts of a Circle, that the Sum of those Secants made by Addition,
would exceed the true Area of the Secants space (which is the true Sum of those
infinite Secants he sought for) by more than half the Sum of the first
difference of all the Secants of those Minute Parts (which I shall demonstrate
in this Paper) but seeing the making of such a Table of Natural Secants would
be extremely tedious, therefore he desisted with this Consideration, that the
decrease would happen in the Decimal parts, remote from degrees.

Moreover, though Mr. Oughtred gave over thinking that the Area of the Secants
space was past finding out, yet Mr. John Collins continued in the Inquiry, and
sought the Solution of that Problem himself, and communicated it to all others,
such as he thought were or would be capable of Solving of Problems of that
Nature. In the Year 1666 Mr. Collins communicated it to me, and told me that if
the true Sum of the Secants were found, we should have the true length of the
Meridian line, on Mercators Chart.

Again in the Year 1668, the said Mr. Collins Communicated this Problem to
James Gregory (of Aberdeen in Scotland) who came and was Resident in London
some months in his return from Padoua, where he writ the true Quadrature of the
Circle and Hyperbola, his ( Geometriae pars Universalis, and his Optics) who
solved this Problem, and Printed it the same year in London, in his
Exercitationes Geometricae, in which after a long and intricate Demonstration,
to prove that the Meridian line on the Planisphere, est Scala Logarithmorum
Excessuum, quibus secantes Latitudinum superant earundem tangentes posito radio
loco unita. He gives us to find the whole Sum of the Secants, this Rule, As the
Radius is to of the Periphery of a Circle: So is the Square of Radius to the
whole Sum of the Secants; in Fol. 19, and sends us to the Second Proposition
of his Geometrical part Universalis, for its Demonstration. Now he that works
by this and finds the Sum of the Secants, and thence to find the length of the
Meridianline, divides it by the Radius, shall find in the Quotient no more nor
less than the of of the Periphery, which I Demonstrate thus: put the Radius= a
and of the Periphery= b, then it is, As a. baa. baa / a=b a and ba / a=b= the
Periph. which was to be demonstrated.

To find the Sum of the Secants of any Arch less than of the Periph. his Rule
is thus, As the Sine of the Arch is to the length of the Arch, so is the
Rect-Angle made of the Sine of the Arch and the Radius, to the Sum of the
Secants of that Arch; which divided by Radius, the Quotient will be=to the
length of the given Arch, as in the last. Put the Rightsine of the Arch= a the
length of the Arch= b, and the Radius= d; now the Demonstration will be as
follows,

As a. badb / a=d b. and db / d=b=the length of the Arch Q E.
Soon after Mr. Gregory's Book was Published, Mr. Collin's desired Dr. B^rrow
to take the Problem of finding the true Sum of the Secants into his
consideration, which he did, and verified what Mr. Gregory had published before
false, with a clear Mathematical Demonstration, which is the Third Proposition
of the Appendix to his 12th Lecture fol. 111, and 166th Figure.

The reason why both those able Mathematicians gave a false Solution of this
Problem, was because neither of them did understand what kind of Figure that
was whose Area they sought, which appears by their own Figures; from whence it
is plain that both of them did force all those Secants that do pass from the
Center through every of the least imaginable parts contained in a Quadrant, to
stand perpendicular upon the length of the Radius, which is impossible: for how
can the length 1571 stand at length upon the length of the 1000 without folding
or standing double in some place or other on the Line: This is both their
Cases, for they both confine the Secants of the whole Quadrant to stand
perpendicular upon the Radius, whereas they must stand perpendicular upon of
the Periphery of the whole Circle, then the Curve Line prescribed by the
extremity of the Secants, is equal to the Tangent of the Arch; and the extreme
Secant is the Secant of the Arch, the other side of the Figure is the Radius.

This I shall Demonstrate, and thence show how the true Area of this Figure is
found, which is the true Sum of the Secants.

Construction, First describe the Semicircle ABED, which we do suppose to roll
as a Wheel, till that the Point E falls in F, Bin C, A in G, and D in K, in
which motion the Point E descibes the Curve ErF, B the Curve BC, and D the
Curve DoK. Now because the Semicircle ABED is supposed to roll upon the Line
BF, therefore BF is equal to the length of the part of the Periphery of a whole
Circle=BE, and the Curve Line described by the Points E, B, and D, are Segments
of the Cycloid, by Dr. Wallis on the Cycloid; next continue the Line BF
infinitely toward R, then is FR a Tangent Line; now from G the Center, draw
the Secants Gab, Gdl and Grx, and imagine the space GFRG, which contains all
those Secants that can possibly be, or imagined possible to be drawn from the
Center G to the Tangent Line FR, to be drawn; then draw the right Sines ac, de,
and rz, and imagine all the rest to be drawn; this done, let the Semicircle
GCFK be supposed to roll upon the Tangent-Line FR until the Point a, in the
Arch do fall in a on the Tangent-Line, d in d, and r in r, and also the Point K
in I; then is FI=in length to the Quadrant FK. Now because that by the 16th of
the Third of Euclid, All Lines drawn from the Center of a Circle, and extended
beyond the Circle, that Line cuts the Periphery of that Circle at Right-Angles;
therefore the Secants Gab, Gdl, and Grx, do cut the Periphery FK at
Right-Angles in a, d, and r; whence it is plain that when the Semicircle GCFK
is roul'd so far on the Tangent Line FR, that the Point a in the Arch comes to
fall on the Tangent Line in a, then will the Center G be the second G toward
the left hand, and the Secant of the Arch F a; that is, the Line Gab shall
stand perpedicular upon the Line GG. Again, when the Semicircle GCFK is roul'd
so far on the Tangent-Line FR, that the Point d in the Arch falls on the
Tangent-Line in d, then will the Center G be the third G, and the Secant Gdl
will stand perpendicular upon the Line GG. Thirdly, when the Semicircle GCFK
is roul'd so far on the Tangent-Line, the Point r in the Arch falls on the
Tangent-Line in r, then will the Center G be the fourth G, and the Secant Grx
will stand perpendicular upon the Line GG. Fourthly and Lastly, when the
Semicircle GCFK is roul'd so far that the Point K falls in I, then will the
Center G be last toward the left hand; now because K is the last Point of the
Quadrant, C falls in H, and F in L, therefore the Secant of this Arch GIR is an
infinite Line. Thus have I not only showed how by the motion of the Semicircle
GCFK to set the whole Sum of the Secants which do naturally issue from G the
Center of the Circle, and terminate at the Tangent-Line FR, perpendicular upon
the Base GG, whose length is=FK the of the Periphery of the Circle, and made of
a Triangular Figure of the Secants, viz. GFR, the four Lined Figure, viz.
FG=Radius, GG=FK=the of the Periphery of the Circle. GR the extreme Secant of
the Quadrant FK, and the Curve. Line FR=the Tangent Line FR; the Area of this
Figure FGGRF is the true Sum of the infinite Secants required.

But in order to the finding of the true Sum of the Secants of any Arch, I
shall first show what kind of Figures the true Sums of the Right and Versed
Sines do make, and also show how to find the true Sum of the Right and Versed
Sines, and also to find the true Sums of the Right and and Versed Sines of any
Arch, and then proceed to the Operation.

First, When the Semicircle GCFK is roul'd so far, that the Point a in the
Arch do fall in the Point a in the Tangent-Line, FR then is ac the Right Sine
of the Arch Ka laid on the Secant Gab from a downwards to c.

Secondly, When the Semicircle GCFK is roul'd so far that the Point d in the
Arch does fall in the Point d in the Tangent-Line FR then is de the Right Sine
of the Arch Kd, laid on the Secant Gdl from d to e.

Thirdly, when the Semicircle GCFK is roul'd so far that the Point in the Arch
does fall in r on the Tangent-Line FR, then is zr laid on the Secant Grx from c
to z, and thus by this motion all the Sum of the Right Sines of the Quadrant FK
are imagined to be set perpendicular downward on the Quadrant FK extended at
length=FI, which terminates in the Curve Line Gcez I; therefore the Area of the
Figure FG cez IF is equal to the three Lined Figure DoKED=the Square of
Radius=the Sum of the Right Sine, by the first Corollary of the third
Proposition of Honorato Fabrio Opusculum Geometricum. Now the Right Sine ae is
the Sine of the Arch Ka; therefore ac is the Sine Complement of the Arch Fa,
and the Right Sine de is the Sine of the Arch Kd; therefore de is the Sine
Complement of the Arch Fd, and the Right Sine rz is the Sine of the Arch Kr;
therefore zr is the Sine Complement of the Arch Fr, which is to be imagined of
all the rest. Moreover the Versed Sine of an Arch is the difference between the
Sine Complement of that Arch and the Radius. Therefore Ga=GF=Radius -
ac=Gc=Versed Sine of the Arch Fa and Gd=GF=Radius - de=Ge=Versed Sine of the
Arch Fd and Gri=GF=Radius - rz= Gz=Versed Sine of the Arch Fr


Which is to be imagined of all the rest; therefore the Figure Gcez IGG is
equal to the whole Sum of the Versed Sines.

Now to find the whole Sum of the Versed Sines.

Put the Radius GF=10000000, then is FI=15707913, Then GF=10000000 x
FI=15707913=GFIGG=157079130000000.

But it is evident by Construction, that Gcez IFG the whole Sum of the Right
Sines + Gcez IGG the Sum of the Versed Sine is=Rect-Angle GFIGG=157079130000000
From which Substract G^IFG=100000000000000 the Sum of the Right Sine, whose
Differen is G^IGG=057079130000000 the whole Sum of the Versed Sines QE.


Now to find the Sum of the Right Sines of any Arch desired, Honorato Fabrii
has by the 5th Proposition of his Opusculum Geometricum Demonstrated the
following Rule. As the Radius is to the Versed Sine of an Arch so is the whole
Sum of the Right Sines, to the Sum of the Right Sine of the Arch required.

Example. In the Parallellogram GFIGG let there be given the whole Sum of the
Right Sine Gcez IFG=100000000000000, the Versed Sine of 60 d. eG=05000000, and
the Radius GF=10000000, to find the Sum of the Sine contained in the Arch of 60
d. 00 m. Iacezl.

The Operation. As the Radius -- GF=10000000 Is to the Versed Sine of 60 d. 00
m. -- lG=05000000 So is the whole Sum of the Right Sines Gcez
IFG=100000000000000 To the Sum of the Right Sine of 60 d. 00 m.
lacezI=050000000000000


Here we are to Note, that by Construction the Rect-Angle made by the Radius
and the Length of an Arch, is ever equal to the Sum of the Sine Complement of
an Arch + the Sum of the Versed Sine of that Arch; therefore to find the Sum of
the Sine Complements of the Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m. it is Gcez IFG=100000000000000
- Iacezl=050000000000000= FacGF=050000000000000 the Sum of the Sine Complements
of the Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m. which was desired.

Hence to find the Sum of the Versed Sines of the Arch Fa 30 d. 00 m. viz. the
Area of the Figure GcG, I multiply the length of the Arch Fa=5235988 by the
Radius GF=10000000, that Product is equal to the Parallelogram
FaGGF=52359880000000 from which PacGF=050000000000000 the Sum of the Sine
Complement of the Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m. being subtracted, the Remainer will be
GcG=2359880000000 the Sum of the Versed Sine of the Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m.

Corollary. The Rect-Angle made by Radius, and the Right Sine of an Arch is
equal to the Sum of the Sine Complement of that Arch.

The common Rule to find the Secant of an Arch by the Right Sines, is thus, As
the Cosine of an Arch, is to the Radius, so is the Radius to the Secant of
that Arch: which stands by the Figure thus, As ac:GFGF:Gb. But better thus, put
the Radius GF=1, and the Versed Sine of an Arch= a, then the Sine Complement of
an Arch will be 1 -- a; therefore it is as 1 -- a:11:1/1 -- a which being
divided, the Quotient will be 1 + a + a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + a6 + a7 + a8 + a9 +
a10 + a11, etc. the Secant of the First Part upon the Arch.

Whence its manifest the Secant of an Arch is a Series of continual
Proportionals, whose Termination is in the Curve Line FblxR; which by the
Figure is as Gr Radius, is to r 3 the Versed Sine of the Arch, so is r 3 to 3.7
the fourth proportional: And as r 3:3.73.7:7.8. And again, as 3.7:7.87.8:8.2,
etc. whose Termination is in x; the Sum of the Secants are found by adding of
the first to the second, the second to the third, as follows, The first=1 + a
+ a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 etc.=3 + 6 a + 14 a2 + 36 a3 + 98 a4 + 276 a5 The second=1
+ 2 a + 4 a2 + 8 a3 + 16 a4 + 32 a5 etc.=3 + 6 a + 14 a2 + 36 a3 + 98 a4 + 276
a5 The third=1 + 3 a + 9 a2 + 27 a3 + 81 a4 + 243 a5 etc.=3 + 6 a + 14 a2 + 36
a3 + 98 a4 + 276 a5


Moreover, though the Secants space is not the very same with the Hyperbolick
space, yet it is of the same nature, as it appears by the dividing of an
Unite, by an Unite less (...) the quantity assigned. Therefore the Secant space
falls under an infinite Series compounded of Ingredients of the same nature,
and as proper to this Problem as that of the Hyperbola; for in the Hyperbola we
have a Square made of the Difference between the Divisor and an Unite, whose
half is an equal sided Plain Triangle or half Square. But in this Problem the
Difference between the Sine Complement of an Arch, (the Divisor) and the
Radius, is equal to the Versed Sine of that Arch, whose length is ever less
than the length of the Arch to which it belongs, in the place of half the
Square in the Hyperbola. I have a Right Angled Plain Triangle, whose Base is
the length of an Arch, and the Perpendicular the Versed Sine belonging to that
Arch, and the Hypotenuse is a Curve-Line which falls within a straight Line,
the Area of this mixed Right-Angled Plain Triangle is the Sum of the Versed
Sine of the Arch on which they stand; this Sum of the Versed Sines, I call the
P2 that is half of the second Power; I put P to signify Power, because the
Base is ever longer than the Perpendicular. Now to proceed, I double the Sum of
the Versed Sines, which being doubled makes a plain Parallellogram, which
being multiplied by the Versed Sine of the Arch, that Product is a long Cube or
Parallellopipedon, which I divide by 3, and that Quotient I call one third of
the third Power, which slands thus P3; then this Parallelopipedon being
multiplied by the aforesaid Versed Sine, and that Product divided by 4 that
Quotlent shall be the of the Squared Square, or of the fourth Power, which
stand thus P4, thus by the continual Multiplication of the several Products by
the said Versed Sine; and then dividing each Product by the Index of the Power,
that is the third Product by 3; the fourth Product by 4, the fifth by 5, etc.
which I put thus P3, P4, P5, P6, 1/7 P7, P8, etc.

Moreover, for your better Understanding of the Solution of this Problem
according to Dr. Wallis on the Quaderature of the Hyperbola.

We put 1 + 1 + 1 etc.=Radius x length of the Arch=A We put a + 2 a + 3 a
etc.=Sum of the Versed Sines -- = P2 We put a2 + 4 a2 + 9 a2 etc.=
Parallellopipedon -- = P3 We put a3 + 8 a3 + 27 a3 etc.= of the Squared Square
-- = P4 We put a4 + 16 a4 + 81 a4 etc.= of the Surd Solid -- = P5
Hence it is plain that the whole Sum of the Secants GRxlbFG is equal to the
infinite Sum of A + P2 + P3 + P4 + P5, etc.

Then for Example, Let it be required to find the Sum of the Secants of the
Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m. which is the Area of the space GbFG.

First, In order to the Operation, I multiply the length of the Arch Fa=5235988
by the Radius GF=10000000, whose Product is the Area of the Parallellogram
GaFG=A=52359880000000, which is the first set down of the Synopsis. Secondly,
Set down the Sum of the Versed Sine aiF=GcG= P2=2359880000000 Unity, under
Unity, that is 8 under 8. Thirdly, The Sum of the Verfed Sines being doubled,
and that Sum being multiplied by the Versed Sine of the Arch Fa, which is
aI=Gc=1339746, and that Product divided by its proper Index 3, the Quotient
will be P3=210775986032, etc. which place as in the Synopsis, one place short
toward the Left Hand, then Multiply the last Product by the aforesaid Versed
Sine aI=1339746, and that Product being divided by its proper Index 4, the
Quotient will be P4=21178971312, etc. which set one place short toward the
left hand, and then multiply the last Product by the aforesaid Versed Sine
aI=Gc=1339746, and that Product being divided by its proper Index 5, the
Quotient will be P5=2699553162, etc. which being placed as aforesaid, and
continuing thus multiplying still the last Product by the same Versed Sine, and
dividing every Product by its proper Index, ever placing that Quotient as
aforesaid, until you arrive directly under the last place of Decimals assigned
with one Figure, as in the Synopsis; this being done, I by Addition did find
the true Area of the space Gb FG=5495467.1242579, which is the true Sum of the
infinite Secants contained in the Arch Fa=30 d. 00 m. which being divided by
Radius, the Quotient is 5495467, and because that the Decimal Fraction 1242579
is much less than an Unite, therefore I neglect it as of no value, and I divide
5495467 by this improper Fraction 62831853/360 the Quotient is 31
10380687/62831853, which being reduced into a Decimal Fraction, the true length
of the Meridian-line from the Aequinoctial, to the parallel of 30 d. 00 m.
is=31 168/1000 Aequinoctial Degrees, according to Mr. Oughtred.

The Synopsis. The Right Angled Figure GFaG=A=5235988.0000000 The Sum of the
Versed Sines a IF= P2=0235988.0000000 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=
P3=0021077.5986032 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF= P4=0002117.8971312 The Sum
of the Versed Sines a IF= P5=0000269.9553162 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=
P6=0000025.2430297 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=1/7 P7 P7=0000002.9010277
The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF= P8=0000000.3411651 The Sum of the Versed
Sines a IF=1/9 P9=0000000.0406291 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=1 1/0
P10=0000000.0048979 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=1 1/1 P11=0000000.0005963
The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=1 P12=0000000.0000733 The Sum of the Versed
Sines a IF=1 P13=0000000.0000091 The Sum of the Versed Sines a IF=1
P14=0000000.0000001 The true Area of the Figure FbGG=5495467.1242579


Which reduced into degrees, makes 3rd. 168/1000 And in this manner I found the
true length of the Meridian-line from the Equator, to the Parallel of 50 d. 00
m. to be equal 10091347.0241352=57 d. 819/1000. And for 60 d. 00 m. to be equal
12919708.7579278=74 022/1000. And 70 d. 00 m.=87 208/1000. And for 80 d. 00
m.=104 937/1000. And for 89 d. 59 m.=125.464, which is the true length of the
Meridian-line, from the Aequinoctial to the Parallel of 89 d. 59 m. which is
not so much as of the length of the Meridian-line made by the Addition of the
Secants, which difference arises hence, for the sum of the Secants made by the
Addition of the Secants of any Arch, though a minute be divided into Ten
thousand parts, shall exceed the true Area of the Secants space, or the true
Sum of the Infinite Secants of any Arch, by more than half the Sum of the first
differences of the Secants of every one of the Secants of those minute parts.

Let Bx represent the length of an Arch extended, which let be divided into
equal parts, BC, CD, DE, OF, FG, etc. each part containing one minute, or any
minute part of the Circumference of a Circle, and upon this line, and from each
point B, C, D, E, F and G, raise perpendicular-lines, as BA=Radius, Cc=Secant
of one part, Df=the Secant of two parts, EI= Secant of three parts, Fm=Secant
of four parts, Gp=Secant of five parts, etc. Then through the Points A, c, f,
I, m and p, draw the Curveline A, c, f, 1, m and p, and parallel to the line
Bx, draw the lines Az, cb, ce, fd, fb, Gi, and complete the Parallellograms zb,
ed, hg, etc. Now I say that the right Angled Figure AzcbA is=difference between
the Radius AB and the Secant of the first minute Cc, and the right Angled
Figure cefd=difference between the Secant of the first minute Cc, and the
Secant of the second minute Df, etc.

Demonstration. Forasmuch as BC=CD=DE=OF=FG one part, therefore the
Parallellogram BCZAB=Radius BA; and by the same reason the Parallellogram BCcbB
is equal to the Secant of the first minute part Cc, therefore BCcbB -
BCZAB=AzcbA the difference between BA the Radins, and Cc the Secant of the
first minute part. Then Dd - Dc=Cb=the difference between Cc the Secant of the
first minute part, and Df the Secant of the second minute part, then Eg -
OF=Dd=hg the difference between Df and Ei, then Fk - Fi=Eg=lk, the difference
between Ei and Fm: And then Gn - Gm=Fk=on, the difference between Fm and Gp,
etc. Hence it is evident that the Sum of the Secant made by the aggregate of
the Natural Secant, will be Cb + Dd + Eg + Fk + Gn, etc. whose Sum is the
Figure BGpnmkigfdcbB, whereas the true Sum of these Secants is really the space
BGpwmuitfrcsAB, Therefore the true Sum of the Secant of the Arch BG is equal to
the Figure BGpumkigfdcbB - space ABsc + cdrf + fgti + kum + mnwp; wherefore the
Sum of the Secant made by the Addition of the Secants of any Arch, though a
minute be divided into never so many parts, shall exceed the true Area of the
Secant space, or the true Sum of the Infinite Secant of an Arch, by more than
half the Sum of the first difference of the Secant of every one of the Secants
of those minute parts, Q.E.

Thus have I found and shall demonstrate (else where) that the Sum of the
Secants, however attained, has no relation to the Meridian-line on the true
Sea Chart.

In order to which, I shall resolve the following Problem, Admit a Ship to be
at A under the Aequinoctial, and is bound to an Island B in the Latitude of 89
d. 59 m. whose Longitude to the Westward is CB=70 d. 00 m. the Question is, On
what Rumb the Ship must Sail from A to B? First by the plain Sea Chart,
secondly, by the length of the Meridian-line, which I have here found to be
125.464, thirdly, by the length of the Meridian line which Mr. Wright made by
the Addition of the Secants of whole minutes, which is 539 +. The Question
truly-Resolved, The true Rumb on which the Ship must Sail from A to B by the
Plain Sea Chart is North 37 d. 53 m. West; by the second she must Sail from A
to B North 29 d. 09 m. Westerly; by the third, which according to Mr. Wright or
Mercator, she must Sail from A to B North 07 d. 24 m. Westerly.

But that Ship which Sails from A intending to arrive at B, by either of these
three Rumbs, shall as certainly sail of their Desires, as he did who
endeavored to draw the proportion of Hercules Body by his footsteps on the
sand. For I say, That Ship which sails from A intending to find B, must sail
directly North, until she is in the Latitude 89 d. 59 m. then shall B bear West
from the Ship distant 1.22 mile, which may be seen that distance, if but four
foot above the Water.

Demonstration. Seeing that the Parallel of 89 d. 59 m. wants but one mile of
the Pole, and that mile being made the Radius of that Parallel, then shall the
Circumference of that Circle be 6.28 miles: Then if 360 Degrees of Longitude be
contained in 6.28 miles, in how many miles is 70 d. of Longitude contained,
which by multiplying and dividing according to the Rule of Three, I find 1.22
answering to 70 d. of Longitude in the Aequinoctial Circle. Therefore that Ship
which is to sail from A under the Aequinoctial to B in 89 d. 59 m. North
Latitude, whose Longitude to the Westward is 70 d. 00 m. must sail North, until
she is in the Latitude of 89 d. 56 m. then shall B bear West from her distant
1.22 mile, Q. E. The reason why I took this extreme Problem, To demonstrate in
part to the World, That Mr. Wright's Projection is false, was, because that the
truth of this Problem is evident merely by inspection on the Globe: Thus much
for this single sheet. But I have already written in order to Navigation fifty
sheets of paper, to which I shall, God willing, add the manner of describing of
a Spherical Superficies into a Concave Cylinder Geometrically of any given
length greater than the Diameter of the Sphere; provided their Diameters be
equal; this was Mr. Wright's Case.

Moreover, I shall Geometrically show the Description of Spherical Superficies
into a Concave Cylinder, their Diameters agreeing, in such manner that in all
its parts it shall Mathematically agree with the Globe, and that the
Meridian-line has no relation to the Sum of the Secant divided by Radius, as
was asserted by Mr. Wright and others.

And also I shall show the making and use of the true Sea Chart, and shall
Problematically demonstrate the plain Sea Chart to be false.

And shall show the difference between the distance between two places in the
Arch of a great Circle, and the distance in the Rumb line, on which a Ship must
sail from one place to another.

And shall show the difference between the Angles of Position and the Rumb-line
on the Globe.

And shall show how to keep a perfect Journal in such manner, as that any man
which is capable of taking Charge of a Ship at Sea, may judge whether the
Reckoning were well kept or not.

I shall also annex an Examination, which all such Navigators ought to pass,
that shall be judged capable of taking Charge as Master of any of his Majesty's
or Merchants Ships, etc.

Query. Whether or not, it be possible Mathematically to demonstrate how deep a
Ship must go in the water, and what difference there must be between her
Draught of Water at her Head and Stern to sail best.

FINIS.
London, Printed by Tho. James for the Author 1685.

Fig. 3.
geometrical figure

geometrical figure Fig. 2.



