The True CONFESSION OF Mr. George Norton, Concerning the MURDER OF Mr. HARRIS
the Dancing Master, On the 11th of June last.
Taken out of his own PAPERS, delivered by him to Mrs. Mary Edwards, before he
took the Fatal Draught of Poison, on the 8th of August, of which he died the
next following day, which was appointed for his Execution at Tyburn.
MR. George Norton possitively declares, that what Mary Ager, who was walking
along with Mr. Harris, when he had the Misfortune to kill him, deposed
concerning his clapping the said Thomas Harris upon the Shoulder, and his
asking him who he was, and his Swearing that he would lie with her, without any
Provocation, was utterly false; as was likewise, what she had declared, that he
had drawn his Sword first; and that the said Mr. Harris had been wounded by
him, as she believed, at the first Pass; The Quarrel betwixt Mr. Harris and him
happening in the following manner: As he was walking on the 11th of June last,
about Eleven a Clock at Night at the Bar in High-Holbourn, near the
Fountain-Tavern, being contrary to his Custom, somewhat in Drink, he happened
to meet and take the Wall of the beforesaid Thomas Harris, who was leading this
Mary Ager; at which, she being much exasperated, called him, without any
further Provocation, a Prigg, and a Puppy, for offering to take the Wall of a
Woman, adding, that she wondered Mr. Harris would not kick him Into the Kenell,
and so pushed him from the Wall. That then, and not before, he asked her who
she was, and without any further Intention of taking her from Mr. Harris, told
her, that he would know why she should give him such abusive Language before
they parted, and that he would have her before her Betters; upon which, Mr.
Harris coming up close to him, told him, he would make him know who she was,
and immedlately drew his Sword, and attacked him so unexpectedly, that he was
forced to defend himself as well as he could with his Cane, which he did for
some time, till Mr. Harris, having cut his Cane in many places, and at last
struck it out of his hands, he was forced to have recourse to his Sword; when
several Passes were made betwixt them, and the beforementioned Mary Ager,
having taken the opportunity to take away his Sword, he was forced to close in
with the said Thomas Harris, and having broke his Sword, with one of the
Pieces, he gave, in the greatest heat of Blood, and for the Security of his own
Person, the Wound, which proved Fatal to his Enemy, and put him under such an
immediate Affliction, that he was no sooner brought into the Watch-house,
(which was not above 20 yards from the Place where the Quarrel happened) but
hearing that his Wound was judged Mortal, he cried out to the Surgeon, to
use his utmost Endeavors to save his Life, and that he should have a 1000 l.
secured him for a Reward, expressing his Sorrow for having killed a Man, for he
did not know what, as was testified by several Watchmen, and the Neighboring
Vintner and his Apprentice, who were there present, and afterward Evidences
for the King; as Nicholas Mountain, another Watchman, (who was likewise Sworn
for the King) has sufficiently contradicted the deposition of Mary Ager in that
Point, relating to Mr. Harris, having received his Wound whilst they were
passing at one another; the said Mountain having declared possitively, that he
found Mr. Harris with a Piece only of his Sword in his Hand, the Point of about
a Foot long, lying near him upon the Ground all Bloody, and that his own Sword
was found near Mary Ager, clean, without any Marks of Blood; which is a
sufficient demonstration that he could not be killed before his own Sword was
drawn but afterward when he was forced to close with him to preserve his own
Life.

The said Mr. George Norton further declares, that one Mrs. Ellit, living at
the sign of the Blew-Ball near the Watch house in High-Holbourn, where the
Quarrel happened, heard the first Words about taking the Wall, which proved the
unfortunate occasion of the Quarrel, upon which she opened her doors, brought
out Lights, and took up his Cane, cut and hacked in many places by Mr. Harris's
Sword; as one Mr. Ch^^tam, who happened to pass by accidentally, was an
eyewitness, that the said Thomas Harris drew his Sword first against him and
that he was fain to defend himself with his Cane, but did not tarry to see the
whole issue of this Quarrel; and Mr. Rook heard distinctly out of his
Chamber-Window, which he opened at the first Noise, the Clashing of the Sword
and Cane, very violently, as if they were striking at one another.

Mr. Norton further says, that there are several Persons of good Credit, who
have and are ready at all times to attest, that the abovementioned Thomas
Harris was always accounted a very Quarrelsome Person, as Mary Ager was looked
upon by those that knew her well, as a Woman of a very slight Reputation. One
Mr. Graves a Bookbinder, and Housekeeper at St. James's has declared, that he
used frequently to draw his Sword upon naked People, and that he had been once
in danger himself of having been killed by him unawares, if a certain Person,
who stood by, had not given him timely Notice.

One Mr. Rook, and the Widow of the Deceased Harris has confessed her self,
That the said Thomas Harris had for a considerable time led a very idle and
loose Life, That he was addicted to Gaming and other Vices; That he had lived
with this Woman as if she were his Wife; and the said Widow of Mr. Harris has
possitively Affirmed, that her Husband, since his Conversing with this Woman,
was turned Strouler up and down the Country, leaving his Wife, and family
destitute at home, without the least Care for their Subsistence; and that the
said Woman had been an Actress in most Parts of England. The Character of this
Woman is confirmed by the Testimony of one Mrs. Ager, the True and Lawful Wife
of Mr. Ager, who has deposed in Court, That this Counterfelt Mrs. Ager, had
taken upon her the Name of her Husband, with whom she had kept Company for near
ten years, to the Destruction of her and her Children, who were thereby reduced
to the utmost Extremity.

And one Mr. Dubois has by his Affidavit, declared, That this pretended Mrs.
Ager, has proved the Ruin and Death of several Persons before, and had been
likely to have been the occasion of his. That notwithstanding the
disadvantageous Character of this Woman, who was the main Evidence against him;
and though he brought several Gentlemen of good Reputation and Quality, who gave
a good Account of his Civil and Peaceable Deportment, he was upon her
Deposition; to wit: That he attempted to take away a Man's Wife from him and
Death ensuing) found guilty of Murder; which he again solemnly declares to
have been falsely deposed by the said Mary Ager, his Intention being not in the
least to take her away, but only to call her to an Account for the ill Language
she gave him, upon which the Quarrel arising, as mentioned before; he, what
with the Heat of Passion, and partly in his own Defense, did give the Wound to
Mr. Harris with the broken Piece of his Sword, which proved fatal to him.

Whereas a Printer that bears the Name of a Quaker, near the Pumo in
Little-Britain, makes it his practice to print Men's Copies upon them, and give
such lame Descriptions as bear no proportion to the Original, having the Sense
maimed, the Impression imperfect, and the Faults so abounding, as not so be
worth the price they put them out at, which is but half what the Originals are
sold for. This is to acquaint the Reader that none concerning this Subject are
Genuine, but what have the same price, paper and same Letter begun as this has.
And whereas the publishing of small papers in Correct Orthography does
infinitely abdance True reading and proper Speaking of our Native Tongue, a
half sheet of theirs contains as many Errors as words, which proved prejudicial
to youths and others that are not arrived to the perfection of the English
Tongue; that when it happens into the hands of an Ingenious Man, it is enough to
make him Spew* to see the nastiness of the print, and the abundance of Errors,
to the no small Disparagement of the famous Art and mystery of printing.

LONDON: Printed by D. Edwards in Fetter-Lane. 1699.


