TWO TREATISES Concerning the Divine Light, THE FIRST, Being an Answer to a
Letter of a Learned Quaker, which he is pleased to call, A Just Reprehension to
John Norris for his Unjust Reflections on the Quakers, in his Book Entitled,
Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life, etc. THE SECOND, Being a Discourse
concerning the Grossness of the Quakers Notion of the Light within, with their
Confusion and Inconsistency in Explaining it.

By JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum, and late Fellow of
All Souls College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1692.

Licensed,

April. 15. 1692.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THo I have not professedly undertaken in the Two following Treatises to give
an express and full Account of the Divine Light, but only so far as I have
occasion to do it in dealing with my Adversary, yet (if my Judgment may be
taken concerning my own Work,) I think that even this Occasional Account that
occurs up and down in these Papers, may be so considerable as to give them a
fair Right to the Title of Treatises concerning the Divine Light. And tho the
direct and professed business of the former of these Treatises be only a
Private and Personal Engagement between me and my Opposer, yet that it has been
the occasion of my delivering many great and considerable things, as well
Absolutely as Relatively considered, and such as if read carefully and
judiciously, and with a thoroughly Awakened Attention, may contribute very much
to the clearing of many useful Truths, and to the Improvement of the Reader in
several curious Points of Speculation.

An Answer to a Letter of a Learned Quaker, which he calls, A just Reprehension
to John Norris of Newton St. Lo, for his unjust Reflection on the Quakers, in
his Book Entitled, Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life, etc.
By the Author of those Reflections.
THO I do not think it any great piece of Ignorance or Defect of Learning, not
to be rightly acquainted with the Quaker's Principles, which if I knew them
never so well, would add but little either to my Knowledge, or to my Opinion of
it; yet I am withal so sensible of that Right, which even the meanest Persons
and Parties have to Justice and Fair Dealing, that I think I should not be able
to justify my misrepresenting those Principles, of which I might be very
excusably Ignorant.

And since this is the thing laid to my Charge, and that with a great deal of
Passion and angry Resentment, not to say Rudeness and Incivility, I think I may
be allowed to be so far concerned at the Indictment, as to endeavor to acquit
my self of it; not so much for the Honor of my Judgment (which I do not
conceive at present to lie much at stake) as for the Justification of my
Sincerity: Which tho I so peculiarly value, that I might be allowed to be a
little warm in the Vindication of it, especially coming after such a provoking
and affrouting Adversary, yet I hope I shall be able so to temper my Spirit and
govern my Pen, that the Defense shall not be near so passionate as the Charge.

I confess indeed, I did not expect any great Civility of Address from a Man of
this sullen Tribe, whose visible Mark and Character is Rusticity, and who are
generally at as great Defiance with all Courtliness of Style, as of Behavior.
But yet I thought that the Gentleman and the Scholar (for such it seems is the
Quality of my Adversary) might so far balance and overruled the Quaker, as to
contain him within the Limits of Ordinary Decency, and keep him on this side
Rudeness and Scurrility. To be blunt and downright is one thing, but to be
rude and abusive is another. And however I might expect the former from him,
and excuse in him as a Quaker, yet of the latter I thought he would not be
guilty as a Gentleman. Indeed the least that I could expect from a Person of
Mr. Vickris his Education and Quality, was, that he would not be uncivil,
especially in his first Onset, and writing to a Person that was a Stranger to
him; and who, tho he does not look upon himself to be so great as to be above
Contradiction, may yet justly think himself considerable enough to expect and
deserve fair and civil Language. But in stead of this he falls foul upon me,
after such a rude, violent and passionate manner, as is below the Breeding even
of a Water-man, and such as a Man of any Temper would be ashamed to be guilty
of, even in the sudden Heats of common Discourse Which may tempt some unlucky
Fancies to imagine, that he has exchanged his Gold quaking Fit for an Hot one,
and that the Light within is turned into a Flame.

I cannot in Justice deny, but that for a Man of his Way, my Adversary is
pretty considerable for his Sense and Learning, (notwithstanding that he
endeavors to represent me as a Dunce and Blockhead as well as a Knave) and I
believe he would have shown more of each, and with better Advantage, if the
Violence of his Passion had not disturbed the Clearness and Order of his
Thoughts, and put him often out of his Guard. For Passion is the great
Contrariety to Reason, and will draw a Cloud over the brightest Mind. The quiet
and sedate Soul is most fit for the Contemplation of Truth, as the calmest
Weather is commonly the most serene. If Love be blind, Anger I Am sure is much
more so; and there is this remarkable difference between the Wars of the Pen
and those of the Sword, that tho the Soldier may fight to most Advantage in Hot
Blood, the Disputant will reason best in Cold.

But lest I should appear guilty of a false Charge in this respect, as he says
I am in some others, and be thought to misrepresent the Temper and Behavior of
my Adversary, as he says I do his Principles, I think it necessary for my own
Security, to give the Reader some Account of the Passion, Rudeness and
Abusiveness of this Aggressor, before I proceed to consider the Argument of his
Paper.

And here (to pass by the Roughness and the Magisterial Air of the Title Page,
where at first Dash he assumes the Office of a Censor, and undertakes to
Reprehend, taxing me with no less than False Representation, Confusion and
Self-Contradiction, which I think might be more properly left to the Judgment
of the Reader, or bring up the Arrear, than be placed in the Front of the Book)
I appeal for the Truth of this Charge to the following Passages.

When first (says he, page 3.) I perused thy Reflections upon the Conduct of
Human Life, etc. I was, and still am pleased with all that tends to the
Propagation of Original and Necessary Truth, but rejoice where I find it spring
from an upright Mind, pure Intention, and clean Vessel. What Reason has he to
question or prejudge the Uprightness of my Mind, or the Purity of my Intention,
or the Cleanness of my Vessel? Either this is very impertinently, or very
uncharitably suggested. Either he means nothing by it, or he means ill. And
that he does so, he has taken Care to satisfy the Reader, by explaining
himself more fully in the very next Words, For whosoever (says he) undertakes to
reprehend the Intelligible Conduct of Human Life, ought first to purge himself
from the Irregularities of his Moral Conduct, which does Cloud and darken his
Understanding. What a scurvy malicious Insinuation is this! For tho the Words
abstractly considered be a Proposition of Universal Truth, and may bear an
innocent and inoffensive Sense, yet considered with their Occasion, and with
their Application to me, if they signify any thing they must signify ill;
there must be either an intolerable Impertinence in them, or a great deal of
Malice and Censoriousness. For does he not by this plainly insinuate to the
World that I am an ill Man, and that there are such Irregularities in my Moral
Conduct as make me unfit to reflect upon the Intellectual Conduct of Human
Life? And would not any one that knew nothing of me any otherwise than by this
Paper of his, and were to take his Measure of me from hence, be tempted to
conclude, that I was a Man of a loose and debauched Conversation? Now if I
deserve this Character, I have nothing to complain of; but if I do not, (and I
appeal even to Mr. Vickris himself, nay, even to the World, whether I do or no)
then this is a very uncharitable and very unchristian Insinuation.

And yet as bad as it is, he has more of the same; and that notwithstanding
what he says of himself in the Paragraph immediately following, that he is far
from a Spirit of Detraction. Which Passage I think should either have been left
out, or set at a greater distance from the foregoing one, wherein, there seems
to be so strong a Savor of that Spirit. As there does in what follows, when
(p. 4.) He charges me with despising the Testimony of God through the Meanness
of the Instruments: Applying to me that of the Apostle to the Thessalonians,
chap. 4. v. 8. He therefore that despises, despises not Man but God, who has
also given unto us his Holy Spirit. Which Allegation I shall allow to be
pertinent, when he has proved those Instruments he talks of to be equally
inspired with the Apostles: But till then he must give me leave to think and
call it a Blasphemous piece of Arrogance. For it can be no less to make
Despising the Quakers the same with despising God, unless it be proved that the
Quakers are Divinely inspired. When I see this done, I shall allow of the
Expression: In the mean while I must beg Mr. Vickris not to be angry, if I tell
him that it puts me in mind of a Story I have heard of a Quaker in Oxford, who
when some of the young Scholars for some Rudenesses and Disturbances he had
been guilty of in the College, had brought him to the Pump to pump him, while
he was doing his Penance, impudently cried out, Pump on, Pump on, you Pump not
me, but the Lord. I will not say Mr. Vickris his Expression is exactly of a
piece with this, but there is so much Resemblance between them, that as soon as
I read one, I could not choose but think of the other.

But he goes on in his Censorious and Uncharitable Reflections; for after he
had quoted (Page 6.) that Passage out of the Book of Wisdom, chap. 1. v. 4.
Into a malicious Soul Wisdom will not enter, nor dwell in the Body that is
subject to Sin. For the Holy Spirit of Discipline will fly Deceit, and remove
from Thoughts that are without Understanding, and will not abide when
Unrighteousness comes in. For Wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a
Blasphemer of his Words; for God is the Witness of his Reins, and a true
Beholder of his Heart, and an Hearer of his Tongue. Therefore he that speaks
unrighteous things cannot be hid, neither shall Vengeance when it punishes pass
by him. All which in the abundance of his Civility and Charity he has thought
fit to apply to me: He proceeds to add, Now seeing these Sayings are true and
righteous, and that it is possible to profess this Doctrine of the Divine Word,
Light, Grace, Spirit of Wisdom and Truth, and the teachings of it, and yet not
possess it, nor be learned of it, nor led by it, but whilst preaching of it to
others to be a Cast-a-way: I advise thee to consider in what Ground and Nature
thou yet stand and live in, and what Spirit lives and rules in thee. I
thank him for his Advice, but not for that spiteful and strangely censorious
Insinuation that goes along with it, which amounts to no less, than that I am
one of those malicious Souls into which Wisdom will not enter; that I am
deceitful, without Understanding, unrighteous, and a Blasphemer: That tho I
profess the Doctrine of the Divine Light, yet I do not possess it, nor am led by
it, but while I preach it to others, am my self a Castaway; which I think is
as bad as one Man can well say of another, and yet it is what he plainly
insinuates, if there be any Connection or Pertinence in what he says.

But fearing he had not been yet plain enough, and lest the too candid Reader
should miss his Meaning, he proceeds, Has not Unrighteousness entered in
through Self-love and Esteem, which blinds the Eye, and causes the Tongue to
speak Unrighteous things? Here he charges me with Unrighteousness, Ambition and
Self-love; which last he is pleased to beighten to such an extravagant pitch,
as to make me an Idolater, and that of the worst sort, as making my self to be
my God. For says he, Is not Self exalted to sit in the Temple of God, as God in
thee? What a Flight of Censoriousness and Uncharity is this! For besides the
Heinousness of the Charge, (it being as bad as can be said of the Devil
himself, that he makes Self his God, there being nothing so opposite to Charity
which refers all to God, as Self-love, which refers all to its self) I say,
besides the Heinousness of the Charge, it is also of such a particular Nature,
as were I indeed guilty of it, it would be impossible for any Man, much more
for Mr. Vickris, who is a mere Stranger to me, without a Divine Revelation ever
to know. For Self-love is a Vice of the Heart, and one of the most latent and
retired of all the Vices that are lodged there, and consequently obnoxious to
his Judgment only who is a Discerner of the Heart, to whom all Hearts be open,
all Desires known, and from whom no Secret is hid. God alone can tell how far
Self is exalted either in me, or in any Man else: And therefore Mr. Vickris had
much better have left me to His Judgment, than to sit in Judgment upon me
himself, and pass so severe a Sentence in a Cause that does not, cannot fall
within his Cognizance.

Nor is he satisfied with representing me as an ill Man, but he must also find
fault with me for being a Scholar. Art thou not decking thy self with thy
corrupt Wisdom, (says he) which is the forbidden Fruit, and will prove Folly in
the end? By which I suppose he must mean Philosophy, and the Study of Arts and
Sciences, which he will needs have to be corrupt Wisdom, and the Forbidden
Fruit. Now tho I not only grant, but in a Treatise purposely written upon this
Subject, have expressly contended, and if I mistake not, fully demonstrated,
that considering the present State of Man, the Study of Learning and Knowledge
is no farther allowable, than as it is conducive to the moralizing of his Life,
and that all Prosecution of it beyond or beside this End, is an immoderate and
blameable Curiosity; yet I hope as far as it is apt to serve the Interest of a
good Life, there is no reason to disallow or condemn it. Tho it be not to be
allowed any farther, yet I think it may and must be allowed so far. And herein
I think I state the measure of prosecuting Learning and Knowledge in a due
mean, between the Extremes of those overinquisitive Spirits on the one hand,
who set no Limits to their Curiosity, and those narrow and contracted ones on
the other who confine it too straightly, condemning all Human Learning in gross,
under the reproachful Appellations of Carnal Reason, Corrupt Wisdom, Vain
Philosophy, and the like; under which Characters I think it ought not to be
represented, as far as it is apt to serve and minister to the Interest of
Religion and a good Life. And that it may be serviceable to that purpose, I
might undertake to show, but that the excellent Mr. Boil has saved me the
trouble in a late Treatise upon this very Subject, called, The Christian
Virtuoso. I cannot therefore but wonder what should make Mr. Vickris (who is
himself a Scholar) thus condemn all Human Learning in gross, under the Name of
Corrupt Wisdom, and blame me for decking my self with it, especially
considering that a little after (Page 10) he supposes the Divine Light to
assist the Natural Faculties of the Soul in the Attainment of Arts and
Sciences: Why then does he tell me of decking my self with my Corrupt Wisdom?
What, does the Divine Light assist the Natural Faculties of the Soul in the
Attainment of Corrupt Wisdom, and such as will prove Folly in the end? Can that
Wisdom be corrupt, which is taught us by the Assistance of the Divine Light? Or
is that Light to be esteemed Divine, whose Instructions are so corrupt? How are
these things consistent, unless Mr. Vickris will be understood not of
condemning Human Learning in general as Corrupt, but only that which is the
Object of my particular Study; as if my Studies were not directed to the ends
of a good Life, which would be as great a Gensure, as the other is a
Contradiction. So that in short, he is necessarily reduced to this Dilemma,
Either he condemns Human Learning in gross, as corrupt, and then he contradicts
himself, in making the Divine Light assistant to it; or he condemns the
particular matter of my Study as corrupt, and then he Censures me.

As he does again most unpardonably, (Page 7.) telling me, that I wilfully
blast the Fame of God's Name and Work in the Earth, in and by his People,
because they agree not with Man's Ways and Conceited wise Notions. Which is a
Charge next to that of committing the Sin against the Holy Ghost. For does Mr.
Vickris consider what it is wilfully to blast the Fame of God's Name and Work?
Or does he consider how intimately acquainted a Man had need be with another
Man's Interior, to be able to pronounce what degrees of Wilfulness there are
in his Overt Acts? Does he well consider this? The best Apology I can make for
him, is to say, that he does not. And yet as if he had said nothing amiss, but
were secure of the Truth of his Charge, he wipes his Mouth, and very gravely
applies to me two of the most severe Texts of Scripture that he could pick out
in all the Bible, namely, the 12th Verse of the 2d of Peter the 2d, and the
10th Verse of the Epistle of St. Jude, which tho through a guilty Modesty he
would not speak out, I shall. The Words are, But these, as natural Brute
Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they
understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own Corruption. And again,
But these speak evil of those things which they know not; but what they know
naturally as Brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Upon my
Word very civilly, and very charitably applied: But there are some Men, who tho
they revile those they disaffect never so bitterly, so it be done with the
Solemnity of a Text, and in Scripture Phrase, think they charge in Armor, and
have a Warrant for their most abusive Scurrility. And so having poured out the
Dregs of his Venom, he concludes this Reprehension-Part, having (as he words
it) discharged himself to me on the aforementioned occasion. I think he might
very properly say, He has discharged himself, having thrown up such a deal of
Choler and other Filth. Indeed (Poor Man) his Stomach was very Foul, and 'twas
high time to have it cleared. And yet it is not all up yet; he has not yet so
fully discharged himself, but that we find him Reaching again toward the End of
the Book. For after he had passed a disingenuos Reflection upon my Reason and
Conscience, Page 13.
in wishing they were both reformed, (which implies, that at present they are
both very corrupt) and after he had charged me with no less than Evil
Presumption and Blasphemy against some that Page 15.
dwell in Heaven, and Profaneness into the Bargain, in the Extravagance of his
Zeal and Passion he cries out, What art thou, O Man, that boastest thy self?
Art thou wiser than thy Maker? Threatening me withal in the Style, and with the
Authority of a Prophet, that God shall confound my Wisdom, and bring to naught
my Understanding wherein it is exalted; for he has determined to stain the
Pride of all Flesh, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Taking for granted
that my Understanding is exalted beyond its due Limits, and that I abound with
Pride. Which indeed are all of them fine Censures, considering the illness of
the things suggested, and the little Knowledge Mr. Vickris has of me; upon whom
he is pleased to bestow one stroke of Civility more at parting, telling me,
This is written for the clearing of Truth's Testimony from the Rubbish thou
have cast thereon. What a rude uneducated Pen does this Gentleman write with!
Whether it be his Anger, or his ill Nature, or his Persuasion, that so
uncivilizes him, I will not stay to examine; but upon the whole matter, I think
he has given me no small occasion to suspect that this was written, not so much
for the Clearing of Truth, as for the clearing, that is, the discharging
himself, and the ridding his Stomach of an uneasy Load, which now he is
discharged of, I hope he will sleep in quiet.

And thus having given the World a View of some of the Rudenesses of this
Author, (for in mercy to the Reader as well as to my Adversary, I have not set
down all) I now dare appeal to the same Judge, whether such foul reflecting
Expressions as these become either the Breeding of a Gentleman, or the Charity
of a Christian, or the Pretensions of a Quaker. I say, the Pretensions of a
Quaker; for tho the Quakers do not pretend to the External Civilities either of
Language or of Behavior, but rather seem to distinguish themselves by an
opposite Rusticity in each; yet it is well known that they make high Pretensions
to Charity, particularly to that most Christian part of it that consists in
Meekness and Gentleness, in Patience and Long-suffering, in a quiet and passive
temper of Spirit. To these (as it is well known) their Pretensions run so high,
as to offer to turn the other Cheek to the Smiter; nay, even to scruple the
Lawfulness of War, which it seems is too rough a thing for such calm
inoffensive Creatures as they, all made up of Love and Sweetness.

But now let any but a Quaker judge how well Mr. Vickris has maintained this
Character. Had I been never so gross in misrepresenting the Quakers Principle,
I could not have deserved such a Barbarous Treatment from him; or if I had, yet
it would not have been consistent with his so highly Christian Pretensions to
give it me. No, he should have suffered rather, and have returned Good for
Evil. At least he should have had so much regard to their so greatly pretended
Principle of Meekness, as not to suffer himself to run into such Intemperances
of Passion and Language, as he appears now to be guilty of. Is this the
Charity, is this the Meekness of a Quaker? If it be, then Sit Anima mea, Let my
Soul be with the Philosophers, shall I say? Or with the Men of the World; or
indeed with any Men, rather than with such a bitter foul-mouthed Sect as this.
What the Temper of this Gentleman is in his Conversation I know not, but if he
governs his Tongue no better than he does his Pen, (and it is strange if he
should) I think 'twould be a Blessing both to himself and others, if he were
Speechless. For the Language of the latter is so very foul, that I believe the
Archangel in his Dispute with the Devil about the Body of Moses, did not only
use better to him, (which would be but a small matter) but received better from
him. I Am sure he could not well receive worse. And now we are upon
Scripture-Allusion, I shall beg leave to offer one Text to Mr. Vickris his
Consideration, in requital to those many severe ones he has set before mine.
This Gentleman is both by his Principles and by his express Declaration in this
Paper, a great Despiser of that Wisdom which is from below (otherwise by him
called corrupt Wisdom) and a great Pretender to that Wisdom which is from
above; let him hear then and consider what St. James says, The Wisdom that is
from above Jam. 3. 17.
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc. With which I conclude this part,
and so pass on from the Passion to the Argument that is contained in this Paper.

And here, if there be any Dependence upon that Saying, that Strong Passions
produce weak Arguments, I may hence take a Presage of a Successful Issue in the
present Engagement. But however for fear of the worst, I think it necessary
here in the Entrance to advertize the Reader, that the Question now in Debate
beween us, is not concerning the Truth of the Quakers Principles, but
concerning the Truth of my Representation of them; not whether their Principles
are true in themselves, but whether they are truly represented by me. So that
if Mr. Vickris should have the Fortune to win the Stake, it would only be a
private personal Victory, without any Advantage to the Cause of Quakerism,
which is not concerned in the Issue of this Dispute.

This being premised, I must further acquaint the Reader, that the Book which
Mr. Vickris excepts against, as guilty of misreporting their Principles, is my
Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life, particularly in the Postscript
added to the Second Edition, where I undertake to give some Account of the
difference between my Notion of the Divine Light, and the Quakers Light within.
And this I do in several Articles distinctly, which because of the frequent
recourse that we shall have to them in the Sequel, it will be a Satisfaction to
have here set down. They are therefore as follows:

I. The Quakers usually talk of this Light within as of some Divine
Communication or Manifestation only, whereas I make it to be the very Essence
and Substance of the Deity, which I suppose vertually to contain all things in
it, and to be intimately united to our Minds.

II. The Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of Extraordinary
Inspiration (whence they have the Name of Enthysiasts) whereas I suppose it to
be a Man's Natural and Ordinary way of Understanding.

III. The Quakers (if I mistake not) confine their Light within to some certain
Objects, namely, Moral and Spiritual Truths, in order only to the direction of
Practice, and accordingly make it a Suppliment to Scripture, which they say is
not sufficient without it, nor indeed any more than a mere Dead Letter. But now
I do not appropriate this Divine Light to Moral or Spiritual things, but extend
it as far as all Truth; yea, as far as all that is Intelligible, which I
suppose to be perceived and understood in this Divine Light, as I have
explained it.

IV. The Quakers make their Light within a special Privilege of a certain Order
of Men, their own Party. Not inded as to the Possibility, because they suppose
all Men to be indifferently capable of this Divine Illumination, as may appear
from their contending against Predestination, and for Universal Grace. But tho
they do not make it a special Privilege as to the Possibility, yet they do as
to the Act, making none but those of their own Way to be actually enlightened
by it. Whereas according to my Principles this is no special Privilege, but the
common and universal Benefit of all Men; yea, of all the Intelligent Creation,
who all see and understand in this Light of God, without which there would be
neither Truth nor Understanding.

V. The Quakers by their Light within understand some determinate formed
Dictate or Proposition, expressly and positively directing and instructing them
to do so or so. Whereas my Light is only the Essential Truth of God, which
indeed is always present to my Understanding, as being intimately united with
it, but does not formally enlighten or instruct me, but when I attend to it,
and consult it, and read what is written in those Divine Ideal Characters.

VI. And Lastly, The Quakers do not offer any rational or intelligible Account
of their Light within, neither as to the thing, nor as to the mode of it, but
only Gant in some loose general Expressions about the Light, which they confirm
with the Authority of St. John's Gospel, tho they understand neither one nor
the other. Whereas I have offered a Natural, Distinct and Philosophical way of
explaining both, namely, by the Omniformity of the Ideal World, or the Divine
(...), who has in himself the Essences and Idea's of all things, and in whom
the same are perceived by us and by all Creatures.

Now this Mr. Vickris is pleased to censure as a Misrepresentation of the
Quaker's Principle concerning the Light within. But before I proceed to
consider whether it be or no, there are two intermedial Passages of his that
expect to be taken notice of. I had said in my Reflections, page 77. speaking
of the Light within as untowardly represented by the Quakers, that the thing in
it self rightly understood is true, and if any such shall yet call it Quakerism
or Enthysiasm, that it is such Quakerism as makes a good part of St. John's
Gospel, and of St. Austin's Works. And so again to the like purpose in my
Postscript, that if the Quakers understood their own Notion, and knew how to
explain it, and into what Principles to resolve it, it would not much differ
from mine: Of which two Passages Mr. Vickris endeavors to make a notable
Advantage, and fancies that they mightily befriend the Cause of Quakerism, as
implying a sort of Confession Page 7.
to their Principle, and that the Difference between us would only be in
Terminis. But is the Man in good earnest? Or does he think that he writes to
one that understands not what belongs to Consequence, and will be imposed upon
by any thing? Does it therefore follow that I confess the Truth of the Quakers
Principle of the Light, because I allow the Notion in its self to be true when
rightly understood, that is, when taken in a right Sense? What, does the
General Truth of any Notion rightly stated infer the Truth of this or that
particular way of explaining it? May there not be a false and erroneous
Explication of a true Hypothesis? Suppose I should say that the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith only is a true Notion rightly understood, do I thereby
confess the Truth of the Solifidian way of understanding it, who so explain our
being justified by Faith only, as to exclude the concurrence of Obedience? Or,
Suppose I should say that the Doctrine of Pleasures being our supreme Good is a
true Doctrine rightly understood, do I thereby acknowledge it to be true in that
Sense of the Proposition usually attributed to Epicurus? Or (to put these two
Instances together) can I justly be supposed to imply that the Solifidian and
the Epicurean differ from their respective Adversaries only in Terminis,
because I acknowledge that the Notions in themselves rightly understood are
true? If Mr. Vickris had but been at the pains to deck himself with a little
more of that Corrupt Wisdom, called Logic, he would never have imposed upon
himself, nor have offered to impose upon me with such Womanish Consequences as
these.

The other Passage that I must take Page 8.
in my way, is his general Complaint against me, for not quoting the Quakers
own Words and Authors in representing their Principle. Now to this I answer,
that having in my time read several of the most considerable of the Quakers
Books, and (as I thought) well enough comprehended them as far as they were
intelligible, I thought I might trust my Memory so far, as to venture to
represent their Sense as to one (and that the most remarkable) of their
Principles, without ransacking their Books, and mustering up Quotations, which
at that time I could not very well do neither, having but few of them by me.
But neither should I have thought it necessary if I had had never so many. For
sure a Man may venture to give an Account of one Notorious Principle belonging
to a certain Persuasion, and to show the difference between that and another,
upon the Stock of his former Reading, without being obliged to bring an Author
to attest to every thing he says. Thus were I to state the general Difference
between the Cartesian and the Aristotelean Philosophy, might I not securely
place it in this, that the one offers to explain Appearances of Nature by Forms
and Qualities, and other such abstruse Beings, which the other chooses to
resolve into the more simple and intelligible Principles of Figure and Motion,
etc. without appealing presently either to the Text of Aristotle, or to the
Principles of Descartes? Or suppose I were asked the Difference between a
Socinian and a Mahumetan, might I not be allowed to say, that tho the Socinian
denies the Divinity of Christ as well as the Mahumetan, and the Mahumetan owns
him as a true Prophet as well as the Socinian, yet they differ in this, that
whereas the Mahumetan allows him to have been only a Temporary Prophet, and
that his Religion is now superannuated, as having had it is Time; the Socinian
acknowledges him to be a Prophet of a perpetual Authority, and that his
Religion is ever obliging, as being the last and standing Revelation of God: I
say, might I not be allowed to state the difference thus between them without
Book, but I must needs be put upon fetching Proofs, Chapter and Verse, out of
Socinus and the Alcoran? Mr. Vickris might therefore well have spared this
Objection, without any prejudice either to the Beauty, or to the Strength of
his Discourse; especially considering, that he himself is not pleased to bring
so much as one single Citation out of any one Quakerish Writer, (for that
Passage of Barclay's (page 5.) is quoted upon another occasion) to disprove the
Representation of their Principle given by me. Now Mr. Vickris was much more
concerned to allege Testimonies out of Authors than I, as undertaking to show
that Representation of mine to be false, which I was then contented barely to
propose, not to prove. For though it was possible for me to give an Account (and
that a right one too) of the Quakers Principle, without producing any of their
Testimonies, yet it was not possible for Mr. Vickris to prove that Account of
mine to be false, without referring to their Books. Because it is one thing
barely to propose, which was my Undertaking, and another thing to prove, which
was his. Since therefore Mr. Vickris thought fit to save himself the Trouble of
appealing to Authors when more concerned to do so, he might well forgive it me,
the only thing material in this business being, not whether I quote their Books
or no, but whether I have given a true Account of their Principle, which is the
thing that now comes to be examined.

And here that Mr. Vickris may not have the least Ground to suspect pretend
that I contrive things to my own Advantage, by picking and choosing what I can
best Answer, or that I misrepresent his Arguments, by reporting them in my own
Words, or that I omit or conceal any part of their Strength, I will deal so
fairly and squarely with him, as to set down at large his Exceptions against
every one of the forementioned Articles, applying to them their respective
Answers distinctly.

Exception against the First Article.
1. THou say, the Quakers usually talk of this Light within, as of some
Divine Communication and Manifestation only. How does this appear to be true?
Thou quotest no Author for it. I apprehend thou intendest hereby, or else thy
Assertion has little weight or matter in it, viz. That the Quakers own the
Light within to be an Accident, and not a substantial inherent Principle of
Divine Excellency; which is a great Mistake, and it is to be feared a wilful one
too, seeing it is generally known, and thou confessest it too, that they quote
the Testimony of John the Evangelist for their Principle, as thou have done for
thine, they believing according thereunto, Chap. 1. v 4. In him was Life, and
the Life was the Light of Men: And if the Life of the Word be the Light of Men,
then surely the Quakers cannot be supposed to believe in any thing less than a
real Spiritual Substance, which the Soul of Man is capable to feel and
apprehend: For all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made that was made, John 1. 3. Thus thy first Distinction falls to the ground.

The Answer.
SUppose for the present, that the Sense intended in the Assertion were what
Mr. Vickris apprehends it (tho the Antithesis or counter-part of the Article
plainly implies the contrary) that the Quakers represent their Light within
after the nature and manner of an Accident, and not as a Substantial Principle.
I say as a Substantial Principle; for as for a Substantial Inherent Principle I
know not what to make of it, it being the first time that I ever heard that
Inherency was an Attribute belonging to Substance. Leaving out therefore by Mr.
Vickris his Leave this illsuited Term, which I fancy happened to slip in while
he was taking a Nod over his Paper; suppose, I say, my Meaning were, that the
Quakers represent their Light not as a Substantial Being, but rather as an
Accident, how does he make out the contrary? Why, he tells me this is a great
Mistake. But may I not reply to him in his own Language, How does this appear
to be true? Thou quotest no Author for it. But tho he produces no Authority,
yet he offers at an Argument, the Sum of which is this, The Quakers building
upon the Authority of St. John, make the Life of the Word to be the Light of
Men, and therefore must be supposed to make it a Substance, the Life of the
Word being confessedly so. But if this be all Mr. Vickris has to say for his
Point, he is very short of proving what he undertakes, tho at the same time
what he undertakes be nothing to the purpose. For tho it be true, that both the
Word, and the Life of the Word are real Substances, yet this Proposition, The
Life of the Word is the Light of Men, considered simply in its self, without
depending upon some proper and peculiar Hypothesis that shall limit and
determine its signification, does not at all infer, that the Light here is a
Substance. For the Word may be said to be the Light (unless a contrary
Hypothesis oblige us to understand otherwise) Efficiently, as it causes our
Illumination, as it enlightens and instructs by assisting the Understanding,
according to the common received Notion, as well as Formally, by being it self
the Formal and Immediate Object of our Conception. And so when Christ says of
himself, I am the Light of the World, there is no necessity, I mean from the
Words themselves, of understanding them in a Formal way of Predication; but the
Sense may very well be, what it is generally presumed to be, that he is the
Author, or Efficient Cause of our Illumination. Which is allowed to be
sometimes the certain and necessary Acceptance of the Particle (is), whereof
we have a remarkable Example, Ephesians. 2. 14. He is our Peace, that is, the
Author or Procurer of our Peace. And if these Propositions are not of
themselves determined to a Formal Sense, but may aptly enough be taken
Efficiently as well as Formally, then their grounding their Principle of the
Light upon these or such like Expressions does not infer that they hold it to
be a Substantial Being.

And it does not of necessity neither; tho we should suppose them to understand
that Proposition of St. John in a Formal Sense. Indeed in case the Word be
Formally the Light of Men, it will truly follow, that the Light is a Substance,
because the Word it self is so. And if the Quakers do construe the Proposition
in such a Sense, that is, Formally, it will also follow that they ought (if
they will be consistent with themselves) to make the Light to be a real
Substance. But it will not follow that they actually and expressly do so, unless
it were necessary that Men should always so strictly attend to the Consequences
of what they lay down; as never to say any thing inconsistent with their
Principles; which is an Happiness that Men of more Logical Heads than the
Quakers are generally presumed to be, would give a great deal to be secure of.
So that whether the Proposition be taken Efficiently or Formally, it does by no
means follow from their bare quoting those Words from St. John in the behalf of
their Principle, (which yet is the only Argument Mr. Vickris is pleased to
insist upon) that the Quakers do profess their Light to be a Substantial Being.
I do not say they do not, but only that had that been the Sense of my
Assertion, Mr. Vickris is far from proving the contrary by virtue of the
Argument he has used.

But why must that needs be the Sense of my Assertion? Why, because otherwise,
as he conceits, there will not be much weight or matter in it. No? Suppose this
should be the Sense of it, (as it is plain from the Antithesis that it is) That
the Quakers represent their Light not as God himself, but only as a Divine
Communication, that is, as something communicated or exhibited by God, whereas
I make the Light to be the very Essence and Substance of the Deity, etc. Will
he say there is little Weight in this Assertion? Is not the Difference very
material, if true? And that this is the natural, nay, the necessary Sense of
the Article is so evident from the Antithesis, that I wonder how a Man of Mr.
Vickris his Apprehension could miss of it. For (as he will quickly see, if he
review the place with the least Attention) the Opposition between my Notion of
the Divine Light, and that of the Quakers, is not made to consist in this, that
they make it to be an Accident, and I a Substance; but in this, that they
represent it as something only communicated, exhibited or manifested by God,
(whether as an Accident or a Substance I was not then concerned to consider)
whereas in my Account it is the very Essence and Substance of the Deity,
exhibitive of all Truth, and always presential to our Mind. And therefore when
it is said, that the Quakers usually talk of the Light within as of some Divine
Communication or Manifestation only; the Term (only) is not exclusive of
Substance in general, but of the Divine Substance, or Essence of God. I know
very well, and have no temptation to dissemble it, that it is the express
Doctrine of the Quakers, that the Divine Light is a Substance, not an Accident.
For they make it the Principle of Regeneration, which they all say, (and Mr.
Keith has taken a great deal Way to the City of God, p. 62.
of Pains to prove it) is a Substantial Life, as much as the Life of
Vegetation, Sensation, or Reason is; and as far as I can apprehend, the Notion
may be sound and true enough in its self, and wants only to be fixed upon a
right Bottom. And I know that Mr. Barclay in his Apology, lately Printed in
Folio with the rest of his Works, says expressly, We understand not this Seed,
Light Page 334.
or Grace to be an Accident, as most Men ignorantly do, but a Real, Spiritual
Substance, which the Soul of Man is capable to Feel and Apprehend; from which
that Real, Spiritual, Inward Birth in Believers arises, called the New
Creature, the New Man in the Heart.

But tho it be too plain to be denied, that the Quakers make the Light to be a
real Substance, yet it is also as plain, that they do not make it the very
Substance of God. By this Seed, Grace and Apology, p. 133.
Word of God and Light, (says Mr. Barclay) wherewith we say every Man is
enlightened, and has a measure of it, which strives with them in order to save
them, and which may by the Stubbornness and Wickedness of Man's Will be
quenched, bruised, wounded, pressed down, slain and crucified, we understand
not the proper Essence and Nature of God precisely taken, which is not
Divisible into Parts and Measures, as being a most pure simple Being, void of
all Composition or Division, and therefore can neither be resisted, hurt,
wounded, crucified or slain by all the Efforts and Strength of Men. But we
understand a Spiritual, Heavenly and Invisible Principle, in which God as
Father, Son and Spirit dwells; a measure of which Divine and glorious Life is
in all men, as a Seed, which of its own Nature draws, invites and inclines to
God. And this we call Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual Body of Christ, the Flesh
and Blood of Christ which came down from Heaven, of which all the Saints do
feed, and are thereby nourished unto eternal Life. Whether there be any such
thing as this Vehiculum Dei, or Spiritual Body of Christ, (which is a Notion
several Learned Men both before and since the appearance of Quakerism have
entertained upon the reading the 6th Chapter of St. John) I have neither Cause
nor Mind at present to dispute. But I think it is plain from this Account Mr.
Barclay gives of the Light, that tho it be a Substance, yet it is not the same
with, but really distinct from the Substance or Essence of God. For it is not
Deus, but Vehiculum Dei. And to the like purpose Mr. Keith, another of their
most considerable Writers, speaking of the Seed of God, (which is the same with
the Light now in Question) says, that it is not the Godhead Way to the City of
God, p. 130.
it self, but a certain middle Nature, Substance or Being, betwixt the Godhead
and Mankind, etc. Again, says he, p. 131. This middle Nature I call a Divine
Substance or Essence, not as if it were the Godhead it self, or a Particle or
Portion of it, but because of its excellency above all other things next unto
the Godhead, as on such an Account Men do call other things Divine which are
very excellent, etc. Again says he in the next Paragraph, This excellent and
intermediate Being may be called the Divine Being, because the Godhead is most
immediately manifest therein, and dwells in it, as in the most Holy Place, or
Holy of Holies. More Testimonies I might, but I think need not add, it being
sufficiently clear from these cited out of Mr. Barclay and Mr. Keith, that the
Quakers do not hold their Light to be the very Substance and Essence of the
Deity, though at the same time I think they ought, and that they are
inconsistent with themselves in that they do not. For that Text of St. John, In
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, which they quote to prove the
Light to be a Substantial Principle, does not prove so much as that, unless the
Proposition be understood Formally; and if it be, then it proves a great deal
more, viz. That it is not only a Substance, (which is all they infer from it)
but also a Divine Substance strictly speaking, even the very Essence of the
Deity. And indeed what less than that can be a Light to the Soul? How can any
thing that is not God, or that is created, be so? But it is not my present
Business to consider what the Quakers ought to say, but what they do say. It Is
plain, that they do not make the Divine Light to be the proper Substance of
God, but a certain middle Nature; and it is as plain that I do, which lays a
sufficient ground of Difference between us; so that my first Distinction is so
far from falling to the Ground, that it stands upon firmer Ground than ever;
and if my Adversary has but the Understanding and the Ingenuity of a Man, I
dare appeal to him whether he be not fairly Answered and Confuted as far as
concerns this first Particular. But whatever his Judgment be, I presume the
Judicious Reader will be of mine, and so give me leave to advance forward to the

Exception against the Second Article.
THY Second is as insignificant, and like an Arrow shot at random, lights on
thy own Head, being attended with some contradiction to thy former. Thou
say, the Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary
Inspiration. Where learn'st thou this? Before it was a Divine Communication and
Manifestation only, and now an extraordinary Inspiration. Thou would have
done well to have let the Quakers Principle alone till thou had learnt it
better, and more honestly to represent it. Is not Extraordinary, more than
Common, or Communication and Manifestation only? Have not the Quakers declared
the Light to be Universal, as well as Divine, in its Gift and Manifestation to
the Sons of Men? It is certainly true they have; and yet I deny not but such
who apply their Minds in Obedience to the teachings of this Light and Heavenly
Gift, may be made Partakers of more, viz. Extraordinary Gifts and Graces by the
Inspiration of the same Spirit. If for this they have the Name of Enthysiasts
given them, as in this Section of thy Postscript, tho it be in Derision, they
will rejoice in it; for it shall be as an Ornament of Grace to their Head, and
Chains about their Neck. Again, in the same Section thou say I suppose it,
viz. The Light within to be a Man's natural and ordinary way of Understanding.
And just before thou made it to be the very Essence and Substance of the
Deity, which are thy own express Words: See thy Confusion and
Self-contradiction. By these Words, a Man's Natural and Ordinary Way of
Understanding I take thee to intend the same thing as in page 77. where thou
call'st it Reason and Conscience; and yet at the same time call'st it, The
Divine (...), and Region of Truth, in which are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, the great and universal Oracle lodged in every Man's Breast,
whereof the ancient Urim and Thummim was an express Type or Emblem. Here thou
debasest and confoundest thy Principle, making it to be a part of Man's Nature,
whereas the Principle of Divine Light as held by the Quakers, is a distinct
thing from Man's Soul, Reason, or Natural Conscience, viz. a more excellent
Spirit and Principle. And herein I confess is a material Difference betwixt thy
Principle of Light and the Quakers, as thou have expressed it. Sure I am, it is
a great Error to render the Divine (...) by which all things were made, and are
upheld, to be no higher a Principle than Man's Reason and Conscience, or
natural and ordinary way of Understanding, which Reason is a Property Essential
to him as Man. I confess to know the things of a Man, according to that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 14. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, etc. By which it manifestly appears, that the true Knowledge of God
and Spiritual Things are attained by the Spirit, which is superior to Man's
rational Principle or natural Conscience, which may be defiled and corrupted,
as it is said expressly of the impure, that even their Mind and Conscience is
defiled.

The Answer.
THIS Second Exception, consisting of several things, must be severally
considered. First, He demands of me where I learnt, that the Quakers represent
this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration? But before I answer
his Question, I must settle the Meaning of my own Words, which he is pleased to
take in a Sense quite different from what I intended, and what the scope and
occasion of the Article requires. When therefore I say, that the Quakers
represent this Light within as a sort of Extraordinary Inspiration, it is plain
from the Antithesis of the Article that my meaning is, that they represent it
as a Supernatural Gift or Grace, meaning by Supernatural not only something
beside, above or beyond the Nature of Man; (for so also upon my Principle it is
acknowledged to be Supernatural, because I expressly make it to be the very
Essence of God) but something above or beyond the common Order, State or
Condition of Human Nature. Supernatural not only as to the Substance of it,
(for that is confessed on both Hands, only more exalted upon my Hypothesis than
upon theirs) but also as to its Dispensation and Order, being such an
extraordinary superabundant Addition to the Nature of Man, as is not necessary
he should always have, and without which he would still continue a rational and
intelligent Nature. In opposition to which I said, that it is a Man's Natural
and Ordinary way of Understanding, that is, that it is so far from being such an
extraordinary Superaddition to Human Nature, as Man might be without, and yet
be a reasonable Creature; that it is so much the Natural and Ordinary way of his
Understanding, that he could not be able to understand at all without it: That
he would not only have less Light should it be taken from him, but be quite in
the Dark. In one Word, that it is not a thing of Advantage only, but of
Necessity, necessary to the very Being, as well as to the well or better Being
of a reasonable understanding Spirit as such, who without this Light would not
only not see so well, but would be able to see nothing, or not at all. This is
the plain obvious Sense of my Words, only drawn out more at length, whereby it
appears that my Notion differs considerably from that of the Quakers in this
particular also.

And now if this be the Sense of my Proposition, (as it is plain that it is, it
being not capable of any other) I may easily answer Mr. Vickris his Question,
that demands of me, Where I learnt that the Quakers represent this Light within
as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration? For it is very plain that they make this
Internal Light to be Grace, that special and peculiar Grace of Christ whereby
he restores lapsed Man from the Corruption of his Natural State. For this end,
says Mr. Barclay, (that is, Apology, p. 330.
for the Restoration of Man) God has communicated and given unto every man a
measure of the Light of his Son, a measure of Grace, or a measure of the
Spirit, etc. And again he calls it expressly a Supernatural Gift and Grace of
Christ. Page 346.
Not that I would be thought to deny the Divine Light to be Grace as to certain
Degrees of it. So far from that, that I think it to be the greatest Grace of
God, that is, with respect to the Degrees of it, many of which I allow to be
such extraordinary Superadditions to the common Order or State of Human Nature,
as Man might simply be without, and yet continue in the Rank and Form of a
reasonable and intelligent Creature. But not content with this, the Quakers
make the Divine Light to be Grace simply and absolutely, as to its whole Nature
and Kind, so as to be all over extraordinary. And if so, then they are so far
from making it (as I do) necessary to a Man's Natural and Ordinary way of
Understanding, that they must make it such a Superabundant Accession to the
common Condition of Man's Nature, as without which he would still understand
enough to denominate him a Rational Being. For certainly a Man may understand
without Grace.

But that my Adversary may not pretend that I lay the whole stress of this
matter upon a Consequence, (tho it be a very plain one) I will prove the same
by express Testimony, namely, That the Quakers do make their Light to be
according to the before-stated Sense of the Word, something extraordinary,
something added to the common way of Understanding, so as not to be simply
necessary to Understanding in general, but only to the greater Advantage of it.
For says Mr. Barclay, That Man, Apology, p, 337.
as he is a Rational Creature, has Reason, as a Natural Faculty of his Soul,
by which he can discern things that are rational, we deny not. For this is a
Property Natural and Essential to him, by which he can know and learn many Arts
and Sciences, beyond what any other Animal can do by the mere Animal Principle.
So that here the Light is not simply and ordinarily necessary to the
understanding of things, which it seems may be done by Reason alone without the
Light. To the same purpose again, says the same Author, Man in his Natural
State (that is, in the Page 346.
state devoid of this Light, which he had just before called the state of
Darkness) can easily comprehend, and does comprehend, those things that are
peculiar and common to him, as such. And tho they commonly call the natural
state of Man (when without the Sensation of this Light) a state of Darkness,
yet it is not because they suppose him to be absolutely dark, and to know
nothing but only dark as to Spiritual and Saving Truths. So that according to
them there may be Knowledge and Understanding without the Divine Light, which
therefore they must be supposed to look upon as an extraordinary Accession, and
not as an ordinary Requisite to Human Understanding. Which again sets their
Principle at a sufficient Distance from mine. Tho I must needs do them so much
Justice as to confess, that herein they speak as agreeably to their Principle
as I do to mine: For conceiving their Light not as the very Object of Human
Understanding, not as that Truth it self which we perceive, (as is plain,
because they do not make it the Essence of God, as was noted above) but as
something that serves for the clearer Revelation or Discovery of that Object,
that is in one Word, conceiving it rather as a more advantageous Medium, than
as an Object, they might well be excused from making it simply and absolutely
necessary to Understanding: Whereas I conceiving the Divine Light to be the
Omniform Essence of God, and accordingly making it to be the very immediate
Object of my Understanding, that very Truth which (not that Medium by which) I
contemplate, was obliged to suppose it so necessary to the common and natural
way of Understanding, that there could be no such thing as Understanding
without it; which I am sure a Quaker will not, or at least upon his Principles,
can never say.

And thus far the Difference between us is very clear and plain, and would
indeed be on all sides unexceptionable, but that Mr. Vickris has here spied out
something, (for which I very much admire the Quickness of his Eyesight) and
that is a Contradiction. Before (says he) it was a Divine Communication and
Manifestation only, and now an extraordinary Inspiration. Is not Extraordinary
more than Common, or Communication and Manifestation only? And this he takes
for a Contradiction of what was laid down in the First Article. But methinks
Mr. Vickris should not undertake to write Controversy, unless he had known
better how to judge of a Contradiction. For does it follow, that because I
first say, that the Quakers represent their Light as a Divine Communication or
Manifestation only, in opposition to its being the very Essence or Substance of
God, and afterward add (as another Step or Degree of Difference) that they
represent it as an Extraordinary one, in opposition to the Natural and Ordinary
way of Understanding; I say, Does it hence appear that I contradict my self?
What if Extraordinary be more than Common, or Communication or Manifestation
only, does it therefore Contradict it? What, is every Addition a Contradiction?
It may indeed be so, in case the Degree added in the Second Proposition were
denied or excluded in the first. But is this the present Case? Tho
Extraordinary Communication be more than bare Communication simply considered,
is it therefore denied by it? Is it not plain that this is only an Abstraction,
and not any Negation? For if he should take hold of the Term (only), where I
suppose his Mistake lay, is it not very plain that the Term (only) in the First
Article is not exclusive of Extraordinary, which is added in the Second, but
only of the Divine Essence or Substance; this being the Sense of the
Proposition, that they represent their Light not as the very Essence of God,
but only as something communicated by God? And where then is there any
appearance of a Contradiction? But lest Mr. Vickris should not take this, (for
he has now given me just occasion to question his Capacity) I will illustrate
it by an Instance: Suppose a Cartesian should say first, That Light is only the
Endeavor of the Globules of the Second Element to Motion, not the Motion its
self; and then afterward should further say, that it is the Endeavor of those
Globules to recede from the Center of the Luminous Body in a Right Line, would
one of these Propositions contradict the other? It Is more than I can find if
they do. But he continues his Exception upon this part, asking me, Have not the
Quakers declared the Light to be Universal, as well as Divine, in its Gift and
Manifestation to the Sons of Men? Well, what if they have, may they not also
notwithstanding that hold it to be an Extraordinary Gift, according to the
above-stated Sense of the Word Extraordinary, as it signifies something
superadded to the Natural way of Man's Understanding? Does Extraordinary in
this Sense import any thing inconsistent with Universal? Suppose Adam had
persevered in his Original State, and his whole Posterity had inherited that
extraordinary Grace, that Fraenum Justitiae, which (according to some) was
superadded to the Essential Perfection of his Human Nature, would it have been
the less Extraordinary, that is, the less a Superaddition to the Nature of Man,
because Universal? Sure Mr. Vickris must be but little acquainted with the
Nature of Opposition, if he thinks there is any between these two things. But
suppose there were, he himself is accountable for it, and not I. For I have
brought Evidence enough to prove, that they do make their Light to be (as I
have explained it) Extraordinary, and if that be inconsistent with their other
Notion of its Universality, the Inconsistency lights upon themselves, and I
cannot help that.

And thus the Former Part of this Section is sufficiently vindicated; but it
seems there is a Flaw in the Latter, which Mr. Vickris endeavors to make great
Advantage of, tho it be such as is plainly owing to the Captiousness and
Uncandidness of his own Construction. Again, (says he) in the same Section thou
say, I suppose it, viz. The Light within to be a Man's Natural and Ordinary
way of Understanding. And just before thou made it to be the very Essence and
Substance of the Deity, etc. Did I so? Then this one would think should have
been a Key to my Meaning to any one that was not resolved to misunderstand and
pervert it, that he might have something to expose and harangue upon. For is it
in the least to be imagined, or does Mr. Vickris in his Conscience seriously
think that I, who in this very Book, and in these very Articles he reflects
upon, as well as in the whole Course of my other Writings upon this occasion,
do all along earnestly contend, that this Internal Light is no other than the
very Essence and Substance of God, whose Omniformity is exhibitive of all
things, and is the immediate Object of our Conception, that very Truth which we
conceive: And that I who make this the ground of Difference between my
Principle of the Light and that of the Quakers, that they do not make it the
Substance of God, but only something communicated by or from him, whereas I
expressly do: I say, can it be imagined that after all this, I should so far
forget my self, as to make this Divine Light to be the very same thing with
Human Understanding, and so confound (as he pretends) the Divine (...), with
Man's Reason and Conscience? Sure I should be fitter to pick Straws in Bedlam,
than to write Books, should I be so senseless as to make Truth and
Understanding, Object and Faculty, God and Creature all one. But as this is too
gross to be my real Meaning, so the Scope and Antithesis of the Article do
plainly show that it was not. It Is plain from thence (and no candid Reader
would have understood me otherwise) that my Meaning, tho for Brevity's sake not
so explicitly worded, was no other than what has been already suggested, viz.
That whereas the Quakers represent their Light as something extraordinarily
superadded to the natural way of Understanding, (as supposing two distinct
Lights in the Soul) and so not absolutely necessary to Understanding as such,
which according to them may be without it: I on the contrary making but one way
of Understanding in all, suppose this Light to be so far from being such an
Extraordinary Superaddition, that it is so requisite to the Natural and Ordinary
way of Understanding, that there is no Understanding without it. And so when I
say, page 77. This is Reason, this is Conscience, it is plain enough that I mean
no more than that this (namely the Light) is that whereby I perform Acts of
Reason and Acts of Conscience; not that it is my very reasoning Faculty, but
that whereby I reason and discourse, as furnishing me with Idea's for my
Contemplation. And if this be the Natural and Necessary Sense of my Words (as I
believe Mr. Vickris must needs be sensible that it is) then his whole following
Harangue about my confounding the Divine (...) with Man's Natural Reason and
Conscience is quite spoiled, and from a piece of Rhetoric becomes a most
trifling Impertinence, (or to borrow a Stroke of Oratory from him)
Insignificant, and like an Arrow shot at Random.

Exception against the Third Article.
IN thy Third Section thou come in with a Salvo Errore. If I mistake not, the
Quakers confine their Light within to some certain Objects, namely, Moral and
Spiritual Truths in Order only to the Direction of Practice. How should thou
do otherwise but mistake the Principles of others, seeing thou art so confused
about thine own? However, I must tell thee it is no small Fault at such an
Uncertainty to expose Peoples Principles; and it is an Abuse to say, that the
Quakers confine the Light within. It is Divine, Supernatural, and
Uncircumscribable; in it are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
Where have the Quakers taught otherwise? Have they not testified and declared
the Light and the Spirit of Truth are one and the same in being, which will
guide into all Truth, John 16. 13. The Quakers believe this Divine Light to be
the Quickner of their Understandings to Know, and of their Wills to Love and
Practice all Truth, and that it assists the Natural Faculties of the Soul in
the Attainment of necessary Arts and Sciences, as well as capacitates it to
Know and Practice Moral and Spiritual Truths. Thou may read what the Author
to the Book of Wisdom says on this Subject, in the 9th and 10th Chapters.

And whereas thou say, the Quakers make the Light within a Supplement to
Scripture, which they say is not sufficient without it, nor indeed any more
than a mere dead Letter. I answer, These Words Supplement to Scripture are thy
own, not ours; and this seems to be a Composition of thy own Notion of the
Quakers Faith concerning the Holy Scripture, without any Quotation of their
Words or Writings; and as it is an Objection is built upon thy mistake in thy
former Section, viz. The Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of
extraordinary Inspiration. Which has been already Answered, proving the
Universality of the Divine Light in Man; which considered, there is no just
Cause for this as an Objection against the Quakers assigning the Scriptures to
be insufficient without the Light, because the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures
cannot occur to the Understanding without it, and the Formal Reason thereof is
its Presence and Manifestation. The Quakers believe that Christ Jesus by his
Divine Light within, does in these Days, as in the Days of his Flesh, expound,
fulfill, and open to the True Believers the Holy Scriptures, which according to
the Apostles Exhortation to Timothy, Chap. 2. 3, 15. are able to make wise unto
Salvation, (Note) through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. The Word Supplement
in this Sense, I hope, will be found no Error, but according to thy
Construction of the Quakers representing the Light within as a sort of
Extraordinary Inspiration, Sect. 2. or special Privilege of a certain Order of
Men, their own Party, as in Sect. 4. And then making them to say the Scriptures
with relation only to the Direction of Practice, (as thy Lines import, Sect.
3.) are not sufficient without it, nor indeed any more than a mere dead Letter,
is to render the Quakers not only singular and erroneous in their Principle of
the Light (which shall be more duly observed in its place) but also
contemptuous of the Holy Scriptures as useless and insufficient to all but
themselves, which is a great and heinous Abuse of a Society of People, without
Cause and Provocation, and contrary to their Public and Known Assertions both
by Word and Writing, who believe according to the same Apostle to Timothy, Cap.
2. 3, 16, 17. that all Scripture, etc. And this shall suffice for an Answer to
thy Third Section.

The Answer.
IF I delivered my self with more than ordinary Caution and Reservedness in
this Article, it was because of my abundant Concern, lest I should injure those
whom I was representing by a false Charge; tho I think it is too much for Mr.
Vickris to condemn me for misrepresenting them, and yet to upbraid me with my
Tenderness in doing so at the same Time. But I find upon further Examination
that I needed not to proceed with such Suspense in this matmatter, being so
fully assured of my being in the right here, as well as in the other parts of
my Account, that had I the Liberty to New-Cast this Article again, it should be
in the very same Mould. Mr. Vickris indeed tells me that it is an Abuse to say
the Quakers confine the Light within. And I tell him again, that it is an abuse
in him to say, that this is my Charge. I never said absolutely and simply that
they confine the Light within, (which would imply a Confinement to Persons) but
that they confine it to some certain Objects, namely, Moral and Spiritual
Truths, in order only to the Direction of Practice. And that they do thus
confine the Light is as plain and certain as that they hold it, if Mr. Barclay
may be allowed to understand their Principles. For says he, As God gave two
Apology, p. 337.
great Lights to rule the outward World, the Sun and Moon, the greater Light to
Rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night; So has he given Man the
Light of his Son, a Spiritual Divine Light to rule him in the things Spiritaal,
and the Light of Reason to rule him in things Natural. Here it is very plain,
First, That he supposes two distinct Lights in the Soul, the Divine Light, and
the Light of Reason, or the Natural Light, which by the way sufficiently
confirms what was said in the last Section concerning their making the Divine
Light an Extraordinary Communication, that is, Superaccessory to the Natural
Light, or Man's Natural and Ordinary way of Understanding, which might remain
entire and unextinguisht, tho separated from the Divine Light, as being a
Principle wholly distinct from it, and that stands upon another Bottom.
Contrary to what I contend for, namely, That there is but one Light in the Soul
of Man, which is the Divine Light, wherein we see and perceive all things, and
by which we naturally and ordinarily understand. It Is also very plain in the 2d
place, That as he supposes two distinct Lights in the Soul, the Divine and the
Natural, so he assigns them two distinct Offices, no less distinct than Day and
Night, the Divine Light being to direct in things Spiritual as the Sun rules
the Day; and the Natural Light being to direct in things Natural, as the Moon
governs the Night. Each it seems has its proper Orb and Province; and they can
no more interfere with one another's Order, than the Sun can usurp the
Government of the Night, or the Moon assume to her self the Conduct of the Day.
And if this be not to confine the Divine Light to some certain Objects, namely,
to Moral and Spiritual Truths, I know not what is. It Is confined as much to
such Objects as the Sun is confined to the Day, and I desire no more, thinking
that to be Confinement eenough. If Mr. Vickris had been but half so much
confined to Civility and Good Behavior, he would have treated me with more
Humanity and Courtesy than he has done in some parts of his Book.

I might be more liberal of Quotations upon this occasion, if I thought there
were any need; but since that already produced is so express to the purpose, I
shall only take notice of a remarkable Passage in the Preface to Mr. Barclay's
Works, lately Printed in Folio, where the Ingenious Author giving an Account of
his Apology for the true Christian Divinity, makes one himself for the
Scholastic manner and way of its Composition, which it seems was in Tenderness
to Scholars, and in Condescension to their Education. His Words are, The Method
and Style of the Book may be somewhat Singular, and like Page 21.
a Scholar; for we make that sort of Learning no part of our Divine Science,
etc. Where it is plain, that by that sort of Learning, he means Human Learning,
those Arts and Sciences which are the common Objects of our Academical Studies.
And that by our Divine Science he means that Knowledge which is supernaturally
communicated to them by the saving Light of Christ, whereof he had discoursed
before. So that when he says we make that sort of Learning no part of our
Divine Science, it comes to as much as if he had said, We make Human Learning,
or those Arts and Sciences which are the common Objects of Academical Study, to
be no part of that Knowledge which is supernaturally communicated to us by the
Light of Christ. And if Human Learning be no part of that Knowledge which comes
by the Divine Light, then the Divine Light is not extended to Human Learning,
and consequently must be confined to Spiritual Truths, the very Province which
Mr. Barclay had assigned it before.

And to this Supposition the Thread of their former Principle naturally leads
them. For supposing the Divine Light to be an Extraordinary Communication of
God, that is, something superadded to the Natural and Ordinary way of
Understanding, there is all the reason in the World that they should assign to
it Divine and Spiritual Objects as its proper Sphere and Province, since
Natural things were before sufficiently discernible by a Natural Light and
Principle. Especially considering that this Divine Light is also conceived and
represented by them as that very Grace of Christ whereby Men are Converted and
Saved, and which was given to them by God for that very purpose. For so Mr.
Barclay in his 5th and 6th Propositions, Page 317.
reckoning up the Ends and Purposes for which the saving and spiritual Light
(as he calls it) was given by God, makes them to consist in making manifest all
things that are reprovable, in teaching all Temperance, Righteousness and
Godliness, and (in general) in Lightning the Hearts of all in order to
Salvation. So then it seems this Light is purely in order to Salvation, and
consequently ought to be confined to the things that concern it, that is, to
Divine and Spiritual Truths in order to the Direction of Life and Manners.
Herein therefore they are consonant to their Principles: As they do thus
confine their Light to Spiritual things, so they ought thus to confine it. For
what has Grace to do with the things of Nature? And as they follow their
Principle, so I follow mine. For not conceiving this Internal Light as any
thing superadded to the ordinary way of Man's Understanding, but as that
whereby he naturally and ordinarily Understands, and not conceiving it after
the manner of Grace neither (I mean as to its simple Kind, tho I allow it may
have that Estimation in some of its Degrees) but rather as according to the
Natural Order of Human Understanding: I had no reason to confine it (as the
Quakers do) to Divine and Spiritual Truths, but to extend it to all Truth
without Exception, which I suppose to be equally perceivable in this Divine
Light, which, as being the very Essence of God, must be equally exhibitive of
all.

But Mr. Vickris will still have it an Abuse to say, that the Quakers confine
the Light within. For, says he, It is Divine, Supernatural, and
Uncircumscribable, and in it are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
Alluding, I suppose, to that of the Apostle concerning Christ, Col. 2. 3. But
tho they do make it to be Divine and Supernatural, yet I do not see how they
can make it, or he can call it, Uncircumscribable, since (as has been observed
in the preceding Pages) they do not make it to be the proper Essence or
Substance of God, but a certain middle. Nature between God and Man: And for the
same reason he cuts himself off from all Pretense to that Text concerning the
Divine Word, that in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
which indeed is very applicable, and carries a very apposite and emphatic Sense
upon my Hypothesis, who make the Divine Light within to be the very Divine
(...) himself, the Substantial and Essential Wisdom of God; but must be
altogether usurped upon his, who either does, or by the Principles of Quakerism
is obliged to make it not the very Essence of the Deity, but something of a
middle Nature.

But says he, Have they not testified and declared the Light and the Spirit of
Truth are all one and the same Being, which will guide into all Truth? Joh. 16.
13. And I do not at present well remember whether they have or no, hor shall I
give my self the Trouble to enquire, thinking it altogether impertihent. But
sure I am, that they have often, testified and declared that the Light is not
the proper Essence of God, but a certain middle Being between God and Man; and
if they will afterward testify and declare that it is the very same with the
Spirit of Truth (which is really and truly God) I think they will evidently
testify against themselves, and declare Contradictions, and then it is no great
matter what thy testify or declare. But besides, suppose they did make the
Light to be one and the same with the Spirit of Truth, which according to that
of St. John, will guide into all Truth; yet it is plain from the foregoing
Measures that they must, and from the Context of the place, that they ought to
mean it only of Spiritual, Saving and necessary Truths, which may very well
confist with their supposed Confinement of the Light.

But how can this be so confined, when Mr. Vickris testifies again, and
declares that the Divine Light does assist the Natural Faculties of the Soul in
the Attainment of Arts and Sciences? But Page 6, 7.
how is this consistent with what he says in the Beginning of his Book, where
he calls this Corrupt Wisdom, and the Forbidden Fruit, and what will prove
Folly in the End, and the Wisdom that is Below, and that which God's Wisdom
from Above ever did and will confound? See the Inconsistency and Unsincerity of
this Writer! When it would serve his turn to disparage and down Human Learning,
then it is Corrupt Wisdom, Forbidden Fruit, and I know not what. And when he had
another turn to serve, (that is, to contradict me) then this Wisdom, as corrupt
as it is, is taught us by the Instruction of the Divine Light. But stay, Sir,
tho this Divine Light be not as you say the very Essence of God, yet is it so
far divided against him, as to teach what is contrary to him, and what his
Wisdom ever did and will confound? Are the Divine Light and the Divine Wisdom
at such Defiance with each other? But it is Mr. Vickris that is at Defiance with
himself, and I am afraid will not easily be reconciled. For if the Divine Light
teaches this sort of Wisdom, then it is not Corrupt, which contradicts what he
said in the other place; and if this sort of Wisdom be Corrupt, then the Divine
Light does not teach it, (as being a Pure and Clean Principle, and such as
cannot consent to Apology, p. 338.
any Evil or Wickedness) which contradicts what he says here. So that either
way Contradiction is his Doom.

As to what I said concerning the Quakers making the Light within a Supplement
to Scripture, etc. it was not intended as a direct and particular Objection
against them, of it self, but only to confirm the other, wherein they are
charged with confining it to Moral and Spiritual Truths in order to the
Direction of Practice. For that being the acknowledged End and Use of
Scripture, it seems an high Presumption, that what is made a Supplement to the
Scripture, is also intended for the very same End and Use. And therefore Mr.
Vickris need not have opposed himself against this as a direct and particular
Objection, it being not by me either intended or used as such. For whatever my
Thoughts may be concerning the Sufficiency or Insufficiency of the Scripture
without the inward Light, I had no occasion then, nor have any Mind at present
to engage in a Dispute about that matter. Only I would desire Mr. Vickris and
his Brethren by the way to consider, whether they can answer that Argument of
Episcopius, whereby he proves the Vanity and Absurdity of the Spiritualists,
(as he calls them) in making the Inward Word the Interpreter of Scripture.
Either (says he) they will Institut. Theolog. Page 253.
have that inward Word, as they call it, to have an intelligible Sense in it,
or not to have an intelligible Sense. If they will have it to contain an
intelligible Sense, then they must grant that that Sense being perceived by the
Understanding may be pronounced and expressed by outward Speech. And if so,
then it follows that this Sense may also be written, since whatever is
pronounced by the Mouth, may also be expressed in writing. But then this
written Sense will again be nothing else than an external Word, which being
expressed in Letters will according to them be nothing else but an inky Letter or
Scripture, which they deny to be sufficient. But if they will have this inward
Word to have in it no intelligible Sense, or that may be pronounced, or
written, then it will necessarily follow, that this their Word is no Word, or
only a vain and foolish Word. For such must that Word be which has no
Intelligible Sense. If they say, that this Word is not perceived but by him
upon whom it is immediately impressed by God. Then I say again, Either it is
impressed without any intelligible Sense, or with it. If without any, then the
same Difficulty will return, viz. That it is a vain and foolish Word. But if it
be imprinted with intelligible Sense, then what hinders but that it may be
expressed and written? And then how will it differ from that written Word we
have hitherto treated of?

But he tells me that these Words, Supplement to Scripture, are my own, not
theirs. It may be so, I will not stand with Mr. Vickris for a Word, since he is
so kind to me as to acknowledge all that I intended by it, namely, That the
Light is the Interpreter of Scripture, and that the Scripture is not sufficient
without it; without denying that it is not any thing more than a mere dead
Letter, a Phrase usually applied by the Quakers to the Scripture considered in
its self, as unaccompany'd with the Testimony of the Internal Light. For the
further clearing of which Notion, when any of them write next, I would desire
them to take the Argument of the beforementioned Learned Objector in their way.

He tells me again that this, as it is an Objection, is built upon my Mistake in
my former Section, viz. That the Quakers represent this Light within as a sort
of Extraordinary Inspiration, which he says has been answered already in
proving the Universality of the Divine Light. But I answer, First, That this
was not intended as a particular Objection of its self, but only to second and
enforce another. Secondly, That if it be an Objection, it is not built upon
what he supposes, which is only a mistake of his own concerning my meaning by
the Word Extraordinary, which because by me not opposed to Universal, cannot be
said to be any way answered by his proving the Universality of the Divine
Light. Then as to what he says afterward concerning my rendering the Quakers
contemptuous of Holy Scripture, as useless to all but themselves, in regard
that it is held as a dead Letter without the Light, which Light according to my
Construction of their Principle, is an Extraordinary Inspiration, and a special
Privilege of a certain Order of Men, their own Party. I answer, That indeed the
Scripture would be made useless to all but themselves upon this double
Supposition. 1. That it is a dead Letter without the Light. And, 2. That this
Light is their own peculiar Privilege; but then this latter (upon which the
Strength of the Objection turns) was not absolutely charged upon them by me.
For as for the Term Extraordinary, it has been more than once noted, that it
was not used in a Sense opposite to Universal. And as for their making the
Light a special Privilege of a certain Order of Men, that this is not to be
understood in such a Sense as will lay any Ground for my Adversary's Complaint,
will sufficiently appear, when I come to consider his Exception against the
Fourth Article, to the Examination of which I now proceed.

Exception against the Fourth Article.
THE Fourth is a downright Falsity, viz. The Quakers make their Light within a
Special Privilege of a certain Order of Men, their own Party. Not indeed as to
the Possibility, yet they do as to the Act, making none but those of their own
way to be actually enlightened by it. This is so abundantly confuted by the
Writings in general of those People, more particularly in the afore-recited
Book of Robert Barclay's, which considering thou have read, I am the more
amazed at thy Assertion. They say all are actually enlightened by it, all are
called, but all have not obeyed, according to those Scriptures, Micah 6. 8. He
has showed thee, O Man, what is good, etc. 1 John 9. 3, 19. 1 Cor. 13. 17.
Tit. 2. 11. etc. Thy Distinction of a Possibility, and not actually with
respect to the Divine Illumination of this Principle is trivial, tho not with
respect to Salvation by it. The Capacity or Possibility is not, nor can be in
Man abstract from the actual illuminating Power and Spirit, no more than
seeing, if the Light be not separate from the Eye. The Quakers have, and still
do declare, that Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, is the Universal Eree
Gift of God, for the Benefit of all Men, in order to their Salvation. And is
not this Common, yet Special Privilege, because dearly purchased and freely
bestowed on lost Man? That thou may not want occasion to traduce the
Quakers, thou have so much over-done it in this Section, as to contradict thy
self in the Fifth. As for Instance, Sect. 4. to be actually enlightened
according to thy-Principle is no special Privilege, but the common and
universal Benefit of all Men, yea, of all the Intelligent Creation, who all see
and understand in this Light of God, without which there would be neither Truth
nor Understanding. On the contrary, Sect. 5. thou say, thy Light does not
Formally enlighten or instruct thee, but when thou carefully attends to and
consults it, and read what is written in those Divine Ideal Characters. The
like Doctrine thou have, Page 71. of thy Book, Sect. 5. and 6. where, treating
of thy double Illumination of the Divine (...), viz. Fundamentally and
Potentially, or else Effectually or Actually; in the former Sense (thou say)
he enlightens every Man; in the latter, only those who duly consult him and
attend to him. See what Contradiction thy strained Notions run thee into? One
while to be actually enlightened, is the Common and Universal Benefit of all
Men; another while only of those who consult it and attend to it, and all to
avoid being thought to Symbolize with the Quakers in thy Notion of the Divine
Light. Thy Distinction of Potentially and Actually can have no more in it than
the Difference in the Subject, the one Universal Act of the Word or Light
enlightening every Man, comprehends both. These are but new invented Terms to
express the most ancient, and more Divinely, and better revealed Truths of the
Gospel.

The Answer.
THIS Exception seems to have in it the most of Subtilty and Artifice, and to
be the most fair and plausible of any: But I make no great Question but that it
will have as fair and clear an Answer as any of the rest. And because a
Question well stated, and put in a good Light, is half resolved, I shall first
of all define the Sense and Meaning of my own Words in this Fourth Article,
that so it may appear what it is that I there affirm, and what he does or
should deny, and wherein the Point of the Question between us lies. Now when I
say that the Quakers make their Light within a special Privilege of a certain
Order of Men, it is plain, First, in general, from the Article its self, that I
do not mean as to the Capacity or Possibility, but as to the Act. For I grant
as to the Possibility, that they suppose all Men to be indifferently capable of
the Divine Illumination, as appears from their contending against the Doctrine
of Absolute Reprobation, and for Universal Grace. I do not therefore make them
to confine the Light as to the Possibility, but only as to the Act. And then as
to the Act (in which respect alone I say they confine it) it is also very
plain, that I mean not the Act of Having or Possessing the Light (for I know
very well that it is one of their Fundamental Tenets, that God has Communicated
and given unto every Man a Measure of the Light of his Son, a Measure of Grace,
or a Measvre of the Spirit, as Mr. Barclay Apology, P. 330.
expresses it) but the Act of being enlightened by it. And that this is my
Meaning, the Tenor of my Words do sufficiently show, because I there say, Tho
they do not make it a special Privilege as to the Possibility, yet they do as
to the Act, making none but those of their own way to be actually enlightened by
it. Where by Act it is plain that I mean not the Act of Possession, but the Act
of Illumination. For Mr. Vickris is to consider, that it is one thing to have or
to possess the Light, and another thing to be actually enlightened by it. And
they who very zealously contend for the Universality of the former, may at the
same time, and that without any Inconsistency, confine the Latter. Which is the
thing that I affirm the Quakers do, viz. That tho they do not confine the Light
either as to the Possibility of being enlightened by it, or as to the Act of
having or possessing it, yet they do confine it as to the Act of Illumination.
That they do thus confine it, I will first show, and then consider what he
alleges to the contrary, which I think is a fair and distinct way of
Proceeding.

That the Quakers do confine the Light as to the Act of Illumination to certain
Men, or to Men of a certain Order, I think will be readily granted me, if I can
show that they do thus confine it to the Regenerate. And that they do so, I
believe I can not only render exceeding Probable, but even Demonstrate; which I
undertake to do in this Form of Argument:

They that do exclude all Men that are in their Natural and Corrupt Estate from
the actual Illumination of the Divine Light, do confine the Divine Light as to
the Act of Illumination to the Regenerate.

But the Quakers do exclude all Men that are in their Natural and Corrupt
Estate from the Actual Illumination of the Divine Light.

Therefore the Quakers do confine the Divine Light as to the Act of
Illumination to the Regenerate.

The first of these Propositions is most evident. The Second I prove thus:

They that do exclude all Men that are in their Natural and Corrupt Estate from
any Sensation or Feeling of the Divine Light, they do exclude all Men that are
in their Natural Corrupt Estate from the Actual Illumination of the Divine
Light.

But the Quakers do exclude all Men that are in their Natural and Corrupt
Estate from any Sensation or Feeling of the Divine Light.

Therefore the Quakers do exclude all Men that are in their Natural Corrupt
Estate from the Actual Illumination of the Divine Light.

The First of these Propositions is again most evident. And for the Proof of
the Second, which alone requires it, I appeal to the Testimony of their most
Authentic Writer Mr. Barclay, who in his Fourth Proposition speaking concerning
the Natural Condition of Man, gives this express Account of it, that he is not
only fallen, degenerated and dead, but deprived of the Sensation or Feeling of
this Inward Testimony, or Seed Apology, p. 310.
of God; And is subject to the Power, Nature and Seed of the Serpent, which he
sows in Men's Hearts, while they abide in this Natural and Corrupted Estate.
From whence it comes, that not only their Words and Deeds, but all their
Imaginations are Evil perpetually in the fight of God, as proceeding from this
depraved and wicked Seed. Man therefore as he is in this state can know nothing
aright; yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions concerning God and Things Spiritual
(until he be disjoined from this evil. Seed, and united to the Divine Light)
are unprofitable both to himself and others. Thus Mr. Barclay. Now how far Man
in his Natural and Corrupt Estate may be capable of conceiving rightly, either
of God, or of Divine things, it is not my present Business to enquire or
dispute. But what I observe from these Words of Mr. Barclay is this, That
Natural Men, or Men in their Natural and Corrupt Estate, however they may have
the Divine Light in them Seminally or Radically, yet they have not (while in
that state) any Sensation or any Feeling of it. They are his own express Words.
And if they have not any Sensation or Feeling of the Light, then they are not
actually enlightened by it, which agrees with the Distinction before laid down,
that tho they have the Light as to the Act of Possession, yet they have it not
as to the Act of Illumination. And if all Natural Men are excluded from the
actual Illumination of the Divine Light, then it is plain that the Divine Light
as to the Act of Illumination, (tho not as to the Act of Possession) is
confined to the Regenerate. Which was the Proposition I undertook to prove.

And that all Natural and Unregenerate Men, tho they have the Divine Light
lodged in them, are yet supposed to be deprived of all actual Illumination by
it, may be fairly collected from another remarkable place in Mr. Barclay, where
he uses this as an Argument to prove, that the Light is a Substance not an
Accident, because it may be in the Heart of wicked Men without denominating
them, that is, as appears by the Tenor of his Disconrse, without affecting
them, or deriving any Influence or Virtue upon them. His Words are these, We
know Apology, p. 334.
it to be a Substance, because it subsists in the Hearts of Wicked Men, even
while they are in their Wickedness. Now no Accident can be in a Subject,
without it gives the Subject its own Denomination; as where Whiteness is in a
Subject, there the Subject is called White. So we distinguish betwixt Holiness,
as it is an Accident, which denominates Man so, as the Seed receives a place in
him; and betwixt this Holy Substantial Seed, which many times lies in Man's
Heart as a naked Grain in a Stony Ground. So also, as we may distinguish
betwixt Health and Medicine. Health cannot be in the Body, without the Body be
called Healthful. Because Health is an Accident. But Medicine may be in a Body
that is most unhealthful, for that it is a Substance. In which Words Mr.
Barclay does, as far as I can judge, plainly imply, that wicked Men, tho they
have the Light really and truly in them, as well as those that are good, yet
they are not actually enlightened by it. It is indeed in their Hearts, but it
lies dormant there like hot Embers covered up under the Ashes, without
affecting, or denominating, or enlightening them. For it seems, it lies in them
as a naked Grain in a Stony Ground, and as Physic in a Body that is not at all
wrought upon by it; that is, it lies there, and that is all. Which amounts to as
much as if he had said in the Words of the beforementioned Distinction, that
they have it indeed as to the Act of Possession, but not as to the Act of
Illumination. Which must therefore be confined to good Men only, or to the
Regenerate.

To this purpose I might cite many other Passages which occur up and down in
the Writings of Mr. Barclay, as when he says (as he does frequently) that the
Divine Light or Seed lies in wicked Men, hurt, bruised, wounded, slain, yea,
and buried. And when Apology, p. 354.
he says that in this Seed in the Hearts of all Men is the Kingdom of God, as
in Capacity to be produced, or rather exhibited, according as it receives
Depth, is nourished and not choked. And when he says that this Seed was in the
Ibid.
Pharisees, as a Seed lying in a Barren Ground, which springs not forth, etc.
But I forbear more Quotations, having I think already produced enough to make
it plain and out of Question that they do exclude all wicked Men from the
actual Illumination, tho not from the actual Possession of the Divine Light, or
which is all one, that they confine the Divine Light to good Men, to the
Regenerate, as to the Act of Illumination, tho not as to the Act of Possession.
In short, All have it, but the regenerate only are actually enlightened by it.

I may urge this also as another Argument to prove that they do confine the
Light as to the Act of Illumination to a certain number of Men, because (as
every body knows that has had the least Conversation either with them or their
Writings) they do confine it only to those that turn their Soul and Mind
ininwards unto it, (for till then, as the Prefacer to Mr. Barclay's Works says,
Man is Darkness) Page 3.
at the same time supposing that not all, but a very few do so convert
themselves unto it. Upon which double Supposition are grounded their so often
repeated Admonitions and Exhortations to those they address their Writings or
Discourses to, that they would turn their Souls inwards unto the Light, that
they would mind, heed, follow it, and wait upon it in quietness and silence,
etc. All which would be extremely ridiculous and impertinent, if either Men
might be enlightened without converting themselves to the Light, or if it were
certain and necessary that all Men should so convert themselves to it. Since
therefore they do confine the Light as to the Act of Illumination to those that
convert or introvert themselves to it, and at the same time do not make all Men
to do so, it appears plainly that they do confine it to a certain number of Men.

And since again (as is well known) they look upon themselves as the only
Professors and Embracers of the Truth of God, and the only Followers of the
Light, and the only Converters of themselves to it, (which it seems is so much
the proper Characteristic of a Quaker, that when any one is Proselyted to their
way, it is ordinary for them, to say, Such an one is turned to the Light) I
think I had very good reason to say that they confined the Light to their own
Party, meaning, (as plainly appears, and as I have often suggested) not as to
the Capacity or Possibility, nor as to the Act of Possession, but only as to
the Act of Illumination. That tho other Men as well as themselves, yea, all Men
have the same Light in them, yet they only see by it, and have actual
Illumination from it, because they only turn themselves unto it, and (to
express it in their more peculiar Phrase) are Inward with it. Wherein I think
they differ again sufficiently from me, who am so far from confining the Divine
Light in the least respect or degree, that I extend it as a common Benefit to
all Men without Exception, yea, to all the Intelligent part of the Creation
(which by the way I do not find they do, nor do I see how upon their Principle
they can, since making it the Grace of Christ they must confine it to Man) and
that not only as to the Act of Possession, but as to the Act of Illumination
too, because I expressly say, that they all see and understand in this Light of
God, without which there would be neither Truth nor Understanding.

Now to consider what Mr. Vickris alleges to the contrary: He says First of
all, that it is a downright Falsity that the Quakers do thus confine the
Light. But let him prove this to be a Falsity as well as say it. He says again,
that it is abundantly confuted by the Writings of the Quakers in general,
particularly those of Robert Barclay. But I have made the contrary appear from
those very Writings. But he says again, that they say all are actually
enlightened by it, etc. To which I return, That then they say Contradictions,
and are inconsistent with themselves. But he says again, that the Quakers have,
and still do declare, that Christ Jesus the Light of the World is the Universal
Free Gift of God, for the Benefit of all Men, in order to their Salvation. But
by Mr. Vickris his leave this does not reach the Point in question, as proving
the Universality of the Light only as to the Capacity of being enlightened by
it, or as to the Act of Possession only, which I never supposed them to deny.
But the Question is concerning the Universality of the Light as to the Act of
Illumination, which is not at all proved by saying, that Christ Jesus the Light
of the World is the Universal Free Gift of God, for the Benefit of all Men in
order to their Salvation. But he further says, that my Distinction of a
Possibility, and not Actually with respect to the Divine Illumination of this
Principle, is trivial. But why so? May there not be a Capacity of being
enlightened where there is no actual Illumination? Are not these distinct
Idea's? And may not therefore one be without the other? But he says, the
Capacity or Possibility is not, nor can be in Man abstract from the actual
illuminating Power and Spirit, no more than seeing, if Light be not separate
from the Eye. No? Why then do they so often divide the one from the other, in
making all to be capable of Illumination by the Divine Light, when yet
according to them all are not actually enlightened by it, nor any at all times?
Of the Former, That all are not actually enlightened by it, I have already given
an Account out of Mr. Barclay: And as to the Latter, That none are actually
enlightened by it at all times, the same Author is so kind as to furnish me with
an Account in another place, where he gives this as a Reason why the Light is
no Power or Natural Faculty of a Man's Mind, because he cannot be actually
enlightened by it at pleasure, but must wait for the Irradiations of it. For,
says he, This Light, Seed, etc. appears to be no Power or Natural Apology, p.
338.
Faculty of Man's Mind, because a Man that is in Health can, when he pleases,
stir up, move and exercise the Faculties of his Soul. He is absolute Master of
them. But this Light and Seed of God in Man he cannot move and stir up when he
pleases, but it moves, blows and strives with Man as the Lord sees meet. For
tho there be a Possibility of Salvation to every man during the Day of his
Visitation, yet cannot a man at any time when he pleases stir up that Light and
Grace, but he must wait for it, etc. Bringing in the Comparison the Lake of
Bethesda, and the Angel at certain times moving upon the Waters. From which
Words of Mr. Barclay it plainly appears, that no Man, tho never so close a
Follower of the Light, is under the actual Illumination of it at all times; and
yet the same Author does not deny, but every where earnestly contend, that the
Light is always in Man as well as in every Man; and if this be not to abstract
the Capacity or Possibility from the Act of Illumination by the Light, I
despair ever to know what is. And why may not the Capacity of Illumination be
abstracted from the Act, since they are not only in themselves distinct, but
proceed from different Causes, and between which there is (according to them)
no necessary Connection. The former depending upon the in-being only of the
Divine Light, and the latter upon the Soul's Introversion of it self to it,
without which she will not be enlightened by that Light which she bears.
According to what Mr. Barclay says upon that Text, Romans 3. 11. There is none
that Truth cleared of Columnies, p. 8.
understands: Why understand they not, but because they are not turned to the
Light that can give them Understanding?

As to his Comparison taken from seeing, which he will not have possible to be
abstracted, if Light be not separated from the Eye. I answer, First, That if
there be any Force in it, it is against themselves, as convincing them of
Absurdity in Abstracting or Dividing what is not to be divided. For the
Signification of it must be this, That as the Act of Seeing is not to be
abstracted from the Capacity when Light is not separated from the Eye, so the
Act of Illumination is not to be abstracted from the Capacity of it, when the
Divine Light is not separated from the Soul. And why then do they abstract the
Act of Illumination from the Possibility, when they suppose the Divine Light to
be present in the Soul; as it is plain they do when they reach, that it is not in
the power of Man to be enlightened when he please, tho the Light be really in
him? If the actual Illumination of the Soul must necessarily follow upon the
Presence or Being of the Divine Light in it, then why do they abstract it from
it, by supposing that Man has it not always in his Power to move and stir up
the Light, as was before noted? But indeed, whatever Connection there may be
between the Presence of the Divine Light and the actual Illumination of the
Soul, it does not follow that there is any from the Similitude he here uses, in
which there is no Force at all, the ground of it rightly conceived not being
true. For Seeing may be either taken in a Material Sense, for that Physical
Impression made upon the Retina by the Rays of Light that pass in various
Refractions through the several Humors of the Eye; or else in a Formal Sense,
for that Sensation of the Soul which ordinarily accompanies that Impression,
and whereby she is conscious of it. If Seeing be taken in the former Sense,
then indeed it will hardly be possible to abstract the Act of Seeing from the
Capacity of it, if the Light be not separated from the Eye. But if Seeing be
taken in the latter way, for the Sensation of the Soul, whereby she is
conscious of that Physical Impression made upon the Organs of Sight, (which is
the most proper acceptance of the Word Seeing) then the Act of Seeing may very
well, and is often abstracted from the Capacity of it; and that notwithstanding
the Light be not separated from the Eye: There being nothing more common than
for Men, whose Minds are deeply fixed upon some engaging Objects that call off
and divert their Attention another way, not to observe what stands just before
their Eyes, and what Physically and Materially speaking they cannot choose but
see. So that this Comparison as prettily as it looks, will not serve the
purpose for which it is used. But I forget my self; it is pity a good Similitude
should be spoiled by being too nicely examined.

And now as to the Contradiction which he pretends to find between the Fourth
Article, where all Men are supposed to be actually enlightened, and the Fifth,
where the Light is supposed not Formally to enlighten me, but when I attend to
it and consult it: Tho he has so lately spoiled his Credit with me in this
point, that I shall not be very forward to take his Word for a Contradiction
again, yet I shall not scruple to confess, that there is at first View some
Appearance of Opposition between these two, but I think no more than what any
Fair and Candid Reader may easily accommodate, only by considering and
collating together the two different occasions upon which these two seemingly
opposite Passages were delivered. For in the Fourth Section, being to oppose my
Notion against the Quakers as to the Confinement of the Light to certain Men,
as to the Act of Illumination, there I lay down this Assertion, That all Men
are actually enlightened. And in the Fifth Section, being to oppose my self
against another Notion of the Quakers, in making the Light to be some
determinate formed Dictate or Proposition, expressly and positively directive
and instructive; there I say, that it does not formally enlighten me but when I
attend to it and consult it, as being no Formed Proposition, but only the
Essential Truth of God. Wherein it is plain that I do not deny the actual
Illumination of all, (the thing asserted in the former Section) but only
determine the manner of it, that it is not done by any Proposition ready formed
and held forth to the Soul, but by the Soul's consulting the Divine Idea's, or
Essential Truth of God. For when I say it enlightens Men only when they attend
to it and consult it, I do not suppose that there are any that are not actually
enlightened, but that those who are enlightened are enlightened by attending,
supposing at the same time that all Men do in some measure attend to, and
consult the Divine Light, so far at least, as is necessary to their common and
ordinary way of Understanding, and to render them rational and intelligent
Beings. It Is true indeed, the Quakers do also make the Light to enlighten none
but those that convert themselves to it: But then there is this material
Difference between us, that they representing the Light as an extraordinary
Accession to the Order of Human Understanding, and as a Saving Grace in the
whole Kind of it, do not suppose it necessary that all should turn themselves
to it: Whereas I not looking upon it as an Extraordinary Grace as to the whole
kind, but as an ordinary Requisite to Human Understanding, do suppose it
necessary for all to turn to it, or consult it so far, as to render them
thinking and understanding Beings. And so long as I make all Men in some
measure to consult it, tho I do withal say, that they are enlightened by it only
when they consult it, I do not thereby deny that all are actually enenlightned
by it. For this does not deny the Universality of Actual Illumination, but only
determins and specifies the way and manner of it. So that here is no
Contradiction, but all things are Uniform and Confistent.

Exception against the Fifth Article.
THE Fifth I take in the First Part of it to be the same in Substance with thy
First, differing in Form of Expressions, viz. The Quakers by their Light within
understand some Determinate Formed Dictate or Proposition expressly or
positively directing or instructing them to do so or so, as in thy first thou
calledst it some Divine Communication or Manifestation only. Where did thou
learn this Definition of the Quakers Faith and Doctrine of the Light within? The
Quakers believe the Light of Christ within to be God's Divine Oracle of Wisdom
in the Soul, the Former, Dictator and Determiner of Heavenly Propositions, them
directing and instructing what to choose, and what to refuse, as the Original
Cause of the Knowledge and Love of Truth, which are its proper Effects. Now
wherein is the Quakers Light, as thou term'st it, inferior to that of thine,
except in the differing Character thou give it? They own the Real and
Substantial Truth of God, the Life of the Word, the Light of Men, as Christ
said of himself, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. That this Divine Light,
which is the Light of Men, is always in some Degree and Measure present in the
Soul, by which it is upheld either in God's Love or Anger, the Quakers believe;
and that in him we live, move, and have our Being, tho with respect to
Operation after a different manner and measure, and passing the Understanding
of Man. And whereas thou say, Thy Light is only the Essential Truth of God;
This is an high Presumption, about which I have already showed thy Confusion in
other places, calling it Reason and Conscience, and a Man's Natural and
Ordinary way of Understanding. Consider Mat. 6. 22, 23. The Light of the Body,
etc. If therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, etc. So may I say, if
that Doctrine and Principle thou recommendest to the World for Truth and
Excellency be erroneous and faulty, how great is that Error and Fault? Again,
thou say, Thy Light is always present to thy Understanding, and intimately
united with it still, Sect. 5. which in thy Sense of the Light is to say, thy
Soul is never without thy Reason and Conscience. I wish they were both
reformed, that thou may be no more guilty of these and such like false
Aspersions; That the Light, supposing it to be what really it is, a distinct
Principle from the Soul, is always present to the Undestanding, which implies
its Operation upon the Natural Capacity or Organ, the ordinary means of
knowing, I conceive is more than can be safely or experimentally said, because
the Organ may be hurt, and the Understanding in that Sense interrupted, and
consequently no fit Medium or Receptacle either for the Soul or its Light.
Besides, the Soul may be absent from the Natural Understanding by the
Interposition of Spiritual, as well as Natural Causes, and yet present with the
Light in its Spiritual way of Understanding. But to say as thou do, that Thy
Light is only the Essential Truth of God, and that it is always present to thy
Understanding, and intimately united with it, and yet that it does not formally
enlighten or instruct it, but when carefully attended to and consulted, seems
to discover a Contradiction in its self, and to the Formal Reason of its Being,
and Presence, and Sufficiency in the one Act of the same Principle, as well as
to the State and Nature of Intimate Union. For how can any thing be intimately
united to its Principle, and not partake of its Nature and Influences, which is
the Reason and Manner of its Union? And how can this be, and not carefully
attended to and consulted? Is not this manifest Confusion? That the Presence of
the Light does enlighten and instruct all in some Sense and Degree, is
sufficiently proved by Scripture. By thy Word Formally Enlighten I apprehend
thou intendest the Operative Exercise, as in Page 17. and as here applied to
Light, signifies no more than actually to enlighten, ex part Objecti. I grant
such as do not carefully attend to and consult this Divine Light, do not
witness the Increases of it unto the Redemption and Salvation of their Souls.

It is the Path of the Just that is as the shining Light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect Day. If the Light, as thou assertest, does not formally
enlighten or instruct, but when carefully attended to and consulted, how then
should it quicken and raise the Soul from Death to Life, according to the
multiplied experience of Holy David? And how does God speak once, yea twice,
yet Man perceives it not, Job 33. 14, 15, 16, 17. and Isa. 65. How frequently
does the Lord complain by his Prophets of his calling to his People to return
and repent, but they would not answer? Note, the Call of God is not without
Instruction, read Mic. 6. 8, and Prove. 1, from 20, to the end. And see what
Wisdom does also in Nehemiah, how they rebelled against God, notwithstanding he
gave his good Spirit to instruct them. The Testimony of John the Evangelist,
the 5th and 21th, Ephesians 2. 1, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. These and many other Texts,
abundantly prove that God quickens and enlightens Man, before Man can turn unto
him.

The Answer.
I Have given my self the trouble to set down this Exception at large, not
because I intend to answer it all, but that it may appear to the Discerning
Reader, that there is a great deal of it which I need not answer, as being
either answered already, or so very impertinent and remote from the business,
that it deserves no consideration. But in the first place, I cannot but admire
at the singular Happiness of his Fancy, in imagining the former part of the
Fifth Article to be the same in substance with the First, and to differ only in
form of Expression. In the First it is said, that the Quakers usually talk of
the Light within, as of some Divine Communication or Manifestation only; that
is, as it has been explained, that they represent their Light, not as God
himself, but only as a divine Communication, or as something communicated or
exhibited by God. In the Fifth, it is said, That the Quakers by their Light
within (that is as Directive,) understand some determinate formed Dictate or
Proposition, expressly and positively directing and instructing them to do so or
so: That is, that they make the Direction of the Light, or the Light as
Directive, to consist in Dictates or Propositions ready formed and presented to
the view of the Soul, whereby she is formally taught and instructed. Now are
these Two the same? If they are, so are a Square and a Circle, Mr. Vickris and
my Self, Quakerism and Primitive Christianity. But he demands of me where I
learnt this Account of the Quakers Faith and Doctrine of the Light within, viz.
That they represent its direction by a determinate formed Dictate or
Proposition? I answer, from one that may be presumed to have dived into the
bottom of Quakerism, and to have comprehended the whole Mystery of it, as well
as any Man of that Profession, and that is Mr. Barclay, who speaking of that
Letter of our Master that is writ in our Hearts, says, Our Truth cleared of
Calumnies. p. 13.
Master is always with us, and he requires us to do all our Works by his
immediate Counsel, Direction, etc. And again to the same effect, speaking of
the Jews rejecting Christ, notwithstanding that they had the Scriptures, he
resolves it into this, because they hearkened not Ibid. p. 16. P. 17.
unto the inward Voice and Testimony of the Father concerning him. Again, he
speaks of a Word in the Heart, and of the inward Testimony of the Spirit.
Again, He writes them a living Copy in their Hearts. Again, he talks P. 18.
of immediate Teaching of the Spirit, and of Preaching that comes immediately
from the Spirit. He says further, that this saving Spiritual P. 28.
Light, is the Gospel Preached in every Creature under Heaven. And that tho the
Apology, p. 349.
outward Declaration of the Gospel be taken sometimes for the Gospel, yet it is
but figuratively, and by a Metonymy. For to speak properly, (says he,) the
Gospel is this inward Power and Life, which Preaches glad Tidings in the Hearts
of all Men, etc. More expressly Possibility and necessiry of inward immediate
Revelation, p. 896. Way to the City of God, p. 163. P. 170.
yet, Mr. Barclay calls the Revelation of the Light, the Voice of God inwardly
speaking to the Mind of Man; and in this he makes the very form of Revelation
to consist. And Mr. Keith makes the Divine Light to be all one with the Divine
Voice and Call; and to this he applies that of the Twenty Ninth Psalm, The
Voice of the Lord is a Glorious Voice. And to this purpose it is usual with them
to apply that of the Prophet Habakkuk, I will stand upon my Watch, and set me
upon the Tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, Hab. 2. 1. And
that of the Psalmist, I will hear what God the Lord will Speak, Psalm. 85. 8.
All which Passages do plainly enough imply, that they represent the Direction
of the Light after the manner of a determinate formed Dictate or Proposition
formally and expressly tutouring and instructing them. And Mr. Vickris himself
acknowledges as much in the Words immediately following his Question, when he
says that the Quakers believe the Light of Christ within to be God's Divine
Oracle of Wisdom in the Soul, the Former, Dictator and Determiner of Heavenly
Propositions, them directing and instructing what to choose, and what to
refuse. Which how it differs from my Account, that they make it a determinate
formed Dictate or Proposition expressly directing and instructing them to do so
or so, I confess my Eyesight too weak to distinguish. But if Mr. Vickris be as
good at finding out Differences, as he is at finding out Likenesses, perhaps he
may be able to distinguish them.

As to what he says concerning the Light's not always actually operating upon
the Understanding, because the Organ of Perception may be sometimes indisposed,
he does not therein at all contradict me, who tho I make the Light to be common
to all Men, even as to the act of Illumination in some degree or other, (enough
to render and denominate them Rational Creatures,) yet am far enough from
supposing with Descartes, that the Soul does at all times actually think. His
Principle indeed obliges him so to suppose, because he makes actual Cogitation
to be of the very Essence of the Soul, as much as Extension is of the Essence
of Matter. But my Principle does not any way oblige me to the like supposition;
nor do I suppose that the Soul is in every instant actually inllghten'd, or (in
other words) that she does always actually think. It Is plain she does not, as
in the case of Infants in the Womb, and of Maturer Persons when in a deep
Sleep. Herein therefore Mr. Vickris does not at all contradict me, who agree
with him as to this Point, that the Soul is not always in actual Illumination.
But tho in this he does not contradict me, yet he very foully and grossly
contradicts himself, in making at the same time the Presence of the Light to
the Understanding, to imply its Operation upon it, when according to his
Principles he must acknowledge the Light to be ever present with the Soul. And
if always present, then according to him it must always operate, since the
Presence implies the Operation, wherein he plainly contradicts himself. As he
does again afterward, when he taxes me of Contradiction and Inconsistency, in
supposing the Light always present to my Understanding, and intimately united
with it; and yet that it does not formally enlighten it, but when attended to
and consulted. This he says, discovers a Contradiction in it self, and to the
formal reason of its Being and Presence, and Sufficiency in the one act of the
same Principle, as well as to the state and nature of Intimate Union. For how
can any thing, says he, be intimately united to its Principle, and not partake
of its Nature and Influences, which is the reason and manner of its Union? In
all which, he still proceeds upon his former Supposition, that the Presence and
Union of the Divine Light with the Soul, does necessarily imply and infer its
operation upon it. And since upon the Principles of Quakerism it is
acknowledged, and by Mr. Vickris himself in this very exception openly
confessed, that the Light is always present; (for says he expressly, that this
Divine Light is always in some degree and measure present in the Soul, the
Quakers believe;) this plainly contradicts what he had laid down before, that
the Light does not always operate upon the Understanding, and that to say that
it does, is more than can safely be said. Why more than can safely be said, if
the Divine Light be always present to the Soul; and if the Presence of the
Light does necessarily infer its actual Operation? I may ask here of him in his
own Words, Is not this manifest Confusion? Nay, is it not withal manifest
Contradiction, and downright Inconsistency? If not, I will never pretend to
judge of a Contradiction again.

As to the Contradiction, he would sain fasten upon me, because I suppose the
Light always present, and yet not actually to inlighten but when attended, it is
evident that it is of no force, unless I had held the same Principle with him,
that the bare Presence of the Light does infer its actual Operation on the
Soul; and then indeed I had been guilty of Contradiction, as he plainly is. But
I do not acknowledge the truth of that Principle, that the bare Presence of the
Light does of it self infer its actual Operation, and that for the same reason
he himself has provided ready to my Hands, viz. because the Organ of Perception
may be indisposed. There must concur the Disposition of the Organ as well as
the Prefence of the Light. Among which Dispositions, the most immediate is
Attention, which I therefore make necessary to actual Illumination, not
intending thereby to deny the Universality of actual Illumination but only to
specify and determine the manner of it, supposing at the same time, that all
Men do attend in some measure or other, tho not at all times, or in every
instant of their Lives.

Now as to those Texts of Scripture he insists upon to prove that our
Illumination is not by Attention, because the Grace of God prevents Man's
turning to him; which I think is the short of what he deduces in many Words. To
this I return this double Answer, 1. That if there be any force in this
Argument it falls as heavy upon themselves as upon me, because (as it is well
known) they also make turning to the Light, which is the very same with my
Attention, to be a necessary requisite to actual Illumination. 2. That there is
no force in the Argument; for the word Turning here is Equivocal, and may
signify either the Moral Conversion of the Will to Holiness and Righteousness,
which is the fruit of true Illumination, or that Simple Conversion of the
Understanding to the Light of God, which is the cause of it. If the former,
then I grant that the grace of God does Inlighten Man, before Man can turn to
him; that is, a Man is first Enlightened before he is Converted. But if the
latter, I deny that God does Inlighted Man, before Man turns to him; nor do the
Texts cited by him prove it. Man must first Convert himself to the Divine
Light, and attend it, before he can be enlightened by it: For it is by Man's
Attention to the Light, that the Light has any actual Influence upon his Mind.
Nor is this any derogation to the Grace of God, to say that Attention is on
Man's part a prerequisite Condition to Illumination, because it is by the Grace
of God that he is first moved and enabled to attend. For the work of Divine
Grace does not (as Mr. Vickris seems to fancy) consist in this, in Inlightning
Man without his Attending, but in engaging and inciting him to Attend, which
since I acknowledge, I may without any derogation to the Grace of God say, that
Man must Attend, before he can be Enlightened; or that without Attention, there
is no Illumination. As suppose I should say, (what is commonly presumed as true
in Moral Discourses,) that Consideration is the Principle of Repentance, I do
not thereby either exclude or prejudice the Grace of God, because it is by the
Motions of that, that the Man is brought to consider. And now I think I have
answered all that is Material in this Fifth Exception.

Exception against the Sixth Article.
THy Sixth and last Section, I take to be an extravagant Noise and Bluster
against the Quakers, to supply the want of real matter of Objection. What means
else so great and general Reflections, without offering any proof, or reducing
it to a particular Charge? To say the Quakers do not offer any rational or
intelligible account of their Light within, proves nothing. To tell the World
as thou do, they Cant in some loose and general Expressions about the Light,
does little else but impose upon trust, which is to beg Credit, whilst thou
mentionest not what those loose and general Expressions are. But to say they
confirm them by the Authority of St. John's Gospel, is in some sort to
contradict thy Assertion; for so to confirm them, argues they agree to what is
there taught, etc.

The Answer.
IN the Sixth and Last Article against which he now excepts, I had charged the
Quakers with not offering any rational or intelligible account of their Light
within, neither as to the Thing, nor as to the Mode, which I then thought, and
do still, to be altogether unprincipled and unphilosophical. Now this he is
pleased to call Noise and Bluster, and complains of it as a general Charge
without any Proof. It Is true, I did not prove it then, not because I distrusted
my ability to do so, but because it would have engaged me upon a Subject too
large for my undertaking at that time, which was only to point out in short
those principal Heads of Difference which distinguished my notion of the Divine
Light within, from that of the Quakers. But since he is pleased to call upon me
for a Proof of this now, I will be so civil as to give it him, tho I believe he
will find occasion by that time I have done, to wish he had never put me upon
this Undertaking. For I doubt not but that I am able to make my Words good, by
showing the Quakers Notion of the Light to be indeed unprincipled and
unphilosophical. But because this is a general Charge, and such as concerns the
entire Body of their Hypothesis concerning the Light, I shall not do it here,
but shall rather refer it to a particular Treatise by it self, which I intend
as an Appendix to this, under the Title of The Grossness of the Quakers Notion
of the Light within, with their Confusion and Inconsistency in explaining it;
which I suppose will be a full Answer to this last Exception. In which
therefore I shall only further take notice for the present, of a pleasant fancy
of our Author, in supposing that I make their Expressions about the Light,
agreeable to what is taught in St. John's Gospel, because I say that they
confirm them by that Authority. Whereas it is plain that I mean no more than
that they allege the authority of St. John's Gospel for their Confirmation,
which is the common sense of the Word Confirm, as it is used by the best Latin
and English Authors. If Mr. Vickris does not know this, he is very Ignorant; if
he does, he is very light and trifling.

THE GROSSNESS OF THE Quaker's Principle OF THE Light within, WITH THEIR
Inconsistency in Explaining it. DISCOURSED In a Letter to a Friend.

By JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum, and late Fellow of
All Souls College in Oxford.

If the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness!

Matthew. 6. 23. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, 1692.

SIR,
WHAT you observe to me concerning the general Exultation and Triumph that is
among the Quakers upon the late Publication of Mr. Barclay's Works in Folio, is
what I can easily believe, and know not well how to blame. For I know of no
Church or Society of Christians that is already so rich in Reputation for Great
Men, but might well be proud of the Accession of so considerable a Writer, much
more they who have hitherto been so barren in Productions of this kind, that in
stead of having many Intelligent Writers, they have had but few that are so
much as Intelligible. We may therefore well allow the Quakers to swell and
plume a little, when they have at once so Rare and so Great an Occasion for it.
For really, Sir, Mr. Barclay is a very great Man, and were it not for that
common Prejudice that lies against him, as being a Quaker, would be as sure not
to fail of that Character in the World, as any of the finest Wits this Age has
produced.

But to qualify and allay their Joy, that they may not be overset with it, you
suggest to me that it would be convenient if they were now a little taken down
and humbled, to which I assent as a very proper and seasonable Undertaking, and
withal as now worthy of the greatest of our Learned Pens. For I cannot forbear
thinking Quakerism to be now considerable enough to deserve an Opposition, and
that if any of the Learned would with Credit and Reputation attempt the
Confutation of it, now is their Time, now their loose and scattered Notions are
reduced to Order and Method, and appear under the Form of a Regular and
Artificial System, with all the Advantages that can be given them from a
Scholastical Head, and a well-ordered Education. Now therefore there would be
some Adventure in the Engagement, and Honor in the Conquest.

And thus far, Sir, I agree with you, thinking an Undertaking of this kind to
be as proper and seasonable as any that the Juncture of the present Age can
afford; I only dissent from you in the Choice of the Undertaker, who I doubt is
not so well qualified for such a Work as you who are not so well acquainted
with him as I, seem to imagine. However, since you are pleased to impose your
Commands upon him, he is loath wholly to decline them even while he knows
himself unable to perform them, but does so far prefer his Duty to his
Reputation as to be willing to lead the way, and to flourish a little upon the
Strings, in hopes that his awkward and inartificial touching of them may
provoke some more Masterly Hand to take up the Instrument.

By this, Sir, you may perceive that it is nor my Design to examine the whole
Body of Quakerism, which indeed would require more leisure and opportunity than
the ordinary Busmess and particular Engagements of my Life will conveniently
allow. I shall choose rather to single out one of their most Capital and
Fundamental Principles, and to expose the Grossness and Absurdity of it, and
that is, their Famous Doctrine of the Light within, which you know, Sir, to be
the very Heart of their Cause, that Cardinal Point upon which the whole Weight
of their System turns, the very Life and Soul of Quakerism.

I know very well, nor can you, I suppose, be ignorant, that this Principle of
theirs, since its first appearance in the World, has been all along entertained
with Laughter and Contempt; and tho by themselves the most regarded of any,
(for there is no Point of theirs upon which they lay so much Stress as upon
this) has yet by others been most of all Vilified and ridiculed, and has
contributed the most of any one thing to that great and general Contempt they
lie under, next to the particular Oddness of their Habit and Air, and the
Uncourtliness of their Language and Behavior.

Nor is there any thing either strange or amiss thus far. For certainly this
Notion of the Light within, according as the Quakers explain and represent it,
is really ridiculous enough to make the Patrons of it so, and well deserves all
the Scorn and Contempt that is cast upon it. But that which I particularly
observe as blamable in this matter, is this, that me generality of those who
deride the Doctrine of the Light within, know not upon what Grounds they do it;
nay, for the most part, they do it upon no other Grounds, than barely to
indulge the humersom Inclinations of a certain light and wanton Spirit that
loves to disparage and run down all novel and singular Opinions, especially if
they carry in them an Air of Seriousness or Religion. And of those few that
proceed by more certain Grounds and Measures of Judgment, the greatest part
proceed by false and undue ones, condemning the Doctrine of the Light within not
as it is held and represented by the Quakers, (for to my Knowledge very few even
of the Learned have given themselves the Curiosity to know how they hold it)
but in Gross, and in General. They condemn the Doctrine not as so or so stated,
but in common, and as such, in its most direct and immediate Sense, thinking it
absurd to suppose that there is any other Principle of Light in Man besides his
Rational Soul, which they will have to be a Light to it self, at least as far
as concerns Natural and Moral Truths.

Now herein I confess I am so far from agreeing with these Gentlemen of the
Second Order (for the former are of no account) that I think they do very ill
in deriding and ridiculing this Doctrine of the Light within in general and as
such, and are guilty of more Impiety and Profaneness than they are aware of.
For upon the deepest Consideration of all the possible ways of Human
Understanding I am thoroughly persuaded, (and have partly shown the Grounds of
this my Persuasion elsewhere) that Man cannot be his own Light, or a Light to
himself in the acquirement of Knowledge, and therefore that there must of
necessity be some other Principle of Light in him distinct from his own
Rational Nature; which you know I make to be the Divine Ideas, the Eternal
(...), the Substantial Word and Wisdom of God, in whom I suppose Man to
perceive all that he perceives. I am therefore so far from disallowing or
condemning the Doctrine of the Light within, that I very earnestly stand and
contend for it, as for a very true, solid and necessary Notion, without which
there can be no intelligible Account given of the Mode of Understanding. I am
therefore so far from taxing the Quakers for the general Supposition they go
upon, that I heartily join with them in it, supposing, as they do, that Man
cannot be a Light to himself; only I adhere more closely to this Supposition
than they do. For when they make Man incapable of being a Light to himself,
they mean, not as to Natural things, (which according to them may be discerned
by a Natural Light) but only as to Spiritual things, which cannot be discerned
but by an Higher Principle. Whereas I acknowledge the Supposition in a greater
Latitude, supposing Man incapable of being a Light to himself, not only with
respect to Spiritual Truths, but even as to Natural things, all which are
discerned by that one common Light of Man, the Divine Light, which I make to be
necessary not only to the Discernment of Divine and Spiritual Truths, but even
to the Natural and Ordinary Acts of Understanding.

I do not therefore find Fault with the Quakers for holding such a thing as the
Light within; so far from that, that I very much outdo them in the Latitude of
the Principle, as making it more necessary, and more extensive than they. I do
not (as some do) disapprove of the Doctrine in general, but have a very
convincing Assurance of it, and a very awful Regard and Veneration for it, as a
very Noble and Sacred Theory. But that which I condemn in the Quakers as to
this Point, is their particular manner of stating and explaining the general
Notion of the Light within, which I think to be as Gross and Absurd, as the
Notion it self in general is fine and rational. And that upon this double
Account.

I. Because they make it to be a Creature. II. Because they make it a Material
Creature.
Upon which two Grounds I question not but that I shall be able so to
demonstrate the Falsehood and Absurdity of this grand Article of Quakerism, as
to render it utterly incapable of Defense, even tho Mr. Barclay himself were
now alive to be my Opposer.

But because this is to be the Ground and Bottom of the following Discourse,
and that I may not be thought to contend against a Supposititious Notion, or
Imaginary Absurdity, I must take care in the first place, that this which is to
be the Foundation of all, be well laid, by proving plainly and undeniably that
the Quakers do represent their Light within after the manner already intimated,
viz. As a Creature, and as a Material Creature, before I undertake to expose
their Absurdity in so doing. In order to which I must give an Account of this
Light within, and show what it is according to the Quakers. Wherein I believe
(so little have the Principles of Quakerism been enquired into, even by those
that nevertheless take the liberty to laugh at them) I shall tell a great many
even of the Learned World a considerable piece of News.

And here to reduce the matter to as narrow a Compass as may be, (there being
nothing wherein I admire Brevity more than in Quotations) I shall be content to
take my Account from two of their most eminent and approved Writers, Mr.
Barclay and Mr. Keith; and to prevent all suspicion of Misrepresentation, shall
deliver it in their own express Words. Thus then Mr. Barclay, speaking of the
Universal and Saving-Light of Christ, By this Seed, Apology, P. 333.
Grace and Word of God, and Light wherewith we say every Man is enlightened, and
has a measure of it, which strives with them in Order to save them, and which
may by the Stubbornness and Wickedness of Man's Will be quenched, bruised
wounded, pressed down, slain and crucified, we understand not the proper
Essence and Nature of God precisely taken; which is not divisible into Parts
and Measures, as being a most pure simple Being, void of all Composition or
Division, and therefore can neither be resisted, hurt, wounded, crucified or
slain by all the Efforts and Strength of Men. But we understand a Spiritual,
Heavenly, and Invisible Principle, in which God, as Father, Son and Spirit
dwells: A measure of which Divine and Glorious Life is in all Men as a Seed,
which of its own Nature draws, invites and inclines to God. And this we call
Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
which came down from Heaven, of which all the Saints do feed, and are thereby
nourished unto Eternal Life.

From which Account of Mr. Barclay it is plain, 1. That they do not make their
Light within to be God, (for he says they understand not by it the proper
Essence and Nature of God) and consequently must make it to be a Creature,
there being no Medium between God and the Creature. 2. That they do also make
it to be a Material Creature, since he supposes it divisible into Measures and
Portions, calls it Vehiculum Dei, and the Spiritual Body of Christ, and that
Flesh and Blood of his which came down from Heaven, and which is both Food and
Nourishment to the Saints. None of which Affections can with any tolerable
Congruity agree to a Spiritual Substance, strictly so called. Again, says Mr.
Barclay, discoursing of the Communion or Participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ, The Body then of Christ which Believers partake Apology, p. 494.
of, is Spiritual, and not Carnal, and his Blood which they drink of is pure
and Heavenly, and not Human or Elementary. If it be asked, what that Body, what
that Flesh and Blood is? I answer, it is that Heavenly Seed, that Divine,
Spiritual, Celestial Substance of which we spoke before in the 5th and 6th
Propositions; (the place just before quoted) This is that Vehiculum Dei, or
Spiritual Body of Christ, whereby and wherethrough he communicates Life to
Men, and Salvation to as many as believe in him, and receive him, and whereby
also Man comes to have Fellowship and Communion with God. Again, says he, Page
495.
That this Body and Spiritual Flesh and Blood of Christ is to be understood of
that Divine and Heavenly Seed before spoken of by us, appears both by the
Nature and Fruits of it. And again, Ibid.
That Christ understands the same thing here by his Body, Flesh and Blood which
is understood, John 1. By the Light enlightening every Man, appears, etc. Again,
As Jesus Christ did by the Eternal Spirit offer up that Body, (meaning his
Carnal Body) for a Propitiation for the Remission of Sins, so has he likewise
poured forth into the Hearts of all Men a measure of that Divine Light and Seed
wherewith he is clothed, etc. I shall quote but one Passage more from Mr.
Barclay to this purpose, and it is in his last Discourse concerning the
Possibility and Necessity of inward Immediate Revelation, where having
distinguished between Natural and Supernatural Ideas, he says, As the Natural
Ideas are stirred up in us by outward and natural Bodies, so those Divine and
Supernatural Ideas are stirred up in us by a certain Principle, which is a Body
in Naturals, in relation to the Spiritual World, and therefore may be called a
Divine Body. Not as if it were a part of God, who is a most pure Spirit; but
the Organ or Instrument of God, by which he works in us, and stirs up in
us these Ideas of Divine things. This is that Flesh and Blood of Christ, by
which the Saints are nourished, which is a Mystery to all unregenerated and
mere natural men, etc. Page 901.


Here we meet with a Continuation of the same Notion. For as in the former
Instances he made the Light to be all one with the Spiritual Body of Christ,
and again reciprocally the Spiritual Body of Christ to be the selfsame thing
with the Light, so now supposing our Spiritual Ideas to be raised by a Divine
Body, he makes this Divine Body to be no other than that Flesh and Blood of
Christ by which the Saints are nourished, and which he had before made all one
with the Light, and consequently he makes the Light to be a Divine Body. For if
the Light be the same with that Flesh and Blood of Christ by which the Saints
are nourished; and if that Flesh and Blood be a Divine Body, then it is plain
that the Light is also a Divine Body.

So much at present for Mr. Barclay. Now let Mr. Kieth take his turn, who in
his Way Page 64.
to the City of God, speaking of the Divine Seed (which they always make one
and the same with the Light) says, That it is called often in Scripture the Body
of Christ, and his Flesh and Blood, which the Soul feeding upon becomes
clothed therewith, as with a Body, and thereby dwells in Christ, and lives
in him, as the Branch in the Vine. Again, The Saints feel it Ibid.
(namely the Divine Seed or Light) in them as really to be a Part or Particle
of the very Substance of Heaven, viz. Of that Spiritual and invisible Heaven
where the Saints live, as they do feel the Body of their outward Man to be a
Part or Particle of the Substance of this outward World. Again he says, that
this Divine Seed Page 130.
(or Light) is not the Godhead it self, but a certain middle Nature, Substance
or Being, betwixt the Godhead and Mankind, etc. This will be thought the more
strange (says he) by many, because they have been commonly taught, and have
commonly received it, that there is no middle Substance betwixt the Godhead and
us, at least as to the inward: For they have supposed that the Spirit or Mind
of a Man or an Angel is next unto the Godhead, which I deny; for the Heavenly
or Divine Substance or Essence of which the Divine Birth was both conceived in
Mary, and is inwardly conceived in the Saints, is of a middle Nature.

And lest by their Calling (as they often do) this Substance a Divine
Substance, they should be thought to imply that it was the very Substance of
God, he takes care to lay in a Caution against any such Construction in the
next Paragraph. This middle Nature (says he) I call Ibid.
a Divine Substance or Essence, not as if it were the Godhead it self, or a
Particle or Portion of it, but because of its Excellency above all other things
next unto the Godhead; as on such an Account Men do call other things Divine
which are very excellent; yea, some call Holy Men Divine, and some call these
who teach the things of God, Divines, as John, who wrote the Revelations, is
called John the Divine. Also this excellent and intermediate Being may be
called the Divine Being, because the Godhead is most immediately manifest
therein, and dwells in it as in the most Holy Place, or Holy of Holies.

He further tells us, speaking of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, that God
did really sow a most Divine and Heavenly Seed in Page 129.
the Virgins Womb, and that by Virtue of this Christ had a Divine Perfection
and Virtue, and Page 132.
that Substantial, above all other Men. Again, he says, that his Body has not
only the Perfections Page 133.
of our Body, but also much more, because of its being generate not only of the
Seed of Mary, but of a Divine Seed, and that this Divine Seed is that Universal
Balsom or Medicin to cure and Ibid.
restore not only all Mankind, but also the whole outward Creation: That this
is the Little Leaven that shall Leaven the whole Lump of this visible Page 134.
Creation, whereby all things shall be made new, etc. That this is that Stone
of the Wise Men, Ibid.
which by its Touch shall in due time change, not only the Bodies of the
Saints, but the Body of the whole Creation, and purge it from all its Weakness
and Impurity. For (says he) what can perfectly cure and restore the Sick and
Diseased Body Ibid.
of Nature either in Man, or in other things, but his incorruptible Body? etc.
All which Expressions do plainly intimate, that this Divine Seed whereof Christ
was generated, and we are regenerated, (for according to them, that which was
the Principle of Christ's Natural Birth, is the Principle of our Spiritual
Birth) was really, a material corporeal Substance; and since the Light is by
them supposed to be all one with this Divine Seed, it is very evident that they
make the Light to be also a material corporeal Principle. The short of this
matter lies in this Form of Argument.

The Divine Seed whereof Christ was naturally generated, and whereby we are
regenerated is a Body.

But the Light within is one and the same thing with this Divine Seed.

Therefore the Light within is a Body.

And thus do these two great Pillars of Quakerism Mr. Barclay and Mr. Keith
agree with each other, and both of them in this, in making the Light within not
to be God or a Substance properly Divine, but to be a Creature, and more than
that, to be a Material and Corporeal Creature.

But that the Reader may have yet a more full Account, and more clear and exact
Comprehension of this matter, I will take their Hypothesis from the very Ground
and Bottom of it, and resolve it into certain distinct Principles or
Suppositions, which (as far as I am able to gather from the forecited and other
like Passages that occur up and down in their Writings) are such as these.

1. They suppose that the Spiritual Life, or the Life of Holiness and Grace, is
a Substantial Life, even as the Life of Vegetation, the Life of Sensation, and
the Life of Reason are all Substantial.

2. They suppose that this Substantial Life is by the Vital Union of the Soul
with some Body or other.

3. They suppose that this Body in the Vital Union of the Soul with which
Spiritual Life does consist, is a certain Divine or Celestial Body, even as the
Natural Life does consist in the Vital Union of the Soul, with a Natural or
Terrestrial Body of the common Elementary consistence.

4. They suppose that Christ had Two Bodies of a distinct Original, and of a
different contexture, a Carnal Body, and a Spiritual Body, a Body which he took
from the Virgin Mary, and a Body in which his Soul existed long before he took
Flesh of the Virgin. They are the very Words of Mr. Barclay, Apology
Vindicated, p. 861.
which because they are of particular concernment, I will set down at large. To
the Question of his Adversary, Had Christ Two Bodies? He answers, Yes; and let
him deny it if he dare, without contradicting the Scripture, Joh. 6. 58. Christ
speaks of his Flesh which came down from Heaven; but this was not the Flesh he
took from the Virgin Mary, for that came not down from Heaven; but he had a
Spiritual Body, in which his Soul existed long before he took Flesh of the
Virgin. Which I think is an express Declaration for a Twofold Body of Christ,
the Body wherein he was Incarnate, and a Body antecedent to his Incarnation.

5. They suppose that this latter, the Spiritual Body of Christ, is that Divine
or Celestial Body in the Vital Union of the Soul, with which our Spiritual
Life, or our Life of Grace does consist; that this is properly that Seed of God
mentioned by St. Peter and St. John, which was sown in the Womb of the Virgin,
and in the Hearts of Mankind, that whereby Christ was naturally generated, and
whereby the Saints are regenerated, that this is that Heavenly Manna, that
Living Bread discoursed of in the Sixth of St. John, that Divine Aliment upon
which the Saints do feed, and whereby they are nourished unto everlasting Life.

6. And Lastly, they do also suppose that this Spiritual Body of Christ wherein
his Human Soul existed before his Incarnation, a measure whereof is given as a
Divine Seed to every Man to Leven, Season and Sanctify his Nature, and by
closing and uniting with which our Nature becomes actually Sanctified, that
this I say is that very Divine Light which God has set up as a Monitor,
Instructor and Teacher in the Hearts of Men, to guide and direct them in the
way of Salvation: That this Spiritual Body of Christ, is what they suppose to
be the Light of Mankind, I need appeal to no other Evidence than the latter
part of the first Quotation out of Mr. Barclay, where he says that they
understand by the Light, a Spiritual, Heavenly and Invincible Principle, in
which God as Father Son and Spirit dwells, a measure of which Divine and
Glorious Life is in all Men as a Seed, which of its own nature draws, invites
and inclines to God. And this we call (observe) Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual
Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ which came down from Heaven, of
which all the Saints do Feed, and are thereby nourished unto Eternal Life. By
which I think it is plain as far as Men's meanings may be gathered from their
Words, that they make the Light within to be the Spiritual Body of Christ, or a
certain measure or Portion of that Body.

And thus having according to the best of my Understanding and Observation
given an Extract of the Quakers Principle concerning the Light within, (which I
have so well considered both before and after the framing it, that I can with
good assurance stand by it, and dare appeal to all the Learned of that way,
whether I have not given a true and just account of their Principle.) I now
hasten to the Second part of my Undertaking, to expose the Grossness and
Absurdity of it.

And here in the first place, I shall be so free and ingenuous, as to declare
that I shall not stand with them concerning any of the Five First Propositions,
which may be all true for ought I know to the contrary. Particularly I shall
not stand with them concerning the Spiritual Body of Christ, as distinct from
that Natural Body, wherein he was incarnate of the Virgin Mary: There may be
such a thing for ought I know, or am able to show to the contrary, and I know
that several among the Ancients have been of this Opinion, alleging for its
Foundation the Sixth Chapter of St. John, which to confess the truth, seems to
favor it not a little. And this Hypothesis has been of late to the great
surprise and amusement of the stiffer and severer sort of Divines, readvanc'd
by a Person of singular note and eminence in our Church, who makes use of it to
salve and maintain the Doctrine of the Real Presence, supposing that while the
Bodies of the Communicants feed upon the grosser Elements of Bread and Wine,
their Souls (as many of them as are fitly disposed) do take in and feed upon
this Divine and Spiritual Body of Christ, which strengthens and nourishes their
Inner Man, and becomes to them a Principle of Regeneration and Spiritual Life,
as you may see more fully deduced in his Discourse of the Real Presence,
particularly in the First and Sixth Chapters of that Treatise.

I shall not therefore, I say, contend with them concerning the Spiritual Body
of Christ, either as to its Existence, or as to this its use, whether there be
such a thing, or whether it be the Principle of Regeneration and Spiritual Life
to the Saints: They may be both true for ought I know, I see nothing absurd or
so much as improbable in them; and as I do not surrender up my full Assent to
what I cannot demonstrate to be True, so neither do I care to run down and
condemn such Principles which I cannot prove to be false. But that which I
dislike and condemn here, is their making this Spiritual Body of Christ to be
the Light within, that Light which is to teach Man Wisdom and Knowledge, and to
be his constant Tutor, Monitor and Director; which notion of the Light within
(notwithstanding that I highly approve of the thing it self) I take to be
extremely gross and absurd, and that upon those Two Accounts before touched
upon.

1. Because hereby they make it to be a Creature. 2. Because they make it a
Material Creature.
That they do make the Light to be a Creature, and a Material Creature, is
sufficiently shown already, in the account that I have given of their notion
concerning it. I am now only to lay open the absurdity of this.

And First, It Is absurd to make the Light De inquirend. Veritat. p. 198.
within to be a Creature. Monsieur Malebranche considering with himself of all
the possible ways whereby we may come to have the Ideas of things without us,
makes this Division or Enumeration of them. It is necessary (says he) that
these Ideas should either proceed from the Objects, or that our Mind has a
power of producing them; or that God should produce them, either with the Mind
when he Creates it, or occasionally, as often as we think of any Object. Or
that the Mind should possess in it self all the Perfections which it sees in
things. Or else lastly, that it be united to some Absolutely Perfect Being,
that includes in himself all the Perfections of Created Beings. And these are
all the possible ways of Human Understanding that this excellent Theorist could
conceive, or thought conceivable. But this it is to have a dull Invention, and a
straitness of Imagination, that is not open enough to let in a full view of
things. We now meet with a sort of Philosophers of a freer Prospect, and more
enlarged Survey, that have found out another mode of furnishing the Mind with
Ideas, and that is, by its being united to some Created Being, and that too a
Material one. Strange, that so inquisitive and so working a Head as that of M.
Malebranche should be so defective in his Enumeration, as not to hit upon this
most wonderful Expedient of uniting the Soul to a Creature, in order to its
Illumination! But sure he could not overlook it, but rather thought it too
inconsiderable to be mentioned. 'Twas no doubt very easy and obvious for him
to have considered, that the last Member of his Distribution might have been
divided into Two, only by making his Supposition run first in general, that the
Mind be united to some Being or other, and then by distinguishing that general
into Created or Increated. This I say he might easily have done, and in point
of exact order and Method, perhaps should have done; but not dreaming that any
would ever be so extravagantly gross, as to resolve the Illumination of the
Mind into its union with any Creature, and not in the least questioning but
that if Men were once come so far into the right path, as to make the
Illumination of the Mind to depend upon its Union with some Being or other,
they would have no further scruple upon them whether this Being were God or no,
he chose rather to pass over all union with the Creature in Silence, and to
make this his last and only further supposable way of inlightning the Mind,
that it be united to some absolutely perfect Being that includes in himself all
the Perfections of Created Beings. Which no doubt is the only Basis upon which
an Intelligible Hypothesis of Human Understanding can ever be raised. And I
cannot but greatly wonder that those who come up so very near it, should yet
upon a sudden turn off, and pass it by.

The Quakers seem with M. Malebranche to disclaim and renounce the Four First
of the ways proposed, and they agree with him so far in the Fifth and last, as
to resolve the Illumination of the Soul into its Union with some Being or
other. But herein they divide and take several ways, in that M. Malebranche,
makes this Being to be God, who is absolutely Perfect and all-comprehensive,
eminently and vertually all, and the Quakers will needs have it to be a Created
Being. Which Hypothesis I think to be very Absurd.

1. As needless. 2. As impossible.
1. It is a needless Hypothesis: For if the Soul of Man be not sufficient to be
a Light to it self, but its Illumination must be resolved into its union with
some other Being (which these Men implicitly grant when they resolve it into
its Union with a Created Being,) then what Being so fit and proper for this
purpose as God, who by reason of the Immensity and Spirituality of his Nature,
must needs be intimately present to all Minds, and by reason of the Infinity of
his Essential Perfection, must needs have in himself after an eminent and
intelligible manner, all the Degrees of Being, and consequently the Ideas of
all things? If there be a Being so qualined, certainly our Illumination must be
resolved into our Union with that Being: And if there be a God, then there must
be a Being so qualified. And therefore it must be from our Union with him that
all our Light and Knowledge is derived, who would of himself sufficiently
inlighten Man, not only without the Conjunction, but even without the
Coexistence of any other Creature.

For I would demand of these Men that contend for a Created Light, an Answer to
this one Question: Suppose God should annihilate all the whole Creation except
one Intelligent Spirit, so that there should be nothing in being but that
single Spirit and Himself, would this Spirit upon the removal of all his Fellow
Creatures out of being, cease to understand or no? I know upon their Principle
they must say that he would, as supposing his capacity of Knowledge to depend
upon his Union with a certain Created Being, viz. the Spiritual Body of Christ:
But setting aside their Principle, (which is the thing under Question, and
therefore must not be used as a Medium to prove another thing by,) I see no
reason in the nature of the thing it self, why they should say that such a
Spirit would in such a Supposition cease to understand; and I think there is
all the reason in the World to suppose he would not, as being still
notwithstanding this great and Universal Emptiness, united most intimately to a
Being of Absolute and Infinite Perfection, and that contains in himself the
Ideas of all things. Certainly this great and Universal Representative would be
a sufficient Light to that Solitary Spirit, who would not want Thoughts or
Ideas, tho he might want a Companion to Communicate them to. And therefore tho
the Notion were otherwise never so possible and consistent, yet it is
altogether needless to seek out for Union with any Creature, in order to that
Illumination, which considering the Omnipresence and All-perfection of God,
must needs be supposed, tho there were no other Creature besides one
Intelligent Spirit in being. But as this is needless, so

2. It is also an impossible Hypothesis: It is absolutely impossible, that a
Creature should be a Light to Man, or that one Creature should be a Light to
another. God is the great Luminary of the whole Intellectual World, and it is he
only that can be a Light either to the Soul of Man, or to any other Intelligent
Being. No Creature, tho never so glorious and excellent, not even the Human
Soul of Jesus Christ, (much less his Spiritual Body,) can ever be a Light to
the Mind of Man. For to be a Light to the Mind, is to be to it the Principle of
Understanding, to furnish it with Ideas, and to be the formal and immediate
Object of its Conception. And for this there are Two Conditions necessarily
required, First, That it be intimately present and united to the Mind.
Secondly, That it have the whole Perfection of Being, so as to have the Ideas
of all things, and to be an Universal Representative. Which Conditions,
(especially the last,) no Creature either has, or can possibly have: And
therefore no Creature is able to be a Light to the Soul of Man.

Were a Creature never so excellent, yet it would be of a finite Perfection,
and consequently of such a certain determinate order, rank, kind or species;
that is, it would be such a particular degree of Being. It would not be all
Being, or Being at large, (for then it would be God,) but only such a definite
and determinate degree of it. And consequently were it never so intimately
united to my Mind, it could be able to represent only it self, and such degrees
of being as were in it self. That is, it might represent it self and all that
is of the same kind with it self, but it could not represent any thing else,
for it could not represent more degrees of Being than it had. It could not
therefore represent any Creature of another Order from it self, as a Sun
suppose could not represent a Tree, nor a Triangle a Circle, since each of
these have degrees of Being that are not in the other, and consequently cannot
be represented by the other. For this is a most undoubted Principle, that
nothing can represent any more degrees of Being than it has. Suppose your
Creature therefore of never so raised and excellent an Order, it would be able
to represent only it self, and those of the same Species. And what a poor
account would this turn to! What a dim Wooing Light would this be for a
Rational Soul to see by!

And as such a Created Light would represent but little of the Creation, so it
would not be able to represent God at all, whom we are chiefly concerned to
know, if 'twere only that we might be ascertained of the Truth of other things,
the certainty of which (as Descartes has well observed and proved, depends upon
our knowledge of God. But now it is impossible that God should be represented
to our Minds by a Created Light; for as there must be at least as much Reality
in the Object, either formally or eminently, as there is of Objective Reality
in the Idea, (which is one of the Principles upon which M. Descartes grounds
the existence of God,) So it is as true on the other Hand, that there must be as
much Reality in the Idea, as there is formally or eminently in the Object, or
else that Idea will never be able to represent that Object, and that by virtue
of the Principle before laid down, That nothing can represent any more degrees
of Being than it has. But now God does infinitely surpass the whole Order of
the Creatures, exceeding the highest degrees of them by a whole Infinity, and
therefore cannot possibly be represented by any or all of them. God indeed may
represent a Creature to my Mind, as having all the degrees of Being in that
Creature, and infinitely more, but a Creature can never represent God, as
having no manner of Proportion to his Excellency. For if (as it has been
shown,) one Creature cannot represent another, that has but one degree of Being
beyond it, or which the other has not, as a Triangle cannot represent a
Quadrangle, as having one Angle more than it self, much less can a Creature be
a Representative of God, of whom it falls short by no less a measure than a
whole Infinity. Take an Extract of all Created Perfection, and you will never
be able to raise an Idea of God out of it; for to add Creature to Creature, is
but to add finite to finite; and as that will never make, so neither will it be
ever able to represent an Infinite. So much impossibility is there in the
notion of a Created Light, which can represent but little of the Creature, and
God not at all. And so very Absurd are those that stand for it, since the end
for which they mainly design it, and suppose it to be afforded to Man, is to
conduct him to God, of whom it seems it cannot give him so much as an Idea.

And now if it be so Absurd to make the Light within to be a Creature, then how
much more Absurd is it to suppose it a Material Creature? Aquinas I remember
proposes Prim. Part. Quaest. 106. Art. 1.
it as a Question, Whether one Angel may not Illuminate another: But among the
many trifling and frivolous Questions which he puts, I think he never thought
it worth his while to inquire, whether a Clod of Earth, or a Sunbeam (if you
please) could illuminate an Angel? He that thought an Inferior Angel Ibid. Art.
3.
could not illuminate an Angel of a Superior Order, to be sure did not imagine
that it could ever enter into any considering Head, that Matter should be able
to illuminate Spirit. And I cannot but stand amazed at the Extravagancy of
their Imagination who think it can. Sure the wild disorders of a Fever, can
hardly produce a more odd fantastical conceit than this. It has been thought a
strange adventure in Speculation, to suppose, that Matter by the advantage of a
finer Mechanism, should be made capable of Thought, and be able to reason and
understand; and the truth is, I would give a great deal to see the Mould in
which those Men's Heads were cast, who could entertain such a Notion. But alas,
what is this in comparison of making Matter the Principle of Illumination! It Is
gross enough of any sense to suppose Matter capable of thinking it self, but to
suppose it to be an Intellectual Light, to be a Principle of thinking, to make
it a Master and Instructor, a Furnisher of Thoughts and Ideas, what an
Extravagance must this be! What, Matter illuminate Spirit! How harshly it
sounds! How it grates upon a Philosophical Ear! For besides that such a
Supposition as this would invert and confound the whole Order of things, by
exalting Matter above Spirit (which according to this must depend upon Matter
for the noblest of its Operations, that very Operation whereby it is
distinguished from (...), and supposed to be placed above it,) I say besides
this, how is it possible that Matter should be a Principle of Illumination to
the Soul? For in the first place, how shall we suppose it capable of being
intimately united and present to it? Or if we could conceive this to be
possible, yet what would it be able to represent? It would be able to represent
nothing but what is Material, and but a little of that neither, even no more
than those few degrees of Material Perfection it self is supposed to have; it
could represent nothing Immaterial or Intellectual. For its Ideas could be no
other than certain Material Images or Figurations; and a Material Idea can
never represent an Immaterial Object. A Principle so very clear and certain,
that even those who derive our Ideas from Sensible Objects, supposing them to
be Corporeal Emanations, do yet find it necessary to look out for an Expedient,
whereby they may be refined and Spiritualized after their admission into the
common Sensory, namely by the help of what they call Intellectus Agens, whose
Office they say is to purify and refine these Material Phantasms, and to
render them Immaterial, that so they may become Intelligible. A very hard Task
task for poor Intellectus Agens, and were he not a Creature of their own Brain,
it would move any ones Pity to think what a piece of Drudgery he is Condemned
to. But that puts an end to our concern; for so he that reads the many severe
toils and hardships of a poor Romantic Adventurer, feels a secret warmth about
his Heart, and is apt ever now and then out of a tenderness of Spirit, to
dissolve into a passion for the Noble Sufferer, till as he is just about to
drop a Tear, he remembers that it is but a Romance, and then all is well again.
But by the way, this is a most miserable Device, and such as sufficiently
betrays the absurdity and nullity of their Hypothesis. For hereby they plainly
acknowledge the truth of this Principle, that a Material Idea cannot represent
an Immaterial Object, (for otherwise, what necessity of having it
Spiritualized,) and if so, then since their Ideas are Material, the whole
weight of their Hypothesis rests upon this single Bottom, The Transmutability
of Material into Immaterial Ideas, which if found to be impossible, their
Hypothesis can no longer stand. Now I must needs confess it does as much
surpass my Understanding, how a Material Idea can be transformed into an
Immaterial one, as how a Material Idea can represent an Immaterial Object. They
are alike Mysteries to me, and I doubt not but that they are both alike
Absurdities in themselves.

Well then, the Sum of the matter in hand will come to this: If the Ideas of a
Material Principle must be also Material, and if a material Idea cannot
represent an Immaterial Object, then 'twill follow, that a Material Light will
not be able to give the Soul a Representation of any thing that is Immaterial
or Intellectual. And if so, what little stead will it serve us in! The greatest
part of our Notions are Intellectual. We cannot speak or write three or four
Words, but some of them will stand for Ideas that represent Intellectual
Objects. There is no thinking nor conversing, tho never so little, without
this. And what shall we do then with a Light that is not able to furnish us
with Ideas for a quarter of the things we are concerned both to think and to
discourse of? So utterly unserviceable and insufficient is a Material Light for
the purposes of Human Understanding, and so senseless and absurd is the Notion
that Asserts it. The Sum of what has been hitherto discoursed turns all within
the Compass of this Syllogism.

That Notion which makes the Light within to be a Creature, and a material
Creature, is Absurd.

But the Notion of the Quakers concerning the Light within makes it to be so.

Therefore the Notion of the Quakers concerning the Light within is Absurd.

The First of these Propositions is what we have been proving now last of all.
The Second was proved in the Account given of the Quakers Principle of the
Light. The Conclusion therefore follows, That the Quakers Principle of the
Light within is Absurd. Which was the Proposition I undertook to prove, and I
am very much mistaken in my Accounts if it be not well proved.

And thus having represented the Grossness of the Quakers Principle of the
Light, I will now in the Conclusion add a Word or two concerning their
Inconsistency in explaining it. That Person may well be esteemed Inconsistent
with himself, who so explains his Hypothesis in the Particulars of it, as to
contradict that general Ground upon which it is built. But now this I take to
be the Fault of the Quakers in relation to the Point in Hand. The general
Ground upon which they build their Hypothesis of the Light within is this, That
Man cannot be a Light to himself, (for if he could, what need there be another
Principle of Light within him) and does therefore require some other Principle
of Illumination for his Conduct and Direction. This is the Principle they go
upon, and so far I think they are right enough. But now when they come to give
a particular Account of their Hypothesis, they so order the matter as to
contradict and give up again that General Principle. For if that Light within,
which is to be the Principle of Human Understanding be a Creature, then Man
might as well have been his own Light, or a Light to himself, that is, he might
arrive to the knowledge of things, by consulting the Perfections of his own
Nature, the only Reason why Man cannot be a Light to himself being this,
because no Creature can be so. But if a Creature may be a Light, and the Light
within be a Creature, then why may not Man himself be that Creature; and then
what need of any such thing as a Light within distinct from the Rational Nature
of Man, which would be to renounce their general Principle, and to fall in with
the Vulgar Hypothesis of Human Understanding. So that this is a Notion
altogether inconsistent with it self, as well as disagreeable to Truth.

I have now finished what I undertook, and, if I mistake not, fully answered
the Title of this Treatise. If any should think it strange that I would be so
far diverted from better Studies, as to spend time and pains in disproving the
Principles of so inconsiderable a Persuasion swasion as that of the Quakers, I
must in answer to this take the Liberty to tell them,

1. That (as to better Studies) I know nothing that does better deserve the
Consideration of a Rational Creature, than the Mode and Way of Human
Understanding.

2. That (as to the Inconsiderableness of the Persuasion) I cannot think
Quakerism to be so, as the Principles of it are laid down and managed by Mr.
Barclay. That Great and General Contempt they lie under, does not hinder me
from thinking the Sect of the Quakers to be by far the most considerable of any
that divide from us, in case the Quakerism that is generally held be the same
with that which Mr. Barclay has delivered to the World for such; whom I take to
be so great a Man, that I profess to you freely, I had rather engage against an
Hundred Bellarmins, Hardings, or Stapyltons, than with one Barclay.

However, as great a Man as he is, I think I have given his Principle of the
Light a clear and thorough Confutation, and have likewise therein sufficiently
answered my particular Adversary, who perhaps by this time may have reason to
repent that ever he set me to work. I know, Sir, very well, that it is one thing
to answer the Book, and another thing to answer the Man: For some Men will
never be answered, tho their Books are. But I am not ambitious of the last
Word, because I know wise Men do not use to judge of the issue of a Dispute by
that Measure. Mr. Vickris therefore may have that if he please, and the rather,
because I think it will be all he is like to get by his Engagement with

SIR, Your Humble Servant, J. N.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
THERE is one very material Consideration relating to the Impossibility of the
Hypothesis of a Created Light, which happened to escape my Thoughts till I was
past the place where it ought naturally to have come in, and therefore I must
set it down here by itself. You know, Sir, a very great Part of our Study and
Thinking, as well as of our Familiar Discourse and Conversation, is employed
about Necessary and Eternal Truths. And most of our Arts and Sciences are
Conversant about them, as being indeed the Principal Object of Human Knowledge.
And therefore it is necessary, that that which is to serve us as an
Intellectual Light should be able to represent these things to our Minds,
whatever else be left unrepresented. But now this is what a Created Light will
never be able to do, there being nothing in a Created Light that is able to
answer or bear any Correspondence to that which is Necessary and Eternal. For a
Creature is a Contingent Being, all the Reality that is in it is wholly
Contingent; and as Contingency can never represent Necessity or Eternity, so
neither can that which is Contingent represent what is Necessary or Eternal.
This I confess is a very Metaphysical Argument, and such as will require a
great deal of Abstraction and Attention in him that will be Master of it. But
if attentively weighed and considered, I believe it will be found to amount to
no less than a Demonstration.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Sam. Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhil.
A Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters. The Second Edition, with Amendments. Price Bound 4 s.

Theory and Regulation of Love, a Moral Essay, in Two Parts. To which are
added, Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and Dr. More. In 8o.
Price 2 s.

Reason and Religion, or the Grounds and Measures of Devotion, considered from
the Nature of God and the Nature of Man, in several Contemplations; with
Exercises of Devotions applied to every Contemplation. In 8o. Price 2 s.

Reflections on the Conduct of Human Life, with Reference to the Study of
Learning and Knowledge. In a Letter to the Excellent Lady the Lady Masham. To
which is annexed a Visitation Sermon, by the same Author. The Second Edition
with large Additions. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Christian Blessedness, or Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. The Second Edition. In large 8o. Price Bound 3 s.

The charge of Schism continued, being a Justification of the Author of the
Christian Blessedness, for his charging the Separatists with Schism,
notwithstanding the Toleration. In a Letter to a City Friend. In 12o. Price 1 s.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. In large 8o. Price 3 s. All
these Seven Written by the Reverend Mr. John Norris, M. A.


