Discourses UPON TRADE; Principally Directed to the CASES OF THE Interest of
MONEY. Coynage of MONEY. Clipping of MONEY. Increase of MONEY.


LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street. 1691.

THE PREFACE.
THese Papers came directed to me, in order, as I suppose, to be made Public:
And having transmitted them to the Press, which is the only means whereby the
University of Mankind is to be informed, I am absolved of that Trust.

The Author is pleased to conceal himself; which after perusal of his Papers, I
do not ascribe to any Diffidence of his Reasons, the Disgusts of Great Men, nor
overmuch Modesty, which are the ordinary Inducements for lying hid; but rather
to avoid the Fatigue of digesting, and polishing his Sentiments into such
accurate Method, and clean Style, as the World commonly expects from Authors: I
am confident he seeks only the Public Good, and little regards Censure for the
want of Neatness, and Dress, whereof he seems to make a slight account, and to
rely wholly upon the Truth, and Justice of his Matter; yet he may reasonably
decline the being noted, for either a careless, or an illiterate Person.

The Public is an acute, as well as merciless Beast, which neither over-sees a
Failing, nor forgives it; but stamps judgment and Execution immediately, tho
upon a Member of itself; and is no less Ungrateful than common Beggars, who
affront their Benefactors, without whose Charity their Understandings would
starve.

Wherefore I cannot but excuse our Friend's Retiredment, and shall take
advantage of his absence so far, as to speak of his Discourses with more
freedom, then I verily believe his Presence would bear.

As for the Style, you will find it English, such as Men speaks, which,
according to Horace, is the Law and Rule of Language. Nor do I perceive that
the Gentleman intended more than his Title holds forth; common Discourses,
which possibly were taken by an Amanuensis, and dispatched without much
Correction. Surely no Man would refuse the Conversation of an ingenious Friend,
because he does not speak like Tully; And if the Conversation be so desirable,
why should we, quarrel with the same thing in Writing? Nay, it is very
impolitick, by such Exactions of Labor and Pains, to discourage all Ingenious
Persons from meddling in Print, whereby we lose the benefit of their Judgment,
in matters of common concern.

Words are indeed a Felicity, which some have in great perfection; but many
times, like a fair Face, prove Temptations to Vice; for I have known very good
Sense neglected, and post-poned to an Elegance of Expression; whereas if Words
are wanted, the whole Effort is made by pure strength of Reason, and that only
is relied on.

The Lawyers in their Deeds, wave all the Decorums of Language, and regard only
incontrovertible Expressions. The Merchants in their Policies and Exchanges,
use no one Word but what is necessary to their Point, because the Matter and
Substance only is intended, and not the Dress; Why then should Reasoners be
encumbered, beyond what is necessary to make their Reason understood?

To speak very short, and yet clear, is a Virtue to be envyed; and if directed
to Persons, or Assemblies whose business is great, or made so by many Men's
interposing in it, it is absolutely necessary; for your Discourse, if it be
tedious, is better spared than the time; but it is not so in dealing with lazy
Ignorance of any sort, or an Earitching Rabble, who are actually impertinent
(as well as impetuous) and not sensible of cheat. And I may add, That in
Writing unless in the Epistolary way, (which being supposed hasty, ought to be
short and figurative) an abundance of Words is more pardonable than obscurity,
or want of Sense, because we take our own time, and have leisure to peruse it.

I will grant that amongst opulent and idle Persons, as well as Scholars,
whose business lies in Words, the bare polishing of Language, is one of the
most commendable Entertainments; and to them we resign it; for to Men of
business, it is the most hateful thing, I mean, mere Idleness.

I grant also, that delicacy of Words, now most used in Poetry, is useful for
disposing way-ward People to learn, or make them endure to read. But the World
is not at such low ebb of Curiosity in this Age. Men are forward enough to run
their Noses into Books, especially such as deal in Faction and Controversy:
And it were well if they were either Wrote or Read with as much Integrity as
Industry; we have no need of Sugar-plum devices to wheedle Men into Reading,
they are Inquisitive enough; and if the Subject be their own Interest, I am of
Opinion, if you can make 'em understand it, you may trust them.

As for the Method used in these Papers, there is so little of it affected,
that I am afraid some will say there is none at all: I never thought that true
Method consisted in affected Divisions, and Sub-divisions, Firsts, Seconds,
Sub-firsts, etc. though all that is very useful in Works intended to be consulted
as Repertories; but where the Understanding is to be informed, it is mere
trash, and the business is often lost in it.

And in such Designs it is enough, if Things lie in the Order of Nature, and
the Conclusion is not put before the Premises, so that the course of the
Argument is limpid, and intelligible: A Friend of mine used to say, That if the
First Chapter were before the Second, it was all the Method he cared for,
meaning only what I have observed, which I suppose you will find here.

This drudgery of Digesting, is another Excise upon Sense, which keeps back a
great deal of it from coming forth; and without a singular tallent, and much
exercise, it makes composing extremely difficult. I do not understand why other
Men, as well as Mountaigne, may not be indulged to ramble in Essays, provided
the Sense fails not.

The Scalligerana, Pirroana, Pensees, and Mr. Selden's Table-talk, are all
heaps of incoherent scraps; yet for the wit and spirit esteemed; therefore let
that which is most valuable, Reason and Truth be encouraged to come abroad,
without imposing such chargeable Equipages upon it, whereby Writers are made to
resemble Brewers Horses, very useful Animals, but arrant Drudges.

Methinks when I meet with a great deal of Firsting, and Seconding, I smell one
who conceits himself an Author, a Creature as fulsome as any other sort of
Impertinents. If there be Reason, and that understood, what could the formal
Methodist add? Let me have the Cockle, and who will take the gay shell.

Now after all this it will be injust, not to say some. what of the
Subject Matter of these Discourses, which is Commerce and Trade; and the
Author's manner of Treating it.

He seems to be of a Temper different from most, who have meddled with this
Subject in Public; for it is manisest, his Knowledge and Experience of Trade
is considerable, which could not be attained, unless he were a Trader himself;
and yet it is not to be collected from any thing he says, of what Nature his
dealing has been; for he speaks impartially of Trade in general, without
warping to the Favor of any particular Interest. It has been observed
formerly, when Merchants have been consulted, and the Questions concerned only
Trade in general, they agreed in Opinion; but when opposite Interests were
concerned, they differed toto caelo. As for his Opinion touching Interest of
Money, wherein he is clear, that it should be left freely to the Market, and
not be restrained by Law, he is liable to the same suspicion, which attends
those of a different judgment; that is, partiality to his own Interest; the
difference is only in the supposed Cause, which in the one, is Wealth, and in
the other Want. He has given his judgment with his Reasons, which every one is
free to canvas; and there is no other means whereby a wise and honest Person
can justify his Opinions in Public Concerns.

In the next place, I find Trade here Treated at another rate, than usually
has been; I mean Philosophically: for the ordinary and vulgar conceits, being
mere Husk and Rubbish, are waved; and he begins at the quick, from Principles
indisputably true; and so proceeding with like care, comes to a Judgment of the
nicest Disputes and Questions concerning Trade. And this with clearness enough,
for he reduces things to their Extremes, wherein all discriminations are most
gross and sensible, and then shows them; and not in the state of ordinary
concerns, whereof the terms are scarce distinguishable.

This Method of Reasoning has been introduced with the new Philosophy, the old
dealt in Abstracts more than Truths; and was employed about forming Hypotheses,
to fit abundance of precarious and insensible Principles; such as the direct or
oblique course of the Atoms in vacuo, Matter and Form, Privation, solid Orbs,
fuga vacui, and many others of like nature; whereby they made sure of nothing;
but upon the appearance of Des Carte's excellent dissertation de Methodo, so
much approved and accepted in our Ages, all those Chymera's soon dissolved and
vanished.

And hence it is, that Knowledge in great measure is become Mechanical; which
word I need not interpret farther, than by noting, it here means, built upon
clear and evident Truths. But yet this great. Improvement of Reason which the
World has lately obtained, is not diffused enough, and resides chiefly with
the studious and learned, the common People having but a small share; for they
cannot abstract, so as to have a true and just thought of the most ordinary
things, but are possessed and full of the vulgar Errors of sense: Except in some
few things that fail within the compass of their day-labour, and so gives them
an Experience; As when a Common-Seaman, with all his Ignorance, proves a better
Mechanic, for actual Service, than the Professor himself, with all his
Learning.

The case of Trade is the same; for although to buy and sell, be the Employment
of every man, more or less; and the Common People, for the most part, depend
upon it for their daily subsistence; yet there are very few who consider Trade
in general upon true Principles, but are satisfied to understand their own
particular Trades, and which way to let themselves into immediate gain. And out
of this active Sphere nothing is so fallacious, and full of Error, as men's
Notions of Trade. And there is another Reason, why this matter seems less
understood, than in truth it is. For whenever Men consult for the Public Good,
as for the advancement of Trade, wherein all are concerned, they usually esteem
the immediate Interest of their own to be the common Measure of Good and Evil.
And there are many, who to gain a little in their own Trades, care not how much
others suffer; and each Man strives, that all others may be forced, in their
dealings, to act subserviently for his Profit, but under the covert of the
Public.

So Clothiers would have men be forced to buy their Manufacture; and I may
mention such as sell Wool, they would have men forced to buy of them at an high
Price, though the Clothier loses. The Tinners would have their Tin dear,
though the Merchant profits little: And in general all those who are lazy, and
do not, or are not active enough, and cannot look out, to vent the Product of
their Estates, or to Trade with it themselves, would have all Traders forced by
Laws, to bring home to them sufficient Prizes, whether they gain or lose by it.
And all the while, not one of them will endure to be under a force, to Sell, or
Let their own Estates at lower rates, than the free Market of things will
produce.

Now it is no wonder, that out of these Ingredients a strange Medley of Error
should result, whereby seldom any Public Order, which has been established,
and intended, or at least pretended for the good of Trade in general, has had
a suitable Effect; but on the contrary, has for the most part proved
prejudicial, and thereupon, by common consent, been discontinued. But this is
too copious Matter for a Preface, and though many Instances occur, I leave all,
and return to the matter of Vulgar Errors in Trade.

It is not long since there was a great noise with Inquiries into the Balance
of Exportation and Importation; and so into the Balance of Trade, as they
called it. For it was fancyed that if we brought more Commodities in, than we
carried out, we were in the Highway to Ruin. In like manner have we heard much
said against the East India Trade, against the French Trade, with many other
like politic conceits in Trade; most of which, Time and better Judgment has
disbanded; but others succeed in their room, according as new Persons find
Encouragement to invent, and inspire, for promoting their private Interest, by
imposing on those, who desire to be cunning. And now we complain for want of
Money in specie, that Bullion is Exported or mis-employed to other uses, than
making Money; and ascribe the deadness of Trade, especially of Corn, and Cattle
in the Country, to this; and hope by a Regulation of the Bullion-Trade, and
stinting the Price, except it be in Money, to make a through Reformation, and
give new Life to all things, with much more, ejusdem farina, which I do not
particularize, this being enough for a taste.

Now it may appear strange to hear it said,

That the whole World as to Trade, is but as one Nation or People, and therein
Nations are as Persons.

That the loss of a Trade with one Nation, is not that only, separately
considered, but so much of the Trade of the World rescinded and lost, for all
is combined together.

That there can be no Trade unprofitable to the Public; for if any prove so,
men leave it off; and wherever the Traders thrive, the Public, of which they
are a part, thrives also.

That to force Men to deal in any prescribed manner, may profit such as happen
to serve them; but the Public gains not, because it is taking from one
Subject, to give to another.

That no Laws can set Prizes in Trade, The Rates of which, must and will make
themselves: But when such Laws do happen to lay any hold, it is so much
Impediment to Trade, and therefore prejudicial.

That Money is a Merchandise, whereof there may be a glut, as well as a
scarcity, and that even to an Inconvenience.

That a People cannot want Money to serve the ordinary dealing, and more than
enough they will not have.

That no Man shall be the richer for the making much Money, nor have any part
of it, but as he buys it for an equivalent price.

That the free Coynage is a perpetual Motion sound out, whereby to Melt and
Coin without ceasing, and so to feed Goldsmiths and Coyners at the Public
Charge.

That debasing the Coin is defrauding one another, and to the Public there is
no sort of Advantage from it; for that admits no Character, or Value, but
Intrinsic.

That the sinking Money by Allay or Weight is all one.

That Exchange and ready Money, are the same, nothing but Carriage and
re-carrige being saved.

That Money Exported in Trade is an increase to the Wealth of the Nation; but
spent in War, and Payments abroad, is so much Impoverishment.

In short, That all favor to one Trade or Interest against another, is an
Abuse, and cuts so much of Profit from the Public. With many other like
Paradoxes, no less strange to most men, than true in themselves; but in my
Opinion, clearly slowing from the Principles, and Discourses that follow, which
you may freely peruse and censure, for now I have done.

Perhaps my unknown Confident may think me too saucy, for putting my Oar into
his Boat, and I will not excuse my self to him, otherwise than by demanding the
same Liberty he has taken; that is, to have a fling at the World; and as yet
the Advantage is his, for he has two, and better, for my one. And so Farewell.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Abatement of INTEREST.
ARguments for Abatement of Interest are many, viz.

I. When Interest is less, Trade is encouraged, and the Merchant can be a
Gainer; whereas, when it is great, the Usurer, or Money-owner takes all.

II. The Dutch, with whom Interest is low, Trade cheaper, and under-sell us.

III. Land falls in value, as Interest rises.

With diverse others, whereof the Facts may be true, but proceed from another
Cause, and conduce nothing to the purpose for which they are alleged.

I shall not formally apply my self to answer all the Arguments and Discourses,
that commonly are found in Pamphlets, and Conversation upon this Subject; as if
I were to Advocate the Cause of Interest: But give my thoughts impartially in
the whole matter, with regard to the Profit of the whole Nation, and to no
particular Persons project: Wherein I hope to propose, that which may resolve
any doubt that can be raised, and leave every one to apply it, as they think
fit.

The Question to be considered is, Whether the Government have reason by a Law,
to prohibit the taking more than 4 l. per Cent. Interest for Money lent, or to
leave the Borrower and Lender to make their own Bargains.

In the Disquisition of this, many things are to be considered, and
particularly such as relate to Trade, of which a true Notion will set right a
World of Mistakes, wherefore that now shall be chiefly treated of.

Trade is nothing else but a Commutation of Superfluities; for instance: I give
of mine, what I can spare, for somewhat of yours, which I want, and you can
spare.

Thus Trade, whilst it is restrained within the limits of a Town, Country, or
Nation, signifies only the Peoples supplying each other with Conveniences, out
of what that Town, Country, or Nation assords.

And in this, he who is most diligent, and raises most Fruits, or makes most
of Manufactory, will abound most in what others make, or raise; and
consequently be free from Want, and enjoy most Conveniences, which is truly to
be Rich, although there were no such thing as Gold, Silver, or the like amongst
them.

Metals are very necessary for many Uses, and are to be reckoned among the
Fruits and Manufactories of the World. And of these, Gold and Silver being by
nature very fine, and more scarce than others, are higher prized; and a little
of them is very reasonably esteemed equal in value with a great quantity of
other Metals, etc. For which reason, and moreover that they are imperishable,
as well as convenient for easy stowage and removal, and not* from any Laws,
they are made a Standard, or common Measure to deal with; and all Mankind
concur in it, as every one knows, therefore I need not enlarge further in this
matter.

Now it is to be considered, that Mankind being fallen into a way of commuting
in this manner, to serve their occasions, some are more provident, others more
profuse; some by their Industry and Judgment raise more Fruits from the Earth,
than they consume in supplying their own occasions; and then the surplus
remains with them, and is Property or Riches.

And Wealth thus contracted, is either commuted for other Men's Land (supposing
all Men to have had some) or massed up in heaps of Goods; be the same of
Metals, or any thing valuable. And those are the Rich, who transmit what they
have to their Posterity; whereby particular Families become rich; and of such
are compounded Cities, Countries, Nations, etc.

And it will be found, that as some particular Men in a Town grow richer, and
thrive better than others; so also do Nations, who by Trade serving the
occasions of their Neighbors, supply themselves with what they have occasion
for from abroad; which done, the rest is laid up, and is Silver, Gold, etc. for
as I said, these being commutable for every thing, and of small bulk, are still
preferred to be laid up, till occasion shall call them out to supply other
Necessaries wanted.

Now Industry and Ingenuity having thus distinguished Men into Rich and Poor;
What is the consequence? One rich Man has Lands, not only more than he can
manage, but so much, that letting them out to others, he is supplied with a
large overplus, so needs no farther care.

Another rich Man has Goods; that is, Metals, Manufactures, etc. in great
quantity, with these he serves his own occasions, and then commutes the rest in
Trade; that is, supplies others with what they want, and takes in exchange what
they had of, beyond their own occasions, whereby managing cunningly, he must
always advance.

Now as there are more Men to Till the Ground than have Land to Till, so also
there will be many who want Stock to manage; and also (when a Nation is grown
rich) there will be Stock for Trade in many hands, who either have not the
skill, or care not for the trouble of managing it in Trade.

But as the Landed Man letts his Land, so these still let their Stock; this
latter is called Interest, but is only Rent for Stock, as the other is for
Land. And in several Languages, hiring of Money, and Lands, are Terms of common
use; and it is so also in some Countries in England.

Thus to be a Landlord, or a Stock-lord is the same thing; the Landlord has
the advantage only in this: That his Tenant cannot carry away the Land, as the
Tenant of the other may the Stock; and therefore Land ought to yield less
profit than Stock, which is let out at the greater hazard.

These things considered, it will be found, that as plenty makes cheapness in
other things, as Corn, Wool, etc. when they come to Market in greater
Quantities than there are Buyers to deal for, the Price will fall; so if there
be more Lenders than Borrowers, Interest will also fall; wherefore it is not
low Interest makes Trade, but Trade increasing, the Stock of the Nation makes
Interest low.

It is said, that in Holland Interest is lower than in England. I answer, It
is; because their Stock is greater than ours. I cannot hear that they ever made
a Law to restrain Interest, but am certainly informed, that at this day, the
Current Interest between Merchant and Merchant, when they disburse Money for
each others Account, is 6 per Cent. and the Law justifies it.

I allow Money is many times lent at 3, and 4 per Cent. but it is upon
Mortgages, out of which the State has a Duty, and by the course of Titles
there, such dealing is perfectly safe; and this is still by private consent and
agreement, and not by co ersion and order of Law. The like often happens here,
when poor Widows and Orphans purchase the Security of their Livelihoods, and
punctual Payment, by lending at small Interest, to such as need not the Money.

It might not be amiss in this place, to say somewhat of the Public Banks that
are in Foreign Parts, as Amsterdam, Venice, etc. but that is a Subject I have
not time to dilate upon: I shall only say, that it is a cunning way of
supplying the Government once with a great Sum; and as long as the Government
stands, it is no loss to them that have the Credit, nor no great Inconveniency;
for all Bills of Exchange are made by Law payable in Bank, and not otherwise;
for Dealers in Exchanges it is best that way, and such as want their Money,
find no difficulty in selling their Credits, the price of which rises and
falls according to Demanders, as of other things.

I do not understand that true, two Banks pay any Interest; it is true there
are several Funds, viz. The Mint in Venice, and the Chamber in Amsterdam, with
several others in those, and other Cities, where Money is put out at Interest
for Lives, and several other ways, and at different Rates, more or less,
according to the Credit these Funds have, which are the Security; and these
may, by mistake, be called the Banks, which they are not, being only such as
the Chamber of London, East-India-House, etc. were.

I do not believe, but the Usurer, according to the saying, will take half a
Loaf, rather than no Bread: But I averr, that high Interest will bring Money
out from Hoards, Plate, etc. into Trade, when low Interest will keep it back.

Many Men of great Estates, keep by them for State and Honor, great Quantities
of Plate, Jewels, etc. which certainly they will be more inclined to do, when
Interest is very low, than when it is high.

Such as have nothing to subsist by, but the Interest of Money, must either let
it out, or Trade with it themselves, and be contented with what they can get;
but that hinders not, but very many other Men, who are rich, and not so pressed,
may, if Interest be very low, choose to make use of their Stocks in Jewels,
Plate, etc. rather than run the hazards, and be at the trouble of dealing with
necessitous and knavish Men, such as many Borrowers are, for inconsiderable
gains.

So that it cannot be denied, but the lowering of Interest may, and probably
will keep some Money from coming abroad into Trade; whereas on the contrary,
high Interest certainly brings it out.

Next is to be considered, that Dealings between Borrowers and Lenders are of
two kinds: 1. Upon Mortgage, or Pawn. 2. Upon Personal Security, and that
either by single Bond, or with Sureties; all which, as they differ in goodness,
so ought in reason to bear different Prizes. Shall any Man be bound to lend a
single Person, upon the same Terms, as others lend upon Mortgages, or Joint
Obligations?

Then again it is to be considered, that the Moneys employed at Interest in
this Nation, are not near the Tenth part, disposed to Trading People, wherewith
to manage their Trades; but are for the most part lent for the supplying of
Luxury, and to support the Expense of Persons, who though great Owners of
Lands, yet spend faster than their Lands bring in; and being loath to sell,
choose rather to mortgage their Estates.

So that in truth an Ease to Interest, will rather be a Support to Luxury, than
to Trade; the poor Trading Man, who has but a narrow Stock, or none at all,
supplies himself by buying Goods of rich Men at time, and thereby pays
Interest, not at the rate of 5, 6, or 8, but 10, 12, and more per Cent. And
this is not in the Power of any Legislature to prevent, or remedy.

It may be said, let him take Money at Interest, and not buy at Time. But then
Men must be found, that will lend; the Legislative must provide a Fund to
borrow upon.

The Trade of setting out Ships, runs very much upon this course, wherein it is
usual to Bum'em (as they call it) at 36 per Cent. And this cannot be remedied;
and if it were, it would be a stop, as well to the Building, as the setting out
of many Ships; whereby, after all, not only the public, but the private
Persons concerned are Gainers for the most part.

Thus when all things are considered, it will be found best for the Nation to
leave the Borrowers and the Lender to make their own Bargains, according to the
Circumstances they lie under; and in so doing you will follow, the course of
the wise Hollanders, so often quoted on this account: and the consequences will
be, that when the Nation thrives, and grows rich, Money will be to be had upon
good terms, but the clean contrary will fall out, when the Nation grows poorer
and poorer.

Let any one Answer me, why do not the Legislators in those poor Countries,
where Interest is at 10, and 12 per Cent, make such Laws to restrain Interest,
and reduce it for the good of the People? If they should attempt it, it would
soon appear, that such Laws would not be effectual to do it. For when there are
more Borrowers than Lenders, as in poor Countries, where if a rich Man has 100
l. to dispose, and there are four, five or more Men striving for it; the Law
would be evaded by underhand Bargains, making Loans in Goods, drawing Bills,
and a thousand ways beside; which cannot be prevented.

It is probable that when Laws restrain Interest of Money, below the Price,
which the Reason of Trade settles, and Traders cannot (as we will suppose)
evade the Law, or not without great difficulty, or hazard, and have not Credit
to borrow at Legal Interest, to make, or increase their Stock; so much of Trade
is lopt off; and there cannot be well a greater obstruction to diminish Trade
then that would be. The consideration of all these Matters, makes out an
universal Maxim, That as more Buyers than Sellers raises the price of a
Commodity, so more Borrowers than Lenders, will raise Interest.

And the State may with as much Justice make a Law that Lands which heretofore
have been Let for 10 s. per Acre, shall not now be Let for above 8 s. per
Acre, as that Money, or Stock, from 5 per Cent, shall be Let for 4 per Cent,
the Property being as good, and as much the Substance of the Kingdom in the
one, as in the other.

I will not say any thing to the Theological Arguments against Interest of
Moneys; by those 3 per Cent is no more lawful, than 4, or 12. But this I shall
maintain Politically, that if you take away Interest, you take away Borrowing,
and Lending. And in consequence the Gentry, who are behind hand, be it for what
cause soever, must sell, and cannot Mortgage; which will bring down the Price
of Land. And the Trader whatever his skill is, if he has no Stock, must either
sit still, or buy at Time, which is Interest under another Name. And they who
are poor, will always be so, and we should soon relapse into the state of One
Thousand Years ago.

And whereas the Stock of the Nation is now reckoned great, let it be fairly
valued, and it will be found much less than it seems to be; for all the Moneys
that are owing upon Land Securities, must be struck off, and not estimated; or
else you will have a wrong Account; for if a Gentleman of 500 l. per Annum,
owes 8000 l. and you value his Land, and the Lender's Stock both, you make an
account of the same thing twice.

And whereas we make great Accounts of Moneyed Men in the Nation, in truth
there are but few; for suppose all that have lent upon Mortgage, had Land for
their Moneys, as indeed in strictness of Law they have, there would be but few
Moneyed Men in the Nation left. The borrowing of Money of one, to pay another,
called, Robbing of Peter to pay Paul, so much practiced now adays, makes us
think the Nation far richer than it is.

A Discourse of COINED MONEY.
IN the former Discourse, it has been already made appear, that Gold and
Silver for their scarcity, have obtained in small quantities, to equal in value
far greater quantities of other Metals, etc. And farther, from their casie
Removal, and convenient Custody, have also obtained to be the common Measure in
the World between Man and Man in their dealings, as well for Land, Houses, etc.
as for Goods and other Necessaries.

For the greater Improvement of this Convenience, and to remove some
Difficulties, which would be very troublesome, about knowing quantities and
qualities in common and ordinary dealing: Princes and States have made it a
matter of Public concern, to ascertain the Allay, and to determine the
Weights, viz. the quantities of certain Pieces, which we call Coin, or Money;
and such being distinguished by Stamps, and Inscriptions, it is made difficult,
and highly Penal to Counterseit them.

By this means the Trade of the World is made easy, and all the numerous
species of several Commodities have a common Measure. Besides the Gold and
Silver being thus coined into Money, and so become more usesul for Commerce
than in the Log or Block, has in all places, except in England since the free
Coynage, reasonably obtained a greater value than it had before: And that not
only above the real charge of making it so, but is become a State-Revenue
(except as before) though not very great. Whereas if Silver coined and uncoyned
bore the same rate, as it does with us in England, where it is coined at the
Charge of the Public, it will be liable frequently to be melted down, as I
shall show anon.

Money being thus the Common Measure of Buying and Selling, every body who has
any thing to sell, and cannot procure Chapmen for it, is presently apt to
think, that want of Money in the Kingdom, or Country is the cause why his Goods
do not go off; and so, want of Money, is the common Cry; which is a great
mistake, as shall be shown. I grant all stop in Trade proceeds from some cause;
but it is not from the want of specific Money, there being other Reasons for
it; as will appear by the following Discourse.

No Man is richer for having his Estate all in Money, Plate, etc. lying by him,
but on the contrary, he is for that reason the poorer. That man is richest,
whose Estate is in a growing condition, either in Land at Farm, Money at
Interest, or Goods in Trade: If any man, out of an humor, should turn all his
Estate into Money, and keep it dead, he would soon be sensible of Poverty
growing upon him, whilst he is eating out of the quick stock.

But to examine the matter closer, what do these People want, who cry out for
Money? I will begin with the Beggar; he wants, and importunes for Money: What
would he do with it if he had it? buy Bread, etc. Then in truth it is not
Money, but Bread, and other Necessaries for Life that he wants. Well then, the
Farmer complains, for the want of Money; surely it is not for the Beggar's
Reason, to sustain Life, or pay Debts; but he thinks that were more Money in
the Country, he should have a Price for his Goods. Then it seems Money is not
his want, but a Price for his Corn, and Cattle, which he would sell, but
cannot. If it be asked, if the want of Money be not, what then is the reason,
why he cannot get a price? I anwer, it must proceed from one of these three
Causes.

1. Either there is too much Corn and Cattle in the Country, so that most who
come to Market have need of selling, as he has, and few of buying: Or, 2.
There wants the usual vent abroad, by Transportation, as in time of War, when
Trade is unsafe, or not permitted. Or, 3. The Consumption fails, as when men by
reason of Poverty, do not spend so much in their Houses as formerly they did;
wherefore it is not the increase of specific Money, which would at all advance
the Farmers Goods, but the removal of any of these three Causes, which do truly
keep down the Market.

The Merchant and Shopkeeper want Money in the same manner, that is, they want
a Vent for the Goods they deal in, by reason that the Markets fail, as they
will always upon any cause, like what I have hinted. Now to consider what is
the true source of Riches, or in the common Phrase, plenty of Money, we must
look a little back, into the nature and steps of Trade.

Commerce and Trade, as has been said, first springs from the Labor of Man,
but as the Stock increases, it dilates more and more. If you suppose a Country
to have nothing in it but the Land it self, and the Inhabitants; it is plain
that at first, the People have only the Fruits of the Earth, and Metals raised
from the Bowels of it, to Trade withal, either by carrying out into Foreign
Parts, or by selling to such as will come to buy of them, whereby they may be
supplied with the Goods of other Countries wanted there.

In process of time, if the People apply themselves industriously, they will
not only be supplied, but advance to a great overplus of Foreign Goods, which
improved, will enlarge their Trade. Thus the English Nation will sell unto the
French, Spaniards, Turk, etc. not only the product of their own Country, as
Cloth, Tin, Lead, etc. but also what they purchase of others, as Sugar,
Pepper, Callicoes, etc. still buying where Goods are produced, and cheap, and
transporting them to Places where they are wanted, making great advantage
thereby.

In this course of Trade, Gold and Silver are in no sort different from other
Commodities, but are taken from them who have Plenty, and carried to them who
want, or desire them, with as good profit as other Merchandises. So that an
active prudent Nation grows rich, and the sluggish Drones grow poor; and
there cannot be any Policy other than this, which being introduced and
practiced, shall avail to increase Trade and Riches.

But this Proposition, as single and plain as it is, is seldom so well
understood, as to pass with the generality of Mankind; but they think by force
of Laws, to retain in their Country all the Gold and Silver which Trade brings
in; and thereby expect to grow rich immediately: All which is a profound
Fallacy, and has been a Remora, whereby the growing Wealth of many Countries
have been obstructed.

The Case will more plainly appear, if it be put of a single Merchant, or if
you please to come nearer the point, of a City or County only.

Let a Law be made, and what is more, be observed, that no Man whatsoever shall
carry any Money out of a particular Town, County, or Division, with liberty to
carry Goods of any sort: so that all the Money which every one brings with him,
must be left behind, and none be carried out.

The consequence of this would be, that such Town, or County were cut off from
the rest of the Nation; and no Man would dare to come to Market with his Money
there; because he must buy, whether he likes, or not: and on the other side,
the People of that place could not go to other Markets as Buyers, but only as
Sellers, being not permitted to carry any Money out with them.

Now would not such a Constitution as this, soon bring a Town or County to a
miserable Condition, with respect to their Neighbors, who have free Commerce,
whereby the Industrious gain from the slothful and luxurious part of Mankind?
The Case is the same, if you extend your thought from a particular Nation, and
the several Divisions, and Cities, with the Inhabitants in them, to the whole
World, and the several Nations, and Governments in it. And a Nation restrained
in its Trade, of which Gold and Silver is a principal, if not an essential
Branch, would suffer, and grow poor, as a particular place within a Country, as
I have discoursed. A Nation in the World, as to Trade, is in all respects like
a City in a Kingdom, or Family in a City.

Now since the Increase of Trade is to be esteemed the only cause that Wealth
and Money increase, I will add some farther Considerations upon that subject.

The main spur to Trade, or rather to Industry and Ingenuity, is the exorbitant
Appetites of Men, which they will take pains to gratify, and so be disposed to
work, when nothing else will incline them to it; for did Men content themselves
with bare Necessaries, we should have a poor World.

The Glutton works hard to purchase Delicacies, wherewith to gorge himself; the
Gamester, for Money to venture at Play; the Miser, to hoard; and so others. Now
in their pursuit of those Appetites, other Men less exorbitant are benefitted;
and though it may be thought few profit by the Miser, yet it will be found
otherwise, if we consider, that besides the humor of every Generation, to
dissipate what another had collected, there is benefit from the very Person of
a covetous Man; for if he labors with his own hands, his Labor is very
beneficial to them who employ him; if he does not work, but profit by the Work
of others, then those he sets on work have benefit by their being employed.

Countries which have sumptuary Laws, are generally poor; for when Men by those
Laws are confined to narrower Expense than otherwise they would be, they are at
the same time discouraged from the Industry and Ingenuity which they would have
employed in obtaining wherewithal to support them, in the full latitude of
Expense they desire.

It is possible Families may be supported by such means, but then the growth of
Wealth in the Nation is hindered; for that never thrives better, then when
Riches are tossed from hand to hand.

The meaner sort seeing their Fellows become rich, and great, are spurred up to
imitate their Industry. A Tradesman sees his Neighbor keep a Coach, presently
all his Endeavors is at work to do the like, and many times is beggered by it;
however the extraordinary Application he made, to support his Vanity, was
beneficial to the Public, though not enough to answer his false Measures as to
himself.

It will be objected, That the Home Trade signifies nothing to the enriching a
Nation, and that the increase of Wealth comes out of Foreign Trade.

I answer, That what is commonly understood by Wealth, viz. Plenty, Bravery,
Gallantry, etc. cannot be maintained without Foreign Trade. Nor in truth, can
Foreign Trade subsist without the Home Trade, both being connected together.

I have touched upon these matters concerning Trade, and Riches in general,
because I conceive a true Notion of them, will correct many common Errors, and
more especially conduce to the Proposition I chiefly aim to prove; which is,
that Gold and Silver, and, out of them, Money are nothing but the Weights and
Measures, by which Traffic is more conveniently carried on, then could be done
without them: and also a proper Fund for a surplusage of Stock to be deposited
in.

In confirmation of this, we may take Notice, That Nations which are very poor,
have scarce any Money, and in the beginnings of Trade have often made use of
something else; as Sueden has used Copper, and the Plantations, Sugar and
Tobacco, but not without great Inconveniences; and still as Wealth has
increased, Gold and Silver has been introduced, and drove out the others, as
now almost in the Plantations it has done.

It is not necessary absolutely to have a Mint for the making Money plenty,
though it be very expedient; and a just benefit is lost by the want of it, where
there is none; for it has been observed, that where no Mints were, Trade has
not wanted a full supply of Money; because if it be wanted, the Coin of other
Princes will become current, as in Ireland, and the Plantations; so also in
Turkey, where the Money of the Country is so minute, that it is inconvenient for
great Payments; and therefore the Turkish Dominions are supplied by almost all
the Coyns of Christendom, the same being current there.

But a Country which uses Foreign Coyns, has great disadvantage from it;
because they pay strangers, for what, had they a Mint of their own, they might
make themselves. For Coined Money, as was said, is more worth than Uncoyned
Silver of the same weight and allay; that is, you may buy more Uncoyned Silver,
of the same fineness with the Money, than the Money weighs; which advantage the
Stranger has for the Coynage.

If it be said, That the contrary sometimes happens, and coined Money shall be
current for less than Bullion shall sell for. I answer, That wherever this
happens, the Coined Money being undervalued, shall be melted down into Bullion,
for the immediate Gain that is had from it.

Thus it appears, that if you have no Mint whereby to increase your Money, yet
if you are a rich People, and have Trade, you cannot want Specific Coin, to
serve your occasions in dealing.

The next thing to be showed is, That if your Trade pours in never so much
Money upon you, you have no more advantage by the being of it Money, then you
should have were it in Logs, or Blocks; save only that Money is much better for
Transportation than Logs are.

For when Money grows up to a greater quantity than Commerce requires, it comes
to be of no greater value, than uncoyned Silver, and will occasionally be
melted down again.

Then let not the care of Specific Money torment us so much; for a People that
are rich cannot want it, and if they make none, they will be supplied with the
Coin of other Nations; and if never so much be brought from abroad, or never so
much coined at home, all that is more than what the Commerce of the Nation
requires, is but Bullion, and will be treated as such; and coined Money, like
wrought Plate at Second hand, shall sell but for the Intrinsic.

I call to witness the vast Sums that have been coined in England, since the
free Coynage was set up; What is become of it all? no body believes it to be in
the Nation, and it cannot well be all transported, the Penalties for so doing
being so great. The case is plain, it being exported, as I verily believe
little of it is, the Melting-Pot devours all.

The rather, because that Practice is so easy, profitable, and safe from all
possibility of being detected, as every one knows it is. And I know no
intelligent Man who doubts, but the New Money goes this way.

Silver and Gold, like other Commodities, have their ebbings and flowings: Upon
the arrival of Quantities from Spain, the Mint commonly gives the best price;
that is, coined Silver, for uncoyned Silver, weight for weight. Wherefore is it
carried into the Tower, and coined? not long after there will come a demand for
Bullion, to be Exported again: If there is none, but all happens to be in Coin,
What then? Melt it down again; there is no loss in it, for the Coining cost the
Owners nothing.

Thus the Nation has been abused, and made to pay for the twisting of straw,
for Asses to eat. If the Merchant were made to pay the price of the Coynage, he
would not have sent his Silver to the Tower without Consideration; and coined
Money would always keep a value above uncoyned Silver: which is now so far from
being the case, that many times it is considerably under, and generally the
King of Spain's Coin here is worth One penny per Ounce more than our New Money.

This Nation, for many Years last past, has groaned, and still groans under
the abuse of clipped Money, which with respect to their Wisdom, is a great
mistake; and the Irish whom we ridicule so much, when in Peace, would not be so
gulled, but weighed their (Pieces of Eight) Cobbs, as they call them, Piece by
Piece; this Error springs from the same Source with the rest, and needs no
other Cure then will soon result from Non-currency. Whereof I shall set down my
thoughts.

There is great fear, that if clipped Money be not taken, there will be no Money
at all. I am certain, that so long as clipped Money is taken, there will be
little other: And is it not strange, that scarce any Nation, or People in the
whole World, take diminisht Money by Tale, but the English?

What is the reason that a New Half-crown-piece, if it has the least snip
taken from the edge, will not pass; whereas an Old Half-crown clipped to the very
quick, and not intrinsically worth Eighteen Pence, shall be current?

I know no reason, why a Man should take the one, more than the other; I am
sure, that if New Money should pass clipped, there would soon be enough served
so. And I do not in the least doubt, unless the currency of clipped Money be
stopped, it will not be very long before every individual piece of the Old Coins
be clipped.

And if this be not remedied, for fear of the Evil now, how will it be born
hereafter, when it will be worse? surely at length it will become
insupportable, and remedy itself as Groats have done; but let them look out, in
whose time it shall happen; we are all shoving the Evil-Day as far off as may
be, but it will certainly come at last.

I do not think the great Evil is so hard to be remedied, nor so chargeable as
some have judged; but if rightly managed, it may be done with no intolerable
loss, some there will be, and considerable; but when I reflect where it will
fall, I cannot think it grievous.

The general Opinion is, That it cannot be done otherwise, then by calling in
of all the Old Money, and changing of it, for doing which the whole Nation must
contribute by a general Tax; but I do not approve of this way, for several
Reasons.

For it will be a matter of great trouble, and will require many hands to
execute, who will expect, and deserve good pay; which will add to the Evil, and
increase the Charge of the Work; and the Trust of it, is also very great, and
may be vastly abused.

Now before I give any Opinion for the doing this thing, let some estimate be
made of the loss, wherein I will not undertake to compute the Total, but only
how the same may fall out in One Hundred Pound: There may be found in it Ten
Pound of good New Money, then rests Ninety Pound; and of that I will suppose
half to be clipped Money, and half good; so there will be but Five and Forty, in
One Hundred Pounds, whereupon there will be any loss; and that will not surely
be above a Third part: so I allow 15 l. per Cent. for the loss by clipped Money,
which is with the most, and in such Computes, it is safest to err on that side.

Now in case it should be thought fit, that the King should in all the Receipts
of the Public Revenue, forbid the taking of clipped Coin, unless the Subject
were content to pay it by weight at 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce, every Piece being cut
in Two, (which must be especially and effectually secured to be done) I grant
it would be a great surprise, but no great cause of Complaint when nothing is
required, but that the Public Revenue may be paid in lawful English Money.

And those who are to make Payments, must either find good Money, or clip in
two their cropped Money, and part with it on such terms; by this Example it would
likewise be found, that in a short time, all Men would refuse clipped Money in
common Payment.

Now let us consider, where the loss would light, which I have estimated to be
about 15 per Cent.

We are apt to make Over estimates of the Quantities of current Money; for we
see it often, and know it not again; and are not willing to consider how very a
little time it stays in a place; and although every one desires to have it, yet
none, or very few care for keeping it, but they are forthwith contriving to
dispose it; knowing that from all the Money that lies dead, no benefit is to be
expected, but it is a certain loss.

The Merchant and Gentleman keep their Money for the most part, with
Goldsmiths, and Scriveners; and they, instead of having Ten Thousand Pounds in
Cash by them, as their Accounts show they should have, of other Men's ready
Money, to be paid at sight, have seldom One Thousand in Specie; but depend upon
a course of Trade, whereby Money comes in as fast as it is taken out: Wherefore
I conclude, that the Specific Money of this Nation is far less than the common
Opinion makes.

Now suppose all the loss by clipped Money should happen and fall where the Cash
is, it would be severe in very few Places. It could do no great harm to Hoards
of Money; because those who intend to keep Money, will be sure to lay up that
which is good. It would not signify much to the poor Man, for he many times
has none; and for the most part, if he has any, it is very little, seldom
Five Shillings at a time. The Farmer is supposed to pay his Landlord, as fast
as he gets Money; so it is not likely he should be caught with much: Wherefore
it will light chiefly upon Trading Men, who may sometimes be found with
Hundreds by them; and frequently not with many Pounds. Those who happen to have
such great Cashes at such time would sustain loss.

In short, clipped Money is an Evil, that the longer it is born with, the harder
will the Cure be. And if the Loss therein be lain on the Public, (as the
Common Project is) the Inconveniences are (as has been showed) very great; but
in the other way of Cure it is not such a terrible Grievance, as most Men have
imagined it would be.

So to conclude, when these Reasons, which have been hastily and confusedly set
down, are duly considered, I doubt not but we shall join in one uniform
Sentiment: That Laws to hamper Trade, whether Foreign, or Domestic, relating
to Money, or other Merchandises, are not Ingredients to make a People Rich, and
abounding in Money, and Stock. But if Peace be procured, easy Justice
maintained, the Navigation not clogged, the Industrious encouraged, by
indulging them in the participation of Honors, and Employments in the
Government, according to their Wealth and Characters, the Stock of the Nation
will increase, and consequently Gold and Silver abound, Interest be easy, and
Money cannot be wanting.

Postscript.
Upon farther Consideration of the Foregoing Matters, I think fit to add the
following Notes.

WHEN a Nation is grown Rich, Gold, Silver, Jewels, and every thing useful, or
desirable, (as I have already said) will be plentiful; and the Fruits of the
Earth will purchase more of them, than before, when People were poorer: As a
fat Ox in former Ages, was not sold for more Shillings, than now Pounds. The
like takes place in Laborers Wages, and every thing whatever; which confirms
the Universal Maxim I have built upon, viz. That Plenty of any thing makes it
cheap.

Therefore Gold and Silver being now plentiful, a Man has much more of it for
his labor, for his Corn, for his Cattle, etc. then could be had Five Hundred
Years ago, when, as must be owned, there was not near so much by many parts as
now.

Notwithstanding this, I find many, who seem willing to allow, that this Nation
at present, abounds with Gold and Silver, in Plate and Bullion; but are yet of
Opinion, That coined Money is wanted to carry on the Trade, and that were there
more Specific Money, Trade would increase, and we should have better Markets
for every thing.

That this is a great Error, I think the foregoing Papers makes out: but to
clear it a little farther, let it be considered, that Money is a Manufacture of
Bullion wrought in the Mint. Now if the Materials are ready, and the Workmen
also, it is absurd to say, the Manufacture is wanted.

For instance: Have you Corn, and do you want Meal? Carry the Corn to the Mill,
and grind it. Yes; but I want Meal, because others will not carry their Corn;
and I have none: say you so; then buy Corn of them, and carry it to the Mill
your self. This is exactly the Case of Money. A very rich Man has much Plate,
for Honor and Show; whereupon a poorer Man thinks, if it were coined into
Money, the Public, and his self among the rest, would be the better for it;
but he is utterly mistaken; unless at the same time you oblige the rich Man to
squander his new coined Money away.

For if he lays it up, I am sure the matter is not mended: if he commutes it
for Diamonds, Pearl, etc. the Case is still the same; it is but changed from
one hand to another: and it may be the Money is dispatched to the Indies to pay
for those Jewels: then if he buys Land, it is no more than changing the hand,
and regarding all Persons, except the Dealers only, the Case is still the same.
Money will always have an Owner, and never goes a Beggar for Entertainment,
but must be purchased for valuable consideration in solido.

If the use of Plate were prohibited, then it were a sumptuary Law, and, as
such, would be a vast hindrance to the Riches and Trade of the Nation: for now
seeing every Man has Plate in his House, the Nation is possessed of a solid
Fund, consisting in those Metals, which all the World desire, and would
willingly draw from us; and this in far greater measure than would be, if Men
were not allowed that liberty. For the poor Tradesman, out of an ambition to
have a Piece of Plate upon his Cupboard, works harder to purchase it, than he
would do if that humor were restrained, as I have said elsewhere.

There is required for carrying on the Trade of the Nation, a determinate Sum
of Specific Money, which varies, and is sometimes more, sometimes less, as the
Circumstances we are in requires. War time calls for more Money than time of
Peace, because every one desires to keep some by him, to use upon Emergencies;
not thinking it prudent to rely upon Moneys current in dealing, as they do in
times of Peace, when Payments are more certain.

This ebbing and flowing of Money, supplies and accommodates itself, without
any aid of Politicians. For when Money grows scarce, and begins to be hoarded,
then forthwith the Mint works, till the occasion be filled up again. And on the
other side, when Peace brings out the Hoards, and Money abounds, the Mint not
only cease, but the overplus of Money will be presently melted down, either
to supply the Home Trade, or for Transportation.

Thus the Buckets work alternately, when Money is scarce, Bullion is coined;
when Bullion is scarce, Money is melted. I do not allow that both should be
scarce at one and the same time; for that is a state of Poverty, and will not
be, till we are exhausted, which is besides my subject.

Some have fancied, that if by a Law the Ounce of Silver were restrained to 5
s. value, in all dealings, and at the Tower the same were coined into 5 s. 4 d.
or 5 s. 6 d. per Ounce, all the Plate in England would soon be coined. The
answer to this, in short, is: That the Principle they build upon is impossible.
How can any Law hinder me from giving another Man, what I please for his Goods?
The Law may be evaded a thousand ways. As be it so: I must not give, nor he
receive above 5 s. per Ounce for Silver; I may pay him 5 s. and present him
with 4. d. or 6 d. more; I may give him Goods in barter, at such, or greater
profit; and so by other contrivances, ad Infinitum.

But put case it took effect, and by that means all the Silver in England were
coined into Money; What then? would any one spend more in Clothes, Equipages,
Housekeeping, etc. then is done? I believe not; but rather the contrary: For
the Gentry and Commonalty being nipt in their delight of seeing Plate, etc. in
their Houses, would in all probability be dampt in all other Expenses:
Wherefore if this could be done, as I affirm it cannot, yet instead of
procuring the desired effect, it would bring on all the Mischiefs of a
sumptuary Law.

Whenever the Money is made lighter, or baser in allay, (which is the same
thing) the effect is, that immediately the price of Bullion answers. So that in
reality you change the Name, but not the thing: and whatever the difference is,
the Tenant and Debtor has it in his favor; for Rent and Debts will be paid
less, by just so much as the intrinsic value is less, then what was to be paid
before.

For example: One who before received for Rent or Debt, 3 l. 2 s. could with it
buy twelve Ounces, or a Pound of Sterling Silver; but if the Crown-piece be
worse in value than now it is, by 3 d. I do averr, you shall not be able to buy
a Pound of such Silver under 3 l. 5 s. but either directly, or indirectly it
shall cost so much.

But then it is said, we will buy an Ounce for 5, s. because it is the Price set
by the Parliament, and no body shall dare to sell for more. I answer, If they
cannot sell it for more, they may coin it; And then what Fool will sell an
Ounce of Silver for 5 s. when he may coin it into 5 s. 5 d.?

Thus we may labor to hedge in the Cuckoo, but in vain; for no People ever yet
grew rich by Policies; but it is Peace, Industry, and Freedom that brings Trade
and Wealth, and nothing else.

FINIS.

