OBSERVATIONS AND ADVICES OECONOMICAL.

Infelix nimis cujus domicilio ignavia adhaeret.

LUKE 8. 16.No man when he has lighted a Candle covers it with a Vessel,
etc. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at
the sign of the Bell without Temple Bar. 1669.

The Preface.
A Short Work needs little Preface, and this Work is both short and slender, so
as it may be easy to make a Gate large enough for the City it self to run out
at. A Journey cannot be too little, nor the Way too plain, for a person of Body
tired, and Spirits spent by past travel; and I may well profess my self such,
having in my days galopped so many Post-stages. In the prime of my youth I
past (or rather lost) some few years at the University of Cambridge. Then I
came to have a taste of the Court, but my Father soon called me from thence,
knowing by dear experience the Air of that place to be such, as few elder
Brothers can long breath there without falling into a Consumption. Afterward I
lived with my Parents at their London habitation, and having no employment I
surfeited of Idleness, taking my pastime with some of the most corrupt young
men of those days. By Gods grace I quickly found this unfit for continuance,
and therefore I prevailed with my Father to send me beyond Sea to travel, where
in less then two years I had a view of the best part of Italy, France, and
Spain, being present at Madrid and Paris, when the several Marriages for our
then Prince of Wales were treated on in those Courts, and so I became a partial
witness of the artifices, and uncertainty of such Negotiations. From thence I
was employed as a Soldier in Holland, about three years, Commanding a Foot
Company in our Sovereigns Pay. And there I ran hazard again of being lost in
debauchery, and especially in the Vice-rampant of that People. But by Gods
grace I came home scot-free, though I served under a Scotch Colonel. Then I
became a Married man, and was speedily called to Public affairs, being elected
to four successive Parliaments, where the Service and approaches were excessive
chargeable, and of no profit as to my particular. One of these was that fatal
Parliament which set the whole Kingdom on fire, seeking to enervate or unsinue
all Government, and that it might the better be effected, diverse of us their
Members were by Club-law forced from our station. Yet it pleased God (even by
that Parliament) when we were readmitted) to put all again in such a way, as
the old Government was perfectly restored in a succeeding Assembly. Then I made
my full retreat into the Country, which renewed my experience in businesses
relating to that course of life; and now at last I am come to reside at the
chief Mansion House of our Family, where I have no other ambition then to end
my days with a peaceable and pious dissolution; So much of my self tired and
retired, which I may well be, since the World can scarcely show me any thing
new. Now a word or two about my approaches to this little Inventary: Being
overtaken with old Age, and by diverse infirmities rendered unfit for action, I
entertain my self frequently by turning over old Books (whereof I have good
store in several Languages) without any fixed Study, and among them I lately
perused one, consisting of certain politic and prudential Considerations,
written by three distinct Italian Authors in an articular way, and as I was
reading, it fell into my thoughts, that the same might profitably be done in
Oeconomicks, which is a path not much traveled in. Thence I took occasion, to
turn my meditations that way, and having spent same little time therein, I put
my materials together, and so this small Work received being, without any
further trouble by way of Method. As for the Subject, though not of any sublime
consideration, I conceived it fitter for me to embrace, then N^tes in Politic
Government, as not having coversed sufficiently with Sovereign Princes, and
taking it to be a high presumption for private persons to give them
instructions. Yet the government of private Families may be considerable even
with Princes, because their Principalities are composed of Families, and they
who are known to have well governed their private fortunes, are the rather
judged fit for Public Offices. Economy is a subject, that entertained the Pen
of Learned Aristotle himself, but it yields little occasion for pleasant
conceits or curious terms, wherefore I must advise all persons of nimble fancy,
to forbear reading, least it become a kind of torture to them; happy it is for
this Discourse, that it came into the World so seasonably; for never was there
more need of good menagery then now, at a time when Revenues of the Gentry are
fallen beyond what could have been imagined of late years, and they are most
likely to continue so, if not to incur a farther diminution. I meddle not with
small Families, which are concerned in the mysteries of Agriculture and petty
Huswifery, matters no way suitable to my mind or experience; and there was no
need, for diverse persons of peculiar knowledge in those matters have written of
them. But it may be demanded, why I, having been so great a straggler, do
undertake to give Rules in Economy? To which I answer, That at times I have
been a Housekeeper a great part of my days, and more especially in these my
latter years, at which time Men are accustomed to take matters into
consideration more maturely, then when distracted with pleasures of youth.
Indeed my nature is not so perverse, but I receive great contentment in being
beneficial to others, for In minimis prodesse juvat, better do a little good,
then none at all. Neither am I so ill opinioned of this my Brains production,
as to think it altogether useless, and therefore such as it is, like a Knight
errant, it shall travel about to seek adventures.

Perhaps it may yield assistance somewhere; and so I leave it to its fortune. I
expect to be Censured in all, and not to escape in this Introduction, as having
said too much of my Self, and too little of Economy our Subject: But my Face
being masked, the blushes cannot appear, and therefore I may content my self to
be a patient hearer.

OBSERVATIONS and ADVICES OECONOMICAL.
I.
OUr first Observation shall be touching the importance of Economy; wherefore
let us bring it to the Balance for trial. Though a Family (which is its general
object) be very small in comparison of the State whereof it is a member, yet is
it not like an Epicurean atome, unexposed to sense, but an aggregation capable
of Government, and the good government is of such Concernment as a State cannot
subsist without it; for Agriculture and Manufactures are dependant upon
families, and a Nation can neither be fed nor defended without these, since
public contributions receive their life from them. There were very evident
marks of Domestical thrift among the Roman Senators in their beginning: and the
Noble Venetians now subsist in their greatness by it. True it is, that States
having obtained much riches, become subject to extravagant Expense and Luxury;
but these excesses grow not to their height, till the State come to its
declination, as it was with the Romans and Persians. And now having made our
approaches, let us give a Definition of Economy.

II.
Economy is the Art of well governing a man's private house and fortunes, by
which appears, that there is no necessary Object of Economy, save an Owner
with his house and possessions, but it is seldom exercised without Wife and
Servants. And Children will be desired for Succession sake, and as the bond or
tie of affection between man and wife; wherefore we shall treat of all these,
and in the first place of a Wife, whose care within doors is of greatest
importance.

III.
It is an ancient English Proverb, That if a man will thrive, he must ask leave
of his Wife; and thrift is a matter of no small consideration in Economy. If
therefore choice be made of a Wife, let him use as well his Ear as his Eye,
that is, let him rather trust to his discretion according to what he hears,
than to his affection kindled by sight, that she may be no less useful in the
day than agreeable at night.

IV.
A Jove principium. Let her be of the same profession in Religion with her
Husband; for between them that agree not to go to Church together, there can
hardly be consent in other things. Neither should she otherwise be of too
different inclination and affections from her Husband; for if one delight in
Company, and the other in Privacy, they must live together with as little
convenience, as in the Fable the Swallow and the Lark would have done, whereof
one loved Summer and the other Winter. Let her not be too Young, for unripe
fruit yields no increase. Not too Old, for fruit past its maturity tends to
putrefaction, and is noysom. Not too rich in Revenue (especially by a reserve
of a great part in her power) lest she become too imperious and upbraiding, as
giving subsistence to her Husband. Not too Fair, least like honey she draw Wasps
to his House. And not too Foul, for that is not only unpleasing, but brings
shame with it. To conclude, he cannot use too much circumspection, being to
give her an irrevocable Estate for life in his Person. And for advancement by
Marriage, let him consult Martials Epigram: Vxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim
Quaeritis? Vxori nubere nolo meae
Inferior matrona suo sit quaeque marito,
Non fuerint aliter foemina virque pares.
Or thus Ask you why Wealth in Marriage I not crave?
It Is that my Wife the Breeches should not have.
The Wife brings less in Birth, and Wealth then he,
Or else the Man shall not her equal be.


V.
A Master of a Family being already Married must maturely consider the
disposition of his Wife. If she be defective in brain, or naturally given to
Idleness, unfit she is to be much used in governing the Family. The like may
be said of one Laciviously disposed; for how improper to be trusted in
business is one, who deserves not to be trusted with her self? And yet these
will hardly suffer themselves to be excluded; for what is more usual, than a
desire of power in those who are incapable of managing it? But if the Wife be
industrious, prudent, and affectionate to her Husband (as some such there are)
no confidence can be too, much for her; for she is such a blessing as may sway
the balance against very many (not only good Servants but) Children.

VI.
Our first Mother Eve was inflamed with a desire of Knowledge, which caused her
fall, and begot our mischief; but her Daughters in these days affect nothing
so much as the enjoying of their Will. For the attaining of this they apply
themselves to several ways, according to their different constitutions and
dispositions. The best of them are so happy in temper and abilities, as they
are able in a modest way to propose to their Husbands strength of Reason for
their chief desires, and these ought to receive full satisfaction, unless the
Husband can convince them with stronger reason.

VII.
Some others of milder temper seek to have their Will by discontent upon
refusal, expressing it by Tears, and pretended indisposition of Body; and these
find many times an indulgence, perhaps too often. Some are of so fiery
constitution, as upon denial they are ready to fly in their Husbands face; and
these deserve little encouragement. In this case the Husbands Patience must be
a Narcotick to keep him from being too quick of sense, and so the fit may pass
over without Battle, and good use may be made of her passion, which being
troublesome but in few cases, may be generally useful in obliging Servants
strongly to their duty. To prevent Contests between Man and Wife, a great Lord
of the late times had a pretty way. He would often profess, that he never in
his whole life denied any thing to his Lady; and his meaning was this, that
when the matter proposed by her could not be conveniently yielded to, she could
not by any importunity wrest any answer from him.

VIII.
But those are of the worst Condition, who free enough from the passion of
Anger, are fully bent to have their Will in all things. And as Tiberius the
Emperor said to Agrippina Widow to Germanicus, Si non imperes filiola credis
tibi injuriam fieri. They think themselves wronged if they be not permitted to
have a complete Empire. These are harsh and perverse enough by nature, but they
strein theirs to the height, to become not only cross, but insupportably so,
till they obtain their end. They do not apply themselves to storm the fort, but
by siege to make the holding of it incommodious, and so to cause a rendry to
them for want of convenience, as the French say our Englishmen surrendered
Calais for lack of Mustard. The Husband who yields all upon these terms,
deserves to wear the Petticoat, having renounced the prerogative of his Sex,
and therefore deserves not the least pity. Some Husband would use the Poet's
harsh Complement, and say, Vade uxor for as, aut moribus utere nostris. Or thus
Abroad good Wife, and there new dwelling find,
Or act at home, as I declare my mind.


IX.
Progeny gives a futurity of being, and the word Posterity may be fitly
understood in that sense; for the Body (if not the Soul extraduce) of Parents
has a partial continuance by the Seed, though not perpetuity. Affection
therefore to Children is most natural, and the care of them is most strictly
required of Parents, even in Religion it self, according to the uniform consent
of all Divines. In their Infancy the government of them does belong to the
Mother, and so properly, as the Father is as then incapable of it. The Mothers
care of them is as duly theirs, as is naturally the Milk of her Breasts.
Unhappy therefore are those Children whose Mother is ravished from them by
Death during that time, she being so obliged to a careful preservation, as
their being lost by negligence is a kind of Murder in her. And whereas many
times after such loss of a true Mother, a second marriage brings the Name and
not the Nature of the Mother; and sometimes there grows a disaffection to the
Children upon a second brood: it then concerns the Father to double his care,
putting on as much of a Mother as is possible for those of his Sex to do.

X.
Male Children when they become disciplinable fall under government of the
Father, whose duty in the first place, is to infuse into them the general
Principles of Religion, and then as he shall be able, to preserve them from the
rust of Idleness, a certain Bane of Youth. In this he cannot be too sedulous,
for as well the defects, as faults of Young persons, which are generated by
want of good education do justly become imputable, rather to their Parents than
to themselves. The Father must therefore take into Consideration his own
Condition, which if it be Mechanical may find them employment at home. But if
he be of the chief Gentry, as we treat little of others, his Children may be
directed unto ways of a more refined nature, and in my opinion, Parents of
such condition are praiseworthy who cause all their Male Children to undertake
some Profession of the more Noble way, whereof this Kingdom affords good
plenty, as that of Divinity, of the Laws Common and Civil, of Soldiery, and of
Physic. Neither is Merchandise to be contemned, whereunto in foreign Lands
persons of the most Honorable condition do apply themselves. And though the
care of Daughters do chiefly belong to the Mother, yet Parents of Eminency
shall do well to place them fitly and seasonably in Marriage, which the wise
Siracides calls the performance of a weighty matter; Eccl^s. 7. 25.
yet that endeavor is better spared, if the Daughter shall be found so much
better disposed, as to embrace S. Paul's counsel of perpetual Virginity.

XI.
Howsoever Daughters are designed, either to a Single, or Married life, there
must be a due preparation called Breeding, of which a word or two. Virginity is
a precious thing, but most precious when preserved in a Religious
consideration. It is a perfection that was unknown in the Church of God till
Christ's Incarnation, for the Jews did neither enjoin, nor exercise it, but were
so averse, as (if the Learned Seldom deliver truth) Vxor Ebr. lib. 1. cap. 9.
those men who did not apply themselves to the getting of Children (except some
few men who dedicated themselves to study of the Jewish Law) were esteemed as
bad as homicides, being very great offenders against the first general
Commandment, Increase and multiply. But with us Christians, perpetual Chastity
is most commendable; but to oblige themselves to it is only proper for those
who have the gift of Continence, which is not every person, for otherwise our
blessed Savior, having said that some have made themselves Eunuchs for the
Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat. 19. 12.
would not have added, Qui capere potest, capiat. Let him receive it who can.
Therefore it may be mischievous to enjoin it, which deserves the Consideration
of Roman Catholics, who are said sometimes to oblige their Children to such a
Vow, though indisposed to it. For these different Courses of life there are
different ways of breeding, but in each there must be a training up to Virtue
and Piety. A Single life is the better part, giving a capability of beginning
the heavenly joys here on Earth, by an uninterrupted Contemplation of the
Divine Excellencies. These young Women cannot be too little inured to vanity,
since the true business of their life is a pursuance of their dedication, and
worldly businesses are but accidental. But the other sort, which in this faece
Romuli or corrupted race of People are thousands for one, may be permitted (as
S. Paul says) 1 Cor. 7. 34.
to care for the things* of this World, that they may please their Husbands,
and therefore it seems, that in their breeding such strictness is not
required, as in educating the others, neither is vanity so much to be declined.
From this it follows, that these may assume some liberty to dress and adorn
their persons, as also to exercise themselves in Music and other Courtly
entertainments. If excess be avoided, and if their only end of such their
employment be to give contentment to a Husband. Yet such trifles must not be
used to destroy the learning of more necessary things, as the ways of
Domestical thrift, with the well governing of a Family; much less may they
take up so much time, as not to leave sufficient for the performance of
Religious duties.

XII.
Enough has been said to show that Children are a blessing to the Parents, yet
they may be unprofitable; for the same Siracides gives it as a Precept, Ecclus.
16. 1.
not to desire a multitude of unprofitable Children; nay sometimes they prove
dangerous, as it was with our second Henry, who had many Sons, and most of them
Rebellious, so as before his death he bitterly Cursed two of them who survived
him, and never would be persuaded by his Bishops to revoke the Curse. And David
was no less unhappy in his Sons (I except Solomon, though he made but ill use
of his Wisdom) and this seems to have befallen him, by his own default, of
too much indulgence to them, for in Scripture there is such a Note set upon him
in the case of Adonijah; 1 Kings 1. 6.
and the same may be observed in Eli, whose negligence of reproof deprived his
Family of that great Dignity of the Priesthood. Prove. 13. 24.
Solomon therefore had good reason to say, He who spares the Rod hates his
Son.

XIII.
Having spoken of Children, I shall take the freedom to say something by way of
Comparison between our English Law, and the Civil or Imperial; as they relate
to Succession for Inheritance. By the Civil Law every man is capable of having
legal issue, as well as natural, and may adopt whom he will, though he have
posterity otherwise. These adopted Children are as Capable of Inheritance as
the natural, so as not only the Childlesse person may provide himself of an
Heir, but any other man use his judgment in choosing one educated, and of
inclination according to his mind. Why this is wholly rejected in our Law, is
left to conjecture. Our Lawyers have this saying, that God only makes Heirs,
and we know that he can make better choice then we our selves. Sure I am, it
may well become us to submit to his determination. To this it may be added,
that there is not so much need of Adoption with Northern people, as with
Southern, for we are more fruitful and generative than they. And by Adoption
there is a total change of Blood, and a change more certain, then if the
Succession were Spurious, or of Bastards by the Fathers side. This is very
injurious to Progenitors, from whom Families often receive their Honor and
Inheritance, for in the choice of a new Heir the Father has an election, but
not they, who perhaps may be then deceased; and for the most part there remains
some of the Kindred lineally descended from those Ancestors, who yet become
rejected, though numerous, and sufficiently deserving. But enough of this.

XIIII.
Now we have digressed, touching upon other Laws concerning Children. It may be
pardonable to consider them about Marriage in some particulars. The most
essential difference lies in two points, a multiplicity of Wives, and power of
Divorce; for both these we must acquiesce in our Saviors decision, which
concludes against multiplicity of Wives, and limits the power of Divorce. The
Jews (saving their King and High Priest) before the Captivity, might have as
many Wives as they could maintain; and at this day the Mahomitans permit
Poligamy. The Jewish King's Dignity caused a limitation to him in Marriage; but
the Turks prerogative exempts him from Nuptials altogether. Oh the vast
distance between several results of Humane reason in the same matter. I say of
humane Reason, taking the Jewish Matrimonial Customs to be grounded not upon
Divine Institution, but upon resolutions of Rabins like to judged cases in our
Law. Let us compare Monogamy or single Marriage, with Polygamy, and somewhat
weigh the conveniences on either side. Polygamy is said to be little less than
necessary, to Nations desirous of Empire, as were the Jews, and now the Turks
are, since abundance of People is chiefly instrumental in Conquest; but to this
may be answered, that no People was ever more ambitious of ampliating their
limits, then the Romans, nor more desirous to abound in People then they, as
appears by the Privilege of Jus trium liberorum, and yet they never admitted
Polygamy. It may be added, for Pol^gamy, that a single Wife wants the spur to
Virtue, which emulation gives where there is more. But Religion is a sufficient
spur to Virtue, and the benefit of Emulation may arise from the consideration
of other men's virtuous Wives, as well as from Rivalls in relation to the
Husband. But certainly in the Oeconomical way, a multiplicity of Wives must be
very inconvenient, as causing many distractions and altercations within a
Family, to the great disturbance of the Master; for if one Contentious Woman be
scarcely supportable, how must it be where there is many, and with power almost
equal? As to the power of Divorce, Christianity does not allow it, but in the
case of Fornication, for impotence produces a nullity and not a Divorce. But
the Jews (and Romans also before they were Christian) had a full liberty to
Divorce. This was a great power to the Masculine Sex, which Women will readily
tax as unjust, as was thought by Salome Sister to Herod, who to give a
president for equality between the Sexes, sent a Bill of Divorce to her
Husband, a thing opposite to the Jewish Custom. For liberty of Divorce, it is
said, that otherwise a man is for life (and without remedy) confined to the
inconvenience of a humorous, unquiet, and disobedient Wife; but the fault is
our own, for Marriage should never be without full consent on both sides. To
conclude, our Levity and inconstancy is such, as the general unhappiness would
be much greater, if every man might be Divorced at pleasure.

XV.
The next part of a Family that offers it self is the Servants, and of a great
Family (for those that are little deserve small consideration) the whole may be
termed an epitome of hereditary Monarchy. The Master of such a Family si parvis
componere magna licet, if we may compare great things with small, does somewhat
resemble the Sovereign Prince, his Children the Nobility or second estate, and
the Body of Servants bears some similitude to the Commons. And this
comparison may the better be admitted, because Writers very considerable fetch
their chief argument for Monarchy (as being the most natural and ancient
Government) from its Conformity with the Paternal, which always supposes a
Family. Let us see how this comparison is proper. All Power and Office is
derived from the Sovereign in a State, and so is all from the Master in a
Family. The Protection and Defense of a Kingdom belongs only to the King, and
so of a Family to the Master. All the People pay tribute to the Sovereign, and
all work of Servants in a Family, whence profit may arise, is to the Masters
use. Thus far there is an agreement, but in other things a difference. In
Monarchy every Subject has a natural Interest in his Prince, and the relation
is indissoluble. But in a Family Servants have no natural interest in their
Master, and the relation is only indissoluble between the Father and his
Children. Again, Monarchy is one of the Forms of political Government, and a
principal end of all such Government is the whole Peoples welfare, whereof the
Commons make the greatest part, whereas in a Family there is no other design or
intention then profit and convenience of the Master, and his Servants have no
concernment of their own in such things as peculiarly belong to the Family.
Many other instances of difference might be given, but they fully concur in one
particular more, which is this, that neither of them can well subsist withont
due subordinations, and good order.

XVI.
The first Consideration belonging to Servants is their number, wherein no
certain rule can be given, for respect must be had to several things, as to the
Dignity and Revenue of the Master, his number of Children, etc. But it is
absolutely against the Rules of wisdom to err in the excess. Better it is to
have too few, then too many, as well in respect of their idleness, which is to
be shunned as a Rock, and cannot so be in case a fit number be exceeded, as
also in regard of increasing charge beyond the Masters income, a most necessary
thing to be prevented; for what is, or can be more uncomfortable, then for a
Master to find his Estate in a continual ebb or diminution.

XVII.
The next thing to be weighed concerning Servants in general is their
condition, which as I conceive, may better be expressed by the negative then the
affirmative. As first, that they differ not in Religion from their Master, for
whatsoever their zeal may be otherwise, it cannot be excessive in relation to a
Master, whom they think not capable of Heaven and eternal happiness.

XVIII.
That they be not much addicted to any notorious Vice, and especially unto
excess of Drinking, which for the most part (like the Crocadile) grows as long
as it lives with the person, and is every day more incurable, bringing with it
many inconveniences into a Family, as well by ill example as otherwise, whereas
other Vices in the habit of them, are not so frequent, and not appearing so
often in public, minister less scandal.

XIX.
That they be not affected with any Chronical disease, which must of necessity
render them unfit for active business, since they are obliged to a continual
observation of their health, and in that respect are much fitter to be served
then to serve.

XX.
That they be not noted for extravagancy in the matter of their own expense, or
much given to Gaming, for both these will need a continual supply, which cannot
in any probability be wrought out but at the Masters charges, and the latter of
these is deprived of all limits.

XXI.
That they be not disposed to wander much abroad out of doors, much less
nightwalkers, or lodgers out of the House; which last consideration renders
Married persons altogether unfit for Service, since they never want just
occasion to lodge abroad, and it may be added, that a relation to two families
(whereof their own is one) must be almost as inconvenient, as the serving of
two Masters.

XXII.
The Proverb says, So many Servants, so many Enemies; and properly enough, for
there is scarcely any waste in housekeeping but Servants or their favorites do
fare the better for it, and even the best of them do sometimes build upon their
Masters ruins, as it is seen in these days by Purchasers of their Masters
Lands. It is also no less wittily said, that he who is served by one, has a
Servant; he who by two has half a Servant, and he who is served by three has
none at all. This is most applicable to Masters of small Families, but in great
Families it may point out to this Rule. That the care of one business be not
committed to above one person, for otherwise when account is taken, every ones
answer is likely to be, that he thought others had done it.

XXIII.
I have thought it strange, that Servants are now worse then in former ages,
and I have been apt to impute it to the iniquity of the times, and to
degeneration of people from their wonted Integrity, but upon better
consideration I find, that the way of retaining is much altered; for not a full
Century of years past, Masters gave small wages, and their Servants expected
reward by a good pennyworth in some Farm when they were aged. This kept them in
diligence, and in a strict observance of their Master, they having an eye to
the reward, which still remained in his power. But now by Contract Servants
have Wages equivalent to the Service they are obliged to, and being sure of
that which is agreed upon, they may stand at defiance with their Master, and
not care how perfunctorily they apply themselves to their duty.

XXIV.
In the choice of particular Servants much care should be used, for respect
must be had to the Employment whereto they are designed.

Economy is an Art, and every Artist ought to be curious in the choice of his
Instruments, and not only so, but to trust chiefly to his own eye, cast either
upon the whole work it self, or upon those who act in it. He must not choose a
Young Steward, or an Old Husbandman, for the one needs experience to direct,
and the other must have strength to labor. Every Servant should also have some
knowledge and particular aptness to the business referred to his care. I knew
a Person of eminence, who having observed a diligence and natural promptness
in a young man trained up in his Stable, thought him capable of any kind of
Service, and a considerable Farm being cast into his hands, he found it best to
employ this young man as a Bailiff, who answered his expectation fully in point
of diligence and promptness; but for want of experience in Tillage the Master
lost his Seed for diverse years; and then finding his error, he was enforced
from that time forwards to use a person who had been exercised in that way.

XXV.
In this Nation heretofore there were Villains, Servants by Inheritance, whose
persons and Estates in Land, were liable to be disposed of at the will of their
Lord, and this continued with us a very long time, but at last it was found
(and perhaps upon ground of right reason) that such a condition did not well
consist with Christianity, unto which a natural Servitude is too opposite. But
in process of time that precious thing called Liberty of the People, gained so
much ground in our Laws, as now a Master cannot sufficiently chastise his
Servant, or put any restraint upon him within limits of his House, without
incurring a Complaint to the Magistrate for breach of the Peace, or false
Imprisonment, which gives much presumption to Servants.

XXVI.
I cannot but mervail, that the French should term England, Pugatoire des
serviteurs, the Servants Purgatory; since all Europe affords no Country
where they have more freedom; and I no less wonder, that Francis Guichiardin,
that excellent Author in his Avertimenti Civili, taking notice how little
Masters respect their Servants, and cast them off upon every small disgust,
should more then once advise Servants to follow their Masters example, and to
make more account of their own interests, then of their Masters, since all men
are now so naturally disposed to self-love as nothing can withold them from
advantaging themselves upon all occasions.

XXVII.
A Steward of the household (styled Oeconomus, to show his usefulness in a
Family) is his Masters right hand in presence, and his Deputy in time of
absence. He has a general Command over his fellow Servants, and therefore
ought to be a man of understanding, and somewhat of an Austere nature, that
they may not too far press upon him in way of familiarity, but rather stand in
awe of him. He must be of a higher condition then the rest, which will draw
respect. And because he is highly trusted with receipt of moneys, he should be
possessed of some considerable Estate of his own, that he may be sufficiently
provided to answer upon account. He should excel in quickness of
apprehension, that he may readily see faults, and as readily give order for the
reformation of them. He must be full of observance toward his Master, and
careful that his Commands be put in execution, as on the other part his Master
is imprudent, if he discountenance his Steward in presence of other Servants,
though he do find him faulty, for such disgrace will much prejudice his
business in relation to others of the Family, who may thence be encouraged, to
dispute with him upon every occasion, and so retard the business to be done.
Lastly, he must be a good accomptant, and not defective in memory, least he
injure his Master or himself in setting down Receipts and disbursements.

XXVIII.
In great Families (for we treat little of others) there are many offices, and
a Series of subordinations; as a Gentleman of the Horse, and under his
jurisdiction several offices belonging to the Stable. A Clark of the Kitchen,
and under him the Cook with his underlings, and so the Butler, etc. and all
these are to be countenanced in what they shall justly command to be done by
their subordinates. Here the Master says Go, but in small Families especially
in the Country, the Master may say Gow (as we phrase it in East England) or go
we, implying that he will accompany them. When Go is said, the Command is
executed, but with some uncertainty, because the business passes through
diverse hands, but Gow does the business immediately, and with surer effect.

XXIX.
Though the Wages of Servants (together with their Diet) is supposed to set the
balance even against their service to be done, yet they do so overween their
own merit, as when they have long resided in one Family they are apt to become
remiss in their Service, and make no difficulty to say, that being old
Servants they ought to have an indulgence. Upon this ground diverse persons have
taken a resolution, not to keep any Servant for long continuance, except a
Steward, and such as are necessary about their person, and this has succeeded
well with some of them, but others have been unhappy, falling into great losses
by unfaithfulness. And the danger in this kind seems great, for how can it
be, but in frequent changes some must offer Service coming with foul intentions.

XXX.
Some Masters there are, who never seem more displeased, then when they find
much agreement and quietness among their Servants, fearing least there may be a
consent in them to cheat their Master; and thinking also, that when they
quarrel they will be apt to accuse one another, if any thing be amiss. But
certainly when there is continual disagreement and strife, it must be a great
remora to them in the performance of what is to be done, and few there are, who
hold it not the highest baseness to accuse a Fellow Servants.

XXXI.
The industry of a Servant is not more useful in any office then that of a
Gardner, who besides his care in Gardens of pleasure, by his improvement of the
Orchard and Kitchen Garden may bring great plenty with little charge to the
Kitchen, and so by consequence to the Table, from which arises the chief
honor of Housekeeping.

XXXII.
The Porters care is also of great use in a Family, who should be a man
somewhat aged, that he may be endued with patience, to give attendance at the
Gate, and take account of all strange faces who shall desire entrance, and
especially of such as by Habit or Countenance give any the least suspicion, for
it is most usual to suffer by such admittances, but most of all in City
dwellings. And this Officer ought constantly to see the Gate made fast in due
time at night.

XXXIII.
And since the well ordering of a Table gives so much honor to a housekeeper,
the offices of Clark of the Kitchen and of Cook, cannot but be of great
concernment. That of the Clark to provide and appoint what is to be used, and
of the Cook to dress it, and especially the Cooks office, which makes me call
to mind how in the Family to which I have relation, there was a time, when
notice being given of very extraordinary Persons to come to Dinner, and the
warning being so short, as there was no time to fetch in Achates fit for such
an Entertainment; the Cook who had been trained up at Court, was such a Master
in his Culinary way, as by well ordering of our ordinary Provision in making
and well seasoning several Dishes of one sort of meat, he furnished the Table,
so as it gave great satisfaction to the Guests, and caused little less then a
wonder in us.

XXXIV.
The second person in a Family is the Wife, who if she be industrious, and
prudent, flies at all within doors, and pity it is that any obstacle should be
met withal, which is well illustrated by the Queen at the game of Chesse, where
the King, or Master, keeps his gravity by going but one draught at once, but
the Queen as his Lieutenant, is not limited for way, since she has power to
march every way, nor for distance, so as she keep within compass of the
Chesse-board, which you may understand to be the House or Family.

XXXV.
Common use has made the governing of Diet and Housholstuff so proper to the
Wife, as a name of reproach is framed for such Husbands, as shall interpose in
those matters. But that which is hers most particularly is government of
Females within the Family, and good ordering of them is so necessary, as all
that is neat depends upon it. They have one good quality wherein Menservants
are defective, which is, the keeping themselves constantly within doors. And so
many things besides are done by them with more perfection then by men, as it
should be in that of Women-Servants, if I would exceed my number in any kind.

XXXVI.
Having in the last Article intimated the Oeconomical virtues of Women, it
would be injurious to them not to mention one of them in particular. It is
their attaining of a moderate skill in Physic and Chyrurgery, attended with
their providing of Simples and other materials, as also their due preparation
of them at the Still and Fire-hearth, and the exercise of that knowledge where
need requires. This is a good fruit of Charity and of good advantage, as well
within doors as without. And though it be much exclaimed against by Professors
in those Arts, yet can it not be improper for the Sex, since the Prophet
Samuel, reckoning up the several Tyranical oppressions that should fall upon
the Israelites under their so much desired Kings, does particularly express
the taking of their Daughters to be Apothecaries, for so our old English
Translation renders it; 1 Samuel ^. 13.
and the word Vnguentarias (used both by the vulgar Latin and Tremelius) is
not much dissonant. Much good arises to poor people by the application of such
ordinary remedies, and it is of more certain benefit, then the dealing about
Cures of extraordinary consideration, whereof observing the uncertain (and
sometimes dangerous) event, some have taken occasion to doubt, whether there
come more good, or harm, by those Arts in such difficult Cures.

XXXVII.
The Children, though of full growth and understanding, are not to meddle with
business further then they are called to it by their Parents. In my own
thoughts I blame such Parents, as make their Son and Heir an absolute Stranger
to their Estate, though perhaps it may be reasonable enough toward an Heir
remote in Blood. I was told by a Noble man of great Fortunes, that his Father,
even to his Death, did so effect to keep him in darkness, as he would take
offense, if his Son upon any emergency made enquiry concerning the least part
of his Estate. It cannot be, but by that means the Young man was exposed to
much abuse, when he came to be owner. The inclination of my Father was clear
other; for as soon as my years gave me Capability, he not only acquainted me
with matters of his Estate, but would sometimes take my advice, and frequently
make use of my endeavors, which was the way to give me not only experience in
those matters, but ability for business in general.

XXXVIII.
The Master has a kind of Pastoral charge within his own Family, and shall do
well to take order for the external and public Service of God there twice a
day, and in case any of the Servants (especially those whose business lies
within doors) be negligent to give attendance at the Chapel or other place
assigned for that duty, he must either by himself, or his Chaplain, who is his
substitute, in spiritualibus, if he have one, reprove them for it, and so for
scandalous courses that any of his Family shall give themselves over unto.

XXXIX.
There was a piece of managery heretofore which is now wholly out of use, and
yet might be beneficial. It is the having of a Wardrobe in considerable
Families, wherein was kept such Household Stuff as seldom came into use, and
there was also preserved all the old Vestments of the Master and Mistress, which
had been any thing costly. This was a Storehouse, out of which might be taken
at any time materials, toward the making of new house Furniture, and Saddles,
or such like things, but now it is grown a shame with us, to preserve any such
frippery, as they call it.

XL.
Having in the last Observation mentioned Vestments or Apparel, I cannot think
it improper in this place to take that matter further into consideration. The
most natural uses of Apparel are these, to defend against the injuries of
Weather, and to be a Covering for the obscene parts of the Body; which last was
the occasion of our Father Adams first piece of Clothing by Fig Leaves. But
certainly it may also be used for ornament, or else our Savior would not have
said, that such as wear soft Clothing are in Kings Houses; Mat. 11. 8. 1 Cor.
12. 23.
nor S. Paul have spoken of bestowing more abundant honor on those members of
the Body which we esteem least honorable. Excess in bravery of Apparel
causes much waste, and therefore some Rules should be given to prevent it.

There can be little said in general, the condition of persons being so
different in respect of Age, Quality, etc. As for those who are aged,
especially in a retired way, they cannot be too moderate, for much vanity and
great age should be incompatible. Most indulgence is to be afforded to people
in the flower of their age, who may find advantage many ways by adorning their
persons. I knew a Nobleman whose course was this, to apparel his Daughters in
very plain Habit till they became Marriagable, and then he trimed them one by
one in Garments of more cost, which succeeded very well, all of them being
seasonably and fitly disposed of. The same course may be proper for Male
Children, and the way is not irrational, for persons so trained up will return
with less reluctation to plain attire, if need be. In the general, it is a
good Rule, to defer the making of new Apparel as much as may be, which at the
long run becomes a great saving of charge. And on the contrary, those who must
have many Suits of Clothes at the same time, find themselves at great loss,
since the Fashion cannot but alter, before some of them have had their full
wearing. That wise and frugal People, the Venetians, have a way to distinguish
the quality and degree of persons by the form and not the bravery of their
Habit, which of necessity must become a great advantage to their State in
general. But the wiser part of every Nation must submit it self to the common
usages of the whole; yet prudence ought to be showed in affecting rather
moderation then affectation; for men are not sooner concluded to be defective
in judgment by any thing, then by their Apparel; and moderation is
incomparably the best governor of expense, and no less so in this, then in
other particulars.

XLI.
The Master (and not only he, but his steward) ought to govern as much by
Example, as by Command; for how indecent must it be, for a man to reprove
another for excess of Drinking, or any other habit of Vice, whereunto he
himself is given over, Longum iter per precepta, breve per exempla, the way by
Precept is long, and that by Example short. And if the Example of Superiors be
attractive, up the cragged rock of Virtue, it cannot be imagined, but our
course after them will be speedy and somewhat tending to precipitation, on the
smooth down-hill of Vice, when we are spurred forwards by our own depraved
inclinations. Such persons as are Leaders had need be very cautious in the
choice of their way, since they have no small share in others faults

XLII.
It is a common precept, that the Master of a Family must be last in Bed at
night, and soonest out of it in the morning; for so he may see good order kept,
and that the Servants not only attend their business, but observe fit times
for it. Yet in great Families the Masters dignity is such for the most part, as
that, and other personal activities, are fitly transferred to the Stew^rd.

XLIII.
The Master shall do well to take his Stewards Account once in a Year at the
least, and to be very punctual and curious in it, or seem to be so. This is
good also for the Steward, for by that means he may the more easily satisfy
his Master, as to particular disbursements, and the Masters seeming care, will
make the Steward fear to be discovered, if he use any underboard play.

XLIV.
Masters of Families are much favored in our Law, for their houses are termed
their Castles, and have the privilege not to be forced by public Officers,
but in prosecution of high treason, felony, present breach of the peace within
doors, and some other extraordinary cases.

XLV.
The good government of Families is very profitable to the Prince or State; for
Servants well trained up in obedience, and free from Idleness, become good
members of the Commonwealth, and none more fit for Soldiers then they, but
especially those of the better sort, who by their breeding attain to a kind of
generos^ty of spirit, which renders them most fit for the Martial profession;
and I am fully persuaded, that the great actions performed by our Kings in
foreign Countries heretofore, were chiefly acted by the Nobility and Gentry,
who being obliged by tenure of their Lands to attend their Prince in person,
carried with them their Servants, and these had not their heart so much at a
home of their own, as members of the Traind-Bands in our days.

XLVI.
It is necessary for Fortresses and Families to have a years provision before
hand, the first to be in readiness for Siege, and the latter to prevent loss
by a year of Dear^h but as well in Corn, as in most other provisions of store
within doors, the damage will be very great, if sufficient care be not taken in
custody of them.

XLVII.
Money is said to be the Sinew of War, and it is little less in the way of
Economy, for if the Householder have not money in hand he must bear much loss.
Provisions will almost double their price, if they be not bought in due time,
and in fitting place, for being taken up upon trust, they must be had of such
persons as make a trade of buying and selling, whose manner is to work upon the
necessity of others, and they will be sure to have great advantage by laying
out their Money. Besides this, if the Family be resident in the Country, our
Master will find that such Lands as he keeps in hand will frequently want
stock, which must be accompanied with great prejudice.

XLVIII.
Some persons are so Rich, as they have many places of residence, and Romae
Tibur amant ventosi Tibure Romam, these are delighted in variety of habitation,
swimming in plenty, and may do well to change often* having no need to be
frugal; but our thrifty Master of a Family shall do better, to keep constant to
his chief habitation, unless the change afford him some certain and constant
opportunity of gain, for no place can afford him otherwise so much advantage,
as that where much time has yielded means to settle things with convenience
for habitation.

XLIX.
I have always thought it a most uncomfortable thing to keep House in so
sparing a manner, as to pinch the belly of Servants; and some I have known, who
doing so have yet wasted the greatest part of their Patrimony. Hospitality has
ever been a great honor to this Nation; and certainly it is accompanied very
far with Gods Blessing. And so thought King Charles the first, who being told
of a Noble man's Estate much wasted by Housekeeping, could not give credit to
it, but attributed the decay to some other extravagancy. I have been informed
of a Gentleman of the times little foregoing mine, who had been a great
Traveller in Italy, and was very expenceful, as well in Apparel, as in other
matters of parade; but for Housekeeping so great a Lesinante or Miser, as it
was his use to keep but one Meal a day, and to hold it about three in the
afternoon, pretending that he did it for health. By this means he kept off all
Company from eating with him, and made it so useful as to bear out his other
excesses without impairing his Estate.

L.
Having in the last Observation taken notice of a Blessing upon Hospitality, I
think it fit to consider, how that happiness may be procured. I conceive the
readiest way to obtain the Blessing may be, to take care sufficient for relief
of the poor neighborhood, and best it is to appoint set days and times for
it, with a method in the doing, yet so, as the set time and method do not any
whit diminish the proportion fit for them.

LI.
It is a good Rule in Housekeeping to observe fasting days according to the
Law; for much good arises thence. It becomes a great encouragement to the
Trade of Fishing, by which Shipping is much increased, and many Mariners are
bred and maintained, whereof no Country has so great need in the way of
defense as ours; Abstinence conduces much to the confirmation of health, and
the breed of Cattle being a great part of the Kingdoms stock is spared by that
means. But the observation of this constitution may the better be thought
reasonable, because there is no other particular (to my knowledge) either
commanded or restrained within a Family by the public Magistrate.

LII.
Alike to that of Fast days is the consideration of observing Feasts (for
between these the opposition is so far relative as they should answer one
another) and the latter is no less sitting in a Family then in a State, for
cheerfulness and plenty in Diet cause labor to be undergone the more willingly
another time, which may appear the better, since the wisdom of Legislators have
made Lent but an attendant upon Easter, and each Vigil Fast upon his relative
Feast. I speak not of occasional Feasts, for to have these too frequent
consists not well with the Rules of frugality. Yet sometimes even the Miser
will have his feast famous for excess.

LIII.
As good it is, to observe set hours for public Meals, and for going to rest;
for by that means Servants know their proper times allotted to their business;
meat is the better dressed and served in, and night disorders are much prevented,
whereby there comes not only great wast for the most part, but danger by fire.

LIVE.
Some have a way of diversifying their Dishes according to several days of the
week in a constant course, and this not only affords variety, which is pleasing
to Nature, but gives much ease to the Mistress of the Family, who has so much
less trouble in appointing what shall be dressed

LV.
In household expenses care would be taken not to have the excess in such
things, as require money to be immediately disbursed, and especially in those
that drain the Kingdom it self of bullyon, as Wine, dried Fruits, Sugar, Spices
etc. but rather in Commodities which arise originally upon the Masters own
land, as of Cattle there bred, Corn of growth upon the same, etc. or at least
of such, as are improved there, as Cattle bought and fatted.

LVI.
Nothing (as I conceive) can be fitter to close up the Advices to a Householder
for that which is to be done within his House, then to put him in mind of
filling his petty Magazines in due season with those provisions of store which
are necessary. These branch themselves into so many particulars, as here can be
no room to specify them, but so it is, as the very life of domestical
frugality consists therein, and as to these, if occasion be not taken by the
foretop, it will be little less then impossible to make these provisions at
all, especially in a Country Family. And wheresoever the Family is, the Supply
must otherwise be wrought out with infinite loss. Our Master therefore must
not slumber in such matters, least his experience be too dearly bought.

LVII.
Most of these Observations do chiefly concern Housekeeping in the Country;
and it is not unreasonable to have it so; for the most considerable hospitality
is held there. Families in the City are generally less, and being so, the care
of them must be less also. Yet the principal consideration takes place there,
which is the disposing of money, all being there bought with the penny, so as
he deserves greatest commendation who has the best faculty in spreading his
shilling, as William late Earl of Bedford was wont to style it, by which is
meant a making of the best appearance with least expense.

LVIII.
We have already mentioned Villains Servants by descent or (...) and have
approved of their among us Christians; But there is another kind, termed by
Writers in politics Servi natura, who are endued with extraordinary strength
of body, but altogether defective in point of understanding. These receive
advantage by being Servants, and may be of good use in a Family, if laboring
in body be necessary there; but I altogether disapprove of that use, which is
made of them by great Persons turning their defect of Nature into sport. These
do not much increase charge, as serving only for Victuals and Raiment, and
excel Beasts little in point of Reason, or in any thing else, save their
outward figure, and in that they have an immortal Soul* happy in being
innocent, and possessed of less malice, then appears to be in some Beasts.

LIX.
That famous Lawyer Sir Edward Cook, would often boast of it, as a matter of
prudence, That he had never cast his Penny into the Water, nor dipped his finger
in the Mortar; meaning that he had never been an adventurer at Sea, not yet a
Builder. I confess that Building magnificently is a great honor to the
Kingdom, and in that respect deserves all encouragement; but it is fit either
for persons of very eminent Estate, or for great getters as Cook was; but our
Oeconomist takes it for a Rule, not to disburse any considerable sum, but
where he may either find great profit in a return, or a prevention of a future
expense, and therefore he uses expedition in necessary repairs of his Housing
already built, for delay in that matter does increase charges beyond
expectation.

LX.
It has been observed as a great unhappiness to our Nobility and Gentry, that
generally they are over-housed. This must be meant of Capital Houses in the
Country, for Buildings in the City are clearly matter of advantage and profit,
because they may be rented out; as for the other, the observation is true in
both parts, for the Builders of such great Houses were persons either of wast,
or rising fortunes, and they contrived their Mansions to be fit for their
present or approaching condition, and no man will doubt, but Estates are much
diminished, and likely to be so more and more.

This puts me in mind of him who when his Kitchen was found fault with, as
being too little for his House, answered, that the littleness of the Kitchen
had made the House so great; and contrariwise, where there is a very great
House and a small Estate, we may for the most part say, that the great House
has made the Estate so little; for it is like to great Personal titles,
causing the owner to hoise up more Sail, then the bottom can bear, which
draws on his Ruin. All men know (and some of us by experience) the great
charge of fitting a large House, and keeping it in sufficient repair, together
with the uncomfortablenesse (and seeming shame) of living there attended by a
small Family, so as it is hard to give advice to persons in such condition,
especially if they be fettered so as they cannot transplant themselves, yet
they may be wished, rather to affect (and dispose themselves to) the Italian
humor of living in a Palace with small retinue, then to our English
inclination of abounding in number of Servants, with the inconveniences
appendent to it, and the observation may ^lso give a Caveat to rich persons,
that they use not too much excess in Building at their chief Habitation for
their posterities sake.

LXI.
Though it be out of the circumference of our Circle to consider the niceties
of Architecture, yet we may give some touches upon the difference, in point of
convenience, between Building modern and ancient. The old way of building was,
to seek out places sheltred from Wind (unless it were for a Castle) and to
make thick Walls with small Windows, covering much ground with housing of
moderate height. About the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign they began to
enlarge their Lights, and of late the Buildings are made high with great
Windows, and much uniformity is affected, after the Italian manner. I conceive
this fitter for Cities, where ground is scarce and Houses strengthen one
another being joined, then for the Country, since to be exposed to Tempest is
so great an inconvenience, especially where the situation is chosen high for
prospects sake, as is now usual. Besides this, the Hall (or basis of
Hospitality) is either wholly left out, or so contrived as to be without Chimny
of Fire-hearth, which in Winter time should draw Company together, and give
cheerfulness to a Family. Great Staire-cases are also affected, which fill a
house with noise, and uniformity does often deprive us of inward Rooms, and of
Closets, with other little retiring places. These considerations and some
others make me less forward, then the generality, in crying down the pretended
rusticity of our Ancestors; yet I must confess, that not only Beauty both
inward and outward, but even the fashionablenesse of Building is to be desired,
where it may be attained with convenience, but certainly convenience ought to
give the rule. And so I leave the matter to be taken into further consideration
by others of better judgment who have more space for it.

LXII.
It is a rule in Menagery, not to entertain many Workmen by the day, nor Women
to assist those of the Family within doors; but in great Houses it is
impossible to avoid day-men, since there is so much use of them about repairs,
felling and making up of Wood, and such like matters. All therefore that can be
done, is to decline them as much as may be, by removing the occasion. And when
such are set to work, the Steward shall do well, morning and evening, to take
account of what is done, by which means they must either be active in their
business or run hazard of loosing employment afterward. When any of the
Servants are to work abroad, the same diligence is to be used in appointing
what is to be done, and in taking account of it.

LXIII.
It is certain that Families of Noblemen are clean other, then they were
anciently; for within memory of some yet alive, it was usual for persons of the
inferior Gentry, to put their Sons into such service for breeding, and it
succeeded well, saving unto them many a penny, which would have been spent by
sending them to London out of remote Countries, and in maintaining them there;
to this purpose may be related that which happned in the Family of Robert
Dudley the great Earl of Leicester, and this it is. As he was sitting at his
Table with many other Noblemen, a Letter was delivered to him, whereby appeared
that an Earl was dead whose Heir served him in his House, being somewhat remote
in blood from the deceased, whereupon he called the Gentleman to him, and
acquainting his Guests with the Letters substance, made him presently to sit at
the Table above himself and many other of the Lords.

LXIV.
A new Married couple, if they be young, shall do well not to engage themselves
in Housekeeping too suddenly, but to Sojourn with their Parent, or some other
Friend, for some years, that they may have time to observe what order is to be
held, and to provide themselves of Household Stuff, and of other utensils, in
some measure, for otherwise they will be like fresh water Soldiers going to a
Military Command, before they are fitted with Arms, and understand the use of
them, or what belongs to the exercising of their Soldiers.

LXV.
When the Heir becomes a Married man and Master of a Family of his own, yet
sometimes the Parent thinks his Sons presence so necessary to him, as he will
summon him again to Sojourn, which must be inconvenient, unless the Son has
brought himself by improvidence to an impossibility to live by himself. This I
know by experience; for having many Children I was called home by my Father
several times, who finding the inconvenience of two considerable Families in a
house, returned me as often to my own home, which was not only a doubling of
charge* but a very great hinderance to me in my whole course.

LXVI.
A considerable Family ought to be furnished with Household Stuff accordingly;
but it is far from necessary to have it wholly modern (or a la mode, as they
call it) as it was with an Earl whom a friend of mine found giving direction
for taking down his hangings and some other stuff, which were decent enough, my
friend asked why it was done, and his answer was, that they were out of
fashion, and he would put new in their place. Upon this ground a Person of
quality must change his furniture every ten years, for in or near that time the
fashion changes, and the same may be a motive for a House to be pulled down,
and a new one to be set up in its place, as many have done, who were well
housed before.

LXVII.
Now we are come to look abroad, I wish our Pater familias would take into
consideration the situation of his Mansion House, together with the
Conveniences and Inconveniences of it, that by his industry he may remove what
is offensive, and add what may yield advantage; for it argues want of
prudence, either to sit under an inconvenience, where it may be removed, or to
bear a defect where it may be supplied. But by no means would I have him to
fall out utterly with his Habitation, for it is an old note, That few persons
thrive in the world, who quarrel with the ancient Seat of their Progenitors.

LXVIII.
If there be any receptacle of impure water near the House, which may render it
unhealthful, I should wish him cause it to be drayned; for nothing is so
precious as health, yet the provision of Fish is so necessary toward
housekeeping, as he shall do well to make Fish Ponds at convenient distance if
the situation will bear it, and how necessary it is to be furnished with Fish
may appear by the placing of Religious Houses anciently, which were for the
most part set near to running waters, so as they seemed more studious, to enjoy
plenty, then to preserve health.

LXIX.
Our Law makes it wast, to cut down high Trees (though they be not properly
Timber) standing for safeguard and defense of a Mansion House, though it be
done for necessary Reparation, yet many hold it unhealthful, to suffer a House
to be choked up with Trees, in regard that the Air wants free passage; the
choice of a fit distance may reconcile this difference: But in these days
people are so disposed to quarrel with Timber, as there shall need no advice to
fell Trees about a House.

LXX.
A Cony Warren yields so constant Dishes to a Table, as it is very fit to be
had, where the Soil will bear it. A Dove-house is as requisite, and though to
have a Park about a House be not generally esteemed a point of good husbandry,
yet to a person of the higher condition there can be no great loss in it,
lying so conveniently, and the pleasure is very great, not only in sight of
the Deer, but in having so much Pasture-ground at hand lying open for riding,
walking, or any other pastime.

LXXI.
To govern the Plow was an Entertainment used by the Roman Senators; for
Quintius Cincinnatus was called from the Plow to be Dictator, which Office was
endued with the Sovereign Power for a time; but it was in the Infancy of that
State, when their Territory was small, and their Nobility not great; but as for
our Master of a Family, I should not advise him to use Tillage farther then his
household necessities require, for Gentlemen, who cannot attend those
employments in person, must be great loosers by it, Servants for the most part
being perfunctory in those Services, which lie out of their Masters view.

LXXII.
I should not advise a Gentleman to keep any of his Farms in hand at great
distance, to prevent diminution of Revenues; for if there be loss in Tillage
at home, the damage of necessity must be very great far off. He shall therefore
do much better, to abate Rent in a moderate proportion, which course is
confirmed to me by my own experience, for I have always found most comfort,
where I have let good pennyworths, otherwise our Farms are now and then thrown
up into our hands (as the Countryman calls it) by which means more loss is
contracted in one year, then abatement of Rent would arise to in many. And
Divines will also have it, that Gods Blessing does not accompany such persons
as are too hard to their Tenants.

LXXIII.
A great unhappiness it is to the Nobility and Gentry, that they do not
measure their expenses, so as to keep them somewhat under their annual Revenue,
by which being done they may continue a fair subsistence, and not otherwise.
They consider high living as a great happiness, and the least diminution of
pomp, as a great dishonor, which causes them to continue their wastful way,
presuming of a supply to come to them out of the Clouds. This is no less then
folly, yet those may deserve some pity, who have not put themselves into that
height, but were left in it by their Parents. For this the remedy is easy, for
common prudence forbids all men, to continue in a consumptive condition,
without absolute necessity, and therefore much better it is (though it give
occasion of discourse to the people) to slack sail betimes by a reduction of
the grounds of their expense, then to be dishonored at last totally, by a
ruin which might have been prevented in a resolution maturely taken. And let
them not think themselves dishonored, for there is no justification so sure,
as that which is built upon necessity.

LXXIV.
There is one great danger which has not yet been touched, and it is this;
That housekeepers upon their first setting up, either are already in debt, or
by providing of necessaries contract a debt, which in the beginning is small,
but too easy to be increased for want of experience, so as at last they become
enrowled in the Usurers Books. This grows unawares to a mass, which like a
Cancer so eats into the Estate, as ere long the very heart of it is in danger;
this with other ill managery becomes the ruin of much Gentry, for men are
generally so unapt to think of a lessening, as they can hardly find any
particular, that may be spared for sale. But I must advise our owner, above all
to remedy this in good time, though it be by a fell of Timber, or by selling of
that which may seem precious; for as the French men say, Pays gaste vault mieux
que pays perdu. It is better to be Master of a wasted Country, then of none at
all.

LXXV.
Another danger there is, which though not to the generality, yet is very
destructive to some, and it is a being engaged to Law Suits.

An itch of being observed to prevail in matters of difference between
Neighbor and Neighbor is too frequent, even with such as are not observed to
be much bent to the having of their will, but with wilful people it surpasses
any other pleasure. This is a very chargeable entertainment, and brings
bitterness in the end, for such businesses are for the most part concluded
with little advantage to any, but the Lawyers; it is therefore much more
convenient (or rather Christian) to make an end speedily by Reference, or
mediation of Friends, which is the course whereunto I would advise our
Housekeeper.

LXXVI.
The point of non-residence at the prime Mansion house is of so great
importance, as the chief (or at least the most probable) cause of it, may
deserve consideration. I take it to be the abhorrence of Solitude, unto which
the Country life is always subject, and in a very high measure but especially
in the conceit of those of the best condition, who have been constantly used to
much converse, and who cannot with the least contentment apply themselves to
Rural businesses. I confess that Melancholy must be prevented; for nothing
can be more mischievous, and therefore they must entertain themselves with such
delights, as may best quadrate with this course of life, so new and
unaccustomed.

LXXVII.
It was an Observation of my Fathers (and perhaps printed in his Forest)
whereof I may borrow the substance, and this it is; That the English Gentleman
can hardly be prosperous in government of his Estate; for whereas the Genius of
some other Nations prompteth them to particular excesses; as the Italian to
curiosity of House and Furniture; the French man to bravery in Habit of Clothes
and other matters of Parade, as abundance of Pages and Laquays, etc. And the
German to variety and excess in Drinking; but they are all frugal otherwise.
Our English man affects all these together, as also that of our own, which is,
a number of Menial Servants, and great plenty in Diet. Of this I shall make no
application, but say concerning the Observation, Valeat quantum valere potest.

LXXVIII.
I have conversed much heretofore in the Family of a Nobleman of great
fortunes, who having many Children, would never send any of them to travel
beyond Sea, giving for a reason, that the seeing of so great variety and
splendor, made young men dislike their own native Country and place of
Habitation. The truth is, it proves to be so too often, but as I conceive, the
inconvenience arises from the persons disposition and not from travel, for it
is not so with all Travelers; neither is there reason for it, England being
supplied with all necessaries of its own growth; nor is it destitute of matters
of Ornament and Splendour. In many things we fall short for curiosity and
beauty, but in other things we exceed our Neighbors; as particularly in our
Universities, which have no parallel, and London falls not much short of the
greatest foreign Cities. Besides this, our situation is such, in respect of the
Sea, as we are not in want of curious Wines, and such delightful commodities.
But to show fully how prevalent the persons disposition may be, the said
Nobleman gave breeding to his eldest Son, with charge extraordinary, at our
Court and chief City, where vanity so far prevailed with him, as afterward he
bcame the wonder of those days, contracting a Debt greater then ever was
known, by a person having little or no Estate of his own, for a foundation of
security.

LXXIX.
Of Country delights, Study may deserve the first place, whereby our Gentry
may in some sort converse with persons of the greatest rank and wisdom. It were
needless here, to discourse upon the excellency of that Entertainment, which
is so much treated of every where. In all ways whereby delight is sought there
must be variety, and therefore those Families enjoy a great advantage in the
way of satisfaction, which are furnished, and enriched with plenty of good
Books. There can be no direction given, for choice of Authors, to those who
seek pleasure in Reading, for different persons have different inclinations;
but if reason might be our guide, I should advise our Gentleman to the study of
History; and in first place to that concerning our own Nation, and his time
will be the better spent, if by Reading he acquaint himself with the Laws of
this Kingdom, as far as may be obtained without much labor, for pains: taking
and delight can hardly consist together. But some men are altogether averse to
Study; and for such there must be found some divertisement of more activity.

LXXX.
Of active Rural recreations, Hunting offers it self in the first place, which
Horace calls, Romany solenne viris opus utile famae Vitaeque and membris. Or
thus, A serious work to all of Roman name,
Useful to life, and limbs, and of good fame.


This is a Pastime Royal fit for Princes, inuring their bodies to motion and
exercise, and as Machiavel observes, acquainting them with variety of places
and situations, as Hills, Dales, Woods, Plain grounds and uneven, Moorish, and
Dry, Enclosed, and Champain; a knowledge very useful for Commanders Military,
which Profession is fit to be understood, not only by Princes, but by the
Gentry universally, it being their proper vocation, as appears in some measure
by the ensigns of Nobility, their Coats of Arms impressed upon a Shield. This
affords entertainment, not only abroad, but at home in the discoursing of it;
and to this may be added Hawking, Bouling, Fishing, etc.

LXXXI.
Of Pastimes within doors Music may challenge the next place to Study, and is
more sociable, for it entertains many at the same time. This is more innocent
then that of Hunting, for no living Creature receives vexation or damage by it,
and no man can complain that his fences are destroyed. Horace his advice
concerning verses, is, Quocunque volunt aninum auditoris agunto. Or thus, Let
Verses gently charm the mind,
And as they will the affections wind.


Which quality I have found more constant in Music, from which I my self have
received a great subsistence in this my retirement. When I found my self
subject to be pensive, then by Musical Airs, Corantoes, and Sarabands, I was
rendered more cheerful; and when I desired to become Serious, the work was done
for me by hearing Almayns, Fancies, and Pavans; variety is most pleasing, and
much of this is afforded even in the diversity of Musical Instruments, as the
Lute, Harp, etc. but certainly no Music can bear up with the Vocal, to which
some suppose a continuance in Heaven it self; but howsoever that be, Music is
found useful in the Service of God here below (even with the most rigid who
must have singing Psalms) and so it was anciently in the Jewish Church. I
profess not to know any pleasure exceeding Music, saving that of
Contemplation in matters Divine. Music indeed may be said to be sensual, for
it is altogether conveyed by the Senses, but certainly it has a great approach
toward Spirituality, or else the Prophet Elisha would never have called for a
Minstrel, when an Inspiration was required. I may fear I have been too tedious
concerning this Recreation, to which I confess my self a little partial; and I
cannot but wonder at some persons, who are so much more then brutish, as they
have a total aversion to it, whom I must leave in their misery.

LXXXII.
Some are so austere and rigid in the way of Religion, as they will admit
nothing of pleasure farther then refection, which includes eating, drinking and
sleeping, only supposed to be necessary. Recreation or Pastime they hold
altogether unlawful, as injurious to better employment; These men's Religion is
very conformable to Mahometisme, wherein all Professors must have a Mechanical
profession, even the great Turk himself, and they consider not the necessity of
health, which cannot be preserved with a continual intention of mind. A Bow
that stands always bent loses its strength in the end, and so it is with the
mental faculties, if they be continually at the stretch. Immediately after
meals all serious thoughts are prejudicial to health; and certainly at such
times entertainments of some levity are to be tolerated, and not only then,
but in the long winter evenings, a season unfit for stirring business, so as
for the Master, and better sort of Servants, there may be then some use made of
Gaming in a moderate sort. For can it be better to sit by the fire and sleep
(or for a man to rack himself by his own thoughts) then to entertain himself by
innocent pastime? But in this I leave our Master to his own thoughts.

LXXXIII.
A Gentleman of quality, whom I consider chiefly in these Oeconomical Notes,
living in the Country can hardly keep himself out of employment, under the
Lievtenancy or Commission of the Peace; and this may contribute something
against the inconveniences of Solitude. Though this gives trouble, yet it
generates an Acquaintance and correspondence between those of the Gentry, and
may also yield some inward satisfaction to a well disposed person, who ever
desires to be useful to others; and here, as I conceive, notice may be taken
that our Sovereign is happy beyond other Princes; for he is very much served
gratis, in matters of Common Government, whereas others are enforced to use
Mercinaries to their cost.

LXXXIV.
In these Observations and every of them, I would not be understood, to intend
persons of vast fortunes, Noblemen or others, for it is fit that such should
have their freedom, since they need not be obliged to any Rules of Frugality;
and I may say, it is for the honor of this Kingdom, that the Court and chief
City should be frequented, and expense in bravery there, is not only
honorable, but brings advantage to the People, since many Trades and
Manufactures subsist merely by excess, of that nature. Every man therefore
must use his prudence, and do that which is most proper for himself, as well in
relation to the public as to his own private Condition.

LXXXV.
I think we cannot better Conclude these Observations, then with some notes
concerning the Royal Family or Household, which as I conceive, has not its
Peer in Christendom; exceeding all others, as well for Hospitality, as for
Order. As touching the first, it has no parallel; for consider it as it was in
the time of former Princes (and as I hope now is) and we may justly say, That
more Flesh and Fish, Bread and Drink is spent yearly there, then is consumed in
some Italian Cities, whose Bishops are capable of sitting in general Councels.
And for Order, it resembles rather a State, then a Family, having within it or
thereto belonging, establishments for Government Ecclesiastical, Military,
Civil and Criminal. First, there is a kind of Cathedral Church, with an
Episcopal Dean, etc. adorned with a Quire, and Vestments for the Clergy, as
also with materials for Music very extraordinary: Then there is a Judicatory
called the Green-Cloth, which determines in matters belonging to the Household
Provisions and Government, where the Lord Steward, the Treasurer, and
Comptroller of the Household, are Judges, with several under Officers. Thirdly,
there is two Military Companies, one of Horsemen called Pensioners, all
Gentlemen; and the other that of the old Guard, consisting of Yeomen, and these
are under Command of two eminent persons their Captains. Lastly, it has a
Jurisdiction as well Civil as Criminal appertaining to it called the Verge,
extending it self twelve miles about the Court, where the Lord Steward of the
Kings House, and Marshal and a peculiar Coroner do respectively exercise a
Jurisdiction, and none of the public Judges may interpose in cases proper to
that Court uncalled; which limit of the Verge bears some similitude to the
Rural Territory of a City or State. Besides this, the Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household has governance of all the Gentry, and Officers abovestairs,
who are very numerous. Lawyers tell us, that originally all Justice was
administered within the Royal Family, and that the Kings Bench was styled Aula
Regia. Of these there still remains some shadow, in the styles of Test meipso,
and of Coram Rege, and at this day the Privy Council, an Assembly supposed to
consist of the most eminent persons for Wisdom in the whole Nation, has its
residence within the Kings House, with a Jurisdiction extending it self over
the whole Kingdom in matters of State. To this Royal Family relate two others,
whereof one is that of the Queen Consort, who by the Law is a person distinct
from the King, and may plead, or be impleaded apart. The other is, that of the
Prince of Wales, when there is one, and both these have especial Officers of
State belonging to them. It is a Prerogative of the Royal Family that the
Servants are obliged to a faithful and diligent performance of service
domestical, which as I conceive, is not by the Law permitted in the case of any
person, who is a mere Subject. And all this under a Race of Princes of unknown
Antiquity, linked in Blood with most of the Royal Families of Christendom, and
that in all ages has given to the world Illustrious Persons yielding to none
for eminence in Wisdom, and virtue, and sometime such, as by foreign Conquests
were famous for their Martial Power, and in great part Arbiters of the most
important affairs of Europe, unto which Royal Race all true-hearted English men
desire (and pray for) a continuance in Regality, even until the universal Day
of Judgment.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Lord our most gracious God: We of this Family do acknowledge with all
thankfulness thy many great Mercies unto us; but more especially thy freeing
us from danger and temptation during this night past, and thy giving of
healthful and pleasing rest unto us therein, whereby we are enabled to perform
the duties of this day, and chiefly that of prayer unto thee. For we justly
confess, that the glorifying of thee is the principal end of our life; which
glorifying is most advanced, according to our weak power, by invocation of thy
Name, and by professing a full dependence upon thee in all our actions. We
confess, that of our selves without thy especial grace we cannot step one step
toward thee, by our actings in any Religious duty; yet by means of that grace
we are enabled so far to act, as to obtain acceptance at thy hands in Jesus
Christ, which is sufficient for us. We above all express our thankfulness to
thee, for thy mercies in thy beloved Son; and more particularly for his
undergoing the shameful death of the Cross for us. Grant O Lord, that by his
Blood and Sufferings, we may be purged from the old leaven of unrighteousness,
and that by Faith in him our hearts may be purified and disposed to the
performance of whatsoever duties are required by thee toward the attainment of
everlasting Life. Grant that we may do all things with a holy mind and sincere
intention in obedience unto thy holy will, and not with any self-love, which
may be offensive unto thee a God of pure eyes, who can not behold the least
iniquity with approbation; Grant O Lord, that we may this day apply our selves
to the doing of our duty, according to our several relations and subordinations
within this Family, looking still up unto thee as the foundation of all power,
and under whose protection we can only be happy. We know O Lord, that dutys
perfunctorily done, satisfy the world but not thee, who art a God having an
All-seeing Eye, from which nothing can be hid, and who hate eye-service,
being only well pleased in a pure heart free from all hypocrisy. We beseech
thee therefore so to guide all our actions as we may do nothing but what is
acceptable in thy sight, and that our demeanor this day, and all the other
days of our life may be such, as not to fill up our measure of iniquity and
sinfulness, against the Day of Judgment, but that we may then be accepted of,
as pure and holy by and through the Merits of the same Jesus Christ, by whom we
expect our eternal happiness.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Lord God Creator of Heaven and Earth, the preserver and Governor of all
things that have a being. We thy poor Servants of this family laden with
iniquity implore thy mercy unto us in the forgiveness of our sins. We
confess, that there is nothing in us but the Seeds of impiety which daily
spring up and generate actual sins, to the great provocation of thee our most
gracious God. We confess, O Lord that by the sin and disobedience of the day
past we have added very much to the mass of our transgressions, in so much as
the very weight of them may press us down, even to the pit of Hell, to our
everlasting ruin, unless it shall please thee to show mercy unto us. O Lord,
thy mercies in Jesus Christ are abundant, and sufficient to blot out, not only
ours, but all the sin in the whole World; Yet thou will not do it to those that
are impenitent. We therefore in his Name beseech thee to give us humble and
penitent hearts, together with a resolution to forbear all manner of sin
hereafter, as a thing that is totally opposite to thy nature, and therefore
must become the destruction of all such persons as wallow in it without
reluctation. We are fully bent, O Lord, to delight in our own ways, and to be
linked in Affection with the things of this World, which is enmity against
thee. Cure us, we beseech thee, of this destructive malady, and inflame our
hearts with the love of thee, which is so precious, as it cannot be enjoyed
without a renunciation of our wicked selves, and all our impious ways. Create
in us, O Lord, a lively Faith, whereby we may lay fast hold on the Merits of
our Blessed Savior, and so become fully justified in thy sight O Lord, kindle
in us by thy Holy Spirit a brotherly affection one unto another, so as we may
be wholly disposed to do good, and not to delight in mischief through evil will
and envy. Lastly, we beseech thee, more especially, to remit our sins of the
day past, and so to bless us this Night, as we may not therein fall into any
temptation, by evil thoughts and immaginations, or otherwise, but enjoy quiet
and seasonable rest, to the refreshment of our Bodies and Spirits, whereby we
may be fitted for such Services as the day following shall require, and always
retain in our mind the fear of thee, restraining us from all manner of
wickedness. These mercies, and whatsoever else thou know to be necessary
for us, we beg of thee, for thy own Mercies sake in Jesus Christ thy dearly
beloved Son, in whose most absolute form and words, least our prayers should be
otherwise defective, we conclude them, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.

