THE THEORY and REGULATION OF LOVE A Moral Essay.

IN TWO PARTS.

To which are added Letters Philosophical and Moral between the Author and Dr
Henry More.

By John Norris M. A. and Fellow of Allsouls College in Oxford.

Quod ergo nos Coelo restituit,
Non Dei Cognitio est, sed Amor.
Marsilius Ficinus Tom. 2. p. 296. OXFORD, Printed at the Theater for Hen.
Clements. 1688.

TO THE LADY MASHAM AT OATS in ESSEX.
Madam,
THE Esteem, wherewith your Ladyship honored my former writings, has at once
obliged me to an high measure of Gratitude, and pointed me out a way of showing
it. For I was hence led to conclude, that if any thing of Mine could afford you
Pleasure and Entertainment, when you had no other interest in it than in the
Common light of the Sun, much more would it be acceptable, if made yours by
some peculiar Right and Property. The difference of advantage seeming to me
much the same, as between taking a turn in a Common walk, and enjoying the
Retirements of one's own Private Garden.

One only Objection stood in my way. I was a little scrupulous whether the
Oblation were worthy the Altar, whether so mean a Performance could Strike the
Taste, much more deserve the Patronage of a Person of such nice and refined
Sense, and whom Nature and your own unassisted Curiosity have Conspired to
accomplish beyond what the Present Age can parallel, Or (unless your Ladyship
will be persuaded to bequeath some Monument of your extraordinary Genius to the
world) the Future will ever believe. This Consideration I confess, did a little
arrest my Pen, till I confronted it with another, that your Ladyship is as
Eminent for Candor and goodness, as for Parts and Ingenious Seize, and
that you have Mildness and Sweetness enough to temper the Severity even of your
own Judgment.

These Madam, were the Considerations that emboldened me to entitle your
Ladyship to this work. Concerning which (whatever faults it may be charged
with) I have something to boast, which I am sure all writers have not, that I
make an Offering of that which is purely my Own. Which if your Ladyship please
to accept, there will be much added both to the Happiness and to the Duty of

Madam, Your Ladyship's most humble and devoted Servant J. Norris.
All Souls Coll. March 26. 1688.
TO THE READER.
HAving accounted in the first Section for the general Design of this
undertaking, I have here no more to do than only to prepare the Reader, by
giving him some few Advertisements concerning the Manner of its Performance.

In the first place, I make no Apologies; For I would not have exposed these
Papers to the view of the world if I thought they needed any. Neither do I
desire any Favor or kind allowances from my Reader, I only desire that he
would be so kind to himself, and so just to me, as to afford me his Closest and
most unprejudiced Attention, that he would suspend his Judgment till he has
gone over the whole, and that then he would Censure no farther than he
Understands.

This Request is at all times Reasonable, but now I think it in a manner
necessary. For I have here used great Liberty of Thinking, and accordingly
could not avoid lighting upon several Notions, which are remote from common
Observation, and some that are directly contrary to the Vulgar Sentiments. And
these I have endeavored to dispose according to the greatest Accuracy of Order
and Method, and to carry on with a Thread of more than ordinanary connection and
Dependence. All which, as it requires a great deal of Attention and Application
of mind in the Composer, so does it almost as much in the Reader, who can no
more expect with an hasty and careless glance to comprehend the Recesses and
Retirements of a nice Speculation, than a man that rides Post can discern the
artful strokes and curiosities of a fine-wrought Picture.

Attention therefore is the thing that I do again commend to him that shall
find leisure to pursue these Meditations; Though for his comfort I must tell
him, that I have endeavored to ease him of this trouble as much as I could, by
expressing my Notions with all possible distinctness and Perspicuity. In order
to which I found it necessary sometimes to use new Terms, and such as would
raise more clear and distinct Ideas than those which had before obtained, which
I hope will easily be excused by those who consider, that Words are purely in
Order to Thoughts, and would therefore rather think rightly, than Speak
Customarily.

And this I was the more necessitated to do, by reason of the Novelty and
Singularity of my Design. For I must further observe to the Reader, that this
way of writing Ethics is entirely New and unblown upon. For though the
reduction of all Virtue and Vice to the various Modification of Love be Obvious
enough to any one that will consider, yet I do not know of any Moralist that
ever drew up a Scheme of Morality upon this Hypothesis.

I hope the Reader will find it here done to his satisfaction, though I must
tell him that I do not descend to a particular consideration of Virtues and
Vices, it being not my Design to insist minutely upon Particulars, but only to
lay down such general Principles upon which a more Particular Scheme of
Morality may be erected, or into which those Particular Morals which are
already extant may and ought to be ultimately resolved.

The whole I have endeavored to comprize within as little Room as may be. I
have set my self this Law, to write nothing but what is directly and
Perpendicularly to the Point in hand, and to express what is so in as few words
as I could with perspicuity. For I think it the Perfection of Discourse to come
as nigh Intuition as may be, and that none are so far removed from the Measures
of Angels, as prolix and voluminous writers. It would have been more for my own
ease to have been lax and Popular, but I thought it of more concern to consult
the Patience, the Time, and the Purse of the Reader.

Joh. Norris.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS of the whole.
PART. I.
SECT. I.
THE general Design of this undertaking, and its great usefulness to the whole
drift of Morality. Page 1.
SECT. II.
Of the Dignity and Nature of Love in general, and of the First and great
Division of it. page 6.
SECT. III.
The Analogy between Love and Motion, particularly with the Motion of the
Heart, with a further Illustration of the First and great Division of Love.
page 17.
SECT. IV.
Of the first great Branch of Love, viz. Love of Concupiscence or Desire, with
the several kinds of it. page 30.
SECT. V.
Of the second great Branch of Love, viz. Love of Benevolence, its Division
into Self-love and Charity, where also it is inquired whether all Love be
Self-love. page 50.
PART. II.
SECT. I.
THat Love requires some Measures of Regulation, and why Love as Dirigible is
made the Subject of Morality rather than Understanding. Page 63.
SECT. II.
The Measures of Love of Concupiscence all reduced to these two general Heads,
what we must desire, and what we may desire. The Measures of these, both in
general and in Particular. Whether Sensual Pleasure be in its self evil, with
an Account of the true Notion of Original Concupiscence, and of Mortification.
page 73.
SECT. III.
The Measures of Love of Benevolence, particularly of Self-love. p. 112.
SECT. IV.
The Measures of Common Charity. p. 118.
SECT. V.
The Measures of Friendship. page 124. Motives to the Study and Practice of
Regular Love by way of Consideration. page 135.
PART. I.
SECT. I. The general design of this undertaking, and its great usefullness to
the whole drift of Morality.
1 THE Subject of these Contemplations is Love. A thing that has employed many
curious pens to little purpose, and has been perhaps the most and withal the
worst written upon of any Subject in the world. It Is I confess, strange that
men should write so darkly and Confusedly of that which they feel and
experiment so intimately, but I must take the boldness to say that what I have
hitherto seen upon this Subject, has been so Confused, ambiguous and
indistinct, that I was thereby rather distracted, than informed in my Notions
concerning it.

2 Finding therefore no Satisfaction in advising with Books, I was fain to shut
my Eyes and set my self a Thinking, without having any regard to what others
had observed upon the same matter, so as to be in the least swayed or
determined in my Conclusions by it. A method that would tend more to the
discovery of Truth, and to the Advancement of all Notional Learning, than that
narrow straitlaced humor of adhering to the Dictates of those, who have
nothing more to recommend them, but only the luck of being born before us.

3 My design therefore here is to employ my Meditations about two things, 1 st.
the Theory of Love according to its full Latitude and Comprehension, and 2 ly.
the Measures of its Regulation. The discharge of which double undertaking will
thoroughly exhaust the Subject, and answer the Ends both of Speculation and
Practice.

4 I think it requisite to begin with the Theory of Love. For since the
Physician thinks it necessary to know the Anatomy of that Body which he is to
Cure, and the Logician to open the nature of those Intellectual operations
which he is to direct, I know not why the Moralist should not think himself
equally concerned to frame a just Theory of that Affection of the Soul which he
is to regulate.

5 The whole work I conceive to be of great usefulness and general importance
to all the purposes of Morality, nay indeed to contain the whole Sum and
Substance of it. For what is the grand intendment and final upshot of Morality
but to teach a man to Love regularly? As a man Loves so is he. Love is not only
the Fulfilling, but also the Transgressing of the Law, and Virtue and Vice is
nothing else but the Various Application and Modification of Love. By this a
Good man is distinguished from a bad, and an Angel of Light from an Angel of
Darkness. This is that which discriminates the Orders of men here, and will
consign us to different Portions hereafter, according to that of St. Austin
Faciunt Civitates duas Amores duo. Jerusalem facit Amor Dei: Babylonem Amor
Saeculi. Interroget ergo se quisque quid Amet, and inveniet unde sit Civis. The
two Loves make the two Cittys. The Love of God makes Jerusalem, the Love of
the World Babylon. Let every one therefore ask himself what it is he Loves, De.
Civ. Dei l. 14. Cap. 28. Tom. 5.
and he will find to which City he belongs.

6 He therefore that shall rightly state the Nature, and prescribe due Measures
for the Regulation of Love, not only serves the Cause of Morality, but may be
truly said to discharge the whole Province of a Moralist; This I take to be a
Sufficient Apology for the undertaking it self, and if the Performance come up
to the Moment of the Design (whereof the world is to judge) I know of nothing
wanting to render it both Serviceable and acceptable to the Public.

SECT. II. Of the dignity and Nature of Love in general, and of the first and
great Division of it.
1 LET us make Man in our Image, after our own likeness, said God. Now among
other instances of Resemblance wherein man may be likened to God, such as the
Internal Rectitude of his Nature, or Self-dominion, and his External dominion
over the Creatures and the like, this I think may be Considered as one, and
perhaps as the Chiefest of all, that as in the Divine nature there are two
Processions, one by way of Intellect which is the (...) or word, and the other
by way of Love which is the H. Spirit, so likewise in the Humane nature there
are as it were two Processions, and that of the same kind too as in the Divine,
Understanding and Love.

2 These are the two Noble Facultys that branche out from the Soul of man, and
whereby he becomes a little Image of the Trinity. And although we generally value
our Selves most upon the Former; yet I know not whether there be not an
Equality in these as there is in the Divine Processions, and whether it be not
as much the Glory of man to be an Amorous, as to be a Rational Being.

3 Sure I am that in the Gentile Theology and in the most refined Philosophy of
the Ancients the pre-eminence is given to Love. Socrates in Plato's Symposion
says Concerning Love, that it is (...) the eldest and most honorable of the
Gods. And we know Love is made the first Hypostasis in the Platonic Triad. The
Holy Scripture goes yet higher, and does not only in several places set forth
Love as the Flower of the Divinity, and magnify the Divine Essence chiefly from
that Excellence, but seems to resolve all the Perfection of the Deity into this
one Point. For when it defines God it does not say he is Wisdom or Power, no
not so much as Wise or Powerful, but seems to overlook all his other
Perfections, and says in the Abstract that he is Love. They are great words of
St. John, 1.4.16.
and such as make much for the great Dignity of this Divine Affection, God is
Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God. So Noble a thing is Love,
and so deserving of our most intense Theory and Inspection.

5 And indeed it needs it, as well as deserves it. For there is nothing that
darken's the Nature of things, and obscures the Clarity of our Conceptions more
than Ambiguity of Terms, and I know nothing that is more Equivocal and full of
Latitude than this word, Love. It is given to things whose Ideas are
Notoriously different, and men seem to have agreed together not to detect the
Fallacy, and from the Identity of the name to conclude the Identity of the
thing. To give one instance out of many, what is there that passes for an Axiom
of a more simple, certain and uniform Signification than that Common
Proposition in Divinity, that we must love God for himself, and our Neighbor
for God's sake. But now when we come to examine what Ideas we have under these
words, it is plain that that Idea which is expressed by Love in the first part
of the Proposition, is not the same with that which is expressed by Love in the
Second. For Love in reference to God Signifys Simple Desire, and in reference
to our Neighbor, wishing well to, which Ideas are as different as East and
West, and yet because of the Commonnes of the Name, and the Jingling turn of
the Proposition, this passes smoothly and unquestionably for one and the same
Love.

5 But though this word Love be used to signify Ideas so very different that they
seem to have nothing in Common but the Name, yet I think there is one thing
wherein they all agree and whereof they all partake, and which may therefore be
acknowledged as the General and Transcendental Notion of Love. And that is, A
motion of the Soul toward good. This I say is the first and most general
Notion of Love, and which runs throughout all the Species of it. But then this
includes two things. For as in the motion of Bodies we first Conceive Gravity or
a Connaturality to a certain Term of motion, and then the motion it self which
is consequent upon it, so also in Love (which is the motion of the Soul) order
requires that we first conceive a certain Connaturality or Coaptation of the
Soul to good, whence arises all the variety of its actual motions and tendencys
toward it. This I take to be that peculiar Habitude of the Soul to good which
the Schools call Complacentia boni a Complacence, a Liking or Relish of good,
which I consider as really distinct from and antecedent to its actual motion
toward it. For as it is observed by Aristotle with more than Ordinary Nicenes
in his 3d de Anima; The motion of Love is in a Circle. First good moves and
acts upon the Soul, and then the Soul moves and exerts it self toward good,
that so there may be the End whence was the Rise of its motion. This first
Alteration of the Soul from good answers to Gravity in Bodies, and may be called
for distinction sake the Moral Gravity of the Soul, the Second to Gravitation
or actual Pressure, and may as fitly be called the Moral Gravitation of the
Soul.

6 I further Consider that this Moral Gravity is impressed upon the Soul
primarily and Originally by good in general, or by the universal good or
Essence of good, that is, by God himself, who is the Sum and Abstract of all
goodness, and the Center of all Love. So that this Moral Gravity of the Soul
will be its Connaturality to all good, or good in general, that is, to God as
its primary and adequate object, and to particular goods only so far as they
have something of the Common Nature of good, something of God in them. Whence it
will also follow that the Moral Gravitation of the Soul does Naturally and
Necessarily respect good in Common or God as the Term of its motion and
Tendency. So that upon the whole to speak more explicitly the most general and
Comprehensive Notion of Love will be found to be, A Motion of the Soul toward
God.

7 But now in this motion there is great difference. For God having unfolded
his Perfections in the Creation with almost infinite Variety, and as it were
drawn out himself into a numerous issue of Secondary goods, our Love becomes
also Multiplied, and divides its course among several Channels, and though after
all its turnings and windings we may at last trace it up to the (...) (...) as
Plato speaks, the greot Sea of Beauty and Head fountain of all Being and
Perfection (For we love Particular goods only as they carry some impress of the
universal, or to speak more properly, we love the universal good in the
Particulars) yet it must be acknowledged that the immediate object of our Love
becomes hereby more various and Multiplied, and Consequently our Love too, as
receiving its Specification from it.

8 Nor does our Love receive less variety and diversity from the manner of its
Motion or Tendency, Motion being Specified from the manner of it as well as
from its Term. And it may be also lastly diversified according to the nature of
the Part moved, whether it be the Superior or the Inferior part of the Soul.
From these three, the Term of Motion, the manner of Motion, and the nature of
the part moved, arise all the different kinds of Love, such as Divine and
Worldly, Spiritual and Carnal, Charity and Friendship, Love of Concupisccnce
and Love of Benevolence, Intellectual and Sensitive, Natural, Animal and
Rational Love, with several others which I shall not stand to enumerate.

9 But notwithstanding this variety I believe all will be comprehended under
these two in general, Concupiscence and Benevolence. This I take to be the
First and great Division of Love, to which all the several kinds of it may be
aptly reduced. For when I Consider the Motion of Love, I find it tends to two
things, namely to the good which a man wills to any one, whether it be to
himself or to another, and to him to whom this good is willed. So that the
Motion of Love may be Considered either barely as a Tendency toward good, or
as a willing this good to some person or Being. If it be considered in the
first way, then it is what we call Concupiscence or Desire, if in the second,
then it is what we call Benevolence or Charity.

10 For there is the same Proportion in Love that there is in Hatred, which
also involves a double Motion. Either a declining or tending from evil, which
the Greeks call (...), the Latins Fuga, in our own language Aversion or
Abhorrence, or else a willing evil to some person or other, which we call
Malice or Malevolence. Concupiscence or Desire answers to the former of these,
and Benevolence or Charity to the Latter.

11 There is indeed this difference to be observed between the Motions of Love
and the Motions of Hatred, that those of Hatred are not necessarily
Concomitant. For there may be a simple Aversion without any Malice or wishing
ill to, though perhaps the latter can hardly be conceived without the former. But
now in Love these Motions are always concomitant and reciprocal. There is no
Desire without Benevolence, and no Benevolence without Desire. For every thing
that is desired is desired to some body, and so again, desiring to some body
implies and supposes simple Desire. And this I suppose has been the occasion of
that great confusion which has been generally incurred in this matter, men
being very apt from union and Concomitancy to infer indistinction and Identity.
But notwithstanding this Connection, the Ideas of Desire and Benevolence are
very distinct, as will easily and Clearly appear to any close and attentive
Thinker.

SECT. III. The Analogy between Love and Motion, particularly with the Motion
of the Heart, with a further Illustration of the First and Great Division of
Love.
1 HAving in the foregoing Section fixed the general Idea of Love in the Motion
of the Soul toward good, and this being a Term somewhat Metaphorical, and
withal not so often applied by Scholastic Writers to this purpose, I thought
it concerned me to draw here a short Parallel between Love and Physical Motion,
and to show the admirable Agreement and Correspondency that is between them:
whereby 'twill appear that the general Idea of Love could not have had a more
convenient Representation.

2 The excellent Monsieur Malebranche undertaking to describe the Nature of the
Mind, and considering its Idea to be very abstract, and such as did not fall
within the Sphere of Imagination, Lib. 1. De Inquirenda veritate. p. 2.
thought it best to Shadow it forth by the two Eminent Propertys of matter,
viz. that of receiving various Figures, and that of Motion or Mobility. To the
Property of receiving various Figures he resembles that Faculty of the mind
which we call understanding. And to Motion or Mobility he liken's the Will. The
first of these Parallels he persues and illustrates in many Particulars, but
when he comes to the last he gives only this one instance of resemblance, that
as all Motions Naturally proceed in a right line, unless by the interposition
of external and particular causes they are otherwise determined, so all the
Inclinations which we have received from God, are Right, and would tend only to
the true good, were they not turned aside to ill ends by the impulse of some
foreign cause.

3 This indeed is finely observed by this Ingenious and Learned Theorist, but
for an enlargement of the Parallel I consider further, that as in the Motion of
Bodies Gravity precedes Actual Gravitation, that is, we necessarily conceive a
certain Congruity or Connaturality of a Body to a certain Term before its
actual Tendency thither, so in the Soul there is a Natural Complacency or
liking of good, before its actual exerting it self toward it, for we desire
nothing but what we like or relish as convenient and agreeable to us. But this
I have touched upon already, and shall therefore no longer insist upon it.

4 Further therefore, as this Affection called Gravity in Bodies, is nothing
else but that first impression or alteration made upon them by the various
actings of those Effluviums or streams of Particles which issue out from the
womb of the great Magnet, the Earth, so that if there were either no such
Magnetic Body, or a Vacuum to intercept its influences, there would be no such
thing as Gravity; so in the like manner this radical Complacency and
Connaturality of the Soul toward good (which I call her Moral Gravity) is
nothing else but that first Alteration or Impression which is made upon her by
the streaming influences of the Great and Supreme Magnet, God, continually
acting upon her, and attracting her by his active and powerful Charms. So that
if either there were no God, or this his influence never so little a while
intercepted, there would be no such thing as this Complacency or Moral Gravity
of the Soul.

5 Again, as this Physical Gravity causes in Bodies an actual Effort or Tendency
toward the Center, and that with such necessity that they cannot but tend
thither even while violently detained, and when at liberty hasten with all
possible speed to this last Term of their Motion, so by Virtue of this Moral
Gravity the Soul actually puts forth and exerts her self toward the great
Magnet, good in general or God, and that with as much necessity as a stone
falls downwards. And though detained violently by the interposition of her Body,
yet still she endeavors toward her Center, and is no sooner set at liberty
but she hastens away to it and unites her self with it. For the will
notwithstanding all her Sovereignty and Dominion acts according to Nature and
Necessity when she tends to her Perfection. Nay I take this Necessity to be
such, that I think it absolutely Impossible for God to Create a Soul without
this Tendency to himself, and that not only because it is against Order and
Decorum that he should do so, but also because this Moral Gravity of the Soul
whence proceed all her actual Tendencys, is caused by the continual acting of
God upon her by this attractive and Magnetic Influences. For God is the first
Mover in Moral as well as in Natural Motions, and whatever he moves he moves to
himself.

6 Again I consider, that as the Gravitation or actual endeavor of Bodies
toward the Center is always alike and uniform however their real Progress may
be hindered or the swiftness of it resisted by accidental Letts and
impediments, so is this Moral Gravitation or actual endeavor of the Soul
toward good in general or God always equal and uniform (for a man does not
desire to be Happy more at one time than at another as I have elsewhere shown)
I say this endeavor of the Soul toward good is always equal, Contemp. and
Love. p. 296.
however her real advancing to it be hindered or resisted by the Interposition
of the Body.

7 Again I consider, that as Natural Motion is a Tendency or Translation of a
Body from an undue and incongruous place to a place of Rest and Acquiescence,
whereby it acquires as it were a new Form of Perfection, so Love is Extatical,
and carries a man out from himself as insufficient to be his own good toward
good without him, which by union he endeavors to make his own, and so to
better and improve his Being, till at length his Desire be swallowed up in the
Fruition of the universal good, and Motion be exchanged for Rest and
Acquiescence.

8 This Parallel between Love and Motion in general might be carried on much
further, but besides that it is convenient to leave something for the
Contemplative Reader to work out by himself, I have also another Parallel to
make between Love and a certain Particular Motion, namely that of the Heart,
wherein as there is as much Harmony and Correspondency in other respects, so
there is this peculiar in it, that this is a Motion performed within a man's
self, and depending upon an intrinsic and vital Principle as well as the other.

9 First then we may Consider that the Heart is the great Wheel of the Humane
Machine, the Spring of all Animal and vital Motion, and the Head-fountain of
Life, (...) as Hippocrates somwhere calls it, and that its Motion is the First
and Leading Motion of all, that it begins as soon as the Flame of Life is
Kindled, and ends not till the vital Congruity be quite dissolved. And thus
it is in Love. This is the great wheel of the Intellectual frame as the other is
of the Natural, this is the Spring and Ferment of the Soul, that gives her Life
and Energy, and without which she would be utterly torpid and unactive. Love is
the first and Mother Motion that both prevents and actuates all the rest. It Is
from her that all the Inclinations and Passions of the Soul take their rise,
and did we not first love we should neither Hope nor Fear, nor hate nor be
Angry, nor Envy nor be any other way affected. Nay we Love and Desire before we
can Apprehend, Judge, Reason or Discourse, nay our Love is then Commonly most
impetuous and high-set; we love long before we know what it is to Love, nay
before we know whether we love or no, even as soon as we receive the Breath of
Life. And as it is the First, so it is also the Last Motion. It Is the Vltimum
Moriens of the Intellectual, as the Heart is of the Natural Structure. This is
the Motion that out lives and sees the Funeral of all the other Operations of
the Soul. For when either Age or sickness by disturbing the Crasis of the Body
has also untuned and disordered the Facultys of the Soul, when the man can no
longer understand, nor Discourse, nor Remember, when all his Rational Facultys
are as 'twere benumbed and death-struck, yet still he Loves, and inclines
toward Happiness with as much weight as ever; Can.
for Love is strong as Death, and as Importunate as the Grave, many waters
cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it

10 Again we may consider, that as by the Pulsation of the Heart the Arterial
blood is transmitted to the Brain, whereby are generated those Animal Spirits
which are the Instruments of Motion throughout the Body, and which very Animal
Spirits do again return and assist the Motion of the Heart by Contracting its
Muscular Fibers, and so straitning its Ventricles to expel the blood contained
in them into the Arteries; the same Reciprocation may we observe in the Motion
of Love. That Moral Gravity and Gravitation of the Soul impressed on her by the
universal Good acting attractively upon her, and whereby she stands inclined to
good in general, first moves the understanding, which as the Schools allow, is
moved by the will quoad exercitium actus, though not quoad specificationem. And
then the understanding Moves the will as to particular and actual Volitions
concerning particular Goods. For as to these we will nothing but what we first
know and judge pro hic and nunc fit to be willed. Which by the way may give
great light to that intricate and perplexed Controversy, whether the will moves
the understanding or the understanding the will. For they both move one
another, though in different respects. Even as the Heart by its Motion sends
Spirits to the Brain, and is by those very Spirits assisted in her Motion. This
indeed is a wonderful instance of Resemblance, and the more I consider it the
more strange I think it, and full of Mystery.

11 Again as by the Continual Reciprocation of the Pulse there is caused a
Circulation of the Blood, which is expelled out of the Heart into the Arteries,
out of these into the parts which are to be Nourished, from whence it is imbibed
by the Capillary Veins, which lead it back to the Vena Cava and so into the
Heart again; and same may in proportion be applied to Love. This is the Great
Pulse of the Body Politic, as the other is of the Body Natural. It Is Love that
begets and Keeps up the great Circulation and Mutual Dependence of Society, by
this Men are inclined to maintain Mutual Commerce and intercourse with one
another, and to distribute their Benefits and Kindnesses to all the parts of
the Civil Body, till at length they return again upon themselves in the Circle
and Reciprocation of Love.

12 And if we further Meditate upon the Motion of the Heart we shall find that
it is not only an apt Emblem of Love in General, but that it also Mystically
points out to us the two great Species of Love, Concupiscence and Benevolence.
The Motion of the Heart we know is Double, Dilatation and Contraction.
Dilatation whereby it receives blood into its Ventricles, and Contraction
whereby it expels it out again. And is it not so also in this great Pulse of
the Soul, Love? Is there not here also the like double Motion? For we desire
good, which answers to the Dilatation and immission of the Blood, and we also
wish well to, which answers to the Contraction and Emission of it.

13 I know not what some may think of this, and I know there are a sort of men
in the world that never think themselves, and look with Scorn and Contempt upon
such Notions as are not to be found out without more than Ordinary Thinking;
But for my part I must needs own that I stand amazed at this wonderful Harmony
and Correspondence, and that I am thereby the more Confirmed in that Celebrated
Notion of the Platonists, that as the Soul is the Image of God, so the Body is
the Image of the Soul, and that this Visible and Material is but the Shadow, or
(as Plotinus will have it) the Echo of the Invisible and Immaterial World.

SECT. IV. Of the First Great Branch of Love viz. Love of Concupiscence or
Desire, with the several Kinds of it.
1 WE have Considered the Nature of Love in general, and have shown it to
Consist in a Motion of the Soul toward Good, whence we took occasion to
represent the Analogy between Love and Physical Motion, which we find to be
exact and Apposite even to Surprise and admiration; We have also discovered the
double Motion of this Mystical Pulse, and accordingly have branched out Love
into two General Parts, Love of Concupiscence and Love of Benevolence. I come
now to treat of each of these severally.

2 And first of Love of Concupiscence or Desire. The general Idea of which I
conceive to be A simple Tendency of the Soul to good, not at all considering
whether it wills it to any Person or Being or no. Not that there is or can be
any desire without wishing well to, (For as I observed before these are always
inseparable Concomitants) but their Ideas being very distinct, I think I may
very well abstract from the one, when my business lies only to consider the
other.

3 Concerning this Love of Desire I further consider, that the Primary and
Adequate object of it is the same that is of all Love, namely good in general
or God. For we desire good as good, or good in Common, before we desire this or
that good in particular. And when we do desire any particular good, it is still
for the sake of the universal good whereof it partakes, and according to the
degree of this Participation either real or apparent so we measure out and
dispense our Love. So that good in general is the Primary and Adequate object
of Desire.

4 But now this general or universal good being variously participated by
Particular Beings, hence it comes to pass that our Desire has many Subordinate
and Secondary objects, which it tends to with more or less Inclination
according as the Marks and Footsteps of the universal good appear in them more
or less discernable. For the universal good is so Congenial and Connatural to
the Soul as always acting upon it and attracting it to it self, that we love
every thing that carries the least image or semblance of it.

5 There is this difference only between the love of the universal, and the
love of Particular goods. Our love to the universal good is Natural, necessary
and unavoidable. We have no more Command over this love than we have over the
Circulation of our Blood or the Motion of our Pulse. For God is the Center of
Spirits, as the Earth is of Bodies, and in our love of him we are as much
determined as Fire is to burn, or a stone to descend. And the Blessed in Heaven
Love him with the highest degree of Necessity and Determination. But now we are
not thus determined to the Love of Particular goods. I say not thus determined.
For it must be acknowledged that there is a sort of determination even here
also. For good being desirable as good and consequently in every degree of it,
so far as we consider any thing as good we must needs Love it with a Natural
Inclination, that which the Schools term a Velleity or Voluntas Naturae, or a
loving a thing Secundum quid, according to a certain respect; But it being
possible that this Lesser Particular good may in some circumstances come into
Competition with a greater Particular good or with the greatest of all, the
universal good, and so upon the whole become evil, it is not necessary, nor are
we determined to love it absolutely, thoroughly and efficaciously, but may nill
and decline it Absolutely, though still we retain a Natural Love or Velleity
toward it as before.

6 For the case is the same here as it is in Evil. We necessarily hate evil as
evil, and the greatest evil we hate Absolutely as well as necessarily. But
for particular and lesser evils, though we necessarily hate them too by a
Natural Aversion as far as we Consider them as evil, yet it is not necessary
that we should always hate them Absolutely, but may in some Circumstances
Absolutely will them as a means either to avoid a greater evil, or to obtain a
greater good. And in the same proportion as any evil less than the greatest
though it be necessarily nill'd and declined in some respect, may yet be
Absolutely willed and embraced, so any Particular good though it be in some
respect necessarily loved, may yet Absolutely be nill'd and refused.

7 Indeed the Excellent Monsieur Malebranche in his Treatise of Nature and
grace, asserts this non Determination of our Love to Particular goods in more
large and unlimited terms, when he tells us, that the Natural Motion of the
Soul to good in general, is not invincible in respect of any Particular good.
And in this non Invincibility he places our Liberty or Free will. But in my
Judgment this Proposition of his must either be Corrected, or better
explained. For without this our Distinction, it will not hold true. Our Love to
Particular good is Invincible Secundum quid or as to a certain respect, but
Absolutely and simply speaking it is not Invincible. And if in this Absolute
non Invincibility he will have our Liberty or Free will to consist, I readily
agree with him, and do think the Notion to be very sound and good.

8 And thus the Difference between our Love of the universal, and our Love of
Particular goods is clear and apparent. Our Love to the universal good is
Primary and Immediate, but our Love to Particular good Secondary and Mediate.
Our Love to the universal good is invincible Absolutely and Simply, we will it
necessarily, and we will thoroughly, but our love to Particular good is
invincible only in some certain respect. We do not always love it thoroughly
and effectually, though we must always love it. In short, our love to the
universal good is like the Motion of our Blood within our veins, which we have
no manner of empire or Command over, but our Love to Particular good is like
the Motion of Respiration, partly necessary, and partly Free. We cannot live
without Breathing at all, and yet we can suspend any one turn of Respiration in
particular, but yet not without a natural inclination to the Contrary. And so
in like manner we cannot live without loving some particular good or other, but
when we point to this or that particular good, there is not one but what we may
nill and refuse Absolutely and simply, though yet in some respect we must love it
too, with a Natural Love.

9 Thus far I have Considered the general nature of this First great Branch of
Love, Love of Concupiscence or Desire. I come now to the Kinds of it. For the
right distribution of which I consider first that any Motion of the Soul is
specified from the Quality of the Object or Term to which it tends. Now the
Object of Desire being good it follows that the Kinds of Desire must receive
their distinction from the Kinds of good. Now good is Relative, and the
Relation that it implies is a Relation of Convenience either to the Soul or
Body, that is, either to the Soul Directly and Immediately, or Indirectly and
by the Mediation of Bodily sensations. So that all good is either Intellectual
or sensual, and consequently the same Members of Divisition will be the
adequate Distribution of Desire. That is an Intellectual Desire whose Object is
an Intellectual good, and a sensual Desire is that whose Object is a sensual
good.

10 But I further observe, that this same denomination of Intellectual and
sensitive may be taken from the Nature of the part moved as well as from the
quality of the Object. The Appetitive Faculty in man is double as well as the
Cognoscitive, and consists of a Superior and Inferior, of a Rational and
sensitive part. For as in the Cognoscitive part there is Pure Intellect whereby
Ideas are Apprehended without any Corporeal Image, and Imagination whereby
objects are presented to our minds under some Corporeal Affection, so also in
the Appetitive there is a pure and mere act of Tendency or Propension to the
agreeable object, which answers to Pure Intellect and is what we call Will or
Volition, and there is also such a propension of the Soul as is accompanied
with a Commotion of the Blood and Spirits, and this answers to Imagination, and
is the same with what we usually term the Passion of Love. And it is in the
divided Tendency or Discord of these two wherein consists that Lucta or
Contention between the Flesh and Spirit. That which our B. Lord intimated when
he said The Spirit truly is willing, but the Flesh is weak, and which St. Paul
calls the Law of the Mind and the Law of the Members. Romans 7.
I say in the Divided Tendency of these two. Because sometimes the Intellectual
and Sensitive Appetite may both point one way, and conspire in the same object,
as it does either in men very wicked, who sin with unity and intireness of
Consent without any Check or Remorse from the Superior part, or in men
Eminently good, who have reduced even their very bodily Inclinations to the
order of the Spirit, and have attained to the highest degree of Mortification
and simplification of Desire.

11 And it may yet be observed further, that so far as this Denomination of
Intellectual and Sensitive is taken both from the quality of the Object, and
from the part moved, our Desire may be at the same time both Intellectual and
Sensitive. For that Desire which is Intellectual in respect of the Part may be
also sensitive in respect of the Object, (For we may Will a sensual good as
well as Passionately Desire it) and so on the other side, that Desire which is
sensitive in respect of the Part may be Intellectual in respect of the Object.
For there may be a sensitive Appetite of an Intellectual good, and we may love
even God himself Passionately as well as Rationally.

12 Thus is Love of Desire divided in general into Intellectual and sensual.
But as for the particular kinds under these they are almost infinite, and
therefore I shall not offer at a distinct recital of them. I shall only
remarque some few things concerning Intellectual Love, and by the way shall
also briefly touch upon the principal and most eminent species of sensual Love,
and so end this Section.

13 And first concerning Intellectual Love, I consider that the general Object
of it is (...) or Beauty. For Intellectual Love is that whose object is an
Intellectual good, and an Intellectual good is that which pleases the
Intellect, and the Intellect is pleased with nothing but as it is
Proportionable, Harmonious and some way or other Beautiful. Whence it follows
that Intellectual Love has Beauty in general for its proper Object.

14. But then this Beauty which is the proper Object of Intellectual Love, is
either the First and Original Beauty, or Created and Derivative Beauty; if the
First and Original Beauty, then the love of it is Divine Love, and if this be
in a very high degree such as is the Product of an intense Contemplation, then
it is what we call Seraphic Love, which is the greatest Exaltation, and
Perfection of Intellectual Love, and withal the greatest Happiness the Soul of
man is capable of in this State, See Idea of Happiness.
as I have shown at large in another Treatise.

15 But if it be Created and Derivative Beauty, then I consider that either we
Ascend by and from the love of it to the love of the First and Originary
Beauty, or else we stick there, or we Descend to the desire of Corporal
Contact, and the delight arising from it. If we take Occasion to Ascend, then
it is what we call Platonic Love, which (as I have elsewhere more at large
explained the Notion) is the Ascent of the Soul to the love of the Divine
Beauty from the Aspect of Beauty in Bodies. But if we terminate and stick in
this sensible Form or Pulchritude, though this Affection be not so noble and
generous as that which ascends higher, yet still this is pure Intellectual
Love, so long as it is free from all desire of Corporal Application, and for
distinction's sake may be called the Love of Abstracted Beauty.

16 And let not any one think it strange that I make this Abstract Love of
sensitive Beauty an Intellectual Love. For Beauty let the subject of its
inherence be what it will, consists in Harmony and Proportion which is the
immediate good of the Soul, that only being capable both of understanding it,
and of being primarily affected with it. And tho we give it the name of
Sensible Beauty, yet that is only because the senses are the Instruments of
Conveiances, not as being the part primely affected, and to distinguish it from
those Beautys which are immediately Intelligible, such as the Beauty of Truth,
the Beauty of Virtue and the like; But in reference to the Part directly and
immediately affected all Beauty, even Sensible Beauty is an Intellectual good,
and is one of the fainter Rays of the Divine glory, one of the remoter Mirours
that reflect the Supreme and Original Beauty.

17 The Sublime Platonist Marsilius Ficinus has a fine Notion to this purpose.
Lib. de Lumine Tom. 1. Cap. 14. p. 1006.
He takes the First Beauty to be nothing else but the Splendor of Gods Glory,
and of this he says there is a threefold Reflection. For he supposes Angelical
Minds, Rational Souls, and Beautiful Bodies as three Glasses of different
Colors, which reflect this one and the same light after different Manners. His
words are, Ipsa certe Pulcritudo Prima nihil aliud est quam Splendour Gloriae
penes Patrem luminum, and Figura Substantiae ejus. Vnde triplex emicat
Pulcritudo. Prima quidem per Angelicos Intellectus, secunda vero per
Intellectuales animas, tertia per Corpora ubique formosa quasi lumen unum per
tria quaedam vitra Coloribus inter se varia, ideoque varium ex Primo Splendorem
subinde reddentia. The First Beauty Certainly is nothing else but the Splendor
of Glory with the Father of Lights, and the Figure of his substance. Whence
there shines forth a threefold Beauty. The First through the Angelical Minds,
the second through Intelligent Souls, the third through Beautiful Bodies, which
reflect the same Light as it were through three Glasses of diferent Colors,
and accordingly they successively reflect a different splendor from the First.
So that sensible and Corporeal Beauty is one of the Glasses that reflect and
represent the First Beauty, and though it must be confessed that we see through
this Glass darkly, yet still it represents according to its proportion, and is
only as a Picture remotely drawn after several Copies, a weaker and further
projected Ray of God. And therefore it must needs be an Intellectual good, and
Consequently the Love of it, if abstracted from Corporal Applications, must
also be a pure Intellectual Love.

18 But if we do not stick and terminate here, but are by the aspect of
sensible Beauty precipitated down to the desire of Corporal Contact, and the
pleasure thence arising, then this is sensual Love, that is, a desire of a
sensual good. I may add of the greatest sensual good, and Consequently that
this is the most sensual Love. And it is so Common with men thus to descend,
rather than love Platonically or Abstractedly, that the name of love is almost
wholely appropriated to this Affection, and to be in Love signifies as much as
to be inclined to Corporal Contact by the Occasion of Corporeal Beauty. As if
there were no other good but this Kind of sensual good, and no other love but
this sensual Love. And accordingly Plato in his symposion distinguishing
between his two Cupids, Intellectual and sensual Love, styles the Latter by the
name of (...), the Vulgar or Epidemical Love.

19 Indeed this is a very strange Affection, and has so universally prevailed
as to turn all other Love almost out of the World. This is a Passion that has
made more slaves than the greatest Conquerours, more stir and disturbance in
the world than either Ambition, Pride or Covetousness, and has caused more Sin
and Folly than the united force of all the Powers of Darkness. It has wounded
almost as many as Death, and devoured like a Contagion or the Grave. It makes
no distinction, the wise man is as little secure from it as the Fool, Age
submits to it as well as youth, the strong as well as the weak, the Hero as
well as the Coward. In fine, this one Passion sets on fire the whole course of
Nature, rages and spreads with an unlimited Contagion, and is an Image of the
universal Conflagration.

20 And that which increases the wonder is the vileness of that structure which
is made the Object of this sensual Love. It Is not indeed much to be wondered
that we should love Corporeal Pleasure, all Pleasure being in its Proportion
lovely, but that the embracing such poor Materials should afford any, that is
the wonder. Should one Angel fall in love with the pure and refined Vehicle of
another, though Matter even in its highest Exaltation is but a poor sort of
Being, there would however be something of Proportion in this: but to see a man
Idolize and dote upon a Mass of Flesh and Blood, that which the Apostle calls
our Vile Body, Phil. 3.
Or as it is in the Original more Emphatically, (...) the body of our
Humiliation, that is at present the Reversion of Worms, and may the very next
Minute be a Carcass, this is indeed so strange to one that thoughtfully
considers it, that one would think all Mankind were intoxicated with some
general Philtrum or Love Potion, that has thus Charmed them into this most
stupid and Wretched degree of Idolatry. So that whether we consider the
greatness of the Effects, or the slenderness of the Cause, this Kind of sensual
Love is of all the most wonderful and unaccountable.

21 One thing more I have to observe concerning this Kind of sensual Love, the
Desire of Corporal Contact occasioned by the Aspect of sensible Beauty, and
that is, that this is a Passion peculiar to Man. Brutes are below it, and
Angels are above it. For Man being a middle sort of Creature between an Angel
and a Beast, it is requisite he should have something to distinguish him from
each, and that in his Appetitive as well as in his Intellective Part. And thus
it is, in his Intellective part he has Reason and Discourse, which is above
sensible knowledge, and short of Intuition. And so likewise in his Appetitive
there is this Desire of Corporal Contact arising from the sight of Beauty,
which is a mixed Love, partly Intellectual and partly sensual, and is thereby
distinguished from the Love of Brutes, which is purely sensual (for they are
not affected with Beauty) and the love of Angels which is purely Intellectual.
So great Harmony and Proportion is there in the works of him who made all
things in Number, Weight, and Measure.

SECT. V. Of the Second Great Branch of Love viz. Love of Benevolence, its
division into Self-Love and Charity, where also it is enquired whether all Love
be Self-Love.
1 HAving dispatched the First great Branch of Love, Love of Concupiscence or
Desire, with the several Kinds of it, I come now to consider the Second, viz.
Love of Benevolence. By this I understand a desiring or willing of good to some
Person or Being that is Capable of it. And herein it is differenced from Love of
Concupiscence. The Idea of Love of Concupiscence is, A simple Tendency of the
Soul to good, not at all considering whether it wills it to any Person or Being
or no. But the Idea of Benevolence is A desiring or willing this good to some
Being or other. As far as it is a Desiring or willing of good, it agrees with
Love of Concupiscence, but it is distinguished from it in that it wishes well
too.

2 For as in Physical Motion a Body may be considered either as simply moving
toward another, or as moving this other to some Certain Body, so in Love which
is a Moral Motion, the Soul may be considered either as simply desiring or
willing good (which is Concupiscence) or as desiring or willing it to some
Capable Being, and this is that Species of Love which we call Benevolence.

3 And I further Meditate that as in Motion the Body that moves another may
either move it toward it self as in Circular Motion, or toward some other
Body as in Direct Motion. So in the Love of Benevolence this wishing well to,
may either be a willing of good to ones self, or to some other Being. If to
ones self, then it is that special sort of Benevolence which we call self-love.
If to another, then it is what we call Charity.

4 Then again as to Charity, this may be considered either as extended to all
men in Common, grounded upon one Common Consideration, viz. Similitude of
Nature, and a Capacity of being benefitted, which is Common Charity; Or as
confined to one or two, and as Mutual, and as Mutually known, and withal as in
a special degree of Intensness and Application, and then it is Friendship, which
differs not from Common Charity but as it is qualified by the preceding
modifications.

5 But this our Division is in danger of being closed up again by some who
contract all these kinds of Benevolence into one, by telling us that all Love
is self-Love. Thus the Epicureans of old, who by this Plea thought to evade the
necessity of owning a Providence. For when you argue from the Perfections of
God that the world is cared for and governed by him; No say they, the quite
contrary follows. For all Love is self-Love, and proceeds from Indigency, if
therefore God be such a Full and Perfect being as you suppose, he cannot be
concerned for any thing abroad, as having no self-interest to serve.

6 And indeed the Conclusion would be right, were the Principle so. For if all
Benevolence did proceed from Indigence, it would certainly follow that the more
perfect and self-sufficient any being is, the less he must needs regard the
good of others, and consequently a being that is absolutely perfect, must
necessarily be utterly void of all Benevolence or Concern for another welfare.

7 But to hear an Epicurean Maintain this Principle is no wonder. Even Plato
himself in some places seems to look favorably toward it, particularly in his
Lysis, where purposely treating of Friendship he concludes toward the end of
the Dialogue that Friendship arises from Indigence, necessity and privation.
The same he again insinuates in his symposion, when he makes Penia Indigence or
Poverty to be the Mother of Love. But the Roman Plato, Cicero, in his book of
Friendship will by no means allow this Notion, but contends that Love proceeds
rather from Nature, than from Indigence or Imbecility.

8 There is in the other opinion something of Truth, and something of Error, or
rather it is either true or false as it is understood. How far true and how far
false, I shall determine in the following Conclusions. And first I do
acknowledge that all Love of Concupiscence does proceed from Indigence, and
ends in self-Love. For all desire is in order to further Perfection, and
Improvement, and did we not want something within, we should not endeavor
toward any thing without. And accordingly God, the self-sufficiency of whose
Nature excludes all want of Indigency, is by no means capable of Love of
Concupiscence.

9 Again I acknowledge that even Love of Benevolence or Charity may be, and
(such is our Present Infirmity) is for the most part occasioned by Indigence,
and when unravel'd to the bottom concludes in self-love. Our Charity not only
begins at home, but for the most part ends there too. For it must be confessed
that we generally love others with respect to our own interest, and dispense
kindnesses upon the consideration of common Infirmity, and that both the
Condition and the Releif may be our own another day.

10 I do also further acknowledge that things are so happily twisted and
complicated together, that a man cannot benefit another without doing some
kindness to himself, either in the Consequence and final issue of things, or in
the very act of Benefaction, it being not only a Pleasure to do good to others,
but perhaps one of the greatest pleasures in the world. And this Pleasure is
withal inseparable from acts of kindness, so that it is as impossible for a man
to bestow a kindness to his Neighbor, without having it some way or other
redound to himself; as it is for the Sun to shine upon the Earth, without having
his light reflected back again toward his own Orb.

11 All this is true, and thus far I grant that Love proceeds from Indigence,
and that all love is self-love. But if the Meaning of the Assertion be that all
love of Benevolence does so necessarily depend upon Indigence and so
necessarily point to self interest, that were not a man Indigent himself, and
had an eye to his own advantage, he could not possibly wish well or do well to
another, in this sense I deny that all love is self love. And I think not
without just reason. For first there is nothing in the Nature of the thing to
hinder but that there may be a pure and disinteressed Benevolence. For I
consider that the good of another considered as another may be the object of
volition as well as ones own. For the object of Volition is good in common, or
that which is agreeable to any Intellectual being, whether ones self or any
other. But now good as another or to another, is good as well as ones own, and
therefore may be the object of Volition, and consequently we may will good to
another independently on our own Interest.

12 If it be objected that there is no such thing as Pure Malice, for when we
wish ill to another we consider his evil as making for own good, and therefore
why should there be any such thing as Pure Benevolence. I answer, the
difference lies in this. That in Malice the thing which we wish to another is
evil. Now evil being not any way desirable whether to ones self or another,
as evil, it must in order to eligibility be considerd under the formality of
good in some respect or other. But now it cannot have the formality of good
with respect to our Neighbor, for to him we wish it as Evil. It must therefore
appear good with reference to our selves. That is, we consider another evil as
making for our good some way or other, and so will it to him. But now in
Charity or Benevolence the thing which we will to another being supposed to be
good already, there is no cessity that in order to the willing of it we should
further consider it under the formality of being our own. The Nature of good in
Common being sufficient for that. And this I conceive to be the reason that
although there cannot be a Pure and uninteressed Malice, yet there may be a
Pure and uninteressed Charity.

13 Besides, this Love of Benevolence is frequently exercised without any
design of Prospect, nay sometimes where there is no possibility of any self
advantage. This is plain in God, who as he is the most self-sufficient and
unbenefitable, so is he also the most Beneficient and Communicative Being. And
I question not but that it may be so in Men also. For not to mention our doing
kindnesses to those, whom we are certain never to see again, to dying persons,
who cannot live to requite us, or to the living when we our selves are dying,
and cannot live to be requited, and the like, I only consider, that we often
rejoice at the Happiness of those who were born and lived before us, and hear
with pleasure the successes of good Men, with whom (as being of another Age)
our Interest cannot be at all concerned. Now what we rejoice at we do
implicitly and vertually Will, for nothing can be matter of Joy which is not
according to our will.

14 Lastly I consider that if all Benevolence did necessarily spring from
Indigence and self-love, then it would certainly follow that our Inclination to
do good would be continually abated as our Fortune rises, and we make nigher
advances to Full-ness and Self-sufficiency. But now I dare appeal to Common
Observation and Experience, whether there be not many generous Spirits, who
retain the same Propension to be beneficial, when they are set at the greatest
distance from Poverty, as they had before when at the lowest Ebb, which yet
could never be, if Benevolence did necessarily depend on Indigence. More I
might add, but this I thing sufficient to show that all Love is not, as some
pretend, resolvable into Self-love, or Founded upon Indigence, and consequently
that my Division of Benevolence into Self Love and Charity is sufficiently
accurate and contra-distinct.

THE SECOND PART Of the Discourse WHICH CONTAINS THE MEASURES whereby our Love
is to be regulated.

Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be
stayed,

Job. 38.11. PART. II.
SECT. I. That Love requires some Measures of Regulation, and why love as
Dirigible is made the subject of Morality rather than understanding.
1 HAving finished the Theory of Love, I come now to consider the Measures of
its Regulation. A great and important work this; for next to the Regulating of
our Love, I know nothing either more difficult or more useful and necessary,
than to prescribe Measures how it ought to be Regulated. Indeed it is very
Necessary to six the Bounds of Regulating our Love; and that both because of
the Difficulty of Loving Regularly, and because of the Moment and Consequence
of it.

2 For the Difficulty, as it is impossible not to love at all, so is it one of
the Hardest things in the world to love well. Solus sapiens scit Amare, says
the Stoic, The wise man only knows how to Love. And there are very few of these
wise Men in the World, and to love regularly is oftentimes more than the wisest
of us all can do. For first the Appetite which we have to good in General is so
strong and Craving that it hurries us on to all sorts and degrees of Particular
good, and makes us fasten wherever we can trace the least Print or Foot-step of
the universal good. Now this Promiscuous and Indefinite prosecution of
Particular goods must needs oftentimes engage us in sin and irregularity. For
though these particular objects of Love separately considered are good, as
being Participations of the universal good, yet considered as they stand in
relation either to one another or to the universal, they may become evil, in as
much as there may be a Competition, and the the lesler may hinder the greater.
As for instance, The pleasure of sense (as indeed all Pleasure) singly and
separately considered is good, but the enjoyment of it may in some
circumstances be against a greater good, the good of Society, and then it is
evil as in Fornication or Adultery. But now we are so violently pushed on to
Particular good, by that General Thirst after good in Common, that we don't
mind how things are in Combination, but only how they are singly and separately
in themselves. For to observe how things are in Combination requires thought
and Reflection, which in this Hurry we are not at leisure to make, but to find
how things are Singly in themselves there needs nothing but direct Taste and
natural sensation. Whence it comes to pass that we more readily do the one than
the other, and so are very apt to transgress order, and to love irregularly.

3 This is one ground of the Difficulty of Loving well, and as I conceive a
very considerable one, though no one that I know of did ever assign this as the
cause of this difficulty. But there is also another. For as from the love of
good in general we are eagerly carried out to Particular goods, so from the
Original Pravity and Degeneracy of our Nature, among all these Particular
goods, that which we most eagerly propend to, is sensual good. The Lower life
is now highly invigorated and awakened in us, the Corruptible Body (as the wise
man complains) presses down the Soul, and the Love, which we have to good in
general, does now by the Corruption of our Nature almost wholly display and
exert it self in the prosecution of this one Particular good, the good of Sense.

4. Now though good of Sense be as truly good as good of the Intellect, as
being a Rivulet of the same Sea, and a Ray of the same Sun, yet (as I said
before) it may in some Circumstances and Combinations cross and thwart some
higher Interest, and so become Evil. And the strong inclination, which we now
have to the good of Sense in general, will often betray us into the love and
enjoyment of it in those particular circumstances wherein it is evil, and
against Order. And that oftentimes, even when we consider it as Evil, that is,
when we do not only mind it as it is singly in it self, but as it is in a
certain Combination. For this Sensual Concupiscence in us may be so strong,
that though we do actually consider a sensual pleasure so circumstantiated as
Evil, yet we may for that time think it a lesser Evil than to deny our selves
the gratification of so importunate an Appetite, and so choose it, and be guilty
of an exorbitant and irregular Love.

5 And if we further consider how we are perpetually sorrounded with sensible
goods, which by Troops thrust themselves upon us, while those that are
Intellectual require our Search and Inquisition, how early they attack us, and
what deep impressions they make upon our then tender Faculties, how much the
Animal part is aforehand with the Rational, that we live the life of Plants and
Beasts before we live the life of men, and that not only in the sense of
Aristotle, while we are in the Womb, but long after we have beheld the Sun,
that the Seducer Eve is Formed while Adam sleeps, and that sensuality comes to
be Adult and Mature, when our Discourses are but young and imperfect. So that
by that time we arrive to some competent use of our Reason, there has been laid
in such a stock of Animal impressions, that it is more than work enough for our
riper Age, even to unravel the prejudices of our youth, and unlive our former
life; I say if we consider this, the Difficulty of Regular love will appear so
great, that instead of admiring at the ill course of the World, one should
rather be tempted to wonder that men love so regularly as they do. So great
Reason had the Stoic to say, The wise man only knows how to love.

6 But were it only a piece of Difficulty to steer the Ship right, and were
there not also danger of splitting against Rocks, and of other ill
Contingencys, the Pilot might yet be secure and unconcerned, commit himself to
his Pillow, and his Vessel to the Winds. But it is otherwise, there is Moment
and Consequence in Loving regularly as well as Difficulty. No less a thing than
Happiness depends upon it, private Happiness and public Happiness, the
Happiness of single Persons, and the the Happiness of the Community, the
Happiness of this world, and the Happiness of the next.

7 For as Motion is in the Natural, so is Love in the Moral world. And as the
good state of the Natural World depends upon those Laws of Regular Motion,
which God has established in it, in so much that there would need nothing else
to bring all into confusion and destruction, but the irregular Motion of those
Bodies which it consists of, so does the welfare and happy state of the
Intellectual world depend upon the Regularity of Love. According as this Motion
proceeds, so is the Moral world either an Harmonical Frame, or a disorderly
Chaos, and there needs nothing but the Irregularity of Love to undermine the
Pillars of Happiness, and to put the Foundations of the Intellectual World out
of Course. And accordingly we see that God who loves Order, and takes care for
the perfection of both worlds, has prescribed both Laws of Motion and Laws of
Love. And for the same reason it is a thing of great importance and necessity to
state these Laws and Measures, the welfare of the Moral world being as much
concerned in Love, as that of the natural is in Motion.

8 And this is the Reason why Love as Dirigible is made the subject of Morality
rather than understanding. For the Happiness of life is not so much concerned
in the Acts of our understanding, as in the Acts of our Love; indeed not at all
in our understanding any further, than as our understanding affects our Love,
and opinion influences practice. And then indeed it is, which is the ground of
that Obligation to Orthodoxy, which we are under as to those Articles of Faith
which are called Fundamental. Otherwise in matters of pure Speculation the
happiness of Society is not at all concerned in what we think, as for instance
in that Celebrated Mathematical Problem, whether the pertual Approximation of
some lines be consistent with the impossibility of their Concourse, what does
it signify to the good estate of Society which way this be held? It Is
indifferent therefore which side we take. But now we cannot advance one step in
the Motion of Love, but something or other comes on it in relation to Political
Happiness, as there is not the least Motion in Nature but what tends either to
Generation or Corruption. For the difference is this, the Acts of our
understanding are Immanent, and ineffective of any alteration upon things
without us, but the Acts of Love are Transient, and leave external and
permanent effects behind them in the course of things, and for this reason
Love, as Dirigible, is made the Immediate and proper subject of Moral
consideration, and understanding is here no otherwise concerned than as it
influences and determines our love. What the Measures of regulating our love
are, I come now to define.

SECT. II. The Measures of Love of Concupiscence, all reduced to these two
general Heads, what we must desire, and what we may desire; The Measures of
these, both in general and in Particular. Whether sensual Pleasure be in its
self evil, with an account of the true Notion of Original Concupiscence and of
Mortification.
1 BEing now to define the Measures of Love, I shall first begin with Love of
Concupiscence. And here I consider that Duty and Liberty divide between them
the Bounds of Morality, which ought wholely to be taken up in the consideration
of these two things, what we must or ought to do, and what we may do without
being Peccant. And accordingly I shall reduce all the Measures of Love of
Concupiscence to these two general Heads, what we must desire, and what we may
desire.

2 Concerning the first, all that we must desire will I suppose be comprehended
under these three, God, the good of the Community, and all those things which
have a Natural Connection with it. God, as the greatest and last End Absolutely
and Simply, the good of the Community, as the greatest of Subordinate Ends, and
all those things which have a Natural Connection with it, as Means without which
it is not to be obtained. Wherein is also comprehended the obligation of not
desiring, or avoiding whatever has naturally a contrary or opposite Tendency.

3 The first thing which we must love or desire is God. But now God may be
loved two ways, either confusely and implicitly, or distinctly and explicitly.
The confuse and implicit Love of God is Natural and necessary, for it is the same
with the love of good in common or Happiness, to which our Nature is Originally
and invincibly determined, and consequently cannot be Morally obliged. But that
which we are here obliged to, is to love or desire him distinctly and
explicitly, that is, to contract and concentre that Natural and Original Love,
which we have to good in general or happiness, upon God, as being the true and
only cause of all that happiness, to which we so blindly and necessarily aspire.

4 The love of God therefore, to which we are obliged, includes two things, a
Desire and an Explicit desire of him. And this indeed is the only Love of him
to which we can be Morally obliged. For as to loving him confusely, that we
cannot be obliged to, because it is necessary and unavoidable; and as to loving
him with love of Benevolence or wishing well to, that we cannot be obliged to
because it is unpracticable; The former we cannot be obliged to, because of the
condition of our own Nature, and the latter we cannot be obliged to, because of
the Nature of God.

I know very well that I am singular in this Point, and that nothing is more
common, among those that treat of the love of God, than to talk of it as of a
love of Benevolence, and accordingly they always express our Love to God, and
our Love to our Neighbor under the same common Appellation of Charity, as if
they were both one and the same love, whereby we love God, and whereby we love
our Neighbor. But there is I remember an old Rule, that we may talk with the
Many, but must think with the Few, and I think it is very applicable in this
case. For however we may use the word Charity in respect of God, to comply with
popular modes of speaking, yet I cannot see how in strictness and propriety of
Notion God may be loved with Love of Benevolence. For certainly as Indigence in
the Lover is the ground of his loving with love of Concupiscence, so Indigence
in the Person loved is the ground of our loving him with love of Benevolence.
But now what can we wish to God that he has not already? My goodness extends
not to thee, Psalm. 16.
but to the Saints which are in the Earth, says the Psalmist, and to speak
truly we can no more love God with love of Benevolence, than he can love us
with love of Desire. God is as much above this our Love as he is above our
understanding, He can indeed wish well to us, but we can only Desire him.

6 And I observe that in Scripture our Love of God is set forth in such
expressions as import not any Benevolence to him, but a Desire of him. As when
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 42.
like as the Heart desires the Waterbrooks, so longs my Soul after thee O
God; And again; My Soul is a thirst for God, when shall I come to appear before
the Presence of God? Psalm. 119.
And again, My Soul breaks out for fervent Desire. Again, whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I Desire in Comparison of
thee. Psalm. 73.
And so again in the Canticles which express the very Soul and Spirit of Divine
Love, says the enamored Spouse, the Church, Let him kiss me with the kisses
of his Mouth, 1.2.
for thy love is better than Wine. Again, Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves,
1.7.
where thou feedest. But most emphatically of all, when She says, I charge you
O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, 5.8.
tell him, that I am sick of Love. Thus again the Angel expresses the Seraphic
temper of Daniel, by calling him A man of Desires; Dan. 10.
For so the Hebrew Critics choose to read it. I shall mention but one place
more, and that is in the 2 of Tim. where the Apostle describing a sort of
wicked men, says of them, that they are (...), Lovers of Pleasure more than
Lovers of God. Which plainly intimates that our Love of God is of the same sort
with that love wherewith we love Pleasure; But now we don't love Pleasure with
Love of Benevolence, but only with Love of Desire, and consequently that is the
Love wherewith we love God.

7 If it be here objected that though there be no room for wishing well to God
Formally and Directly, yet we may rejoice and take a Complacency in those
Perfections of his, which make him incapable of our more express Benevolence,
which will amount (as was urged before) to an implicit and vertual willing them
to him, I answer, that what we rejoice at we do implicitly will, if it be in a
Being who either might not have had that Happiness, or holds it precariously
and may hereafter be deprived of it, For here is still some Indigence in the
Person to make him capable of our good wishes; But now the Happiness of God is
as necessary as his Existence, and consequently however we may rejoice in his
being Happy, we can no more will him to be Happy, than we can will him to
exist. For to will him to be happy necessarily supposes, that he has not the
perfect Possession of that Happiness which we will him, for if he has, why do
we yet will it to him? Here therefore is no room for Benevolence. Nay I do not
conceive how we can wish well to God so much as ex Hypothesi, on supposition
that he were not happy in that respect wherein we would wish well to him. For
the Supposition is impossible, and takes away the very Subject of our
Benevolence. For if God were not completely Happy, he would not be what he is,
but some other Being.

8 I would by no means straiten or retrench our Love to God, but am rather for
enlarging and multiplying its Channels as much as may be, and therefore if any
think that God may be loved with Love of Benevolence, Let them enjoy and (if
they can) act according to their Notion. For my part I cannot bring my self to
any clear conception of it, and I am very scrupulous in venturing upon any
thing whereof I have no distinct Idea. Which ought to be Apology sufficient for
me, if I make Love of Desire to be the only Love, wherewith we are obliged to
love God.

9 And that we are obliged thus to love him, I shall briefly make out from the
consideration of our own Nature, and from the Nature of God. As to our own
Nature, I consider that our Thirst after good or Happiness in general is so
natural, so necessary, and so vehement, that as at present we can neither
suspend, nor moderate, nor in the least interrupt it, so we can never expect
fully to quench or extinguish it, but in the enjoyment of that Object, which
has all that happiness in it, on which the whole Bent of our Soul is so
strongly set.

10 From the strength and invincible necessity of this our Inclination to good
in general, I conceive 'twill follow that it is highly Reasonable, that that
Being wherein is all this happiness, to which we indefinitely are inclined,
ought to be loved and desired expressly by us, and not only so, but with the
very same love wherewith we love happiness it self. For otherwise we should
contradict our first and grand Appetite, and act against the very Frame and
Constitution of our Nature.

11 This admitted, I consider secondly that God is that Full and rich Being,
that has all this happiness in him. He is not only the Cause of all good, but
the very Essence and Nature of it. He is (as the Divine Philosopher styles him)
(...) good it self, Lovely it self, and Desirable it self. He is indeed the
First Desirable as well as the First Intelligible, and as we see and understand
all things in him, so in him we desire all that we desire. In short, he is the
Complement and perfection of good, the End and the Center of the whole
Intelligent Creation, and all that we can desire or enjoy; and consequently as
we cannot Love beyond him, so we ought not to love short of him. St. Austin has
words to this purpose worth Citing. Summa Bonorum Deus. Neque infra remanendum
nobis est, neque ultra quaerendum. Alterum enim periculosum, alterum nullum
est- God is the Sum of all good. We are neither to fix on this side of him, nor
to seek any thing beyond him, Lib. De Mor. Eccl.
the former is dangerous, and the latter is nothing.

12 And as we are obliged to love God, so ought we to love him beyond all other
things whatsoever. We cannot indeed love him as he is lovely at all, nor can we
love him to our utmost till we shall see him as he is, but we may and must now
prefer him in our love. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
with all thy Soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; so runs the
Commandment. And very just we should. For if even in Particular goods Order
requires that the most lovely should be loved most, much more ought we to love
him who is the very Essence of good, good it self, beyond all Derivative and
secondary good. For there is here no Proportion or Comparison at all.

13 And for the same cause we can never love God too much. As moderation has
here no excellence, so excess has here no place. An Infinite Desirable can
never be too much desired. God is the Measure of all Love, every thing being
lovely only so far as it participates of him, and consequently the Measure of
loving him is to love him without Measure. The Philosopher says well in his
Politics, that the Appetite of the End is always without end or Term, Lib. 1.
cap. 6.
and that bounds and stints are only in those things that are in order to the
End. God therefore being our End we can never love him to excess, no nor the
Angels in Heaven neither. Indeed the thing is Absolutely as well as Relatively
impossible, for as the Narrowness of our Nature will hinder us from loving him
enough, so the infinite Fullness of his own makes him incapable of being loved
too much.

14. And thus much for the Love of God. The next thing that we are to desire is
the good of the Community. This next to God is the greatest possible good. For
it is the good of the whole, than which nothing can be greater. The good of the
Community is the End, the Measure, the Accomplishment and the final result of
all private goods. Hither they all point, and here they all conspire and
concentre. And consequently this is the greatest Beauty, the greatest Order,
and the greatest Harmony that can possibly result from the Creature, and is the
very next Resemblance of the Perfection of God, who is all in all.

15 This therefore being the greatest Delectable good in it self, it ought to
be so also to us, who are to love and desire this good of the Community beyond
all private good whatsoever. Nay we ought to desire private good no further
than as it is conducive to, or at least consistent with the Public Interest. For
I consider Society as a Musical Instrument, consisting of variety of strings of
different sizes, and strained up to different pitches, some of whose Sounds,
though ungrateful in some junctures, are yet Musical as they stand in relation
to others, and in order to a Common design. Now tho it is Natural to desire the
grateful sound of every string singly, were this equally conducing to the
harmony of the whole, yet certainly no body is so unreasonably absurd, as to
desire that this or that Discord should be turned into a sound singly more
grateful, to the prejudice of the general harmony, which is of infinitely
greater Consequence, than the single gratefulness of one or two Particular
Strings.

16 And this is the Case of us men in Society, and this ought to be our
measure. We ought to consider our selves as so many strings of one great
Instrument, and not affect any Pitch or Degree more grateful to our selves, to
the prejudice of the common harmony, the good of the Community, which is the
most delectable good, and ought by us to be most Cordially tendered, and
Principally regarded. Especially considering that this is the good which God
himself chiefly proposes, and principally regards both in the Creation and
government of the nniverse.

17 And now since the Desire of the End necessarily includes the Desire of the
Means, the next Object of our Desire must be all things which have a Natural
Connection with the good of the Community. And here it is supposed in the first
place, that there are some things that have this Natural connection with it. And
it is necessary so to suppose. For as God cannot make a natural World according
to any particular system whatsoever, but there will necessarily arise upon it
some certain Relations and habitudes of agreement and disagreement; some
Motions will naturally make for its order and Perfection, and some against it.
So is it impossible for God to make an Intellectual word, that is, to
constitute Society in any particular condition, Scheme or posture, but
Relations of agreeable and disagreeable will naturally and necessarily arise;
some things will naturally make for its order and convenience, and some things
will be as naturally contrary to it. And this without any arbitrary
interposition of God by the mere natural result and necessity of things. For to
recur again to the instance of a Musical Instrument, let an Instrument be so
and so made, so and so strung, and so and so tuned, and some certain strokes
upon it will necessarily be harmonical, and other some as necessarily
disharmonical. But now let the Instrument be tuned another way, and the
Relations of convenience and disconvenience will alter, the same strokes, that
were before disharmonical, may be now harmonical, and so on the contrary. But
yet still some strokes will be naturally agreeable and some disagreeable, let
the Instrument be set which way you please. The Application of this to Society
is too obvious to insist upon.

18 To proceed therefore, it being supposed that there are some things, which
have a natural connection with the good of the Community, the next obligation of
our Love will be, that whatsoever has this natural connection be willed and
desired by us. For as the good of the Community is the greatest Delectable
good, so that which has a natural Connection with it is the greatest Proffitable
good, and is therefore to be loved with the same love wherewith we love the
good of the Community it self, wherein is also implied that whatever has an
opposite Relation is in the same manner to be hated and abhorred. For this is
the general Reason of Moral good and Evil, of Virtue and Vice, and the Prime
Fundamental Law of Nature, which never can cease of expire, however the
Particular Instances may change according to the variation of the Intellectual
Systeme: As I have more fully shown in another Discourse, Consid. upon the
Nature of Sin.
and shall therefore here no further enlarge upon it.

19. And now because with relation to the present posture of the Intellectual
world, there are some particular things in Specie, which have this natural
connection with the interest of the Community, such as Justice, Temperance,
Fortitude, Patience, Humility, Veracity, Fidelity and the like; hence it comes
to pass that these are to be loved and willed by us, by virtue of that general
Canon, that whatever naturally serve to the good of the Community is to be
loved, to which these are reduced as special Instances and exemplifications.

20 But I do not think my self obliged to descend to a particular prosecution
of these or any other virtues, it being not my design to insist upon
Particulars, but only to lay down such general Principles, upon which a more
Particular Scheme of Morality may be erected, or into which those Particular
Morals which are already extant may and ought to be resolved. And besides
having brought the Reader into the Road, I think I may now be excused from
attending him any further, and shall therefore advance to some other Theoryes
of more remote and uncommon observation.

21 Having therefore fixed the general Bounds of Duty by showing what we must
desire, I proceed to consider the Bounds of Liberty by showing what we may
desire. Now the Measures of this are either General or Particular. The general
Measures are two. The First is, that we may desire any thing that is not
contrary to what we must desire. From this arises the second general Measure,
which is that we may desire any thing that is not contrary or Prejudicial to
the good of Society.

22 Now as to the Particular Measures, there is too much variety in them to be
all minutely and punctually considered. And besides it would be a needless as
well as a tedious undertaking. I shall therefore only touch upon the more
considerable Instances, and such as have not been made the subject of ordinary
speculation. And the first Instance of our Liberty which I shall consider, is
that we may desire Pleasure. First because the Desire of it is Necessary and
invincible, implanted in us by the Author of our Nature, and which we can no
more divest our selves of, than we can of any the most essential part of our
constition. 2ly Because pleasure as such in the common Nature of it is singly
and simply good, and in no respect or combination evil. It is singly and simply
good, because convenient and agreeable, and in no respect or combination evil,
because as such not against the good of the Community.

23 For if pleasure as such were against the good of the Community, then every
Particular pleasure would be so, because every particular Pleasure partakes of
the common nature of pleasure, which would then be enough to render it evil,
the least defect being a sufficient reason to make any thing so. But now this
is so far from being true, that not only some Pleasures are laudable and
excellent, but on the contrary no particular pleasure is evil so far as
Pleasure, but only by reason of some accidental Combinations and Circumstances,
wherein some higher Interest is opposed by it. Now this is so far from making
against Pleasure, that it makes strongly for it. For if the enjoyment of
particular pleasures be then only and in such Instances and Circumstances
restrained, when the interest of some greater Happiness is thereby crossed, it
follows that pleasure it self is a thing principally regarded and provided for
by God; and consequently that it is good in it self, and therefore may be
desired by us.

24 So much as to the Desire of Pleasure in general, or as such. Now concerning
Particular Pleasures I propose these two general Canons, which I think will
hold in all Instances whatsoever. First that that Pleasure which has no trouble
or pain annexed, may, nay indeed cannot but be embraced; as on the contrary,
that Pain which has no Pleasure annexed is to be avoided. The other Canon is,
that that pleasure which either hinders a greater pleasure, or causes a greater
pain is to be nill'd and avoided, as on the contrary that pain which either
takes off a greater Pain, or causes a greater pleasure is to be willed and
embraced. By these two general Canons we are to regulate our desire of
particular pleasures.

25 But now of Particular Pleasures, some are Intellectual and some are
Sensual. As to Intellectual Pleasures there is no question to be made, but that
any of them may be desired as to their kind, only there are some Measures to be
observed with reference to their Degree, Time, Place, and other Circumstances
which are too numerous to define, and withal too obvious to need it, and may
therefore be left to the Discretion of common Prudence to determine according
to the two preceding general Canons.

26 But now concerning sensual pleasure, especially that eminent Species of it
which we call Venereal, there is more difficulty. Of this it may be doubted
whether it be in its self Evil or no. Some we know among the Ancients have
expressly thought so, and upon this ground have condemned the use of Marriage,
as namely, the Sect of the Essenes among the Jews, Tatianus, Marcion,
Manichaeus and others. And though these were censured as Heretics, yet nothing
more common even among Orthodox and approved Writers, than to let fall such
expressions, from which the same conclusion will follow. For when they tax the
immorality of some particular instances of Sensual Pleasure (suppose Adultery
or Fornication) they don't ground their charge wholely upon those Civil
inconveniences, which either of them bring upon Society in their respective
Circumstances, but resolve part of their immorality into sensuality as such,
abstracted from those other ill Consequences. They condem them not only as
unjust, as injurious, as inconvenient to the Public, etc. but also as Sensual:
Now if any particular sensual pleasure be evil as sensual, then 'twill
unavoidably follow that sensual pleasure as such is evil.

27 And that it is so, a man might be further induced to think, when he
observes that in the Divine Writings (not to say any thing of our Common way of
Discourse) such peculiar Epithets of Infamy are given to certain Instances of
sensual Pleasure, which can belong to them on no other score than as as
Sensual. Nay and as if here lay the very Point of the Immorality, they often
receive a Denomination from the Sensual Pleasure, but never from the injustice,
unfaithfulness or the like. Thus is Adultery called the sin of Uncleanness. And
Adulterers are common called unclean Persons, Filthy, brutish, etc. In like
manner David in his Penitentials for that sin insists chiefly upon the sensual
part of it, and accordingly speaks of washing, cleansing, and making clean.
From all which a man would be tempted to gather that the Moral ilness of
Adultery were at least partly to be resolved into the sensuality of it, and
consequently that sensual pleasure is in it self or as such evil.

28 And this seems yet more probable from the consideration of a certain
Instance of Sensual Pleasure, wherein there seems to be nothing besides the
mere sensuality. As namely voluntary Pollution. And yet this is universally
condemned as immoral, and consequently sensual pleasure seems to be in it self
evil.

29. As it does yet further from those sharp invectives, which the Moral
writers of all ages have ever used against it as a low, base, brutish and
dishonorable thing, and from that Shame which naturally attends it, even in
Circumstances professedly lawful, whereby men seem naturally conscious of some
Moral incongruity in the thing purely as such.

30 But now to all this I need oppose but these two things. First that if
sensual pleasure were evil in it self or as such, it would be so in all its
Instances. This is an undeniable Consequence. But now that it is not so in all
its Instances, is plain from the Divine Institution of Marriage. And therefore
it is not evil in its self. For it must not be thought (as some seem to fancy)
that Marriage makes that good which was in it self evil. For if once evil in it
self, it must eternally and universally be so, and consequently even in
Marriage it self, that as to Sensual Pleasure being the same with Fornication
or Adultery. But sensual pleasure is not evil in Marriage, therefore not in it
self or as such. This is Demonstration.

31 To this I further add that even the grossest Pleasure of Sense, is one of
the remoter Participations of God. For it must be granted to be at least a
Natural good, and every particular good be it what it will, is a Ray and
Emanation of the universal good. But now nothing of God can be simply and
absolutely evil. And besides, I consider that in the Human frame God has
prepared Organs and Instruments for the use of Sensual Pleasure, and that he
has also given us Natural Appetites and Inclinations to it. Whereby it appears
that God has provided for the gratification of the Animal as well as the Divine
life. And though this is to be chiefly nourished, yet the other is not to be
starved. For it is a Tree of Gods own planting, and therefore the Fruit of it
may be good for Food, as well as Fair to the eye. For there can be nothing
simply evil in the Paradise of God. As it is finely made out by the excellent
Doctor More in several places of his Conjectura Cabalistica, where the Reader
may find this Argument copiously and very excellently managed.

32 I conclude therefore that Sensual Pleasure is not in its own simple Nature
evil, and Consequently that no Particular Instance of it is evil barely as
being Sensual (for if so then sensual pleasure as such would be evil) but only
as it stands invested with some Circumstances, which make it inconsistent with
some higher good, the good of society. Thus in voluntary Pollution there is a
deordination from the End of Nature, Generation, and herein consists its evil,
not in its being a sensual pleasure. And accordingly we find that those other
Pleasures of sense, which are not appropriated by Nature to any peculiar end,
are in their use wholely indifferent, as using rich Perfumes, drinking
delicious Wines, etc. Thus again in Fornication, though the end of generation
may be here served, yet the ends of Convenient Education cannot. And herein
lies the evil of this, not in its being an act of sensuality or a sensual
Pleasure.

33 But because there are some that are ready to call in question the natural
immorality of simple Fornication, and those that do allow it are scarce
resolved where to fix it, 'twill not be amiss to prosecute this a little
further. The best Account that I know of this matter, is that which is given by
Tho. Aquinas, Lib. 3. con. gent. cap. 122.
and indeed I think it very Full, rational and satisfactory. And because I
cannot do it in better words, I will give it in his own. It is to be considered
(says he) that in those Animals, in which the Female alone is sufficient for
the bringing up of the young, the Male and Female after Copulation remain no
time together, as in Dogs. But among those Animals in which the Female is not
sufficient for the bringing up of the young, the Male and Female after
Copulation remain together, as long as is necessary for the Education and
Instruction of the young. As it appears in some Birds, whose young ones cannot
get their living presently after they are brought forth. For since Birds don't
nourish their young with milk (which Nature has made ready at hand, as in
Beasts) but are forced to go forage abroad for Meat, and besides to cherish
their young while they feed them, the Female would not be sufficient alone for
all this. And therefore by the order of Providence the Male among such
Creatures is Naturally inclined to abide with the Female for the Education of
the young. Now it is plain that in Human kind the Woman would by no means
suffice alone for the Education of the Child, since the necessity of Human life
requires many things which cannot be supplied by one only. It is therefore
convenient according to Human Nature that the Man after Conjunction should
abide by the Woman, and not presently depart, and take up indifferently with
any body, as it is among those that Fornicate. Neither will the case be altered
by the woman's being so rich as to be able to nourish her child by ber self.
Because the Natural Rectitude of Human actions is not to be measured according
to those things, which happen by Accident in one Individual, but according to
those things which follow the whole Species. Again it is to be considered, that
in Human kind the Offspring does not only need nourishment as to the body,
like other Animals, but also Instruction as to the Soul. For other Animals have
Natural Instincts by which they may provide for themselves. But now man lives
by Reason, and must attain to discretion by long experience. Whence it becomes
necessary that Children be instructed by their experienced Parents. Nor are
they capable of this Instruction as soon as they are born, but after a
considerable time, and chiefly when they come to years of Discretion. For to
this Instruction a great deal of time is required, and even then too by reason
of the violence of Passion by which the Judgment is perverted, they will want
not only to be instructed, but to be subdued. Now for this the Woman alone is
not sufficient, but this is rather to be the work of the Man, whose Reason is
better able to instruct, and his strength to Correct. It Is necessary therefore
in Human kind to take care of the Offspring not for a short time as in Birds,
but for a considerable space of life. And therefore whereas it is necessary in
all Creatures that the Male abide with the Female as long as the Office of the
Male is requisite for the Offspring, it is natural to mankind that the Man
associate not for a little while but always with one determinate woman. And
this Society we call Matrimony. Matrimony is therefore natural to mankind. And
Fornicarious mixture, which is besides Matrimony, is against the good of Man,
and for this reason must of necessity be a sin.

34 Thus this excellent and most exact Theorist, whose words I should not have
transcribed at length, were they not of more than ordinary weight and moment.
By this it appears, that Simple Fornication is naturally immoral, and wherein
its Immorality lies. Not in its being a Sensual Pleasure, but in its being so
circumstantiated as not to comport with the good of society. And what I observe
here in particular of simple Fornication, the same may be said of any other
forbidden Instance of Sensual Pleasure, that they are not evil as sensual, but
upon the Consideration of some Accident or Circumstance, whereby they interfere
with the Public interest.

35 To the Objections therefore on the other side I answer, first that it must
be owned that nothing is more common, even among approved Writers, than when
they tax the immorality of some particular Instances of sensual pleasure to
condemn them under the Formality of their being sensual. But herein is their
mistake, and if men will talk confusedly of things, and assign false causes for
true ones, who can help it?

36 To the second I answer, that when the Scripture gives such peculiar
Epithetes of Infamy to some instances of sensual pleasure, that can belong to
them on no other score than as sensual, it must be confessed that the sensual
part is then taxed. But then this is not, must not be understood as to the
kind, but as to the Degree. Not the degree of Pleasure, but the degree of
Affection, it being a plain Argument, that men are too much set upon Sensual
Pleasure, when for the sake of it they will adventure to gransgress Order, and
trespass against the good of Society. And this indeed is a culpable sensuality.

37 To the third I answer, that in that certain condemned Instance of sensual
pleasure wherein there seems to be nothing besides the mere sensual perception,
there is really something besides, tho not according to a Physical, yet
according to a Moral Estimation. For it is not barely a sensual pleasure, but a
sensual pleasure deordinated from the end of God and Nature, namely,
generation, for which it was designed. And in this Deordination not in the
sensuality consists its natural evil and Moral Turpitude.

38 To the fourth I answer that those severe declamations which the Moralists
of all Ages have made against sensual pleasure in general, as a low, base,
brutish and dishonorable thing, must either be understood Comparatively, with
respect to the higher character of Intellectual Pleasures, or they are ill
grounded and unreasonable. And then as to the shame, which naturally attends
the acting of this sensual pleasure in all its instances, though it may in the
first place be questioned whether this shame be from Nature or no, and not
rather from Education and Arbitrary usages, yet for the present I will suppose
it natural, and the Account of it I conceive must be this, it being a thing of
vast consequence and Moment to the interest of Sociable life, that man should
be propagated in a decent and regular way, and not as Brutes are, God thought
it convenient for this purpose to imbue our Natures with this impression of
shame with respect to venereal pleasure in general. Not because this sensual
delectation is in its own nature simply evil, but lest our Inclination to
sensual pleasure in general should betray us into those instances of it which
are so. Which this natural impression was intended as a curb to prevent. By all
which it plainly appears notwithstanding all the intricacy, wherewith some
confused Thinkers have entangled this matter, that Sensual, even the grossest
sensual pleasure cannot be in its own nature and as such evil, and consequently
that it may be desired by us in such convenient Circumstances, wherein no
higher good is opposed.

39 Now from this Hypothesis it will follow first, that Original Concupiscence
must be far otherwise stated than usually it is. It is commonly understood to
be a vicious disposition or Depravation of Nature, whereby we become inclined
to evil. Now if you ask, what evil. They tell you, it is Carnal or sensual
pleasure. But now (as it has been abundantly demonstrated) this is not simply
and in its own nature evil, but only as it is Circumstantiated. And this
original Concupiscence is not so particular (as being a blind Appetite) as to
point to sensual pleasure in this or that Circumstance, but is carried only to
sensual pleasure in common or as such. Which being not evil, neither can the
inclination that respects it be evil or sinful, every Act or Inclination being
specified from its Object. It must not be said therefore, that this Originary
Concupiscence, or natural Impression toward sensible good, is formally evil and
sinful, the most we can allow is, that it is an Occasion of evil, the strong
tendency we have to sensual pleasure in common, being very apt to betray us to
consent to the enjoyment of it in inconvenient Instances and Circumstances.

40 Another Consequent from the Premises is this, that the Duty and virtue of
Mortification does not consist (as it is vulgarly apprehended) in removing and
killing the natural Desire of sensual pleasure. For the natural Desire of
sensual pleasure is not evil, its Object not being so, and consequently not to
be eradicated. But that it consists in such a due Repression and Discipline of
the Body, that our natural desire of sensual pleasure in Common may not carry
us to the express willing of it in such instances as are against Order, and the
good of Society.

SECT. III. The Measures of Love of Benevolence, particularly of Self-love.
1 HAving prescribed some general Measures for the Regulation of the first
great Branch of Love, Love of Concupiscence, I come now to set bounds to the
other Arm of the same great Sea, Love of Benevolence. And because this is first
divided into Self-love and Charity, or wishing well to ones self, and wishing
well to some other Being, I shall in the first place state the Measures of
regulating self-love.

2 This sort of Love is generally the most irregular of any, and that which
causes irregularity in all the rest. We love our selves First, and last, and
most of all. Here we always begin, and here we most commonly end, and so
immoderate are we in it that we prosecute our own private interest, not only
without any respect to the Common good, but oftentimes in direct Opposition to
it, and so we can but secure to our selves a Plank, care not what becomes of
the Vessel we sail in. This is the great Sucker of Society, and that which
robbs the Body Politic of its due nourishment, and drains the Common Fountain
to feed our own lesser Streams. Nay so foolishly immoderate and inordinate are
we in the love of our selves, that we prefer our own little interest not only
before greater of the Public, but before greater of our own, and love our
Bodies better than our Souls, a lesser interest that is present better than a
greater that is distant, tho equally sure, and infinitely greater. In short, it is
from the inordinateness of this one Principle, Self-love, that we ruin the good
of the Community here, and our own selves both here and hereafter. Here
therefore is great need of Regulation.

3 Now I suppose the Measures of Self-love may all be reduced to this one in
general, viz. that self-love is never culpable, when upon the whole matter all
things being taken into the Account, we do truly and really love our selves.
It is then only culpable, when we love our selves by halves, and in some
particular respects only to our greater disadvantage in others of more
importance. And because this we generally do, hence it comes to pass that
self-love is commonly taken in a bad sense, as if 'twere a thing evil and
irregular in it self. But that is a mistake, Self-love is a Principle and
Dictate of Nature, and the Instrument of attaining to that Happiness, which is
the End of our Creation, and consequently can never be faulty, when upon the
whole matter all things considered, it is a true Love of our selves,

4 Now to make it so, three things are required. First that we do not mistake
our true selves by wishing well to, or consulting the welfare of our worser
part in prejudice to our better, by feeding the Brute and starving the Man.
This would be to love our selves in a little, and to hate our selves in much,
and would therefore upon the whole, better deserve the name of self-hatred than
self-love. If therefore we would love our selves truly and regularly, we must
learn in the first place not to mistake our true selves.

5 The next requisite is, that we do not mistake our true Interest, by willing
to our selves a lesser good, when the having it will cost us the loss of a
greater. This is properly that Foolish Exchange condemned by our B. Savior;
It Is to gain a World, and loose a Soul; and what gain's that? This is indeed
the Bargain of Fools and Madmen, and yet such Bargains we usually make, and
what adds to the folly, think that we love our selves all the while. But this
is not to love our selves truly, and therefore not Regularly.

6 The third and last Requisite for the Regulation of self-love is, that we do
not will any good to our selves, that is not consistent with the good of the
Community. And that not only because the Public good is of greater Consequence
than any Private good can be, but also because that which is against the good
of the Community, cannot be upon a final Consideration of things really for the
good of any Particular Person in it. For the good of the whole is the good of
the Part, and the evil of the whole is the evil of the Part, and all private
Interest is so twisted, complicated and imbarqued with the Public, that there
is no prejudicing this without prejudicing that. This indeed may not be the
present and immediate effect, but 'twill prove so in the consequence and final
upshot. For Society is like an Arch in a Building, where one Stone supports
another, and in supporting others they support themselves. And so on the
contrary, should they undermine one another, they would at length by
consequence undermine themselves. He therefore that out of love to himself
prosecutes any private interest to the Prejudice of Society, trespasses against
his own good as well as that of the Community, and when all is computed, cannot
be said truly and really to love himself. The Sum is, to make our self-love
Regular and according to Order, we must take care not to mistake our true
selves, nor our true Interest, and that we don't prejudice the Public welfare,
and then we can never love our selves too much.

SECT. IV. The Measures of Common Charity.
1 COncerning Common Charity. I consider that the Measures of it may all
briefly be absolved in these two, the Object of it, and the Order of it. As to
the Object of Charity, it is of a very great and diffused latitude, and takes in
first all men, whether good or bad, Friends or Enemies, Neighbors or
Strangers, and in all Respects, whether as to Soul or Body, name or goods etc.
It extends also in some Measure to the very Irrational Creatures, it being one
of the Characters of a good man in Scripture to be Merciful to his Beast. Nay
it reaches to the Angelical Natures themselves, and indeed to the whole
Intellectual, Rational and Sensitive world that are capable of the least degree
of Benefit.

2 In all this there is no Difficulty, only it may be here questioned, whether
the Devils and Damned Spirits are to be comprehended within the Sphere of our
Charity? To which I answer, that there are two things that may render any Being
incapable of being an Object of our Charity or wishing well to. Either Perfect
Fullness, or Perfect Indigence. Now it is the Perfection of Indigence to be
reduced to such a Degree of want as not to be in a Capacity of ever being
releiv'd. The former is the Condition of God, which makes him incapable of
being made the object of our Benevolence, as was observed before, the latter is
the case of Devils and Damned Spirits: And for this reason we cannot will any
good to them, as not being capable of any. For we cannot exert any act of Love
which we know to be in vain and to no purpose at all, let the incapacity
proceed either from extreme Fullness or extreme Indigence; for what is there
that should excite any such Act? And besides if we could possibly wish well to
such Beings, yet I don't see how we may do it lawfully and Regularly. For our
will would not be then conformable to Gods, but directly opposite to it, and
besides we should disapprove, at least tacitly and interpretatively, the
Justice of his ways, by thus loving them whom he extremely hates, and Blessing
them whom he curses and abandons for ever.

3 Thus far of the Object of our Charity. Now concerning the Order of it, let
these general Measures be observed. First that we wish well to him most, who is
most likely to be serviceable to the Public, supposing the good which we will
him, to be such, as by the having it, he become more capable of serving the
Public. Thus had I the Disposal of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, which is a
thing wherein the good of the Public is highly concerned, I ought certainly to
bestow it upon him who I thought would do most good in it. Tho at the same time
I had never so many Friends or Relations that wanted it. For this is a sure and
never failing Rule, that the good of the Public is always to be preferred
before any Private interest whatever.

4 Secondly that of two that are equally serviceable to the Public, we will
this good wherein the Public is concerned, to him that is most Indigent; for
after the Public exigence is provided for, private necessity comes in to be
regarded. But if both equally serviceable and equally Indigent, then we are to
will it to him that is most our Neighbor, Friend, or Relation, or any other
way indear'd to our Affection.

5 But thirdly, supposing the good to be such that the Interest of the Public
is not concerned who has it, then I am only to consult the good of the Person
to whom I will it, and consequently here Equity will require that the
Preference be given to those that are near me before strangers, and among those
that are near to those that are nearest, whether by Nature, Choice, or Place,
or in any other Respect. And among strangers it is equitable that the Indigent
be preferred in our Charity before the Rich, the good before the Bad, and the
more good before the less good, and the like. But still with this necessary
Reserve, that all other things be equal between them.

6 For 4ly, it is utterly unreasonable, that I should prefer the Convenience of
my Friend before the Necessity of my Enemy. No, I ought to do the contrary, and
prefer the Necessity of my worst enemy before the Convenience even of my
Dearest Friend. Thus I would leave my Friend in the Mire, to save my enemy from
drowning. For in this and such like cases the greatness of the Necessity
compensates for the want of merit in the Person.

7 The last general Measure that I shall prescribe is, that as we ought not to
prefer any man's convenience before another man's necessity, so neither ought
we to prefer any man's own convenience before his own necessity. My meaning is,
that we ought to consider our Neighbors true and best Interest, will and do
him that good which he stands most in need of, and not do him a little kindness
which will end in a greater mischief. Hence it follows that we ought to tender
the Interest of his Soul, more than the good of his Body; the Direction of his
conscience more than the ease and security of it; that we stick not to prick
and lance him in order to his Cure; and (when both cannot be done) that we
choose rather to proffit him than to please him. For this is true Charity, tho a
severer sort of it, and he is a Fool, who when saved from drowning, complains
of being plucked out of the water by the hair of his head.

SECT. V. The Measures of Friendship.
1 I Am now come to my last Stage, where I am to give Measures to the greatest
Rarity, and the greatest Excellency in all the world. For indeed among all
Human enjoyments nothing is so Rarely acquired, so Dearly possessed, and so
unhappily lost as a True Friend.

2 Indeed true Friendship is so great a Rarity, that I once thought it hardly
worth while, to prescribe Measures to a thing that so seldom happens, and when
it does, those few excellent Persons, that are fit for so Sacred a union, can
never want to be instructed how to conduct it. But then considering withal the
great excellency, and usefulness of it to human life, I could not forgive my
self so considerable an Omission, as the passing by the Regulation of so noble
a Charity.

3 I call it Charity, for it is a special Modification of it, and differs no
otherwise from common Charity, than as it is qualified by some particular
Modifications and Circumstances, as was above described. It is a Sacred
Enclosure of that Benevolence, which we owe to all Mankind in Common, and an
Actual exercise of that kindness to a few, which we would willingly show to
all, were it practicable and consistent with our Faculties, Opportunities, and
Circumstances. It Is indeed a kind of Revenging our selves upon the Narrowness
of our Faculties, by exemplifying that extraordinary Charity upon one or two
which we both owe, and are also ready and disposed, but by reason of the
scantiness of our condition, are not sufficiently able to exercise toward all.
We are willing that even this our love should be as extensive and diffused as
the Light, (as for Common Charity, that must and ought to be so) but then
finding that the Rays of it would be too faint and weak, to give any body any
considerable warmth, when so widely spread and diffused, we are fain to
contract them into a little compass to make them burn and heat, and then our
Charity Commences Friendship.

4 Now as to the Measures of Friendship, these have been already so amply and
excellently stated by the Seraphic Pen of a great Prelate of our Church, in a
just Discourse upon this Occasion, that there needs nothing to be further
added; nor should I offer to write an Iliad after such an Homer, did I not
think it more necessary to the Intireness of this work in general, than to make
up any defect in this Particular Part, which that excellent Author has not
supplied. I shall therefore be the more brief and sparing in this Account.

5 Now I suppose all that is necessary for the Regulation of Friendship may
conveniently be reduced to these three general considerations. First what
Measures are to be observed in the Contracting of Friendship. 2ly What Measures
are to be observed in the conducting or maintaining it. 3ly What Measures are
to be observed in the dissolving of it.

6 In the contracting of Friendship our first care must be to make such a
choice as we shall never have cause to repent of. For when ever we cease to
love a Friend, it is great odds if we do not mortally hate him. For it is hard to
maintain a Mediocrity; and nothing can reflect more upon our Prudence and
Discretion, than to hate him whom we once thought worthy of our highest love.

7 Now that we may not repent of our Choice, the Measures to be observed are
these. First, that the Person whom we mark out for a Friend, be a good and
virtuous Man. For an ill man can neither long love, nor be long beloved. Not by
a good man to be sure, nor indeed by one as bad as himself. For this is a true
Observation, that however men love evil in themselves, yet no man loves it in
another, and tho a man may be a Friend to Sin, yet no body loves the Sinner.
And accordingly we find that the Friendships of wicked men are the most
temporary and short-lived things in the world, and indeed are rather to be
called Conspiracies than Friendships. And besides their Interests will draw
them several ways, and so distract and divide their union; for vice is full of
Variety and Contradiction, sets one and the same man at odds with himself, much
more with another. But now Virtue is a thing of oneness, simplicity and
uniformity, and indeed the only solid Foundation for Friendship.

8 The next Measure is that we choose a Person of a sweet, liberal and obliging
humor. For there are a thousand little endearments and compliances in the
exercise of Friendship, that make good Nature and necessary as rigid virtue and
Honesty. Strict virtue in Friendship is like the exact Rules of Mathematics in
Musical compositions, which indeed are necessary to make the Harmony true and
regular, but then there must be something of Air and Delicacy in it too, to
sweeten and recommend it, or else 'twill be but flat and heavy.

9 The next Measure to this purpose is that we choose a Person of a humor and
disposition as nigh our own as we can. This will make our friendly
Communications both more pleasant and more lasting. The other qualities are as
the Materials in Building, this answers to Figure and shape. And unless the
Materials be of an agreeable and correspondent figure, though otherwise never
so good, the structure will neither be sightly to the eye, nor hold long
together.

10 One thing more I would have remembered in the contracting of friendship,
and that is, that we don't make our selves over to too many. Marriage which is
the strictest of Frienships admits but of one, and indeed inferior Friendship
admits not of many more. For besides that the Tide of Love, by reason of the
contractedness of our faculties, cannot bear very high when divided among
several channels, it is great odds but that among many we shall be deceived in
some, and then we must be put upon the inconvenience of Repentance and
retractation of choice, which in nothing is so uncomely and inconvenient as in
friendship. Be kind therefore to all, but Intimate only with a few.

11 Now the Measures of conducting and maintaining friendship may be such as
these. 1. That we look upon our Friend as another self, and treat him
accordingly. 2. That we love him fervently, effectually and constantly. 3. That
we use his conversation frequently, and always prefer it. 4. That we trust him
with our Secrets and most important concerns. 5. That we make use of his help
and service, and be not shy of being obliged to him. 6. That we don't easily
entertain any Jealousies or Suspicions of him. 7. That we defend his Reputation
when we hear it wrongfully charged. 8. That we wink at those small faults which
he really has. 9. That we take the Freedom to advise, and if need be, to
reprove him, and that we be well contented to take the same usage from him
again. 10. That we freely pay him that Respect and just Acknowledgment that is
due to his Merits, and that we show our selves pleased when the same is done by
others. 11. That we do not envy him when advanced above us, nor despise him
when fallen beneath us. 12. That we relieve him plentifully and liberally when
reduced to any streights or exigencyes. And lastly, that we always prefer the
good of his Soul before any other interest of his, and make it our strictest
concern to promote his Happy condition in the other world. This indeed is the
most excellent and necessary Office of Friendship, and all without this is but
of little signification.

12. And thus much for the Conducting of Friendship. I proceed now to the
Measures that are to be observed in the Dissolution of it. And here two things
come to be considered, the Cause, and the Manner of dissolving it. And first,
it is supposed that there may be a Cause for the Dissolution even of Friendship.
The wise man tells us, that for some things every Friend will depart, and
Marriage, which is the strictest Frindship, has its Divorce. For it is with the
union of two Friends, as with the union of Soul and Body. There are some
degrees of distemperature that, although they weaken and disturb the union, yet
however they are consistent with it, but then there are others again, that
quite destroy the Vital Congruity, and then follows Separation.

13 Now as to the Cause, that may justify a Dissolution of Friendsh, it can be
no other than something, that is directly contrary to the very Design and
Essence of Friendship, such as a notorious Apostasy to vice and wickedness,
notorious Perfidiousness, deliberate Malice or the like. To which (were I to
speak my own sense) I would add, a desperate and resolved continuance in all
this, For I think as long as there is any hopes of amendment, the man is rather
to be Advised than Deserted.

14 But if hopeless and irreclaimable, we may and must desert him. But let it
be with all the tenderness imaginable, with as much unwillingness and
reluctance as the Soul leaves her over-distemper'd Body. And now our greatest
care must be that our former Dearness turn not to inveterate Hatred. There is
great danger of this, but it ought not to be so. For tho the Friend be gone,
yet still the Man remains, and tho he has forfetted my Friendship, yet still I
owe him common Charity. And 'twere well if we would rise a little higher, and
even yet pay him some little respect, and maintain a small under-current of
Affection for him, upon the stock of our former dearness and Intimacy. For so
the deceased Ghost loves to hover for a while about her old Companion, though
by reason of its utter discongruity, it be no longer fit for the mutual
intercourses of Life and Action.

MOTIVES TO THE STUDY AND PRACTICE OF REGULAR LOVE By way of Consideration.
1. COnsider O my Soul, that the very Essence of the most Perfect Being is
Regular Love. The very same Apostle that says God is Love, says also in
another place that God is Light, and that in him there is no darkness at all,
Joh. 1.5. God therefore is both Love and Light; Light invigorated and actuated
by Love, and Love directed and regulated by Light. He is indeed a Lucid and
Bright act of Love, not Arbitrary Love, but Love regulated by the exactest
Rules and Measures of Essential Perfection. For how Regular a Love must that
needs be, where the same Being is both Love and Light!

2. Consider again my Soul, that the Material World the Offspring and Emanation
of this Lucid Love, is altogether conformable to the Principle of its
production, a perfect Sample and Pattern of Order and Regularity, of Beauty and
Proportion, the very Reflection of the first Pulchritude, and a most exact Copy
of the Divine Geometry. And if thou could but see a draught of the
Intellectual world, how far more Beautiful and delightsom yet would that
Orderly Prospect be. And will thou my Soul, be the only Irregular and
Disorderly thing among the Productions of God? Will thou disturb the Harmony of
the Creation, and be the only jarring String in so Composed and well-tuned an
Instrument? As thou will certainly be if thou do not Love Regularly. For

3 Consider My Soul, that it is Regular Love that makes up the Harmony of the
Intellectual world, as Regular Motion does that of the Natural. That Regularity
of the understanding is of no other Moment or Excellency, than as it serves to
the Regulating of Love. That herein lies the Formal Difference between good and
bad Men in this world, and between the good and bad Spirits in the other.
Brightness of understanding is Common to both, and for ought we know, in an
equal Measure, but one of these loves Regularly and the other does not, and
therefore one we call an Angel, and the other a Devil. For it is Regular Love upon
which the welfare and Civil Happiness of Society depends. This is in all
respects the same to the Moral world, as Motion is to the Natural. And as this
is maintained in its Course by Regularity of Motion, so must the other be
upheld by Regularity of Love. And therefore further.

4. Consider O my Soul, that the God of Order, he that is both Light and Love,
has prescribed two sort of Laws with respect to the two worlds, Laws of Motion,
and Laws of Love. Indeed the Latter have not their Effect as Necessarily and
determinately as the former; for the Laws of Motion God executes by himself,
but the Laws of Love he has committed to the execution of his Creatures, having
endowed them with choice and Liberty. But let not this my Soul be used as an
Argument to make thee less Studious of Loving Regularly, because thou art not
irresistibly determined and necessitated to Love according to Order, but art
left to thy own Choice and Liberty. Neither do thou fancy God less concerned
for the Laws of Love, than for the Laws of Motion, because he has not enforced
those, with the same Necessity as he has these, For

5. Consider yet further My Soul, that God has taken as much care for the
Regulation of Love as is consistent with the Nature of Free Agents. For has he
not prescribed Laws of Regular Love? And has he not furnished thee with a stock
of Natural Light and understanding, of Reason and Discourse to discern the
Antecedent Equity and Reasonableness of these Laws? And lest thou should be
negligent in the use of this Discursive Light, has he not as a farther security
of thy Regular Love against the danger either of Ignorance or Inconsideration,
furnished thee with certain Moral Anticipations and Rational Instincts, which
prevent all thy Reasonings and Discoursings about what thou ought to Love,
and point out the great Lines of thy Duty, before thou art able, and when thou
do not attend enough to see into the Natural grounds of it. And left all this
should prove insufficient or ineffectual, has he not bound thy Duty upon thee
by the most weighty Sanctions, and most prevailing Engagements of Rewards and
Punishments, of Eternal Happiness, and Eternal Misery? And to make all this
efficacious, does he not assist thee by the Graces of his Spirit in the
Regulation of thy Love? And what can God do more with the safety of his own
Wisdom, and of thy Liberty? And lest thou should fancy that it is either in
vain, or unnecessary to apply thy self to the Study of Regular Love,

6. Consider yet further My Soul, that the great Mystery of godliness is
nothing else but a Mysterious Expedient for the promotion of Regular Love. As
it proceeded from Love, so does it wholly tend to the Regulation of it. 'Twas
to atone for the Irregularities of Love, that the Son of God became a
Sacrifice to his Father. To atone for it so far, that all the Lapses and
Misapplications of our Love should be forgiven, provided we return to the
Regularity of Love for the future. Had he not done so much, to return to
Regular Love had been in vain, and had he done more, it had been Needless. But
herein is the Mystery of Godliness, that by the wise dispensation of God the
matter is so ordered, that Happiness is attainable by the Order of Love, and
not without it. And can there be a stronger engagement, O my Soul, to persuade
thee to the Study of Regular Love, or to convince thee that God is not less
concerned for the Harmony of the Moral, than of the Natural world, for the
Order of Love, than for the Order of Motion? Be wise then O my Soul, and
consult the Ends of God, the Harmony of the World, and thy own Eternal
Happiness. And that these thy Considerations may be the more effectual, apply
thy self with all possible elevation of spirit to the God of Light and Love.

THE PRAYER.
O God of Order and Beauty, who sweetly disposest all things, and have
established a Regular course in the visible World, who have appointed the Moon
for certain Seasons, and by whose decree the Sun knows his going down, let
the Moral world be as Regular and Harmonious as the Natural, and both conspire
to the declaration of thy Glory. And to this End grant that the Motion of our
Minds may be as orderly as the Motion of Bodies, and that we may move as
regularly by Choice and free Election, as they do by Natural instinct and
Necessity.

O God of Light and Love, warm and invigorate my Light, and direct and regulate
my Love. In thy Light let me see Light, and in thy Love let me ever Love. Lord
I am more apt to err in my Love than in my understanding, and one Error in
Love is of worse Consequence than a thousand in Judgment, O do thou therefore
watch over the Motions of my Love with a peculiar governance, and grant that I
my self may keep this Part with all diligence, seeing hence are the issues of
Life and Death.

O Spirit of Love, who art the very Essence, Fountain and Perfection of Love,
be thou also its Object, Rule, and Guide. Grant I may Love thee, and what thou
love'st, and as thou love'st. O Clarify and refine, inlighten and actuate my
Love, that it may mount upward to the Center and Element of Love, with a
Steady, Chaste, and unfullied Flame; make it unselvish, universal, liberal,
generous and Divine, that loving as I ought I may contritribute to the Order of
thy Creation here, and be perfectly Happy in loving thee, and in being loved by
thee Eternally hereafter. Amen.

Letters Philosophical and Moral, to Dr Henry More, with the Doctor's Answers.
Advertisment to the Reader.
THe Publication of this Correspondence was almost extorted from me by the
importunity of some friends, who would not endure to think that any Remains of
so great and extraordinary a Person should be lost. And truly when I
considered, how curious and busy some men are in recovering a few broken
Fragments of some old dull Author that had scarce any thing to recommend him
but only, that he lived a great while ago, I began to think there was some
force in the Argument, and that I should be unkind to the world as well as to
the Memory of my deceased Friend, should I detain in obscurity such rich
Treasures of excellent Theory as are contained in these Letters.

To the publishing of which I was yet the less unwilling to consent, because of
that near Relation which some of them have to the Matter of some part of this
Book, which may receive some further Light from what is herein contained.

But there is more in the business yet. I had formerly in a Discourse, at first
printed by it self and dedicated to the Doctor, but now inserted in my
Collection of Miscellanies lately published, laid down an Hypothesis concerning
the Root of Liberty, which whether for its novelty and singularity, or because
not well understood, underwent a great deal of Censure at its first appearing;
And the Excellent Dr. himself was pleased to animadvert upon it; And I think
has urged all that can be said against it. But I think I have sufficiently
vindicated the truth of the Notion, and was therefore willing it should now
appear to the world in its full strength and evidence, which could not have
been more abundantly confirmed to me, than in its being able to stand the shock
of so severe a Speculatist.

Epistola prima ad Clarissimum Virum Henricum More.
Vir eximie,
QUum eruditionem tuam and Humanitatem ex scriptorum tuorum genio pari passu
ambulare animadvertam, and insuper in ipso Libri tui Vestibulo te Coram
profitentem audiam, te non tibi soli laborare, sed etiam pro omnibus iis qui
exquirunt sapientiam, eousque mihi nativus exolevit pudor, ut ad te (ignotum
licet) Oraculi vice de quibusdam Arduis sciscitatum mitterem.

Duo igitur sunt (ut apud virum horarum quam parcissimum Compendio agam) quae
animum meum suspensum tenent. In Enchiridio tuo Metaphysico demonstrare satagis
immobile quoddam extensum a Mobili materia distinctum existere; Quod
demonstrationum tuarum nervis adductus non solum Concedere paratus sum, sed
etiam firmissime Credo. Illud tantum me male habet, quod dimensionem istam
incorpoream (quam spatii nomine designare solemus) in infinitum porrigas, and
undequaque immensam statuas. Hoc equidem ut admittam nondum a facultatibus meis
impetrare potui. Quum enim spatium illud sit Quantitas permanens, cujus omnes
parts, quotquot sunt vel esse possunt, simul existunt, contradictoria mihi
videtur affirmare quisquis illud infinite extensum dixerit. Infinitum enim esse
and tamen secundum omnes parts actu existere repugnant. Nam secundum omnes
parts actu existere est certis limitibus claudi. Eodem modo ac quilibet
numerus (quantuscunque assignetur) continetur sub certa specie numeri,
proindeque finitus concludi debet. Fateor aliter se rem habere in quantitate
successiva, cujus parts existunt aliae post alias, quae quoniam post
quantamcunque appositionem incrementi ulterius capax est, suo modo cenferi
possit infinita. Cujus vero parts omnes coexistunt (cujusmodi est spatium)
finitum sit necesse videtur, quum parts ejus (prout etiam innuit Terminus ille
inclusivus (Omnes) sub certam numeri speciem cadant.

Altera quam ejusdem Enchiridii tui lectio mihi suggerit Difficultas est de
Penetrabilitate Spiritus. Dicis spiritus non obstante illorum extensione posse
se mutuo penetrare, hoc est, idem ubi occupare. Quod tamen explicas per sui
Contractionem, and illustras exemplo Cerae in minus spatium convolutae. Quod
innuere videtur, te per spirituum Penetrationem nihil aliud intelligere, quam
quod duo spiritus per situs mutationem in pressiorem formam reducti, eundem
illum locum occupare possint quem situ non mutato unus illorum forsan impleret.
Itane? Sed haec non est Penetratio illa in scholis adeo decantata, scilicet
Coexistentia Dimensionum in eodem ubi, sed solum juxta positio in eodem loco
communi, quae non minus corporibus quam spiritibus competit.

Haec forsan a me non adeo dilucide prolata sunt, verum tu tam meae quam
propriae mentis facilis esse potes Interpres. Rogo igitur ut in tenebris hisce
(modo per alia majoris momenti non stet) facem mihi accendere non graveris. Non
Oppugnatoris sed Quaesitoris personam gero, nec ut te inscitiae arguam haec
scribo, sed ut propriae ignorantiae Medelam quaeram. Opera tua omnia tribus
voluminibus latin edita studiose perlegi, and ob summam illorum eruditionem ut
in Bibliotheca nostra statione donarentur, curavi. Utinam Metaphysicam quam
exorsus es pertexeres. Scire vehementer aveo quodnam tibi de ista re sit
consilii. Dolenda profecto res esset, si tam admirandum opus mancum semper
maneret and imperfectum. Maneat vero necesse est, nisi te Authore ad exitum
perducatur. Quis enim alter erit Apelles, qui dimidiato operi manum ultimam
admovere sustineat? Noli igitur Curiosos speculatores spe tanta in aeternum
frustrari. Quod superest Deum ex animo precor ut te lucidissimum in orb
literato sidus diu ab occasu praeservet, and post decursum stadium beatorum
choro immisceat, and ex ipso sapientiae font immensam tuam cognoscendi sitim
tandem expleat. Sic exoptat

Dovotissimus Tui and tuorum Scriptorum Cultor Johannes Norris.
Dabam Oxon. ex Coll. Om. An. Jan. 8. 1684.
Dr More's Answer.
Sir,
I Have received your very civil and elegant Latin Letter, but answer you
according to my constant use to our own Country men, in English. You have
therein such significations of your kindness and esteem for me and my writings,
that you have thereby obliged me to a professed readiness to serve you in any
thing that lies in my power. And therefore without any further Ceremony I shall
endeavor, as touching those two difficulties you propound, to give you the
best satisfaction I can. The first difficulty, if I understand you aright, is
this: How that Immobile Extensum distinct from matter which in my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum I demonstrate to exist, can truly be said to be infinite, when as
it has all its parts that are or can be coexistent at once. Because to exist
according to all its parts at once is to be included within certain limits, as
any number how big soever is contained under some certain species of Number,
and therewithal conceived finite as the term [ All] also implies. And therefore
successive Quantity seems more capable of being infinite then permanent
Quantity, because there may be still more parts coming on; when as in Permanent
Quantity all the parts are at once, and that term [ All] includes an actual
bounding of the whole. This I conceive is the full scope of the first
difficulty propounded.

To which I briefly answer first, That that Immobile Extensum distinct from
matter, being really a substance Incorporeal, I do not conceive that the Term
[Parts] in a Physical sense does properly belong thereto, every Incorporeal
substance or spirit, according to my notion of things, being Ens unum per se
and non per aliud, and therefore utterly indiscerpible into parts, it implying
a contradiction, that this of the substance or Essence should be divided from
that, the entire substance being Ens unum per se and non per aliud. But
understanding by parts only Notional or Logical parts, which will consist with
this Indiscerpibility, we will admit the phrase in this sense for more easy and
distinct discourse sake, and also of Totum and Omne and whatever is a kin to
them. And the same caution I premize touching the word [Quantity] that we take
it not in that crass Physical sense, such as belongs to matter and bodies, but
merely in that notional and Logical sense, which is so general that it clashes
not at all with the sacrosanctity, as I may so speak, of incorporeal substances.

And now secondly to come nearer to the point, if we mind closely and
distinctly, what sense we have of those terms Totum and Omne, we shall
certainly discern, that they may signify either the Entireness-Indefectuousness
or Perfection of the thing they are pronounced of, or merely that there is
nothing left out of that subject they are spoken of, or else they imply also a
comprehensibleness, limitableness, or exhaustableness of the number of those
parts which are said all to be there. In this sense is Totum plainly used in
summa totalis at the foot of a reckoning. But for those that hold Infinity of
worlds at once, and infinite Matter, when they will easily acknowledge, That
omnes parts Materiae sunt divisibiles, understanding by Materia a congeries of
Atoms; Omnes Mundi generabiles and corruptibiles, and Tota Materia Mundana
impenetrabilis, without the least suspicion that they thereby imply, that there
is only a finite Number of worlds, or parts of Matter, or that all the matter
of the Universe taken together is but finite; It is plain that to them the
former sense is as easy and natural of Totum and Omne as the latter; And indeed
to speak my own mind, I think it is the most natural and proper of all and the
only true Logical sense of omne and totum; which suspends it self from making
the subject, of which it is pronounced, either finite or infinite, but declares
only whatever it be that there is no part left out of that Subject it
pronounces of. So that if Totum, or Omne, or omnes parts be pronounced of a
Subject infinite, it leaves nothing of that infinite Subject out nor omits any
parts, and consequentially implies the perfect Infinity thereof. So far is it
from curbing or terminating it, it reaching as far as that absolute Infinity it
is pronounced of. So that it is the subject of which Omne and Totum are
pronounced, when it is finite that makes them have a finite signification, and
not the intrinsic sense of those terms themselves. Whence I think we may
discern, that there is no Repugnancy to assert that all the parts of that
Immobile Extensum distinct from Matter do exist together at once, though it be
infinite, and that [ All] in this Enunciation does not curb the Immensity of
this Extensum, but rather necessarily implies it according to the true Logical
Notion thereof, that term being always commensurate, when it is truly used to
the subject it is spoken of.

And lastly, it is only permanent Quantity, and Spiritual, and indiscerpible,
whose parts are all at once, that is capable of absolute Infinity. But as for
successive Quantity, it is not capable of being infinite, neither a part ante
nor a part post. But your fancy seems unawares to have transferred the
property of successive quantity to the permanet, and so because, so soon as we
can say of successive quantity there is all of it, it implies certainly there
is an end of it, and so it is finite; so you seem unawares to have imagined,
because it is true of the parts of permanent Quantity that there is all of them
at once, therefore they are now exhausted, as the parts of successive Quantity
were, and therefore are finite. This I think is the sophisme you put upon your
self. But you are the best judge of your own meaning.

Now as for the second difficulty, it seems such to you from your missing my
meaning in my bringing in that Instance of Wax drawn out an Ell long. And after
reduced into the form of a Globe, suppose no bigger than of an ordinary Nutmeg:
An heedless or Idiotick Spectator of this change may happily imagine the
dimension of Longitude quite lost thereby, whenas there is not one Atom of the
quantity thereof lost by this change of Site, no more than there is of the
substance of the wax. But what seems lost in Longitude, it is compensated in
Latitude and profundity. So say I of the contraction of a created Spirit,
suppose from a spherical form, (for we must take some figure or other) of half
a yard diameter, to a sphere of a quarter by the Retraction of it self into so
much less an Vbi (eight times less than before) for as much as nothing of its
substance is annihilated thereby, nothing of its dimensions is, but what seems
to be lost in Longitude, Latitude, and profundity, is gained or compensated in
Essential spissitude, which is that fourth dimension I stand for, that it is in
Rerum Natura. Which tho it is more particularly belonging to the contraction of
one and the same spirit into it self, yet it is also truly found, when any two
substances whatever adequately occupy the same Vbi; As suppose a Spirit occupyd
a Cube of Matter of such a side or Diameter. The spirit and the Cube have their
proper dimensions each of them in the same Vbi, and therefore are an Instance
of a real essential spissitude in that Vbi. And if there were another Spirit in
like manner occupying the same Cube, there would be still a greater essential
spissitude. And he that will not grant this essential spissitude, He must
either list himself with that ridiculous Sect of the Nullibists, or that
wretched sect of the Materialists, or Atheists, that hold there is nothing but
matter in the Universe, which I conceive I have again and again demonstrated to
be false in this Enchiridium of mine. But I suppose out of what has been said,
you see plainly now that by the contraction of a Spirit, I mean that of the
same spirit, whereby it may occupy a less Vbi than before, and not of several
spirits so contracted, that they may take up no more space then any one of them
did before contraction. And these hints I doubt not are sufficient to one of
such quick parts as yours, to make you thoroughly and distinctly understand the
meaning of the 7th Section of the 28th chapter of my Enchiridium Metaphysocum.

To satisfy your desire of knowing my intention touching the finishing the said
Enchiridium, I must confess to you freely, that I have no purpose of so doing.
I am now of a great Age, above threescore and ten, and have other designs also.
And besides, this first part which I have finished is the most useful, the most
assured, and yet I add the most difficult of all; and having thoroughly made
out the main truths of the existence of Spiritual Substance, and what its
nature and Essence is, intelligibly and demonstratively, I make account the
greatest business is done, and I may leave the rest to others, especially there
being laid in so much already in other Treatises of mine, as you may observe in
reading the Scholia upon the 21 Sect. of the 28th chapter of the Enchiridium.
Where yet I have left out what is considerable, my Cabbala Philosophica, and
Exposition of the Jewish Mercava, or Ezechiels Vision, the right understanding
whereof contains the choicest secrets of the Jewish Theosophy or Metaphysics.

This is all for the present, but the repeating of my thanks for the great
kindness you seem to have for

Worthy Sir, Your affectionate friend to serve you Hen. More.
C.C.C. Jan. 19. 1684/5
The second Letter to Dr More.
Sir,
THe Civility and profound subtilety of your Letter are both so very
extraordinary, that I know not which most to admire. Indeed I cannot but look
upon it as an infinite Obligation, that a Person of your Age, worth, and
Character in the World, should vouchsafe an Answer (and that so Candid a one)
to such a green Student as my self, one that just begins to climb that Tree of
Knowledge, upon whose utmost bough you sit, and is so far from spreading his
Name (like you) far and near, that he has scarce luster enough to enlighten the
little Orb wherein he moves.

This great Condescension of yours bespeaks you to be a Person of an excellent
spirit, as well as understanding, and ingages Me (if possible) to honor and
esteem you more than I did before, and to say of you as Cicero in his book De
Legibus does of Plato, Quem admiror, quem omnibus antepono, quem maxim diligo.

Sir, I have considered and digested your Letter, and I find my satisfaction
increases with my perusal of it. Which gives me encouragement to trouble you
with another Inquiry, especially since I find you willing as well as able to
inform, and that you do not send away those that inquire of you, as the Sullen
Oracle did Augustus, asking concerning his Successor with -- (...)


The thing then is this. I am not well resolved concerning the Moral Turpitude
of Sensuality. Not of such species of it as are complicated and accompanied
with civil incommodotyes, such as Adultery, Fornication, etc. (Concerning which
it is easy to account from those mischeifs, which, considering the present
system of the Intellectual world, they necessarily bring upon Mankind) but of
sensuality as such. Now concerning this I inquire, 1. whether there be any
Moral Turpitude in it or no. And 2ly, supposing there is, wherein it lies. For
my own part I am so divided betwixt Arguments on both sides, that I know not
what to resolve. For first that there is some Moral, or intrinsic Turpitude,
in Sensuality as such, I am tempted to suspect from the Authority of many great
Moralists (especially among the Ancients) who, when they lay open the
immorality of Adultery or Fornication, do not fetch their Arguments wholely
from those ill effects, which either of them has upon the welfare of society,
but resolve part of their immorality into Sensuality as such, abstracted from
those other ill Consequences. Besides I observe, that in the Divine Writings
(not to say any thing of our Ordinary Oral discourses) such peculiar Epithetes
and Adjuncts of infamy are given to Adultery, which can belong to it on no
other score, than as it is an act of sensuality. Nay, and as if that were the
principal Ingredient, it oftentimes receives a Denomination from the
sensuality, but never from the injustice, infaithfulness, or the like. Thus it
is called the sin of uncleanness. And Adulterers are said to be unclean
persons, filthy, brutish, etc. In the like manner David, in his Penitentials
for that sin, insists much upon its sensuality, and accordingly speaks of
washing, and cleansing, and making clean. All which seems to imply, that the
immorality of Adutery is not wholly to be derived from those mischeivous
effects it has upon Society, but does also partly (if not chiefly) consist in
the mere sensuality, and consequently that Sensuality as such is immoral.

Again 2ly (to proceed from mental abstraction to real separation) there are
some acts of sensuality (such as voluntary Pollutions etc.) which are really
separated from such ill effects, and yet these by the consent of all Nations
were ever condemned as dishonorable and immoral, and yet there is nothing in
them besides the sensuality, and consequently there seems to be a Moral
Turpitude even in Sensuality as such.

Again 3ly, that there is some natural Turpitude in Sensuality as such, I am
apt to believe, when I consider how unanimously it is vilify'd and decry'd by
those, who were mere strangers to Revelation, and so could not derive this
Notion from the prohibition of some certain Species of it. Sir I need not tell
you, what a Continual Topic for Invectives this has been to the Platonists and
Stoics. Now how these men, who followed the mere Conduct of Nature, should all
conspire in such abject and disdainful thoughts of Sensuality, unless it were
some way or other disagreeable to the unsophisticate and genuin relish of the
Soul, I cannot comprehend.

Again 4ly and lastly, that there is some Natural intrinsic Turpitude in
Sensuality as such, seems to receive no small confirmation from that natural
shame, which attends the acting of it, and that not only in Circumstances
professedly unlawful, but also in those which are otherwise reputed, whereby
men seem conscious to themselves of some incongruity in the thing as such.

From this and more that might be alleged, it seems to me that there must be
some Moral Turpitude in sensuality as such. But now wherein this immorality
should ly, I am still to seek. As also I am how to unwind my self from the
Difficulties of the other side. For first, I find that the more Modern Masters
of Morality (such as Grotius, Dr Cumberland, Puffendorf with many others)
resolve the immorality of Adultery wholly into those pernicious effects it has
upon Society, without bringing in the sensuality as such into any part of the
Account, which they could not do, did they Apprehend any moral Turpitude in
Sensuality as such.

Again 2ly, that there is no moral Turpitude in Sensuality as such, seems to
appear from hence, that if there were, it would be so in all its instances, and
Consequently even in Marriage it self. But it is said (...). So that hence
arises a considerable Difficulty. For if there be no Moral Turpitude in
sensuality as such, then all abstracted Acts of it (as Voluntary Pollutions
etc.) must be held lawful, which are yet condemned. And if there be, then
Marriage must be condemned, which yet is held lawful.

Again 3ly, I can see no reason why that sort of Corporal indulgency, which is
emphatically called sensuality, should be charged with any moral Turpitude,
when as other pleasures of sense (and those perhaps equally intense) are not
so. Such as using choice perfumes, eating delicious Sweetmeats, etc. It Is plain
these all agree in this, that they are gratifications of sense, and therefore
why there should be a Moral Turpitude in one, and not in another, I am yet to
learn.

Again 4ly and lastly, to argue from the simple and absolute nature of the
thing, I cannot imagine how it should be a Moral incongruity for a man to
please himself. What malice is there in it either against God, himself, or his
Neighbor? For that there is in some particular instance (as in Adultery) or in
Degree (as in intemperance) is purely accidental, and therefore ought not to be
charged upon sensuality as such.

These considerations do prevail with me to think, that there is no Moral
Turpitude in Sensuality as such, that all the Pleasures of sense are in
themselves equally indifferent, like the Trees of Paradise. So that if that,
which we here treat of, only be evil, it must be (as the forbidden Fruit)
because made so by a Positive law (which yet I know not of) as an instance to
try our obedience. But how to reconcile this with the former difficulties, I
profess I know not. And here Sir, I desire your unerring hand to lead me out of
this Labyrinth, and that at your own leisure, (For I am not in have, and would
by no means be troublesome to you) you would be pleased to give me a Resolution
of this whole matter, and that you would not only satisfy the Doubts, but also
pardon the boldness of

Most worthy Sir, Your most real Friend and most humble Servant J. Norris.
Allsouls Coll. Ian. 28. 1684^
Dr More's Answer.
Sir,
YOU may very well judge me more than ordinarily rude and uncivil, that I have
not all this time answered your so friendly and affectionate Letter. But I have
such abundance of business lying upon my hands, that I could not find time till
now, and foreseeing that I shall be suddenly more busy than before, in this
strait of time that I am in, I have chosen, rather than to be still silent, to
write, though but briefly, and it may be brokenly to the point you propound.
Viz. concerning the Moral Turpitude of Sensuality. You have showed a great deal
of not only wit and eloquence, but solidity of Reason in pleading pro and con
in the case. But you had proceeded more clearly, if you had first defined what
you meant by sensuality, (which, according to the ordinary acception of the
word, signifies immorally, and insinuates an irregular and ungovernable
indulgence of the pleasure of the grosser senses) and so the business had been
less difficult. But considering the whole matter of your arguing on both sides,
I perceive you mean no more by sensuality, then the pleasure of what Iul.
Scaliger in his Exercitations calls the sixth sense. For so he counts that
Tactus venereus, which some are so taken with. And therefore, if you will, we
will state the Question according to his phrase, and it shall be, whether the
pleasure of the sixth sense have any Moral Turpitude in it. Wherein I will
adventure to pronounce, that it has not as such. But to be captivated to that
pleasure, so as to make us less capable of that, which is better, or to break
the laws of what is just and decorous, this is the Turpitude that is contracted
therein, and argues him, that is thus captivated, to be brutish and sensual in
the ordinary sense of the word. And therefore it is no wonder such persons are
styled filthy, brutish, and unclean in the holy Scriptures, because the goatish
nature has got dominion over them. You have urged excellently well for the
Turpitude of Sensuality hitherto taken in the usual sense, though prescinded
from the consequent Inconveniences thereof. But now that Platonists decry
without Revelation, the delight of corporeal pleasures, and that there is a
natural shame of having to do with those pleasures of the sixth sense, this
looks like a shrewd argument for an innate turpitude in those very pleasures
themselves, though in lawful circumstances; But yet I conceive this instinct of
natural shame, if rightly interpreted, does not so much intimate any Moral
Turpitude in having to do with the pleasures of the sixth sense, as admonishes
us, that though these things rightly circumstantiated have no Moral Turpitude
in them, yet such is the nobleness of the Soul of man, that such gross
enjoyments are exceedingly below her, who is designed for an Angelical life,
where they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, and therefore even nature
has taught her to sneak, when, she being Heaven-born, demits her noble self to
such earthly drudgery. If this Passion of Venereal shame be rightly
interpreted, I suppose this is all it signifies, and not that there is any
intrinsic Immorality or Turpitude in the pleasures of the sixth sense.

But for sensuality taken in the ordinary sense, of which Adultery is a
specimen, most certainly there is a foulness and uncleanness in it, distinct
from what it sins against Political Society, which by no means is the adequate
measure of sound Morality, but there is a Moral Perfection of human nature
antecedent to all Society. I pray read what I have writ on this Argument in my
Scholia on the 3 Sect. of the 4 chapter of the first Book of my Enchriridium
Ethicum. Which will save me the labor of adding any thing more here. But when
the matter is simply the perception of the sixth sense, there (...). This
rightly phrasing the point in question takes away all the difficulties, that
would infer no moral Turpitude, where there is such, or any moral Turpitude,
where there is none. To your third plea for no moral Turpitude I answer, that
corporeal pleasures in eating and drinking etc. if they be irregular or
excessive, have a moral Turpitude in them. Viz. if they are so much as to
hinder and lessen the better enjoyments of the Soul, and obstruct the design of
living (...), as Aristotle some where speaks, and makes our bodies a less
commodious Temple for the spirit of God to dwell in. And to your fourth and
last, wherein you say you cannot imagine how it should be a moral Incongruity
for a man to please himself. What malice is there in it either against God,
himself, or his neighbor? You say right, he may mean no ill to himself, but he
may mistake himself, and out of ignorance of the dignity of his own nature,
take that to be chiefly himself, which is least of all himself, or the meanest
part of him, I mean that part which is common to him with the Brutes, the
pleasures of which life the more he endeavors to shun, as far as is consistent
with the health of his body, and disdains to be captivated with the
gratifications of the flesh, the more surely will he arise into the enjoyment
of such a life, as is unexpressibly above all the pleasures this mortal flesh
can afford. But he that lays his hand to the plough and looks back is not fit
for the kingdom of God. There must be assiduity, constancy, and a perpetual
guard and watchfulness over a man's ways, over the Inclinations of of his mind
and outward words and actions, and devotional addresses to God for further
illumination and strengths, to carry on the work of real Regeneration, and the
issue will at last be ineffably pleasing and glorious. And he, that gives
himself up to such a dispensation of life, will not miss of meeting with the
clearness of all useful truths. And when his true self is awakened in him, it
will be a Moral Congruity to please himself, that is, that Intellectual and
Godlike life and sense raised in him. And all the Trees of Paradise, which God
has planted, the pleasures of all the six Senses, he may taste of, so long as he
keeps in the life aforesaid, and makes that the measure of all his inferior
Enjoyments, that he is not lessened above, by being captivated by any thing
below. Then the pleasure of the sixth sense is not forbid, nor is there any
thing forbid in the Paradise of God, but the irregularity of our own lust and
will. I hope out of this you will pick out my meaning, though this pinch of
time that I am in, has made me but huddle up things together with less order
than I usually endeavor to do. Thus in some have committing you to Gods
gracious keeping, I take leave and rest,

Dear Sir Your affectionate friend to serve you Hen. More.
C.C C. April. 13. 1685.
The third Letter to Dr. More.
Sir,
Suddenly after my receiving your last, I withdrew into the Country, whence I
am but lately returned. I had no manner of convenience of writing to you there,
but now I have, I think, my self obliged to use it forthwith, left you should
suspect that I am forgetful of you, or of the thanks I owe you for your last
excellent Letter. It gave me much satisfaction in several things, and I read it
(as indeed I do every thing of yours) with a peculiar pleasure. But since I
have begun to move a Question, and you have been so kind as to Communicate to
me your thoughts concerning it, I hope you will not take it amiss, if in order
to the clearing up the whole matter I here reassume it, and desire from you
some further satisfaction obout it.

The Sum of the Determination which you give to the Difficulty I proposed, is
(if I understand you right) in short this. You distinguish of Sensuality as it
signifies Concretely and immorally either as to Measure or other Circumstance,
Or as it is Simply the Perception of the pleasure of the sixth Sense. Which last
(that which I meant in my inquiry) you acquit from all Moral Turpitude. Now I
confess I am and ever was perfectly herein of your judgment, and that (among
other reasons) because of the Divine Institution of Matrimony. Only there is
one thing that still sticks with me. I find my self still entangled in one of
my Difficulties which, tho in your Answer you take notice of it, appears to my
apprehension the most considerable of all. It Is this, that if there be no Moral
Turpitude in the simple perception of Venereal pleasure, then all Abstracted
acts of it, such as voluntary pollutions, lascivious embraces etc. must be
accounted lawful, which are yet condemned by all Moral and Divine writers. The
reason of the Consequence is, because there seems to be nothing in such
abstracted acts, besides the simple Peception of the pleasure of the sixth
Sense. For as for excess, Captivation of Spirit, too sensitive applications and
the like, these are merely accidental, and equally incident to the same acts in
all other Circumstances.

This is the short of the Difficulty, which I need not pursue in more words to
a person of your exquisite Conception. Sir I humbly crave your sense in this
point, (the only thing not cleared in your Answer) which if you please to
vouchsafe me, you will no less engage the Affections than inform the Judgment
of (most worthy Sir)

Your most real and highly Obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris.

Dr More's Answer.
Sir,
IT is now above a Month since I received yours. But Indisposition of Body, and
several unexpected Occurrences have hindered me from writing till now. If my
memory fail me not, I intimated to you in my last, that I would read over again
that Sermon, which you was pleased to dedicate to me, and signify to you more
of my mind touching it. Wherefore to be as good as my word, I will take notice
of a Passage or two, before I answer this present Letter.

You fall, page 10. upon a very subtle Subject, viz. What it is, in which our
pretense to free Agency may be safely grounded, whether in the will or
understanding. And in order to decide the point in hand, you do with good
judgment declare against talking of the will and understanding, as faculties
really distinct either from one another, or the Soul her self. But tho you
begin thus hopefully, yet methinks you run your self into an unnecessary nooze
of Fatality, by granting the Soul necessarily wills as she understands; you
know that of the Poet. -- Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor. -- And for
my part, I suspect there are very few men, if they will speak out, but they
have experienced that truth. Else they would be in the state of sincerity,
which over few are.

But now that you would salve the Phenomenon of free Agency, page 11. by making
it depend upon the degrees of Advertency or Attention which the Soul uses, and
which to use either more or less, is fully and immediately in her own power,
this is an Invention ingeniously excogitated, to escape the difficulty you have
cast your self into, by admitting the Soul necessarily wills as she
understands, and necessarily understands as the Object appears to her. For thus
indeed we were frozen up in a rigid Fatality and Necessity. But this does not
cast the ground of free Agency upon the Soul as Intelligent, more than as
Volent, if so much. For unless she will exert her Advertency or Attention, how
can she to any degree advert or attend to the Object? So that the ground of
free Agency will be still resolved into the Soul, not as Intelligent, but as
Volent, and willing to understand the nature of every Object she is concerned
to speculate.

Moreover, though the Soul be willing to exert her Advertency or Attention to
the Object, this alone seems but a defective Principle as to the redeeming us
into the ability and freedom of closing with what is best, as discerning it to
be so. For as the eye, let it (...) never so much, if it be vitiated in it
self, cannot rightly discern the condition of the visible Object it fixes its
sight upon; so the mind of man, let him set himself never so diligently to
contemplate any Moral or Intelligible Object, if she be made dim by Moral
corruptions and impurities, will not be able or free to close with what is best
in the Circumstances that lie before her, being held captive by the vices the
Party has not yet purifyed himself from. Wherefore the true ground of our being
able and free to choose what is best, consists rather in the purity of the Soul
from vice, than in Advertency and Attention to the Object, while the mind is
vitiated and obscured for want of due purification. Which the best Philosophers
and Christians have always declared to be requisite to true Illumination.

And that notable Instance of Martyrdom, which you bring in to illustrate the
case, methinks, may be made rather to illustrate and confirm what I drive at.
Viz. that there is something of greater weight than Advertence or Attention,
that will enable a man to witness to the truth with his blood. For
notwithstanding the mere being notionally convinced, that sin, or such a sin as
the denying of Christ, is the greatest evil in the world, though he never so
closely attend to this truth in the Notion thereof, if the old man or carnal
mind be still alive in him, that crafty Serpent will not fail to suggest such
evasions or Tergiversations, as will excuse him from suffering, and that, it
may be, though he do firmly believe the Torments of Hell, and Joys of Heaven
after this life. For the Mercy of God, and future Repentance, and Violence of
the Temptation, or pretense of making amends some other way, and I know not how
many other such slim Insinuations, may be fool the Unregenerate man from ever
adventuring to suffer Martyrdom.

But he that is to a due degree Regenerate, and made, as S. Peter speaks,
Partaker of the Divine nature; The Spirit of life in the New Birth being
awakened in him, and the Love of God in him perfected; this New Nature in him
into which he is born from above, having rather quicker sensations than the
Animal Nature it self, this is the thing indeed that will secure the crown of
Martyrdom to him, nor will he be liable to be imposed upon by the Carnal mind,
to listen to such Evasions and Tergiversations as I mentioned before, but had
rather dye a thousand natural Deaths, than wound and pain that life and spirit
into which he is regenerate. Wherefore no fear of pain from man can shake him;
the Love of the Lord Jesus and of his life, into which he is regenerate, being
stronger than Death, and all pains of the natural life more tolerable by far to
him, than to wound and pain and grieve that life and spirit in him, which is
supernatural and Divine.

And this is that which the beloved Apostle S. John witnesses, 1 John 4.18.
That there is no fear in Love, but perfect love casts out fear. Because fear
has torment. He that fears is not perfected in love. And toward the
beginning of that Chapter he says, Greater is he that is in us, than he that
is in the world. Speaking of the Spirit of Christ, and the spirit of the World.
These things I hint to you to let you understand, that sometimes more than the
notional attending to the hainousness of sin is required to furnish out a
Martyr. And that our being redeemed into an ability or freedom of choosing what
is best, is not from mere attention to the Object, but from Purification,
Illumination and real Regeneration into the Divine Image. But I cannot insist
largely on any thing. Verbum sapienti sat est.

I will only take notice of one place more in your ingenious Discourse, and
that is, page 15. where I stumbled a little at your seeming severity toward
the severe Masters, as you call them, of Spiritual Mortification. I confess
some passages in them lie fair for your lash. But the high and Hyperbolical
expressions of holy and devout men are not to be tried by the rigid Rules of
Logic and Philosophy, but to be interpreted heartily, according to the scope
they aim at. Which is a perfect exinanition of our selves, that we may be
filled with the sense of God, who works all in all, and feelingly acknowledge
what ever good is in us to be from him, and so be no more elated for it, than
if we had none of it, nor were conscious to our selves we had any such thing.
And to be thus self-dead and self-annihilated is the only sure safe passage
into eternal life, peace and glory. And is the most safe and lovely condition
of the Soul that possibly can be attained to. All knowledge to this is but vain
fluttering, a Feather in a man's Cap tossed with the wind. Here is firm
Achorage, Rest, and such a Peace as passes all understanding. This is the
proper Character of Christ and his followers. Learn of me for I am humble and
meek, and you shall find rest for your souls. And blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. This Mystical Death or spiritual
Annihilation, whereby all self-wishing is destroyed, is the peculiar
transcendency of the Christian state above that of the noblest Heathen
Philosophers that ever were. And who ever feels it will find it so. For these
are Divine sensations, and lie deeper than imaginative Reason and Notion. Nor
is there any mistake in this state devoid of all self-attribution. For tho the
soul attribute not to her self what good she has in possession, yet she denies
not but that she has it. Like that profession of S. Paul Gal. 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Cbrist lives in me,
namely by his Spirit. And being this Christian state is the most perfect state
the soul of man is capable of, we are obliged by way of duty to endeavor after
it as much as we can, according to that of the Stoic, (...). But I have dwelt
upon this point also longer than I intended. And I know you will pardon my
freedom in thus descauting upon these two passages of your learned and Elegant
Discourse. I will pass now to your Letter, and endeavor to finish the point
betwixt us there, and make up what you think defective in my other Letter.

We are both agreed in this, that the simple perception of the pleasure of the
sixth sense has no moral Turpitude in it. But you say hereupon that there is
one difficulty still you are entangled in, which, though I took no notice of in
my Letter, yet seems to you the greatest and most considerable of all, namely,
If there be no Moral Turpitude in the simple perception of Venereal Pleasure,
then all abstracted Acts of it, such as voluntary Pollutions, lascivious
Embraces, etc. must be accounted lawful, which are yet condemned by all Moral
and Divine Writers. And the Reason of the consequence, you say is, because
there is nothing in such abstracted Acts besides the simple perception of the
pleasure of the sixth sense. For as for Excess, Captivation of Spirit, too
sensitive Applications and the like, these are merely Accidental, and equally
incident to the same acts in all other circumstances. I suppose you mean in the
state of Matrimony, where the perception of this pleasure is lawful and allowed.

There was in my former Letter what might answer this difficulty, tho you took
no notice of it. But here I will answer more fully and gradually.

First therefore, though we should admit, that the perception of the pleasure
of the sixth sense in such Circumstances, as you describe, had nothing in it
immoral, yet certainly it were a thing Disangelical, if I may so speak, and
undivine; whenas we being born to that high condition of Angels, we ought to
breath after that state, and as Aristotle somewhere advises (against that
vulgar Proverb (...)) we ought (...), to affect the life of the immortal
Angels, who neither marry nor are given in marriage, and therefore to have
nothing to do with that pleasure farther then necessity requires, not for the
mere pleasures sake, which Nature has stigmatized with the sense of shame
accompanying it, on purpose to remind us of that immortal and Angelical
Condition we are called to, where that pleasure is perfectly silent; though at
the Resurrection, we then having organized bodies, it were hard to conceive,
that we should be like the Idols of the Heathen, have eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, noses and smell not, no not so much as the fragrant odours of
Paradise, nor taste of the food of Angels, as the Psalmist somewhere expresses
it. Which Philosophical Hypothesis, if it be true, there is an Obvious Reason
why the sixth sense has the stamp of shame upon it, and the other five not, and
is no contemptible argument of the immortal state of the Soul out of this
earthly body: so handsomely are these things complicated gether.

Secondly, it being apparent to any, that has but the least sagacity in
interpreting Nature, that the pleasure of the sixth sense is in order to that
weighty end of Propagation, it is most manifestly a gross abuse of the pleasure
of the sixth sense, to affect it, and excite it merely for the pleasures sake,
the end of God and Nature being frustrated at the same time, and the due use of
that sensation grossly perverted. If this be not (...), an unnatural Act or the
transgression of the Law of Nature, what is? so that it cannot be said that
this is the simple perception of the pleasure of the sixth sense, but is the
perception thereof in such Circumstances, as make it abominable. And here are
broken the Laws of what is fit and decorous, as I intimated to you in my former
Letter, and which might have afforded an Answer to this scruple you now again
raise in this.

But thirdly and lastly, There is an Analogy betwixt the pleasure of the sixth
sense, and the pleasure of Taste. The former as it is in order to the
propagation of the species of living Creatures, so the latter is in order to
the sustentation of the Individuals. The pleasure of the taste is to engage the
Animal to eat sufficiently to nourish him and to renew his strength. Now
suppose any man had found some Art or Trick, to enjoy the pleasure of the Taste
of Meats and Drinks all the day long in a manner, and from day to day, though
he eat no more for strength and sustenance than others do, were not this man
most wretchedly sensual and gluttonous? How then can the exciting of the
Venereal pleasure by voluntary Pollutions, etc. be thought to be any other than
the foulest Act of Lust that may be, thus to indulge to this carnal pleasure
merely for the pleasures sake, against the Law of God and Nature. Wherefore you
see that the Reason of your Consequence is very infirm, and that there is
something in those Abstract Acts, as you call them besides the simple
perception of the pleasure of the sixth sense. For the very Abstractiveness of
this pleasure from the natural end and use of it, is its Essential Filth or
Moral Turpitude, to be abhorred of all holy Souls, and abominated for the
reasons I have mentioned. Nor is the pleasure of the sixth sense lawfully
enjoyed, but in the state of Matrimony. But excess Captivation of Spirit, etc.
are lawful in no state that I know of.

And thus you have as full Resolution of this point as I can give, and if it
may have the success to prove satisfactory to you, I shall think my pains well
bestowed. But if upon a deliberate perusal of what I have writ, and an
impartial improvement thereof to your best satisfaction you can, there should
chance to remain any further scruple, I shall, if you write me word of it,
readily endeavor to ease you thereof as it becomes

Dear Sir, Your faithful and affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.
C. C. C. Ian. 16. 1685/6.
The fourth Letter to Dr More.
Sir,
THere was no need of an Apology either for the lateness of your Answer, or
your freedom in descanting upon some passages in my Sermon. I can very easily
be contented to stay for what by its excellency will reward my Patience, and
can easily forgive him that will make me wiser. For I am concerned for no
Opinion any farther than I think it true, and so far I am, and therefore as I
profess my self heartily obliged to you for your kind and excellent endeavors
to rescue me from an Error, so I must beg your leave to return something in
defense of my Hypothesis. Which I question not but you will readily grant,
especially when I assure you that I argue only to be better informed. And that
your Authority is so Sacred with me that nothing less than the desire of Truth
should engage me to oppose it.

Presuming therefore upon your pardon, I shall first offer something in
confirmation of my Opinion, and then consider what you allege to the contrary.
And in the first place it is agreed betwixt us that there must be a (...), some
Principle of free Agency in Man. All that does or can fall under debate is what
is the primary and immediate subject of this free Agency. Now this being a
Rational perfection must be primarily subjected either in the understanding or
in the will, or (to speak more accurately) either in the Soul as Intelligent,
or in the Soul as Volent. That the latter cannot be the Root of Liberty will be
sufficiently clear, if this one Proposition be fully made out, viz. that the
will necessarily follows the Dictate of the understanding, or that the Soul
necessarily wills as she understands.

Now for the Demonstration of this, I shall desire but this one Postulatum,
which I think all the Schools of Learning will allow me, viz. that the Object
of the Soul as Volent is Apparent good, or that the Soul cannot will Evil as
Evil. Now good Apparent or evil Apparent, is the same in other terms with that,
which is apprehended or judged to be good or evil respectively. (For to appear
thus or thus does not ponere aliquid in re, but is an Extrinsecal Denomination
of the Object in reference to the Faculty.) If therefore good Apparent be the
Object of the will, good Apprehended will be so too, and Consequently the Soul
necessarily wills as she understands, otherwise she will choose Evil as Evil,
which is against the supposition.

This I take to be as clear a Demonstration of the Souls necessarily willing as
she understands upon the supposition that our Postulatum be true, as can be
afforded in the Mathematics. But for more Illustration, we will bring it to an
example. And for the present let it be that of S. Peter's denying of his
Master. Here I say that S. Peter judged that part most eligible which he chose,
that is, he judged the sin of denying his Master, at that present juncture, to
be a less evil than the danger of not denying him, and so chose it. Otherwise
if he had then actually thought it a greater evil, all that whereby it exceeded
the other, he would have chosen gratis, and consequently would have willed evil
as evil.

There was therefore undoubtedly an error in his understanding, before there
was any in his will. And so it is in the case of every sinner, according to
those trite sayings, Omnis peccans ignorant, and Nemo malus gratis etc. And
therefore it is that in Scripture, Virtue is expressed by the names of Wisdom and
understanding, and Vice goes under the names of Folly and Error. All who
commit sin think it, at the instant of Commission, all things considered, a
lesser evil, otherwise it is impossible they should commit it. But this (as the
Psalmist expresses it) is their Foolishness, and in another place, have they
any understanding that work wickedness? From all which I conclude that the will
is necessarily determined by the Dictate of the understanding, or that the Soul
necessarily wills as she understands, so that in this sense also that of the
Stoic is verified, (...).

The Soul therefore as Volent cannot be the immediate subject of Liberty. If
therefore there be any such thing as Free Agency, the seat of it must be in the
Soul as Intelligent. But does not the Soul necessarily understand as the Object
appears, as well as she necessarily wills as she understands? she does so, and
therefore I do not place the Seat of Liberty in the soul as judging or forming
a Judgment, for that I confess to be determined by the appearance of things.
But though it be necessary that the Soul judge as things appear, yet it is not
necessary (except only in self evident Propositions) that things should appear
thus or thus, but that will wholely depend upon the degrees of Advertency or
Attention; such a degree being requisite to make the Object appear thus, and
such a degree to appear otherwise. And this Advertency is that wherein I place
the seat of free agency. Lower than this I discern not the least glimps of it,
and higher I cannot go. Here therefore I conceive I have good reason to fix,
and to affirm that the only (...) of the Soul consists in her having an
immediate power to Attend or not Attend, or to attend more or less. I say an
immediate power, for if you will have an express act of the will interposed,
that act of the will must have a Practical Judgment, that Judgment an Objective
appearance, that appearance another Attention, that attention another Will, and
so on ad Infinitum. I think it therefore reasonable to stop at the First.

I shall now apply my self to your Objections. And first, against the necessity
of the Soul's willing as she understands you allege that of the Poet,
Concerning Medea -- Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor -- I answer by
distinguishing the Antecedent, a thing may be judged good either by a
Speculative or universal knowledge, and that I do not always follow, Or by a
Practical Knowledge, when I look upon it and pronounce of it pro hic and hunc as
clothed with all its Circumstances, and that I do always follow.

But you farther urge that if so, then there would be no such thing as Sin
against Knowledge. Or (which is the same otherwise worded) that then men would
be in a state of sincerity. To this I answer, that a sinner according to this
Hypothesis may be said to sin both knowingly and ignorantly too in different
respects. He sins knowingly in as much as he knows in the Theory or by an
Habitual judgment, that such a Fact is a Sin, and yet he sins ignorantly too,
in as much as either he does not actually attend to that Speculative and
Habitual judgment of his, that such a thing is a sin, Or if he does, yet he
thinks it upon the whole matter to be a lesser evil; which indeed is implicitly
and confusely though not explicitly that it is not a sin, because that which is
truly a lesser evil cannot be a sin, for a sin can never be eligible, but a
lesser evil may.

And whereas you say that Advertency, or Attention to the Object is a defective
Principle as to the redeeming us into the ability of closing with what is
discerned best, I confess I can easily conceive how a man may be defective in
his Attention, but not how Attention it self if duly applied can be defective
toward true illumination though in the midst of Moral Corruptions. All that
can be said is, that these moral Corruptions may divert the Soul from
sufficiently attending to the Beauty of Holiness, and this I take to be the
true and ultimate ground of all sin, and here it is I fix the necessity of Grace
and Divine assistence.

And whereas you say, that the Instance of Martyrdom which I alledg for my
Opinion, does rather confirm that there must be something of more weight than
Advertency to enable a man to die for the Truth; And that though a man be
notionally convinced that the denying of Christ is the greatest evil in the
world, and attend never so closely to this Notion, he may yet find such
evasions as will excuse him from suffering; For you say the Mercy of God, and
future Repentance, and of the temptation, or pretense of making amends some
other way, may do it.

To this I reply, that he who is notionally convinced that the denying of
Christ is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly choose it so long as
he continues that Judgment, or Notional Conviction, there being according to
his then apprehension no greater evil for the avoiding of which he should think
it eligible. If thefore he should then choose it, he must choose it as a greater
evil, that is, simply as evil, than which I think there can be no greater
absurdity. As for those Considerations therefore which you subjoyn, the Mercy
of God, future repentance, etc. these cannot prevail with him to choose the
denying of Christ while he judges it the greatest evil, any more than they can
induce him to choose evil as such. They may indeed prevail with him in the
present juncture not to think it the greatest evil, nay to pronounce it a
lesser evil than the evil of Pain, and then no wonder if he choose it. But this
I do not conceive to make any thing against my Hypothesis, but to be rather
according to it.

As to what you remark concerning Humility and Spiritual Mortification, I think
I may be perfectly of your mind without retracting or altering any thing of my
Sermon, for I don't find, if the business be sifted to the bottom, that we
differ any thing at all.

Your Determination concerning the pleasure of the sixth sense, I submit to as
very full and satisfactory. And I have only one thing more to move concerning
it. Which is, that since you make the Abstractedness of this pleasure from the
natural end of it, that of propagation, to be its Essential Turpitude, whether
this does not conclude against all those who Marry in such an age, when it is
impossible according to the course of nature, that this End should be served.
And whether there be any difference according to your Measures between the
enjoyment of the sixth sense in such Circumstances or the like, and Voluntary
Pollutions. I would willingly know your sense in this matter.

And now (Sir) all I have to do is to return you extraordinary thanks for your
many and great Civilities, to desire a long Continuance of your health and
welfare, and favorable construction of the defense which I make against your
Reflections. That it is not in the least from a design of wrangling and
opposition, but from a persuasion of my being at present in the right, and an
earnest desire of being Wiser. I am truly indifferent which side of the
Question be true, all that I am concerned for is to know which is so. And being
so indifferent, as I am the more likely to find the Truth, so I hope I am so to
obtain pardon from you who are so great a Friend to it. Which yet you will be
the more ready to grant when you consider how much your judgment (tho not in
this particular fully assented to) is yet admired and esteemed by (Most
honored and Dear Sir)

Your most obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris.

Dr More's Answer.
Sir,
I Have received yours, and reading the Confirmation of your Hypothesis (which
I took the boldness a little to vellicate) and your Answer to my Objections
against it, I could not but observe your ingenious dexterity therein with
pleasure. And yet I must ingenuously confess that I still stick where I was,
nor can conceive but that the free Agency we are conscious to our selves of, is
placed in the Soul as Volent as much as intelligent, because this Volency, as I
may so speak, is employed in her Attention or Advertency, and is a necessary
requisite thereof. The thing therefore that I affirm being this viz. That this
(...) is placed in the Soul as Volent as well as Intelligent, the Volency of
the Soul being required to make those free attentions or Advertencies on the
object, let us see how you demonstrate that it cannot be seated in the Soul as
Volent.

Your argument in brief is this, (For I intend to answer your Letter with all
possible brevity I can) That since the Soul cannot will evil as evil she must
necessarily will and and choose according as the betterness of the Object
appears to her understanding, otherwise she will choose evil as evil which is
against the supposition. To this I answer, that though she does not choose
according as the betterness of the Object appears to her understanding, it does
not thence follow that she will choose evil as evil, but that she will choose a
natural good and prefer it before the Moral. So that the absurdity of choosing
evil as evil here vanishes, and the demonstration falls to the ground. And
this was the case of S. Peter in denying Christ. The Object of his choice was
that natural good, his security from pain and punishment, which he preferred
before that Moral good the faithful and professed adhesion to his Lord and
Master Christ Jesus. Nor could the understanding of S. Peter err so grossly as
not in the Notion to think that faithfulness to his Lord Christ was better
absolutely than the securing himself from pain and punishment (as indeed there
is no comparison betwixt the Moral or Divine good and the natural) but there
was wanting in this Act the exertion of his will toward the Divine good; or
else the Divine Nature or Grace was wanting, whence he slipped into this choice
of the meaner good.

And as for that Maxim, Omnis peccans ignorant; If it be true in that
Universality the sense is, that whoever sins it is out of defect of either
Notional knowledge or inward sense, such as accompanies real Regeneration; in
which sense the (...), Insensati in Scripture are to be understood, and on the
contrary the Pythagorick (...). Those that want this (...), though they have a
Notional knowledge of the thing, yet they may sin, and that from the want of
this sensibility of Spirit. But he that is born of God sins not because the
seed remains in him, this life or sensibility in the New Birth which is an
higher and more effectual Principle then Notional knowledge. Which alone is not
able to determine the choice of the Soul to a Moral or Spiritual Object without
the accession of the other. For life and sense can only counterpoise life and
sense, not mere Notion. Whence the (...), i. e. the Moral or Divine good is not
followed, but what is pleasing and grateful to the Animal nature. So that the
soul here wills or chooses against the dictate of her understanding, which is
the sin against conscience, otherwise there would be no such thing.

The chief Pith of the last Paragraph of your Confirmation is this. Though it
be necessary the Soul judge as things appear yet it is not necessary (except
only in self-evident Propositions) that things should appear thus or thus, but
that will wholly depend upon the degrees of Advertency or Attention. And in
this, say you, I place the seat of free Agency, viz. in an immediate power in
the Soul of attending or not attending or of attending more or less to the
Objects that occur. I demand therefore is this any thing more then what is
couched in that of the Poet, Quid verum atque bonum quaero and rogo and omnis
in hoc sum,
Viz. A sincere Inquisition (and sincerity is immediately in our power, that is,
it is in our power to do as well as we can) after that Truth and Good in which
human Happiness consists. Which if it be done in a mere Notional way there will
still remain that liberty I mentioned above of the Soul choosing contrary to the
dictates of her understanding. So that there will be more liberties then you
conclude for in this Paragraph. But if this diligent and sincere Inquisition,
or sincere desire of knowing what is man and whereto serves he, what is his
good and what is his evil be absolutely sincere, it cannot fail to inquire what
is the most safe and effectual way to have Objects duly represent themselves to
the understanding as the Objects of sight to a pure and clear eye. And what can
this be but the Purification of the soul as I intimated in my last to you,
which is by Mortification and real Regeneration, that the Divine Principle may
be more fully awakened in us, and so become life and sense to us in virtue
whereof the soul will be free and able to choose what is absolutely the better,
that is to prefer the Moral or Divine Good before that which is Animal or
Natural, and if this state advance to the highest, never to choose any, if they
stand in competition but the Moral or Divine, according to that of S. John
above mentioned, He that is born of God sins not etc. Wherefore so far as I
see, it may be but a (...) betwixt us as to this point where you place the
(...) of the Soul in her immediate power of using the best means she can to
find out what is her best good or readiest means to true happiness and riddance
of sin and error. Which taken in the full sense thereof as I have intimated,
is, as I conceive, a sound and useful Theorem and well adapted for the
chastising of the world for their sloth and laziness in these things.

We come now to your Answers to my Objections. And to that of Video meliora
proboque you answer indeed learnedly and scholastically, by saying, a thing may
be judged good either by a Speculative or Universal knowledge, or by a practical
knowledge when it is looked upon and pronounced of pro hic and nunc as clothed
with all its circumstances, the former is not always followed but the latter
is. But is there any thing more in this but that the Eligent (when as both
these knowledges are speculative or universal, the former already granted, the
other plainly employed by the choice of the Eligent, who in such circumstances
judges the choice is universally to be made, else how is he obliged to make
it?) but that the Humor of the Eligent only has made this latter practical by
putting it into practice instead of the former, it being clothed with the
circumstances of Iucundum or Vtile, when the other recommends it self only
upon the account of Honestum: which though he sees (as Medea says Video
meliora proboque -- and that hic and nunc, for she speaks of the present case
and time, yet deteriora sequor) notwithstanding he declines that which is
absolute and simpliciter melius according to his own judgment, and closes with
that which seems melius, that is, Vtilius and jucundius to himself, to his
Animal Nature against the Dictate of the Divine. This is the clear case of the
Controversy freed from the clouds of the School. And therefore notwithstanding
what you have answered it is plain that the Soul may understand Notionally and
actually better then she practices, and not follow the dictate of her
Understanding but of her Animal Appetite.

To my Objection against your Hypothesis, That thence every man would be
sincere, nor any sin against knowledge, you answer, That a sinner may be said to
sin both knowingly and ignorantly, he may know in Theory or habitual judgment
such a fact is a sin, and yet be ignorant by not actually attending to his
Habitual knowledge; or by judging the sin upon the whole matter to be the lesser
evil and thence implicitly to be no sin, and so not sin against knowledge. But I
answer, It is incredible that one that has an habitual knowledge, that such a
thing is a sin should not remember it is so when he meets with it or is entering
upon it. It is as if one had the habitual Idea of such a person in his mind,
and should not remember it is he when he meets him in the very teeth. Nor can
he judge the sin upon the whole matter to be the lesser evil, but he must in the
mean time remember it is a sin and so commit it against his knowledge, only
sugared over with the circumstance of Iucundum or Vtile or both. This
Composition though there be Ratsbain in the Sugar, makes the Soul listen to the
dictate of the Animal Appetite and let go that of Moral reason, tho they both
clamor in her ears at once. And there the Soul against the understanding
concludes for the suggestion of the Animal Appetite, that bears her in hand,
that such a sin with pleasure and profit is better then an Act of of virtue
with pain and wordly loss. This I conceive is the naked case of the business.
Nor does this choice seem to be of a lesser evil to the Soul as Intellectual,
which dictates the contrary, but as sensual or Animal.

To your Answer to my third Objection of Attention or (Advertency) being a
defective Principle, That though a man may be defective in his Attention, yet
you cannot easily conceive how Attention it self if duly applied can be
defective: I reply, that mere Attention of it self in a Morally corrupt mind,
let it be never so great can no better rightly discover the Moral Object, than
the vitiated eye the Natural. It is the Purity of the Soul through Regeneration
that enables her to behold the beauty of Holiness as our Savior speaks,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. There is no seeing of
God but by being purified and regenerate into his Image. (...). As Plotinus
somewhere has it, touching the Divine Pulchritude. If thou be it, thou see
it. If we be regenerate into the Image of the Eternal Pulchritude we then shall
see it, having (if I may use the Poets expression here) -- Incoctum generoso
pectus Honesto. But if this Principle of life be not sufficiently awakened in
us, no Attention is sufficient to make us rightly discern the beauty of
Holiness, but only a shadowy Notion or Meager Monogrammical Picture thereof,
which will not avail though you use all the Attention in the world against the
dictates of the Animal sense and life unmortified, in the day of trial. Whence
the defect of this Principle alone, is evident.

But if you mean by sufficiently attending to the beauty of Holiness the
diligent and sincere Inquisition after Truth and Holiness, which implies our
serious entering into a Method of Purification and clearing our inward Eyesight
by our resolved progress in the way of Mortification and thereby of real
Regeneration, whereby the Divine Life and sense will sufficiently at length be
awakened to counterpoise and overcome the sway and importunity of the Animal
life and sense; the neglect of this we shall be both agreed in, that it is the
ultimate ground of all sin, and that we shall discern, when we seriously make
trial, the necessity of Grace and Divine Assistance to carry us through so weighty
an Enterprise as you rightly note in this Paragraph; which I hope I have
sufficiently spoke to by this. I will only add, that, what occurs Psalm. 48.
verse. 5, 6, 7. seems a figure of this Spiritual Progress toward the beauty of
Holiness in virtue of which every one at last appears before God in Sion,
according to that promise of our Savior, Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God.

And now lastly for your Reply to what I said touching the Instance of
Martyrdom, which Reply of yours is this. That he that is notionally convinced
that the denying of Christ is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly
choose it so long as he continues that judgment, there being according to his
then Apprehension no greater evil for the avoiding of which he should think it
eligible. If therefore he should then choose it he must choose it as a greater
evil, that is, simply as evil, than which I think there can be no greater
absurdity, etc. This Reply is handsome and smart, but in my judgment not free
from a fallacious subtilty. If where the greater evil is chosen the two
compared evils were of one kind that Absurdity would be manifestly consequent,
but when one of the Evils is Moral, suppose the greatest Moral evil that is,
the other Natural and very great or the greatest Natural Evil that is, suppose
a painful torturous and ignominious Death, in the avoiding of which is implied
the securing to himself the natural Ease and sweetness of this present life,
tho upon this account he choose that which is the greatest Moral evil and is so
esteemed in his notional judgment, yet he cannot be said then to choose it as
evil, but as the only effectual means and therefore good or expedient for that
end, viz. the avoiding the highest natural Evil and enjoying the sweet of that
great Natural Good, a life painless and at ease. And therefore upon this
account he having only a Notional judgment of the Moral evil of that highest
sin mentioned, but a lively sense both of the natural evil and Good here
specified which are the one avoided the other secured by choosing the aforesaid
Moral Evil: It is no wonder that, though retaining still his notional judgment
of that greatest Moral Evil he yet chooses it to avoid that horrid natural evil,
and to enjoy the sweet of that Natural Good, viz. this life with ease and
safety, there being in one scale of the balance nothing but the mere truth of
Notion, in the other the urgent weight of Life and sense which will easily
preponderate, if there be not life and sense also, (which is the state only of
the Regenerate) to weigh against it in the other scale of the balance. So that
though the Notional judgment be not corrupted, but that such a sin is still
held the greatest Moral Evil that is, yet the Soul is born down to follow the
suggestion of the Animal Life and sense against the dictate of her notional
discernment and may truly pronounce with Medea.

-- Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor. --
Nor need I proceed any further. For what is already said I hope will reach
every Particular of the whole Paragraph which contains your Reply to this last
point. At least it will make good, that the Soul does not choose evil as evil in
the present case, which is the main sting of your Argument.

That we agree in our sentiments touching Humility and Spiritual Mortification,
this profession of yours I easily believe from reading what occurs in the
latter part of your Sermon which is excellently good solid and edifying.

And that I have satisfied you in my Determination concerning the pleasure of
the sixth sense I am glad of that also. And as for this last scruple you move;
whether what I have said does not conclude against all those who marry in such
an Age when it is impossible according to the course of Nature that this end of
propagation should be served, I say it does not so conclude. Because there is a
considerable end of marriage besides that of propagation of children, which in
our Liturgy the Office of Marriage takes notice of, viz. mutual society Help
and Comfort, which comprizeth all the handsome Adjustments of the married
Parties, Secular affairs and Oeconomical Conveniences, and also their mutual
help to one another in Piety and devout pursuance of fitting themselves for the
future State, their Age remainding them that it is not far off. And in this
Regard their mutual Society may be very delectable to one another while their
discourses and Meditations are of the Joys of the other World, and so they may
live chastely and comfortably without any frustranious abuse of their bodies
upon the titillation of lust, which exact Christian Temperance and holy
Meditations and discourses together of their joyous change into the other near
approaching state ought to prevent. Sir, I have told you freely my sentiments
touching all the things you have propounded, but I dictate nothing but leave
all to your own free judgment, and so wishing you good success in your virtuous
studies, I take leave and rest

Dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.
C. C. C. Febr. 22. 1685/6.
The fifth Letter to Dr. More.
Sir,
AS I cannot express the thanks which I owe you for your great Condescension
and Civility, so neither can I the pleasure which I had in perusing your
ingenious and learned Answer. it is spun throughout with a very fine thread, and
richly fraught with curious and retired sense. But yet tho I was and still am
exquisitely pleased, I am not fully satisfied with it, whether the defect be in
your letter, or in my Apprehension I shall not take upon me to determine. But
so it is I cannot as yet bring over my judgment to yours, and that I do not
dissent without some Considerable reason, it shall be the business of this
paper briefly to show you.

And first then I observe, that the Postulatum upon which I ground my
Demonstration of the will's necessarily following the Dictate of the
understanding, is by you admitted, as indeed it is by all except only the
School of the Nominals, namely, that the Soul cannot will evil as evil. This
you admit by saying (Paragraph the second) that the Absurdity of choosing evil
as evil vanishes, only you deny the Consequence of that acknowledged absurdity
upon such a choice as is made against the Practical Dictate, by saying, that it
vanishes, Here then is the (...) with the truth or falsehood of which I am
content the Demonstration should either stand or fall to the ground.

Now to make appear that this is a true Consequence, that the will by not
following the Practical Dictate would choose evil as evil, I shall not add any
Positive and direct proof to the former Demonstration, but only consider
whether the Consequence is any thing invalidated or evaded by what you have
offered. You say, that although the Soul does not choose according as the
Betterness of the Object appears to her understanding, it does not thence
follow that she will choose evil as evil, but that she will choose a natural good
and prefer it before the Moral. True, but unless this natural good be in the
present Circumstance, all things considered, judged greater and more eligible
than the Moral, the choosing of it will not be the choosing of good, but of evil
as evil. For a less good (whether natural or any other it matters not) tho good
singly considered, yet in Competition with a greater does induere speciem mali,
as a less evil tho evil singly considered yet in competition with a greater
does Commence good and eligible. Such a choice therefore as is here supposed
would not be the choice of a natural good, nay not so much as of good, but of
evil as evil. There is therefore no choice but what is according to the
appearing Betterness of the Object; which Conclusion you your self seem
unawares to slip into by using the word (Prefer) for what is it to Prefer, but
to think or pronounce upon the whole matter to be better or more eligible.

And thus you say again concerning St. Peter that he preferred the natural good
of security from pain before the Moral good of adhesion to his Lord. Well, if
so, then however strange it may seem, his understanding did err so grossly as
at that instant not to think Faithfulness to his Master to be absolutely better
than security from pain, otherwise his choosing the latter would have been the
choosing of what he then thought a lesser good, and consequently of evil as
such. Nor will it suffice to say, that there was wanting in that act of his
denial the exertion of his will toward the divine good, That indeed is true,
but not the whole Truth, for had there not been also a defect in his
understanding, there would have been nothing amiss in his will. As for your
(...) or sensibility of spirit, I have a very good liking to the notion, and do
think it a Concomitant if no^ the principal part of real Regeneration. But
whereas you say, those that want this (...) tho right in their judgment may yet
sin, and that because Life and sense can only Counterpoise life and sense, to
this I reply, that the want of this (...) may indeed in the heat of a
Temptation be the occasion of a wrong judgment (and so indeed it is necessary to
the prevention of sin that life and sense Counterpoise life and sense) but it
can never be the Occasion of sin with a right and Practically unerring
Judgment, for the reasons above mentioned. So that notwithstanding this (...)
the Reason of the action good or bad will be ultimately devolved upon the
rectitude or obliquity of the Judgment. And in that respect only the Axiom will
hold true, Omnis peccans ignorant.

As to the close of this your third Paragraph how sinning according to the
Dictate of the understanding and yet against Conscience are consistent, I think
they are very reconcilable. For he that commits a sin tho by not sufficiently
attending to it at the moment of action either as a sin, or as a greater evil
he comes to pronounce it eligible and so to choose it, and so may be said to sin
ignorantly, yet he sins knowingly and against conscience too, in as much as he
does such a fact either against an actual Dictate that it is a sin, or an
habitual Dictate that it is also a greater evil, as I intimated to you in my last.

As to the question which in this next Paragraph you are pleased to put to me,
whether this Attention, wherein I place the seat of Free Agency, differ any
thing from what is coutch'd in that of the Poet Quid verum atque bonum quaero
and rogo and omnis in hoc sum.
I answer that it does, and that my notion may be more clearly conceived, I
shall here briefly explain what I mean by this Power of Attention. Whereas
therefore the Operations and Powers of the Soul as Intelligent are usually
divided into these three, Apprehension, Judgment, and Discourse, I find it
necessary to add a fourth, that of Attention, which I look upon as really
distinct from the other three, they being Conversant about their Objects as
true and false, but this only as Intelligible, and is only in short, a general
power of converting the Acies of the understanding toward any Intelligible
Object, whether simple or complex, and answers exactly to the Application of
the eye to a sensible object, and accordingly is as distinct from either
Apprehension, Judgment or Discourse as this Application of the eye is from the
very act of Vision. In short it is a kind of Openness or Wakefulness of Soul,
such as I conceive to be hinted at in Scripture by such and the like
expressions as these, watch lest you enter into Temptation, Awake to
righteousness and sin not, Awake thou that sleep and arise from the dead
etc. The Notion thus explained I will now show how it differs from that of the
Poet. The difference is in this. That inquisition of the Poet denotes a
particular exertion and employment of all the faculties, a diligent use of all
means, methods and opportunities, and that in order to the finding out a Truth
or a good not yet known, but this Attention I speak of is only a general
wakefulness of the understanding, or Application of mind to the speculation of
a Truth habitually known, which will make it actually present, and so determine
the Practical judgment, and by that the Will.

I come now to the place where you consider my Answers to your Objections. And
here to that distinction of mine of Speculative and Practical knowledge, the
latter of which I said was always followed, though not the former, you say
they are both speculative and universal, the first granted to be so, and the
other plainly implied by the choice of the Eligent, who in such circumstances
judges the choice universally to be made. I answer, you may call them both
speculative if you please, I shall not contend with you for a word, but then
it is to be considered that there will be two distinct Speculative Dictates, one
that is Habitual, out of the Circumstance of action, that such a thing is a sin
and a greater evil, and another that is actual, in the Circumstance of action,
that it is a lesser evil, which therefore for distinction's sake I call
Practical, because of the immediate influence it has upon action. Which latter
is always followed, tho the former is not. Neither is this latter as you say
made only Practical by being put into Practice, but is so Antecedaneously,
being that which determines the choice of the Eligent.

As to the next Paragraph, where you think it incredible that one, who has an
Habitual knowledge that such a thing is a sin, should not remember it to be so
when he is entering upon it. I reply, that it seems to me most certain, that
whoever commits sin must think it some way or other eligible. Now this must
come to pass one of these two ways, either by his not attending to it as sin,
or not as a greater evil. The first of which in many cases I can easily
conceive possible, and the latter in all cases I think certain. And this
methinks you your self run into by saying (Paragraph the sixth) that the Animal
appetite bears the Soul in hand, and such a sin with pleasure and profit is
better than an act of virtue with pain and worldly loss. For what is this but
in other words to say, that the Concupiscible may be so strong and rampant,
that the Soul may judge pro hic and nunc the uneasiness of abstaining to be a
greater evil than an unlawful Indulgence, so as upon that Judgment to choose the
latter.

To your next Paragraph where you continue your Charge upon mere Attention as a
defective Instrument toward the discovery of a Moral Object in a Morally
corrupt mind, I make this short reply, that since for such a Fact to be a sin,
or for sin to be the greatest evil, are plain and obvious Theorems, I cannot
conceive but that constant and actual Attention should prove a sufficient
Directory to the understanding, all the Difficulty is to be thus actually and
constantly attentive, and here (as I said before) is the work of grace and
Regeneration.

And now lastly to your last Paragraph concerning the Instance of Martyrdom,
whereas I said that he, who is notionally convinced that the denying of Christ
is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly choose it so long as he
continues that judgment, there being, according to his then Apprehension, no
greater evil for the avoiding of which he should think it eligible, if
therefore he should then choose it, he must choose it as the greatest evil, that
is simply as evil, etc. This reply you say is not free from a fallacious
subtilty, Concerning which you thus distinguish. If where the greater evil is
chosen the 2 compared evils were of one kind, that absurdity would certainly
follow; But where one of the evils is Moral, the other Natural, tho a man
should choose the greatest Moral evil, yet he cannot be said to choose it as
evil, but as the only means of avoiding the natural evil, and consequently as
good. This is the sum of your Answer. To which I return, that I cannot conceive
how the diversity of the compared evils, as to their Specific Nature, can any
thing alter the case, the Question as to eligibility being not concerning their
specific natures, but concerning their Degrees, not which is Natural and which
Moral, but which has most of the general nature of evil. So that if I choose
that which to me has the most of the general nature of evil, notwithstanding
its being an evil of another kind, I certainly choose evil as evil. Neither can
this be brought off by saying that it is chosen as a means of avoiding the
natural evil, and consequently as good, for it can never be good to choose a
greater evil to avoid a less, that being all over loss and damage.

And thus as briefly and as fully as I could have I set down the grounds of my
opinion, which I am ready to part with upon the first conviction of their
weakness or insufficiency. If you should find any thing in this paper worth
your notice, you may return answer at your best leisure, for I would by no
means divert you from more important concerns. I am very sensible what
interruptions I have already given you, but I hope you will easily pardon me
when you consider that it is the peculiar reverence I have for your Judgment
which has brought this trouble upon you from

(Dear Sir) Your highly obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris.

AN APPENDIX.
COnsidering with my self that those into whose hands these Papers may light,
may not all of them have that other Book of mine, which contains the Hypothesis
here defended concerning the Root of Liberty, and that it is very necessary the
Hypothesis should be seen with its Defense, I thought it convenient to set it
down here for the Benefit of the Reader.

The Hypothesis runs thus.
That the will cannot be the immediate Subject of Liberty, must be acknowledged
plain, if the will necessarily follows the Practical Dictate of the
understanding. And that it does so I think there is Demonstration.

It Is an unquestionable Axiom in the Schools of Learning, that the Object of
the will is Apparent good. Now Apparent good in other words is that which is
Judged to be good, and if so, then it Follows that the will cannot but conform
to the Dictate of the understanding; Because otherwise something might be the
Object of the will that is not apprehended good, which is contrary to the
supposition.

In short, the will (as Aquinas well expresses it) is the conclusion of an
Operative Syllogism, and follows as necessarily from the Dictates of the
understanding, as any other Conclusion does from its Premises, and Consequently
cannot be the immediate Subject of Liberty.

But then are we not involved in the same Difficulty as to the understanding?
Does not that act with equal (if not More) Necessity than the Will? So I know
it is Ordinarily taught.

But if this be absolutely and universally true, I must Confess it above the
reach of my Capacity to Salve the Notion of Morality, or Religion. For since
it is evident that the will necessarily conforms to the Dictates of the
understanding, if those very Dictates are also wholly and altogether necessary,
there can be no such thing as a (...), the man is bound hand and foot, has
nothing left him whereby to render him a Moral Agent, to qualify him for Law or
Obligation, Virtue or Vice, Reward or Punishment. But these are consequences
not to be endured, and therefore I conclude according to the Rules of right
reasoning, the Principle from which they flow to be so too.

To clear up then the whole Business, I shall no longer consider the
understanding and will as Faculties really distinct either from the Soul it
self, or from one another, but that the Soul does immediately understand and
will by it self, without the intervention of any Faculty. And that for this
Demonstrative Reason in short, because in the contrary Hypothesis, either
Judgment must be ascribed to the will, and then the will immediately commences
understanding, or the Assent of the will must be blind, brutish, and
unaccountable, both which are Absurd.

This being premised, I grant that as the Soul necessarily wills as she
understands, (For so we must now speak) so likewise does she necessarily
understand as the Object appears.

And thus far our sight terminates in fatality, and necessity bounds our
Horizon. That then which must give us a prospect beyond it must be this, that
although the Soul necessarily understands or judges according to the appearance of
things, yet that things should so appear (unless it be in Propositions
self-evident) is not alike necessary, but depends upon the degrees of
Advertency or Attention which the Soul uses, and which to use either more or
less is fully and immediately in her own Power.

And this Indifferency of the Soul as to attending or not attending I take to
be the only (...) the Bottom and Foundation into which the Morality of every
action must be at length resolved. For a farther proof and illustration of
which Hypothesis, let it be applied to a particular case, that we may see how
well it will answer the Phenomena.

In the Case then of Martyrdom, I look upon sin as an evil, and not only so but
(while I attend fully to its Nature) as the greatest of evils. And as long as I
continue this Judgment it is utterly impossible I should commit it, there being
according to my present apprehension no greater evil for the declining of which
I should think it eligible. But now the evil of Pain being presented before me,
and I not sufficiently attending to the evil of sin, this latter appears to be
the lesser evil of the two, and I accordingly pro hic and nunc so pronounce it,
and in Conformity to that dictate necessarily choose it.

But because it was at first absolutely in my Power to have attended more
heedfully, there was liberty in the Principle, the mistake which influenced the
action was vincible, and consequently the Action it self justly imputable. This
is the Hypothesis.

I shall now sum up the whole matter in this Order of Reasoning.
1. THat a Creature void of Liberty cannot be capable of Law or Obligation,
Virtue or Vice, Reward or Punishment, is certain. 2. That Man is capable of all
these, is certain. 3. That Man therefore is endowed with Liberty, is certain.
4. That Liberty is a Rational Perfefection, or a Perfection belonging to an
Intellectual Nature, is certain. 5. That therefore this Liberty must be
subjected either in the understanding or will, or (to speak more properly) in
the Soul as Intelligent, or in the Soul as Volent, is certain. 6. That it
cannot be subjected in that Part which acts Necessarily, is certain. 7. That
the will necessarily follows the Dictate of the understanding, Or, that the
Soul necessarily wills according as she understands, is certain. 8. That
therefore this Liberty cannot be immediately subjected in the will, or, in the
Soul as Volent, is certain. 9. That therefore it must be subjected in the Soul
as Intelligent, is certain. 10. That even the Soul as Intelligent so far as it
acts necessarily cannot be the Immediate subject of Liberty, is also certain.
11. That the Soul as Intelligent necessarily judges according as the Object
appears to her, is certain. 12. That therefore the Soul as judging or forming a
judgment, can no more be the Immediate subject of Liberty, than the Soul as
Volent, is certain. 13. That, since the Soul necessarily wills as she judges,
and necessarily judges as things appear, we have thus far no glimps of Liberty,
is certain. 14. That therefore our Liberty must be founded upon the No
Necessity of some certain things appearing determinately thus or thus, or that
we have no Liberty at all, is as Certain. 15. That things appearing thus or
thus (unless in self-evident Propositions) depends upon the various degrees of
Advertency or Attention, and nothing else, is certain. 16. That therefore we
have an Immediate Power of Attending or not Attending, or of Attending more or
less, is certain. 17. That therefore this Indifferency of the Soul as to
Attending or not Attending, or Attending more or less is the Prime Root and
Immediate subject of Human liberty, is no less certain, which was the Point to
be demonstrated.
ERRATA.
PAGE 37. for Divisition read Division. p. 43. for Conveiances read Conveionce.
p. 57. line 14. after, for, add Our. p. 58. l. 20. for of read or. p. 71. for
pertual read perpetual. p. 90. for serve r. serves. p. 97. for Common r.
Commonly. p. 120. l. 19. for as r. that. p. 179. l. 2. after, take, add, no. p.
202. for hunc r. nunc. p. 204. l. 18. before of the, r. violence.

Books Printed and sold by Henry Clements.
ARchaeologiae Atticae Libri Septem, by Francis Rous, and Zachary Bogan. 4o.
Mr. Rodericks Visitation Sermon at Blanford-Forum. 4o. 1683. Sermon at the
Consecration at the Ld Weymouths Chapel at Long Leat. 4o. 1684. Education of
young Gentlemen, 5th. Edition. 12o. Angliae notitia, five praesens Status
Angliae succinte Enucleatus. 12o. 1688. Smith aditus ad Logicam, 12o.
Brerewoodi Elementa Logicae. 12o.

