PRACTICAL DISCOURSES Upon several Divine Subjects.

Written by JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Newton St. Lo, near Bath, and late
Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

Licensed, July 16, 1691. Z. Isham.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Manship at the Black Bull, near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1691.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, RICHARD Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
My Lord,
THE peculiar Honor I justly have for your Personal Worth concurring with that
Reverence I owe to your Episcopal Character, and that happy Relation wherein I
now stand to you as my Diocesan, obliges me to lay these Papers at your
Lordship's Feet; and that which your Eminent Greatness has made a Debt, your no
less Illustrious Goodness incourages me to Pay. Upon which Two inducements (the
greatest that can be even in Religious as well as Human Addresses,) I humbly
presume to tender these Plain Discourses to your Lordship's favorable Perusal
and Acceptance, which as they are wholly designed, so I hope are in some
measure fitted for the Advantage of the Public; not so much in respect of
Notion and Speculation, but what is a great deal more wanted in this very
Degenerate, though otherwise highly Improved Age, the promotion of Piety and
good Life. Which great and excellent end that your Lordship may yet much better
promote, both by the Prudence of your Government, and by the Brightness and
Authority of your high Example, to the Honor and Interest of our most
excellent Church, and the Glory of our common Lord and Master, shall be the
Constant and Zealous Prayer of him whose great Ambition is to be esteemed

Your Lordship's Most Humble and Dutiful Servant J. Norris.

TO THE READER.
SINCE the Publication of my Discourses upon the Beatitudes, having received
some Intimations, that it is the earnest desire of several Worthy Persons to see
some more of my Practical Discourses; for the gratification of their Pious
Curiosity, and for the general Advantage of all other well inclined Persons, I
have been persuaded to make a Scrutiny among my Papers, and to pick out a Set
of such Discourses as are of the most Practical Composure, and most apt to
season the Mind of the Reader with a Tincture of Piety and Virtue: And these I
think are of this Character, which I therefore here communicate to the World in
the same Matter and Dress for the Main wherein they were first Penned and
Preached, only bestowing upon them the advantage of a Review, that so they
might have that Accuracy and Correctness as might fit them for a Public
Appearance.

I am not insensible how well furnished the Present Age is with Provisions of
this kind; so far from that, that I think we have in this respect much the
Advantage above any Age or Place in the World: And I think withal, that if
there were a Choice Collection made of our English Sermons, especially of the
Later times, it might deserve to wear the Honorable Chain in our Public
Libraries, as well as any the best Curiosities we have there, and indeed to
turn out a great many dull Wormeaten Authors, which fill our Stalls, as many
Persons do the World. Idly and Insignificantly, and are not worth the Room they
take up. And I further think, that if the Selectest parts of these our Modern
Sermons were ranged under certain Heads, and judiciously sorted and disposed in
order, out of these Materials might be framed far the best Body of Divinity,
both for the Rational and for the Persuasive part, that is in the World. And
it is great Pity but that a convenient number of competent Undertakers (for I
think it would be too great a Task for any one Person,) would agree together
upon the Performance. It would I am persuaded be a work of excellent use as
well as Curiosity, and withal a standing Monument of Shame and Condemnation to
those of our Dissenters, who are so Silly and so impudent, as to make this one
of their Pleas for leaving the Church, because they have better Preaching in a
Conventicle.

But lest this should be turned as an Objection against the present
performance, that the Age is so rich in these Provisions, I consider withal on
the other side, how much it stands in need of them: Its Supplies indeed are
great, but its Necessities are as great and greater; and till Men come to be
persuaded to live better than they now do, more like Men, and more like
Christians, I think further Addresses of this nature will be always Seasonable,
and will be so far from needing an Apology, that they will, deserve to be
encouraged.

But there is something else that needs it very much, and that is, the
unproficiency of the World under such extraordinary Advantages: It Is indeed a
thing of strange Consideration, and what I have often admired at, that
considering what excellent Preaching and Writing there is now in the World, the
World should be no better than it is; that there should be so much good
Discoursing, and so little good Living; that the Instrument of Religion should
be so much Improved, and Religion it self so much Decayed.

It must be allowed that the present Age has Advantages of both sorts,
Preaching and Writing, far beyond what former Ages could ever boast of; and
that Christians now have Assistances almost as much beyond those of the
Primitive Christians, as theirs were beyond those of the Heathen World; and yet
(which is both strange and lamentable to consider,) they excelled us as much in
Goodness, as we do them in Learning and Knowledge, and were much better without
these Advantages than we are with them. No Learning like Modern Learning, no
Reasoning like Modern Reasoning, and yet no Christianity like Primitive
Christianity. Now indeed Christianity is better understood, and better
defended, and the Rules of it more rationally enforced, but then 'twas better
Practiced: Now we Discourse better, but we live worse.

What shall we, what can we say to these things? It is our great Shame, and it
will be our Condemnation: But we must not give over Medicinal Applications,
though the Disease seems not to yield to them, but rather to rage and increase
under them; for though we are really worse under these great Assistances, yet I
hope it is not they that contribute to make us so; and if the World be so bad
with them, it is to be feared it would be in a much worse Condition without
them. The Means are therefore to be continued, whatever the Event and Success
be, which is God's concern not ours. And I further consider, that the badness
of the Age under the greatest helps to Goodness is so far from being a
reasonable discouragement against endeavors of Reformation, that there is
great reason to think that God reserves the best Remedies and Assistances
against the worst Times, that when the Malignity of the Contagion is at
strongest, it may have a Proportionable Antidote.

I am not so vain as to think my self interessed in this last Consideration,
any further than as it may serve me with an Answer to an Objection, wherein it
is pretended, that Men are the worse for having so much Application made to
them for their Recovery, that they suffer in their Morals by being
over-tutour'd, as some Men do in their Health by being over-Physick'd: The
ground of which Objection proceeds I suppose upon this Observation, that when
there are the greatest helps and advantages to goodness, the Age is then always
worst. The Observation I confess is too true, but the Consequence that is made
from it, may I conceive be taken off, by supposing that this comes to pass by
the special Assignment of God's Providence, reserving the best assistances
against the worst times, and not by any natural connection that is between the
things themselves in order to such a Juncture.

Upon these Considerations I am encouraged to send these Discourses abroad,
having this only to say concerning them, that as the Subjects of them are of
extraordinary importance, so I think they do not fall very much beneath what
they undertake for in their several Titles; that they consist of very weighty
and serious matter, and are indifferently Correct as to their Composition; that
they speak both to the Reason and to the Affection of the Reader, and are in
good measure fitted both to Convince and to Persuade: In short, that they may
be read with a great deal of Profit, and not without some Entertainment. The
former is the more considerable end, and it is what I mainly aim at; I wish the
Reader may do the same, and when both of us concur in so laudable an End, it is
to be hoped the Blessing of God will not be wanting; and I pray God it may not.

J. Norris
The General CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.
A Discourse concerning Worldly and Divine Wisdom, upon Luke 16. 8. A Discourse
concerning Righteous and Unrighteous Judgment, upon John 7. 24. A Discourse
concerning Religious Singularity, upon Romans 12. 2. A Discourse concerning the
Excellency of Praise and Thanksgiving, upon Psalm. 50. 23. The Importance of a
Religious Life, considered from the happy Conclusion of it, upon Psalm. 37. 38.
A Discourse concerning Heavenly-Mindedness, upon Phil. 3. 20. A Discourse of
Submission to Divine Providence, upon John 18. 11. A Discourse concerning the
Folly of Covetousness, upon Luke 12. 20. A Discourse concerning the
Consideration of God, and of the Divine Presence, upon Psalm. 16. 9. A Discourse
concerning doing God's Will on Earth as it is in Heaven, upon Mat. 6. 10.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Worldly and Divine Wisdom.
Luke 16. 8. The Children of this World are in their Generation Wiser than the
Children of Light.


Of all the infinite Follies incident to Mankind, there is none that may more
justly employ both our Pity and our Admiration than an Ill-timed, Misplaced and
Disproportionate Wisdom. The thorough Fool is not nigh so great a Prodigy as
the Half-wise Man; nor is a stark uniform Ignorance so mysterious and
unaccountable as an uneven misconducted Prudence. Of this latter we may
conceive Two sorts, either a proposal of a wrong End, or an undue prosecution
of a right one. In the sormer, the Man is supposed to be right enough in his
Means, but to be wrong in his End; in the latter, he is supposed to be as right
in his End, but to be wrong in his Means. In the former, we consider the Man as
Wife in little things, and a Fool in great concerns; Wife where Wisdom might be
spared, and a Fool where it is highly necessary. In the latter, we consider him
as not so wise in great things, as either himself or another is in little
things. And this I take to be a stranger sort of Folly than the former; for
here the Man is supposed to be so wise, as to have aimed at the true Mark, and
to have fixed upon a right End, but yet withal at the same time to be so much a
Fool, as not to prosecute this right End as prudently and carefully as the
other does a wrong one; which truly is a very odd Combination. It Is a great
Folly not to propose a good End, and he that fails in this part, can never
expect to have any thing orderly and regular in the whole course of his Life:
Such a Man (if he deserve that Name) lives Backward, and the longer he lives,
and the more active and busy he is, the more he is led out of his way, and the
further he is from his Journey's End. A Man were better have no Mark before
him, but live at Rovers, without any End or Design at all, than to propose an
End to himself that is not good. The former indeed seems to be more sottish and
stupid, and to have less of Soul and Thought in it; but the latter, if I
mistake not, is more dangerous and mischievous, and will lead a Man into more
fatal Miscarriages.

But though it be so great a Folly not to propose a good End, yet it seems a
much Stranger Folly not to prosecute it when you have proposed it, and when one
has attained so far, not to proceed further: The Reason may be obvious why a
Man does not propose a good End, for he may want clearness of Understanding to
discern which is so. But he that has proposed aright, shows by his very doing
so, that he does not want that. The rightness of his Aim sufficiently argues
the goodness of his Eyesight, and why then he should not prosecute his
well-chosen End, is somewhat unaccountable: And besides, the greatness and the
goodness of the End, has a natural and genuin efficacy both to quicken and to
regulate the execution of it; and the more considerable the End 18, the more it
has of this Influence. As the Means themselves do take their measure from the
End, so does the execution of them too, and the more weighty and concerning is
the End proposed, the more pressing and urging is the engagement that lies upon
the Proposer, both to choose fit and proper Means for the compassing it, and to
be diligent in the use and application of them when chosen. So that whether we
regard that rational Light and discernment of Mind which he discovers himself
to be Master of that proposes a right End, or that aid and assistance which is
communicated to him from the weight and moment of the End it self, (which
cannot but help on its own prosecution,) the Folly of not prosecuting a
well-proposed End, will appear to be of all others the most strange and amazing.

And yet this is that Folly which is more or less chargeable upon the Wisest of
Men; those who have duly considered and taken a just measure both of themselves
and of the World without them; that have well examined and sifted out the
capacities of their Nature, and the utter insufficiency of all created Good to
fill those Capacities; those that have duly prized and valued the whole
Inventory of this Worlds Goods, and have fixed a general Inscription of Vanity
upon them all, and who accordingly upon the strength of this Conviction, have
gone out of the Circle of this World for their Happiness, and have proposed to
themselves the supreme Good for their End, and for the wisdom of this their
Choice, are styled Children of Light: Even these Men are chargeable with this
strange Folly, and it is here actually charged upon them by the eternal and
substantial Wisdom of God in this his weighty Remark upon the Politic
Stratagem of the unjust Steward, The Children of this World are in their
Generation, wiser than the Children of Light.

In the Words there is something implied, and something directly asserted. It Is
implied,

1. That there are a sort of Men who are Children of this World, that is, who
make the Good of this World their End, and seek no further for their Rest and
Happiness. It Is implied again on the other side,

2. That there are a sort of Men who are Children of Light, who look beyond
this Sphere of Vanity, and black Vale of Misery, and propose to themselves the
Beatitudes of another Life, as their true and last End; and these our Lord
calls Children of Light, both from the Object of their Choice, (the Glories of
Heaven being frequently represented in Scripture under the Symbol of Light,)
and from their Wisdom in choosing it. It Is implied again,

3. That the former of these notwithstanding the preference here given them, do
not act according to the measures of true Wisdom; and therefore our Lord does
not say absolutely that they are Wise, but only that they are Wiser in their
Generation.

4. The thing directly asserted by our Lord is this, That notwitstanding their
want of true Wisdom, (that Wisdom which is from above) they are however wiser
in their Generation than the Children of Light. That is, that however they are
befooled in the Choice of their End, yet they make more prudent Provisions for
its Attainment and Security, and prosecute it by more apt and agreeable Means,
and with greater Cunning and Diligence than they who have chosen a better, do
theirs. And in this the Children of this World, though great Fools, are yet in
their Generation, in their way and manner, Wiser than the Children of Light.

These I shall make distinct Subjects of Discourse; to each of which I shall
speak according to the present Order.

And first of all, it is implied, that there are a sort of Men, who are Children
of this World, who make the Good of this World their End, and seek no further
for their Rest and Happiness. It Is I confess strange that there should be any
such, considering that the World is no proper Boundary for the Soul even in its
Natural Capacity, much less in its Spiritual: It Is too cheap and inconsiderable
a Good for an Immortal Spirit, much more for a Divine Nature. And therefore did
not the Commonness of the thing take off from the Wonder, 'twould seem no doubt
as great a Prodigy to see a Man make the World his End, as to see a Stone hang
in the Air. For what is it else for a Man, the weight of whose Nature presses
hard toward a stable and never failing Center, to stop short in a fluid and
yielding Medium, and take up with the slender stays of Vanity, and lean upon
the Dream of a Shadow? I say, why is not this to be looked upon as equally
strange and preternatural, as a Stone's hanging in the Air? Is not the Air as
proper a Boundary for a Stone, as the World is for a Soul? And why then is not
one as strange as the other? For in the First place, one would think it next to
impossible, that a Man who thinks at all, should not consider frequently and
thoroughly the vanity and emptiness of all Worldly Good, the shortness and
uncertainty of Life, the certainty of Dying, and the uncertainty of the Time
when; the Immortality of the Soul, the doubtful and momentous Issues of
Eternity, the Terrors of Damnation, and the Glorious things which are spoken,
and which cannot be uttered of the City of God. These are Meditations so very
obvious, so almost unavoidable, and that so block up a Man's way; and besides
they are so very important and concerning, that for my part I wonder how a Man
can think of any thing else. And if a Man does consider and revolve these
things, one would think it yet more impossible that he should make so vain a
thing as this World, his End; that he should think of Building Tabernacles of
Rest on this side the Grave, and say, it is good to be here. So that upon the
whole matter, were a Man put to the Question, whether 'twere possible that a
Rational and Thinking Creature, as Man is, should be so far a Child of this
World, as to make the Good of it his End, and seek no further for Rest and
Happiness; were a Man I say to consider this only in Notion and Theory, without
having any recourse to Observation and Experience, he would go nigh to resolve
the Question in the Negative, and think it impossible that he who is capable of
Choosing at all, should Choose so ill.

But, whether it is that Men do not heartily believe such a thing as a future
state of Happiness and Misery; or if they do, that they do not actually and
seriously consider it, but suffer it to lie dormant and unactive within them,
and so are as little affected with it, as if they did not believe it; or that
they look upon it through that End of the Perspective which respresents it as a
great way off, and so are more vigorously drawn by the Nearer, though Lesser
Loadstone; or whatever other cause may be assigned for it, we are too well
assured from Experience, that there are such Men in the World: Men, who going
through the Vale of Misery, use it not only as a Well to refresh Psalm. 84. 6.
and allay, but fully to quench and satisfy their Thirst; (...), as the Apostle
Phrases it it, who mind Phil. 3. 19.
and relish Earthly things, who make the Good of this World their last Aim, the
Sum total of their Wisbes, the upshot of their Desires and Expectations, their
End: Who love it as they are Commanded to love God, with all their Heart, Soul,
Mind and Strength, who rest and lean upon the World with the whole stress and
full weight of their Being, who outdo the Curse of the Serpent, and whose very
Soul cleaves to the Dust.

For I demand, Is not the Interest of this Animal Life, the great Governing
Principle of the World? Are not the Policies of the Statesman, and the little
Under-crasts of the Plebeian all put into Motion by this Spring, and all guided
and determined by this Measure? Is not every thing almost reckoned Profitable
only so far as it conduces to some Temporal Interest, in so much that the very
Name Interest, is almost appropriated to Worldly Advantage? And is not this the
great Bias of Mankind? Is not most of the Noise and Bustle that is in the
World, about the World it self, who shall have the greatest Share of it, and
make the greatest Figure in it? Do we not see Men all set and intent upon the
World, that lay themselves out wholly upon it, and that can relish nothing but
what has relation to it? Men that seem to grow into the Soil where they dwell,
and to have their Heads and Hearts fastened to the Ground with as many Cords
and Fibers, as the Root of a Tree; and that seem to be staked down and nailed
fast to the Earth, and that can no more be moved from it, than the Earth it
self can from its Center: In one word, Men of whom it may be said without
Censure, that the World is their God, and its Pleasures, Honors, and Profit,
their Trinity.

Nor is this matter of Practice only, but of Opinion too; for we know there
have been some among the Ancient Philosophers, who have expressly taught, that
the End of Man, the Totum Hominis, lies in the Good of the Animal Life, in the
Pleasure of the Grosser Senses. Thus we know did Aristippus, Cyrenaeus, and a
whole Sect of Philosophers after him, called Cyrenaici; which Opinion is also
charged upon Epicurus by Cicero, and by many of the Fathers of the Church: And
the Charge is still believed and entertained among many Persons of sufficient
Learning and Worth, notwithstanding the favorable and plausible Plea Monsieur
Gassendi has offered in the behalf of his Master. But the best Plea is, that
these are Pardonable in comparison of those who enjoy the Advantages of a
Revealed Religion, and that in its last Perfection and Consummation too, and
yet take no higher aim than at the Good of this World, and in direct
Contradiction to our Saviors Aphorism, think that the Life, that is, the true
Interest and Happiness Luke 12. 15.
of Man does consist in the Abundance of things which he possesses.

To our Experience, we may add the Attestations of Scripture, which gives
several intimations of this lowsunk, wretched and deplorable Degeneracy of
Soul. To instance in a few, does not Job say in vindication of his Integrity,
If I have made Gold my Hope, Job 31. 24.
or have said to the Fine Gold, thou art my Confidence? Implying that some
there were that did so. And does not the Psalmist say, Lo this is the Man that
Pfal. 52.8.
took not God for his Strength, but trusted in the multitude of his Riches, and
strengthened himself in his Wickedness? And does not the Apostle tell us of
some whose God is their Belly, and of Phil. 3.19.
others, whose Godliness is their Gain? 1 Timothy 6.5.
And what else does the Apostle mean, when he says of Covetousness, that it is
Idolatry? Does he not thereby intimate, that the Covetous Wretch not only
delights in his Possessions, and loves to count over his Heaps, (for this a Man
may do without being an Idolater,) but that he places his End and chief
Happiness in his Treasures, that he falls down and adores his Golden Calf; and
in the forementioned Phrase of Fob, makes Gold his Hope, and says to the Fine
Gold, Thou art my Confidence?

But the Minds of Men (thanks be to God) are not all under this Eclypse, nor is
this Darkness spread over the whole Face of the Deep; Light and Darkness divide
the Moral as well as the Natural World, though with the difference of unequal
Proportions; the Darker is here the bigger side. There are however, though not
so many, yet there are Secondly, a sort of Men who are Children of Light, whose
Minds are more Illuminated, and their Eye more clear and single, who look
beyond the Veil of the Material World, the Beauty of which can neither charm,
nor its Thickness detain their piercing Sight, and propose to themselves the
Beatitudes of another Life as their true and last End. This many do in
Profession, and some in Reality: In Profession all Christians do it, to whom
therefore the Title of Children of Light is promiscuously given by the Apostle,
Ye are all the Children of Light, 1 Thef. 5.5.
and the Children of the Day; We are not of the Night, nor of Darkness: That
is, as far as concerns Profession and Solemn Undertaking. But that which all
Christians profess, some do really do, proposing to themselves Habitually at
least, the Happiness of the other World as their last End, being by repeated
Experiences, as well as rational Reflections upon the Nature of things,
abundantly convinced of the vanity of this. And these indeed aim at the right
Mark, though all of them have not a Hand steady enough to hit it.

But to return again to the Children of this World, it is implied in the Third
Place, that these do not act according to the Measures of true Wisdom; for our
Lord does not say absolutely that they are Wise, but only that they are Wiser
in their Generation; which implies, that absolutely speaking, and upon the
whole, they are not Wise. Indeed they think themselves Wise, and the World for
the most part is of their Opinion: They are generally esteemed not only Wise,
but the only Wise Men, Men of Reach and Design, Policy and Conduct; and he that
does not play his Game, so as to thrive in the World, is generally pitied, more
for his Folly than for his Poverty. Nay hence, and hence only, are taken the
Measures of Wisdom and Prudence, and this is made the Rule and Standard of all
Policy and Discretion; a Man is counted so far Wise, and no farther, than he
knows how to get an Estate, to raise a Family, to give Birth to a Name, and
make himself great and considerable in the World: He that can do this, is a
Shrewd Man, and he that cannot, is either Pitied or Laughed at (according to the
Humor the World's in) by those that can.

Neither is it any Allay or Abatement of their Character, to say that all this
is brought about by Sinister and Indirect Means, by Fraud and Cousenage, by
Deceit and Corrupt Proceedings: This rather Commends the Parts and Ingenuity of
the Man; shows him to be a Man of Art and Contrivance, and that he owes his
Success more to good Management, than good Fortune; nay, he that can do thus,
is the Topping Wise Man, and is thought worthy not only to have, but so far to
ingross the Name, that a Shrewd Cunning Man (even in their own Language) is but
another Word for a Knave. This is the general Sense of the World.

But whatever the Opinion of Men may be, we are assured by the Apostle who had
Conversed in the other World as well as in this, that the Wisdom of 1 Cor. 3.
19.
this World is Foolishness with God; and if so, to be sure `tis Foolishness in
it self, since the Intellect of God is the Measure of all Truth. And the
Psalmist speaking of Worldly-Minded Men, that think their Houses shall continue
for ever, and call their Lands after their own Names, says expressly, This is
their Foolishness. And this Censure Psalm. 49.13.
he boldly charges upon them, how singular soever it might seem; and though not
only the present Generation of Men should vote them Wise, but even their
Posterity; those of more Improved Reasonings, and more Enlarged Experience,
should praise their Saying.

Thus light do these Men weigh in the Balance of the Sanctuary; nor will they
be found to be less wanting in that of Reason: For how can they deserve the
Title of Wise Men, who are out in the very first and leading part of Wisdom,
the Choosing of a Right End? This is such a mighty Flaw, as nothing that comes
after can make up or Compensate for. When once a Man has fixed himself a
wrongEnd, he has cut out a false Chanel for the whole Course of his Life, which
must needs be ever after one continued Mistake, one constant Blunder; and
though he be never so Ingenious afterward, to compass this End, his Wisdom
comes too late, and does but serve to insure and hasten his Ruin. The Ship
indeed has good Sails, there is nothing wanting to the Executive part; but
steering to a wrong Point it has this only advantage from them, to be dashed
upon the Rock with the greater Speed and Violence.

The short is, no Man is, or ought to be accounted Wise for that wherein he is
Mistaken; and that this is the case of those who propose to themselves false
Ends is most certain: For no Man proposes any End but what he takes to be Good,
and fit to be Prosecuted, Evil as Evil being not within the Possibilities of
Choice, whether as to the End or as to the Means. If therefore the End prove
really Evil (which is here supposed to be the Case,) it is otherwise than what
he thought it, and consequently he was abused and imposed upon in his Choice.
And now let him play his After-game never so well, and pursue this his false
End by never so apt and compendious Methods, the most he can pretend to, is to
drive well in a false Road, and the most he can justly expect is to be thought
a Cunning, but he must never set up for a Wise Man. He may indeed pass for such
an one among the Many, as an Ill Acted Part is commonly the most Applauded by
the injudicious Rabble of the Theater. But his Wisdom is now Foolishness with
God, the only exact and unerring Judge, and will one day be made appear so to
Angels and Men. Then also shall the Children of this World, who have been so
often admired and cried up for their extraordinary Depth and Reach, and been
reckoned the Sharpest Intreaguers and Projectors, the very Machiavels of their
Age, confess and lament their own great Folly and Weakness, (when yet it is too
late to be Wise,) and admire the Wisdom as well as the strange Salvation of
those whose Life they once thought Madness.

And thus I have done with the Three things implied in the Text; I now proceed
in the Fourth place to the thing directly Asserted: Which is, that
notwithstanding the want of true Wisdom in the Children of this World, they are
however Wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light. Or in other
Words, that however they are befooled in the Choice of their End, yet they make
more prudent Provisions for its Attainment and Security, and Prosecute it by
more agreeable Means, and with more Cunning and Diligence, than they who have
Chosen a Better, do theirs. They are indeed worse Proposers, but they are
better Executors, Worse Designers, but better Contrivers. They come vastly
short indeed of the Children of Light in the First part of Wisdom, the Choice
of a right End, in which respect the Child of Light has as much the Precedence
in point of Wisdom, as Heaven is better than Earth; but then they exceed them
as much in the Second, the Choice and Application of right Means.

Now this I shall make appear Two ways; First, Antecedently, by considering
what Grounds of Probability there are that it should be so. Secondly, a
Posteriori, by Comparing the Proceedings of each of these Men, whereby it will
appear that it is so.

And First, there are Grounds of Probability and Presumption that it should be
so: For it may be considered in the First place, that the Children of this
World having chosen the Good of the Animal Life for their End, must be supposed
to set the same value upon it, and to look upon it with the same Eye that the
Children of Light do upon Glory and Happiness; And this not with standing all
its real Vanity and Emptiness: For did they see and perceive that, they would
never have chosen it for their End; and if they do not, then it is all one to
them, as if it were a Solid and Substantial Good, and they prize it
accordingly. Thus far therefore they both stand upon equal Ground.

But then Secondly, It Is to be considered, that although these two Ends
considered Absolutely and Simply in themselves, are alike valued by their
respective Proponents, (for then is a thing at the highest value, when it is
made an End,) yet one of the Scales may and will receive some moments of
Advantage more than the other, from some Accidental and Collateral
Circumstances, which may more sensibly indear one of these Ends, and give it a
more Commanding Influence over the Soul that proposes it: Which indeed is the
present case.

For Is It, The good things of this World are Present, those of the other Remote
and Distant: How far distant we don't know, and are therefore apt to fancy the
farthest remove; like Travelers, that think the Way always longest, where they
are the greatest Strangers. Now we know a present Good has a great Advantage
above a far distant and late Reversion. A Candle that is near, affects us more
than the Sun a great way off, and by its Neighborhood, outdoes the others
Bigness. And as it is in distance of Place, so is it in distance of Time; a
present Good though it be less, is more affecting and inviting, than one of a
more Sizeable Dimension, if it be Future; and there is more Force and Virtue in
one Single Now, than in many Hereafters. It Is not in the Moral as in Physical
Statics; there indeed that Weight weighs heaviest, which is furthest removed
from the Center of Motion; but here the nearer the Weight, the stronger is its
Power: And there is this convincing Reason for it, the Good that is Present,
opens it self all at once to the Soul, and acts upon it with its full and
entire Force; there is not so much as a Ray of its Light but what strikes us.
But now that which is future, is seen by Parts and in Succession, and a great
deal of it is not seen at all; like the Rays of a too distant Object which are
too much dispersed before they come at us, and so most of them miss the Eye.
This makes the least Present Interest, outweigh a very considerable Reversion,
since the former strikes upon us with the strong Influence and Warmth of the
Neighboring Sun, the latter with the Faint and Cold Glimmerings of a Twinkling
Star. And accordingly the Holy Ghost takes notice of it, as an extraordinary
thing in Moses, and that argued him to be a Person of great Presence and
Discernment of Mind, that he could so rightly Calculate his Interest, as to
prefer the Future Rewards of Heaven, before the Present Glories of Egypt.

Then 2dly, The Good Things of this World are not only Present and at Hand, but
Sure and Certain; I mean as to us, for the other are no less so in themselves.
We are sure Job. 28.
(as Job says) that there is a Vein for the Silver, and a Place for Gold where
they fine it. Our Senses inform us of this, and that is a Testimony we seldom
reject. As for the place of Happiness, we have heard the Fame thereof indeed
with our Ears, but have neither seen it our selves, nor discoursed with those
that have; and although it is assured to us with as much Evidence as is
consistent with the Nature and Virtue of Faith, nay with almost as much as a
thing Future is capable of; yet Darkness and Fear commonly go together, and Men
are generally very jealous and distrustful about things whereof they are
Ignorant, or half Informed, as Imperfect Eyes are apt to start. And though the
Principles of Faith are in themselves as Firm and Firmer than those of Science,
yet to us it is not so Evident; nor do we ever assent so strongly to what we
Believe (be the Testimony never so Authentic,) as we do to what we Know.

Then 3dly, The Good Things of this World, as they are Present and Sure, so do
they strike upon the most Tender and Impressible part about us, our Senses.
They attempt us, as the Devil did Adam, in our Weaker part, through the Eve of
our Natures. A Sensible Representation is the strongest of all Representations;
a Sensible Representation even of the Vanity of the World, would work more with
us, than the Discourse of an Angel about it; and I question not, but that
Alexander the Great was more inwardly affected when he saw the Ruins of the
Grave of Cyrus, when he saw so great Power reduced to such Narrow Limits, such
Majesty seated on such a Throne; the Monarch of Asia Hid, or rather Lost in an
Obscure Cave, a Stone for his Bed, Cobwebs for his Tapestry, and all his Pomp
and Glory turned into Night and Darkness; I say, he was more Convinced of the
Vanity of Greatness by this lively Appeal to his Senses, than he ever was or
could be by all the grave Lectures of his Master Aristotle. And if the Vanity
of the World when represented to the Senses, has such vigorous Effects upon
them, what shall we think of the Glory of it when so Represented? How would
that Affect and Subdue us!

And this the Devil very well knew and considered, when he was to Tempt the Son
of God; his Design was to decoy him into Covetousness and Ambition, and in
order to this, he might have entertained him with fine Discourses about the
Wealth and Glories of the Terrestrial Globe, and have read him a Geographical
Lecture upon the Kingdoms and Empires of it; but he knew his Advantage better
than so; and chose rather to draw a Vistonary Landscape before him, and present
him with a Sensible Idea of all this, knowing by old Experience how much more
apt the Senses are to take Impression, than any other faculty of Man,

Now this is the great advantage that the Good Things of this World have, they
are obvious to our Senses, we See them, we Hear them, We Smell them, we Taste
them, we Feel and Handle them, and have the most intimate and indearing
Conversation with them; The things that are Temporal are Seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
says the Apostle: It Is their distinguishing Character. But the things that are
Eternal are not seen, but only through a Glass darkly, so Seen as not to be
discerned, and in reference to the other World, as the same Apostle says, We
walk by Faith and not by Sight. 2 Cor. 5.7.


From these and other such Collateral Advantages which the Things of this World
have above those of the next, it may in the First place be presumed, that those
who have erred so far as to make this their End, are in all probability like to
Love it more Intensely, and value it more highly than the Children of Light do
their End, which wants these Sensible Indearments and Recommendations. Well,
and if so, then it further follows, that of necessity they must be more
heartily concerned for its Attainment, and consequently more Wary in the
Choice, and more Diligent in the Use of such Means as serve to that purpose.
For the Love of the Means always receives its Measure from that of the End.

And thus we see what grounds of probability there are, that it should be so. I
come now in the Second Place, briefly to compare the Proceedings of each of
these Men, whereby it will appear, that de facto it is so.

And here First, we find by Experience, that the Men of this World do prefer
their Secular Interest above all other things whatsoever; and that not only in
Notion and Theory, Habitually and in General, (for that is supposed in its being
made their End,) but also in every instant of Action, in all Junctures and
Circumstances. Though their End be False, yet they are not so, but keep true to
it, and always prefer it, retaining in every point of Action the very same
Sense and Judgment they had of it when they first made it their Choice. And to
satisfy that they are in good earnest, they will adhere to it at any rate, they
will forfeit any Good, and undergo any Evil to Secure this their grand Stake.
For will they not Rise Early, and Late take Rest, Drudge and Toil, Plot and
Contrive, Cheat and Defraud, Lie and Dissemble, be of any Religion, or of no
Religion, and submit to all the Basenesses imaginable, to Get or Secure or
Recover a Place of Honor or Profit? Will they not incur the Curses of the
Widow and Orphan, the Contempt of Wise Men, the Hatred of Mankind, the Censures
of Posterity, the Displeasure of God, and even Damnation it self for the sake
of their beloved Mammon? They will; they will bustle through all this, and will
gain their Point, though they lose every thing besides: And herein they are
consistent with themselves, they act agreeably to their Principles.

But now will the Children of Light do much for their End? Will these part with
the World for Heaven, as the other will part with Heaven for the World? Will
these do or suffer any thing for the Interest of their Souls, as the other will
for that of their Bodies? Some few there are that will, and God add to their
Number. But are there not many who Habitually and in General, have proposed to
themselves Heaven for their End, and so far are supposed to give it the
Preference above all; and yet when they come to be set upon by a Temptation, to
have before them the Charms of Pleasure, or the Terrors of Pain, or to be
pressed with either Hopes of Gain, or Fear of Loss; in short, when they come to
have anyother considerable Interest brought into Competition with that which
they made their End, will they not then suffer a present Interruption of their
former Judgment, and actually undervalue what they Habitually prefer? Will they
not enter into a Cloud of Darkness and Obscurity, lose the present Light of
their former Convictions, and so act as Foolishly as those that never had any
better Principles, or truer Sentiments? Will they not prove False to their
Cause and to themselves, make a Foolish Exchange, let go the Substance, and
catch at the Shadow? Will they not refuse to take up the Crown for fear of the
Thorns that guard it, and choose rather to lose Heaven, than be Translated
thither in a Fiery Chariot? Yes, it is to be feared that most of them will; and
that of those many that have proposed Heaven as their End, there are but few
that would have the Courage to be Martyrs for it.

Again Secondly, The Children of this World as they will spare no Pains, so
will they lose no Time or Opportunity for the Securing a Temporal Interest.
They greedily Seize upon the next Minute, take Opportunity by the Forelock, and
make haste to be Rich, though by doing so, they know they shall not be
Innocent. They carefully observe every Season, lay hold upon the First that
comes, and will be sure to strike Sail with the very next Wind that will carry
them to their Port. They know very well, that the present time is the only time
they are Masters of, and that they may reckon upon as their own, and therefore
that they will be sure to Improve, and not trust to the Uncertainties and
Contingencies of Futurity. Let but a Question arise about their Title to their
Estate, and they cannot Sleep till it be cleared up and Confirmed. Let but a
Place of Dignity or Profit fall, and with what Expedition do these Eagles
repair to the Carcass! They take the Wings of the Morning, perhaps of the Night
too, and fly as if Running for a Prize, or Chased by an Enemy.

But now, are the Children of Light such Prizers of Time, and such Improvers of
Opportunity? 'Twere well if they were. For what is more common than to see Men,
not only the professedly Wicked and Profligate, but even those who have set
their Faces Sionward, and propose Heaven as their End, to procrastinate and
adjourn their Repentance from Day to Day, from Month to Month, from Year to
Year, to delay their Preparations for Eternity, and to Sleep Soundly and
Securely, in a Doubtful and sometimes in a Damnable and Irreconciled State; and
all this, though they know how short and uncertain their Lives are, that it is
but a Breath and a Vapor that soon passes away, and we are gone. Though they
know that there is but this one time of Probation, and that there is no Eccl.
9.10.
Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave. Though they know
that Now is the Accepted time, 2Cor. 6.2.
that Now is the Day of Salvation.

Again Thirdly, the Children of this World, as they will lose no Time, so
neither will they let slip any other Advantage of advancing their Fortunes, and
of providing against a Wet Day. They twist their own Interest with the Interest
of their Friends, seek out for all Helps, and make use of the Best, and take
the advantage of every Rising Ground. They have also a quick Eye upon all
Revolutions, Suppose themselves in all Possible Cases, and make early
Preparations for every Accident. They sit like Wary and Watchful Spiders in the
Heart of their Webs, and there with a quick and perceptive Sense, they feel out
the least Disturbances that threaten the Security of their little Tenement. Nor
do they smell out Danger more suddenly than they provide against it. Thus the
unjust Steward, when he foresaw he should quit his Office, and in that his
Livelihood, and be turned loose to the wide World, he presently bethought him
of a Plank to Swim upon, made an Interest with his Lords Debtors, by
under-rating their Accounts, that so when his Master should Discard him, they
in Requital of his Kindness, might Receive and Harbor him.

But now are the Children of Light so careful to make use of all Helps and
Means that may further them in the Attainment of their Great End? Such as the
Grace of God, Happiness of Temper and Complexion, Good Education, Well-disposed
Circumstances of Life, the Good Examples of others, Advice of Spiritual
Persons, and the like. Besides, are they also so Frugal and Provident, so
Forecasting and Contriving for the future? Are they so careful in the day Grace
to lay up in Store against a Spiritual Famine, in the days of Peace to Store
themselves with Spiritual Armor against the time of Persecution, in the time
of Life and Health to provide against the Hour of Sickness and Death, and by a
Wise Dispensation of the Fading and Unrighteous Mammon, to procure to
themselves everlasting Habitations? Are they? Every ones Experience and
Observation may assure him that they are not.

Once more, the Children of this World, as they Catch at all Advantages that
may further their Grand Affair, so are they withal as careful to avoid all
Occasions of Loss and Damage; they love to tread upon Firm Ground, shun Hazards
as well as actual Misfortunes, and will not so much as come within the Smell of
Danger. How Shy is the Man of Interest, of lighting among such Company as he
thinks will be apt to Borrow Money of him, draw him into Suretyship, or betray
him into any Expenses! Does he not fly from these as from the Snares of Death,
or from the Face of a Serpent?

But do the Children of Light take the same Care to avoid all Appearances of
Evil, all Spiritual Dangers, and all Occasions and Temptations of Sinning
against God and their own Happiness? We Pray indeed, and our Savior has taught
us to do so, that God would not Lead us into Temptation? But don't we often
lead our Selves into as Bad as the Worst of those we can Pray against? We
venture oftentimes causelessly and rashly within reach of the Devil's Chain,
and are not afraid to stir up and awake that Roaring Lion: We love to play with
Danger, to handle Knives and Razors, to walk upon Slippery Ground, to stand
upon Turrets and Battlements, and to hazard our Virtue and Innocence by
Needless, and sometimes Doubtful Trials, where if we should Overcome, the
Victory would scarce atone for the Imprudence. So much do the Children of this
World exceed the Children of Light in Wisdom.

Thus it is, and to our great shame we must Confess it: There is no Doubt or
Dispute in the Victory, the Contention has been all along very unequal, and the
Odds very apparent; we are utterly Distanc'd in the Race, and see the Prize of
Wisdom born away before us. We have indeed in our Eye a much Nobler Mark, but
we want a Steady Hand. Our End is better than theirs, but our Management is not
so good. And what a shame is it for us that have proposed a Greater and a
Better End, and are also more Instructed in the Choice of Means, (which are
pointed out and described to us by God himself,) to be yet so far outwitted by
those of Lower Aims, and who are fain to Study and Contrive their own Means,
and whose Wisdom after all, is Foolishness with God! And yet thus it is, the
Devil's Scholars are better Proficients than Christ's Disciples; the Ark falls
before Dagon, and Light is outshone by Darkness.

What therefore remains, but that since we will not Learn in Christ's, we
should be sent to the Devil's School, and imitate the Politics of the Dark
Kingdom, and of the Children of this World? Imitate them I say, not in the
Choice of the End, (which indeed is very Poor and Low,) but in that Wisdom,
Diligence and Care wherewith they prosecute it, and be as Wise at least unto
Salvation, as they are to Destruction. Go to the Aunt thou Sluggard, Prove. 6.6.
says Solomon, consider her Ways, and be Wise. And may I not in like manner
bespeak the greatest part even of Piously disposed Christians, Go to the Men of
the World, and learn Wisdom?

Let us then be as Wise as these Serpents; and since we have Chosen the Better
Part, and are so nigh to the Kingdom of God, let us not for the want of One
thing, miss of being completely Wise and Happy. But as we have made a good
Choice, let us prosecute it with equal Prudence. So will our Wisdom be Whole
and Entire; Uniform and Consistent, Blameless and Irreprehensible; in a Word,
that Wisdom which shall be Justified of all her Children.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Righteous and Unrighteous Judgment.
John 7. 24. Judge not according to the Appearance, but judge Righteous
Judgment.


THAT which the great Descartes makes necessary to a Philosopher, is indeed no
less so to a Christian; to strip and divest himself of all Prejudices and
Partialities, to unravel all his former Sentiments, to unthink all his
Pre-conceived Opinions, and so reduce his Soul to the natural Simplicity of a
Blank Table, and to the Indifferency of an even and well-poised Balance. For
as it matters much in reference to our Actions, what our Sentiments and
Judgments of things are (because we always act as at that present instant we
think,) so does it to the Regularity and Uprightness of our Judgments what the
Temper and Disposition of our Mind is. The Wise Ben-Sirach has long since
observed, that Wisdom will not enter into a Polluted Spirit; and St. Paul, that
the Animal Man perceives not 1 Cor. 2.14.
the things of God. There are it seems some Moral as well as Natural
Dispositions of the Man that make the Soul unfit for Knowledge, and till these
Scales fall off from her Eyes, she cannot see. But the Pythagoreans went
higher, and taught their Disciples, (...) that they must separate and unwind
themselves even from their very Bodies, if they would be good Philosophers.
This in a Qualified and Corrected Sense is true, for the Body is the great
Impediment and Disadvantage of the Soul, and therefore all Bodily Passions and
Inclinations, as well as Intellectual Habits and Appetites must be put to
Silence, in the still and Attentive Search and Inquiry after Truth. But to the
present purpose, it will be enough to remark, that Prejudices and
Prepossessions as well as vicious Habits, a cross Constitution, and a gross
Texture of Blood and Spirits, do Cloud and Pervert the Understanding, and take
away the Key of Knowledge. This is that Veil which (as the Apostle complains,)
remained 2 Cor. 3.4.
untaken away upon the Jews, in the Reading of the Old Testament, and which
hindered them from understanding it, and made them stand out in defiance
against all the Divine Precepts and Convincing Works of the Son of God, whose
Divinity through this Veil of Prejudice they could not discern. It was a
greater hindrance to them in distinguishing the Character of his Person, than
the Veil of his own Flesh was, or the Mystery of the Incarnation. This
therefore must be removed by the Christian as well as by the Philosopher, and
the Soul must be Purged before it can be Enlightened, Freed from Prejudices and
false Appearances before it can be from Errors and Misapprehensions. Without
this Purity of Heart, there will be so little Clearness of Head, that let our
Parts stand upon never so great Advantages, either of Art or of Nature, we
shall neither be right in our Determinations of things, nor just in our Censure
of Persons; neither Wise in our Discourses, nor Righteous in our Sentences; we
shall neither maintain Truth nor Charity. All which is briefly Intimated and
summarily Contained in this Admonition of our Savior to the prejudiced and
partially affected Jews, Judge not according to the Appearance, but judge
Righteous Judgment.

In Discoursing upon which Words, I shall First of all Inquire, what it is in
general to judge according to Appearance?

Secondly, Whether all judging according to Appearance, be opposed to judging
Righteous Judgment, and consequently here forbidden?

Thirdly, If all be not, which it is that is so?

Lastly, I shall show the great Reasonableness and Necessity of the Precept,
and Conclude.

I begin with the first Inquiry, what it is in general to Judge according to
Appearance. Now this will be best known by Considering the import of the Terms
severally. By Judging therefore, is properly understood that action of the Mind
which either joins the Attribute with the Subject, or separates it from it. Or
to speak less Artificially, and more to Common Apprehension, which either
Affirms or Denies one thing of another. By Appearance, I understand the
Representation of the Object to the Mind, with its Motives and Arguments, true
or false, in order either to Assent or Dissent. So that to Judge according to
Appearance, is in other Words to Affirm or Deny one thing of another, upon the
representation of certain Arguments or Motives, to Believe, Think, or to be
Assured that a thing is so or so, upon such and such Grounds; and so it takes
in the Threefold kind of Assent, and that in all the variety of Degree, Faith,
Opinion, and Science, with this only difference between them, that whereas
Faith and Opinion do not necessarily suppose a Firm Foundation, but are
indifferent to due and undue Appearances, (for a Man may believe and think upon
false as well as upon good Grounds.) Science does always suppose a due and
regular Appearance of the Object, and cannot proceed but upon sufficient
Grounds.

And this I think sufficient in Answer to the First Question; I proceed
therefore to inquire Secondly, whether all Judging according to Appearance, be
opposed to judging Righteous Judgment, and consequently here forbidden. But we
need not inquire long about it, for it is most certain that all is not; for if
it were, there could then be no such thing as that Righteous Judgment which our
Savior Commands, and therefore Supposes. Nay, there could be no such thing as
Judging at all, because all manner of Judgment is grounded upon the Appearance
of things, and without some motive of Persuasion, some show of Truth, no Man
can in any degree be Persuaded. For the Understanding can no more be determined
without an Appearance of Truth, than the Will can without an Appearance of
Good: And consequently it is as absurd, that all Judging according to Appearance
should be Criminal, as that all Willing according to Appearance should be so.
For then indeed all manner of Judgment would be Unrighteous, and a Man could
not use his Intellectual Faculty, but he must Sin; which would introduce a new
and unheard of Skepticism into the World, and oblige Men to suspend the
Exercise of their Intellectual Powers, not because there is no Truth, but
because it is not lawful to Embrace her.

Since therefore, all Judging according to Appearance, is not opposed to
Righteous Judgment, nor consequently here Forbidden, it concerns us to inquire
in the Third place, which it is that is so.

And First to Judge ill of a Man upon clear and full Evidence, is not that
Judging according to Appearance, which is here Forbidden, as opposed to
Righteous Judgment: Nay this is the most Righteous Judgment that can be, for
this is the due use of our Judging Faculty, in the right Exercise whereof, it is
impossible there should be any Miscarriage. I do not make a mere Judging
Rightly, or according to what is True, to be a due use of our Understandings;
for though a Man give his Judgment according to Truth, yet if he be determined
to such an Assent by incompetent Motives, he does not use his Understanding
aright; but if it be in a matter of bare Speculation, is guilty of Levity and
Rashness; if in a thing wherein his Brothers Reputation is concerned, of
Uncharity and Censoriousness. But if my Judgment of another be never so Ill,
provided the Evidence be Full and Clear, I make a right use of my Judging
Faculty, nor can my Judgment be taxed as Unrighteous. And upon this Principle
relies all the Innocence and Equity of Courts of Justice, the severest of whose
Verdicts are Justified by the Sufficiency of the Evidence.

And there is the same common Reason and Measure for the more Private Court of
Conscience, that there is for the more Public ones, and that which warrants
the Proceedings of either, will justify both; so that if it be lawful for a
Jury to bring in a Verdict of the highest Guilt against a Man upon clear
Evidence, any Private Person may also upon the like Grounds pass the like Ill
Judgment concerning any Man within his own Breast, and in his Thoughts
pronounce him a Criminal, if he has good Evidence for such a Judgment. Thus if
I see a Man live in a constant course of Vice, in open Defiance to all Laws
both Human and Divine, to Wallow in all manner of Bestiality, and drink down
Iniquity with Greediness, I may safely and innocently pronounce him an Ill Man.
First, because it is not in a Man's Power to suspend such a Judgment, any more
than it is to resist a Demonstration in Mathematics. The Truth thrusts her self
upon me, and I cannot put her back, she will be Embraced and I cannot refuse
her; I may wink against the Sun, but I cannot shut my Eyes against Manifest
Truth: And to pretend Charity here, is ridiculous; for however Charity may
oblige me to Believe and Hope the Best where there is any room for a favorable
Construction, yet certainly it does not oblige me to put out my Eyes, and
reject all the Information of my Senses: Neither is it possible for me to do
so. But suppose I could resist such a Judgment, yet I need not, because
Secondly, in such a Case, there is no wrong done to the Party whom my Censure
concerns: He is represented in a faithful Glass, censured after his due
Character, and called by his proper Name, and therefore cannot complain of an
Injury, Acts 13.10
without committing one. O full of all Subtilty and all Mischief, thou Child of
the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness, said St. Paul to Elymas the
Sorcerer, when he saw him endeavoring to turn away the Deputy from the
Christian Faith. And have not I chosen Twelve, and one of you is a Devil, said
our Blessed Savior. Both these Charges went very high, but the Evidence of the
Guilt bore Proportion to them, and that was their Justification. It Is therefore
very Warrancable to pass a Severe Judgment upon a Man, when'tis plain and out
of question that he deserves it. Nay it is not only Warrantable, but in several
respects of great use and necessity; for by this Means I am instructed to
enlarge my Litany, both for his Conversion, and for my own Deliverance, to
apply Reproofs and Advices with all other Methods of Reformation, to beware of
his Contagion my self, and in great Measure to prevent its diffusion among
others. Whereas if we suffer our Eyes to be so far blinded by a pretended
Charity, as not to see the Devil under his Monastic Disguise, he has what he
could wish, and what Ill Men use to wish; Noctem Peccatis, and Fraudibus objice
Nubem,

to be Skreen'd about with the Shades of Night, and to Sin in a Cloud, and will
do the more Mischief for not being better Understood, and destrov like the
Pestilence that walks Psalm. 91. 6.
in Darkness.

But Secondly, to judge Ill of a Man upon such a Concurrence of shrewd
Circumstances as makes up what we call a Moral Demonstration, is not that
judging according to Appearance, which is here Condemned. This is also
frequently relied upon in Courts of Justice, where Sentence of Death is often
given upon such Evidence; nay the greatest part of Human Affairs is known to
turn upon this Hinge, and indeed not without good Reason. For although this be
an Inferior degree of Evidence, and such as leaves an Absolute Possibility
that the thing may be otherwise, yet it secures a Man from all Fear of the
contrary; and a Traveller may as little doubt of his way when lightened by the
numerous Union of little Splendors in the Milky Way, as when he has the Broad
Eye of Heaven for his Guide. For though every single Circumstance in this great
heap of Inducements, has but the force of a Probability, and consequently all
together can produce no more than that by a proper and direct efficacy; yet
there is a new and secondary Force that arises from Reflection; and the
Confederate Probabilities, weigh more in their Conjunction, than not only some,
but even all of them would do Singly. Indeed they fall little short of a strict
Demonstration, it being hardly conceivable how there should be such a conflux
of Arguments upon one side of the Contradiction, if the Truth were not there
too.

And moreover there is one Advantage that a Moral Demonstration has above a
Physical one, namely, that there can be no contrary Demonstration brought
against it. It Is otherwise in the latter; as for instance, in that endless and
unbounded Controversy concerning the Composition of a Continuum and the
infinite Divisibility of Quantity, where there are plain Demonstrations (that
is, such as by Men of Art and Subtilty cannot be discerned from such,) on both
sides, which yet are Contradictory. But now, this a Moral Demonstration does
not admit of, since it cannot lay claim to that Name, till after the
Probabilities of both sides have been Compared, and one Scale mightily
outweighs the other. Whenever therefore there is this Evidence for any Man's
Wickedness, I may safely censure him as Guilty. See a short, but very
convincing Account of this matter in Dr. Burnet's Latin Theory; the Second
Part, Page 126.
Thus, that the Sea of Rome is the Seat of Antichrist, though this be not
evident up to the degree of Physical Demonstration, yet when I consider what
the Notes and Marks of Antichrist are, how various in their Number, how
considerable in their Quality, and how exactly they all agree to a certain
Order of Men in the World, and to none besides, together with all the variety
of Concurrence in point of Synchronisms and the like; I suppose I might without
any danger of Censoriousness or Uncharity, write Mystery upon the Triple Crown,
and conclude him that wears it to be the Man of Sin. This would not be that
Judging according to Appearance, which is opposed to Righteous Judgment.

As it is not, in the Third place, to suspect Ill of a Person upon considerable
signs and circumstances, that is, upon such as would determine my Opinion in any
other Matter wholly indifferent, and where I have no Interest, Passion or
Prejudice concerned, to have it thus or otherwise. To pronounce Absolutely and
Peremptorily in such a case, would indeed be a degree of Censoriousness beyond
the allowance of either Charity or Prudence, because the Conclusion would then
exceed the force of the Premises, which is ill in Logic, and worse in
Morality; but a bare Suspicion is very Warrantable upon such grounds, and
consistent with the highest Charity and Prudence of a Christian; for Suspicion
is not Evil as Suspicion, being as such only a certain degree of Assent, which
cannot be evil in its own Nature, but is either so or otherwise, according as
the grounds are upon which it proceeds. Indeed to be Suspicious, we commonly
take in an ill Sense, and reckon it among the Characters of an ill Man, not
that we think Suspecting to be in it self unlawful, but because we suppose the
Man whom we call Suspicious, more apt and forward to entertain ill Suspicions,
than in the reason of the thing he ought to be. But if the grounds of my
Suspicion be just and reasonable, such as considering Men use to be determined
by in other matters of acknowledged Indifferency, it will then be as lawful for
me to Suspect as to Judge more absolutely upon grounds that are more clear and
evident.

There are (I observe) a certain sort of Men in the World who are not only
careless and regardless of their Behavior, not using that Caution and
Circumspection which they ought and easily might for the prevention of ill
Suspicions, but studiously order the course of their Conversation so, as if
they were fond of Jealousies, and laid a Trap for Censure, and designed to
decoy Men into an ill opinion of them; and then (which is the most surprising
thing of all,) as soon as they have caught their Prey, and are thought and
spoken amiss of, they cry out, the World is censorious, and where is your
Charity? But in the First place, are not these Men even with the World? Don't
they Centure as much as they themselves are Centured? But to let that pass, how
do they make good their Charge? Why, they say they are Innocent, they are not
the Men the World has taken and represented them for. It may be so, but sure my
Charity does not stand or fall with the Truth of your Guilt, the Question as to
that being not whether you are really the Man I took you to be, but whether you
have not given me just and reasonable grounds to think so. And if you have,
it is not your Innocence that will condemn me of unjust Censure, any more than
it will acquit you from the Crime of Scandal.

If therefore these great Pretenders to Charity and Candor, would have the
ill-natured World leave off Censuring according to such Appearances, let them
be more careful, to abstain from all Appearances of Evil; for as long as Men
put on Bears Skins, the Dogs will Bark, and to be angry with them if they do,
is as absurd., as to give them the Occasion. For what if you walk not in the
Counsel of the Ungodly? yet if you stand in the way of Sinners, and sit in the
Seat of the Scornful, if you have all the Symptoms and Appearances of an ill
Man, I have good grounds to suspect you as such, and a well-grounded Suspicion
is always according to Charity. Thus if a Man who for many Years past, has been
vehemently suspected to be of a different Religion from that which he openly
Professes, should at length when the warm influence of a like-perswaded Princes
Favor, invites him to come abroad and dismantle his Secrecies, and at such a
period of this Life too, when it is to be presumed that the vibration of his
Judgment has been long since over, and fetled in the point of its gravity, and
that he had no new Changes to make, if I say he should then appear to be what
the World took him for long before, I hope it is a pardonable Censure, if I
think he has been a Dissembling Hypocrite all along, and that he would have
continued so to the last, if Opportunity and Countenance had not put an end to
his Dissimulation.

To think ill of a Man upon such grounds and appearances as these, is to think
rationally, and how can he transgress, that duly follows the conduct of his
Reason? The Wise Son of Sirach allows greater Liberty, when he tells us, that a
Man's Attire, Excess of Laughter and Gait, show what he is; that is, afford us
just Measures whereby to judge of him, to judge him to be none of the Wisest.
And our Savior reproves Luke 12, 56.
the Jews for not discerning the face of the Times. And if a Man may judge of
the Times, then why not of those that live in them, and upon whose account
alone it is that one Time is distinguished from another in relation to good or
evil? In all this therefore we sin not, nor charge our Neighbor foolishly. But
this we do,

First, Whenever we take up an ill Opinion of a Man rashly and suddenly, and at
first dash prick him down for a Knave, without so much as giving our selves the
trouble of inquiring into the merits of the cause; there are too many that do
so, that let their Thoughts and Tongues too run before their Wit; that throw
out their Censures at random, and speak Evil ex tempore, without considering of
whom they talk, or what, or why: Men that are for running down every one that
comes in their way, and are for passing Sentence immediately without any trial
or examination, nay without so much as the formality of asking, Guilty or not
Guilty? This is certainly a very preposterous headlong method against all sense
and good breeding as well as Charity. It Is like the Jews that were all for
Crucifying the Lord of Life before they had heard him. But this is such a gross
piece of Injustice as sufficiently condemns it self; all therefore that I shall
further say to the Men of this Practice is, that he who makes have to Censure,
can no more be Innocent, than he that makes have to be Rich; and that if we
ought to consider before we venture to Commend, (as Wise Men say we ought,)
then much more ought we before we Condemn.

Secondly, When though we do consider, and make some enquiry into the cause,
and withal find some ground and foundation for an ill Judgment, yet we conclude
beyond the force of the Premises, and give a Peremptory Sentence, where there
are grounds for no higher an Assent, than Opinion or Suspicion. This is a
certain sign that we are not determined by the Moments of Truth, by the
strength of Reason and Argument, but by some other By-Consideration and partial
Inducement. For were our Judgments guided and determined by the sole
Appearances of Truth, it is impossible that our Assent should be stronger than
the Evidence that causes it. For the Understanding of it self, can be
determined no farther than as the Object appears to be either true or false; if
it be, all that overplus of Judgment that exceeds the degrees of Evidence, must
be produced by some other cause, the Evidence alone could cause no more than
what was proportionable to it. There is indeed a mixture in all such Judgments,
and the Will has a part in them as well as the Understanding. He therefore that
concludes worse of another than in Appearance he has reason to do, must be
supposed in some measure willing to do so, that is, in other Words, to be under
some Malice or Prejudice-against him; and he that judges upon such Principles,
can never judge Righteous Judgment.

Thirdly, This we do when we conceive an ill Apprehension of a Person from one
or two single instances of his Life, without considering the general tenor of
his Conversation. This is a very unjust way of proceeding, and contrary to all
Human and Divine Measures. The main current of a Man's Life is to be regarded,
and if this maintain a regular Course, it is not here and there a little
straggling Rivulet that should spoil the Character. For if the Denomination
ought always to be taken from the major part, certainly much more so when it
lies on the most favorable side. To balance therefore one single wandering
Star against a whole Constellation of regular actions, is a very ill sort of
unrighteous Judgment, and such as the best of Men could never be able to abide,
who must needs all be cast in such a Court as this. Such a way of Judging
therefore, is not to be endured, especially considering that the Supreme Judge
of all does not judge us at this rate, but often proceeds by a contrary
measure, and suffers one single Virtue to cover a multitude of Sins.

Fourthly and Lastly, To give one general Measure for all; this we do whenever
our ill Opinion of a Man is built upon such poor and slight Appearances, as
would not be sufficient to gain our Assent in any other indifferent matter,
wherein we are altogether dis-interessed which way the Scale turns, or prevail
with us to think the same concerning another Person. This is a sure Sign that
Prejudice holds the Balance, ('it is held so uneven,) and that we judge what we
would willingly have. And this is more particularly that judging according to
Appearance, which our Lord here condemns. For thus stood the case, our Savior
had performed a Cure upon the Sabbath day, among those who were Superstitious
Observers of it; now this carried some Appearance of its Violation: whereupon
the Jews tax him with Profaning that holy Rest, not at all reflecting either
upon Moses's seeming inconsistency, in appointing such a troublesome work as
Circumcision to be done on that day, as often as it happened to be the Eighth,
or upon themselves for then administering it. But the reason was plain, they
were soundly prejudiced against Christ, but not against Moses or themselves.
Well therefore might our Lord say, if a Man on the Sabbath day receive
Circumcision, that the Law of Moses should not be broken, are ye angry at me
because I have made a Man every whit whole on the Sabbath day? Will you wound
upon that day, and shall not I heal? Judge not according to Appearance, ((...),
according to every slight superficial Appearance, such as you your selves would
not submit to in another case,) but judge Righteous Judgment. The great
Reasonableness and Necessity of which Precept comes now in the last place to be
considered.

Its Equity relies mainly upon this double ground, the ill Principle that such
superficial Judging proceeds from, and the ill Consequences it leads to.

First, It proceeds from an ill Principle; it argues First, that we are
conscious of some inward Baseness in our selves, something that is very low and
fordid, which makes us so prone and easy to suspect the same in others; as that
is Drunk himself, fancies every one else to be so that he meets. It argues
Secondly, that we thirst after Eminency, and yet despair of attaining it any
other way, than by levelling those about us; which makes us so ready and
willing to discover Spots in the Moon, and Flaws in the most Solid and Massy
Virtue. It argues Thirdly, a Mind very disassected to our Neighbor, to Human
Nature indeed, and as much alienated from the true Spirit of Love and Goodness.
That we are full of Envy, Pride, Malice and Prejudice, that we love to dwell
upon Sores and Deformities, that we take a secret pleasure in the Follies and
infirmities of Mankind, and grieve at that whereat the Angels rejoice, namely,
the wife Behavior, and good order of Men, all which is Inhuman and Diabolical,
fit only for Devils and Evil Spirits, but altogether contrary to the unselfish
universalized nature of God, who rejoiced when he saw all things good and
perfect; and to Charity, whose Character St. Paul tells us, is, that it
rejoices not in Iniquity. 1 Cor. 13. 6


But Secondly, the Consequences of this sort of Judging are as bad as the
Principle; for Is It, He that proceeds to Judgment upon every little Appearance,
must needs be often mistaken, and give Sentence with and Erring Key, and so
often incur that Woe pronounced by the Prophet against all such as call Evil
Good, and Good Evil; Isa. 5. 20.
because Falsehood often wears the guise of Truth, and things seem otherwise
than they are. Thus the Affability and free Conversation of our Savior, which
was really the effect of his great Humility and condescending Goodness, and of
his earnest desire to benefit Mankind, was hardly Censured by the Maligning
Jews, and misconstrued as a piece of Levity and Dissoluteness; Behold, say
they, a Man Mat. 11.19.
Gluttonous, and a Wine bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners: By this
means we shall mis-rate both Persons and Things, and often deny those our good
word, who it may be, if better known, deserve even our Reverence and
Admiration. By this means private Grudges will be entertained, and open
Quarrels will be broached, Men's Affections will be groundlesly and
unaccountably estranged from one another, the Bands of Friendship will be
untyed, and Men will be jealous and afraid of their dearest well-wishers; good
Constitutions will suffer for Personal Miscarriages, good Churches for unworthy
Members, good Religions for ill Professors, good Counsels and good Causes for
their ill Success; and lastly, that good Reputation which all Men exceedingly
value, and which some Men have a fair Right to, and which the Wisest of Men
prefers before Prove. 22.4.
great Riches, will be wounded by the Roving Shot of every Gossiping Tongue.

To which I may add in the last place, that when Men have once accustomed
themselves to hard Censures, upon small Appearances, they will be apt to
enlarge their Court of Judicature, and from Censuring the Actions of Men,
proceed to Question and Condemn the Dispensations of Providence, and say with
the Impious House of Israel, the way of the Lord is not equal.

It concerns us all therefore to use that Faculty with great Discretion, upon
the right or wrong use of which so much depends; to judge with Caution, and
Circumspection, and Mercy here, lest we find Judgment without Mercy hereafter.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Religious Singularity.
Romans 12. 2. Be not Conformed to this World.


ONE of the greatest Supporters of Absurdity in Speculation, and of Immorality
in Practice, is Authority; that of Doctrine in the former, and that of Example
in the latter. It misguides and perverts the whole Man, puts a false Bias upon
the whole motion of the Soul, imposes both upon our Understandings and upon our
Wills, corrupts both our Sentiments and our Practices, and leads us out of the
way both of Truth and of Virtue. But it has a greater and more prevailing
influence upon our Actions than upon our Sentiments, and our Lives suffer more
by it than our Opinions. For besides, that there are more Examples of ill
Living than of ill Thinking, and a well-moralized Conversation, is a greater
Rarity, than an Orthodox Head, there being not such Temptations and Occasions
to Error as there are to Vice; there is also this further difference, that in
our Opinions we more usually follow those Authorities which stand off at a
great distance from us, and which Antiquity by I know not what Artifice,
recommends to us as Sacred and Venerable. But in our Actions we take a quite
contrary measure, and are rather apt to conform our selves to the Genius and
Mode of the Age we live in, which being present, shines upon us with a direct
and perpendicular Ray, and more strongly influences and provokes our Imitation
and Compliance.

And truly this is the greatest Mischief that is derived upon the Minds of Men
from Authority, and the chiefest Head of Complaint that lies against it; were
it only a Stop to the advancement of Learning, or a Misleader of our
Understandings in Speculative Inquiries; were it only a Bar to Notional
Improvements, or a Betrayer of our Orthodoxy, it might be thought to have done
Penance enough under the Chastisement of a Satyr or Declamation. For the
greatest stock of Knowledge which upon the best advantages we can attain to, is
so inconsiderable, that it is hardly worth while to be very angry and fall out
with what stands in our way, and hinders our little Progress. There is no great
Mischief done; it is like spoiling what was spoiled before, and which otherwise
would come to little. But since it is the great Enemy to all Righteousness, as
well as to all Truth, since it debauches our Morals as well as our
Understandings, and spoils the Christian as well as the Philosopher, it is fit
it should be arraigned before an higher Court, and be Condemned by the Censure
of an Apostle. And so it is, and that upon great and weighty Reasons, in the
Words of the Text, Be not Conformed to this World.

In the Words, we may consider a Supposition and a Caution. The Supposition is
twofold.

First, That the general course of the World is very bad, and that Vice has by
much the Majority of its side.

Secondly, That we are naturally apt to imitate that which is most prevailing,
and to conform to the course and way of the World.

Lastly, the Caution is against this Inclination, that we should not be
Conformed to the modes and usages of this World; which I shall first state as
to its Measures and Limits, and then Justify as to its Equity and
Reasonableness; and so conclude with some Practical Remarks upon the whole.

And in the First place, it is here supposed, that the general course of the
World is very bad, and that Vice has by much the Majority of its side. This,
though at first sight it looks like a Common Place, a matter of frequent,
obvious and familiar Consideration, is yet a thing that is not often thoroughly
considered, and there are but few that have a true, lively, and affectionate
Sense of it. It Is not easy for those that are good themselves, to imagine how
bad others are, and how much Wickedness there is in the World; and as for evil
Men, they don't use to trouble their Heads with such serious Reflections: So
that neither of them are like to have a just sense and resentment of this
matter.

The World we commonly compare to a Theater, and truly for the number of
Actors, and the variety of Action, it is the most Pompous and Magnificent of
any; but the Parts that are acted upon it, are for the most very Tragical, and
its Scenes full of Horror and Confusion. For not to mention unjust and
causless Wars, Massacres, Rebellions and Murders, which like Earthquakes make
the frame of Nature to tremble, and threaten the fall of the Stage upon which
they are Acted; who can reckon up the open Oppressions, and the secret Frauds,
the Violences and the Deceits, the Extortions and the Over-reachings, with all
the Arts of Falsehood and Subtilty which are every where and every day made use
of among Men, to dispossess one another of their Rights and Fortunes? And who
is there that can imagine what private Insinuations, what fly Contrivances,
what spiteful Whisperings, what treacherous Arts there are daily used even
among those that prosess Dearness and Kindness to one another, to undermine one
another Interests, and blast one another Honors and Reputations? I need not
go to the Courts of Princes for this, those Schools and Nurseries of
Immorality, for there is scarce any Society of Men free from it. To this, if I
should add the unnatural Fewds of Relations, the ungrateful Returns of obliged
Persons, the Treacheries of the Marriage Bed, the Falsnesses of Friends, the
ill offices of Neighbors, and the intolerable Practices of Revenge, not only
upon pretenses of Honor among the Duellifts, but as they are generally carried
on by the power and Interest of great Men, by the corrupt and vexatious methods
of the Law, and by the common malice of the World; if I say I should add this
and a thousand times more that might be said, what a Picture should I draw of
Mankind, and what intelligent Spirit is there that would not be afraid, (if
such an account should be given him beforehand,) to be born into, or to live in
such a World as this?

But thus it was immediately upon the beginning of things, thus it has been in
all Ages, and thus it will be till the Arch-Angel's Trump shall at once awaken
us from the sleep of Death, and from the sleep of Sin, and Time it self shall
be no more. For no sooner had God finished his Creation, and declared all
things good in it, and began to take a Complacency in the works of his Hands,
but through Envy of the Devil, Sin came into the World, and untuned the
proportions of its new set Harmony; and being once planted in the Earth, it
liked the Soil, and increased and multiplied by the care and industry of the
Devil, as fast as Mankind could by the Benediction of God. Insomuch that God
who not long before was represented by Moses as Creating Man upon the most
considerate Pause of Counsel and Deliberation, is now brought in, repenting
that ever he had made him. And Genesis 6.6.
accordingly, he first shortens his Days, and that expedient failing, he
proceeds to a severer Judgment, and issues forth a Sentence to destroy him from
the Ver. 5.
face of the Earth. For God saw that the Wickedness of Man was great, and that
every Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was evil continually. And again
the Text says, that God looked upon the Earth, and behold it was Corrupt, for
all Flesh had Corrupted his way upon Ver. 12.
the Earth.

And truly it is incredible almost to think to what a pitch of Villainy and
Wickedness the World was then arrived in so short a time; the World then like
some of our Modern Sinners, was young in Years and old in Debauchery; it looked
as if the Devil being newly thrown out of Heaven, were in the very height of
his Malice and Resentment, and to retrieve again the lost Field, endeavored to
increase his Numbers, to double his Ranks, by making Men as very Devils as
himself. For Vice seemed to reign Absolute and Uncontrolled, and to have taken
full Possession of the whole Earth, so that excepting only Four Persons, Abel,
Seth, Enos, and Enoch, we read not of one good Man from Adam to Noah; so
extremely wicked and debauched was the World at that time, and so highly
deserving of that Emphatical Character which the Apostle St. Peter gives of it,
calling it (...), the World of the Ungodly: 2 Pet. 2. 5.
As if it were a state directly opposite to that of the blessed Millennium, to
that new Heaven and new Earth, wherein as the same Apostle tells us, dwells
Righteousness.

But this you will say, was at a time when God had not given any express
Directory for the Manners of Men, who were then left to the sole guidance of
their natural light, which at best is but a doubtful Twilight, and is withal
apt to be clouded and corrupted by ill Customs and Practices, and in a little
time to be quite extinguished with the Damps of Vice and Debauchery.

Let us see therefore how it fared with the course of the World after the
giving of the Law, when God had trimmed the dim Lamp of natural Conscience, when
Revelation had illustrated the obscure Text of Reason, and the Moral, like the
Natural World, was governed by a greater as well as by a lesser Light. Now sure
one would expect that Men should walk as Children of the Day, and that works of
Darkness should disappear like Mists before the Rising Sun. And questionless,
it must be acknowledged that the State of the Moral World was considerably
bettered by this new accession of Light, and that there was less Vice and more
Goodness among those who enjoyed it; the Peculiar People of God, than among the
rude Heathen, who had no knowledge of his Laws. For to what purpose should God
visit them with this his Dayspring from on high, and give Light to them that
sat in Darkness and in the Shadow of Death, but only that he might the better
guide their Feet into the way of Peace?

In comparison therefore of the Heathen World, this was a good state of things;
but yet Vice had still the upper hand, and considering the vast disproportion
between the Numbers of good and bad Men, the World might still be called (...),
the World of the Ungodly. For not to mention the particular Vices of that
perverse and untractable People the Fews, their Superstition, their Idolatry,
their Infidelity, their Rebelliousness, their Lust and Luxury, their Uncharity,
their Covetousness and the like, the Scripture seems to speak of that state and
age of the World in general, as if'twere quite overgrown with Wickedness, and
as if Virtue were a Stranger among the Dwellings of Men. Thus the Psalmist,
Help me, Lord, for there is not one Godly Psalm. 12.
Man left, the Faithful are minished from among the Children of Men. And again,
The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of Men to see if there were
any that would understand, and seek after God. And what was the result of this
Scrutiny? Why, they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
abominable, there is none that does Psalm. 14.
good, no not one. And again says the Psalmist, speaking of the City of
Jerusalem, I have spied Unrighteousness and Strife in the City, Day and Night
they go about within the Walls thereof, Mischief also and Sorrow are in the
midst of of it; Wickedness is therein, Deceit and Psalm. 55.
Guile go not out of their Streets. And again more largely, All the Earth is
full Psalm. 74.
of Darkness and Gruel Habitations. And again lastly, to add no more, They will
not be Learned nor Understand, all the Foundations of the Earth are out of
Psalm. 82.
Course.

Thus miserably deformed was the face of things in this state and period of the
World: Nor were only the Morals of Men universally Corrupt, but they had
debauched and corrupted their very Principles too, and defaced the Map that was
to guide and direct them, as well as lost their Way. They had almost put out
the light of Revelation as well as that of Natural Reason, so that by that time
our Savior appeared in the World, what by ill Glosses and worse Practices, the
People of God had almost reduced themselves again to the state of Darkness and
shadow of Death, and defaced the Characters of the Mosaic Table, as much as
their Forefathers had done those of the Law of Nature.

But then again, perhaps it will be said, that this was at a time when God had
not made any clear and express Revelation of Heaven or Hell; and therefore
though Men had a written Law to walk by, yet it being supported by no other
Sanctions than of Temporal Rewards and Punishments, they wanted a sufficient
Counterpoise against the violence of Temptations; and then no wonder that
Wickedness should so universally prevail, when the Allurements to Vice were
strong, and the engagements to Duty but weak and unconstraining. But when once
Obedience comes to be enforced by better Promises and by Severer Threatenings,
this certainly will introduce a new way of Living; Men will consider more, and
live better, and will never be so mad and silly as to spend a few days in
Wickedness and Folly, and then in a moment go down to the Grave, and be Damned
for ever.

Let us see therefore how it is with the Moral World under the Revelation of the
Great Mystery of Godliness, and now Life and Immortality are brought to light
by the Gospel; this I think fully answers the Objection: Now therefore
certainly one would expect at least a state of Millennial Happiness, that Men
should be, and live like Angels, that we should see the Tabernacle of God come
down and abide among Men, with a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousuess. But alas, the Mystery of Iniquity began to work as soon as the
Mystery of Godliness; and although the Primitive Christians were for a while kept
bright and shining in the Furnace of Persecution, yet no sooner was the heat of
their Affliction over, but their Zeal cooled with it, and they left their first
Love. For then it was that the great Dragon being wroth that the Woman was
delivered of a Manchild, that Constantine the Great was Converted by the Church
to the Christian Faith, thought to overwhelm her by casting out of his Mouth
that mighty Flood of Arianism. And although Rev. 12.
the Earth helped the Woman, by opening her Mouth, and swallowing up the Flood,
which was done when the First Council of Nice declared against that Pestilent
and Prevailing Heresy; yet 'twas not long before the same Dragon cast forth two
other mighty Floods out of his Mouth, and the Christian World suffered almost
an inundation by the breaking in of Popery and Mahumetism.

We have indeed by the Blessing of God, and the Zealous Endeavors of good Men,
dried up one of those great Floods from a good part of the Christian World, and
restored the Doctrine of the Gospel to its Primitive Purity and Simplicity. But
has the Reformation gone on so prosperously in our Manners, as it has in our
Faith? Are we as Good as we are Orthodox? I doubt not; for if we look abroad
into the World, how little true Goodness and Virtue shall we find in it! How
rare is it to meet with a Man that lives up within some tolerable measure to
the Obligations of his Profession! And how much more rare is it to see one
that is truly Serious and Confiderate, Circumspect and Recollected, that
considers thoroughly and effectually the End of his coming into the World, the
shortness and uncertainty of his stay in it, and what shall become of him when
he is to go out of it; and accordingly lives under a constant and lively sense
of God and of his Duty to him, walks with him, and gives up himself wholly to
him, makes Religion and the care of his Soul the main business and concern of
his Life; works with all his Might while it is Day, and is utterly resolved
whatever it costs him, to mind and secure the One thing necessary! This one
would think were no more than what common Sense would prompt any Man to, that
would allow himself to think but one Minute in a Year; and yet how few such Men
shall we find in the World! Do we not rather see Men drink down Iniquity like
Water, and commit Sin with Greediness? Do not the generality of Men live as if
they were resolved to Sin as much as they could in a little time, and thought
it not only safe, but necessary to do ill? Do they not live as if they were to
be nothing after this Life, or as if they were to be saved by their Vices
rather than by their Virtues; or lastly, as if they thought Hell a better Place
than Heaven, and were in love with Damnation and Everlasting Burnings?

But to come a little nearer to our selves, does not the present Age abound
with a sort of Men who are Crafty and Designing, False and Treacherous, Rotten
and, Hypocritical; Men that seem to have their Eye fixed upon, and terminated
with the Horizon of this World, that make Gain their Godliness, and Interest
their Measure, that will betray the Church for Preferment, sell their Religion
and their Souls for Money, that will depart from the way of Truth for the Wages
of Unrighteousness, and be Damned hereafter to be Rich and Great here? Never
was there more Religion pretended than now, and never less in truth and
reality; never more noise about it, and never a less hearty concern for it.
What Straining about the Knat of a Ceremony, with those who can in the mean
while Swallow down whole Camels of profitable Abominanations! This we may talk
of, and lament, but we cannot help it. 'Twill be ever so with the general course
of the World; Vice will always have the Cry of her side, and we are told, that
in the latter days Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold.
And all this we may learn from the final issue and event of things; we may
measure the state of this World, from the final distribution of things in the
next. Our Savior tells us, that broad is the Way that leads to Destruction,
and many there be that go in thereat. And, that strait is the Gate, and narrow
is the Way which leads to Life, and few Mat. 7.13.
there be that find it.

And this we shall the less wonder at, if we consider the universal pravity and
corruptness of Human Nature, the Multitude of Temptations we are all exposed
to, and the peculiar unhappy circumstances of Living that many Men are engaged
in: To which if we add the great Strength, Cunning and Malice of the Invisible
Powers, that the same Envy of the Devil that first brought Sin into the World,
is still concerned to uphold and increase it; that there are two different
Interests carrying on, that there is a Kingdom of Darkness as well as a Kingdom
of Light, and a Mystery of Iniquity, as well as a Mystery of Godliness; we
cannot think any other, but that the course of the World must needs be very bad.
And the wonder will fall yet lower, if we further consider how prone we are to
confirm and strengthen an ill Custom by our Imitation and Compliance; which
leads me to the Second thing supposed, that we are naturally apt to imitate
that which is most prevailing, and to conform to the Course and Way of the
World.

Now this we are apt to do for one of these Two Reasons; either because we
think the generality has the Right of its side, and that what most Men do, is
fit to be done. Or if we do think they are in the wrong, and do amiss, yet we
are loath to venture the Charge of Singularity, and withal fancy that there is
something of safety and excuse in Numbers and Multitudes.

And First, we are apt to think, that the generality has the Right of its side,
and that what most Men do, is fit to be done. There is nothing that carries so
much Authority with it, as the Example of a Multitude; and though every Man is
ready to imagine himself Wiser than any one of these singly, yet when he looks
upon them as a Body of Men, there is something awful and commanding in it; the
Man blushes to himself, as we are apt to do when we come into an Assembly in
Public, though made up of Men, every one of which we think inferior to our
selves; but their Numbers and Union give them another Air and Appearance, and
the Voice of the People becomes to us now as the Voice of God.

It Is in Practice as in Opinion, what the most hold, we take to be True, and so
what the most do we take to be Good. This is the only Rule some People have to
go by, and it is the Measure that all Popular Spirits do go by, and the Wisest
can hardly refrain it; for we can hardly think it likely, that such an United
and Complicated Wisdom should be mistaken either in the one or the other. Every
Man is apt to reason with himself in the conduct of his Manners, as Luther did
in the business of the Reformation, Art thou the only Wise Man? and, can so
many Worlds err? What? shall we oppose our selves against the Practice of
Mankind, set up for Reformers, row against so great a Stream, and live against
the World? Can there be any ill in that which so many do which is passed into a
Custom and a Law, which is practiced all the World over? Ought we not rather to
suspect our own Judgments, and conclude, that that must needs be the right
Point, where so many Lines meet, and that the right Way where we find so many
Passengers? This is the common and the natural Logic of most Men, and by this
Measure we proceed both in Opinion and in Practice, but especially in Practice.
And this is one cause of our aptness to Conform to the Course and Way of the
World. But there is also another.

For Secondly, if we do think that the Generality is in the wrong, and does
amiss, yet we are loath to venture the charge of Singularity, and withal fancy
that there is something of safety and excuse in Numbers and Multitudes. And
first, as to the Charge of Singularity, it is a dreadful and a frightful Word,
and there are but few that have the Courage and the Confidence to stand up
against and face the Imputation. We either think the World Wiser than our
selves, or would willingly be thought to do so, since this has a show of
Modesty and good Manners, and the contrary seems to carry in it an intolerable
degree of Pride and Self-arrogancy. But now to be Singular in any of our
Actions, is interpretatively and in effect, to prefer our own Sense and
Judgment, before that of the World, at least as far as concerns the particular
case then before us. For since our Actions are governed by our present
Sentiments, if we do otherwise than the World does, it is plain that we think
otherwise too, and that we set a higher value upon those private Thoughts of
ours, than upon the public Sense and Judgment of the World, which is a very
odious and ungrateful thing to own and publish. For we stand in awe of our
Fellow Creatures more than we do of our own Consciences, especially when
combined and confederated together in great Numbers and Companies, and cannot
choose but regard and revere their Censures and Animadversions. And this makes
us willing rather to err with the Multitude, and be Fools for Company, though
we act all the while against the clear Light of our own Minds, than incur the
great Censure, the heavy Anathema of Singularity.

And besides, we think there is no necessity neither of running that risque,
for we reckon our selves secure enough without it, and are apt to flatter our
selves into a fancy that there is something of Safety and Excuse in Numbers and
Multitudes: Though we know we are in the ways of Sin, yet we comfort and
encourage our selves to go on in them, by thinking how much they are
frequented, like Travelers wandering in the Dark, who though they know they are
out of their way, yet solace themselves in their Number and Company. This is
very natural and ordinary for Men to do in all cases, in the case of Sin and
Error as well as in others; and therefore the Psalmist speaking of the
gathering together of the Froward, and of the Insurrection of Wicked Doers,
(which supposes them Many and in Companies) immediately adds, They encourage
Psalm. 64.
themselves in Mischief. This is a very usual but vain confidence; for however
the Multitude of Offenders may be a Security against an Earthly Power, yet God
regards Numbers no more than Persons, and though hand join in Prove. 11. 21.
hand, the Wicked shall not go unpunished.

These are the Grounds and Principles upon which we are inclined to be
Conformable to the general Course of the World. But it is high time now to show
why we should not be so; and this leads me to consider lastly, the Caution it
self, that we should not be Conformable to the World: But before I come to
justify this Caution, as to its Equity end Reasonableness, I must premise
something concerning its Limits and Measures.

And First, This Caution is not so rigorously to be understood, as if we were
not to yield some compliance and conformity with the Humors and Dispositions
of those with whom we Converse; for this is a necessary part of Homilitical
Virtue, and contributes very much to the sweetning and indearing of Society,
and is therefore Good and Commendable, as well as Innocent and Lawful. It Is
indeed that very thing which we call Goodnature, when a Man bends and warps a
little from his own natural Posture, to meet and strike in with the inclination
of his Companions. And the contrary is so far from being a Virtue, that it is a
culpable stiffness and obstinacy of Mind; and we may take this for a rule, that
Religion is ever consistent with Civility and good Manners, as indeed it is
with whatever really conduces to the Comfort and Happiness of Human Life. We
are only to take care that our Compliance prove not a Snare to us, an occasion
of falling into Sin; that we do not offend God, out of Civility toward Men. In
all other cases, we would do well to consider and follow that of the Apostle, I
am 1Cor. 9.22.
made all things to all Men: And again, 1 please all Men in all things. 10. 33.


Neither again Secondly, is this Caution to be so rigorously understood, as if
we were forbidden to conform to the several indifferent Modes of Ages or of
Countries, either as to Customs or Ceremonies, whether Religious or Civil, or
Habits, or manner of Address, or way of Diet, or the like. For however these
may not possibly be ordered according to the best convenience or measure of
Discretion, yet it is according to the public Wisdom of the Place and Nation,
(for the Wisdom of a Nation is seen as much in their Customs as in their
Proverbs,) and therefore the matter of them being supposed indifferent, it is
not civil or modest to contradict them. And there is this further to be
considered, that besides the pride and rudeness of such an opposition, all the
advantage or convenience a Man can get by it, will not compensate for the Odium
and Censure of Affectation and Singularity. And accordingly we find, that the
Wisest of Men in all Ages have ever thought it Prudence to conform to the
Innocent, though otherwise not so convenient Customs of the Age and Place
wherein they lived. And it is observed concerning our Blessed Savior himself,
who was the Wisdom of the Eternal Father, that when he condescended to put on
Flesh, and live among Men, he condescended yet further, and complied with all
the received Customs and manners of the Jewish Nation. And indeed he became in
all things like unto his Brethren, Sin only excepted; Innocence was his only
Singularity.

And this, in one Word, is our measure; we may and ought to be conformable as
far as the bounds of Innocence; usque ad Aras is the measure of our civil
Conversation, as well as of our Friendship and dearer Intimacies: For why
should we show so much disrespect to our Company, as to quit the Road they have
taken, if we may safely travail in it? The Conformity therefore which we are
here cautioned against, is that of Imitating the general Practice of the World,
as to Actions, not of a Civil but of a Moral Nature: We must not be Conformed
to the general Morals of this World; the Reason and Equity of which Caution I
come now to justify.

And the first Reason why we must not be Conformed to this World, is because
this is not such a World as we may safely imitate, it is not a World for us to
be Conformed to; it never was so even in the Best and Purest times, much less
is it now, in these last and worst days. It Is not safe following the Multitude
at any time, much less now; nor in any thing, but least of all in the ordering
our Life and Conversation. It Is a very ill Guide in matters of Opinion, but
much worse in matters of Practice; for the World is a mere Theater of Folly, a
Stage of Vice and Debauchery, one great Aceldama of Blood and Cruelty, and to
use the Description of St. John, the John 5.19.
whole World lies in Wickedness; the Words are Emphatical, (...), it has not
only fallen into the Gulf of Sin, but it lies there contentedly and quietly.
It Is not only slightly dipped or stained with the Waters of Impurity, but it lies
as it were Moated round, or rather all over drenched and soaked in them, like
the Earth in the Universal Deluge: But this I need pursue no further, having
already made it a distinct Member of my Discourse.

Again Secondly, another Reason why we must not be Conformed to this World, is
because by so doing, we shall confirm and strengthen the cause of Wickedness,
and give it Settlement, Succession and Perpetuity: For we shall countenance and
imbolden those whom we imitate, and cause others to imitate us, and they again
will be a President to others, and so on, till Vice pretend to the Right of
Custom and Prescription, and Iniquity be established by a Law. This is one
great Reason why the World is so bad now, and it is the best expedient the Devil
has to make it yet worse; for by this the Vices of the former Ages descend upon
the future, Sin becomes Hereditary, Children transcribe their vicious Parents,
and actual, like Original Sin, is entailed upon Posterity. Fill ye up Mat. 23.
32.
the Measure of your Fathers, said our Savior by way of Prophecy to the Jews,
implying that they would do so; for our Lord very well knew the Temper of those
to whom he said it; and I question not but that most of the wickedness of that
Nation was owing to this, that they were so generally possessed with this
Superstitious Humor of Conformity, and were resolved to do as their
Forefathers had done before them.

Again Thirdly, another Reason why we Christians must not Conform to this
World, is because both the Precepts and the Rewards of our Religion require a
very different method of Life from what is ordinarily practiced; the Precepts
are strict and severe, and the Rewards high and noble, such indeed as cannot be
conceived for their greatness, and they both call for a very excellent and
extraordinary way of Conversation; for after the common way of Living, we shall
neither obtain the one, nor fulfill the other. Indeed our Religion obliges us to
great Strictness and Singularity, and a Christian cannot be like himself, if he
be like other Men. To be a Christian indeed, is to be a New Creature, to be New
in Nature, and New in Life and Conversation; he must not be like his former
self, much less like the rest of the World. The Argument is the Apostle's, Ye
are all the Children of Light, and the Children of the Day; that is,
Christians, Professors of an holy and excellent Religion, whose Precepts are
excellently Good, and whose Promises are excellently Great. And what then?
Therefore let us not 1 These. 5. 5, 6.
Sleep as do others, but let us Watch and be Sober.

Again Fourthly and Lastly, we Christians have one more peculiar Reason not to
be Conformed to this World; we have renounced it in our Baptism, with all its
Pomps and Vanities: By which are meant, not only the Heathen Games and
Spectacles, their vain Shows, and loose Festivities, their lewd Bacchanals and
Saturnals, which we renounce Absolutely, and the Wealth and Glory and Grandeur
even of the Christian world, as often as they prove inconsistent with the ends
of our Holy Institution; but also the promiscuous Company, the general
Practices, and the popular Examples of this World, which are generally so very
corrupt and wicked, that we renounce them not upon supposition, as in the other
instance, but at a venture. The very first step to a Christian Life, is to dye
to the World, and to its general Usages and Customs; and if we will follow
Christ, we must forsake the Multitudes, and ascend up to the Mount of Solitude
and Holy Separation.

And that we may be the better encouraged to undertake this Religious
Singularity, let us to the Reason of the thing, add two very remarkable
Scripture Examples: The First that invites our Consideration, is that of Lot,
who happened to live in a City so prodigiously wicked, and beyond all Measure
or Example Debauched, that though a very Populous Place, it could not afford so
much as Ten good Men, they were so universally seized with the Pest and
Contagion of Vice. And yet this good Man, though he breathed in so corrupt an
Air, was not at all infected with it; the health and cleanness of his Soul,
like that of Socrates's Body, was too strong for the Contagion, and preserved
him from the Malignity of a Plague that was more infectuous and more mortal
too, than that of Athens. Indeed the filthy Conversation of that wicked Place,
disturbed his quiet, but it could not sully his Innocence; it vexed his
Righteous Soul, as the Text says, but it could not 2 Pet. 2. 8.
Debauch it. He dwelt like the Church of Pergamos, where Satan's Seat was, Rev.
2. 13.
in the very Metropolis, the Imperial City of the Devil's Kingdom; but he
Conversed there like an Angel of Light among Fiends and evil Spirits. He was
surrounded with the works of Darkness, but he had no Fellowship with them; his
Company was Devilish, but his Conversation was Angelical; though he could not
make them better, yet they could not make him worse; he lived with them, but he
lived against them.

This indeed was great and extraordinary; but there is an Example of Religious
Singularity beyond this, and that is in Noah, who lived in a World that was as
corrupt, and more than the other's City; the whole World then was but one
Greater Sodom, nay it was much worse than that Seat of Wickedness. Sodom indeed
was so given up to Debauchery, that it could not yield Ten Righteous Persons,
but the whole World in Noah's time, could not afford so much as Two; he himself
was the only good Man then in the World, as may reasonably be concluded from
that Reason expressed by God, why he excepted him from the general Deluge, For
thee have I seen Righteous before Genesis 7. 1.
me in this Generation. Now it is impossible to imagine that Vice should ever be
more in mode and fashion than it was then, when as the Text says, all Flesh had
Corrupted his way upon the Earth, and the whole Earth it self was filled with
Violence. And yet in this allover-wicked World, Noah maintained his Innocence
and his Integrity, shined forth as a Light in the midst of this Crooked and
Perverse Generation, and was not only a Doer, but a Preacher 2 Pet. 2. 5.
of Righteousness. In other Ages of the World, though never so Corrupt,
Religion and Virtue has had some Party, and the Singularity of Living well, is
shared and divided among several, and one is a Countenance and Encouragement to
another; but here poor single Noah was sain to Live, as Athanasius was to
Dispute, against the World, and the whole Singularity lodged and centered in
his single Person, which puts it beyond all Example or Parallel.

And thus have I gone through the several Stages of my Undertaking; I shall now
make one or two brief Reflections upon the whole, and conclude.

In relation therefore to the First Supposition, it may be inferred, That the
Multitude is no safe Guide, and that the Measures of Right and Wrong are not
always to be concluded from the consent of Majority; for you see here, that
Vice has by much the Majority of its side; and yet it is Vice still.

From the Second, it may be inferred, That those who have already a Majority
for their way, ought not to think their Cause any whit the better for having
new Proselytes every day brought over to them, and because Men flock to their
Standard from every Quarter. For, as it has been discoursed, this is no more
than what is to be expected from the ordinary course of things. Men are
naturally apt to imitate that which is most prevailing, and to conform to the
course and way of the World. Those therefore that value themselves or their
Cause the better for this, seem not to understand the World, but to be mere
Strangers to the Inclinations of Human Nature; for did they consider that, they
would quickly perceive, that this does not reflect any Credit upon their Cause,
but rather upbraids the levity and weakness of Mankind, and is no argument that
they themselves are Wise, but only that other Men are Fools.

Lastly, from the Caution it self, we may justly infer, that the Censure of
Preciseness and Singularity which the Men of this World commonly charge upon
good Men, and the Hatred and Spite wherewith they prosecute them upon that very
account, are both of them utterly senseless and extremely absurd: This has been
an old Grudge. Thus the Sinners in the Book of Wisdom, Let us lie in wait Wisd.
2.
for the Righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to
our doings: He upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and objecteth to our
infamy the transgressings of our Education. And again, He was made to reprove
our Thoughts; He is grievous to us even to behold, for his Life is not like
other Men's, his Ways are of another Fashion. A very high Charge indeed, and as
notable an Inference; he lives otherwise and better than we do, and therefore
we must hate and persecute him. But this I say is a very absurd and
unreasonable way of Proceeding; for the ground of the business if sifted to the
bottom, comes to no more than this, They are angry with a Man for not loving
their Company so well as to be content to be Damned for the sake on it. But I
think we may with great Civility beg their excuse in this matter; if they will
have us do as they do, then let them take care to do as they should do. But for
a Man to make himself a Beast, utterly unfit to be conversed with, and then to
call me Singular and Unsociable, because I will not keep him Company, is hard
measure.

And as these Men are guilty of an unreasonable Charge, so shall we be guilty
of an inexcusable Folly and Weakness, if we depart from our Duty and our
greatest Interest upon such a trifling, inconsiderable Discouragement: For then
it is plain, that we are of the number of those low and unconsidering Spirits,
that love the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God.

Let us not therefore be led away with Noise and Popularity, nor be frighted
from our Duty by those empty Anathema's of the Multitude, the Censure of
Unsociableness, Preciseness and Singularity. Let us be sure by doing our Duty,
to satisfy our own Consciences, whatever others do or think. Let us not be
carried away in the Polluted torrent of the Age, nor be Fools for Company. Let
us for once dare to be Wise, and be guilty of the great Singularity of doing
well, and of acting like Men and Christians; and then, if we can have the
liking and approbation of the World, well; if not, the comfort is, we shall not
much want it: And we shall gain something by our Singularity, which the others
cannot by their Numbers, the Favor of God, and deliverance from the Wrath to
come.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Excellency of Praise and Thanksgiving.
Preached in All Souls College Chapel in Oxford, upon the Founder's
Commemoration Day.
Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers Praise, glorifieth me; Or, as in the other
Translation,

Whosoever offers me Thanks and Praise, he honors me.


To Honor and Glorify God, as it is the End of the whole, so is it the Duty
and Privilege of all the Rational and Intellectual part of the Creation. God
indeed has made all things for his Glory, and he fails not to glorify himself
one way or other by all things that he has made; but there are some things
which he has made to glorify him by free and proper acts of Worship and
Homage. And these as he has more enabled, so has he more obliged to the
Performance of this Divine Office, by distinguishing them as well by Favors
and Benefits, as by Order of Being, and degrees of natural Excellence from the
rest of the Creation.

Among these is Man, who though at present not so capable of this Divine Employ
as some of the other Intellectual Orders, yet he has as much, perhaps more
Obligation to it than any of them all; since God has not only favored him with
peculiar Benefits, such as the Grace of Repentance, the Honor of being
Personally united to the Divinity, etc. but has also placed him in such a
Sphere where he is the only Creature that can acknowledge and pay Religious
Service to the common Creator. All other Creatures praise God only Passively,
as far as they carry in them the Characters of the Divine Perfections, which
must be considered and acknowleded before they redound to the actual glory of
the Creator. Like a Lute, which though never so Harmonically Set and Tuned,
yields no Music till its Strings be artfully touched by a Skilful Hand. But
Man can freely command and strike the Strings of his own Heart and Affections,
and is the only Creature here below that can Actively praise and honor his
great Maker and Benefactor. Man therefore is concerned to honor and glorify
God both for himself and for all the Creatures round about him; and as the
whole World is the Temple of the great God, so Man is as it were the Priest in
this Region of it, where he must undertake the Office of honoring and
glorifying God, not only in his own, but also in the name of all this brute and
incapable part of the Creation. And he is here taught how to do it in these
Words of the Psalmist, whosoever offers me Thanks and Praise, he Honors me, or he
Glorifies me.

By Honor or Glory here, I suppose is meant whatever comes within the Notion
of Religious Service, or Divine Worship; and when it is said, that he who offers
God Thanks and Praise, he it is that Honors him; I suppose it is spoken
Emphatically, and by way of Eminence, importing as much as if 'twere said, He
it is that honors him more particularly, and performs a more special piece of
Religious Service. So that from the Words, I shall in the First place collect
this Proposition, That the most principal and most acceptable part of Religion
consists in Praise and Thanksgiving.

Secondly, I shall consider what are the things we are concerned chiefly to
thank God for; among which I shall particularly insist upon that Providential
disposal of Men in such outward Conditions and Circumstances of Life, as may be
of advantage to further their Eternal Interest.

Thirdly, I shall briefly represent to you, that the Circumstances of your Life
are such.

Whence in the last place, I shall commend this Inference to your
Consideration, that you are therefore highly obliged to the Duty of Praise and
Thanksgiving.

The First thing to be spoken to is, that the most principal and most
acceptable part of Religion consists in Praise and Thansgiving. I confess I am
not very fond of making Comparisons between acts of Religion, being not
ignorant of what Religion it self has suffered upon this very account, among a
certain Generation of Men who set up one Duty of Religion against another, as
Preaching against Praying. Nor should I do it here, but that I have for some
time observed, that the Price of this Duty is generally beaten down, and the
Duty it self but seldom and but coldly practiced even among them who make great
account of all the rest, and are more particularly addicted to a Life of Piety
and Devotion. The Parable of the Ten Lepers is a true Draught and Image of
Mankind; all Ten Prayed, being under a great necessity to do so, but there was
but one who bethought himself, and gave Thanks. And so it is in the World, where
to ten that Pray, it is well if there be one that gives Thanks; and even that
one shall perhaps Pray ten times, before he gives Thanks once: And when he
does, it shall not be perhaps with half the Zeal and Affection wherewith he is
wont to Pray; which procedure by the way, I know not how to resolve into any
other Principle than this, that when we Pray, it is for our selves and our own
Interest, to procure some good, or to avoid some evil; but when we give Thanks,
it is to God, and for God, without any Selfregard, as I shall further show by
and by. This I conceive is it that makes Men generally more frequent and more
zealous in their Prayers than in their Praises. Whereas indeed the latter calls
for greater Affection and Elevation of Spirit than the former, Praise being a
greater glorification of God than Prayer, and indeed than any other Act of
Religion.

This I might make appear from several grounds of Argument; but not to burden
my Discourse or your Patience with unnecessaries, I shall confine my self to
this single Consideration, That to Praise and give Thanks to God, is the most
unselfish and disinteressed act of Religion we can possibly honor him with,
and consequently the most noble and generous of all. The Consequence I suppose
will readily be acknowledged, that if it be really the most dis interessed act
of Religion, it is also the most noble and excellent; for the less there is of
Self, and the more there is of God in any Religious Performance, the more
perfect it is allowed to be; and though we do not with some, make it necessary
to the goodness of an Action, that it be unmercenary, and done without any
prospect of Reward, yet the Reason is, because it is too high a mark for a
Mortal aim. We think it a Measure hardly Practicable by any, and therefore not
necessary to all; not denying in the mean while, but rather supposing, that if
we could act by such a Measure, it would be an higher and more noble pitch of
Virtue. Taking therefore the Argument for granted, I shall think my self
further concerned only to justify the Vnder-Proposition, by showing that it is
really the most disinteressed part of Religion.

Now that it is so, will be sufficiently evident from this, that it respects
the Benefits of God merely as they are past; it has indeed the Goodness of God
for its Object, as well as many other acts of Religion, but with this
Difference, that whereas other acts of Religion respect the Benefits of God as
they are to come, this respects them as past, and consequently can have no Eye
upon future Advantage. He indeed that gives Thanks may, but not as, and so far
as he gives thanks: It may be the End of the Agent, but not of the Action. For
observe, though to give thanks for Blessings received be really a Means to
procure more, as well as other Religious acts, yet there is this difference,
that other acts are not only Means to Blessings, but may be used as such to
that end, without destroying the nature of the acts themselves. But now
Gratitude toward God, though it be really in it self, as much a Means in order
to future Blessings, yet it cannot be used and intended to that purpose, without
so far undoing the very Nature as well as Excellency of the Action: For if I
give Thanks merely to get more, if that be my design, this is not Gratitude,
but only another way of Begging, and so my Praising will indeed fall in and be
confounded with Praying, which are supposed to be distinct. So that the very
notion of Thanksgiving excludes all regard to Self-interest; and what some
highflown Theorists have asserted of Virtue in general, that it loses its very
Being and Perfection, by being Mercenary or done upon motives of Interest, is
strictly true, of this particular Virtue, whose very Idea shuts out all respect
to selfadvantage.

The short is, this virtue of Thankfulness, though it be conversant about the
goodness and beneficialness of the Divine Nature, which is also supposed to be
actually exercised upon us, yet it does not respect it in order to our
Interest, but as it is a Moral Perfection of the same Divine Nature, and so is
rather an humble acknowledgment of something excellent in God, whose
Perfections we adore and bear witness to, than an Address to him for something
of advantage to our selves, which as I said before, its very idea excludes, and
cannot at all comport with.

But now this is more than can be said of any of the other acts of Religion;
when we Pray, it is for the Relief of our Wants, our Faith Jeans upon some
future Good, and our Hope is a comfortable expectation of it; and even Charity
it self as it respects God, has a mixture of self-regard in it, I say as far as
it respects God. For it must be yielded (whatever some pretend to the
contrary,) that there is some sort of Love which may be dis-interessed and pure
from any selfish Principle, namely Love of Benevolence, whereby we may wish
well and do well to our Neighbor purely for his Good, without projecting any
Advantage to our selves. But then this is not that Love wherewith we love God,
who is not capable of our Benevolence, but only of our Desire: For when we love
God, we don't pretend to wish any good to him who is already possessed of all;
but only wish him as a Good to our selves, which is the same as to desire him.
Charity therefore as it respects God, is the same with desire of him, and all
love of Desire is founded upon Indigence, and proceeds from Self-interest. So
inconsistent and unprincipled is the Discourse of those who talk of Loving God
purely for himself and his own absolute Perfections, without regarding our own
advantage therein. We may indeed love our Neighbor so, but so we cannot love
God; for to love God, is to desire him, to desire him as our Good and
Happiness, and all love of Desire proceeds from Want, and ends in Fullness. And
if Love it self must give the Precedence to Thanksgiving, I suppose none of the
other acts of Religion will offer at a competition with it.

But you will say, does not our Savior Mat. 22.38.
call Love the First and the Great Commandment? To this I answer, that by Love
there is meant either Love of Benevolence, or Love of Desire; if Love of
Benevolence, that is no immediate act of Religion, God not being capable of
being so loved, as was urged before: And therefore we may allow this to be the
principal Commandment, without any contradiction to the present Discourse which
proceeds wholly concerning Acts of Religion. But if the love here spoken of, be
love of Desire, then this is said to be the First and the Great Commandment,
not because it excells all the rest by its own proper value, but because it
vertually contains, and is productive of them all, there being nothing so
difficult or naturally displeasing which he that truly loves that is, Desires
God, will refuse to do for his sake. And therefore it is, that in another place,
Love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law, that is, vertually and Romans 13.
10.
potentially, as it is a general Mother Virtue, and the principle of a more
particular and special Obedience. And in this respect indeed Love is the first
and the great Commandment; but if we consider the proper dignity and excellence
of the action, he that praises God honors him more, and expresses himself more
generously than he that Loves him. For he that loves God, loves him for his own
good, in order to his Happiness and well-being; but he that Praises him (so far
as he does so,) does it not upon any selfend, but merely because he thinks it
just and equitable that a Creature should acknowledge and adore the Excellency
of his Creator; which certainly is the noblest as well as the justest thing a
Creature can do.

Indeed Love is the only Divine or Religious Virtue that can with any pretense
vye with Praise and Thanksgiving; and accordingly it is observable, that of all
the virtuous acts and habits that are now requisite to quality a Man for
Heaven, none shall be thought worthy to be retained in it but only these Two,
Praise and Love; all the rest shall be Super-annuated and cease, as having no
further occasion for their Exercise; these two only shall remain to be the
entertainment of Angels and Angelical Spirits to all Eternity.

But though Divine Love be equal with Praise as to this respect, in point of
Permanence and Duration, yet in point of Generosity it comes far short of it;
for indeed to speak properly, Love is no further excellent, than as it partakes
of the nature of Praise; no further than as it is one way of acknowledging the
Divine Perfections. For what commendation is it for me to Love what is my good,
and makes for my Interest any otherwise than as by loving, I acknowledge and
bear witness to the excellency and amiableness of the Object beloved? That
therefore which is excellent in Love, is not my Coveting the Divine Good,
(which I do purely for my own Pleasure and Profit,) but my bearing witness to
it. And yet even here Praise will have the Preeminence, because this
acknowledges the Divine Perfections Directly and Expressly, which the other
does only Implicitly and by Consequence. So that in every respect, Praise and
Thanksgiving will be found to be the greatest honor and glorification of God,
which sufficiently establishes the Proposition laid down, That the most
principal and most acceptable part of Religion consists in Praise and
Thanksgiving.

And here before I go any further, give me leave by the way, First to deplore
the general defect of our common ^o^^t-Devotions; Secondly, To commend the
excellent Constitution of our Public Liturgy. As to the First, it is a sad
thing to consider, that so Divine and so Angelical a Service as that of Praise
and Thanksgiving, which is so highly preferred in the Sacred Writings, and
which the Man after God's own Heart was so very eminent and remarkable for, the
Burden of whose Devotion lay in Anthems and Alleluiahs, should be so neglected
and so little regarded as it is: That that which is so much the employment and
business of Heaven, should be so little valued upon Earth; and what the Angels
esteem so Divine a Service, should have so little share in the Devotions of
Men. There are but few even of the Devouter sort, that are duly sensible of the
excellency of Praise, and those that have a considerable sense of it, are
generally very backward to the Duty, and very cold in the Performance. Our
Necessities often call us to our Prayers, and supply us with Devotion in them;
but as for praise, it seems a dead and heartless Service, and we care not how
seldom or how indifferently it be performed. Which common Backwardness of ours,
the Scripture also supposes by its earnest and frequent Exhortations to this
Duty.

But the Church of England (to her great Commendation be it spoken,) proceeds
by another Measure in her Devotions, enjoining Praise as largely and as
frequently as Prayer; she has taken her Copy from the Man after God's own
Heart; and as Hosannah and Alleluiah, Prayer unto God, and Praises of God,
divide the whole Book of Psalms, so do they her Liturgy, which is a Service of
Praise, as well as of Prayer. This the Church admonishes us of, in the very
Preface and Entrance of her Excellent Service, telling us, that we Assemble and
Meet together, to render Thanks for the great Benefits that we have received at
God's hands, and to set forth his most worthy Praise. Then the Priest, Praise
ye the Lord, to which the People, The Lord's Name be Praised. And this is done
in all our Hymns, as the Venite, O come let us Sing unto the Lord, etc. And in
that noble Hymn called the Te Deum, We Praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee
to be the Lord. Thus again in the Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, etc. where we bless God for the. Redemption of the World by Christ;
which also we do in the Jubilate, and in the Blessed Virgins Magnificat, My
Soul does magnify the Lord, etc. So again in the Cantate Domino, and the Nunc
Dimittis, and Deus Misereatur, Let the People praise thee O God, let all the
People praise thee. Besides the Gloria Patri, and many particular Offices of
Thanksgiving, and the whole Psalter of David, which is a considerable part of
the Church Service. So truly sensible was the wisdom of our excellent Mother,
both of the great worth and importance of this Duty of Praise, and of the
general Back wardness and Coldness of Men in applying themselves to it.

But I proceed now in the Second place, to consider what are the things we are
chiefly concerned to Praise and Thank God for. These in general are those
things which relate to our Spiritual Concern, and our grand Interest in another
World; for the same general Order is to be observed both in our Prayers and in
our Praises; and as we are chiefly to Pray for Spiritual Blessings, so it is for
them that we are chiefly to return Thanks. More particularly we are concerned
to thank God (as the Wisdom of our excellent Church directs us,) for his
inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, for
the means of Grace, and for the hopes of Glory. And among these means of Grace,
I think we are not in the last place concerned to thank him for disposing us in
such outward circumstances of Life as are advantageous to our Salvation, it
being hardly imaginable how much the diversity of these contributes to our
Living well or ill. How many Persons of excellent Dispositions, of great
Seize, and of greater Hopes, have we known to be utterly spoiled and
ruined, merely by falling into ill hands; as we have it recorded of the young
Disciple of St. John, in Ecclesiastic Story? And so again on the other hand,
how many Persons of Vicious Inclinations, and more vicious Lives, have been
diverted out of the Road of Destruction, merely by some accidental Occurrence,
some little Providential hit that happened to cross their way!

There is an Ingenious Gentleman of considerable Character and Figure in the
Learned World, who makes that Grace of God whereby he conducts Men to Holiness
and Happiness, to be nothing else but only a happy train or disposition of
external Circumstances and Occurrences. As suppose a Man falls into some very
sharp Affliction, which works him into a softness and tenderness of Mind, while
he is under this sensible and pliant disposition, he happens to meet with a
good Book, which strikes upon the same String of his Soul; after this, he
lights into good Company, where the former Disposition receives a new and
further improvement; and so on in a train of Accidents, the latter still
renewing the Impression of the former, till at length the Man is perfectly
brought over to a new Order and Habit both of Mind and Life.

Now though for several weighty Reasons, too many to be here alleged, I cannot
be of this Gentleman's Mind, so far as to make the Divine Grace (which in
Scripture is frequently ascribed to the Holy Spirit of God working within us,)
to be nothing else but a course of well-laid Circumstances, yet I may and must
needs say, that I think the outward Circumstances of Life, have a very great
stroke upon the moral conduct of it, and that the success of inward Grace does
very much depend upon outward Occurrences. For not to argue from the different
manner of Education upon which the quality of our future life does generally as
much depend, as the, fortune of the Boul does upon its delivery out of the
Hand, it is common and easy to observe, that some Men are engaged in such
unhappy Circumstances, as do almost necessitate them to be Vicious; while
others again are so advantagiously placed, as if God had laid a Plot for their
Salvation.

The ground of this unequal Dispensation, it is neither easy nor at present
necessary to account for, and I believe we may put it among those Difficulties
whose Solution is reserved to the Coming of Elias, as the Jews love to speak of
all desperate Problems. In the mean time however, this is certain, that those
who are distinguished from the Multitude by such advantageous circumstances,
have great reason to bless God for making the work of their Salvation so Easy,
and the Issue of it so Secure, for thus disposing them, and setting them in
order for Eternal Life. For however the glory of doing well be inhanced by
circumstances of disadvantage, as it is spoken to the credit of the Church of
Pergamos, that she held fast the Faith even where Satan's Seat was; yet of Rev.
2.13.
such vast moment is the business of our Salvation, that a Wise Considering Man
would prefer such circumstances as add rather to the Security, than to the
Weight of his Crown. It Is too great a stake to be hazarded for the glory of a
greater Excellence, whether of Virtue or of Reward; and therefore though a Life
of Temptation may possibly serve to that, yet our Savior in consideration of
our state and danger, has taught us to pray that we may not enter into it.

And for the same reason that we deprecate such circumstances of Life as are
apt to hinder, we are concerned to Pray for such as are apt to further us in
the way of our Salvation; and our Savior could intend no less, by his Lead us
not into Temptation, than that we should pray that God would lead us into such
circumstances of Living, as may not only be no hindrance, but an advantage and
furtherance to our Salvation. And if it concerns us to Pray for such, then also
to give Thanks for them. We ought indeed to Bless God for every thing that
contributes never so little to so great an End, much more for disposing us in
such a state and way of Life, where we have few Temptations but to do well, and
are as it were under a Course of Salvation.

And this (my Brethren,) I take to be very much your case, and that the
circumstances of your Life are in a great measure such as I have now described;
for not to mention your grand, though common Privilege of Christianity, which
divides you from above half the World, and your more peculiar Privilege of
being Members of a Reformed Church, and that too the Best of those which are
Reformed, where there is such excellent Provision made for all the Purposes of
a Christian Life; where you have not only all the Substantials of Christian
Religion, but those also most excellently Ordered and Disposed according to the
best measures of Human Wisdom; particularly where you have such an excellent
Liturgy, so Wisely and so Divinely Composed, as might be used even by the
Angels in Heaven, were there any need of Praying there; I say, not to insist
upon these things, I shall proceed to what is more Personal and Peculiar, and
briefly represent to you the advantagiousness of your present Circumstances
upon these Two Considerations.

First, That you here enjoy all the Advantages of Serving God in the way of a
Contemplative Life.

Secondly, That you here enjoy also all the Advantages of fitting and
qualifying your selves to serve both him and the Public, in an Active Life,
whenever you shall be called to it.

And First as to a Contemplative Life; This is immediately and properly a Life
of Religion and Devotion, and absolutely considered, is the most perfect of
any: This the Schoolmen and Mystical Divines commonly represent under the
Figure of Martha and Mary, the former of which they suppose to be the Picture
of an Active Life, and the latter of a Contemplative. And whereas Mary is said
to have chosen the Better part, this they think a Warrant to give the
preference to a Contemplative Life. Whether it be or no, I will not dispute,
but I think the preference it self is just, and that a Contemplative Life
absolutely considered, has the greater Perfection. For though there be great
excellency in an Active Life, yet it is merely with relation to the present
Exigence; and though the Habit of Charity shall (as the Apostle discourses,)
remain 1 Cor. 13.8.
for ever; yet these present instances and expresses of it are calculated
purely for this Life, and shall utterly cease in the next. But now the
Contemplative Life is to last for ever, and to be the Entertainment of that
state where there is nothing but mere Excellence, where all that is imperfect
shall be done away.

And this is that Life which your present circumstances both invite you to, and
further you in; here your Thoughts are your own, and so is your Time too
wherein to employ them; here you live a Life free and dis-ingaged from all
Worldly Encumbrances and Secular Avocations, and blessed with all possible
Advantages for a Contemplative and Affectionate Religion: Here you have
Solitude, Retirement, and Leisure, and so may serve God without Distraction,
and without Disturbance. And you can hardly well imagine till you have tried it,
of how great advantage this last thing is to a Devotional Life. He that has
little Business shall be Wise, says he that was so: I may add, and shall be
good too. Leisure is a great Friend to Meditation, and that to Religion. But
Business is an Enemy to both; for believe me, it is very hard to keep up the
Spirit of Devotion in Multiplicity of Affairs. He that is thus troubled about
many things, is not in the way of Extra-ordinary Religion: It Is well if such a
one can mind the One thing necessary, and discharge the offices of Common Life.
But this is not your case, you have Time, and you have Leisure in abundance;
you have little else to do, but to trim your Lamps, to adorn your Interior,
and to perfect Holiness in the Fear of God. In short, your very Profession is
to be Religious; you live in a place where the Order of the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice is duly observed, where you have stated Hours of Prayer and
Thanksgiving to serve God in Public, and all the rest of your Time is one
continued Opportunity of Serving him in Private. So that you may be said,
considering the advantagiousness of your Circumstances, to be in the very
Emphasis of the Phrase, (...), to stand in order, Acts 13.48.
and rightly disposed for Heaven, and your whole Life may be properly called a
Day of Salvation.

And as you here enjoy all the Advantages of serving God in the way of a
Contemplative Life, so Secondly, you have here also all the Advantages of
fitting your selves to serve both him and the Public in an Active Life
whenever you shall be called to it: For besides, that what makes you Good and
Religious here, serves also to make you useful and serviceable hereafter, a
Pious and a Well-principled Education being the best Preparative for a Life of
Public Action and Employment; besides this, you have here all the Advantages
of Learning that Books and Conversation, and Leisure to make the best use and
improvement of both can possibly afford: So that there is no Employment or
Profession either in Church or State, either Spiritual or Seoular, but what you
have here the best Helps and Advantages to fit your selves for.

And now since there is so much Excellency in Praise and Thanksgiving, and
since we are particularly obliged to bless God for Advantageous Circumstances
of Life, and since the Circumstances of your present Life appear to be
eminently such, let me in the last place commmend this to your serious
Consideration, Whether you are not therefore highly obliged to the Duty of
Praise and Thanksgiving.

Certainly if any Persons in the World are, you are, who are best qualified to
understand the transcendent excellency of it, and also lie under the greatest
Obligations and Inducements to it: Indeed you can never enough bless God for
the Happy Opportunities of Religion you enjoy in this Place, where you are like
the Trees planted by the Water side, in a growing and thriving Situation, (as
the Psalmist elegantly describes Psalm. 1. 3.
the condition of his Happy Man,) and where it must be your own intolerable
fault, if like him, you bring not forth your Fruit in due Season. Particularly
you ought to Bless God for that Happy Instrument of these great Advantages,
whose dear Memory we this Day Justly, and I hope Gratefully Celebrate.

And after a grateful Sense, and hearty Acknowledgment of these kind
Dispensations, your next care should be to make such good use and improvement
of them all, as may answer both the natural tendency of the Privileges
themselves, and the good Ends and Designs of God and your Pious Founder; always
remembering, that if (as the Author to the Heb. 2. 3.
Hebrews tells us,) they shall not escape who neglect the common Advantages of
the Christian Institution, which was so much beyond whatever the World enjoyed
before, much less shall we if we neglect so great Salvation, so great an
Advantage and Opportunity of being Saved.

THE IMPORTANCE OF A Religious Life considered from the happy Conclusion of it.
Pfal. 37. 38. Keep Innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right; for
that shall bring a Man Peace at the Last.


IT IS the great difference between a Life of Sin and Wickedness, and a Life of
Piety and Virtue, that the former consults only the present Interest, but the
latter provides for our future well-being, and lays a sure Foundation for our
everlasting Peace and Happiness. The greatest advantage we can possibly promise
our selves from a sinful course, can be at most but to be diverted a little,
and pleasantly entertained for our term of Life here, which besides the
uncertainty of it, is at longest very short and transitory: Short indeed, if
compared to other Temporary things in the Vegetable or Sensitive World, to the
Life of an Oak or an Elephant; but a mere nothing, if balanced with the days
of Eternity: Time it self has no Proportion to Eternity, much less that Span of
it that makes the Life of Mar. Behold thou have made my Days as a Span Psalm. 39.
long, and mine Age is oven as nothing in respect of thee, says the Psalmist;
so that were our whole Life one continued and entire Scene of Pleasure, nothing
but mere Sonsuality and Epicurism, 'twould be but just nothing in respect of
that long part which we are to act upon another Stage. Indeed such a degree of
Pleasartness would serve to make it yet much shorter, and contract the Span
into a Point. And yet this is the most that a life of Sin can possibly pretend
to, (for it lays claim to nothing beyond the Grave but Misery and Destruction,)
and when once the little Span is measured out, all that we can then say of it,
upon a review, will be to the sense of that severe Remark of the Stoic, (...),
The Pleasure truly is past and gone, but the Evil remains; which is a most
deplorable and afflicting Consideration.

But I speak this only upon Supposition; for indeed the Sinner is seldom or
never so fortunate as this comes to; his whole Life is but a Point, a little
Speck between Time and Eternity, and yet it is not the thousandth part of it
that he enjoys. The more usual method of Sin, is to mix and change the Scenes,
to regale us with a short Entertainment, and then to serve up to us in the
close of the Feast a Deaths Head; to divert us a while with Pleasure, and when
that is over, to make us pay dearly for it; to afflict us with a sharp and
perhaps long Repentance. Indeed a bad Conscience is a Companion troublesome
enough even in the midst of the most high-set Enjoyments; it is then like the
Handwriting upon the Wall, enough to spoil and disrelish the Feast; but much
more when the tumult and hurry of Delight is over, when all is still and
silent, when the Sinner has nothing to do, but attend to its lashes and
remorses. And this in spite of all the common Arts of Diversion, will be very
often the case of every wicked Man; for we cannot live always upon the Stretch;
our Faculties will not bear constant Pleasure any more than constant Pain;
there will be some Vacances, and when there are, they will be sure to be filled
up with uncomfortable Thoughts and black Reflections: So that when the Accounts
of a Sinful Life are cast up, this will be found to be the Sum of it, a little
present gratification at the expense of a deal of succeeding Trouble, Shame and
Selfcondemnation; nothing but present Joys and those too frequently
interrupted, and always overcharged. So that setting aside the great
After-reckoning, its Pleasures are over-bought even in this World, and there is
this great Aggravation of the Folly of Sin, that although some of its Pains are
Eternal, yet all its Pleasures are but for a Season.

But now its quite otherwise in the Practice of Religion and Virtue: This makes
Provision for our Best and Last Interest, and secures to us a Reversion of
never Failing and never ending Happiness. Indeed she is not destitute even of a
Present Reward, but carries in hand a sufficient Recompense for all the trouble
she occasions. She is pleasant in the Way as well as in the End, for even her
very Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. But it is her
greatest and most distinguishing Glory and Commendation, that she befriends us
Hereafter, and brings us Peace at the last. And this is a Portion she can never
be disinherited of, however the Malice of Men, or an ill Combination of
Accidents may defraud her of the Other. And therefore the Psalmist Overlooking
as it were all the intermedial advantages of a good Life, recommends it only
from that which is proper and pecaliar to it. For Vice has its Present
Pleasures as well as Virtue; but herein are they discriminated, that it is
Virtue only that ends well. I my self (says the Psalmist) have seen the ungodly
in great Power, flourishing like a green Bay Tree: There Is the Present Pomp and
Triumph of Sin. But I went by, and lo he was gone, I sought him, but his place
could no where be found: There Is the unhappy Close of the Merry Comedy. Then it
follows as a Practical Remarque from the whole: Keep Innocence, and take heed
to the thing that is Right, for that shall bring a Man Peace at the Last.

The Words are Naturally resolvable into these three Considerations, which
shall be made the Subject of the following Discourse.

1. That Peace at the last is more to be valued than any of the Temporary
Pleasures of Sin.

2. That a good life, which the Psalmist here expresses, by keeping Innocence,
and taking heed to the thing that is right, will certainly bring a Man this
Peace at the last.

3. That therefore it highly concerns every Man to keep Innocence, and to take
heed to the thing that is Right; in one word, to Live well.

The Sum and Force of the whole may be reduced to this practical Syllogism.

That which will bring a Man Peace at the last, is to be chiefly minded, and
most diligently heeded:

But a Life of Piety and Virtue will bring a Man Peace at the Last:

Therefore a Life of Piety and Virtue is to be chiefly minded and most
diligently heeded.

I begin with the first Consideration, That Peace at the last is more to be
valued than any of the Temporary Pleasures of Sin. Now this Term, at the last,
may be taken Two ways, either for the last and concluding Period of a Man's
Life in this World, and then Peace at the last, will be all one with Peace at
the House of Death; or else for the last and unchangeable State of Man in the
other World, and then Peace at the last will be the same with Everlasting
Peace. I shall consider the Proposition with respect to both these Senses: And
First, for Peace at the Hour of Death; The inestimable value of which, though
none are so well able to judge of, as they who are really and actually
concerned in that dreadful moment, yet we may take some measures of it, by
considering a little what it is to Dye, and how miserable is the condition of
those who have lived so ill as to want this Peace at the Hour of Death.

And First let us consider (that which I fear we seldom do) what it is to Dye:
Death is a thing of a strange and dreadful consideration, dreadful in it self,
as it is a Dissolution of Nature, the manner of which, because we do not know,
we mightily fear; but much more so in its Issue and Consequence, which is both
great and doubtful, for upon this one thing more depends, than upon all the
things in the World besides. Indeed the loss of Life and the Pains and Agonies
wherewith it is lost, are the least part of Death. This indeed is the Whole of
it to brute and irrational Creatures, they suffer Pain for a while, then resign
up their Breath, and lose both the Sense and the Remembrance of both Pain and
Pleasure. But to the Dying Man Death appears in another Light, and with another
Face: He is further to consider, that he is just now launching out into the
fathomless Deep of Eternity; that he is entering upon a new, strange, dark, and
withal unalterable state of things; that he shall be within some few Minutes
what at present he has no manner of Notion of, and what he must be for ever;
that he is now about to throw his last and great Cast, and to be resolved once
for all of his whole Condition; that he is now passing from Time to Eternity,
Eternity of Happiness, or Eternity of Misery.

And what a dreadful moment then must that be, which a little precedes this
great Transaction, when a Man stands upon the very edge and brink of the
Precipice, just upon the turning off, and has the great Gulf of Eternity in
view! Nothing certainly can be more dreadful than this, except that very Point,
that narrow Horizon that divides Time from Eternity, the end of the former, and
the beginning of the latter, and actually determines the business of our
Happiness or Damnation.

And now since to Dye is no less a thing in its consequence, than to be either
Damned or Saved, to be either Eternally Happy, or Eternally Miserable, it
cannot sure but be matter of vast importance to a Man, to consider which of
these two is like to be his Lot, when he is just about to try one of them. Nay
indeed, 'twill then nearly concern him to be pretty well assured of the welfare
of his After-state; then if ever, he will rightly understand the inestimable
Price of a quiet Conscience, of a satisfied Mind, and of a Hope full of Glory
and Immortality; then if ever, he will find that that which was always a
Continual Feast, is now a Sovereign Cordial and the Food of Angels; for never
certainly is Peace and Comfort more seasonable than at this instant; never so
much need of it, and never so much value to be set upon it; never can it more
avail us to be satisfied concerning our final condition, than when we are just
entering upon it; never more refreshing to have some few Beams of Light, than
when we are passing through the dark Valley and shadow of Death. Then
therefore, if ever, we shall duly value this rich Pearl, a good Conscience, and
be well content if we had parted with all our Substance for the Purchase of it.
We shall then be fully convinced (O why are we not so now!) how much it
outweighs all the Temporary Pleasures of Sin, yea, and the Severities of Virtue
too; and that if our whole Life had been one continued act of Penance and
Austerity, 'twould have been abundantly recompensed by the Satisfaction and
Consolation of this one Moment. And that it is worth while to live Rigidly, if
'twere only upon this one Consideration, that we may dye Cheerfully.

And without Question it must needs be an unspeakable Satisfaction to a Dying
Man, when if he looks backward, he sees a Life well spent; if forward, he has
before him a bright Prospect of Light and Glory: When he can say with King
Hezekiah, Remember Isa. 38.
now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth and with a
Perfect Heart; and with the great Apostle when within view of his Dissolution,
I have fought a good 2 Timothy 4.
Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. I say it must needs be an unspeakable, an
unconceivable Satisfaction, for a Man in his last Hour, when he is taking leave
of his Body, and shaking Hands with the whole World, when all are sad about
him, and concerned for him, then to consider that there is a better state, and
that he has a Title to it; that when his Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved,
he has a Building with God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the
Heavens: That when he shall cease to live with Men, he shall dwell with God,
and converse with Angels; in a word, that he is to leave nothing but Vanities
and Shadows behind him, and that he has the solid and real Happiness of a whole
Eternity before him. What a mild and unterrifying thing is Death to such a Man
as this, and with what Serenity and Cheerfulness does he entertain its Summons!
He can smile in the Physicians Face, when he hears him pronounce his Sickness
desperate, can receive the Sentence of Death without Trembling, and if his
Senses hold out so long, can hear even his Passing Bell without disturbance.
The Warnings of Death are no more to him, than was the Voice of God to Moses,
when he said to him, Get thee up to Mount Nebo Deuteronomy. 32.
and dye there; no more, but get thee up and dye. For now he feels the
approaches of that Salvation with Joy, which he had before wrought out with
Fear and Trembling, and can lay down his Body with an holy Hope, having
possessed it in Sanctification and Honor. And what a happy state of Mind is
this! How far exceeding all the common objects of Desire and Envy, and all
those Pleasures of Sin, for whose sake it is yet frequently put to the Hazard,
and too often foolishly exchanged! To Live with Peace of Conscience is a
singular Happiness, but much more to Dye with it; then, if ever, it is a Peace
that passes all Understanding. So great reason had Balaam for that passionate
Wish of his, Let me dye the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like
his.

But this we shall be further convinced of, by considering Secondly, the
miserable condition of those who want this Peace at the Hour of Death: This may
be conceived in a double degree, either by way of Doubt or Distrust, or by way
of downright Despair. Suppose we then in the First place, a Man placed upon
his Deathbed, who has led his Life so indifferently, or Repented so lately, or
so imperfectly, that it is a matter of reasonable question, whether he has an
interest in the Mercies of the New Covenant or no; what a strange Kind of
Suspense must such a Man be in, and what a strange concern must he have upon
him! What a disconsolate, what a damping Thought must it be for such a Man to
consider that he is now going out of the World, but does not know whither! That
there are Two States of Eternity, but he does not know which shall fall to his
lot; nor, when his Soul is dislodged from his Body, who shall give her the
first greeting, whether an Angel or the Devil. And how must such an uncertain
Soul tremble and be confounded in this her dark Passage! It Is a sad thing even
to be Doubtful and Unresolved in a business of such vast moment.

But if the Man by reason of the notorious enormity of his Life, is so far a
Stranger to this Peace, as to be in utter Despair of his Salvation, I want
words to express how miserable then his Condition is; with what amazement then
will he look, both backward and forward, upon his Sins, and upon his
approaching Account, and how full of Indignation will he be against himself for
neglecting, when he had so many Opportunities, to consider the things that
belonged to his Peace, and which now he perceives to be for ever hid from his
Eyes! The Memory of a Sinful Life is always tormenting, whatever Pleasure there
may be in the acts of it, and the expectation of Judgment is always terrible;
but never do either of them appear in their true Colors, till a Man comes to
Dye: Then he begins to have a sense and apprehension of them, somewhat like
that which our Savior had in the Garden, which put him into an Agony, and a
Sweat of Blood. When the Man comes within view of Eternity, then will he be
most concerned for his misuse of Time. The Scripture compares a Wicked Man to a
Troubled Sea, always working Isa. 57. 20.
and uneasy, but about the time of Death he is all over Storm and Tempest. Who
can then express the hundredth part of the Disturbance and Consusion he then
feels? For a Man to think he is just going to give an account before God of
such a Life as he cannot so much as reflect upon privately by himself without
Shame and Amazement, and to be sentenced to a place of Torment, from whence
there is no Redemption; to think that he has lived insignificantly and
wickedly, idly and unaccountably, and neglected that only time of Probation,
that only Opportunity of Happiness allowed him, an Opportunity which was
procured him at no less a rate than the Death of his Savior, and which was
denied to the Angels that Sinned: To think that he has neglected so great
Salvation, and that he must now be miserable and undone for ever, when with
ease he might have been happy, and all this for the sake of some little
trifling Interests or Pleasures, for Dreams and Shadows, for that which never
was considerable, and now is not at all: What can be more afflicting, more
astonishing than this? for my part I think the Misery on it so great, that I
cannot see how any Man could support himself under the Agony of such a
Consideration, no, not though an Angel should appear to him from Heaven,
strengthening him: For it is a state of Mind full of the very Blackness of
Darkness, and but one Remove from the Misery of Damnation.

And now I think from this Description of Horror, it may with ease be
gathered, what an invaluable Blessing and Happiness it is to have Peace at the
last, I mean at our last Hour. If there be any one that is not yet enough
satisfied of it, let him but ask a Dying Man the Question, and then remain an
Insidel if he can.

I should now consider Peace at the last, as it signifies Everlasting Peace, or
the Peace of the last and unchangable state of Man in the other World, and show
how far this is to be valued beyond all the Temporary Pleasures of Sin: But
this is that Peace of God which passes all Understanding, all Conception, and
all Expression, and between which and any thing of this World, there is no
manner of Proportion. What the Apostle says of the Sufferings, is as true of
the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this present time, they are neither of them
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed: Not worthy to be
compared for their Greatness, and less for their Duration. I may therefore well
omit any further enlarging upon this, 'twould be almost as ridiculous to go
about to give Light to a thing that is of it so clear, as it is to disbelieve
it; and he that offers to make the least Question of so evident a Truth, is
much too absurd to be seriously argued with.

I shall therefore pass on to the Second Consideration, that a good Life which
the Psalmist here expresses, by keeping Innocence, and taking heed to the thing
that is Right, will certainly bring a Man this Peace at the last. And First,
'twill bring him Everlasting Peace; this is plain from the whole tenor of the
new Covenant, which establishes a standing and never failing connection between
Repentance and Pardon. It Is the very Purchase of Christ's Death, that now
Repentance may be unto Life; and accordingly it is not only matter of Hope and
probable Expectation, but it is made one of the Articles of our Creed, that we
may obtain Forgiveness of Sins. Indeed Repentance is now no where in vain, but
among Devils and Damned Spirits; it would have been so with us too, had not
Christ died, and satisfied the Curse of the Law, and the Justice of the
Lawgiver, and upon that satisfaction erected a new Covenant. For the Law knows
no such thing as Repentance, but the Soul that sins must Dye, Penitent or
Impenitent. But it is the benefit we have by the satisfaction of Christ, that
now if we repent, we shall be forgiven and accepted with God to Salvation and
Happiness. We shall certainly be saved with it, and not without it; for Christ
did not (as some fancy,) so far undertake for us, that we might not Repent and
live well, but that we might Repent to Purpose. He did not design to make our
Repentance unnecessary, but only to render it useful and efficacious to the
ends of Pardon and Reconciliation: So that a good Life is not only the means,
but the only possible means to everlasting Peace and Happiness.

As it is Secondly, to bring us Peace at the Hour of Death, nothing else can do
it but this, and this can, and most certainly will; as a good life gives us a
firm Title to Salvation and Happiness, so will it give us a good comfortable
Assurance of that Title, which is always an unspeakable Peace and Satisfaction,
but especially at the approach of Death. And this is the natural Consequence
and Reward of a Life well spent; a good Man does his Duty with great Pleasure
and Satisfaction, but he reflects upon it with greater; his Present Joys are
very savoury and refreshing, but his After-Comforts are much more so. But of
all the Reviews of his Life, none yields him so much Comfort and Satisfaction,
as that last general Review which he takes of it, when he comes to Dye; then he
has most need of Comfort, then he is most fit to relish it, and then he has
most of it. With what strange Delight and Satisfaction does he then reflect
upon his past Life, and call to mind the good he has done in it! those Joys and
Consolations which before maintained a gentle course within their own Channels,
now begin to swell above their Banks and overflow the Man. A kind of Heavenly
Light springs up in his Mind, and shines forth into his Face, and his Hopes and
his Desires, his Thoughts and his Affections, his Presages and his
Expectations, his Body and his Soul; yea, the whole Man is full of Glory and
Immortality; he is conscious to himself of his Sincerity and Integrity, that he
has not been wilfully and deliberately wanting in any part of his Duty, but has
rather made this his Exercise and constant concern, to keep a Conscience void
of Offense toward God and toward Man. And as he recollects this with
Pleasure, so he builds upon it with Confidence, and accordingly resigns up his
Soul into his Maker's Hands, cheerfully and courageously, nothing doubting, but
that that good God whom he has so faithfully served in his Life, will take care
of him, and reward him after Death.

And for such an Assurance as this, there is sufficient ground in Scripture:
Great is the Peace that they have who Psalm. 119.
love thy Law, says the Psalmist: And Prove. 14. 32.
the Righteous has Hope in his Death, says Solomon. And says the Prophet, The
work of Righteousness shall be Peace, Isa. 32. 17.
and the effect of Righteousness Quietness and Assurance for ever. And says the
great Apostle, Our Rejoicing is this, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, we
have had our Conversation in the World. And we know that we have John 3.14.
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren, says Saint John. And
again, If our Hearts condemn us Ver. 21.
not, then have we Confidence toward God.

There is indeed some Controversy between the Reformed and the Romish Doctors
concerning this Matter, the latter generally denying that a Man may be Assured
or Certain of his Salvation; now though it may and perhaps must be granted,
that he cannot have an Assurance of Divine Faith, (nothing being the Object of
such an Assurance, but for which we have an immediate Revelation from God,
which cannot ordinarily be said of any Man's Salvation in particular, but only
of the general and conditional Proposition of the Covenant upon which we
build,) yet I think there is sufficient reason to conclude from the
forementioned places of Scripture, with many others too numerous and obvious to
allege, that a Man upon the consideration of his past life, may be so Morally
assured of his Salvation, as to be out of all reasonable Doubt or Irresolution
about it; and he that will deny this, must oblige himself to maintain one of
these Two Propositions, either that a Man cannot understand what conditions are
required of him in order to a Salvable State, or that he cannot with any measure
of Certainty, judge of himself whether he be qualified according to those
Conditions. The former of which, would reflect upon the Sufficiency and
Clearness of Scripture which must be allowed to be full and plain in necessary
things, and the latter would redound too much to the dishonor and
disparagement of Human Reason and Understanding; since according to this
Proposition, a Man must be supposed to be so great a Stranger to himself, as
not to know what passes within his own Breast contrary to which the Scripture
supposes in that Question, Who knows the things 1 Cor. 2. 11.
of a Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in him?

It must be acknowledged, that this is not a strict Certainty, neither of
Science nor of Divine Faith, but only a Moral and Human Assurance; for it is
certain, that the Conclusion can be no stronger than the Premises: and
therefore since one of the Propositions (that which contains my own
Qualifications,) is matter only of Experimental Knowledge, which is a Human,
and therefore fallible Testimony, it is certain, that the Assurance that rises
from the whole, can be no more than an Human or Moral Assurance. But that is
enough, and he is neither Reasonable nor Modest that either Desires or Pretends
to more; since the other is sufficient for a Satisfactory, though not for an
Infallible Judgment.

And yet there is something further in this matter yet; for to this Moral
Assurance grounded upon the general Terms of Salvation, (which are matter of
Divine Faith,) and upon the inward Consciousness of our being qualified
accordingly, (which is matter of Experimencal Knowledge,) we may further add,
that Obsignation so often mentioned in Scripture, whereby the Spirit it self is
said to Romans 8.16.
bear Witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God; not by a clear
and express Revelation, (for then the Assurance we have of our Salvation, would
be an Assurance of Divine Faith, which is against what was before supposed,)
but only by a secret Determination of our Minds to assent to this Comfortable
Conclusion, that we are in a state of Pardon and Salvation, and by Confirming
us in that Assent. After what manner this Operation of God is performed, I
shall not be so curious as to inquire, it is enough to know that it is a certain
impression of the Holy Spirit upon our Souls, whereby we are inwardly persuaded
beyond the force of Rational Conviction of our being interessed in the Divine
Favor, and in the Glory that shall be revealed. This is the Seal of the
Spirit, and Ephef. 1. 13. 14.
the Pledge or Earnest of our Inheritance, which God often bestows upon the
Children of Light in this Life, as a Reward for their past, and sometimes as an
encouragement for their future Obedience. For so says the Spirit to the
Churches, To him that overcomes, Rev. 2.17.
will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and I will give him a white Stone, and
in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man knows, saving he that receives it.

And now since Peace at the last is so valuable a Treasure, and since a good
life is a certain and the only way to obtain it, what Consequence can be more
natural and evident from these Premises than that it highly concerns us to keep
Innocence, and to take heed to the thing that is right; in one word, to Live
well, which was the Third and last Consideration. Indeed were Peace at the
last, a thing of no great value, or were not a good Life a sure and a necessary
method to obtain it; were there a failure in either of these Premises, the
Conclusion would fail with it, and 'twere no great matter how we Lived. But
since the quite contrary appears to be unquestionably true, that Peace at the
last is incomparably beyond any Temporal Interest we can propose, and a good
Life is a sure and necessary way to procure it; nothing certainly in the World
can be of such moment and consequence, as to live well: It Is by infinite
degrees the most important thing that can possibly employ our Thoughts, or our
Time, our Studies or our Endeavors, nay indeed it is the One thing needful.
Vain and Impertinent are all those other many things we are here troubled
about, all those Thoughts and Cares we have about Time, and the things of Time,
which indeed would be of little value, even to a Temporary Being, much more to
an Immortal Spirit who is to live in another State, and there either Enjoy or
Suffer to all Eternity. To such a Being Time certainly can be no further
considerable, than as Eternity depends upon it, no further than as it may serve
as an Opportunity to secure the other; which is all the use and all the value
Time and this Mortal Life can have with a wise and considering Man. The best
use therefore we can make of our Time, is to live well in it, to spend it
Innocently and Usefully, Piously and Charitably in the Service of God, and in
doing good to Men. It Is for this we have our Time, and this is the right and
proper use of it, and that which will give the most Happy Conclusion to it.
This is that which will yield us Peace and Comfort, when nothing else can, and
when we stand in most need of it, in the Hour of Death, and in the Day of
Judgment, in either of which there is no comfort like a good Conscience.

When I shall lie faint and languishing upon my Dying Bed, with my Friends all
sad about me, and my Blood and Spirits waxing cold and slow within; when I
begin to reckon my Life not by the Striking of the Clock, but by the throbbings
of my Pulse, every stroke of which beats a Surrender to the Pale Conqueror, in
this great Ebb of Nature, when the Stream of Life runs low, and the Wheel at
the Cistern can hardly turn Eccles. 12. 6.
round its Circle, it will be then no Pleasure or Comfort to my departing Soul
to reflect upon the great Estate that I have got, upon the Family and Name that
I have raised, or upon the Honors and Preferments that I have gone through:
No, my Soul will then have a new Taste, as well as my Body, and these things
will be as insipid to me as my Meat and Drink; only the Conscience of having
done well, will then refresh me, and yield me Peace and Consolation. This is
that Angel that must support and strengthen me in that great and last Agony;
nothing else is able to interpose for my relief, in that dreadful juncture, and
this alone will be a sufficient Comforter and Assistant. Many things there are
that divert and engage our Thoughts in the Course of our Life, but at the end
of it, there is nothing that will be regarded by us, or afford us any
Satisfaction but a good Conscience. Our rejoicing then will be this, the
Testimony of 2 Cor. 1. 12.
our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, we have had our
Conversation in the World. And how infinitely then are we concerned to take
heed to our ways, to walk circumspectly, and heartily to apply our selves to
that now, which will stand us in such stead then!

Besides, it is our greatest Wisdom as well as Interest, and the best Proof we
can give of our being Rational Creatures: We think it a great Commendation of
our Reason to be able to Dispute well, and Discourse well, and we are generally
more impatient of what reflects upon our Intellectuals, than of what reflects
upon our Morals. But certainly to live well, is the greatest argument of
Wisdom, and that which reflects upon our Morals, reflects most of all upon our
Understandings. We live now in an Age wherein Craft and Worldly Policy, nay,
and even downright Knavery has usurped the name of Wisdom, and a Man is in
danger of bringing his Parts in question, by adhering to his Duty against his
Worldly Interest: But this is the Wisdom of Fools and Madmen, of those who
either think not at all, or else consider things by halves; it is in short the
Wisdom of this World, which the Apostle tells us is Foolishness with God. But
there is another Wisdom, and that is the Wisdom of the just; and this is that
Wisdom which God commends, and which we our selves shall hereafter (when best
able to judge,) commend too; for this is that Wisdom from above, which is first
Pure, then Ja^^ 3.17.
Peaceable, which will bring us Peace at the last, and whereby we shall become
Wise unto Salvation.

The Conclusion of all is, Time it self is short, the Time of Man is much
shorter; Eternity has neither end nor change, and every Man is hastening to
this Eternal and Unchangable State; and therefore it infinitely concerns us all
so to live while we sojourn in this World, that when we come to dye, we may
have these Two things to support us in that dreadful Hour, the Reflection upon
the Innocence of our Life past, and the Prospect of future Glory and Happiness.

Which God of his Goodness grant us all, etc.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Heavenly-Mindedness.
Phil. 3. 20. For our Conversation is in Heaven.


THat Man is deeply lapsed and degenerated from a state of Excellency and
Perfection, is evident frem the Ruins of his Nature, which is now too faulty
and defective to be the first and original workmanship of God; but in nothing
is his Fall more fignalized, than in that abject, servile and grovelling
disposition of Mind he now labors under: He has suffered indeed in all his
Faculties, and every String of his Soul is put out of Tune; his Understanding
has a Cloud dwelling upon it, his Will has lost much of its Verticity or
Magnetic Inclination toward the chief Good; but that wherein he is most
diminished, and stands most alienated from the Life of God, and the order of
Grace, is the Passionate part of him, his Affections; these have suffered such
a vast Declination from their true and natural Point, and are so depressed into
the dregs of the Material World, and are now become so unperceptive of any
thing but the gusts and relishes of the Animal Nature, that instead of serving
(as they were originally intended,) to the invigoration and actuation of the
Soul, they are her greatest clog and impediment in all her Endeavors and
Aspirations after the Divine Life.

This is that so much Celebrated (...) of the Platonists, the Moulting of the
Plumes of the Soul; she is not only broken and wounded in her Wings, but
utterly unpinioned, she has dropped her Feathers, and can no longer sustain her
weight in the higher Regions, but falls down, and lies grovelling upon the
Ground, as if besides the Primitive Curse upon Man, of Tilling the Earth from
whence he was taken, he had inherited that of the Serpent too, Upon thy Belly
shall thou go, and Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy Life.

And as this Demission of Soul is the most signal instance of the Degeneracy of
Man, so is it commonly the last from whence we recover; our Affections are the
most stubborn and unconquerable part about us, as being blind and unperceptive
Appetites, and such as are set at the greatest distance from the Light of the
Mind, which shines first upon the Will, and then upon the Passions, whose
illumination is therefore more feeble and languid. Hence it comes to pass, that
this is the most difficult part to be managed, as there is more trouble with
One Fool, than with Ten Wise Men; and when the Understanding and Will are
resigned up, and given over to the importunity of him that stands at the Door
and knocks, these still maintain the Fort against the Heavenly Battery, and are
very often too successful in their resistance. Indeed the regulation of the
Pathetie part is commonly the last conquest of Divine Grace, the consummating
degree of Spiritual Life, the closing feature of that Image of God which is
formed in us; for nothing is more common than to see Men of singular Strictness
and virtuous Conversation in all other respects, who yet have their Affections
deeply engaged in Secular Interests, who stoop and yield to the Magnetism of
this dirty Planet, and (as the Apostle phrases it in the Verse before the
Text,) Mind or relish Earthly things: An eminent Example of this we have in the
Story of the Young Man, who came to our Savior to inquire what he should do to
inherit Eternal Life; who though a diligent Observer of the Law, and generally
accomplished with moral Qualifications, insomuch that our Lord began to have a
kindness for him, yet the affectionate part of his Soul had still a wrong Bias,
and was not sufficiently weaned from Earthly good; One thing thou lackest, and
what was that? not more Justice, nor more Charity, nor more Temperance, but to
have his Affections more loose and disingaged from the World; for when he was
bid go and Sell what he had and give it to the Poor, he was sad at that Saying,
and went away grieved, though he was told at the same time, that it was to be
only an Exchange, and that far for the better, that he should have Treasure in
Heaven, for what he quitted upon Mark 10.21.
Earth.

But however difficult it may be for a Soul so low sunk in her Affections, to
recover again upon the Wing, and bear up above the steams of the Flesh, and the
attractions of the Animal Nature, yet this is that excellent end which the
Christian Institution aims at, and which every good Christian ought diligently
to endeavor after: For what the Author of our Faith and Happiness said of some
particular words of his, is true of all, that they are Spirit and Life, such as
are able, and were designed to reanimate the dead and senseless Minds of Men,
and to diffuse a-vital heat throughout the torpid and benumbed World. And
accordingly St. Paul tells us, that Christianity is (...), the Law of the
Spirit of Life, and in another Romans 8. 2.
place, (...), the Ministration of the Spirit, such as becomes 2 Cor. 3.
a Vital Form in us, to give us Motion and Activity, and to raise us from that
Sown and Lethargy, which by our Fall we were cast into. And the same Apostle
makes it here the Character of an accomplished Christian, such who is fit to be
proposed as an Example for our Imitation, that he is one that is not only
above, but has nothing to do with the petty, trifling Interests of this lower
World, but has his Thoughts and Affections wholly taken up and employed about
the Beatitudes of the next. For says he, Brethren, be Followers together of me,
and mark them that walk so as ye have us for an Example; for our Conversation
is in Heaven. In discoursing upon which Words, I shall show,

First, What it is to have our Conversation in Heaven.

Secondly, How reasonable and becoming it is for a Christian to do so.

Thirdly, What are the Uses and Advantages of such an Heavenly Dispensation of
Life.

Now concerning the First, I consider that Heaven here may be understood either
largely for the state of the other Life in general, by way of opposition to
this, or more strictly for that special and excellent Portion of it, Glory and
Happiness. If we consider it according to the former sense, then to have our
Conversation in Heaven, will be to be perpetually mindful of our Mortality, and
that we are Citizens of another World, and must shortly take our leave of this;
to have a constant prospect into that other World which must be our last Home,
and to be always looking beyond the Horizon of Time, to the Long Day of
Eternity, to dwell in the Meditation of the Four last things, Heaven, Hell,
Death and Judgment; how great they are in their Consequence, how certain in the
Event, and how near in their Approach, and in consideration of all this, to be
always preparing for our great and final Change.

But if we consider it according to the latter and stricter Sense, then to have
our Conversation in Heaven, will be frequently to contemplate the Infinite
Perfections of the Divine Essence, the First of Beings, and the Last of Ends,
and the unconceivable Happiness of those who shall enjoy the Communications of
his Blessedness; to Contemplate, and have always in view that weight of Glory,
that incorruptible Crown with which the Sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared, no not to be mentioned. To Meditate Day and Night upon
that happy time, when we shall be Partakers of Moses's Wish, and be admitted to
that intimate and naked Vision of that Mysterious and Incomprehensible
Excellence, which is too great for our Mortal Faculties, and which none can See
and Live: When we shall see him not in Symbols and Figures, not in Glories and
sensible Manifestations, but openly and clearly, really and as he is, and from
seeing I Joh. 3.2.
him, be transformed into his Likeness: To meditate upon the blessed Society of
Saints and Angels, upon the delicious repasts of Anthems and Alleluiahs, and
that more ravishing Harmony of Divine Love, and intellectual Sympathy; upon the
elevated and raised Perfections of a glorified Soul, the inlargements of its
Understanding, and the sublimations of its Will and Affections, and upon the
Angelical Clarity and Divine Temper of our Resurrection Body: In sum, upon all
those glorious things which are spoken, and which even he that saw them could
not utter, of the City 2 Cor. 12. 4.
of God, and upon the infinite Consolations of that joyful Sentence, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the World. Lastly to contemplate all this not coldly and indifferently as a
thing that is a great way off, or as an uncertain Reversion, or maginary
Utopia, but as a state that will shortly and certainly be, and with that Faith
and Assurance which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen; to Dwell, Converse, and have our Civil Life in Heaven, (for so
the word (...) signifies,) as if we were already Inhabitants of that Blessed
Place, and actual Members of that Sacred Policy and Community.

This is to have our Conversation in Heaven, this is that Heavenly-Mindedness
which the great Apostle who had personally conversed in the Third Heaven, and
seen there more than he could utter, proposes to the imitation of his
Followers, and for which he esteemed himself fit to be an Example: Which leads
me to show Secondly, what a reasonable and becoming thing it is for a Christian
thus to have his Conversation in Heaven; and to convince him that it is so, let
him consider,

First, That the other Life is the state we are chiefly intended for, without
respect to which there is nothing in this considerable enough to justify the
Wisdom and Goodness of God in making the World; that here we have no abiding
City, no durable concern, and consequently what a folly it is to let our
Thoughts dwell where we but Sojourn our selves; that this present state both by
reason of its shortness and other Vanities, is upon no other account
considerable, than as it is an opportunity for, and a Passage to the next; that
as it was not worth while for God to make it, so neither is it for us to live
in it, if it were not in order and relation to something further; that it is a
short Voyage, and where the Haven lies always in sight; that it is the greatest
short-sightedness imaginable, not to see beyond so little a prospect as the
Grave, and the greatest stupidity and dotage, to confine our Cares and
Affections on this side of it, if we do: It Is true indeed if there were no
other state but the present, 'twould be our greatest Prudence to make as much
of it as we could, though 'twere more vain and contemptible than it is, because
it is our All; 'twould then be as reasonable to have our Conversation on Earth,
as now it is to have it in Heaven, and the Epicure's Proverb would then be as
Wise as any of Solomon's, Let us Eat and Drink, for to Morrow we Dye. But since
we are assured by him who brought Life and Immortality to light through the
Gospel, that there is another state, and that our Death is but the beginning of
a new and never to be ended Life, this one would think should deserve and
engross all our Thoughts and Affections, our Meditations and Discourses, and
that we should be no more concerned with the things of this World, than a Ghost
is, that only comes to do a Message of Providence, and when his Errand is over,
vanishes and disappears. Or if we did at any time condescend to interest our
selves in the Affairs or lawful Entertainments of this Life, methinks it should
be only transiently and by the by, as the Hungry Disciples plucked the Ears of
Corn, just to serve a present Necessity, or as the Israelites ate the Passover,
in have, with our Loins girt, our Exodus 12.
Shoes on our Feet, and our Staff in our hand.

Secondly, Let him consider that as the other state is the chief and proper
state of Man, so Heaven is the good and happiness of that state, that it is the
true and natural Center of our Rest, our Home and Native Region; that the Joys
there are unspeakable and full of Glory, such as the Senses of Man cannot taste,
such as his Understanding cannot at present conceive, and such as it will never
be able to comprehend; Joys that are without example, above experience, and
beyond imagination, for which the whole Creation wants a Comparison, we an
Apprehension, and even the Word of God a Revelation. That Eternal Word of God,
which opened to us a Prospect of a future state, and brought Life and
Immortality to light; yet he attempted not to give us a representation of the
Heavenly Felicity, but thought fit rather to cast that unexpressible Scene of
Glory into a Shade. For indeed to what purpose should the Son of God go about
to reveal the Secrets of the Kingdom to us, since if it were possible to
describe it as it is, yet it is not possible for us to conceive it as it is
described, but we must Dye and be Partakers of it, before we can either
understand it or endure it; this therefore would be a Revelation without a
Discovery, a Revelation which he himself only could understand, another Sealed
Book which none but himself would be able to open. Since then Heaven is a Place
of such transcendent Glory and Happiness, as our present Faculties are not fine
enough to conceive, not strong enough to bear, what can be more reasonable and
becoming, than that we who are now journying in the Wilderness toward this our
Heavenly Canaan, where is our Portion and our Inheritance, should have our
constant Conversation there by holy Contemplations and devout Affections, that
so according to our Savior's Argument, where our Treasure is, there our Heart
may be also? For what can be either a more noble or a more concerning Object
for an Human Soul to Contemplate, than its last end and sovereign Happiness;
when all its Changes and Revolutions shall cease, all its Appetites be
satisfied, and nothing further to be expected but a most delightsome
continuation of the same endless circle of Felicity? Certainly one would think,
that what will so wholly take up and engage the Soul when she comes to enjoy
it, should be thought worthy to employ her best Thoughts now, as undoubtedly it
would, did we firmly and heartily believe it. And therefore

Thirdly, Consider that we have no other way of approving the sincerity and
heartiness of our Faith, concerning Heaven and Happiness, but by having our
Conversation there; for so great and glorious things are spoken of the City of
God, that it is not morally possible that a Man should be heartily persuaded of
the truth of them, and yet not to have the main current of his Thoughts and
Affections run in that Chanel: How is it possible that a Man should believe
such great things, and yet not have his Thoughts dwell upon them? Some things
indeed may be very little questioned, and yet as little thought of, because
their Moment and Importance carries no proportion to their Truth; they are
Realities, but Trisles. But sure the things we now speak of, are too
concerning, if true, not to be frequently and seriously considered: If once we
are thoroughly persuaded of their Truth and Reality, their own concernment and
importance will be enough to recommend them to our most inward and recollected
Thoughts and Meditations; and therefore for my part when I see Men plunge
themselves into the depths of Sensuality and Worldly Interests, as if they
never meant to rise again, to love the World as they are commanded to love God,
with all their Heart, Mind, Soul and Strength, to have no serious Thoughts and
Remembrances of Heaven or Heavenly things, but to set up their Tabernacles, and
say it is good to be here, I must conclude, (and they may think me uncharitable
if they please,) that whatever they pretend, they do not heartily and seriously
believe there is any such place as Heaven; for if they did, considering the
vast importance of the thing, it would certainly have a greater share of their
Contemplations, and a larger room in their Hearts. And this very thing our
Savior intimates in his Reprehension of the immoderate Carers for the World;
These things, says he, the Gentiles seek, those who have no Revelation to
assure them of a better and more enduring Substance: Having no certainty of the
future, they make the most of the present, and in so doing, act in some measure
according to their Principles. But seek ye first Mat. 6. 32, 33.
the Kingdom of God; ye that have a Revelation of a nobler end, and of a far
more excellent state, do you apply your selves principally to that, or else you
will not act like your selves, and may justly be suspected of not Believing
that Revelation which the others want.

Fourthly, Consider that as the having our Conversation in Heaven, is an
argument and test of our Faith, so is it also of our Resurrection with Christ,
and our Spiritual Life; the Connection is made by the Apostle, If ye be then
risen with Christ, seek Col. 3. 1.
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the Right Hand of God;
set your Affections on things above, and not on things of the Earth; for ye are
Dead, etc. In which Discourse it is evident, that the Apostle does not only
exhort to Heavenly-Mindedness as a Christian Duty, but makes it also a certain
Mark and Argument of Spiritual Life and Resurrection. The Marks and Signs of
Grace have made a great part of some Men's Divinity, and they are generally such
as do not want for Latitude and Comprehensiveness; to be sure they contrived
their business, so as to take in themselves and their own Party. But certainly
there is not a more notorious Criterion whereby to distinguish the prevalency
either of the Animal or of the Divine Life, than to consider how the Moral Taste
and Relish, that which the Platonists call (...), the Boniform faculty of the
Soul stands affected. It Is a shrewd Symptom of an ill habit of Body, when the
Taste comes to be so vitiated, as to delight to feed upon Trash and unwholsom
things; and so it is in the state of the Mind, the Animal and Sensualized Man,
as he does not Perceive, so neither does he Relish the things of God; they have
no congruity with that Life and Sense that is most invigorated and awakened in
him, and therefore he prefers his Husks and Acorns before the hidden Manna, and
the Food of Angels. But he who is born of that incorruptible Seed mentioned by
St. Peter, and in 1 Pet. 1. 23.
whom the Divine Life is most excited, he having his Spiritual Senses well
disposed and exercised, finds a particular gust in Divine things, contracts his
Affections upon Heaven and Happiness, looks upon all inferior good as dry and
insipid, and is ready to say with the Psalmist, One thing have Psalm. 27.
I desired of the Lord, even that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the
days of my Life, to behold the fair Beauty of the Lord, and to visit his
Temple. This is the Desire, this is the Relish of a Spiritually disposed Soul,
of a Soul that is dead to the World, and alive unto God; the Sum of all which
is briefly comprised in that of the Apostle, They that are after the Romans 8. 5.
Flesh do mind or (as the Word also signifies,) do relish the things of the
Flesh, and they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. This is a
short and compendious, but a very great Test of Spiritual Life, and that
whereby we may distinguish a vital Sense of Religiou from a formal Profession
of it.

Fifthly and Lastly, Consider that one great end of our Savior's Ascending
into Heaven in his Human Nature was, that we Christians might have our
Conversation there; in order to which end, the Ascension of Christ has a double
Influence, First as a Rational Motive, and Secondly as a Moral Emblem.

First as a Rational Motive; for since the Ascension of our Savior into Heaven
adds new Supplements of support to our Hopes of arriving thither (his Ascension
being a Pledge and Pattern of ours,) it must needs at the same time fan the
Flame of our Affections, and make them tend upwards with importunate reaches
toward Heavenly Objects. For this is a Maxim which Experience as well as
Philosophy has stamped for truth, that the more our Hope of any good is
established, the more our Desires after it are increased, and that nothing
sooner cools the Fever of the Affections, than Despair of Fruition: Whence it
follows, that the Ascension of Christ by adding further encouragement to our
Hopes, becomes a Rational Motive to us to refine and elevate our Affections,
and to have our Conversation in that Heaven of our Interest in which the
Ascension of Christ in our Nature is so convincing an Assurance.

Secondly, As a Moral Emblem; the whole course of our Savior's Actions tends
to our instruction and admonishment; and though some of them were never
intended to be copied out in kind, as being set above the Sphere of our
imitation, yet they are not so far out of our reach, but that they point out to
us some resembling Excellence, and may be imitated though not literally, yet in
Figure and Mystery. Of this kind are the Resurrection and Ascension of our
Lord; for although with him we cannot as yet loosen the bands of Death, and
break the Prison of the Grave, yet we can now in some sense rise with him, from
the Death of Sin, to newness of Life, and are by his Resurrection not only
enabled, but also admonished to do so. And although as to his Bodily Ascension,
(as our Lord told St. Peter,) we cannor follow him now, yet we can in some
sense ascend with him, by a passionate elevation of our Thoughts and
Affections, and are also mystically invited to do the latter from the
Contemplation of the former. The Local and Bodily Ascension of Christ, calls
for a Moral and Spiritual Ascent; If I be lifted up from the Earth, I will John
12. 32.
draw all Men unto me, said our Lord in reference to his Crucifixion. How much
more powerful then ought this Consideration to be in reference to his
Ascension; for it cannot be said of him now, what was then, when his Beauty was
benighted under a Cloud, that there is no Form nor Comeliness in him, that we
should desire him; for now are the Mists scattered before the prevailing Sun,
he shines forth in his full Glory and Triumph, yea, he is now altogether
Lovely. Now therefore may the Pious and Seraphick Soul bear up her self upon
the wings of Contemplation, Love and Desire, and follow her Ascending Lord
where the Eyes of the wondering Apostles were forced to leave him, and say in
the Words of Elisha to his departing Master, as the Lord lives, and as thy 2
Kin. 2.2.
Soul lives I will not leave thee; and blessed is he that has part in this
first Ascension, for over him the Second Death shall have no Power.

And thus have I shown by several Considerations, what a reasonable and
becoming thing it is for a Christian to have his Conversation in Heaven; but it
will appear yet much more so, if we consider in the Third and Last place the
great uses and advantages of such a Heavenly dispensation of Life, and they are
many; but I shall consider only some of the most remarkable of them.

First, This is a most excellent expedient to beget and confirm in us the
contempt of the World, and of all those Pomps and Vanities of it which we
renounced in our Baptism; this is a mighty thing, and a thing that has been
essayed by several methods, as by Monastic engagements, by retiring into
Cloisters and Deserts, by Vows of Poverty and the like: But these are rather
Natural than Moral ways of forsaking the World; and it is considerable that our
Savior in his last Intercession for his Disciples, prays not John 17. 15.
that they should be taken out of the World, but delivered from the evil of it.
The best way to forsake the World, is to do it in Heart and Affection, and the
most effectual means to do this, is by conversing in the other World. This
indeed may be done by a serious Contemplation of the powers of external.
Nature, and of the capacities of our own, by comparing which two together, we
may be satisfied of the Vanity and insufficiency of all Worldly Objects to the
purposes of Content and Happiness. And this was the course that Solomon took to
convince himself and others of the Worlds Vanity. But besides that this is a
long way about, and a way that requires a great deal of Time, and a great deal
of Experience, and a great deal of Meditation and Reflection; it is also a
Method fit only for finer and more elevated Spirits, those of a Contemplative
Genius, and of a Nice Discernment. But to Converse in Heaven, is a more
compendious and easy Method to contemn the lower World, more practicable to the
common fort; and those that cannot in the other way Dispute and Demonstrate,
may however in this be sensibly convinced of the Vanity of the World. The Earth
to us that dwell upon it, seems a Body of considerable Magnitude, but to one
that should take a view of it from one of the higher Orbs, 'twould appear but
as a Point. The same indeed might be demonstrated upon Mathematic Principles,
but every one is not capable of doing that, and such an high raised prospect
would save the trouble. And so it is in the case before us; this World
considered alone may perhaps carry with it a specious and goodly Appearance,
and he that does so consider it, will need Reason and Argument to convince him
of its Vanity; but it is but to converse a little in the other World, and take a
view of it from thence, and 'twill all without any more ado shrink almost into
nothing. And therefore 'twas not without reason that the Divine Philosopher
styled Philosophy the Theory of Death; for certainly the Contemplation of the
other state, is the most compendious way to true Philosophy, the Contempt of
the World far beyond all the ways of Reason or Discourse, all the rigid and
mortifying lectures of Stoicism. And accordingly I observe that the Author to
the Hebrews says of Abraham, that Heb. 11.9.
by Faith he Sojourned in the Land of Promise as in a strange Country, dwelling
in labernaoles: And the reason of his doing so more expressly follows, for he
looked for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God; so
that this was that which drew off Abraham's Affections from the Land of
Promise, because by Faith he had a Prospect of a far better Country, and had
his Conversation in Heaven.

Secondly, This is the best Remedy to support us under the Evil, of this
present Life; as it lessens the good, so it lessens the evil of it too, and
will serve to support us under the one, as well as to mean us from the other.
Nay, to speak the truth, it will not so much support us under these Evils as
take them away, and render them slight and inconsiderable. For suppose the
worst that can be Death, and a Painful Death, he that has his Conversation in
Heaven, views the Glory that shall be revealed there, and at once sees that the
sharpest Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
them, no more than the Point of a Circle is with its Circumference: He
contemplates the Joy that is set before him, and so indures the Cross, and
despises the Shame and the Pain too: For a view of Heaven will mitigate any
Cross upon Earth, and help us to encounter any Affliction as St. Stephen did
his Martyrdom: He is one of those steady Men the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm.
112.7.
who are not afraid at any evil Tidings, but his Heart stands fixed in the
Lord. Much less will he for the dread of any Persecutions or Worldly Losses
deny his Religion, or by a Trimming and Hypocritical Mode of Behavior, court
the Favor of those in Power, or by any sinful compliance part with a good
Conscience. He sees nothing so great or so terrible in this World, as to fright
him into any such unworthinesses; no, they that do so, have not their
Conversation in Heaven, but are Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, and for all
their Pretenses to Self-denial, deny nothing of themselves that I know of, but
their Understandings. He that truly converses in Heaven, sees infinitely more
there than he can either get or lose here, and can therefore never be guilty of
such a Foolish Exchange, as to gain not the whole, but a little of the World,
and lose his own Soul.

Thirdly, This Dispensation of Life is the best Preparatory for Heaven that can
possibly be; for besides that the greatness of that Happiness makes him that
Contemplates it, despise any good or evil that may here stand in competition
with it; he further considers the Nature and Quality of that Happiness, that it
is an union of the Soul with her best and last end, that it is a clear Vision
and an ardent Love of God, who cannot be seen by him that Lives, much less by
him that Lives ill; and this must needs put him upon thinking, that a Holy and
Divine frame of Spirit is absolutely requisite, not only as a Condition to our
Admission into Heaven, but also as a Condition of Enjoyment, without which
there is no being Happy even when we are there. And from this Consideration, he
naturally passes to fit himself for the enjoyment of his Maker, to Purify
himself as he is Pure, to Purge, Refine, and Spiritualize his Nature, that so
he may be qualified for the refined Joys of Heaven. The short is, there are Two
things that must and will be considered by him that has his Conversation in
Heaven, the Greatness of the Happiness there, and the Nature of it; and each of
these has a particular influence for the preparing him for it: The former will
make him Temptation-Proof against any present good or evil that shall stand in
his way to his great Prize, and the latter will contribute to form and fashion
the frame of his Mind into a likeness and affinity with the end which he
proposes: But both together will so strongly influence the Man, that he will
become perfectly (...), dead to himself and to all the Luscious Relishes of the
Corporeal Life, and the Life of God will be triumphantly seated in him, so that
now he has but one only Will in the World, which is to have none at all of his
own, but to annihilate himself, that God may be all in all in him. And thus
while like Moses he converses with God on this holy Mount, his Face shine; with
a Divine Glory, and he is transfigured into the likeness of him whom his Soul
loves.

Fourthly and Lastly, This is a dispensation of Life, that affords the greatest
Pleasure and Satisfaction of any in the World, to ascend the top of the
Mystical Pisgah, and thence to take a survey of the Happy Land; to contemplate
the infinite Perfection of God, and the Happiness of those Blessed Spirits that
enjoy him, the Order of Angels, and that noble and blessed Communion of Saints;
to contemplate the last and richest Scene of Providence, and the Discovery of
all the rest that went before; when the reason of all difficult and perplexing
Appearances shall be made plain, and the manifold Wisdom of God set in a clear
Light; to have our Minds employed about the greatest and best things, to walk
with God, and keep a constant Communication with Heaven, must needs be the
sweetest as well as the noblest and most worthy Entertainment on this side of
it. Intellectual Pleasures are certainly greater than Sensual, even by the
Confession of the greatest Sensualists, as may appear from this single
instance, in that Men will abstain from the greatest Pleasures of Sense, that
they may not lose a good Reputation, which is an Intellectual good; and as
Intellectual Pleasures are greater than Sensual, so this is the greatest of
those that are Intellectual. Concerning this the same may be said that is of
Wisdom, that her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and Prove. 3. 17.
that all her Paths are Peace; that she is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold
upon her, and happy is every one that retains her: That they who eat of her
shall yet be Hungry, and they that drink of her shall yet be Thirsty. For there
is a certain inexhaustible Well of Pleasure, a fathomless Abyss of Delight in
this Heavenly Conversation, which they only who have experimented it can
conceive, and which even they want Power to describe.

This I know will be far from satisfying some Voluptuaries, who are sunk so low
into the contrary Life, that of Sense and Carnality, that they will think a Man
Mad that shall either Talk or Live at this Abstracted rate; but to these I have
Two things to say: First, That their having no notion of the Pleasure of this
Dispensation, is no Objection against it; the thing may be true for any thing
they know or can say to the contrary, for they are not, during the quick
sensibility and invigoration of the lower Life, proper Judges in the case, any
more than the Sense it self is of an Intellectual Object; for these things are
spiritually discerned by a certain Divine Taste and Sensation, which is a
Faculty which these Men want.

The other thing I shall commend to the Sensualist is this, that since he is
too scrupulous and skeptical to take our word for it, he would endeavor after
such a degree at least of Spiritual Purification, as to try the Experiment,
that as the Psalmist speaks, he would Taste and See how good and pleasant this
Heavenly Conversation is; and then I Am much mistaken if he does not find that
all the Madness lay on his side, if he does not confess that there are no Joys
like Spiritual Joys, and that one Day spent in these Ante-Courts of Heaven is
better than a Thousand.

And now since it appears to be a thing of so much reason and becomingness, and
of so great use and advantage to have our Conversation in Heaven, methinks we
should easily be persuaded to enter upon this Heavenly Dispensation of Life.
The Region we now Converse in, is very incommodiously seated, and of an
unwholsom Complexion, such as does not at all agree with the Constitution of
the Soul, where she is always sickly and out of order, full of weaknesses and
indispositions; why then do we not change our Abode, and remove our dwelling
into our Native Country, where there is a purer Air, and a more healthy
Climate? When we hear or read a Description of a very pleasant Country, such as
the Bermuda Islands, where the Sky is Serene and Clear, the Air Temperate and
Healthy, the Earth Fruitful and Entertaining, where there are Walks of Oranges,
and Woods of Cedar Trees; though we have no probable prospect of ever going to
dwell there, yet we cannot choose but often think, and sometimes dream of it, and
wish our selves the happiness of so pleasant an Abode. Why then do not our
Thoughts dwell more in Heaven, where besides the far greater delightsomness of
the Place, we have a particular Interest and Concern to invite us thither? It Is
the hope of arriving at Heaven at last that supports our Life upon Earth; it is
not able to support it self: One or two turns here, gives a Considering Man a
full compass of its Enjoyments, and he no sooner comes to understand them, but
he despises them. And what shall a Wise Man do, what refuge has he after this
Discovery, but to Converse in Heaven? What Expedient is there left, but to
anticipate those Joys, when he can no longer taste these?

So that there is a necessity of Conversing in Heaven, if 'twere only to
relieve the Vanity of Earth; and happy is the Man who has so much of Heaven
while he is upon Earth: Yea, Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest Psalm. 65. 4.
O Lord, and receivest unto thee; he shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be
satisfied with the Pleasures of thy House, even of thy Holy Temple.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Submission to Divine Providence.
John 18. 11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not Drink it?


THIS is a Question which our Lord puts to himself; and it is well he did so,
for had he put it to any body else, it is great odds but that it had been
answered in the Negative; for the great and general Center of Human Nature,
whither all the Lines of Appetite tend, and where they all meet, is Happiness:
The desire of Happiness is the First and Master-Spring of the Soul, as the
Pulse of the Heart is in the Body, that which sets all the Wheels on work, and
governs all the under-motions of the Man: It Is that original Weight and Bias
which the Soul first received from the Hands of her Creator, and which she can
never lose so long as she her self is: It Is indeed the strongest and most
radical Appetite that we have, an Appetite to which God has not set any bounds,
and to which Man cannot; an Appetite that is ungovernable and unconfined it
self, and that gives Measures and Laws to all the rest; and consequently there
is nothing which so ill comports with our Nature, which so directly crosses the
grain of our Constitution, as that which threatens or offers the least
contradiction to this ruling Inclination of it. Hence it is that Evil is the
great Antipathy of Human Nature, which though it has many particular Aversions,
yet this is her great and general Abhorrence: From this at its first approach
the whole Man shrinks in, and stands averse, and would be removed from it (if
possible) an infinite distance; the Animal part of Man is against it, and the
Reason of Man wonders and disputes how such an uncooth thing came into the
World, and several Hypotheses have been advanced to account for that strange
Appearance; (...) was the great knot of ancient Morality, and the most
gravelling Problem of all the Heathen Philosophy; and I question whether Reason
without the assistance of Revelation can conquer the Difficulty. So that
considering the Opposition that it carries to the whole Man, both to our
Appetites and to our Understandings, there seems nothing more difficult than to
be reconciled to it, though it be in order to a greater advantage, and we see
an excellent glory behind the Cloud.

It Is said by Plato, that Pleasure and Pain are the two Nails that fasten both
the Wings of the Soul down to the Earth, and hinder its Ascent upward: And the
Wise Epictetus.
Stoic has most excellently summed up the whole difficulty of Virtue into
(...) and (...) to Abstain and Sustain: Indeed Abstinence and Patience are the
Two most rough and uneasy Places in all the Stage of Virtue; the rest of her
ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her other Paths are Peace. But here the
Traveller meets with Trouble and Discouragement, is engaged in a point of
Labor and Contention, and though in the Event he perform his Duty and bear
forth good Seed, yet it is always with the reluctance of his lower faculties,
and (as the Psalmist expresses it,) he goes on his way sorrowing. Psalm. 126.


But the chiefest and noblest Scene of Virtue lies in Patience; it is hard to
abstain from Pleasure, but it is much harder to endure Misery, (which is the
Reason by the way that the Sanctions of Laws are generally taken rather from
Punishments than from Rewards,) and of all Obedience, that which is Passive is
most difficult; for we hate Pain to an higher degree than we love Pleasure. And
of this the Infernal Spirit was so sensible, (one who dwelling with everlasting
Burnings is best able to judge of the difficulty of submitting to Misery,) that
he presumed to say concerning that excellent Person whom God had commended for
his Integrity in all the instances of Active Obedience, and whom he himself
knew to be a Miracle of Patience in particular, that if God would but put forth
his Hand, and touch him with some near and cleaving Affliction, he would curse
him Job 1. 11.
to his Face.

And to this purpose it is yet further observable, that even the Disciples of
the Blessed Jesus whom he had picked and chosen out of the promiseuous Herd of
Mankind, and who followed this Lamb whithersoever he went, and traced him
through all the narrow paths of a Virtuous and Religious Life, yet when he came
to Mount Calvary, within view of the Cross, they all forsook him and fled,
stopped short at the foot of the dreadful Hill, and left him to tread the
Wine Press alone: And even he that had most courage and presence of Mind, and
dared furthest, he whom St. Chrysostom calls the Warm Disciple, even he
followed Luke 22. 54.
him but asar off.

Nay, even our Blessed Savior himself, who besides the peculiar excellency of
his Human Spirit, and the incentives of an Omnipotent Love, had also the
Divinity of his Person for his immediate Succor and Support; as he fainted as
to his Bodily strength under the Load of the Cross, so was he amazed into an
Agony and Sweat of Blood at the very apprehension of what he was to suffer upon
it, and almost fainted in his Resolution too, till after the recollections of
Meditation, and the confirmation of an Angel, he overcame the tenderness and
reluctancies of innocent Nature, with the perfection of Submission and
Resignation, emptied himself of his own Will, as he had formerly done of his
Heavenly Glories, and refused all help and deliverance both from the Guard of
his Angels, and the over-officious Sword of his zealous Apostle with this
gentle Reproof, Put up thy Sword into the Sheath; the Cup which my Father has
given me shall I not drink it?

The full sense of which Words is resolvible into these Two Propositions.

First, That every Affliction which befalls Man, is dispensed to him by the
hand of Providence; which is intimated in these Words, the Cup which my Father
has given me.

Secondly, That therefore he ought to submit to it with all Patience, Meekness,
Contentedness and Resignation of Spirit, intimated in the last Clause, Shall I
not drink it?

And First, that every Affliction which befalls Man, is dispensed to him by the
hand of Providence: That there is such a thing as Providence in general, and
that God does concern himself in the Government and Management both of the
Material and Intellectual World, by ruling and ordering the Motions of the
former, and the Actions and Events of the latter, though denied by the School
of Epicurus, is yet I think acknowledged by all that own a Creation, and
certainly with great agreeableness and consistency with that Principle. For
besides that Creation does both suppose and produce Love toward the Creature,
suppose it as the Principle, and produce it as the Effect, it being impossible
that God should either Create what he did not Love, or not Love what he has
Created; according to that Observation of the Wise Man, For thou love all the
things Wisd. 11. 23.
that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made; for never would thou
have made any thing, if thou had hated it, I say, besides that Love of God
which follows upon the Creation, and that care which as closely follows upon
the Supposition of his Love, I further consider, that it had not been worth the
while for God to have created a World, if he did not intend to govern it; for
since the World is not capable of governing it self, and conducting the
infinite variety of its own motions to any excellent end, and since without
some conduct or other, it must needs fall into disorder and confusion, if God
will not undertake the Government of it; to what purpose should he make such a
World, which without his care of it would bring him more Dishonor by its
After-disorders, than Glory by its first Production? And Disorder is a thing so
opposite to God, that we find he could not be reconciled to a Natural Chaos,
much less then can he be to a Moral one, especially in a World of his own
raising; for indeed Creation is too great a work to be bestowed upon a World
which is ever after to be abandoned and left to it self. And since God has
ingrafted into the nature of every Animal, affectionate Propensions toward its
own Productions, whether Natural, Mechanical or Intellectual, nothing can be
more absurd than to imagine, that he would be so ill a Parent himself, as to
expose this his own Offspring, and which as soon as brought forth, he Loved, and
pronounced very good, to the uncertainties of Chance and Contingency.

Besides, we are naturally led to the existence of Providence by the
consideration of the Divine Perfections, such as his Omnipotence, Omnipresence,
Omniscience, Goodness and Justice. And accordingly we find, that even Aristotle
and the Peripateticks, who would not allow the World to be Created by God, as
supposing it to be Eternal and Uncreated, yet were forced from the
Contemplation of the Divine Excellencies to acknowledge it to be Governed by
him. They owned a Providence, though they disowned a Creation, and that from a
serious consideration of the excellent nature and attributes of God, which they
thought would sufficiently engage him to take care of the World though he did
not make it: And truly were the Supposition possible, I should yet think as
they do; for sure God is too great and too good a Being to suffer Anarchy and
Confusion wherever there is a Capacity of Order.

Epicurus indeed turns this Argument quite a contrary way, and from the
Perfection of the Deity, argues for his profound Repose and Inactivity; that
being fixed upon his own Center, and full of himself, he has nothing to do but
to live at large, secure and unconcerned, and enjoy the richness of his own
Esience, with an infinite and undivided Complacency. But this all depends upon
that precarious and ill-natured Principle of his, that all Benevolence proceeds
from Indigence, or which is the same in other terms, that all Love is
Self-Love; which indeed if true, will oblige us to confess, that the more
perfect and self sufficient any Being is, the less solicitous he must be of the
concerns of others; and consequently a Being absolutely Perfect as God is, must
of necessity be wholly destitute of all Benevolence toward other beings, and
without any concern for their welfare. For no consequence is more plain than
this, that if all Love be from Want, then that Being who is absolutely removed
from Want cannot be capable of any Love. Epicurus his Inference therefore is
very right, but the ground upon which he proceeds is false, in making all Love
to owe its rise to Indigence.

I shall not here undertake a direct confutation of this illiberal and
straitlaced Notion, having particularly confidered Theor. and Regulat. Love. P.
52.
it elsewhere; I shall only remark at present, that the falseness of this
Epicurean Principle, is put out of all Question to us who believe a Creation;
for if, that Love proceeds from want, be an Argument that a perfect Being can
have no Love, then we may argue as well the other way, that if a perfect Being
does Love, then Love does not proceed from want. And we have a sufficient
discovery of this in the Creation, which considering the Self-sufficiency of
the Divine Nature, must needs be the effect of a pure, unselfish, and
disinteressed Love: which by the way is a consideration that mightily commends
the excellency of the Divine Goodness, and should wind up our Affections to
great Heights of Praise and Gratitude.

And as the Self-Sufficiency of God is no Bar against Providence, (being only
upon a mistaken Principle of Epicurus alleged to that purpose,) so are his
other Perfections a strong Argument for it; that is consistent with it, and
these do necessarily infer it. Thus his Omnipotence, Omnipresence, and
Omniscience render him abundantly able to sit at the Helm of this great Vessel,
and his Goodness and Justice engage him to undertake the Charge. He that
contemplates the former, can no longer question, How does God know? can be
judge through Job 22.13.
the dark Cloud? Nor he that contemplates the latter, suspect, that he
purposely declines the Office, and walks idle and unconcerned in the Circuit of
Heaven. Besides, the Perfections of God would not appear so conspicuously, if
there were no Providence. It Is great to Create, but it is more to Govern a
World; as the Skill of the Artist is more seen in well ordering and artfully
touching the Strings of a Musical Instrument, than in the first making and
framing of it.

And if it be once granted that there is a Providence, it is an absurd and
ridiculous conceit, to consine it, (as some do,) to the Supralunary Regions;
for the same Arguments that infer the being of Providence in general, conclude
also for the Universality of it. It Is most congruous to think that the
Providence of God is of equal extent with his Creation, (for sure that which
was not too mean to be Created, cannot be too mean to be Governed,) and that
the same loving and Harmonious Spirit that first moved upon the face of Genesis
1.2.
the Waters, and ranged the most minute particles of Matter into Beauty and
Order, does still run through the now Organized Mass, and preside over, and
sweetly direct, not only the Greater, but also the Lesser Motions of this his
most exquisite Machine: For without this, the Harmony of the Universe would be
very defective, and its parts disproportionate and ill-forted. It Is true,
Beauty and Order would dwell above, but all would be Chaos and Confusion below,
and the Earth would still be without form and void. And thus the irregularity
of the Lower World would cast a disparagement upon the whole System of things,
as the untunableness of one or two Instruments dis-recommends the whole Musical
Consort.

It Is therefore necessary to affirm, that the Providence of God extends to both
Worlds, as the Sun Beautifies and Inlightens each Hemisphere. In this respect
also as well as others, that Divine Comparison will hold, God is Light, and in
him is no Darkness at all. But though nothing be too small or inconsiderable
for the Comprehensive reach of the Divine Cognizance, yet we may reasonably
suppose, that he considers the value of his Creatures, and proportions his
Providential Care according to their different excellencies. Now throughout all
the order of the Visible Creation, Man is the most noble and accomplished
Being, and consequently the chiefest Object, the most peculiar Charge of
Providence; so peculiar, that as the Creation of other Sublunary things carried
a particular respect to Man, so is their Government too chiefly in
subordination to his Interest. And indeed it is no more than what by the
Measures of Proportion we are warranted to suppose, that he should have a more
than ordinary Interest in the care and superintendency of his Creator, who was
made by an immediate Pattern from himself, and with his solemn Counsel and
deliberation.

Nor is this ever waking and broad Eye of Divine Providence open only on
Societies and Communities of Men, and intent only upon the Revolutions of
States and Kingdoms, but also watches over the affairs and concerns of every
particular Person in the World; no Man is too little and despicable for the
notice of Providence, however he may be overlooked by his Fellow Creatures; for
we are told in Scripture not only of the Guardian Angel of the Jews and the
Prince of Persia, but that we should take heed how we offend or despise even
the meanest of Men, because of the interest they have among the Angels of
special Presence, Mat. 18.10.
the Courtiers of Heaven. Nay we are told by the same infallible Oracle, that
even the very Hairs of our Head are all numbered; so that not only the Meanest
of Men, but even the meanest things relating to them, their most indifferent
and insignificant concerns are under the charge and care of Providence.

And if the care of Providence be so very punctual and exact even to Grains and
Scruples in the most trifling and indifferent Concerns of Man, we may with
great reason conclude., that it is much more so in our more weighty and
considerable Interests: And since not only our present but future Happiness
depends much upon various junctures of Circumstances and States of Life, we
have consequently reason to conclude, that these are more particularly
conducted by God's Providential Hand; and accordingly that Affliction comes not
Job 5. 6.
forth of the Dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground, but are
disposed and ordered by God, and Arrest us with a Divine Commission. And
accordingly the excellent Wisdom of our Church in her Office for the Visitation
of the Sick, piously orders the Minister to exhort the Sick Person after this
Form, Dearly beloved, know this, that Almighty God is the Lord of Life and
Death, and of all things to them pertaining, as Youth, Strength, Health, Age,
Weakness and Sickness: Wherefore, whatso ever your Sickness is, know you
certainly that it is God's Visitation, etc. As indeed we have reason to think
that every other Affliction is as well as Sickness, that there is a Chastising
as well as Destroying Angel, and that all Plagues are from God as well as those
of Egypt; that no Calamity can either privily steal, or violently break in upon
us without the Divine notice and particular permission. But that every bitter
Draught which we take, is weighed, mingled and reached out to us by an
invisible Hand, by the Dispensation of Providence, that it is a Cup which our
Father has given us: Our Infinitely Wise, Good, and Compassionate Father, one
who knows to choose for us infinitely better than we can for our selves, and
whose Infinite Goodness, Love and Faithfulness, give us all possible assurance
that he will use his Wisdom for our best Interest, and give good Gifts to his
Children. Which leads me to consider the Second general Proposition, that
therefore we ought to submit to every Dispensation with all Patience, Meekness,
Contentedness and Resignation of Spirit.

Patience and Resignation under all Providential dispensations however
difficult in the Practick, has yet perhaps more to be said for it in the
Theory, than any one instance in all Morality; but I am obliged by the limits
of my Discourse, to confine my Thoughts at present to such Arguments and
Considerations only as may be afforded by the excellent Nature, Attributes and
Relation of God. For 'twas for this reason alone, that our Blessed Lord
cheerfully submitted to the drinking of his Bitter Potion, because 'twas given
him by his Father, The Cup which my Father bas given me.

And that this is a Pillar strong enough for so great a weight, a sufficient
Argument for the most Heroical Resignation under the most accumulated
Affliction, not to argue from the example of our Blessed Lord who supported his
laboring Courage by this single Consideration, under the weight of his
unparalled Agony, will clearly appear, if we consider some of the excellent
Attributes and Perfections of God. Those which more eminently conduce to this
purpose, and wherewith I shall at present content my self, are his Supreme
Dominion, his Self-sufficiency, his Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and his Paternal
Relation to us.

First, Then we may consider, that he from whose Hands we receive our bitter
Cup, has a Sovereign Right and Dominion over us; which though we state at the
lowest pitch, and do not bottom it with some upon the (...) or supereminency of
the Divine Nature, or with others on the unlimitedness of the divine Power, but
rather (which indeed seems more reasonable,) upon the benefit of Creation, yet
even then will follow that he may justly make what deductions he please from
the sum of our Happiness, within the Compass and Latitude of that Benefit. And
consequently we have no just reason to murmur, as if Injured, though either by
Deprivements or positive Inflictions he diminish our Happiness, so long till he
leave us in a state just preferable to that of Nonexistence; though he should
draw out our Happiness to the very Lees, strip us of all good but that slender
one of Being, and forbid us the taste of every Tree but this One, that grows in
the whole Paradise of God. Thus I say by reason of the freeness of his Favors,
God may deal with the most innocent and spotless of all his Angels, who after
all this vast Substraction, and in this state of extreme Barrenness and
Sterility, are yet his Debtors; and therefore instead of Murmuring and
Repining, obliged to take up the Resolution of the Psalmist, While I Psalm. 146.
live I will praise the Lord; yea as long as I have any Being, (though nothing
besides,) I will sing Praises to my God.

But though God might justly do this, and consequently though even in this
case, Patience and Resignation were highly reasonable, yet it is not his method
to deal thus arbitrarily with us, or to proceed to the utmost Bounds of his
Dominion; he has by his very donation of Being to his Creatures, given them all
the fair grounds imaginable to hope and expect that all his after-proceedings
toward them shall be agreeable and correspondent to that his first Favor, and
that he will never take from us the least Scruple of that Felicity wherewith he
invested us at the first Minute of our existence, without either our own fault,
or a reference to some further Advantage; the first of which takes away all
occasion of Complaint, and the Second calls for our Praise and Eucharist.

And that this is the measure whereby God deals with us, we may be well
assured, if we consider the other remaining Attributes, his Selfsufficiency,
his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and his Paternal relation to us; God is a
Being, whose Happiness as it is always perfect, equal, uniform, and at full
height like his other Excellencies, so is it wholly absolved and consummated
within himself, and admits of no Foreign Ingredient into its Composition. He is
as happy as he can ever possibly be in his own Essence, and consequently can
neither receive nor propose any advantage to himself in any change that is
wrought in the Creature; he stands in no need of our Happiness, much less of
our Misery, and therefore whenever he lays an Affliction upon us, since he
can have no Interest of his own to serve by it, we must either say that he
afflicts us merely for Affliction's sake, or that he designs it in order to a
more important good of the Patient: To affirm the former would be Absurdity,
Impiety, and Blasphemy, and withal contrary to the express voice of Scripture,
which tells us that God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve Lam. 3.33.
the Children of Men The latter therefore must be concluded, that all the Evils
which God dispenses to us, (except only where our extreme Demerit alters the
Case, as in the instance of Damnation,) are designed for our greater Interest
either here or hereafter, and to Perfect or Consecrate us through Sufferings.
They are indeed Heb. 2.10.
the Arrows of the Almighty, but sent upon a Friendly Errand; present
Interruptions, but future Inlargements of our Happiness; like the Misty Veil of
the Morning, which for a while shuts in the Rays of the Sun, but at length
contributes to the greater Luster and Triumph of the Day.

And to this purpose we may further consider, that the great Moderator of the
Universe, and Supreme Disposer of all Events, is infinitely Wise and Good, as
well as Self-sufficient, and consequently cannot but do all things for the
Best; for as he is too Self-sufficient to drive on any interest of his own, so
is he too Wise to mistake ours, and too good not to execute the dictates of his
Wisdom; the consequence of which two Suppositions, must needs be the disposal
of all things in the best way and manner that is possible. It Is much more
rational in it self, and less derogatory to the Divine Perfections, to suppose
with Epicurus that God does not at all meddle with the Affairs of the World,
than that he does it by halves, and steers his great Vessel with a
disadvantagious conduct. There is no Artist, but will perform to the utmost of
his Skill, provided it be as easy for him to make his Piece complete, as to
under-work it. And that it is so to God, we can no more dispute, than we can the
absolute Infinity and Perfection of his Nature. Certain therefore it is,. that
if God governs the World, it is governed altogether as well as 'twas made, that
is, as well as is possible: (...), says Plato, God acts the part of a
Geometrician, does all things exactly and regularly; thus he made the World,
and thus he governs it, he proceeds by the same Standard in both, and his
Government of the World is no less Mathematically exact than his Creation of
it. It Is true indeed, the exactness of the former is not so obvious to our
observation, as that of the latter, nor are we so well able to judge of the
Moral, as of the Natural Geometry of God: But considering the Perfection of
God, and the Imperfection of our Capacities, we have no reason to question, but
that one is as exact as the other, and both as exact as possible. Not that this
is to be understood in an Absolute, but in a Relative Sense; for as to the
Perfection of the Natural World, we do not require that every Species of Being
should be in the highest Perfection, whereof a Creature is capable, ( for if
the whole 1 Cor. 12. 17.
Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing?) So neither are we to measure the
perfection of the Moral World by single and separate Instances, but by the
whole conduct and course of the Divine Dispensation. And then as in Music,
what is Discord in particular and separately considered, will be Harmony upon
the whole; a far more excellent Harmony to the Intellect, than the most curious
and artful disposition of Sounds can be to the Sense.

It Is true, we want Light in this Valley of Darkness and Night of Ignorance, to
discern this Harmony and beautiful conspiracy of things, (which is the true
ground of all the Discontent that is in the World;) but hereafter, when our
eyesight shall be cleared and fortified to see our Glorious Maker as he is, we
shall then with the Beauty of his Face behold that of his Providence, we shall
see the deep Plot of this great and wonderful Drama laid open and unravel'd,
and how even the most Cloudy and Doubtful states of things wind up into Beauty
and Harmony: We shall see and be well satisfied, that there is a Geometry in
his Providence, as well as in his Creation; and that as all things were made,
so are they governed too in Number, Weight, and Measure. Then shall we not only
patiently and meekly submit to, but with full acquiescence and complacency of
Spirit, rejoice in the accomplishment of the whole Will of God, though is be in
the Damnation of our nearest Friends and Relatives. Then shall there be an
entire resolution of our Wall into the Divine, God shall be all in all, Ephesians.
3. 10.
and his (...), his manifold and various Wisdom, though not fully comprehended,
yet shall be so much understood, as to be fully justified by all his Children.

In the mean time, till we are in a capacity to judge our selves, we may and
ought to repose a firm confidence in the skill of the Divine Dramatist, and
believe implicitly that there is a most incomparable Beauty in the whole Scheme
and System of this his great Masterpiece, though to us who sit in a dark
corner of the Theater, some of its parts seem obscure and perplexed; that (as
the Wise Man expresses it,) Wisdom Wisd 8. 1.
reaches from one end to another, and that he has poured her out upon all his
Eccles. 1.9.
Works.

And is there now any room for such a Passion as Grief or Discontent after such
a Consideration as this? Can a Man acting upon this Supposition be so absurd as
to be disturbed at any Accident, to repine under any Condition, to take to
heart the loss of any Friend, though another and a better Self, though his
whole Happiness were compendiously summed up in him, so as to lose all at a
Blow; when at the same time he seriously considers, that all things are as well
as they can possibly be? Certainly he that is troubled at any Affliction, may
well be suspected of one of these two things, either of forgetting that God
governs the World, or of charging him with Maladministration. He insinuates
by his Grief and Discontent this much at least, that he dislikes the order of
the Universe, and that if he were placed at the Helm, he would steer its Course
after another method; and does therefore deserve to be remembered of that which
Luther told Melancthon, when troubled that the Reformation did not move on so
smoothly as he would have it, Monendus est Philippus desinat esse Rector Mundi,
Philip is to be put in mind that he leave off governing the World.

For certainly were we thorougly satisfied of the infinite Wisdom and Goodness
of God in the disposal of all events, were this Persuasion deeply fixed in us,
and intimately present with us, that all is for the Best, we should see
Argument enough not only for Patience and Contentment, but also for Rejoicing
and giving Thanks in all Dispensations; we should (as Seneca Epist. 96.
well expresses the Temper of his Wise Man,) non solum Deo parere, sed and
assentiri, not only submit with resignation to the Divine Will, but approve and
embrace it with full choice, as our best Lot and Portion, and say with another
excellent Stoic, (...), Epictetus.
I will not only endure, but plead for the dispensations of Providence, and
justify them to the World. We should not then content our selves with that of
the Royal Prophet, I became dumb and opened not my Mouth, because it was thy
doing, but proceed further, and Psalm. 39.
kiss the Cross even while it oppresses and galls our Shoulders, and go forth
to meet our Sufferings, after the example of our Divine Master, who withdrew
voluntarily to the Garden where he foreknew he should be apprehended, and there
as freely surrendered himself when he might have escaped: We should not so much
as wish to have avoided any Calamity; and though we took never so much delight
in our Paradise, yet after we heard the Voice of God walking in the Garden, and
received his Sentence to depart, we should not endeavor a re-entrance, though
we could remove the fiery Sentinel, and prevail with the angry Cherub to sheath
his Sword, but should rather thank God for his severe Mercy, and say with the
great example of Patience, The Lord gave, and the Lord Job 1. 21.
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

There remains yet one Consideration more, and that is the Paternal relation of
God; he that gives us the bitter Cup, besides the Essential benignity of his
nature, has also a near relation to indear him to us; he is our Father, and
therefore cannot but be very tenderly affected toward us. He loved us when we
were but an Idea in his own Understanding, much more does he now, when we have
actually participated of his Spiritual Nature, and not only so, but of his
peculiar likeness too: Add to this, that he has shown himself to be a Father by
infinite Favors and Kindnesses, some of which border almost upon Fondness and
Partiality, in so much that they have raised envy in some of the Angels, and
wonder in all the rest: For there are things done for Man, which the Angels
have long contemplated, and yet still desire to look into. 1 Pet. 12.


Shall I not then drink the Cup which my Father, this my Father has given me?
My Father who is too full and perfect to need my Misery, though in respect of
his Supreme Dominion he might to great degrees arbitrarily afflict me; who is
too wise to mistake my true interest, and too good (for 1 John 4. 8.
he is Essential Goodness, and his very Definition is Love,) to prescribe me a
Draught which he knows not to be wholesome for me? who has given me all the good
I enjoy, and who has parted with more for my sake, than he can possibly take
from me in this World; for he has given me his Beloved Son, the brightness of
his Glory and the express Image of his Person, shall I then receive good, so
great a Job. 2. 10.
good at his hands, and not receive evil? Shall I refuse the Cup which my
Father, this my Father has given me? no, may the considering Sufferer say, I
will welcome the sharpest Arrow that comes from his Quiver, I will rest heartily
satisfied with his severest dispensations, and though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him.

Let us then at all times and on all occasions with all Patience, Meekness,
Contentedness and Resignation of Spirit be Passively as well as Actively
Conformable to the Divine Will, and demean our selves as becomes Children under
the Chastisement of so wife and so good a Father; let us not only with calmness
endure, but with content and satisfaction approve and justify all his
Dispensations; so will he justify and acquit us hereafter, and to the present
benefit of our Affliction, superadd a Reward of our Patience, and reveal to us
such an excellent Glory with which the Sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared.

To which God of his Infinite Mercy conduct us all,

Amen.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Folly of Covetousness.
Luke 12. 20. But God said unto him, Thou Fool --


IT IS somewhat strange to consider that Wisdom should be a thing desired by
all, and highly pretended to by the most, and yet that Men should betray their
Folly in nothing more than in their Judgments concerning Wisdom; and yet this
is the frequent as well as unhappy fate of the many Pretenders to Wisdom that
are in the World, who in nothing take such absurd measures as in this. We show
indeed enough of our Weakness and Ignorance in the search of Nature, and in
what we call our Philosophy: We live among Mysteries and Riddles, and there is
not one thing that comes in at our Senses, but what baffles our Understandings;
but though (as the Wise Man complains,) hardly do we Wisd 9.16.
guess aright at the things that are upon Earth, and with labor do we find the
things that are before us; yet find them out we do in some measure, and are
seldom so very much out in our Judgments, as to mistake in Extremities, and
take one contrary for another: It Is very rare that we take the virtue of a
Plant to be Hot, when it is extremely Cold, and he must be a very mean Botanic
now, that shall gather Poison instead of Pot Herbs, and yet this we often do in
the conduct of Life, and in the great Ends and Measures of it. Here we often
mistake one contrary for another, Evil for Good, Darkness for Light, and Folly
for Wisdom. We do not only act foolishly, (for that were something tolerable,
would we but acknowledge and be ashamed of our weakness,) but we back this
Folly with another, applaud and justify our absurd measures, and think our
selves Wise not only while we are Fools, but for that very thing wherein we are
so.

The generality of Men place their Wisdom in that which is directly their
Folly, and their greatest Wisdom in their greatest Folly; they lay deep Plots
for shallow Interests, and are very slight and superficial in their
Contrivances about things of real Moment and Consequence; they work out a frame
of little Designs, with as much industry, art and wariness, as the laborious
Spider weaves her finewrought Web, and to as much purpose, to catch a Fly, to
bring about a Trifle, when the same, perhaps half the labor and thoughtfulness
would have served for the securing a weighty and substantial Interest.: And yet
when they have done this, they think they have been very Shrewd and Politic,
and compassed a very notable Point, and are Proud of their little Achievement,
and fancy the Title of Wise as much their due, as if pronounced so by the
Oracle, and as sure and well established, as if their Wisdom as well as that of
Solomon, had built her House upon Seven Pillars, little thinking all the while
that he that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to Scorn, that the Lord shall
have them in Derision: That God, Psalm. 2. 4.
whose Ways are not as our Ways, nor his Thoughts like our Thoughts, has
already weighed them in a truer Balance than that wherein they weigh
themselves, and finds them wanting; wanting in what they chiefly pretended to,
and charges them with downright Folly and Madness. For this was the case of the
Rich Man in the Parable, the Fruitfulness of his Ground had put him upon a new
Expedient, and he was very busy and thoughtful within himself how to find room
to dispose of his Goods; What shall I do, says he, because I have no room where
to bestow my Fruits? The Poor Man it seems was as much straitened in his
Plenty, as other Men use to be in the extremest Poverty; What shall I do? the
very Language of those who are reduced to Straits: Do? why, give the overplus
to the Poor; and that thou may not be so overstock'd again another Year, part
with a good piece of thy Land, and build an Hospital. No, says he, I understand
better things than so, this will I do, I will pull down my Barns and build
greater, and there will I bestow (not on the Poor,) all my Fruits and my Goods;
and I will say to my Soul, Soul thou have much Goods laid up for many Years,
take thine Ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry. This was his Resolution, and a Wise
one too as he thought, applauding himself as much in the Wisdom of his
Contrivance, as in the Fruitfulness of his Ground: But God said unto him, Thou
Fool --

It is here supposed, that the Rich Man thought he had done wisely, and
proceeded by the best Measures of Prudence and Discretion, in that the Judgment
of God is here by way of Opposition set against his; he it seems, and God were
of two different Apprehensious, But God said unto him, -- From the Words
therefore I shall in the First place observe, how vastly the Judgment of God
differs from that of Men, and particularly that what we count Wisdom here, is
Folly with him: And since the Judgment of God is always insallible, and
according to the truth and reality of things, I shall therefore in the Second
place consider the great Folly of what God here condemns as such; First, Of Sin
in general; Secondly, Of placing our Happiness and Content in the good things
of this World: And here I shall consider the great Folly of Covetousness, and
particularly of the Covetous Rich Man in the Text.

And First, I observe how vastly different the Judgment of God is from that of
Men, and particularly that what we count Wisdom here, is Folly with him. My
Thoughts, says God by the Prophet, are not your Thoughts, Isa. 5. 5.
neither are your Ways my Ways; for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth,
so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts.
Indeed the disproportion is very great between Earth and Heaven, between the
Point and the Circumference of so vast a Circle, and yet this cloes but faintly
shadow out the mighty disproportion that is between the Measures of Men and the
Ways of God; for the difference is as great, as between Truth and Falsehood,
which are removed from each other by an unmeasurable distance. There Is more
Truth than we are easily aware of in that fancy of Homer, that the Gods call
things by other Names than we do; so far are they from thinking our Thoughts,
that they do not so much as speak in our Phrase. Not only the Thoughts of God
are above our reach, but even his very Words are (...), Words that cannot be
uttered by a Mortal Tongue, nor understood by an imbodyed Understanding;
there is an unimaginable difference even in the very Nomen-clature as well as
the Logic of Earth and Heaven, for God dwells in unapproachable Light and
Glory, nay, he himself as St. John tells us, is a pure and unmixed Light, a
Light which has no Darkness, and to which nothing is dark, but all things open
and naked. He therefore pierces through the very Essences of things, sees them
all in their proper Colors, and calls them all by their proper Names. He has
before him in one simple view the whole Field of Truth; nay he is very Truth
himself, and consequently can no more be deceived in his Judgment of things,
than he can cease to be what he is. But we, though we see in his Divine Light,
yet we have it reflected to us through false Mediums, and mingled with Clouds
and Mists, and thick Darkness. We look upon Truth as we do upon the Face of the
Setting Sun, through a gross and fallacious Atmosphere, and by a Refracted Ray,
which makes it to appear where it is not; for we see through a Veil of Flesh
those dim Spectacles of the Soul, and the Vapors of the Body cloud the
Understanding, and blunt the Edge of the Mind. We seldom discern things as they
truly are, and when we do, we can hardly keep true to the Judgment which we
have once rightly made, but are oftentimes by the intervening Eclipses of
sudden Passion, actually ignorant of what we habitually know, and then act as
foolishly and absurdly, as if we had never known it. These are the accidental
Disadvantages we labor under, besides the finiteness of our Understandings,
which even in the Perfection of our Nature are bounded within a narrow compass.
And since this is the Case between God and us, the Judgment which God makes of
things, must needs be vastly different from the Sentiments of Men; for if the
Judgment of one Man be so widely different from that of another, if the
Conceptions of Philosophers be so far removed from the fancy of the Vulgar, and
the Measures of an Experienced Statesman be so quite otherwise than those of a
poor Homebred Peasant, how vastly different must the Measures and Judgments of
God be from those of Men, who sees Darkness even in the Angels of Light, and
charges the loftiest Seraph with Folly! Certainly so very different, that they
are for the most part quite contrary; in so much, that what we think Truth, and
withal dogmatically pronounce as such, and perhaps bind with an Anathema, God
in the mean while judges to be Error, and what we take to be Wisdom, he esteems
to be Folly: And I doubt most of our Wisdom is of such a Stamp, as will not
pass above in the Regions of Light, however current it may be here below by the
advantage of this our Night and Obscurity: And the Apostle says plainly of the
Wisdom of the World, (which indeed is the Wisdom of the most,) that it is
Foolishness with God.

But of this we shall be better convinced by some particular Instances, whereof
there are a Multitude, but I shall briesly touch upon a few. And First, as to
the frame of the Natural World, some Mathematicians and Naturalists have
quarreled with the Geometry and Contrivance of it; one dislikes the Situation
and Motion of the Sun, in making some Countries so very Hot, and some so very
Cold, and in occasioning, so frequent Eclipses. Another quarrels with the
conduct of the Weather, and can by no means think it well that a full Cloud
should empty it self upon the barren Sand, or upon the Sea, when in the mean
time many a rich Ground is almost starved for want of Relief from Heaven; and
he can as little reconcile it to wise Administration that the hopes of the
promising Year should be crushed in Pieces by the rude Arrest of an
unseasonable Frost. Another wonders to what purpose there should be such vast
numbers of little Infects, why there should be any such thing as Poison, and
why among Fishes the Greater should prey upon the Less, and why those which are
Food for us, should be so thick set with little Bones; and he can never forgive
Nature for the Luxuriancy and easy growth of Weeds, when choice Flowers are
hardly brought up even with Labor and Care. But to all this and the like, the
Judgment of God stands directly opposed, who upon a Solemn Review of his Works
pronounced all things good that he had made, and found not one Erratum in the
whole Book of Nature.

Thus again as to the Administration of the Moral World, we don't like the
System of this neither, but are wont to be dissatisfied; First. That there
should be any such thing as Evil in it; this has been censured as a great Flaw
by a whole School of Philosophers, and the most favorable Plea they could
advance for it, was to resolve it into Necessity, and the Invincible
Stubborness of Matter; as much as to say, God could not help it. And those who
could be pretty well reconciled to the being of Evil in the World, would yet by
no means endure to think that the greatest share of it should light upon good
Men. This was ever an unanswerable Scandal, and an unmovable Objection; and
yet it is most certain, that if God did not judge it best upon the whole matter,
that there should be Evil in the World, and that the most of it too, should
fall upon those who deserved the least, he would never suffer either the one or
the other.

There is yet another thing in relation to the Moral World, which lies very
cross upon our Minds, and that is the Adjournment of the full Administration of
Justice to another World; we would fain see it in this, and are for an
immediate and visible distinction and separation to be made between Good and
Bad, between the Tares and the Wheat; and because we see no such difference
made, we are apt to censure the Order, if not to question the very Being of
Divine Providence. But it seems the Judgment of God is against ours, he thinks
it not so well that the Tares should now be separated from the Wheat, but that
both should grow together till the Mat. 13.30.
Harvest.

Thus again as to the Matter of the Christian Faith, and the manner of planting
it in the World, which the Apostle in one Word calls the Preaching of the
Crofs; this we know was a Stumbling Block to the Fews, and Foolishness to the
Wise Greeks, who were then the Vertuoso's of the World; and yet we are told by
an inspired Pen, that 'twas both the Power and the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Wisdom of God.

Thus again as to the Government of the Christian Church, even those who have
received the Christian Faith, are not altogether satisfied with that; for many
of us are apt to think that Christ would have made much better Provision than
he has for the good of his Church, if he had constituted in it an Infalliable
Gnide, and Visible Judge of Controversies, by whom all Difficulties might be
cleared, and all Disputes ended, which now so confound and divide the Christian
World; I say many who do not believe that there is any such Constitution, are
yet apt to think and say, that twere a thing much to wished it had been so, and
that 'twould have been a great deal better so than otherwise; and yet God we
see in his Wisdom has not thought fit to have it so.

Thus again as to the condition of Human Life, we commonly imagine it would be
mightily for our Advantage to have a prospect of Futurities, and to foresee
what shall happen to us hereafter; and accordingly we are very curious to taste
of the Fruit of this Tree of Knowledge, and to pry into the obscure Manuscript
of Destiny; and some are so impatient, that they will have recourse to the
Devil for such Discoveries rather than fail. And yet we see God in his manifold
Wisdom has thought fit to Seal up this Book of Futurities from our Eyes, and
will not trust us with so dangerous a piece of Knowledge.

Thus again Lastly, We many of us think it a great Point of Wisdom to heap up
Wealth, to get Honors and Preferments, to raise Families, to perpetuate a
Name; and we are hugely satisfied with our good Policy and Discretion, if we
can secure to our selves a little Portion of this dirty Planet, this little
Spot, this Point, though we pay for it, not only the Price of Labor and Care,
Contempt and Disgrace, Danger and continual Fear, but even the great Price of
our Future Inheritance, and part with our Religion, and our very Souls in the
Exchange. This we oftentimes think Wisdom to do for a little of the World;
whereas in the Judgment of God, to gain the whole upon such Terms, would be but
an ill Bargain. What shall it Profit a Man, says our Savior, to gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? Yes, but there are some, and never so many as in
this Age, that think this no such unprofitable Merchandise, but are very well
content to sell Heaven for Earth, Happiness for Vanity, and will readily part
with the great Reversion of another World for a Turf of Ground in present
Possession. This is the way of them, and they think they do well, and that they
may say of themselves all the while what the Wise King did in the midst of all
his sensual Indulgencies, Also my Wisdom remained with me. But Eccl. 2. 9.
however these Men applaud themselves in their extraordinary Reach and Policy,
God in the mean time has another Opinion of their Conduct, and will say to
every one of them, what he did to the Rich Man in our Parable, Thou Fool.

And now whereas the Judgment of God is ever Infallible, and according to the
truth and reality of things, I am hence led in the Second Place to consider the
great Folly of what God here condemns as such; the thing condemned, is the
Conduct of the Rich Man, which he himself thought Wise, but God thought very
Foolish; and the First ground of the Charge wherewith God taxes him, was the
Sinfulness of it; he was a Fool because a Sinner. I shall therefore in the
First place reflect a little upon the Folly of Sin in general: Sin and Folly,
Sinner and Fool, are Words in Scripture, especially in the Writings of Solomon,
of a parallel Signification, and are indifferently used one for the other: And
the Schools of Morality insinuate the same in that common Aphorism of theirs,
every Sinner is ignorant. (...), says the Socratical Proverb. Indeed Sin has
its Birth in Folly, and every Step of its Progress is Folly, and its Conclusion
is in Folly; there is its Rise, there is its Advance, and there is its End: But
this will appear more distinctly from the consideration of these Two things.
First, The absurdity and madness of the Choice which every Sinner makes.
Secondly, The Error and Mistake that must necessarily precede in his Judgment
before he makes it: These Two things, wherein is comprised the whole Folly of
Sin, have been by me already considered Reason and Religion. Page 250.
elsewhere; but because it is a Consideration of such an uncommon importance, I
shall rather present it here again to the Reader with a little Alteration, than
refer him to it.

As for the Absurdity of the Sinners Choice, it is the greatest that can be
imagined; for what is it that he chooses? it is to do that which he must and
certainly will repent of, and wish he had never done, either in this World for
its Illness and Sinfulness, or in the next for its sad Effect's and
Consequences. It Is to despise the Authority, Power, Justice and Goodness of
God; it is to transgress his Commands which are good and equitable, and in
keeping of which there is present as well as future Reward; it is to act against
the frame of his Rational Nature, and the Divine Law of his Mind; it is to
disturb the Order and Harmony of the Creation, and by extra-lineal motions to
violate the Sacred interest of Society: It Is lastly, to incur the Anger of an
Omnipotent and Just God, and to hazard falling off from his Supreme Good and
the last end of his Being, and the being ruined in his best Interest to all
Eternity. All this the Sinner partly actually incurs, and partly puts to the
hazard in the Commission of any one Sin. And for what is all this? Is it for
any considerable Interest, for any thing that bears something of Proportion,
and may pretend to Competition and a rival weight in the opposite Scale of the
Balance? No, it is only for a Shadow, for a Trifle, for the gratisication of
some baser Appetite, for the acquirement of some little Interest, which has
nothing to divert us from adhering to that which is truly our Best, but only
that poor Advantage of being present, though at the same time its Vanity be
present with it.

And now is this a Choice for a Wise Man, for a Man of common Sense? Nay, is it
a Choice for a Man of any Sense at all, for one in his right Wits to make? Is
there a better Demonstration to be had of a Man's being a Fool or Mad than
this? No certainly, and were it not for the Customariness of the thing, and
that too many are concerned, this would be thought a sufficient Reason why a
Man should be begged for a Fool, or sent to Bedlam: For if Absurdity of Choice
be any Argument of Folly, the Sinner is certainly no common Fool, there being
no Choice so absurd, so unaccountable as his.

But his Folly will further appear, if we consider Secondly, the Error and
Mistake that must necessarily precede in his Judgment, before he does or can
make such a Choice; all Sin is founded upon Ignorance and Mistake, for as it is
impossible to choose Evil as Evil in general, so is it no less imposfible to
choose any particular kind of Evil as Evil; and consequently it is impossible to
choose the Evil of Sin as such: The Devil himself (as Abstract a Sinner as he
is,) cannot love Sin as Sin. If therefore it be chosen, it must be chosen under
the appearance of Good, and it can have this appearrance no otherwise than as
considered as a lesser Evil, (for that is the only way whereby an Evil may
appear good or eligible,) and so it must be considered before it be chosen. He
therefore that chooses Sin, considers it at the instant of Commission as a
lesser Evil, and therein consists his Error and Mistake; he is either
Habitually or Actually Ignorant, he either has not the Habitual Knowledge of
all those things which should preserve him in his Duty, or at least he has not
the Actual Consideration of them; for it is that which must bring him to
Repentance, there being no Consideration beyond this: And it is impossible a Man
should Sin with the very same Thoughts, Convictions and Considerations about
him, as he has when he Repents. This I say is no more possible, than for a
Balance to move Two contrary ways with the same Weight, and in the same
Posture. He therefore that Sins, wants that Consideration at least to keep him
in his Duty, which when he Repents brings him to it; and is therefore Ignorant
and Mistaken.

The Sum of this matter lies in this form of Argument, Whoever thinks Sin a
lesser Evil, is mistaken in his Judgment; but whoever commits Sin, does then
think it a lesser Evil: Therefore whoever commits Sin is mistaken in his
Judgment. So great is the folly of Sin, both in reference to the Absurdity of
the Choice, and to the Error and Mistake of the Chuser; and so great reason has
every Sinner to take up that Confession of the Psalmist, so Foolish was I and
Pfal. 73.
Ignorant, and even as a Beast before thee.

And thus far of the Folly of Sin in general; I come now in the Second place to
the other ground of the Charge, where I am to consider the folly of placing our
Happiness and Content in the good things of this World, and of that particular
sort of Earthly-Mindedness which we call Covetousness. It is certainly a very
great folly to place our Happiness in any Created Good, even in the very Best
of the Works of God; there is nothing even in Heaven that is Created, which can
be our Happiness; not the Discourses of Angels, not the Love of Seraphins, not
the Music of Alleluiahs. And therefore the Psalmist excludes all the Creatures
even in Heaven as well as in Earth from being the Objects of his Happiness;
Whont Pfal. 73.
have I in Heaven but thee? says he; 'twould be a great folly therefore to make
any Created Good our Happiness, even in the very Region of Blessedness. But
then to place it in any good that this World, this Sediment and Sink of the
Creation can afford, is such a degree of Sottishness and Stupidity, as did not
Experience convince us that there are such Fools, one would hardly think
incident to a Rational Creature; for it plainly argues that we are grossly
ignorant of one of these Two things, either of our selves, or of the things of
the World; we are either ignorant of the Dignity and Excellency of our Natures,
of the Designs and Ends of our Creation, and of the Strengths and Capacities of
our Appetites which are to be satisfied with nothing less than Infinite; or if
we do know and consider all this of our selves, then we are so much the more
ignorant of the World about us, to think that there is any thing to be had in
this Circle of Vanity to satisfy the importunity of such Hungry and Capacious
Appetites.

So far indeed is any thing in this World from being able to afford us
Happiness and Satisfaction, that it is well if it can give us Entertainment, and
sweeten the otherwise insipid, and to some very bitter Draught of Life: The
wisest Enquirer into the Capacities of Nature will hardly allow it so much as
that; but says of all here, that it is not only Vanity, but also Vexation of
Spirit; and if we do by an extraordinary Fortune meet with any thing in this
World that can a little cool and allay the heat of our great Thirst, and
refresh the drought of our Spirit, yet we are assured by our Savior who well
understood the World, though he enjoyed but little of it, that whosoever drinks
of this Jeh. 4. 13.
Water shall thirst again; and we all find by repeated Experiences, that it is
so, and our Reason tells us it must be so, considering the vast, the infinite
disproportion between the best things of this World, yea of the whole Creation,
and the largeness, the immensity of our Appetites and Capacities, which are a
plain Demonstration that we were neither made for them, nor they for us, and
that here is neither our Good nor our Evil.

And what a Folly then is it to place our Happiness, and take up our Rest in
such things as these against the Confession and experimental Verdict of the
Wisest of Men, against the express Declaration and Asseveration of God who made
both the World and us, and knows the exact Proportion that all his Works have
to each other; and that a Barn full of Corn can never satisfy the Hunger of a
Soul, against the united experience of all Men ever since Adam; nay, and
against our own Experience too, which will witness to us, if we but ask her,
that we never enjoyed but were disappointed, and found our Souls empty when our
Arms were full; nay, and against the Answer of our Reason too, which satisfies
us of the Necessity of what our Experience confesses to be true, and that as it
has ever been so, so it ever will and must be so: I say, what a desperate,
incorrigible Fool must he be, who after all this, will yet dream of a Heaven
upon Earth, and place his Happiness in the good of this World! The short is,
there is no Folly or Disappointment like that of being mistaken in ones End,
and of all Ends none is so foolishly mistaken as our Last End, and this can
never be more foolishly mistaken than when it is placed in the things of this
World. This therefore is a very great instance of Folly and Stupidity, and to
him that is guilty of it, whatever he be for Wit and Parts in other Matters of
lesser consequence, God justly may and will say, Thou Fool.

And now if there be so much of Folly in Centring in this World, which consists
of great variety of Good, and wherein there is a great Latitude of Enjoyment,
what a Folly must it then be to straiten our Happiness within the narrow
compass of One or Two of its meanest Objects, and to set up our Rest in a full
Purse, or a full Barn, or in a few Acres of Ground! And this the Covetous Man
does; though he be called a Worldly Man, yet it is not the World at large, but a
little of it, and the worst of it that is the Mistress of his Heart: He is such
a Fool to think that his very Life consists in the Abundance of things which he
possesses, and so he makes Gold his Hope, and says to the Fine Gold, Thou art
my Confidence. He places his End in these things, and so is guilty of all the
common Folly and Absurdity of those who place their Happiness in any of the
good things of this World; only there is this one peculiar aggravation on his
Side, that whereas the Ambitious Man though he makes Honor and Preferment his
Happiness, yet he enjoys it when he has it; and so does the Voluptuary by his
Pleasures; and by this means though they lose their true End, yet they have
something in Exchange. In the mean time, the Covetous Wretch, though he makes
Wealth his End, yet he when he has it, enjoys it no more than he did when it
lay hid in the Bowels of the Earth, and so goes to the Devil for nothing. For
nothing did I say? it is worse than so, for though he has nothing of the
enjoyment, yet he will not bate himself an Ace of the Trouble, but endures all the
Pain and Anxiety that Careful Days and Sleepless Nights can give, and so has
his Hell here, and hereafter too.

The truth is, there is more Depth and Mystery in the Folly of Covetousness,
than in any the most profound Wisdom in the World; other Follies of Human Life,
though they are not to be Cured any more than this, yet they may be accounted
for; and though they do overpower and inslave the Mind, yet they do not baffle
it. But this is a Disease that has such variety of uncertain Symptoms, that
it is hard to know what cause to ascribe it to; the Theory of it is as difficult
as the Cure, and we can only say, that the Soul is not well under it, that it is
a Disease. It Is Folly enough one would think, for one Man to place his
Happiness in such a Trifle as a piece of glittering Dirt, and to have ones Soul
dwell among Sacks of Corn, and Bags of Money, and to be always craving, heaping,
counting and admiring; this I say one would think were Nonsense enough,
considering the vileness of the Treasure it self, the Providence of God, the
shortness and uncertainty of Life, the transitoriness of this World, the
fashion of which is always passing away; and considering withal the very little
that Nature requires for her satisfaction. But yet it were something tolerable
if the Wretch would but be persuaded to make use of what he has, and to enjoy
like a Man, what he desires and admires like a Fool. But to see an old shaking
Miser among his Bags, like a Scarecrow in a Field of Corn, to keep others away
from what he has no power to make use of himself, to see him hovering and
brooding over his Heaps, and bringing forth nothing; to see him daily pay
Religious Visits to his Mammon, and to have his Belly empty when his Coffers
are full, sure the Philosopher that laughed to see an Ass eat Thistles, might
well split his Sides at such a Spectacle as this.

Thou Fool! If thou do not want so much Wealth, why do thou desire it, and
take so much Pains to get it? And if thou do, why do thou not use and enjoy
it? But this is the monstrous Folly of the Covetous Wretch, he first desires
absurdly, and then is more absurd in not enjoying what he desires; he is every
whit as Poor when he has, as when he has not; he is good to no body, but worst
of all to himself: In one word, he is a continual Torment to his own Mind, and
a Laughing Stock to the World, whom he diverts with his Folly, the only thing
wherein he is a Benefactor.

It were an infinite undertaking to expose to view the whole Absardity of
Covetousness, which is a World of Folly, as the Tongue is of Iniquity; only
there is one notorious instance of it, which in justice to my Subject, I cannot
well pass over: And that is, that it is a Vice of this peculiar Quality from
all others, to be then most strong and prevailing, when there is least cause
for it, and least Temptation to it; for then generally are Men most Covetous.

1. When they have most Wealth. 2. When they have least Time.
1. When they have most Wealth; this one would think should be the proper Cure
of Covetousness, as a full Draught of Water is of Thirst; for this is what the
Covetous Man desires, this is the Mistress of his Affections, and the delight
of his Eyes, that which he has so long and so passionately wished for, and
promised himself so much Happiness in; and therefore when he is possessed of
this, one would expect that he should be satisfied, and at rest, as other
Lovers are when they are come to the enjoyment of their Desires. But the case
is so far otherwise, that he is more deeply plunged in Covetousness now than
ever, and is the more Empty for being Full; and there is nothing more common
than to see Men who were of a frank and liberal Disposition when they had
little or nothing to support them, to commence Covetous in an instant upon the
Bequest of a rich Legacy, or the sudden fall of an Estate. Strange, that Men
should contract their Spirits upon the enlargement of their Fortunes! Many
indeed are the Temptations and Snares of Wealth; but of all Vices one would
think it should not dispose Men to Covetousness, but rather be an Antidote
against it: And yet so it is, Men are generally most inslaved to this Vice,
when they have really least Temptation to it, and might most easily be above
it, that is, when they have most Wealth. Which indeed is a more strange and
unaccountable Appearance to consider, than either the Attraction of the
Loadstone, or the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; and yet it is as strange to
consider, that Men are also most Covetous,

2. When they have least Time: Indeed when Men are in the Morning of Life, and
have a long Prospect of many Years before them, they have then some Temptation
to be Covetous, and something to plead for their being so; for they may then
live long enough to enjoy what by their Frugality they can get, and considering
the many Contingencies of Human Life, to want what at present they enjoy. But
when the Day of Life is far spent, and the Night is at hand, when a Man has but
a short Prospect before him, and his Sun is just ready to touch upon its great
Horizon, then one would think he should have but little heart to be Covetous;
and yet then is the time when Men are most of all so; for Covetousness is the
proper Vice, or rather Disease of Old Age, and is almost as constant an
Attendant of it, as Gray Hairs, or a Trembling Hand. When all other Vices leave
the Man, as no longer fit for their Service; when even Lust it self, the last
of the black Train has bid him adieu, then Covetousness seizes him, as if it
designed to have him wholly to itself, without Partner or Competitor, to
domineer over him with an absolute Tyranny. Strange, that a Man should be most
solicitous for Provision by the way, when he is almost at his Journeys end,
within view of Home! Thou Fool! If thou must be Covetous, take a proper
Condition, and a right Time for it, and be so either when thou art Poor, or
when thou art Young; when thou have a Temptation to it, and a Pretense for it.
But it seems Absurdity, and Nonsense is so far of the very Essence of this
Mysterious Vice, that then Men are most addicted to it, when in all Reason and
Expectation they should be Proof against it; nay, one would think even
naturally incapable of it, when they are Rich, and when they are Old.

And now I think there is sufficient ground for the Charge wherewith God taxes
the Rich Man; he might well be called Fool, as a Sinner, as an Earthly-minded
Person, and particularly as being Covetous. But let us now consider the
particular Circumstances of his Covetousness, and we shall find that his Folly
was of a nature very Extraordinary; the Text says, that the Ground of a certain
Rich Man brought forth plentifully; now 'twould be expected, that upon this,
his very next Thought should be to return God Thanks for the Fruitfulness of
his Ground, if it were for no other Reason, but that he might have the like
Success again the next Season: No, but instead of that, he immediately thought
within himself what he should do, because he had no room where to bestow his
Fruits; there was the first Instance of his Folly. Well, but in case this
unseasonable and too early thoughtfulness of his had but put him upon doing
some good thing with his Abundance, 'twould have been pretty tolerable yet, and
there would have been some amends for the ill-timing it, before he had returned
his Thanks to God: No, but he thought thus within himself, I will pull down my
Barns, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits and my Goods:
All my Fruits and my Goods; he designs you see to ingross all to himself, and
to remember neither God nor the Poor, to let no part of it go to any Pious or
Charitable use; and there is another instance of his Folly. But after all,
perhaps he does not mean to place his End and chief Happiness in his full
Granary, but only to use it as a lesser good, and as relating to the
Conveniences of the Body, and the gratification of the Animal Life: No, but his
Folly proceeds further than so, I will say to my Soul, says he, Soul thou have
much Goods laid up for many Years, take thine Ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry: A
very noble Soliloquy indeed! That ever a Man should be so much a Brute and a
Sot, as to make a full Barn the good of his Soul! of his Soul who must seek her
Happiness from the same Hand whence she had her Being, and can be satisfied
only by him who is Absolute Perfection. This certainly was a strange
extravagance of Folly, and yet even this has a further Aggravation yet; for had
this Provision of his been indeed for many Years, (as he fancied,) there would
have been more Cause and Pretense for the great Complacency and Satisfaction he
took in it. But little did the poor Fool think upon what Contingencies this
Project of his depended, and how precarious and uncertain the Lease of his Life
was, much less that that very Night his Soul should be required of him; and yet
this was a very obvious Consideration, though in the heat and hurry of his
Contrivances he was not at leisure to take it in his way. And this is the
lamentable Fate of all Covetous Men, they are so busy in making have to be
Rich, that they overlook the Grave, notwithstanding that they are continually
poring upon the Earth. But not to consider a thing so obvious, is a great piece
of dotishness and stupidity; and yet to consider it, and go on in heaping up
Riches without Reason and without End, is much worse.

And thus have we seen the whole procedure of the Rich Man, (if he may now be
allowed that Name,) and the incomparable Folly of it, and in him the Folly of
all Covetous Persons, who yet in one respect, do generally exceed their
Original in the Parable, for he, though he had resigned up his Heart and Soul
to his Wealth, yet he was so wise as to know when he had enough, and when 'twas
time to give over, retreat, and take his Ease. But our Misers never know when
they have sufficient, but drudge on to the very last Minute, and Dye in their
Slavery; and are therefore the greater Fools.

What therefore remains, but that we take other Measures of Wisdom, and other
Objects of Content; that we place not our Happiness in the things of this
World, nor labor for that which is not Bread; that we lay not up Treasures for
our selves upon Earth, but rather endeavor to be Rich toward God; that we do
not plunge our selves so deep into the World, and the Pleasures of this Life,
this short Life, as to forget the days of Darkness which shall be many? Above
all, let us take care that we do not take any thing of the World to be the good
of our Souls, much less so far as for the sake of any Honor, Profit or
Preferment to be false to the infinitely dearer Interest of our Religion, and
the Cause of God and his Church; lest when we begin to Pride and Applaud our
Selves in our Wisdom, and withal fancy that even Posterity shall praise our
Saying, God in the mean time should say to any of us as he did to the Rich Man
in our Parable, Thou Fool.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Consideration of God, and of the Divine Presence.
Psalm. 16. 9. I have set the Lord always before me.


AND 'twere Happy we could all do so; we should then certainly be more Pure and
Incorrupt in our Thoughts and Intentions, more Spiritual and Elevated in our
Affections, and more Orderly and Regular in our Actions whether in our
Retirements, or upon the open Stage; we should demean our selves with more care
and exactness both toward God, our Neighbor and our Selves; we should lead
our Lives with more Innocence, and leave them with more Courage and
Cheerfulness than we generally do.

The Words, as indeed the whole Psalm, seem immediately to concern the Person
and the Condition of Christ, and to be chiefly intended to express that steady,
constant and actual Consideration which he had of the Power and Veracity of
God, to whom he was not so intimately and mysteriously united, but that he
endeavored to be more intimate and familiar with him, and if possible, to
place him in a nearer view, by the arts of Attention and Recollection, by the
most actual and awakened application of Mind. This, as we have great reason to
think, was his constant Practice and Exercise all his Life long, but especially
about that dark and Cloudy Period of it, when he was entering into the Troubles
of his Passion: Then he had occasion to make use of all the Aids and succors
both of Reason and Grace; particularly to renew and reinforce his
Considerations of the Power and Veracity of God, that he would not leave his
Soul in Hell, (in the State of Separation from his Body,) nor suffer his Holy
One to see Corruption. Then therefore he set himself more industriously to
Contemplate the Perfections of God, especially those of his Power and Veracity,
and from hence he drew Arguments of Consolation for his Support, under all the
Terrors and Afflictions of his great Agony, I have set God always before me;
because he is at my Right Hand, I shall not be moved.

But I shall discourse upon the Words with greater Latitude, and in treating of
them, shall concern my self about these Two things.

First, To show what it is to set God always before one; or how many ways we
may be said to set God before us.

Secondly, To represent the many and great Advantages arising from each; and
what an Excellent Art, and Spiritual Expedient it is for Holy Living, thus to
set God always before us.

Now as to the First, to set God always before us, is in the general to have
him ever present in our Thoughts and Meditations, under some Capacity or
Consideration or other; present to our Thoughts not by way of Object only, (for
that he necessarily is, and we cannot possibly exclude him thence,) but also by
way of Object, when we attend to him, and reflect upon him under some
Qualification or other, either absolute, or in relation to us: And in this
there is great variety, even as much as there is in the several Attributes and
Perfections of God; but I shall consider only those that influence our
Practice, and serve to the Direction of our Manners. Now in relation to this,
there are Three very excellent ways of setting God before us, as the Supreme
Good, as a Pattern, and as an Observer.

First, We may set God before us as the Supreme Good; this we do when we
Contemplate the natural and absolute Perfection of his Essence, that universal
Plenitude of his, whereby he contains all that is Good, Lovely and Excellent,
all things that are requisite to the completing of a most perfect and
Sovereign Being, that may be infinitely and unchangably Happy' in himself, and
whereby he may become apt to be the greatest Good to his Creatures, the true
End of Man, the Object of his Happiness, and the last Center of all his
Desires: This is to set God before us as the Supreme Good.

Secondly, We may set God before us as a Pattern; this we do when we
Contemplate the Moral Nature of God, those imitable Perfections of his, which
answer to those Virtues and good Dispositions of Mind which he requires from
us, and which he contributes also to work in us by the Graces of his Spirit:
Such are that universal Sanctity and Holiness of his Nature and Will, whereby
all his Actions become Pure and Right, whereby the Psalm. 145. 17.
Lord is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his Works. His Goodness,
wherein are comprehended all the Heights and Depths, and the whole Length and
Breadth of the Love, the Kindess, the Mercy, the Grace, the Benignity and
Bounty of God, that infinite diffusiveness of his Nature, whereby he is as it
were carried out of, and beyond himself, to Communicate the good that is in him
to his Creatures, according to their several Proportions and Capacities. His
Justice, whereby he deals uprightly and equally with all his Creatures, and
renders to every one his own, according to their Works, Good or Bad, without
any Partiality or respect of Persons. His Truth, whereby all his Revelations
are exactly correspondent and conformable, First to his own Mind, and then to
the Nature of the things themselves, so that he can neither be deceived, nor
deceive. His Faithfulness, whereby he most assuredly performs whatever he has
Promised or Threatened; but more especially is his Faithfulness remarked in
Scripture, for the Performance of his Promises, there being a Right acquired
from these by the Persons to whom they are made, which is not in Threatenings;
and accordingly 'twould be a greater breach of Fidelity, to deny the one, than
not to execute the other. And therefore the Scripture commending the
Faithfulness of God, restrains it chiefly to his Promises; according to that of
the Author to the Hebrews, He is Faithful that has Heb. 10. 23.
Promised. Lastly, when we Contemplate his Sincerity, which consists in his
candid, open and ingenuous dealing with the Sons of Men, in that he never
thinks nor designs any thing contrary to what he Reveals, either by Word or
Deed, in opposition to all Tricks, Juglings, Double-dealings, Hypocrisy, and
the like.

These are those Virtues and Perfections which constitute the Moral Nature of
God, and when we propose these duly and sincerely to our Meditation, as they
are Excellencies in the Divine Nature, we may be then said to set God before us
as a Pattern; I say as they are Excellencies in the Divine Nature, otherwise
the formality of the thing will be changed: For if, for instance, I consider
the Justice of God, not as it is a Moral Excellence in him, but only as an
Instrument of Evil to my self, I do not then set God before me as a Pattern,
but as an Avenger.

The Third and Last way of setting God before us, is as an Observer; when we
consider him as a Being Essentially present in all Places, and with all
Creatures, who all live, move and have their Being in him, and beyond all
Places and Creatures too, in those infinite Spaces where he can erect new
Worlds, but where as yet there is nothing besides himself. I shall not here
enter into a nice Disquisition concerning the Omnipresence of God, being
willing rather to Suppose than Dispute it. But however, lest this way of
setting God before us, should be thought Imaginary and Precarious, give me
leave by the way only to remark, that it is every whit as reasonable to think
the Essence of God to be every where, as to be always, and that Immensity is as
rational as Eternity: That Great and Stupendous Being, who is allowed to reach
through all Times, may as well be allowed to reach through all Places; nay much
rather, since it seems to be a less Perfection to be every where, than to be
always. For to be always in Duration, is such an intrinsical Denomination, as
springs from the greatest of all God's natural Perfections; for it arises from
the necessity of his Existence, whereby he cannot but be, which is the highest
degree of Being, as being directly opposite to not Being, and consequently of
Perfection. But now to be every where, seems rather an extrinsical Denomination
relating to somewhat without, and such as is not directly contrary to not
Being, but only to limited Being. And if we ascribe the Greater to God, why
should there be any Controversy about the Less? Taking therefore the
Supposition for granted, we may well consider God as a Being every where
Essentially present, and consequently as an All-seeing and All-knowing Being,
to whom all Hearts are open, and all Desires known, and from whom no Secrets
are hid; and not only as an idle Observer, but as one that takes such strict
Notice and Cognizance of what he sees and knows, as to treasure and seal it up
against the Day of Retribution, and to Punish or Reward us accordingly.

These I take to be the several ways of setting God before us, so as to reap
any Spiritual advantage from it: I come now in the Second place to represent
the many and great advantages arising from each, and what an excellent Art and
Spiritual Expedient it is for Holy Living, thus to set God always before us;
and truly the advantages are very great; for as the Habitual Knowledge of God,
and the Belief of his Existence, are the first and general Foundations of all
Religion, according to that of the Apostle, He that comes to God, Heb. 116.
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him: So the actual Consideration of him under these Capacities, is highly
conducive to the Promotior and Accomplishment of all Holiness and Virtue.

For First, to begin with those advantages that naturally spring from the
Consideration of God as the Supreme Good, what can be more excellent than the
Love of God? It Is the highest Elevation of a Creature, and withal the most
pregnant and comprehensive of all the virtuous Dispositions he is capable of:
It Is like the Flower or Blossom of a Plant, which contains all in it, and
therefore our Savior calls it the First and Mat. 22.38.
the Great Commandment. But now what more effectual means can there be next to
the Grace of him who is Essential Love, and who, as the Apostle tells us, sheds
the Love of God Romans 5. 5.
abroad in our Hearts; I say, what more effectual means can there be to kindle,
increase, and keep alive in us this Heavenly and Divine Fire, than to set God
always before us as the Supreme Good? Can a Man consider any thing barely as
Good, and not love it, when Love it self is nothing else but an Inclination of
the Soul to Good? He may indeed not proceed to choose it, because it may come
into competition with a greater, which when it does, not the good, but the
absence of it is to be Chosen, as being the lesser Evil; but yet
notwithstanding, he must still love it with a natural Love, as long as he
considers it as in any degree good. Much less then can a Man refuse to love
God, when he considers him not only as Good, but as the Supreme Good. For here,
besides that natural inclination which necessarily follows upon the appearance
of Good as Good, there is this peculiar to be considered, that there is no room
for Competition with a greater Good, and accordingly that natural Love and
Inclination which is due to God as Good, must needs pass into act and effectual
Choice, upon the consideration of his being the Supreme Good. The least degree
of Love or Inclination must needs be actual and effectual, when it has nothing
to outweigh it, as the least Weight weighs down the Scale where there is no
contrary weight to counterballance and overruled it. He therefore that sets God
always before him as the Supreme Good, and never thinks of him but under that
Notion, must necessarily and effectually love him, as he that looks upon Sin as
the greatest of all Evils, must necessarily and effectually hate it: For the
Beauties of God are infinitely Charming and Attractive in themselves, and there
wants nothing but our serious and due Attention to make them become so to us;
and the more we apply our Attention to them, the more we shall be in love with
them. What is it that makes the Seraphin burn and flame above the rest of the
Angelical Orders, but because they see more of the First and Supreme Beauty?
Now as Love depends upon Vision in the other Life, so does it upon
Contemplation in this, and consequently he that considers the infinite
Perfection of God most, must necessarily love him most. Contemplation is the
most proper and genuine incentive of Love wherever the Object is truly
deserving of it, as discovering to us the reasons why it ought to be loved: I
say, where the Object is truly deserving of our Love; for otherwise it will
serve only to discover its Vanity, and so lessen its amiableness; which is the
reason that the best way to cure our Love to the World, is thoroughly to
consider it. But in case the Object be a true and real Good, and such as will
abide the Test of Meditation, and endure to be weighed and handled on both
sides, the proper way to beget and increase our Love toward such an Object as
this, is studiously to Contemplate it; and then the Light that is in our
Understandings, will beget a warmth in our Wills and Affections. Experience as
well as Reason may inform us, that the way to love any thing that is truly
good, and will bear a near inspection, is to look much upon it, and consider it
thoroughly, since even the most indifferent Objects by long stay and dwelling
upon them, do by degrees so gain upon our Afflictions, that we come at last to
have a kind of a fancy and a kindness for them; and many have gazed and stared
upon an ordinary Face so long, till they have entertained a more than ordinary
Passion. And if the meanest Beauty of the Creature by frequent and familiar
interviews, becomes at length so Lovely and Charming, how much more shall the
continual Meditation upon the Beauty of the Creator, kindle in us a Love
toward him, and a Delight in him! The longer certainly we sit thus under his
Shadow, the more we shall delight to do so, and his Fruit will be the Cant. 2.
3.
more sweet to our Taste. And if the general Consideration of God has such
influence upon our Love of him, how much stronger will that influence be, when
we set him before us under the Notion and Capacity of the Supreme Good! And
therefore when the Psalmist in a deep Contemplation of the Beauties of Christ,
had proceeded so sar as to conclude him fairer than the Children of Men; as if
wounded to the Heart with the Rays of his Divine Beauty, he presently adds, Thy
Arrows are very Psai. 45.
Sharp.

They are indeed Lord Jesus, they are very Sharp and Keen, like the Sword that
proceeds out of thy Mouth; and how is it that we can resist the Power of thy
Sovereign Beauty! Thou woundest the Seraphin and Cherubin, and all the Orders
of Angels with the Arrows of thy Love, and they burn at the Rays of thy Divine
Light and Glory: Whom have they in Heaven but thee, and what is there on Earth
that they desire in comparison of thee? But we who are every day vanquished and
led in triumph by Meaner Beauties, stand yet proof against thy Diviner Charms,
and feel none of the impressions of thy Love. But it is our Blindness that is
our Defense, and our unattention is the Shield that repels thy Darts: We do not
Contemplate thee as thy Angels do, nor as we our selves do the Beauties of this
Sensible World. Oh do thou then open and six our Eyes upon thee, and they will
soon receive in thy Divine Rays; engage but our Minds to Contemplate thee, and
then we shall not choose but love thee.

Nor is this the only advantage of setting God before us as the Supreme Good;
for as this is a consideration of excellent use to excite and quicken in us the
Love of God, so does it also Secondly, contribute both to convince us of the
Worlds Vanity, and to support us under that Conviction. He that is not sensible
of the vanity of Created Good, had need present God to his Thoughts as the
Supreme Good, that he may have a right sense and apprehension of it; and he
that is, had need Meditate upon God under the same notion, that he may have
wherewithal to support his Mind under such a Conviction; and this way of
setting God before us, is a very effectual means to do both. The vanity of the
Creature never appears with that advantage of clearness and conviction, as when
we Contemplate the Fullness and Excellency of the Creator, which presently
weakens and puts out all the Luster of the World, as the Sun does that of a
Candle, merely by out-shining it. And when a Man by the help of this
Contemplation is arrived to this sense and conviction, the same will also serve
to support him under it. It Is supposed here, that the Man will then stand in
great need of some Support or other, and that very justly; for the Soul of Man
being not her own End and Good, must needs rely on something without for her
Happiness, and as long as she thinks that this may be found among the
Creatures, she is pretty well satisfied and at ease. But no sooner is she
awakened out of this pleasing Dream, into a Conviction of the World's Vanity,
but she has lost her hold, has nothing to enjoy, nothing to rest upon; and what
a barren disconsolate condition must she be then in, unless she has some other
Refuge to retreat to for her Support? And what other Support can there or need
there be, but the Consideration of the Divine Fullness and Greatness, which
will make abundant Supply for all the Deficiency that is in the Creature, were
it infinitely more vain than it is, and so relieve that Conviction which it has
occasioned.

But Thirdly, This is also a general Remedy against all other Trouble and
Sadness, as well as against that which arises from the Conviction of the
World's Vanity; the best Consolation of an Afflicted Mind, is to think upon
God, this will cheer and refresh the Soul, when Rational Discourses and Wise
Sentences are applied in vain; for if your Sorrow proceed from Fear, what more
proper relief than to Meditate upon the Power of God, who is able to deliver us
from the worst of Evils? If from Love or Desire, what better allay can be found
than to Contemplate the Perfection of God, who is able to satisfy our most
Craving Appetites? If from Distrust or Despair, what can we do better than
Meditate upon the Goodness and Faithfulness of God, who loves whatever he has
made, knows our frame, and considers that we are but Dust? If from the
consideration of the ill state of Mankind, either as to Sin or Misery, how can
we satisfy our selves better than by Meditaring upon the excellent order and
conduct of the Providence of God, who governs the World in a way becoming his
infinite Perfections, and disposes all things sweetly. And so in like manner in
all other instances, whatever be the occasion of our Trouble and Sadness, no
Consolation like Meditating upon God, and setting him before us: It is so if we
think upon him at large, but more especially if we contemplate him as the
Supreme Good. This is a more immediate and direct remedy against all Sorrow;
for Good is directly contrary to Evil, and the Sense of Good will counterpoise
the Sense of Evil, if it be an equal good; and if it be a greater, it will
overcome and swalit up, nay and leave some dgrees of pure Happiness behind, so
that the Man shall rather enjoy than suffer. But now it is impossible for a Man
to represent God to his Thoughts as the Supreme Good, as his proper End and
Happiness, without a strong sense of his Goodness and Perfection; he must in a
great measure taste and seel that Good which he Contemplates and even this
Obscurer Vision of God is in some degree Beatisick. And what grief or sadness
of Mind then is there which this strong sense and taste of God will not
overcome, and which will not be quite dissolved, swallowed up and lost in the
Contemplation of the Supreme good? Upon which Considerations well might the
Psalmist say, When I am in Heaviness, I will Psalm. 77.3.
think upon God. He might have thought upon his Royal Greatness, and the pomp
and Magnificence of his Court, or upon his Riches, or upon his Friends, or upon
his Victories and Triumphs; or if none of these would do, he might have taken
his Harp into his Hand, and have driven away the Evil Spirit of Melancholy by
Music from himself, as he did before from Saul: But he had a better expedient
than all this, When I am in Heaviness I will think upon God.

Nor is this all; for should we not also upon the strength of this
Consideration despise and disrelish all those vain Pleasures which betray us
into Sin? Should we not be above the Temptations of either Honor, Pleasure or
Profit? Should we not be secure from that Foolish Exchange which those that
pass for the Wisest among us frequently make, I mean that of gaining the World,
and losing on's own Soul? Lastly, should we not endeavor by all Means possible
to qualify our selves for the blessed Enjoyment of this Supreme Good, and in
order to that, to cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and
Spirit, and to Purify our selves as he is Pure? Yes, we should; the Love of God
would easily constrain us to all this, and the serious application of our Minds
to the Infinity of the Divine Perfection, would as easily constrain us to the
Love of God.

And so much for the advantages of setting God always before us as the Supreme
Good; let us now consider in the Second Place how we may be advantaged by
setting him before us as a Pattern. We all know and feel the great force and
power of Example, and how naturally disposed Men are to Imitation, and that we
are much the better or the worse for those with whom we Converse: And there is
this great differencce between Example and a Rule, that a Rule only directs,
but Example does also incline; a Rule instructs the Judgment, but Example moves
and reconciles the Affections; the former shows us the right Point to which we
are to steer, but the latter supplies us also with Wind and Sail. And there is
no reason to doubt, but that the Example of God would be as prevailing with us,
as any other, and much more, (as being of infinitely greater Authority,) if we
did but equally propose him to our imitation, and set him before us as a
Pattern. Can then a Man consider the Universal Sanctity of the Divine Nature,
and not find himself strongly inclined to work over anew the defaced Image of
his Creator, and to be Holy as he is Holy? St. John assigns this for a Reason
why we shall be like God hereafter, because we shall see him as he is; We shall
be 1 John 3. 12
like him, says he, for we shall see him as he is. And if the clear and open
Vision of God will so far affimilate us as to make us perfectly conformable to
him, certainly the Contemplation of his Moral Perfections, though through a
Glass darkly, must needs inspire us with Desires and Endeavors to be like him.
Is it then possible for a Man seriously and constantly to contemplate the
infinite Love, Bounty and Goodness of God, and either be ungrateful to him, or
uncharitable to his Neighbor, to be selfish and strait-laced, niggardly and
covetous, reserved and uncommunicative? Much less can he be envious and
spiteful, cruel and unmerciful, and delight in Barbarity and doing Mischief; it
would be a Miracle if he should. The Psalmist thought it so, and therefore says
he, Why Boastest Psalm. 52.1.
thou thy self thou Tyrant, that thou can do Mischief, whereas the Goodness
of God endures yet daily? He thought it strange that any Man should value
himself for being able to do Mischief, when God thought it his Glory to do
Good: He might have reproved his Folly and Wickedness from the very nature of
the thing, by laying open the great unreasonableness of it, but he chose rather
to convince him of the strangeness and absurdity of such a temper, from the
Consideration of the Divine Goodness.

Which before I leave, I shall mention one more very excellent advantage which
it has in the Practice of Religion, in that it is apt to remove from us all
servile fear, and to inspirit us with a generous and ingenuous Principle of
serving God. For all Slavish and Superstitious Fears of God proceed from a
wrong notion of him; we Fear him, and are Jealous of him, because we
misapprehend him; and we misapprehend him, because we do not sufficiently
contemplate him. The way therefore to be afraid of him less, is to be more
Conversant, and better acquainted with him. When the Disciples saw Jesus
walking upon the Sea, and knew not who it was, they were scared with the
Appearance; and therefore our Lord to take off their Fear, only made himself
better known to them. It is I, says he, be not afraid. 'Twas enough to dismiss
their Fears to let them know who he was. Nor need we at any time any other
Remedy against servile Apprehensions, and disingenuous Fears of God, than
barely to contemplate the Goodness and Benignity of his Nature, expressed in
those two Emphatical Descriptions given of him in Scripture, God is Love, and
God is Light.

And thus 'twere easy to give instances throughout all the other Moral
Perfections of God; but I shall insist only upon one more, as being more
particularly fit and useful to be considered in the Age we now live in. Can
then a Man duly contemplate the Truth and Sincerity of God, how candid, open
and ingenuous he is in his dealings with the Sons of Men, and how far removed
from all Tricks, Juggles and Deceits, and that he can no more deceive, than he
can be deceived? Can a Man I say consider this, consider it well, and be a
Hypocrite? And that not only in an instance or two, but in a long series of
Action; not only for a few Hours or Days, but for a course of several Years;
not only in the common concerns of Life, but in the most saered of all things,
and where we owe the tee greatest plainness and Sincerity both to God and Man,
Religion. Is Charity itself able to believe that such a Mysterious Intricate
Sinner as this, has made the Sincerity and Truth of God any part of his
Meditations? No, I fear if the truth were known, such a one would be too much
concerned in that Charge, wherewith the Psalmist taxes the Proud Man, Psalm. 10.
that God is not in all his Thoughts, that he does not think of him at all, or
else that he has a wrong notion of him, and takes him to be altogether such a
one as himself: But let such a one know, that God will reprove him, and set
before him the things which he has done; for God does not only give us a
Pattern of Truth and Sincerity, but does also strictly observe whether we
follow it or no: Which leads me to consider in the last place the advantage of
setting God always before us as an Observer.

It Is most certain, whether we will consider it or no, that God is every where
Essentially and Substantially Present, and that as there is no Place that
includes him, so there is none that excludes him; a notion of God so very
natural, that even the Jews as gross and unmetaphysical as they were, could not
but embrace it. Which was the occasion of that Custom of theirs in their
Sacrifices, (taken notice of by Dr. Outram out of Maimonides,) De Sacrisiciis.
Lib. 1. Page 162.
of waving the Victim toward the Six Parts of the World, upwards and
downwards, East, West, North and South, whereby to express the Consecration of
the Sacrifice to God as every where Present, and possessing all Places.

It Is also most certain, whether we will consider it or no, that God sees and
knows all things, and that (as the Author to the Hebrews expresses Heb. 4. 13.
it,) there is no Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, and that all
things are naked and open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. This we
have most maguificently described by the Psalmist in the 139 Psalm, O Lord thou
have searched me out, and known me; thou know my down-sitting and mine
up-rising, thou understandest my Thoughts long before. Thou art about my Path,
and about my Bed, and spiest out all my ways: For lo there is not a word in my
Tongue, but thou O Lord know it altogether. And again, whither shall I go
then from thy Spirit, or whither shall I go then from thy Presence? If I climb
up into Heaven, thou art there, if I go down to Hell thou art there also. If I
take the Wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea,
even there also shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. If I
say peradventure the Darkness shall cover me, then shall my Night be turned
into Day. Yea, the Darkness is no Darkness with thee, but the Night is as clear
as the Day, the Darkness and Light to thee are both alike.

Why now this we all know, and if formally put to the Question, shall be ready
to confess it; for I am willing to suppose, that there are scarce any that are
either Ignorant or Impudent enough to say with the Atheistical Person in Job,
How does God Job 22.13.
know, can he judge through the dark Cloud? Thick Clouds are a Covering to him
that he sees not, and he walks in the Circuit of Heaven. No, we know the
contrary well enough, that God is present every where, and sees and knows every
thing, but the Misery of it is we don't consider it; and it is for want of
actually thinking upon what we habitually know that the World is ruined. It Is
this that makes so great a difference between the Behavior and Conversation of
one Man and another. All believe Omnipresence and Omniscience to be Perfections
belonging to the infiniteness of the Divine Essence; but one maintains actual
thoughts and recollections of this, and another does not; one has it lying
dormant in him, as a general Notion or Theory, which he can talk and Discourse
of now and then when occasion is offered, and the other has it always actually
present before him in its full Light and Conviction. Whence it comes to pass,
that though both agree in the general belief of the Article, yet because one
attends to it, and the other does not; the way of their Conversation is
altogether different, and one lives as an Angel, and the other as a Devil.

For indeed were this one Consideration sufficiently heeded and attended to, it
were enough of it self to regulate the conduct of Men's Actions, and to reduce
the whole World into a true order and exactness of Living. There are indeed
many excellent Methods of obtaining Virtuous and Religious Dispositions of
Mind, and of improvement in them, but none that I can think of so advantageous
as this: That which comes nearest to it, is the Mediation of Death; but indeed
this comes too near to be reckoned as another, in being rather a further
instance and improvement of the same. For the Meditation of Death is only so
far influential upon our Lives, as it is a nearer and stricter way of
considering the Divine Presence, before which we shall be more immediately
presented by Death. So that the Meditation of Death, (as far as it has any
influence upon good Living,) is comprehended under the Consideration of the
Divine Presence, as a Particular under a General; as indeed whatever is good in
any other method of Holy Living, is after a manner Comprehended in this, which
of all others is the most Comprehensive and Compendious. Which was the ground
of that Admonition of God to Abraham, I am the Almighty Genesis 17.
God, walk before me, and be thou Perfect: Where he supposes such a Connection
between the constant Attention to the Divine Presence and Perfection, that to
attain the latter, a Man need only practice the former. God in giving Abraham
this Direction for a Holy and a Perfect Life, gave him all; for this single
Exercice of Meditating upon the Presence of God, will either incline a Man both
to the Desire and to the Practice of all other Spiritual methods and helps of
Holy Living; or else it will supply the room of them. So that if a Man who
desires to advance in Spiritual Life, should happen to forget any of the other
methods of the Spirit, let him only remember this one, and duly use and
exercise it, and he shall either by this bring the rest to his Mind, or find no
necessity of so doing. This therefore may well be reckoned as the Head and
Chief of all Spiritual Exercises; for indeed this one Exercise draws such a
train of advantages after it, as by the assistance of Divine Grace will be
sufficient to perfect the Man of God, and complete the Christian.

But to be a little more distinct, the advantagiousness of this Practice may
appear in a double respect.

First, As it is a general Countercharm against all Sin.

Secondly, As it is a general Incitement to all that is good.

First, It is a general Counter-charm against all Sin; for as Sin in its
formality is an Aversion from God, so the cause of all Sin does at last resolve
into Forgetfulness of him, and a Non-Consideration of his Presence and
Inspection: There is an Aversion from him in our Understandings before there is
any in our Wills, and the latter is the effect of the former. The Scripture
represents Cain as going out from the Presence Genesis 4.16.
of God, after he had sinned; but it is as true also that he went out before;
for had he not first cast off the thoughts of Gods Presence, it is impossible
that he should have sinned. And the same may truly be said of all other
Sinners, they first depart from God in their Thoughts, and then in their
Actions; first forget his Presence, and then their own Duty: For can we
conceive any Man so stupid and hardy as to commit Sin, when at the same time he
actually reflects upon a Being of Infinite Holiness, Power and Justice, looking
upon him, and upon what he does? Could we suppose God to appear visibly to us
when we were in Private, this we must needs grant would strike us with Serious
and Reverent Apprehensions, and that we should stand in awe, and not Sin,
though in the very heat and full Carier of a Temptation. And why should not
God's seeing us, have the same influence upon us, as Our seeing God? Without
question it would, and a great deal more, if we had but the same lively sense
of it, and were equally awake and attentive to it; for we see that infinitely
less than this will restrain us from Sin; the Eye of the World, nay of one
single Person, though an Inferior, though a Slave, though a Fool, though a
Child: Nay, even the very Eye of the Sun, which very often puts the Sinner out
of Countenance, and makes him defer his Folly till the Shades of Night. And
shall not the Presence of the Great God be as prevalent with us as any of
these, especially considering that no Creature can be so inwardly present with
us as the Creator is, and that no Observation is of such importance and
consequence as his? Shall not then his Presence and Inspection be as strong a
Preservative against Sin, as the Presence of a Man? Without doubt it would, and
infinitely more, did we but equally consider it; it would then secure us not
only from Sin, but even from Temptation too, and keep us out out of Danger, as
well as in Innocence. For how can he be tempted to Sin, who dwells always in
the Presence of his Creator and Judge? Why are the Angels and the Souls of Just
Men made Perfect, secure from the danger of Sinning, but only because they are
always in the open Presence of God, and dwell in the Light of his Countenance?
This is their great Preservative above, and the same if well attended to, would
be a Preservative to us below. The Perseverance of the Angels in Heaven is
owing to their always beholding the Presence of God there; and if we could do
the same here in proportion, that is, if our Contemplation were but as actual,
steady, and uninterrupted as their Vision, we should be as Confirmed and
Established as they. In short, notwithstanding the great Corruption of our
Nature, and our Proneness to Evil, we need no other Guard, either against Sin,
or against Temptation, than these Three Words well considered, God is Present.

But there is One particular Sin to which this Consideration is utterly
irreconcilable, and against which it is a peculiar Antidote, and that is the
Sin of Hypocrisy; this is a Sin which of all others proceeds most upon the
Supposition of God's not being privy to our Thoughts and Intentions, and his
not having a thorough Comprehensive Knowledge of all things: As the Fool says
in his Heart there is no God, so the Hypocrite says in his Heart, that if there
be, yet he is no Observer, as being neither Omnipresent, nor Omniscient: Which
Attributes of God whoever seriously Contemplates, must needs have his Antidote
against this Vice. For to what purpose should a Man play the Hypocrite before
him, who can discern the Fraud and Rottenness of the Proud Pharisee under his
broad Phylactery, and the ravenous Covetousness of the Precise Sectary under
his long Prayer? No, as the Hypocrite takes care to avoid open Immoralities,
because they are visible to the Eye of the World; so, had he a due Sense of the
Divine Presence and Observation, he would be every whit as careful to be
without all inward Impurities, because they are Visible to the Eye of God. But

Secondly, This Practice is also a general Incitement to all that is good; As
the Supposition of Gods Omnipresence and Omniscience is the Foundation of all
Religion; (for to what purpose should we make Religious Addresses to a Being
that is either afar off, or unconscious of our Behavior toward him,) so the
constant and actual impression of it would greatly promote the Practice of all
Religion, Walk before me, and be thou Perfect: How can he be Perfect that does
not walk with and before God, and how can he be otherwise that does? The actual
Thoughts of the Presence of God is the very Life and Spirit of all Religion,
without which we should be quickly weary of well-doing, and with which we shall
be so far from flagging in our Duty, that we shall be always endeavoring to do
better and better, that so we may the more approve our Selves and our Actions
to our All-present and All-seeing Judge. This was the Principle into which
David resolved all the Perfection and Integrity of his Obedience, that he acted
as in the Sight and Presence of his Judge. I have kept thy Commandments and
Testimonies, Psalm. 119.
for all my Ways are before thee. And no doubt if we acted by the same
Principle, we should live with the same exactness; if we lived under a constant
sense of the Presence of God as he did, we should also with him have respect to
all his Commandments. When the Glorious Presence of God appeared to the
Israelites upon Mount Sinai, we find that they were so sensibly affected with
that terrible Sight, as to take up earnest Resolutions of Obedience; for all
the People answered Moses, reporting the Words of God to them, with one Voice,
and said, All the Words which the Lord has said will we do. And as long as
this Presence of God continued, we don't find but that they were very Orderly
and Obedient, and contained themselves within those Boundaries which Moses by
Divine Order had set about the Mount: And there is no question to be made, but
that if they could still have maintained a fresh and lively Idea of this great
Presence in their Minds, they would also have retained the same obedient Temper
of Spirit, and would have contained themselves within all other Bounds of God's
setting, as well as those of Mount Sinai; their Heart would have been whole
with him, and they would have continued steadfast in his Covenant. We may
therefore, and without Censure conclude, that those who take liberty to break
through the Bounds which God has set, by transgressing those excellent Laws
which he has given for the good Order and happy Being of Mankind, are not duly
sensible of the Divine Presence and Observation: They may know it indeed
Habitually as a mere Point of Speculation, but they do not actually weigh and
consider it, and have reason to say in the Words of the Patriarch when awakened
from Sleep, Surely God was in this Place, and I Genesis 28.
knew it not.

And now since the Spiritual Advantages of setting God always before us are so
great and so many, I think I need use no other Persuasive to recommend this
excellent Expedient of Holy Living to our constant Practice: In all other
things we love the most Compendious Methods, and to make use of such Means as
lead most directly and by the shortest Line to the End we aim at. And why
should we not follow the same Method in the Practice of a Religious Life, the
difficulty and consequence of which is enough to engage us to seek out for the
best and most forwarding Assistances? Now this certainly of all others will
deserve that Character, being the most general Instrument of Perfection, and
consequently the most Compendious way to it. Let us then be persuaded to make
use of it, by setting God always before us, and having him always in our
Thoughts, especially under this Threefold Consideration, as the Supreme Good,
as a Pattern, and as an Observer; so shall we have a perpetual encouragement to
do well, and a sufficient Counterpoise against all Temptations. And God grant
we may so set him always before us here, that we may not be afraid to appear
before him hereafter.

Amen.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The doing God's Will on Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Mat. 6. 10. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.


SO our Blessed Lord bids us to Pray, who came to be the Promoter of Holiness,
as well as to be the Author of our Faith, and to Reform the World as well as to
Redeem it. Now as it is the Perfection of the Natural World to be Conformable to
the Understanding of God, those Immutable Ideal Representations which are in
the Divine Mind, so is it the Perfection of the Moral World to be Conformable
to his Will; and in both these, the Second Person of the Sacred Trinity, the
Eternal Word, seems equally and particularly concerned. As to the Natural
World, St. John tells us, that all things were made by him, or according to
him, (...), and without him was not any John 1. 3.
thing made that was made. And St. Paul, that by him were all things Created 1
Col. 16.
that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth; and that by him all things consist.
-- 17.
Again it is said, by whom also he Heb. 1. 2.
made the Worlds. And again, Thou, -- 10.
Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens
are the Works of thy Hands.

Then as to the perfecting the frame of the Moral World, as it was his Meat and
Drink to do the Will of his Father himself, so was it his principal business,
and the Main of his Undertaking, to repair the Ruins of Morality, to enlarge
the bounds of his Fathers Kingdom, to make others conformable to the Divine
Will, and Partakers of the Divine Nature; which in part has already taken
effect, and of which (as we are told,) we are yet to expect a further
accomplishment under his glorious Millennial Reign, when Righteousness shall
flourish and be exalted, and the Will of God be done on Earth to a very near
degree as it is in Heaven.

To this end serves the great Mystery of Godliness, that Grace of God which has
appeared to the World, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live Soberly, 2 Tit. 11.
Righteously and Godlily in this present World; the Covenant of Grace being so
ordered and contrived, that our Duty is secured, as well as our Insirmity and
Necessity relieved, and our Repentance is only made effectual by the
satisfaction of Christ, not unnecessary. To this End he gave us a new System of
Christian Morals, which though no addition to the Eternal Law of Nature and
right Reason, was yet a great Improvement of that of Moses. And he took care
also to second his excellent Precepts, by as excellent an Example, that they
might appear to be Practicable as well as Reasonable.

And here because Example has the greater Influence of the Two, he not only
gave us an absolute one of his own, and exhorted us to the imitation of it,
when he said, Learn of me, but also remits us to the excellent Example of the
Angels, those ready Performers of God's Will, and winged Ministers of his
Pleasure, in that he bids us Pray, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven.

That God's Will is done in Heaven, is here supposed; we are therefore further
concerned only to inquire

1. Of what Will of God our Lord is to be here understood?

2. By whom it is done in Heaven?

3. After what manner it is there done?

4. How far we are concerned to imitate this great Pattern of Obedience?

5. How reasonable it is for us to do so?

And First by Will; here our Lord cannot be supposed to mean that which is a
Faculty in the Divine Essence, or rather the very Essence it self; for how may
we Pray that that should be done, which Eternally and Necessarily is? Neither
by Will here are we to understand the Act of Willing, for this can no more
properly be said to be done than the other; but that Will for the doing of
which we here Pray, is the Res Volita, or the Object of the Divine Will: But
then this is Twofold, either the Object of his Will Decreeing, or the Object
of his Will Commanding; or to word it according to the ordinary distinction,
the Will of his Decrees, or the Will of his Commands: And it is generally held
that both these are to be here understood.

But I must confess it does not appear to me how the Will of God's Decrees can
be at all here concerned, any further than as our Submission to it is a part of
the Will of his Commands; for not to insist upon the necessary and
uncontrollable accomplishinent of God's Decrees, and that things necessary and
certain are not so proper Objects of Prayer, I only observe that this Will of
God is here desired to be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; which supposes it
to be more perfectly performed in the one than in the other; the latter being
proposed as a Pattern and Precedent to the former. But now, as God is in all
Places equally Almighty, so are his Decrees in all Places alike performed in
Earth as well as in Heaven, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 135.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, and in the
Sea, and in all deep Places; this therefore cannot be meant of the Will of
God's Decrees, any further than as it is a part of the Will of his Commands that
we should submit to them, and acquiesce in them. Neither indeed can this be
directly and strictly intended, but only by way of Proportion, that as the
whole Will of God, which is capable of being done in Heaven is there done; so
all that is capable of being done on Earth, should in like manner be there
done. But I say it cannot be directly intended, there being no Afflictive
Dispensations of Providence incident to those who do God's Will in Heaven, and
consequently no room for the Exercise of Patience and Submission; as will
further appear by considering the Second Inquiry, namely, by whom it is that
this Will of God is done in Heaven.

And this indeed is of no great Difficulty to resolve, since the nature of the
Will does of it self point out to the Doers of it; for it being the Will of
God's Commands, it can no more be done by God, than it is possible for God to
obey himself. Nor can it be done by the Celestial Bodies; for however these in
a large and improper sense are sometimes said to obey God, as when the Psalmist
says, that the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
Handywork; and that Wind and Storm fulfill his Word, and the like: Yet being
necessary Agents, they cannot yield any Moral and Acceptable Obedience; much
less in such an eminent and exemplary manner as to be a Pattern to us, which
yet is here supposed. And yet they will be every whit as capable of this
Obedience, as we are, if we be not free Agents; which by the way [leave to be
considered by those who deny that Privilege to Human Nature. It remains
therefore, that the Holy Angels are they that do this Will of God in Heaven;
none else are capable of doing it, and of these the Psalmist says expressly,
that they fulfill his Commandment, Psalm. 103.
and hearken to the Voice of his Word.

Proceed we therefore to the next Inquiry, namely, after what manner this Will
of God is done by the Holy Angels in Heaven; that they do it after a very
perfect and excellent manner, far exceeding the highest Measures of Mortality,
is here implied, in that they are proposed and commended to us as Patterns, and
might be further concluded from the Perfection of their Natures and Faculties,
which we cannot but suppose to be very extraordinary, since the excellency of
our future Condition is summed up in this short Description, that we shall be
like Luke 20.36.
unto the Angels.

But waving this Consideration taken from the Powers and Faculties of Angels as
somewhat too Nice and Metaphysical for a Practical Discourse, I shall choose
rather to represent the great Excellency wherewith they perform the Will of God
from Two Collateral Considerations.

First, The Impediments they are free from.

Secondly, The positive Advantages they enjoy.

And First, as to the Impediments they are free from: It Is the great
disadvantage of all Human Spirits in this, Station, as well as the complaint of
some, that they are united with Bodies that are not proportioned to the Native
Excellency and Activity of their Natures; for indeed the Soul has made an ill
Match, Married very much beneath her self, and has met with a Clog instead of a
Companion:, one that is too weak to obey her Dictates and Motions, and too
strong to be governed; that cannot follow and that will not be led; that sticks
too close to her to be shaken off, and yet is too loose from her to be well
managed: Such an untractable ill suited Consort as this must needs be a
constant encumbrance to the Soul, even in her Natural, but much more in her
Moral and Spiritual Operations, because here the Consort has contrary
Inclinations; so that the Soul is put to encounter not only with her ordinary
weight, but with an Opposite Law, even that Law of the Members which Romans 7.23.
wars against the Law of the Mind, and brings us into Captivity to the Law of
Sin.

Neither is this all, for we are not only cumbered with a weight of Flesh, and
depressed by its low tendencies and propensions; but our Body which at best is
but in an ill disposition for the Operations of the Rational and Divine Life,
is often discomposed and made worse by Sickness, and then the Soul is forced to
sympathize and condole; with her ill-suited Companion, and either not to act at
all, or to perform her Part upon an ill-tuned Instrument: And he that is
blessed with the strongest and most tunable Constitution, and enjoys the most
vigorous Health, has yet a great many necessities of Nature to serve, that will
take up much of his Thoughts and much of his Time; so that he cannot choose but
be troubled about many things, things below the concernment of a Rational
Being, and that, though he has chosen the Better, Part, and is so well
convinced of his true interest, as to acknowledge only one thing to be needful.

Add to all this, that we breath in an infected Air, live in an ill World where
every Object almost is a Temptation, and have a Devil to tempt and seduce us;
one who makes it his proper and professed business to cross the Ends of God, to
disturb the Moral Harmony of the Universe, and to hinder the symphony and
agreement of the Two Worlds, that so God's Will may not be done in Earth, as it
is in Heaven: And with these disadvantages no wonder that it is not.

But now the Holy Angels have none of these Impediments; they have either no
Bodies, or such as no way incommode or retard, but rather help and further
their Faculties; for they are in the full height and last perfection of their
Natures, and consequently must not be supposed to have the least degree of any
of their Natural Perfections detained or held back from exerting it self by any
clog or impediment; there being no reason imaginable why they should be
invested with any degree of Power which must never be brought into Act, as it
never must be if not at present, they being now supposed to be in the last
Perfection of their Natures. They must be therefore conceived in this respect,
to act like necessary Agents to the full and to the utmost of their natural
Strength, and to have nothing in them that is not put forth as far as possibly
can be. And besides, the Scripture always speaks of them under the denomination
of Spirits, without making (...) of any Bodies belonging to them; which must
needs imply, that either they are all Pure Minds; (as the Platonists say of the
highest Order,) or if they have Bodies, they are of so refined and clarified a
Mould, so nigh to an Immaterial Substance, that Spirit might serve as a common
word for both. They have therefore no weight or load upon their Faculties,
nothing to dead or slacken the Spring of their Nature, no Concupiscence to
darken their Understandings, or to pervert their Wills, no Indisposition,
Languor or Weariness occasioned through crazy and sickly Vehicles, but are
always Fresh, Vigorous and Bright, like the life and quickness of the Morning,
and rejoice like the Sun to run their Course. They have no Necessities to
relieve or provide for, no impertinent Avocations to call them off from their
noble Exercises, no ill Company to debauch them, no Devil to tempt and ensnare
them, and therefore must needs act with a full display of their Faculties, and
be carried out uncessantly and entirely toward the Supreme Good, with their
whole bent and energy, as a Stone would tend toward the Center through an
unresisting Medium.

But this will further appear, by considering Secondly the positive advantages
which they enjoy: Their great advantageis, that they have a constant and clear
Vision of the Essence of the great God. Now I consider that the Essence of God
is the very Essence of Goodness, (...), as the Divine Philosopher fitly calls
him; whereupon I conceive that an Angel seeing God after this Essential manner,
must have the same Habitude and Disposition to him, as one that does not thus
see God has to the common nature of Good. But now it is impossible that a Man
should either will or act any thing without attending to good in common, and
without proposing that as his aim: And accordingly it is as impossible that the
Blessed Angels should will or act any thing without attending to God, and
making him their End, as long as they have this Essential Vision of him; and of
this they are never deprived, for our Lord says of them, that they always
behold the Face of his Father Mat. 18.10.
which is in Heaven. This he speaks of the Missionary Angels that have the
Charge and Office of Guardians here upon Earth, that even they notwithstanding
their employment here, have a constant view of the Divine Essence, and are
never interrupted in their Beatisick Vision; much more then is this true of the
Stationary Angels that wait upon the Throne of God, the Residentiaries of
Heaven. Whence it further follows, that it is impossible they should ever Sin,
or do any thing contrary to the Divine Nature or Will. For the Essence of God
being supposed to be the same to them that good in general is to us, the Vision
of it must needs wholly engage and constantly retain all their Powers and
Faculties; (for we can never will any thing out of the Sphere of Good in
general,) communicate a kind of Deiform Habit to their Natures, and render them
in all things exactly conformable to the Divine Will. And accordingly the
Apostle derives our future likeness and conformity to God from our Vision of
him; We shall be like him, says he, for Joh. 3.2.
we shall see him as he is.

This shall be our Felicity hereafter; but it is the Privilege of the Blessed
Angels to enjoy it now, and therefore by the strength of the same Argument it
must be supposed that they are as like God as the clearest Vision of him can
make them; that is, as like him as finite can be like infinite, as a Creature
can be like its Creator. That they are exactly conformable to the Perfections
of that Adorable Excellence which they behold, that they love what he loves,
and hate what he hates, and that in all things they perform his Will and
Pleasure in a more excellent manner than such imperfect Thinkers as we are can
either conceive or describe.

Thus in general; but now for a more particular account of the excellent manner
of their doing the Will of God in Heaven, we are to consider

First, That they do it with full Readiness and Alacrity: It Is the necessary as
well as unhappy Appendage of our Mortal frame, even in its best condition, to
act with a mixed Consent and a divided Choice: Sin indeed we sometimes do with
a full and thorough Consent, without any renitencies to the contrary side; but
our resolutions to Good are mixed and imperfect; for the most part we do not go
so far, but it is our highest achievement to conquer and prevail against the
tendencies of the Animal part, not to be without them. And though after some
uncertain Vibrations, the Scale does at length weigh down for Duty and
Obedience, yet still there is some weight in the other Balance, and the Motion
though Victorious, yet is not entire and unresisted. But now the Holy Angels
being free from the impediments of a contrary Principle, perform the Will of
God with a full, entire and perfect Consent; they have no Demurs or Disputings,
no Reluctancies or Aversions, but at the first intimation approve and execute
the Will of God with all the readiness and alacrity of an entire, pure and
undivided Will. And accordingly in the Prophet Isaiah's Vision of God in his
Glory, the Seraphim appeared with Six Wings, With twain he covered his Face,
(the Isa. 6. 2.
Text says,) with twain he covered his Feet, and with twain he did fly. But to
the Prophet Ezekiel, the Vision was Ezekiel. 10.
enlarged, for to him the Cherubims were represented with Wings and Wheels,
both of them being very significant and lively Symbols of that eminent Alacrity
and Agility wherewith the Holy Angels perform the Will of God.

The Jews indeed have a Proverb, that the Angel of Justice flies but with one
Wing; but hereby I conceive they intend only the slowness of God in issuing out
Commissions of Vengeance, not that of the Angels in putting them in Execution:
For they see the Reason of the Command as well as the Letter of it; or if not,
yet the clear Vision they have of the Divine Essence and Perfections, will not
suffer them to doubt of the Equity and Reasonableness of all his Injunctions,
as being well assured that nothing but what is highly Reasonable can be the
result of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness: So that they are as well satisfied with
the Decrees of Vengeance, as with the milder Emanations of his Love, and
perform them both with equal Cheerfulness. Thus we see the Angel who was
Commissioned to keep lapsed Man out of Paradise with his Flaming Sword, betook
himself as readily to the ungrateful Office, as he that was to carry the welcome
Tidings of Man's Redemption to the Shepherds, and to sing Glory to God on high,
on Earth Peace and Good Will toward Men. And I question not but that those
Sons of God which shouted for joy at the laying the Foundations of this great
Fabric, will hereafter upon the Signal given, be full as ready to assist to
its Destruction and Fiery Dissolution. But we are upon the same Grounds to
consider

Secondly, That their Obedience is Uniform and Universal as well as ready and
Cheerful, and that they have an equal respect to all the Commands of God. Upon
the same Principle that they are Ready and Cheerful, they are also Uniform and
Universal in their Obedience; for the reason why they Obey cheerfully, is
either because they are Convinced of the particular Equity and Reasonableness
of the Law, or because they are convinced of the unerring Wisdom of the
Lawgiver, whom they know they may safely rely upon by an implicit Confidence,
though they should not be able to account in particular for the Reason of what
he Commands. And the same will be a sufficient satisfaction why they should
obey him Universally, since every Precept either carries its own Evidence and
Reason with it, or what is a good, an Inducement to Obedience, the undeceivable
Reason of him that gives it. This is the Principle of Believing all that God
Reveals, Mysteries as well as intelligible Articles, and the same is the
Principle of Obeying all that God Commands. And wherever there is a clear
Conviction of this, there Obedience must needs be as Universal as Faith, as
having the same Grounds and Inducements: And there being no reason to question
but that there is the highest Conviction of this in the Minds of Angels, we may
proceed to consider

Thirdly, With what Constancy they perform the Divine Will: They obey with
Constancy not only as it is opposed to final Cessation, but as it is opposed to
the least Interruption. The highest Perseverance we can pretend to in this
Region of Inconstancy, is not to fall off totally or finally; nor are we sure
of so much as that. But to maintain a steady Course of Obedience without the
least interruption, is beyond the measures of Flesh and Blood. But now the Holy
Angels are not only secure from either total or final Apostasy, but even from
the least abatements or interruptions of Duty; for the Excellence which they
Contemplate is always the same, and so also is the manner of their
Contemplating it. They Contemplate the Face of God as the Philosopher says of
the Supreme Intelligences, (...), always and alike, and consequently cannot but
love and adore him with a constant and uninterrupted Flame of Devotion, the
Glorious Essence of God being the same to them that the common nature of Good
is to us, as was observed before: To which there is this further Advantage to
be added, that their Understandings are never under an Eclips, no not so much
as in part; but as they always receive equal Illumination from God, so do they
shine upon their Wills with an equal Light; and consequently they must needs
stand always equally affected and disposed to what is good, as appearing to
them always in a Light equally advantageous. For the variety and changableness
of our Wills proceeds from the variety of our Judgments; and were our Thoughts
and Apprehensions of things always uniform, our Actions would be so too; for we
always act as for that instant we think. This therefore being the happy
condition of Angels, to have the Eye of their Understanding always equally
awake, and in full Illumination, there must needs be also a constant regularity
in their Wills. The short is, as long as they, Contemplate the Divine Essence,
they cannot divert aside to any thing irregular, because of the Superlative
Excellence of the Divine Good, which fills and wholly ingages their Faculties;
and for the same reason they cannot choose but for ever to Contemplate. And
herein I suppose must be placed that happy Necessity the Holy Angels are under,
of doing the Will of God, and of persevering in it to all Eternity; and that
this is that which we mean, when we say they are Confirmed in good.

But leaving these Flaming Excellencies a while to their Happy and Noble
Employments, before we go further, let us see how these Speculations may be
improved to the benefit of our Practice: And First, since God has made his
Angels such excellent and accomplished Creatures, let us make the same use of
it that the Psalmist did when he took from hence an occasion of Praise and
Thanksgiving, Praise the Lord, O my Soul, says he, and then mentioning some
Characters of his Greatness, he adds, He makes his Psalm. 104.4.
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming Fire. Indeed the Angels are the
greatest Occasions as well as Instruments of Praise, as being the Noblest part
of the Divine Workmanship; Look Eccl. 43.1
upon the Rainbow, and praise him that made it, says the Son of Sirach: And if
God is to be Praised for the Beauty of the Rainbow, caused only by various
Reflections and Refractions of the Globules of the Second Element in their
passage through a Cloud, how much more is he to be adored for these great
Masterpieces of his Art, these Closet-Draughts of his Beauty!

Secondly, We may take a Caution hence to beware of that Voluntary Humility
which the Apostle speaks of, and were he now alive, would have fresh Occasion
given him to Condemn, in Worshipping Angels; take heed to thy self, left when
thou liftest up thine Eyes to Heaven, and seeft the Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars, even all the Host of Heaven, thou should be driven to worship them,
says Moses to the People of Israel: And Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
there is the same and greater danger here, when we Contemplate the Glory of
this other Heavenly Host; for however through Envy or Emulation we usually
lessen and disparage one another Excellencies, yet when we have to do with
Creatures of another rank and order, we are apt to be guilty of the opposite
extreme, and to exchange Detraction for Idolatry.

Thirdly, We have here a most excellent Antidote against Pride, which is a
littleness of Mind that arises from our Ignorance of the World about us as well
as of our Selves; and consequently is best Cured by considering what
Excellencies there are above us. The young Homebred Heir that thinks his
Father's Manor a considerable part of the World, is sent abroad to see more
of it, and returns Home Cured by his Travels. And would the Man that swells and
looks big upon his Parts or Learning but bestow a Thought or Two upon the
Perfections of Angels, I dare warrant him his Plumes will quickly fall, and
that he will never find in his Heart to set up for a Wit more: For alas, what
are we to the Angels? Hereafter indeed it is to be hoped, that some of us may be
made like them; but what are we in Comparison now? They excel us more than we
do the Beasts of the Field, and we need nothing else but this one Consideration
well thought upon to convince us, That Pride was not made for Man.

Fourthly, we may learn hence so to fear the Devil, as to look upon him as a
considerable Adversary, and not to be too secure in our best Condition; for he
is an Angel still, and we know not what he has lost by his Fall, besides that
Grace and Goodness whereby he might be disposed to help and befriend us. And
the Apostle tells us, that we still wrestle against Principalities and Powers:
And therefore it concerns us to provide our selves accordingly, and as he there
advises, to take unto us the whole Armor of God. Ephesians. 6.


Lastly, we should endeavor to imitate all the Moral and Imitable Excellencies
of the good Angels; our Savior has made them our Pattern in his Prayer, and we
should make them so in our Lives, by endeavoring to perform God's Will in
Earth as it is in Heaven: Which calls upon me to return to the Fourth Enquiry,
namely, How far we are concerned to imitate this Pattern of Obedience.

That our Imitation of it is in some Measure or other required, is most
certain, otherwise our Lord would never have taught us to Pray that God's Will
should be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; but how far is the Question? In
answer to which, I observe that the Obedience of the Angels may be considered
either Intensively, or Extensively; or in other Words, either with respect to
the Act, or with respect to the Object; which last may again be meant either of
the kinds of Good, or of the several degrees in each kind.

This being premised, I answer, First, That we are not obliged to the
Intenseness of Angelical Obedience; this I say we are not obliged to, because
it is not among the (...), the things which are in our Power. This indeed will
be part of our Reward hereafter, but it cannot be our Duty here; and therefore
though we are to obey God readily and cheerfully, yet it is not required we
should do it with such a degree of Alacrity as excludes all imperfect motions
to the contrary. It Is not required while we are a Compound of Flesh and Spirit,
that the latter should be wholly free from the Solicitations of the former;
it is sufficient if it have the Casting Voice, and prevail in the Contention;
and so much indeed is Duty. And therefore says the Psaimist, He that now goes
on his way weeping, and Psalm. 126.
bears forth good Seed, shall doubtless come again with Joy, and bring his
Sheaves with him: He must bear forth good Seed, and if he does so, it shall be
no Prejudice to him that he goes on his way weeping.

Neither are we obliged to serve God always with equal heights of Devotion, and
with an uniform fervency of Mind; for besides that, our Savior himself who led
the most Angelical Life, prayed at some times more earnestly than at others;
this depends in a great measure upon the various junctures of Circumstances,
and the various impressions of Objects from without, and the different fineness
and quickness of the Animal Spirits within, with many other Accidental
Dispositions which are not in our Power. We are only accountable for the
Motions of our Wills; and for ebbs and flows of Passion no further than they
are at the disposal of the other; and therefore if we Sail by a true Compass,
and steer our Course to the right Point, we do our Duty, and are not Chargeable
for want of Gusty Blasts, and Swelling Sails, which are not in our Power to
have.

Then Secondly, as to the Extensiveness of Angelical Obedience, if this be
considered in the First Sense, with respect to the kinds of Good, we are
certainly obliged to have our Obedience as Extensive as theirs, being bound to
obey the whole Will of God. For the sincerity of our Obedience can no otherwise
be justified than by its Universality and Uniformity; Uniformity as to the
Object, though not as to the Act; and therefore it is that the Psalmist Prays, O
that my Ways were so direct Psalm. 119.
that I might keep thy Statutes; so shall I not be confounded when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments.

But if the Extensiveness of Angelical Obedience be considered in the latter
Sense, with respect to the several Degrees in each kind of good, so we are not
bound to come up to the Measures and Seize of Angels, and that because
it is beyond the Capacity of our present Condition. Nay, I think we are not
strictly obliged under Pain of Sin, to attain to all the degrees of good which
we possibly can, or always to do what is simply Best; for I think it plain from
Scripture, that the Degrees of good admit of Counsel as well as Precept, and of
Perfection as well as Duty: Much less therefore are we obliged to the full
extensiveness of Angelical Obedience as thus considered: If we are not bound to
our Best, much less to their Best.

But besides this way of considering the Extensiveness of the Angelical
Obedience as to the kinds and degrees of Good, there is yet another, namely
with respect to Time or Continuance; this is what we otherwise call their
Perseverance or Constancy of Obedience: Now as to the Measures of our
Obligation to this, we are to distinguish and consider the Gospel in a double
Capacity, as a Law, and as a Covenant; if we consider it as a Covenant, then we
are not obliged to a constant and all the way along continued Obedience. For
it is not uninterrupted, but only final Perseverance that is the condition of
the Covenant. But if we consider it as a Law, then we are not only obliged to a
final, but to an uninterrupted Perseverance, that is, we are not only required
to be found at our last Exit in a state of sincere Obedience, (which is the
Condition of the Covenant,) but also to continue all the way in it: For every
deliberate and voluntary interruption of it is Sin, and such as while
unrepented of, intitles us to, and if never repented of, will actually bring
upon us Damnation.

Having thus in short stated the general Measures of our Conformity to the
Angelical Pattern, which are also the Measures of our Evangelical Obedience, I
come now lastly to consider how Reasonable it is that we should do thus; and
certainly if any thing in the World be reasonable, it is that we should do the
Will of God; for the Will of God is the highest Reason. Indeed were God an
Arbitrary Humersom Being, that loved to domineer over his Creatures, and to
impose on them harsh and troublesome Commands only for his own Pleasure, and to
show his Authority; though even then we should justly owe him Homage and
Obedience, yet there might be some pretense for disputing it, and making demurs
about it. But God is so good and kind as to enjoin us nothing but what is
pursuant of the End for which he Created us; that is, our Happiness and
Perfection: So kind as to link our Duty and Interest together, and to make
those very things the instances of our Obedience, which are the natural Means,
and necessary Causes of our Happiness: So that were we to contrive a way to
make our Condition Happy, we could pitch upon no better than what he has
already prescribed to us in the Laws which he has given us. So highly consonant
and agreeable are they to the frame of our Natures, and so absolutely necessary
are they both to the order of this present World, and to the Happiness of the
next. This might easily be demonstrated of every one of the Divine Commandments
in particular, but that being too long an Undertaking for the close of a
Discourse, I only consider that we have a certain ground to conclude what the
Will of God must be in reference to us, by what he is in himself; for this is
an evident Principle, That such as God himself is, such must be his Will, it
being unconceivable that he should will any thing contrary to his Nature. But
now we all take God to be a Being Essentially and Immutably Wise and Good,
Holy, Just and True; and if these are Properties inseparable from the Nature of
God, (as all grant they are,) then the Will of God must also be Holy, Wise,
Just, True and Good, and consequently highly fit and reasonable to be Obeyed.

But why O God do we want Reason to persuade us to do thy Will? Is it not
enough that it is Thine? Thine who art the great Creator and Governor of the
World, and have the highest right to be served by all the Creatures, and by all
the Powers which thou haft made? Thine, who art the best and greatest Being,
who art infinitely Wise, Holy, Just and True, and can therefore command
nothing but what is so? Thine, who art above all capacity of addition to thy
Happiness, and can therefore propose no good but that of thy Creatures in the
Laws that thou give them? Why then do we inquire after the Reason of thy
Will? It ought to satisfy us that it is Thine.

And since this Will of God is done in Heaven, why should it not be done on
Earth? Since the Blessed Angels who can discern the Reasons of things, even the
deep things of God, and are infinitely better able to judge of the
Reasonableness of Obedience than we are; since they are so ready and forward to
pay it, why should we make any Question or any Delay about it? Since the great
Heavenly Host, those Excellent Beings that excel both in Wisdom and Strength,
acknowledge and submit to the Government of God, why should we a little handful
of Rebels, stand out? Since the Will of God is done in Heaven, why is it not on
Earth? Yes, it is done on Earth, for at his Commandment the Waters flow, and
the Wind and Storm fulfill his Word; only Man, disorderly Man, will not be
Obedient, though he has a God for his Maker, and Angels for his President.

But let as many of us as hope to be like Angels hereafter, study to be like
them here; let us seriously and diligently endeavor to write after so fair a
Copy, and set before us the Holy Angelsas Patterns as well as Observers in all
our Actions, which would certainly work more upou us, than that Expedient so
much advised by a great Man, the imaginary presence of a Cato or a Lelius. Let
us make it our care as much as in us lies by the Angelical Piety and Regularity
of our Lives to resto e the Moral World to that Symphony and Uniform Harmony
wherein God made it, and not only Pray, but also heartily Endeavor that the
Will of the great God may be done here on Earth as it is in Heaven.

FINIS.

