LETTERS Concerning the Love of GOD, Between the Author of the Proposal to the
LADIES AND Mr. JOHN NORRIS: Wherein his late Discourse, showing That it ought
to be entire and exclusive of all other Loves, is further cleared and justified.

PUBLISHED By J. NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Manship at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, and Richard Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul 's Churchyard, 1695.

Imprimatur,

October 7. 1694. C. Alston.

TO THE Truly Honorable LADY, The LADY CATHERINE JONES, IN DUE Acknowledgment
of her Merits, AND IN Testimony of that Just, And therefore Very Great and
Vnseigned VENERATION Which is paid to her Ladyships Virtues, THESE LETTERS Are
most Humbly Dedicated and Presented.

TO THE READER.
THE Letters herelaid open to thy View are a late Correspondence between my
self and a Gentlewoman, and to add to thy Wonder, a young Gentlewoman. Her Name
I have not the Liberty to publish. For her Person, as her Modesty will not
suffer me to say much of her, so the present Productions of her Pen make it
utterly needless to say any thing, unless it be by way of Prevention to obviate
a Diffidence in some who from the surprising Excellency of these Writings may
be tempted to question whether my Correspondent be really a Woman or no. To
whom my Answer is, that indeed I did not see her write these Letters, but that
I have all the moral and reasonable Assurance that she did write them* and is
the true Author of them, that can be had in a thing of this Nature, And I hope
my Credit may be good enough with those that know me to be believed upon my
serious Word, where there is no other Satisfaction to be given.

The Subject of this Correspondence is the best and greatest that the Thought
of an intelligent Creature can possibly exercise it self about, the Love of
GOD. And 'twere much to be wished that this were made more the Subject not only
of our Conversations and Letters (instead of those many empty and impertinent
Foxmalities that usually fill and ingross them) but even of our Books and more
elaborate Composures, which I think would be better employed in laying good
Foundations for the Love of GOD, and raising the low-sunk Practice of it, than
in curious Researches of his Nature, and an eternal Contention and tedious
Chicane about the Trinity. Men may wrangle for ever about these abstruse
Theories, and sooner dispute themselves out of Charity than into Truth, but our
Wills have at present a larger Capacity than our Understandings, and our Love
of GOD may be very flaming and seraphick, when after the greatest Elevation and
Soar of Thought our Conceptions of him are but faint and shadowy, and we see
him but in a Glass darkly. But if we would even make this Glass more
transparent, it is Love that must clarify and refine it. An affectionate Sense
of GOD will discover more of him to us, than all the dry Study and Speculation
of Scholastic Heads, the Fire of our Hearts will give the best and truest
Light to our Eyes, and when all is done the Love of GOD is the best
Contemplation

However, I am sure it is the best Practice. Love is not only the shortest and
most compendious Way to Perfection, but the greatest Height and Pitch of it.
The more we have of Love, the nearer Advances we make to GOD, who is Love it
self, and who breaths forth from him essential and substantial Love, the more
fit we are to taste the Sweetness of Divine Communion and religious walking
with him here, and the better prepared to relish and enjoy the fuller Display
of his sovereign Excellence hereafter.

Heaven is but a State of the most perfect and comsummated Love, and therefore
the best thing we can practice upon Earth is to tune our Hearts to this Divine
Strain, to set them as high as we can, for sure the best Preparation for Love
must be Love it self. But whatever other Qualifications are requisite, a Heart
once truly touched with this divine Passion cannot long want them. Love will
draw along after it all other Virtues, will perfect and improve them, and will
at least hide those Faults of them which it cannot correct. For this is that
universal Excellency which supplies the Defects of other Works, but which if
wanting (such a necessary and vital Part it is) nothing else can supply or
compound for. Neither Tongues, nor Prophecy, nor Knowledge, nor Faith, nor
Alms, nor even Martyrdom it self signify any thing without Charity. The Heart
is the Sacrifice that GOD demands, and unless that be offered, the richest
Oblation will find no Acceptance. Other Gifts and Graces, whether intellectual
or moral, come indeed from Heaven, but they often leave us upon Earth. Love
only elevates us up thither, and is able to unite us to God. It Is this indeed
that gives us the strictest Union on with him in this Life. By Faith we live
upon GOD, by Obedience we live to him, but it is by Love alone that we live in
him. And so St. John, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God
and God in him. A Passage that makes highly for the Privilege of Love, and
which I cannot mention without calling to mind a most Divine Remark which the
Port Royal, Abrege de la Morale des Epistres, etc. Tom. 4. Page 112. in their
late Abstract of the Morality of the New Testament has upon it. O great God,
you are all Love in your self, and all Love for Man and Man, dares deliberate
whether he should love you, and to inquire when and how far he is obliged to do
it. If to love GOD be to possess him, and to be possessed by him, what an
Emptiness is there in that Heart which does not love God, or of what is it full
if not of Vanity and Indigence it self?

But I may be concerned to plead as well as to recommend the Greatness of our
Subject, which indeed is so sublime and vast, has such immense Dimensions, such
Heighths and Depths in it, that there needs no other Apology than the Theme we
treat of to excuse the Defectiveness of our Meditations upon it. If there be
any Argument that will oppress a Writer with its Weight, dazzle him with its
Glory, and make every thing that he shall think or say upon it appear little,
it is this certainly of the Love of God, which is a Theory of too exalted a
Nature for any humane Pen, and such as Angels alone are fit to write upon.

They that contemplate the Face of GOD can tell it may be in some Measure how
lovely he is, and the very Transport of their high Passion, would furnish them
with Expression, but it is hard for a Soul that sees only his Back-parts to give
any tolerable Representation of his Beauty, and for a Spirit that dwells and
converses upon Earth to speak the Language of Heaven. There are Mysteries in
the Love of God as well as in other Parts of Religion which to the Minds of Men
armed as they are with sensible Prejudices, will appear very difficult, and
which the most purged and illuminated Spirits will not presently comprehend,
and which even those that do will not easily explain so as to make them
intelligible to others. Practice and Experiment will go furthest here, but
after all we must be often forced to cry, O the Depth! St. Paul seems to have
been sensible of this when he prayed for his Ephesians, that being rooted and
grounded in Love, they might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
Breadth and Length and Depth and Height, and to know the Love of Christ which
passes Knowledge. This perhaps may be chiefly meant of the Love of God to us,
but it is as true of our Love to him, which has its Dimensions too, a Depth
which we can hardly sound, and a Height which we can hardly reach.

Some it may be will be ready to say here that we have reached beyond it, by
carrying the Measures of Divine Love to too great a Height. But let me only
desire them to consider (besides what they will find for the Justification of
our Measure in the following Papers) that the Love here discoursed of and
recommended is the Love of a God, that is, of all that is good, of all that is
perfect, of all that is lovely, of all that is desirable, in short, of all that
truly is, and can any Love be too great or too high for such an Object? Or
rather does he not deserve infinitely more than we or any of his Creatures can
bestow upon him? What can an infinite good be loved too much, or is any Degree
of Love too high for him who is infinitely lovely, and who infinitely loves
himself? Is the Heart of Man too great a Sacrifice for a God, though it were
entirely offered and wholly burnt and consumed at his Altar? Especially since
he himself demands it all, requiring us to love him with our whole Heart, Soul,
and Mind. And would we present him with less? What do we think the whole too
great for him that we thus mince and divide it! But does not our Conscience
secretly reproach us when we do so? Yes, it continually upbraids to us the Love
of Creatures, and is always like a faithful Advocate pleading in the Behalf of
God, and asserting his sovereign Right. And why then should it be thought such
a Stretch of the Love of God to make it entire and exclusive of all other
Loves? Can we love God too much, or Creatures too little? Or is it such a
Paradox to make the Church speak to Christ in the same Language wherein he
condescendes to speak to her, my Love, my undefiled is but one.

But after all, is this such a rare and unheard of Conclusion that God ought to
be the sole and entire Object of our Love, to be so stared at as I find it is,
and looked upon as such a Singularity! No certainly, nothing more ordinary in
Books of Piety and Devotion, than to meet with Expressions of this Kind. St.
Austin's Devotional Tracts are full of them, and so are our modern Writers who
commonly run upon the same Strain, as may be seen at large (for it is endless to
make particular Quotations here) in all those Books that are written after the
mystical and spiritual Way, particularly in the Works of the great Spanish
Seraphick St. Theresa, especially in her Pensees Sur L'Amour de Dieu, in
Cardinal Bona's via Compendii ad Deum, Chrestien Interieur, Thomas a Kempis of
the Imitation of Christ, and the great French Poet Corneille in a Book of
Divine Poems upon the same Subject, where he has this memorable Passage.

O Qu' heureux est Celuy qui de Coeur and d' esprit
Scait gouster ce que C'est que d' aimer Jesus Christ,
Et joindre a cest amor le mepris de soy-mesme!
O qu' heureux est Celuy qui se laisse Charmer
Aux Celestes attraits de sa Beauty supreme,
Jusqu' a quitter tout ce qu' il aim
Pour un Dieu qu' il faut seul aimer.
Ce doux and saint Tyran de nostre Affection
A de la jalousie and de l' Ambition,
Il veut regner luy seul sur tout nostre Courage,
Il veut estre aim seul, and ne scauroit Souffrir
Qu'autre amor que le Sien puisse entrer en partage,
Ny du Coeur qu' il prend en Ostage,
Ny des Voeux qu' on luy doit offrir.
Monsieur Jurieu has also a great deal to the same Purpose in his Book of
Christian Devotion, and I might name several among our own Writers, but there
is one that delivers himself so full and home to the Business that I need
mention no more, but shall only present the Reader with a Passage out of him.
It is Bishop Lake, who in his seventh Sermon upon those Words, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. Matthew. 22. and 37. (the very Text we
build upon) expresses himself thus: In the Question of Perfection Divines
require a double Perfection, one partium, the other graduum. There is a
Perfection of the Parts in Man, which must be seasoned with the Virtue, and the
Virtue in those Parts must arise unto its full Pitch. This Text requires both
these Perfections in Charity. The Perfection on of the Parts of Man are
intimated in the Enumeration of the Heart, Mind, Soul and Strength, unto which
all our inward and outward Abilities may be reduced. So that there is no Power
or Part of Man that must not be qualified with the Love of God. But of this
Perfection I have spoken when I showed you the Seat of Love. I made it plain
unto you that there was to be in our Charity a Perfection of Parts. That with
which we have now to do is the Perfection of Degrees. The Text will tell us
that it is not enough for every of those Parts to have the Love of God in them,
they must also be wholly taken up therewith. And this Perfection is noted by
the Word (all) which is added to Heart, Soul, Mind, and Strength.

A Commandment is the sooner admitted if the Reasonableness of the ground
thereof be first discovered. I will therefore first discover the ground upon
the Reasonableness whereof this great Measure is required. The ground is
twofold, one in GOD, another in us. The ground that is found in God is taken
from the Preface of this Text, as Moses has delivered it, and St. Mark repeated
it. The Preface is, hearken O Israel, the Lord thy God is one. But one,
therefore the entire Object of our Love. He will not give this his Glory to any
other, neither will he endure any Corsival herein. The Beginning, the Middle
and the End of this Object is only he that is Alpha and Omega, the first and
last. Had we many Lord Gods then might we have many Objects of our Love. The
Object can no more be multiplied than he can. Take all the Parts of his Title
asunder, and you shall find Oneness and Intireness therein. After a particular
Examination of and Descant upon which he proceeds. I suppose if you have well
heeded what I have said you will acknowledge that there is a fair ground in the
Lord our God why he should challenge all our Love. Let us come now and look
upon our selves, and see what ground thereof we can find there.

When the Question was moved unto Christ whether the Jews ought to pay Tribute
to Caesar or not, he called for the Coin and asked whose Image and
Superscription it bare. And when they answered him Caesar's, he replied, give
unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's. But he adds to our Purpose, that
upon the same grounds they must give unto GOD those things which are GOD's. If
the Image and Superscription were a just ground why Coin should be paid unto
Caesar, where GOD's Image is found there is as good a Reason that that should
be rendered unto him. Now God's Image is found in us by Nature, for we were made
according to his Image, so that all which we receive from him we owe unto him
by the Law of Creation. A second way is God's Image in us, by Grace. For our
Regeneration is but a second Creation, wherein we are reformed unto that Image
according to which God at first created us. All then is due unto God a second
time, by the Law of our Redemption, so that whether we look upon our Heart, our
Mind, our Soul, or Strength, it may be demanded of us, Quid habes, quod non
accepisti? What have thou, etc. And if we have received it all, the Exaction is
but reasonable, Si totum exigit a te qui totum fecit, refecit te. Surely St.
Paul thought so when he wills the Corinthians to glorify God with their
Bodies, and with their Souls, adding this reason, for they are God's.

Well then we have found fair grounds of this Measure. For if God be such and
such to us, as you have heard, the only lovely thing, and all that can be
beloved, and we are all his, and all that we have is due unto him, both by
Nature and by Grace, then ought we with all to express our Love toward him.
But what is it to love him with all! Surely it is to love him sine divisione
and sine remissione. None of our Abilities must be divided, none of them must
be slack in doing this Work. First of the Division, we must not divide our
Hearts, that is, as the Scripture speaks, have a Heart and a Heart, a Heart for
God, and a Heart for the World, etc. Again, all Division of our Abilities is a
plain abandoning of the Love of God, for no Man can serve two Masters as Christ
tells us, etc. God will have all or none, etc. Again says he, What is the Use
of all this but to make us see how little we perform of this Commandment, and
how little Cause we have to boast of the best that we do therein. Who is he
that can deny that his Abilities are divided, and that he loves more things
than God, yea most things more than God, etc.

You see here is a great Man that not only expressly delivers the same
Conclusion; but endeavors to prove it too. Whether his way of reasoning be
conclusive or no I leave the Reader to judge. All that I am at present
concerned to remark is, that the Conclusion it self is far from being such a
Novelty or Singularity as many imagine and object. No, it is frequently to be
met with, and all that I have here and elsewhere done is only to reduce a
common Conclusion into clear and distinct Principles, such as are founded in
the Nature and Reason of Things. So that if what I advance be no Truth, yet I
am sure it is no Paradox, which is enough to fence me from Prejudice, and I am
content that Reason should decide the rest.

When I have desired the Reader to be so just to me as not to meddle with these
Papers till he has first carefully perused the Discourse to which they relate,
and which contains the Principle upon which they proceed, I have nothing more
to say here unless it be to give some account of the Reasons of our
communicating a private Correspondence to the Public, concerning which I shall
leave the Reader to satisfy himself out of the Two ensuing Letters, which
contain my Proposal of a Publication, with the Reason and Manner of my
Correspondents Compliance. The Letters are as follows.

Madam,
SInce we have now both of us concluded our Parts, and so sealed up our Divine
Subject with a double Seal, it would be a little indecorous to break it open
again, especially for me who cannot think' it Prudence to travel on even in so
pleasant a Road after my Guide has left me, to proceed further in a Subject
where you think fit to end, or to vitiate with any Additions of mine the Relish
of an Argument upon which you have left such a pleasing and delicious Farewell.
No Madam, let it stand as you have left it, for though it should not be
absolutely finished (as indeed who can say of such an immense Subject that it
ever is) yet it is most just and fit that wherever you please to end, there
should be the Conclusion, after which, as in Apelles's Venus, there can be no
adding without Presumption. I shall not therefore be guilty of it, only give me
leave to lament a little that you conclude so soon your Meditations and my
Pleasures. For methinks I could eternally hear your Discourse upon this ever
fruitful, ever engaging and entertaining Theme, which as great as it is
receives such an Advantage from your Management, as might recommend it to those
dull cold Spirits whom its own natural Excellency would never affect. The very
Tunings and looser Touches of a sweet and well toned Instrument are pleasant,
and what then is the Harmony when it comes to be played on by a Masterly Hand!
And how is the musical Hearer grieved when he sees the melodious Artist
unstringing it and laying it aside. But Madam, there are some Pleasures that
are always short, if Time be their Measure, and were your Discourses here never
so prolix I should still think and be ready to complain they were done too
soon, so great and noble is the Subject, and so admirable both your Thoughts
and Expressions upon it, such Choiceness of Matter, such Weight of Sense, such
Art and Order of Contrivance, such Clearness and Strength of reasoning, such
Beauty of Language, such Address of Style, such bright and lively Images and
Colors of things, and such moving Strains of the most natural and powerful
Oratory, and all this seasoned with such a Tincture of Piety, and seeming to
come from a true inward vital Principle of the most sincere and settled
Devotion. But why do I say seeming, when it is next to impossible that such
lively and favoury Representations of the Love of God should proceed from one
that is not intimately acquainted with the Mysteries and Secrets of it, or that
there should be any such Knowledge without the most hearty and affectionate
Sense of it, which alone is able to teach and make it known. For, contrary to
the Method of other Sciences,' it is Practice here that begets Theory, and those
only who have their Hearts thoroughly warmed and animated with the Love of God
can either know or describe its Properties.

Madam, I am very sensible what Obligations I am under to you for the Privilege
of your excellent Correspondence, though I can never hope that my Thanks should
ever equal either the Pleasure or the Advantage I have received by it, or that
I should be ever able to express the Value I set upon your Letters, either as
to their Ingenuity or their Piety. The former of which might make them an
Entertainment for an Angel, and the latter sufficient (if possible) to make a
Saint of the blackest Devil. I am sure for my own Part I have particular reason
to thank you for them, having received great spiritual Comfort and Advantage by
them, not only Heat but Light, intellectual as well as moral Improvement. For
(as many Discourses as there are upon the Subject) to my Knowledge I never met
with any that have so enlightened my Mind, enlarged my Heart, so entered and
took Possession of my Spirit, and have had such a general and commanding
Influence over my whole Soul as these of yours. And I question not but that
they would have the same Effect upon other Readers if they were but exposed to
their View, and would help to fan and blow up that divine Fire which our
Savior came to kindle upon Earth, but which the Neglect of careless Men has
let almost go out.

And indeed never was there more need of such warm quickening Discourses than in
this cold frozen Age of ours, wherein the Flame of divine Love seems not only
to burn with a blue expiring Light, but to hang loose and hovering, just ready
to fly away and be extinct. Some have not the Knowledge of God, was the
Complaint of St. Paul, and the chief Character of his Time. But that of ours is
Want of the Love of God, and which equally redounds to our Shame. Perhaps more,
since the natural Capacity of our Wills is greater and more extensive than that
of our Understandings, and he that knows but little may yet love much. But to
our Shame the Reverse of this is now true. There is a great deal of Knowledge
now adays and but little Love. Knowledge indeed is now in its Meridian,
diffusing at once a very bright and universal Light, but the Love of God is
declining and just ready to set. Strange that our Heads should be so full of
Life and Spirits, and yet that the Pulse of our Hearts should beat so low! But
the Ends of the World are come upon us, and a double Prophecy must be
fulfilled, viz. That in the later Days Knowledge shall increase, and that the
Love of many shall wax cold.

O divine Love whither art thou fled, or where art thou to be found? How little
art thou understood, and how much less art thou considered and practiced! What
Discoveries of thee have been made by the Son of God, and yet what a Riddle art
thou still to the World! What a Divine Teacher have thou had, and yet how few
are thy Disciples! How charming and ravishing are thy Pleasures, and yet how
very few have thou inamoured by them! While in the mean time Covetousness and
Ambition have their numerous Altars and Votaries, and sensual Love is
continually spreading its Victories, and leading in triumph its inglorious
Captives. O God that thou should be so infinitely lovely, and yet so little
beloved! That ever Mortal Beauties should be suffered to vye with thine, that
thy Creatures should fall in love with one another and in the mean time neglect
thee, thou infinite, thou only fair, who alone art worthy to have, and who
alone can reward their Passion? What a just Indignation must every true Lover
of God conceive at this strange Disorder, and how willing and ready will he be
to help it by promoting and propagating as far as he can the Love of God in the
World! For this is one great Effect and Sign of the Love of God (and the only
one I would have added to those you have mentioned) that whereas the Lovers of
created Beauties are jealous of them, and willing to ingross them to
themselves, being conscious of their Incapacity to suffice for many, those that
truly love God are desirous to have others love him too, to multiply his
Votaries, and to make the whole World if they can, offer up their Sacrifices
upon the same divine Altar. There cannot be a greater Pleasure to a true Lovers
of God than to see him loved by others, nor a greater Grief than to think what
vast Numbers of evil Spirits there are in Hell, and wicked Men upon Earth who
either hate him or imperfectly love him. And what would not such a Soul do,
what would she not suffer to gain Proselytes to the Love of God, and promote
the Power and Interest of it in the World, that so God might be loved in Earth
as he is in Heaven? And how would it rejoice her to find her Endeavors
succeed, to find that by careful fanning and blowing, she has at length lighted
the Fire under the Sacrifice, and that by her zealous Endeadeavors it burns and
consumes, and sends up to Heaven a grateful Fume? What Satisfaction would she
take, and how comfortably would she warm her self at the Fire which she has
kindled.

And truly Madam, I know no better Fuel wherewith to kindle and nourish this
sacred Fire than such Discourses as yours, which therefore I think are too
useful to the Public not to be due to it. Treasures you know ought not to be
concealed, and so great is the Disorder when they are, that Ghosts oftentimes
think it worth while to come into our World on purpose to have them disclosed.
To be plain and free, I do verily think nothing can be more conducive (next to
the Breathings of the holy Spirit, and the Writings by him inspired) to promote
the Love of God, than your Divine Discourses, nothing more effectual to enlarge
its Empire in the Hearts of Men, which is so excellent an End, that I can
hardly see how you can possibly dispense with your self from serving it when
you have it so far in your power. But I shall not assume to be your Casuist.
You know best what your Opportunities, and what your Obligations are. Only
this, if you communicate your Letters you will be a general Benefactor to
Mankind, who will be highly obliged to thank you, and which is more, to bless
God on your Behalf. But if you deny the World so rich a Treasure, all that I
have to set against the public Loss will be my own greater Privilege, which
however for the common Benefit would willingly be exchanged by

Madam, Your very humble Servant J. NORRIS. Bemerton,
July 2nd.

Sir,
SInce it is your Pleasure to close this excellent Subject, that I might not
with it put an End to those great Advantages which such an agreeable and
instructive Correspondence affords me, I designed (when I had taken notice of
some few incidentals in our former Letters) to propose a new Subject in this,
or else to desire you would please to make choice of such an one as you shall
judge of greatest Usefulness, but that in good Manners I think I am obliged to
return an Answer to that Request with which you conclude the old Subject before
I introduce a new one. Perhaps by this time, and upon maturer Consideration,
you have altered your Desire, which I should be glad of for your sake, lest the
World which so justly values your Judgment in other things, should have too
much occasion to decry it in this. I am not ignorant that Persons who have a
great deal of Worth themselves, are too apt to over rate the least Appearances
of it in others, and give such Characters of their Friends as better express
what they would have them be, than what they really are. It being the Property
of those only who are diffident of their own Merit, to envy and endeavor to
lessen their Neighbors, and because they are little, imagine that others are
so, whilst those who have noble Souls themselves, form their Ideas of others
according to their own worth: And thus it comes that you pass so undeserved a
Character on my Letters, concerning which I believe very few will be of your
Mind. Is the World do you think such an equitable Censor that I should care to
make it my Confessor, and expose to its View Papers writ with the same Freedom
with which I think? Many are the Faults I find in them my self, though we are
generally over partial to our own Productions. Like fond Parents we think our
own Brood the fairest, how disagreeable soever they appear to disinteressed
Judges. What think you then will the Beaux Esprits discover? How will it
gratify that which they call Wit, but is more truly ill Nature, to find so
much Matter to work on? For truly Sir, when we expose our Meditations to the
World, we give them a Right to judge, and we must either be content with the
Judgment they pass or keep our Thoughts at home. Charity and Wisdom indeed
would restrain them from that ungovernable Liberty they usually take; they may
censure so it be with Candor; judge equitably; ay, and pass Sentence too,
provided it be impartially. But though it is the Business of a true Critic to
discover Beauties as well as Blemishes, and by a due ballancing of both, to
pass a found Judgment on the whole, such Equity is not to be expected where so
much Envy abounds, where every Man reckons another's Praises his Detraction,
and never thinks his Fame will reach so high as when it is built on the Ruins of
his Neighbors. A very preposterous Way in my Opinion, to get or increase
Reputation. For where is the Glory of excelling those who have little or no
Excellency in them? No, let them shine as bright as they can, and if then I can
outshine them, I have made some considerable Addition to my Character. The
Censure therefore that abounds in the World is one Reason why I am against
Printing. If a Body have no Worth, to what End should they expose themselves,
and bring their Weakness to the Light? And if they have, Concealment is their
wisest Choice, since they shall be sure to find more Envy than Encouragement?
For it is the Custom of the World when they behold a shining Virtue, to strive
rather to reduce it to their Level, than to raise to its exalted Height. It Is
odds whether such a Man can benefit others, who are too often resolved not to be
benefited by him, but he is certain to suffer himself. Every busy finger will
be pulling the Fly out of his Box of Ointment, not to advance but to lessen
its Price. If he be guilty of a little Mistake or Inadvertency (and who is
secure therefrom?) Charity shall never be called on to dispose of it, but it
shall be bandied about, heightened and aggravated, not only to his, but even to
the Reproach of Wisdom and Virtue it self. Since then the Air is so unkind,
let us keep our tender Plants beneath a Glass; it is enough that they lie open to
the Observation and Influence of the Sun of Righteousness, and that when
Occasion serves, a Friend may be admitted to view and take them. These and some
other Considerations have recommended to me, my darling, my beloved Obscurity,
which I court and dote on above all Earthly Blessings, and am as ambitious to
slide gently through the World, without so much as being seen or taken notice
of in it, as others are to bustle and make parade on its Theater. And
therefore, though I desire by all laudable means to secure a good, I will most
industriously shun a great Reputation. Not that I want Ambition, perhaps there
is too much of that in my Temper, but because I cannot endure to have my Glory
and Reward forestalled, nor can be content ito receive my Plaudit from any but
an infallible Judge. It Is enough for me to do well, let who will take the
Praise of doing it, there being in my Opinion no Encomium comparable to that
which they shall one Day hear, who seek GOD's Glory and despise their own. And
though I bear in me too much Allay to be apprehensive of great Commendations;
yet, to confess the Truth, I as little care for Censure, having not yet
obtained that perfect Indifferency to public Fame which I endeavor after,
because I suppose it is scarce possible to command our selves, and arrive at a
true Generosity of Temper, till we are perfectly mortified to Praise and
Dispraise as well as to other things.

But besides this, me thinks the very Form of a Letter renders such
Compositions improper for public view. Those civilities which are but
necessary, especially when an Acquaintance is founding, will give the captious
World occasion to sneer and laugh. It favors too much of Montaigne's
Affectation to trouble the World with such Particularities of our Humor, and
Infirmities as we may in private very laudably descend to, and which I remember
make a Part of some of my Letters. Alas Sir, we are too prone to overrate our
selves, and consequently to value whatever relates to us on no other Account
but because it does so, but we must not expect to find People so complaisant as
to bear with this Temper, or perhaps, so civil as not to ridicule and expose it.

These are my Reasons against a Publication, I know not how they will weigh
with you, for I must needs confess one of yours overballances them all;
whatever People may say of Temptation, to do good seems to me the only
irresistible one. And indeed, could I be convinced any thing I have writ would
serve the Ends of Piety, I should despise the Censure of the wou'd-be-Criticks,
and reckon, that would more than compensate all other Inconveniences. (And
perhaps a little Censure is necessary to correct that Vanity your too good
Opinion may have raised in me, and which I desire you would be less expressive
of for the future. It Is enough for me to obtain the inward Esteem of any
virtuous and deserving Person, the greatest Kindness they can show is to
acquaint me with such Faults as lessen and obstruct it.) But if those excellent
and elaborate Discourses that are abroad, have so little Effect on the
Generality of Mankind, how can I expect my crude Rapsodies should have any?
Pardon me that I express so mean an Opinion of any thing you are pleased to
commend, I would not do it in any other Case. But all Men will not see with
your Eyes, whose Candor has bribed your Judgment, and I am obliged to you as
Homer and Virgil are to their Commentators for discovering Beauties in them
which they themselves perhaps never so much as dreamt of. Have you indeed been
affected with my Letters? It Is not through any Force of theirs but the Goodness
of your own Temper. For Hearts so full of Love to GOD, like Tinder, catch at
every Spark. But alas there is too much dry Wood in the World to expect that
such a languid Flame should kindle it. Your Letters indeed would be extremely
useful, and I think they are entire enough by themselves, nor do they need a
Foil; so that I cannot imagine to what Purpose mine will serve, unless it be to
decoy those to a Perusal of them, who wanting Piety to read a Book for its
Usefulness, may probably have the Curiosity to inquire what can be the Product
of a Woman's Pen, and to excite a generous Emulation in my Sex, persuade them to
leave their insignificant Pursuits for Employments worthy of them. For if one
to whom Nature has not been over liberal, and who has found but little
Assistance to surmount its Defects, by employing her Faculties the right way,
and by a moderate Industry in it, is enabled to write tolerable Sense, what may
not they perform who enjoy all that Quickness of Parts and other Advantages
which she wants? And I heartily wish they would make the Experiment, so far am
I from coveting the Fame of being singular, that it is my very great Trouble it
should be any bodies Wonder to meet with an ingenious Woman.

If therefore you overruled me, and resolve to have these Papers go abroad, it
shall be on these Conditions; first, that you make no mention of my Name, no
not so much as the initial Letters; and next, that you dedicate them to a Lady
whom I shall name to you, or else give me leave to do it. For though none can
be less fond of Dedications, or has so little Ambition to be known to those who
are called great; yet out of the Regard I owe to the glorious Author of all
Perfection, I cannot but pay a very great Respect to one who so nearly
resembles him. And where can a Discourse of the Love of GOD be more appositely
presented than to a Soul that constantly and brightly shines with these
Celestial flames? One whom now we have duly stathe Measures, I may venture to
say, I love with the greatest Tenderness, for all must love her who have any
Esteem for unfeigned Goodness, who value an early Piety and eminent Virtue. All
true Lovers of GOD being like excited Needles, which cleave not only to him
their Magnet, but even to one another. A Lady, whom for the good of our Sex I
would endeavor to describe, were I capable to write the Character of a
complete and finished Person; but it requires a Soul as bright, as lovely, as
refined as her Ladyships, to give an exact Description of such Perfections! A
Lady who dedicates that Part of her Life entirely to her Maker's Service, which
the generality think too short to serve themselves. Who in the Bloom of her
Years, despising the Temptations of Birth and Beauty, and whatever may withdraw
her from Mary's noble Choice, has made such Advances in Religion, that if she
hold on at this rate, she will quickly outstrip our Theory, and oblige the World
with what was never more wanted than now, an exact and living Transcript of
Primitive Christianity. So good she is that even Envy it self has never a But
to interfere with her Praises, and though Women are not forward to commend one
another, yet I never met with any that had seen or heard of her, who did not
willingly pay their Eulogies to this admirable Person, and if Praise be due to
any Mortal, doubtless she may lay the greatest Claim to it. But not to rely
wholly on Report, I my self have observed in her so much Sweetness and Modesty,
so free from the least Tincture of Vanity, so insensible of that Worth which
all the World admires; such a constant and regular Attendance on the public
Worship of GOD, Prayers and Sacraments; such a serious, reverent and unaffected
Devotion, so fervent and so prudent, so equally composed of Heat and Light, so
removed from all Formality, and the Extremes of Coldness and Enthusiasme, as
gave me a lively Idea of Apostolical Piety, and made me every Time I prayed by
her, fancy my self in the Neighborhood of Seraphick Flames! But -- my
Expression are too flat, my Colors too dead to draw such a lovely Piece! Would
to GOD we would all transcribe, not this imperfect Copy, but that incomparable
Original she daily gives us; that Ladies may be at last convinced that the
Beauty of the Mind is the most charming Amiableness, because most lasting and
most divine, and that no Ornaments are so becoming to a Lady as the Robe of
Righteousness and the Jewels of Piety. I am,

Sir, Your much obliged Friend and Servant.
July 17, 1694.

Postscript to the Preface.
Though Authorities go but a very little way with me in Questions whose
Determinations depends upon Measures of Reason, yet finding that the great and
general Objection that lies against the present Conclusion is the pretended
Singularity of it, I think it convenient to set down a very signal Passage
which (since the writing the Preface) I have met with in the late Continuation
des Essais de morale Part 2. Tom. 1. Page 59, where upon that Text of St.
Peter, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly Lusts, etc.
the excellent Moralist has these Words, But what is the Extent of these carnal
Desires which St. Peter forbids us? It is easy to mark it out. For all that
which is not God is carnal according to the Scripture because it is a
Consequence of the Corruption of the Heart, which having separated us from the
Love of God has made the Soul willing to fill that Emptiness which she feels in
her self by the Possession of Creatures. Whether these Objects are spiritual or
Corporal, the Desires which we have of them are always carnal in the Language
of Scripture. For which reasen it is that St. Paul puts Dissentions and
Emulations among the Works of the Flesh. So that it is a no less carnal Lust to
desire Glory and Reputation, and all that serves in order to it, than to desire
the Pleasures of the Body, because these Objects are no more our true good than
the other. God does no more permit that we should part our Love between him and
Reputation, between him and the (...) of Men, than between him and feasting and
other Bodily Pleasures. For it is always the Division of a thing which was all
due to him. It Is always a Debasement of the Soul, which being made for Good
stoops beneath and degrades her self in being willing to enjoy a Creature
either equal or inferior to her self. God is great enough to be the only and
entire Object of our Heart, and it is to injure him to divide it, because it is
in effect to declare to him that he does not deserve it all.

You see here is the Judgment of a whole Society of great Men, no less than the
illustrious Port Royal of France, in as clear and express Terms as can be to
our purpose. 'Twere infinite to appeal to all those Writers who have either
directly asserted this Conclusion, or occasionally let fall Expressions that
favor and insinuate it. There is hardly a Book of Morality or Devotion extant
whererein Passages of this Nature are not to be found. I do not say there are
many that offer to deduce this Conclusion from Principles, but that it is
generally held, and upon all Occasions alluded to and glanced at, which is
enough to show the irresistible Prevalency of the Truth, and to skreen them
from the prejudice and imputation of Novelty and Singularity, who undertake
upon a rational Ground to clear and defend it.

ERRATA.
PAge 44. Line 7. dele ^. l. 8. read from enjoying pleasures that do very much
outweigh it, and is it self an Occasion and Medium to. p. 49. l. 9. after
pretend add (...) p. 50. l. 6. f. that r. than p. 180. l. 15. d. that. p. 192.
1. 6. f. the r. this. p. 286. l. 5. r. pleases.

LETTERS Philosophical and Divine, TO Mr. JOHN NORRIS, With his Answers.
LETTER 1. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
THough some morose Gentlemen would perhaps remit me to the Distaff or the
Kitchen, or at least to the Glass and the Needle, the proper Employments as
they fancy of a Woman's Life; yet expecting better things from the more
Equitable and ingenious Mr. Norris, who is not so narrow-Soul'd as to confine
Learning to his own Sex, or to envy it in ours, I presume to beg his Attention
a little to the Impertinencies of a Woman's Pen. And indeed Sir, there is some
reason why I, though a Stranger, should Address to you for the Resolution of my
Doubts and Information of my Judgment, since you have increased my Natural
Thirst for Truth, and set me up for a Virtuso. For though I cannot pretend to a
Multitude of Books, Variety of Languages, the Advantages of Academical
Education, or any Helps but what my own Curiosity afford; yet, Thinking is a
Stock that no Rational Creature can want, if they know but how to use it; and
this, as you have taught me, with Purity and Prayer, (which I wish were as much
practiced as they are easy to practice) is the way and method to true
Knowledge. But setting Preface and Apology aside, the occasion of giving you
this trouble is this:

Reading the other day the Third Volume of your excellent Discourses, as I do
every thing you Write with great Pleasure and no less Advantage; yet taking the
liberty that I use with other Books, (and yours or no bodies will bear it) to
raise all the Objections that ever I can, and to make them undergo the severest
Test my Thoughts can put 'em to before they pass for current, a difficulty
arose which without your assistance I know not how to solve.

Methinks there is all the reason in the World to conclude, That GOD is the
only efficient Cause of all our Sensations; and you have made it as clear as
the Day; and it is equally clear from the Letter of the Commandment, That GOD
is not only the Principal, but the sole Object of our Love: But the reason you
assign for it, namely, Because he is the only efficient Cause of our Pleasure,
seems not equally clear. For if we must Love nothing but what is Lovely, and
nothing is Lovely but what is our Good, and nothing is our Good but what does
us Good, and nothing does us Good but what causes Pleasure in us; may we not by
the same way of arguing say, That that which Causes Pain in us does not do us
Good, (for nothing you say does us Good but what Causes Pleasure) and therefore
cannot be our Good, and if not our Good then not Lovely, and consequently not
the proper, much less the only Object of our Love? Again, if the Author of our
Pleasure be upon that account the only Object of our Love, then by the same
reason the Author of our Pain cannot be the Object of our Love; and if both
these Sensations be produced by the same Cause, then that Cause is at once the
Object of our Love, and of our Aversion; for it is as natural to avoid and fly
from Pain, as it is to follow and pursue Pleasure?

So that if these Principles, viz. That GOD is the Efficient Cause of our
Sensations, (Pain as well as Pleasure) and that he is the only Object of our
Love, be firm and true, as I believe they are; it will then follow, either that
the being the Cause of our Pleasure is not the true and proper Reason why that
Cause should be the Object of our Love, (for the Author of our Pain has as good
a Title to our Love as the Author of our Pleasure;) Or else, if nothing be the
Object of our Love but what does us Good, then something else does us Good
besides what causes Pleasure? Or to speak more properly, the Cause of all our
Sensations, Pain as well as Pleasure being the only Object of our Love, and
nothing being Lovely but what does us Good, consequently, that which Causes
Pain does us Good as well as that which Causes Pleasure; and therefore it cannot
be true, That nothing does us Good but what Causes Pleasure.

Perhaps I have expressed my self but crudely, yet I am persuaded I Have said
enough for one of your Quickness to find out either the strength or weakness of
this Objection. I shall not therefore trouble you any further, but to beg
Pardon for this, and to wish you all imaginable Happiness, (if it be not absurd
to wish Felicity to one who already possesses a Virtuous, Large and
Contemplative Soul, and a quiet convenient Retirement, which is indeed all the
Happiness that can be had on this side Heaven) and to subscribe my self

Honored Sir, Your great Admirer and most humble Servant.
London, St. Matthew's day, 1693.
LETTER II. Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
THough in Civility to your Person, my Answer ought to have been more speedy,
yet considering the weight of your Letter, I think it cannot be well too slow,
and I hope you will in Equity, allow me some time to recover my self out of
that wonder I was cast into, to see such a Letter from a Woman, besides what
was necessary to consider the great and surprising Contents of it. I find you
thoroughly comprehend the Argument of my Discourse, in that you have pitched
upon the only material Objection to which it is liable; which you have also
pressed so well, and so very home, that I cannot but greatly admire the Light
and Penetration of your Spirit. One of your clear and exact thoughts might
easily satisfy your self in any Difficulty that shall come in your way, as
having brightness enough of your own to dispel any Cloud that may set upon the
Face of Truth; but however, since you have condescended to apply your self to
me for Satisfaction, I shall endeavor as well as I can to solve the Difficulty
you propose.

I observe therefore first of all, that you grant the two main things contended
for, viz. That God is the only Efficient Cause of all our Sensations; and that
by the Letter of the Commandment, GOD ought to be the Sole Object of our Love.
Only you say, that the Reason I assign for it seems not equally Clear, by which
I suppose you mean, that it does not seem to follow from God's being the only
Cause of our Sensations, that he is the only Object of our Love; Or, that GOD
is not therefore the only Object of our Love, because he is the only Cause of
our Sensations; that is in short, you grant the things, but you question the
Connection.

Now before I consider the Objection you urge against it, give me leave to tell
you that I think it very clear, That not Absolute, but Relative Good is the
Formal Object of our Love; that is, that we love a thing not as it is good in
it self, but as it is good to us; and consequently, GOD is the Object of our
Love, not as he is absolutely, but as he is Relatively Good, as he is our Good,
or Good to us. For to Love GOD is to desire him as our Good. I do not deny but
that the Absolute goodness of GOD, the Natural Perfection of his Essence, is
also the true Object of our Love; but not as Absolute, but as Relative; that
is, not as it is a Perfection in him, but as the same may be a Perfection to us,
as it makes us more happy by the Pleasure that we take either in the
Contemplation, or in the Fruition of so glorious and excellent a Being. So that
the absolute Perfection of GOD must become relative before it can be the Object
of our Love.

Indeed, when in thinking upon GOD, we consider nothing but an infinite Reality
or Perfection, we are ready to acknowledge that Order requires we should esteem
him infinitely. But from this alone we do not necessarily conclude that we
should adore him, fear him, love him, etc. GOD considered only in himself, or
without any Relation to us, does not excite those movements of the Soul which
transport it to Good, or to the Cause of its Happiness. Nothing indeed is more
clear, than that a Being infinitely Perfect, ought to be infinitely Esteemed;
and I am apt to believe, that there is no Spirit that can refuse GOD this
speculative Devoir, as consisting only in a simple Judgment, which is not in
our power to suspend when the Evidence is entire. So that even wicked Men,
those who have no Religion, those who deny Providence, may be supposed
voluntarily to render GOD this sort of Devoir. But then supposing withal, that
GOD (how perfect and good soever in himself) does not at all interess or
concern himself with us or our Affairs; and that he is not the true and
immediate Cause of all the good which they enjoy, notwithstanding the Notion
they have of the Absolute Perfection of GOD, they consider him not as their
good, and accordingly do not apply themselves to the Love of him, but brutally
follow the agreeable movements of their Passions. From all which it is is
clear, that GOD is to be loved not for his Absolute, but for his Relative
goodness.

Now if it be true in the general, that Relative good is the Object of Love,
and that GOD is to be loved as, and because he is our good, then it will
follow, that if GOD only be our good, or the Author of good to us, then GOD
only is to be loved by us. And so the other way, that if GOD only be to be
loved by us, it must be, it can be upon no other account than as and because he
only is our good, as being the only true Cause of our Pleasure. And I cannot
imagine upon what other ground you can cast our Obligation to love GOD only,
(which you grant to be the literal import of the Commandment) if not upon this,
that he only is our good. For as the reason why we are to Love GOD at all, is
because he is our good, so the reason why we are to Love him only (which
supposition you grant) can be no other, but because he only is our good. And
since he cannot be our only good any otherwise, than as he is the only true
Cause of our Pleasure, it follows, that his being the only true Cause of our
Pleasure, is the true reason why he ought to be the only Object of our Love.
This I think, is clear and evident, and therefore though I should rest here, as
not being able to Answer all the Objections to the contrary, this ought not to
be any prejudice to the Truth of what is maintained. For this I take to be a
sure Rule, that we are to stick to what we clearly see, notwithstanding any
Objection that may be brought against it, and not reject what is evident, for
the sake of what is obscure, it being very possible for a Man to be in sure and
certain possession of a Truth, though attended with some Difficulties which he
knows not well how to solve. But let us see whether yours are of that Nature.

You say, if we must Love nothing but what is Lovely, and nothing be Lovely but
what is our good, and nothing is our good but what does us good, and nothing
does us good but what causes Pleasure in us, may we not by the same way of
arguing prove, that what causes Pain in us does not do us good, and therefore
cannot be our good; and if not our good then not Lovely, and consequently is not
the proper, much less the only Object of our Love? True, it is not so far as it
causes Pain; for the causing of Pain as such, can be no reason of Love. But I
suppose your meaning is, whether we may not by the same way of arguing prove,
that what causes Pain is not at all the Object of Love? To which I Answer, That
if that which causes Pain does it in all respects after the same manner as it
causes Pleasure, the causing of Pain will, for ought I can at present see to
the contrary, be as good an Argument for its not being to be loved, as its
causing Pleasure is for its being to be loved. But thus it is not in the
present Supposition. Though I acknowledge Pain to be as truly the Effect of GOD
as Pleasure (for I know not what else should cause it) yet it is not after the
same manner the Effect of GOD as Pleasure is. Pleasure is the natural, genuine
and direct Effect of GOD, but Pain comes from him only indirectly and by
Accident. For first, it is of the proper Nature of GOD to produce Pleasure, as
consisting of such essential Excellencies and Perfections as will necessarily
beatifie and make happy those Spirits, who are, by being in their true rational
Order, duly disposed for the Enjoyment of him. But if this same excellent
Nature occasion Pain to other Spirits, this is only indirectly and by Accident,
by reason of their Moral Indisposition for so Sovereign a Good. Again, as it is
thus in Reference to the Nature of GOD, so in Reference to his Will. GOD's
antecedent and primary Design is the Happiness of all his Creatures (for 'twas
for this that he made them) but if any of them, in the event prove miserable,
it is wholly besides his first Design, and only by a subsequent and secondary
Will. Again, when GOD causes Pleasure, it is because he wills it for its self,
and naturally delights in it, as comporting with his primary Design which is
the Happiness of his Creatures; but when he causes Pain, it is not that he wills
it from within, or for it self (for so it is not at all lovely) but only from
without, and for the sake of something else as it is necessary to the Order of
his Justice. For you are to consider, that if there had been no Sin, there
would never have been such a thing as Pain, which is a plain Argument that GOD
wills our Pleasure as we are Creatures, and our Pain only as we are Sinners.
But now in measuring our Devoirs to GOD, we are not to consider how he stands
affected to us as sinners, but how he stands affected to us as Creatures, how
he is disposed toward us as we are his Work, and not as we have made our
selves. And therefore if as Creatures he Loves us, and Wills our Happiness,
that lays a sufficient Foundation for our Love to him; and it is not his
treating us with Evil as sinners that can overturn it.

Indeed if GOD had designed us for misery, and inflicted it upon us as
Creatures, if this had been his primary and direct Intention, his Natural and
Original Will, according to the systeme of those who say, That GOD made Man on
purpose to Damn them, then indeed I see nothing that should hinder your
Objection from taking place, GOD would not then be the proper, much less (as
you say) the only Object of our Love, at least as to those miserable Wretches
so destined to Ruin, which by the way is to me a Demonstration of the falsehood
of that strange Hypothesis. But upon the supposition, that GOD wills and causes
Pleasure in us as Creatures, and puts us to Pain only as Sinners, there will
not be the same reason for our not loving him upon the account of his being the
Author of our Pain, as for our loving him as the Author of our Pleasure and
Happiness. For we stand obliged to GOD as we are Creatures, and if in that
Relation GOD be our Benefactor, and the Author of our good, he has a sufficient
Right; and, if the only Author, the only Right to our Love, though as sinners
he puts us to pain, which being thus willed and effected by GOD after a manner
so different from our pleasure, cannot so well conclude for our not loving him,
as this does for our loving him. Which may serve to take off the force of your
first Instance.

And will be equally applicable to your second. For whereas you further urge,
that if both these Sensations, ( viz. Pleasure and Pain) be produced by the
same Cause, then that Cause is at once the Object of our Love and of our
Aversion: I answer by the same Distinction, that if both these Sensations were
to be produced by the same Cause, acting alike in the one as in the other, it
would be as you say. But since it is otherwise as I have represented it, all
that you can argue from GOD's being the Author of our Pain as well as Pleasure
will be this, That he is justly to be the Object of our Fear, but not of our
Aversion. We are indeed to Fear him, and him only, as being the true Cause of
all Pain, and only able to make us miserable, according to that of our Savior,
I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, etc. But this is no reason why we
should hate him, as never inflicting it but when Order and Justice require it.
And if he did not inflict it then he would be less perfect, and consequently
less amiable in the view of all regular and well-ordered Spirits. I shall not
determine any thing concerning the Case of the Damned, whether that invincible
Love which they have for Happiness may not inspire them with an invincible
hatred against him who is the Cause of their Misery. Perhaps it may be so.
Though whether it should be so, and whether they do not sin Eternally in so
doing is another Question. But I shall determine nothing here, thinking it
sufficient for my present purpose, that this is no reason why GOD should be the
Object of any Man's Aversion in this Life, whom as the Author of Pain we are
indeed to Fear, but not to Hate, for the reasons before alleged.

Now as to your last Instance, That if these Principles, viz. That GOD is the
Efficient Cause of our Sensations, Pain as well as Pleasure, and that he is to
be the only Object of our Love, be firm and true, it will then follow, either
that the being the Cause of our Pleasure (the doing us good you should say to
make a right Antithesis) is not the true and proper reason why that Cause
should be the Object of our Love, or else if it be, then something else does us
Good besides that which causes our Pleasure; or as you otherwise word it, That
which causes Pain does us good as well as that which produces Pleasure, I think
neither of these Consequences need be admitted. Not the First, because I have
shown you, That God's being the Cause of our Pleasure is a sufficient and
proper reason why he should be the Object of our Love, notwithstanding that
Pain which is also, but after a different manner caused by him. As to what you
suggest to the contrary, namely, That the Author of our Pain has as good a
Title to our Love as the Author of our Pleasure: It Is true, he that is the
Author of our Pain has as good a Title to it as the Author of our Pleasure,
because they are both one and the same; but not as he is the Author of our
Pain. He has a Title to our Love not for that, but notwithstanding that. It Is
his being the cause of our Pleasure that makes him the proper Object of our
Love; which he is, notwithstanding his being also the Author of Pain. But then
say you, if his doing us good be the reason of his being the Object of our
Love, then something else does us good besides that which causes our Pleasure,
namely Pain, the Cause of our Sensations, Pain as well as Pleasure being the
Object of our Love. I answer, Pain may in some sense be said to do us good, as
it may occasion to us some good that exceeds its own proper Evil. But formally
and directly it does not do us good, as not making us while actually under it,
Happy but Miserable. Nor is there need that upon our Supposition it should, God
being sufficiently lovely to us as the Author of our Pleasure, to which we need
not add the advantage that may accrue by Pain, or suppose Pain to be in it self
as Beneficial as Pleasure, it is enough if the Evil of the former does not
frustrate the Obligation that arises from the good of the latter. As I have
shown you that it does not

But after all Madam, there is one thing I must further offer to your
Consideration, viz. That your Objection, whatever force it may have, is not
peculiarly levelled against me, but lies equally against all those who make the
loveliness of God to consist in his Relative Goodness, or in his being our
Good, who I think are the most, at least the most considerable. Those of the
common way say, God is to be loved because he is our Good, or the Author of our
Good; which Notion I think right, but only add to it, That he is the only
Author of our Good, and therefore the only Object of our Love. In which
Argument I suppose, these Men would not deny the Consequence, (as being the
same with their own) but only the minor Proposition. But now if it be an
Objection against my Notion, That God is also the Author of Evil, then the same
will no less conclude against the common way, proving as much that God ought
not to be loved at all, as that he ought not to be lovd only. I say it proves
one as well as the other, though I think if you will attend to what I have
offered, you will find that it proves neither.

Madam, I have said all that at present occurs to my Thoughts upon this
occasion, and I think as much as is necessary, and have now only to thank you
for the great Favor of your Letter, assuring you that whenever you shall be
pleased to do me that Honor again, you shall have a speedier Answer from

Madam, Your very humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, Oct. 13. 1693. Postscript.
ONE consideration more. When you speak of GOD's being the cause of Pain,
either you mean as to this Life, or as to the next. If as to the next, that has
nothing to do with the Duty that we owe him here. If as to the present Life,
the pain that God inflicts upon us here is only Medicinal, and in order to our
greater good, and consequently from a Principle of Kindness. And I think,
setting aside my other Considerations, there will be no more pretense for not
loving or hating God for this, than for hating our Physician or Surgeon for
putting us to pain in order to our Health or Cure.



LETTER III. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
YOU see how greedily I embrace the advantageous Offer you made me in the Close
of your excellent Letter; for which I would return some Acknowledgments, but
that I want Expressions suitable to its Value and my Resentments. Nor is there
any thing in it from which I can withold my Assent, but that too favorable
Opinion you seem to have conceived of a Person who has nothing considerable in
her but an honest Heart, and a Love to Truth. I am therefore exceeding glad to
find this noble and necessary Theory, That God is the sole Object of our Love,
so well established. And though any one of the three Principles you argue from
in your Printed Discourse is a sufficient ground for that Conclusion; though it
may be singly inferred both from God's being the Author of our Love, and from
the Obligation we are under of conforming to his Will, as well as from his
being the true Cause of our Pleasure, yet jointly they are irrefragable; and I
have nothing more left to wish, but that it were as easy to persuade Men to
fix the whole weight of their Desire on their Maker, as it is to Demonstrate
that they ought to do it. For when all is said, and all conclusions are tried,
there is no rest, no satisfaction for the Soul of Man but in her God; she can
never be at Ease nor in Pleasure, but when she moves with her full bent and
inclination directly toward him, and absolutely and entirely depends on him.
Yet I am very well pleased that I made the Objection which you have so well
resolved, because it has procured me a clear and accurate account of what
before I had only in confuse and indistinct Notion; and has begun a
Correspondence, which if it may be continued I shall reckon the greatest
advantage that can befall me. For though by observing the Rules, you have
already enriched the World with I may possibly find out Truth, yet I cannot be
assured I Have done so, being too apt to suspect my own Notions merely for being
my own, but if they can pass so exact a Touchstone as your Judgment, I shall
without hesitancy subscribe to them.

So far am I from thinking that GOD's being the Author of our Pain is any just
Impediment to our entire Love of him, that I Am almost persuaded to rank it
among the Motives to it. For though Pain considered abstractedly is not a Good,
yet it may be so circumstantiated, and always is when GOD inflicts it as to be
a Good. To the pious Man it is so both intentionally and eventually; and though
inflicted as a Punishment on wicked Men, it is however materially good, being
(as you observe) an Act of GOD's Justice. And I think it is an unquestionable
Maxim, that all our Good is wholly and absolutely from GOD, and all our Evil
purely and entirely from our selves. Whatever Methods GOD uses to draw us to
himself, I am fully persuaded are good in themselves and good for us, being
they proceed from infinite Goodness and tend toward it. And therefore since he
has made us passible only for our good, and designed Pain as well as Pleasure
in order to our Happiness, that by these two different Handles he might the
better move and direct our Souls toward himself their true and only Felicity,
I see no reason but to conclude that he is every whit as lovely when he
produces Pain as when he causes Pleasure.

For the Truth is, my Letter was principally designed in Favor of a Notion
which I have entertained, (and which you further confirm me in by what you add
in your Postscript,) viz. That Afflictions, by which we usually understand
something Painful, are are not Evil but Good, which at first seemed to be
contradicted by your Assertion, That nothing does us good but what causes
Pleasure, though upon second thoughts I think they are consistent enough. And
if there by any shadow of a difference, I suppose it arises only from the
equivocalness of the words Pleasure and Pain, as in truth our mistakes are
chiefly owing to our encumbring one word with diverse Idea's, most of the
Controversies that are in the World being (in my Opinion) rather about words
than things.

By Pleasure I suppose you mean in general, all those grateful Sensations which
Mankind is capable of; that is, all such as are truly agreeable to his Nature:
For I know not how it can consist with the purity of the most holy GOD, to say,
he is the Author of those pleasing Sensations wicked Men do, or pretend to feel
in what we call sinful Pleasures: so that we must either conclude, that GOD is
not the Author of these irregular Sensations, or else that they are not
Pleasures. I am for the latter, and do indeed think it the greatest nonsense in
the World to call any thing that is sinful pleasant.

Pain you tell us, is nothing else but a disagreeable Modification of the Soul,
an uneasy Thought occasioned by some outward Bodily Impression. In which
Definition there are two things considerable, the Bodily Impression, and the
uneasy Thought that is consequent thereunto. And when you say that GOD is the
Author of Pain, I suppose you mean no more than that an uneasy Thought is
produced in the Soul of Man by the Power and Will of GOD, at the presence and
by occasion of that Impression which sensible Objects make upon the Body. Now I
suppose that this disagreeable Modification is in the inferior part of the
Soul, that which is exercised about Objects of Sense, and does not necessarily
and directly affect the superior part, the Understanding and Will, and
therefore is no real Evil to that which is properly the Man. And this I take to
be the right Notion of Pain considered as a Sensation, and as GOD is the Author
of it; but then I deny that in this sense it is strictly and properly an Evil.

Now as this Sensation which for distinction sake I will beg leave to call
sensible or Bodily Pain is occasioned by some disorder in the parts of the
Body, or else by the presence of something disagreeable, or absence of
something necessary to the well-being of the Bodily Frame. In like manner, when
the Understanding and Will deviate from the Order and Perfection of their
Nature, and are destitute of their proper good, they are as truly (and if they
be in Health as sensibly) affected with Pain, as the Body is when it suffers
the abovementioned displacences. This I call mental Pain, and do reckon it the
only proper Evil of a Man, both because the Mind being the Man, nothing is
truly and properly his Good or Evil, but as it respects his Mind; as also
because so long as he is under it, it is impossible for him to enjoy any degree
of real Happiness. For where there is a true Vital Principle, where the Soul is
not quite mortified, or at least Paralytick and Diseased, 'twill as certainly
feel Pain when it is thrust out of its Natural Order, and does not move toward
GOD the true Term of its Motion, as its Body will when its Members are
distorted; will be as sensibly affected with craving and unsatisfied desires
when destitute of the Grace of GOD, the proper aliment of the Soul, as that is
with Hunger and Thirst when in lack of its necessary Food; and will feel the
same uneasy chillness and darkness come upon it when deprived of the Light of
GOD's Countenance, that its inferior part does when it wants the Sun's
comfortable and enlightening Beams. And this I take to be the true meaning of
what some People call Desertion; pain and torment being as necessary to the
Soul when she does not stand rightly affected to her GOD, as to the Body when
under Sickness or outward Violence: And in proportion to the health of the
Soul, and the fineness of its Complexion, so is the degree of its Pain when
interrupted in its Motion toward him.

But can GOD in any sense be said to be the Author of this Pain? Has he not
taken all the Care that is consistent with the Nature he has given us to
secure us from it? and has made all imaginable provision to prevent our falling
into that disorder which is necessarily attended with mental Pain; so that
whenever we fall into it, it is purely owing to our own Folly? For though it be
sometimes said that GOD does arbitrarily withdraw the chearing Beams of his
Countenance, which cannot but be uneasy to us so long as we are under that
Eclipse, yet for my own part, I cannot think that he ever does it unless to
quicken our Desires and exercise our Graces; and then, since it is in order to
our greater good, it cannot strictly and absolutely be called an Evil. Or else,
it is the noisome Vapors of our Sins that raise a Cloud between us and the Sun
of Righteousness, which being our own fault, we only are to be blamed for it.
Nor do I believe GOD ever denies his Grace to any but such as have first
wilfully, obstinately and habitually refused it. So that in fine, mental Pain
is neither more nor less than Sin, which I take to be the true and only Evil of
a Man. For as nothing is good but GOD, so nothing is essentially evil but Sin,
because nothing else is directly opposite to the Essence of Goodness. Since
therefore GOD can in no manner of Way be said to be the Author of Sin, he
cannot be the Cause of mental Pain: And I know no Hypothesis that does infer it
except the Predestinarian, which for that Reason I look on as irrational and
absurd, and can scarce forbear giving it severer Epithets.

The short is, GOD is the Author of Pain considered as a Sensation, and so he
is of all our Faculties and Powers; and as it proceeds from him it is good,
designd to do us good, and therefore our good. But he is not the Author of Pain
considered as an Evil, as such it is purely and entirely owing to our selves;
and since there is nothing truly and absolutely the Object of the hatred of a
Rational Creature but Sin, because nothing but that is its true and proper
Evil, consequently GOD's being the Author of Pain can be no just bar to our
Love, much less any motive to our Hatred or Aversion.

I consider further, that though Man does naturally desire Pleasure in all his
Capacities, and therefore Indolence is necessary to perfect Felicity, yet since
there is no such thing as perfect Happiness or perfect Misery in this World,
that which has a greater degree of good than of evil in it, may properly enough
be called a good; admitting therefore that sensible Pain is disagreeable to the
lower Faculties of the Soul, yet being it is designed by GOD to better and
improve the Spirit of the Mind, and has a tendency to do good to our better
part, if we our selves do not wilfully obstruct its operations, misapply and
abuse those opportunities it gives us, I see no reason but we may reckon it a
good, and therefore Eligible. For though Pain (as you say) does not formally
and directly do us a good, yet if it cannot hinder us of enjoying Pleasure,
methinks we have no just Cause to fly it as an Evil. For what though my Body
suffer a little Hunger or Thirst, or Cold, or the like, shall I put that petty
inconveniency in competition with that most delicious Pleasure my Mind does, or
may at the same time enjoy in Acts of Love and Contemplation? Nay even with
that Pleasure which these very inconveniences occasion, the entire Resignation
of my Will to GOD, and the Joy that arises from that delightful Thought, that I
am capable of suffering something for his sake, and in Conformity to his Will:
And as it were but a bad bargain to gain the whole World by suffering the least
mulct or damage in our Souls, so I am persuaded that the greatest sensible
Calamity, no not Death it self, is worthy to be put in the balance with the
very least spiritual advantage. For alas Sir, as you truly say, this World is a
mere show, a shadow, an emptiness! so little Reason have our Pretenders to Wit
to discredit every thing that is not the Object of Sense, that in right
estimate Spirits are the only Realities, and nothing does truly and properly
occasion good or evil to us but as it respects our Minds. And I believe on
these Principles 'twere easy to demonstrate that Martyrdom is the highest
Pleasure a rational Creature is capable of in this present State, a strange
Paradox to the World! But I am confident none to Mr. Norris, who does not use
to think after the vulgar rate.

But whilst I talk of Pain, I forget how much you suffer by this tedious
Scribble. If I have said any thing to the purpose it is because I have your
excellent Letter before me. Ordinary Writers I can penetrate at the first View,
but every Period of yours dilates my Mind, calls it forth to pursue its
recondite Beauties in a Train of useful and delightful Thoughts. I have brought
in my unwrought Ore to be refined and made current by the Brightness of your
Judgment, and shall reckon it a great Favor if you will give your self the
Trouble to point out my Mistakes, it being my Ambition not to seem to be
without Fault, but if I can, really to be so, and I know no way more conducive
to that end than the Advantage of such an Instructor.

Permit me to add a Word or two more which is of greater Concernment to me
because of practical Consideration; you have fully convinced me that GOD is the
only proper Object of my Love, and I am sensible it is the highest Injustice to
him and Unkindness to my self to defraud him of the least Part of my Heart; but
I find it more easy to recognize his Right than to secure the Possession.
Though I often. say in your Pathetick and Divine Words, No, my fair Delight, I
will never be drawn off from the Love of thee by the Charms of any of thy
Creatures, yet alas, sensible Beauty does too often press upon my Heart, whilst
intelligible is disregarded. For having by Nature a strong Propensity to
friendly Love, which I have all along encouraged as a good Disposition to
Virtue, and do still think it so if it may be kept within the due Bounds of
Benevolence. But having likewise thought till you taught me better, that I need
not cut off all Desire from the Creature, provided it were in Subordination to,
and for the sake of the Creator: I have contracted such a Weakness, I will not
say by Nature (for I believe Nature is often very unjustly blamed for what is
owing to Will and Custom) but by voluntary Habit, that it is a very difficult
thing for me to love at all, without something of Desire. Now I am loath to
abandon all Thoughts of Friendship, both because it is one of the brightest
Virtues, and because I have the noblest Designs in it. Fain would I rescue my
Sex, or at least as many of them as come within my little Sphere, from that
Meanness of Spirit into which the Generality of 'em are sunk, persuade them to
pretend some higher Excellency than a well-chosen Pettycoat, or a fashionable
Commode; and not wholly lay out their Time and Care in the Adornation of their
Bodies, but bestow a Part of it at least in the Embellishment of their Minds,
since inward Beauty will last when outward is decayed. But though I can say
without boasting that none ever loved more generously than I have done, yet
perhaps never any met with more ungrateful Returns which I can attribute to
nothing so much as the Kindness of my best Friend, who saw how apt my Desires
were to stray from him, and therefore by these frequent Disappointments would
have me learn more Wisdom that to let loose my Heart to that which cannot
satisfy. And though I have in some measure rectified this Fault, yet still I
find an agreeable Movement in my Soul toward her I love, and a Displeasure and
Pain when I meet with Unkindness, which is a strong Indication of somewhat more
than pure Benevolence; for there is no Reason that we should be uneasy because
others will not let us do them all the good we would. And though your Distinction
be very ingenious, That we may seek Creatures for our good, but not love them
as our good, yet methinks it is too nice for common Practice; and through the
Deception of our Senses, and Hurry of our Passions, we shall be too apt to
reckon that our good whose Absence we find uneasy to us. Be pleased therefore
to oblige me with a Remedy for this Disorder, since what you have already writ
has made a considerable Progress toward a Cure, but not quite perfected it.
Thus you see Sir, what a Trouble you have brought upon your self by your
obliging Condescentions to

Worthy Sir, Your most humble and thankful Servant.
All Saints Eve 1693.
LETTER IV. Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
THE sincere Love you seem to have for Truth, and the great Progress you have
made in it, together with that singular Aptness of Genius that appears to be in
you for further Seize, makes me not only willing to enter into a
Correspondence with you, but even to congratulate my self the Opportunity of so
uncommon a Happiness. For the better Improvement of which, and that our
Correspondence may be the more useful, I would desire that it may be
continually employed upon serious and important Subjects, such as may deserve
the Time, and reward the Pains that shall be bestowed on them, and may occasion
such Thoughts and Reflections to pass between us as may serve to give true
Perfection and Enlargement to the Rational, and right Movements and Relishes to
the Moral Part of our Natures. And (since I have taken upon me to prescribe) I
would have these Subjects well sifted and examined as well as well chosen, that
so we may not enter upon a new Argument till that which was first undertaken be
thoroughly discharged, whereby we shall avoid a Fault very incident to common
Conversation (wherein new Questions are started before the first is brought to
an Issue) and which makes the Discoursings of the most intelligent Persons turn
to so little an account. But this Fault so frequent and almost unavoidable in
the best Companies, is easily remedied in Letters, and therefore since we are
now fallen upon a noble and sublime Subject, I desire we may go to the Bottom
of it, and not commence any new Matter till we have gone over all that is of
material Consideration in this of Divine Love.

So much by way of Proposal, I proceed now to consider the Contents of your
present Letter, in which I find very great and extraordinary things, and such
as will deserve more, and more studied Reflections than my present Leisure (I
fear) will permit me to bestow upon them. However I shall go as far as my Time
and Paper will allow, and if you think I leave any thing considerable omitted,
the Defects of this shall be supplied in another Letter. I observe then that
though you declare your self satisfied with the Account I gave in my last why
GOD's being the Author of Pain should not strike off that Obligation of Love
which was grounded upon his being the Cause of the opposite Sensation of
Pleasure, yet (so greatly are you concerned to have that ill Consequence
effectually shut out) you advance another Hypothesis for the Solution of the
Difficulty. And because it is very ingenious and worth our considering, I shall
therefore first of all set down what by comparing the several Parts of your
Letter together I take to be your Notion. Which when I have stated and
considered, I shall reflect upon some single Passages in your Letter that
relate to it. And in this you have the Model of the Answer that I intend.

To begin then with an Account of your Notion. You distinguish of two Sorts of
Pain; that which is sensible or bodily, and that which is mental. By sensible
Pain meaning that which is in the inferior Part of the Soul, that which is
exercised about Objects of Sense; and by mental Pain that which affects the
superior and intellectual Part. Now as for mental Pain, that you allow to be
an Evil, and the only proper Evil of Man, but then you say GOD is not the Cause
of that. And as for sensible or bodily Pain, that you allow GOD to be the Cause
of. But then you say that is not truly and really an Evil, as not affecting
what is properly the Man. And therefore though GOD be the true Cause of Pian as
well as Pleasure, yet since the Pain which he causes is not of the first Sort,
viz. mental Pain which is an Evil, but of the second Sort, viz. sensible Pain
which is not the proper Evil of the Man, this ought to be no Bar to our Love of
him, much less a Reason of making him the Object of our Aversion. This I think
is in short your true System, which lying thus in a regular and compendious
Draught may be the more distinctly considered, which is the Advantage I aim at
by casting it into this Form.

My first Remark upon this is that your Distinction of sensible and mental Pain
in the general is right, and founded in the Nature of things. For certainly the
Ideas of Joy and sensible Pleasure, Grief and bodily Pain are very distinct.
Some I know that pretend to Philosophy confound these, making that Pleasure or
Pain (suppose) which a Man feels upon his drawing near the Fire to be all one
with Joy or Grief. The Soul knowing (say they) or feeling that the Body which
she loves is well or ill disposed, that there happens some good or ill to its
mechanical Frame, either rejoices or is grieved at it. The one is our Pain, the
other our Pleasure. But this I take to be gross Philosophy, though the Authors
of it think it fine. It is true indeed, that as often as the Sentiments of
Pleasure or Pain do give us notice that our Bodies are well or ill disposed, we
are affected with Joy or Grief, but a little Reflection may help us to perceive
that this Joy and Grief that are the Consequences of our knowing how it is with
the State of our Bodies, differ exceedingly from those antecedent Pains and
Pleasures whence the Information is received. For these prevent our Reason,
whereas the other follow upon it. Pain anticipates all Thought or Reflection,
but Grief supposes it and is grounded upon it. I grieve because I know my self
to be in Pain, or because I expect or fear it, whence it is evident that my
Grief and my Pain are not one and the same, but two very different and distinct
Sentiments. I therefore allow your Distinction, though I am not so well
satisfied with the Ground of it. You ground your Distinction of mental and
sensible Pain upon a double Part of the Soul, the superior and the inferior.
The Distinction is authorized by Custom, and (what is more) by you, but I must
own to you sincerely, that I do not understand it. I have heard much talk of
this superior and inferior Part of the Soul, and have thought much about it,
but cannot for my Life form to my self a clear Idea of any such Parts. For
besides that I think the Soul has no Parts at all, if it had, sure they are not
such dissimular and heterogeneous Parts as superior and inferior,
intellectual and sensitive. The Soul I take to be an entire simple uniform
Essence, Intellectual throughout, without any Parts at all, much less such
heterogeneous Parts. Nor is there any need that it should be supposed to have
any such for the Establishment of the present Distinction. The Distinction of
Sentiments does not need Distinction of Parts in the Soul. The same Essence of
the Soul being variously modified may be variously affected, and be capable of
different Sentiments. Being modified thus it shall be affected with Grief, and
being modified thus it shall be affected with Pain, which will be sufficiently
distinguished from each other, by saying that Pain is a Modification of the
Soul that anticipates and prevents all Reason and Reflection, and that Grief is
a modification that follows it, and proceeds from it. Thus I choose to
distinguish them, rather than by subjecting (as you) these two Sensations in
two parts of the Soul, whereof I have no Idea; or by calling (as others) that
Pain which the Soul suffers by the mediation of the Body, and that Grief which
the same Soul suffers in and by her self without the Mediation of the Body. For
though according to the Law of this State Pain be always occasioned by some
Motion or Change in the Parts of the Body, yet since it is the Soul that truly
feels it, and GOD that truly raises it, I can easily conceive, that GOD can, if
he pleases, raise the Sensation of Pain in her though no Change be made in the
Body, nay though she had no body at all. That GOD for instance can raise the
Sensation of Burning in the Soul without any Impression of Fire upon her Body.
Which by the way may serve to show the Impertinency of that Question among the
Schoolmen, how the Soul that is an immaterial Substance can suffer when
separate by by a material Fire? For let them tell me how Fire affects the Soul
now she is in the Body, and I Will tell them how it may torment it when out of
the Body. But this by the by. The thing I directly intend is, that since the
Soul may be capable of Pain as well without the Mediation of the Body as with
it, this cannot be its Distinction from Grief that it affects the Soul by the
Mediation of the Body.

But to go on, as I am not satisfied with the Ground of your Distinction, so
neither am I with the Use and Application you make of it. Mental Pain say you
is an Evil, but such as GOD does not cause. Again, sensible Pain GOD does
indeed cause, but then that is not properly the Evil of Man. Now I cannot
accord with you in either of these. As to the first, I think it very certain
that mental Pain being a real Modification of the Soul is caused by GOD, who
alone is able to new modifie our Souls, who only acts upon them and is able to
make them happy or miserable, as I have sufficiently proved in my Discourse of
Divine Love, and as you will evidently perceive if you retire within your self,
and attentively consult your Reason. And I wonder why you should stick to allow
GOD to be the Author of mental Pain or Grief, when you allow him to be the
Cause of mental Pleasure or Joy. If he be the Cause of our Happiness, why
cannot he be as well the Cause of our Misery? And if of Pain, why not of Grief?
For as to the other Part that sensible Pain which God causes, is not properly
an Evil, you will find it very hard to persuade any one that has felt it to
this Paradox. That I suppose which persuaded you to it was your distinguishing
the Soul of Man into two Parts, a superior and an inferior Part, the Latter
of which being not properly the Man that Pain which is lodged there cannot be
said to be the proper Evil of Man. Thus the Stoics reasoned of old, and thus
you now. But besides, that this Distinction of the Soul into a superior and
inferior Part which is the Ground of this Supposition wants it self a good
Foundation. I further consider, that if there were such a thing as an inferior
Part of the Soul, yet since the higher is conscious of and affected with what
is transacted in the other, I do not see what Advantage accrues from this
Distinction. And since it is the same Soul that feels Pain and Grief, I see no
Possibility of conceiving but that Pain must be as truly an Evil as Grief. And
if 'twere put to my Choice, there are several Degrees of Grief that I would
choose to endure rather than some Pains. And I would fain know whether Pain be
not against the Happiness of Man, or whether Happiness can consist with it. You
your self imply that it cannot, when you say that Indolence is necessary to
perfect Felicity. And must not that then be an Evil that is contrary to
Happiness? And should you not think your self guilty of offending against that
Charity which you owe to your Fellow Creatures, and which obliges you to wish
and seek their Welfare, if you should put any of them without Cause to Bodily
Pain? Or would you try to bring your self off by your Distinction of the
superior and inferior Part of the Soul? That the Pain which you inflicted was
only in the inferior Part, which being not properly the Man you could not be
said to have done any real Evil to him, and so not to have trespassed against
Charity. I believe you have too much good Nature as well as Discernment to use
such a Plea as this: But now if Pain be not a proper and real Evil, how can it
be against Charity to cause it in any one? For what but willing an Evil to a
Man can be contrary to wishing well to him? It must therefore be concluded that
sensible Pain is truly an Evil as well as mental, evil I mean in it self
formally and simply considered, and that it can become good only occasionally
and consequentially, as it may be a Means to avoid a greater Evil, or procure a
greater Good (and so may mental Pain too) which when all is done I think the
best Apology that can be offered for God's being the Author of it, and to salve
him from being the Object of our Aversion upon that Account, viz. to say, that
though sensible Pain be truly an Evil as well as mental, and that though GOD be
the true Cause of both, yet GOD does not will our Pain as he does our Pleasure
and Happiness, for it self and as such, but merely for the sake of something
else, as it is a means to our greater good. And is therefore so far from
meriting our Hatred for the Pain which he causes in us that he ought for that
very reason to be loved by us, since it is for the sake of Pleasure that he
causes Pain. This I take to be the most satisfactory Account of the Difficulty,
which as it resolves into what I offered in my last so it is what you your self
think fit after all to take up with as your last Expedient toward the latter
Part of your Letter, where indeed you deliver your self very nobly upon this
Occasion.

Madam, I have now done with the Body of your Notion, and have now only to
consider some looser Parts that relate to it. You say you think it an
unquestionable Maxim that all our Good is wholly and absolutely from GOD, and
all our Evil purely and entirely from our selves. The former Part of this I
absolutely allow and contend for, concerning the latter I distinguish, when you
say that all our Evil is purely and entirely from our selves, if you mean of
moral Evil I grant it, but if you mean of natural Evils then I must distinguish
again upon the Words from our selves, which may signify either a physical or
moral, or if you will, an efficient or a meritorious Causality. We are
certainly the meritorious Causes of all our natural Evils, as bringing them
upon us by our Sins, but that we are the efficient Causes of any of them I
deny. As all our good is wholly from GOD, so in this Sense is also our evil. We
have not the Power to modifie our own Souls, and can no more raise the
Sensation of Pain in them than that of Pleasure, GOD is the true Author of
both, as I have elsewhere shown.

You say again that Afflictions are not evil but good, to which I return that
they are both in different Respects. They are certainly evil in their own
formal Nature, and simply in themselves considered, and can be good only
occasionally or consequentially, as they may serve as Means to some greater
Good. And this I think may serve to reconcile the Goodness of Pain to that
Assertion of mine, that nothing does us good but what causes Pleasure, that is,
either formally and directly, or occasionally and consequentially, some Way or
other whatever does us good must be supposed to cause Pleasure to us. Now
though Pain cannot cause Pleasure formally, as being a Sensation formally
distinct from it, yet it may occasionally and consequentially, and so may come
within the Enclosure of those things that do us good.

You think fit to confine my Sense of the Word (Pleasure) to such only as are
truly agreeable to the Nature of Man, by which I suppose you mean those
Pleasures which are called rational and Intellectual. To this I reply that it
seems to me very evident, and I think I have elsewhere made it so, that GOD is
the true Cause of all the Pleasure that is resented by Man. But you say you
know not how it can consist with the Purity of the most holy GOD that he should
be the Author of those pleasing Sensations which wicked Men feel in what we
call sinful Pleasures. But it is your Mistake to suppose that sensual Pleasures
as such are evil, or that there is any such thing as a sinful Pleasure properly
speaking. As Sin cannot be formally pleasant, so neither can Pleasure be
formally sinful. All Pleasure in it self is simply good, as being a real
Modification of the Soul, it is the circumstantiating of it that is the Evil.
And of this GOD is not the Cause, but the Sinner, who rather than forego such
an agreeable Sensation will enjoy it in such a Manner and in such Circumstances
as are not for his own or for the common Good, and therefore unlawful. But
concerning this matter you may further satisfy your self out of the Letters
between Dr. More and Me, and by reading the first and second Illustration M.
Malebranch makes upon his De la Recharche de la Verite. Where he shows you that
GOD does all that is real in the Motions of the Mind and in the Determinations
of those Motions, without being the Author of Sin.

There are two other Passages in your Letter which I know not how to assent to
till I better comprehend them. One is, that mental Pain is the same with Sin,
the other is, that Sin is the only true Evil of Man. I cannot stay long upon
these, but as to the first, besides that Sin is an Act, and Pain a Passion of
the Soul; and that Pain is a real Modification of our Spirit, whereas Sin in
its Formality is not any thing positive but a mere Privation, I say besides
this, if mental Pain be the same with Sin, how shall we distinguish Sin from
the Punishment of it? And how shall a Man repent for his Sin? For if mental
Pain be the same with Sin, then to be sorry for one Sin will be to commit
another. Then as to the other Part that Sin is the only evil of Man, I grant it
is the greatest, but I cannot think it the only one; for besides that mental
Pain is as I have shown an Evil distinct from it, there is also a thing called
Bodily Pain, which I have also shown to be an Evil.

Now Madam as to what you request of me in the Conclusion of your Letter, if
you think that distinction of mine of seeking Creatures for our good, but not
loving them as our good too nice. I further illustrate it thus, you are to
distinguish between the Movements of the Soul and those of the Body, the
Movements of the Soul ought not to tend but toward him who only is above her,
and only able to act in her. But the Movements of the Body may be determined by
those Objects which environ it, and so by those Movements we may unite our
selves to those things which are the natural or occasional Causes of our
Pleasure. Thus because we find Pleasure from the Fire, this is Warrant enough
to approach it by a Bodily Movement, but we must not therefore love it. For
Love is a Movement of the Soul, and that we are to reserve for him who is the
true Cause of that Pleasure which we resent by Occasion of the Fire, who as I
have proved is no other than GOD. By which you may plainly perceive what it is I
mean by saying that Creatures may be sought for our good, but not loved as our
Good. But after all I must needs acknowledge that this (as all our other
Duties) is more intelligible than practicable, though to render it so I know no
other Way than by long and constant Meditation to free our Minds of that early
Prejudice that sensible Objects do act upon our Spirits, and are the Causes of
our Sensations, carefully to distinguish between an efficient Cause strictly so
called, and an Occasion, to attribute to GOD and the Creature their proper
Parts in the Production of our Pleasures, to bring our selves to a clear
Perception and habitual Remembrance of this grand Truth, (the Foundation of all
Morality) that GOD only is the true Cause of all our Good, which when fully
convinced of we shall no longer question whether he ought to be the only Object
of our Love. I am,

Madam, With great Respect, Your humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, Nov. 13. 1693. If you are satisfied thus far, I would desire you to
go on to communicate what other Thoughts you have concerning the Love of GOD,
for it is a Subject I like, and would willingly pursue to the utmost.



LETTER V. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
SO candid and condiscending a Treatment of a Stranger, a Woman, and so
inconsiderable an one as my self, shows you to be as much above the Generality
of the World in your Practice, as you are in your Theory and Speculation.
Hitherto I have courted Truth with a kind of Romantic Passion, in spite of all
Difficulties and Discouragements: for knowledge is thought so unnecessary an
Accomplishment for a Woman, that few will give themselves the Trouble to assist
them in the Attainment of it. Not considering that the meliorating of one
single Soul is an Employment more worthy of a wife Man, than most of those
things to which Custom appropriates the Name of Business and Affairs. But now,
since you have so generously put into my Hand an Opportunity of obtaining what
I so greedily long after, that I may make the best Improvement of so great an
Advantage, I give up my self entirely to your Conduct, so far as is consistent
with a rational not blind Obedience, bring a free and unprejudiced Mind to
receive from your Hand such Gravings and Impressions as shall seem most
convenient, and though I cannot engage for a prompt and comprehensive Genius,
yet I will for a docible Temper.

The Esteem I have for those necessary and useful Rules you have already
prescribed, shall appear by my strict Observation of them. For indeed the Span
of Life is too short to be trifled away in unconcerning and unprofitable
Matters; and that Soul who has any Sense of a better Life, cannot choose but
desire that every Minute of her Time may be employed in the regulating of her
Will with the most critical Exactness, and the extending her Understanding to
its utmost Stretch, that so she may obtain the most enlarged Knowledge and
ample Fruition of GOD her only Good, that her Nature is capable of. I will
therefore pass on to explain a little what I asserted in my last, next add a
few Thoughts concerning Divine Love, and in the last place a Proposal or two
for the better Prosecution of those you have already made.

Now in order to the first, I am very well satisfied that GOD is the Cause of
Mental as well as Bodily Pain, if by mental Pain you understand Grief, my
Mistake lying in this, that I confounded Sin and mental Pain. It Is indeed
evident that Sin and Grief are two distinct things; yet I cannot form to my
self any Idea of Sin which does not include in it the greatest Pain and Misery.
For as Sin is the meritorious Cause of all Misery, so it seems to me that the
Punishment of Sin is concomitant to the Act; Misery is inseparable from Sin,
and the Sinner is ipso facto punished. When therefore I said that mental Pain
is the same with Sin, I meant no more than this, that as a musical Instrument,
if it were capable of Sense and Thought, would be uneasy and in pain when
harsh discordant Notes are played upon it, so Man, when he breaks the Law of his
Nature and runs counter to those Motions his Maker has assigned him, when he
contradicts the Order and End of his Being must needs be in Pain and Misery.
And as the Health and Perfection, Ease and Pleasure, Good and Happiness (or
whatever you will call it) of a Creature consists in its Conformity to the End
of its Creation, and the being in such Circumstances as are agreeable to its
Nature, from which when in the least it deviates it loses both its Beauty and
its Pleasure; so the Soul of Man being made on purpose for the Contemplation
and Love of GOD whenever it ceases to pursue that End, must needs be put out
of the Order of its Nature, and consequently deprived of all Pleasure and
Perfection, whilst it stands rightly affected toward GOD it cannot be
destitute of Pleasure, but whatsoever sets it in Opposition to him does by that
Act deprive it of all Delight.

So that my Hypothesis will lie thus: That although GOD only has Power to
modifie the Soul of Man, and to affect it with Pain and Grief, yet since these
are rather Uneasinesses than Evils strictly so called (nothing according to my
Notion being the proper Evil of Man but Sin, of which more anon) since they are
designed by GOD as Mediums to good, and are, if not formally, yet at least
consequentially Occasions of Pleasure; since the wilful and affected Ignorance
of the Understanding and Pravity of the Will, or in other Words Sin is the true
and proper Evil of a Man, because Sin only is absolutely and directly opposite
to the Essence of Goodness; and seeing GOD can no way be said to be the Author
of Sin, consequently his being the Cause of our uneasy Sensations, can be no
just Bar to our Love, much less any Motive to our Aversion.

As for the Distinction of the Soul into inferior and superior Part, I am as
little satisfied with it as you can be, and do confess to you ingeniously that
I have no clear Idea of that which is properly my self, nor do I well know how
to distinguish its Powers and Operations: For the usual Accounts that are given
of the Soul are very unsatisfactory, that in your Letter being the best I have
met with and therefore for want of better Expressions, I made use of this
Distinction, which I did the more readily because I learned it from your
Christian Blessedness, P. 158. All the remaining Difference therefore lies in
this Question, whether Sin be the only Evil? And in order to the removing it, I
shall first show you my Design in affirming that it is, and then the Reasons
that incline me to it, and when I have done so I will refer all to your better
Judgment.

First, for what I aim at, I have observed that most of the Folly and Mischief
that is in the World proceeds from false Notions of Pain and Pleasure, and
Mistakes concerning the Nature of good and evil. For would Men be persuaded
that GOD is their only good, so they might enjoy him they would not much regret
the Absence of other things; neither would they so greedily pursue the Shell of
Pleasure, nor fix their Hearts on sensible Objects which can never satisfy.
And were they but convinced that nothing is so evil as Sin, they would not
choose Iniquity rather than Affliction. As therefore your Account of Pleasure
does rectify the Errors of our Love, so I could wish that our Aversions were
better regulated than they usually are; and that Sin, which though it be not
the efficient, is yet the moral Cause of all our Evils and Displeasures, were
so represented as that it might appear the only proper and adequate Object of
our entire Hatred and Aversion. This is my Design.

Now for the Reasons (besides what are already intimated) which incline me to
think that Sin is the only Evil. I grant that whatever is contrary to the
Pleasure and Good of Man in any of his Capacities, may in some Sense be called
an Evil, and in this Latitude no doubt but that both mental and sensible Pain
are Evils. But because, when we speak of Evil we usually understand something
that in its own Nature is the proper Object of our Aversion, evil as evil being
no way eligible; and since mental and bodily Pain are not so far evil but that
in some Circumstances they may become eligible, which yet they could not be
without assuming the Nature of good, and therefore they are not pure and
absolute Evils. And further, though it is easy in our Contemplations and
Retirements to distinguish between greater and lesser Evils, to compare and
weigh them together, and to allot to each its due Proportion of Choice or
Aversion, yet since good and evil do frequently present themselves to our Minds
in common Conversation and Business, when we have neither Time nor Appetite to
abstract and consider, but are determined by this short and obvious Sillogism,
Evil is not eligible, but such a thing is Evil, therefore it is not to be
chosen: Whereas perhaps that which we refuse as evil (suppose bodily or mental
Pain) though formally, and in the greatest Latitude of the Word it be an Evil,
yet comparatively and pro hic and nunc, it may be a Good, and so the proper
Object of our Choice. To avoid which common Occasion of Mistake, and because
the Nature of Man has so strong an Aversion to every thing that bears the Name
of Evil, I would rather call Grief and Pain Uneasinesses than Evils, and wholly
appropriate the Name of Evil to Sin, which is The Reader is desired to take
Notice that no more is meant by these Phrases, than that Sin in its own Nature
or Formality is entirely evil, it has neither Form nor Beauty that we should
desire it, can never be ordinable to a good End, is none of GOD's Creatures,
and therefore has not any the least Degree of Goodness in it, is neither
eligible for its own sake, nor upon any other Account whatsoever.
essentially and absolutely Evil and the only entire Object of a rational
Creatures Hatred and Aversion.

But not to contend about Words, admitting that Pain and Grief are Evils, it is
but in a comparative and lower Sense; if they were essentially Evil, they could
not in some Circumstances become good, which you your self allow them to be
occasionally and consequentially, and as they may be a Means to avoid a greater
Evil. Whereas the very The Reader is desired to take Notice that no more is
meant by these Phrases, than that Sin in its own Nature or Formality is
entirely evil, it has neither Form nor Beauty that we should desire it, can
never be ordinable to a good End, is none of GOD's Creatures, and therefore has
not any the least Degree of Goodness in it, is neither eligible for its own
sake, nor upon any other Account whatsoever.
Essence of Sin is evil, it can never in any Circumstance be eligible, which is
a Sign it is never good. We may not commit a lesser Sin under Pretense to avoid
a greater, but we may, nay we ought to endure the greatest Pain and Grief
rather than commit the least sin. For (not to dispute what Good GOD may bring
out of the Sins of Men, or how he does it, which are Questions I will not now
meddle with) I have always thought that the least moral Evil is not to be
chosen, no not in order to the greatest Good, as I think may be inferred from
the Apostles arguing, Romans 3. 8. there is a certain Peculiarity of Evil in Sin,
which (though you will not allow it the only Evil, yet at least) renders it an
Evil paramont to all other Evils, and excludes it from the least degree of
Eligibility. For though Pain and Grief put the Soul into uneasy Circumstances,
yet they don't withdraw her from her true Good, they rather excite her more
strongly to cleave to him, and that Trouble which sensible things occasion, and
which she feels through the Disorder of her own Thoughts, stirs her up to fix
more firmly on him, whose Comforts in this Case are her only Refreshment,
whereas Sin quite alienates the Soul from her only true Good, and thereby
deprives her of the sole Prop she has to rest on, and consequently puts her in
the most wretched, helpless and evil Condition. Every thing but Sin has
something of good in it, because every thing else proceeds from GOD; but Sin is
all over perfect Deformity, an uncompounded Evil, and a direct Contradiction to
Order and Perfection, and consequently to Pleasure, and therefore is, or ought
to be, set at the greatest Opposition to the Nature of Man, and to be the
proper Object of his entire Hatred and Aversion. This is the Point I drive at,
and if it may be gained am very indifferent whether it be by mine, or some
other Way of arguing.

But before I proceed to the next Particular I have two Requests, one is, That
you would please to oblige me with a Definition of Pleasure; and the other,
That you would a little explain the Idea of Pain, for I don't well understand
your Meaning when you say, That Pain anticipates all Thought or Reflection; I
did suppose it to be an uneasy Thought, and how then can it anticipate all
Thought? The Bodily Impression indeed prevents Thought, but that is not
properly the Pain but the Occasion of it.

Now in the next place to gratify your Desire which falls in so much with my
own Inclinations, That I should further communicate my Thoughts concerning
divine Love; a Subject on which it is easy to be endless, and yet impossible to
say too much: I take it to be the Sum and Substance of all Religion, to which
all other Duties are reducible, which are but so many different Modifications
of this Soul that animates the Christian Life: And therefore such Discourses as
serve to lay its Foundation deep, and raise its superstructure high, such as
bring it Fuel by rational Motives, and fan its Flame by devout and relishing
Expressions, do the Work of Religion all at once; for were this Divine
Principle but once firmly rooted in our Hearts, and suffered to display it self
in all its necessary Effects and Consequences, 'twould supercede all other
Instructions, and be instead of a Thousand Monitors.

The Love of GOD is both the best Preservative against Evil (in its greatest
Latitude) and the strongest Impellent to good. It Is the best Antidote against
Sin, in that it disarms Temptations of all their Force, they cannot fasten upon
the Soul that entirely loves its Maker. He who believes GOD to be his only
Good, if he attend at all to that Conviction, can never wilfully sin against
him. For Sin being a Disconformity to GOD, a willing something contrary to his
Nature and Will, it is not possible for a Man to choose that which he believes to
be contrary to his only Good, and which will therefore consequently deprive him
of it. And it being nothing else but the false Appearance of some seeming Good
that inclines a Man to choose amiss, he who considers GOD as his only Good, and
loves him with an Entireness of Affection, has shut up all the Avenues of his
Soul from that Siren apparent Good, and is not capable of being bewitched by
it. Indeed if we allow the Creature to be in any degree our good, it is hard to
keep our selves from desiring it, and if we permit Desire, we can never be
secure from irregular Love, that Shame and Misery of Mankind, it being easier
not to desire at all than to desire with Moderation. For Love is an insinuating
Passion, and wherever it is admitted, will spread and make its Way. And though
the Charms of the Creature be infinitely unworthy to rival those of the
Creator, yet they have this Advantage, that they perpetually press upon the
outward Man, and constantly present themselves to our Senses, so that if we
allow them the least Share in our Hearts, it is odds but that at last they
wholly withdraw it from him who only has a Right to it.

And as the Love of GOD secures our Innocence, so it makes the best Provision
for our Pleasure. The Soul of Man may as well cease to be as cease to love;
something or other it must desire, but so long as it moves toward the
Creature, it may amuse its Cravings but can never satisfy them. How often will
the Objects of our Love be wanting? How often will the Objects of our Love be
wanting? How often will they be unkind? And suppose them as present and as kind
as we can wish them, shall we not be as sick of our Fruitions as we were of our
Desires? For what is there in the Creature but Emptiness, Vanity and Vexation?
But the Object of Divine Love is always essentially present, nothing can hide
him from us but our own Neglect; if we do but fix the Eyes of our Understanding
on, and direct the Motions of our Will toward him, we may always contemplate
and enjoy his Beauty; may always assuage our Thirst at this Fountain, and feast
our hungry Souls upon his never-failing Charms, which though they will still
draw us on to pursue a further Enjoyment, because of their infinite Amability
and Perfection, yet all along they will satisfy and fill our Souls with
unspeakable Delight; though they don't extinguish all Desire, yet they will
remove all Emptiness, and at once replenish our Faculties and enlarge them! But
these ravishing Delights which the enamoured Soul feels in every Approach to
her Divine Lover are better felt than expressed, and when we have once tasted
of these most sapid Pleasures, we shall for ever disdain the muddy Streams of
sensual Delights!

Thus the Love of GOD defends us from the Uneasiness of Pain and Grief, as well
as from the Evil of Sin, and makes us happy in all our Capacities. It is so
Divine a Cordial, that the least Drop of it is able to sweeten and outweigh all
the Troubles of this present State, and render the most Calamitous Condition
not only easy but joyous. For it gives an Anticipation of those Joys in which
it will at last invest us, brings down Heaven into our Bosoms e're it carries
us up thither; and were it but largely shed abroad in our Hearts, we should be
out of the Reach of Fortune, might slight and trample on all Afflictions.
Though the Arrows of Pain and Grief should ruffle our Skin, they could not
touch our Hearts; or they might touch but could not hurt us!

Finally, to what Heights of Piety will not this Divine Principle elevate the
amorous Soul! For what can be too difficult to do to acquire a more perfect
Enjoyment of what we love? What can be too hard to suffer for the sake of that
Object that has won our Heart? It Is nothing else that cramps our Endeavors,
and slackens our Industry after one of the brightest Crowns of Glory, but the
dividing our Love between GOD and Mammon. If a foolish ill-grounded Passion can
many times excite the Soul in which it dwells to do things beyond it self, If
the Love of dirty Clay, or popular Breath can reconcile us to Fatigues and
Distresses, and many things very uneasy to our Animal Nature, shall not the
most rational and becoming Love, that Love which is the End and Perfection of
our Beings, which is secured from Disappointment, Jealousy, and all that long
Train of Pain and Grief which attends Desire when it moves toward the
Creature, set us above all Difficulties, render our Obedience regular constant
and vigorous, refine and sublimate our Natures, and make us become Angels even
whilst we dwell on Earth?

In the last Place for the Proposals I am to make. When you think we have
sufficiently examined the Subject we are upon, I desire the Favor of you to
furnish me with such a System of Principles as I may rely on, and to give me
such Rules as you judge most convenient to initiate a raw Disciple in the Study
of Philosophy; least for want of laying a good Foundation, I give you too much
Trouble, by drawing Conclusions from false Premises, and making use of improper
Terms.

I have no more to add but my repeated Thanks for that great Condescension you
continue to show to

(Worthy Sir,) Your most obliged and humble Servant.
December 12. 1693.
LETTER VI. Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
IT deserves neither your Thanks nor your Admiration that I should endeavor to
be particularly civil to a Person of your extraordinary Worth and
Accomplishments, which indeed appear so great and so beyond what I ever yet
found or could imagine, as at the same time to command and lessen the highest
Respect and Deference that can be shown to you. Your Hypothesis, as you now
explain and rectify it, runs clear and unperplext, and has nothing in it but
what equitably understood challenges my full Consent and Approbation. The
Defect of it before lay partly in your supposing GOD not to be the Author of
mental Pain (and that because you made mental Pain to be all one with Sin) and
partly in your supposing sensible Pain of which you allowed GOD to be the
Author, not to be in it self a real Evil. But now both these Faults are mended,
and all is right and as it should be. For whereas before when you confounded
mental Pain with Sin, you pleaded thus against our hating and for our loving
GOD notwithstanding the Pain which he is acknowledged to inflict upon us,
mental Pain is truly an Evil, but such as GOD does not cause, sensible Pain GOD
does cause, but then that is not truly an Evil. Now distinguishing mental Pain
from Sin, and substituting Sin in the room of mental Pain, you make your
Apology for the Love of GOD run thus, Sin which is truly an Evil GOD does not
cause, and as for mental and sensible Pains whereof GOD is the true Cause, they
are not truly and properly Evils. By which latter Clause I presume you mean not
as you seemed to do at first, that they are not truly and properly Evils in
their own formal Natures and as simply in themselves considered (for so it is
evident that they are Evils, as being as such against the Happiness and
Wellbeing of a thinking and self-conscious Nature) but only as in that
particular Supposition, Juncture or Circumstance wherein they are inflicted by
GOD, who having a thorough comprehensive View of our whole Condition, and so
knowing what upon all Considerations is best for us, thinks it advisable
sometimes to molest and trouble our Repose with mental or sensible Pain, not
for their own sakes, or that he is delighted in them as such any more than we
our selves are, but in order to our Good, and as they are necessary Means to
avoid some greater Evil. In which respect both Pain and Grief (though evil in
their inward formal Natures) do relatively considered so far put on the Nature
of Good as to be truly eligible, and would not fail to be actually willed and
chosen by us for our selves, as by GOD for us, if we had the same Views and
Prospects of things that he has. In this Sense it is very true and certain that
both the mental and the sensible Pain which GOD inflicts in this Life (for as
to the Misery of the next I do not apprehend the present Question concerned in
it) are not, all things considered, truly and properly Evils, because upon the
whole they are eligible, which Sin can never be, it being a contradictory
Supposition that that should be eligible as a Means to avoid a greater Evil,
which is it self the greatest of all. And herein I take it consists the
Peculiarity of the Evil of Sin, that it is never eligible, but always the due
and just Object of our Hatred and Aversion. So that if in this Sense you will
have Sin to be the only Evil, that whereas all other Evils are not so far Evils
but that in some Junctures and Suppositions they may become good and eligible,
Sin as being the greatest Evil can in no Supposition imaginable become good,
but remains ever a fixed and unchangeable Evil, as GOD does a Good, without the
least Variation or Shadow of turning, I entirely consent with you, and do and
hope always shall think Sin to be thus the only Evil. And since GOD is not the
Author of Sin which can never be eligible but only of our uneasy Sentiments
which in some Circumstances may, and then are no longer to be considered as
Evils, this gives clear and full Satisfaction to that Objection against the
Love of GOD taken from his being the Cause of our painful Sensations. And I can
now well conceive that GOD is always lovely and to be loved by us, not only
when under the little common Uneasinesses of Life, but when most miserable and
afflicted, even by a Martyr in his Flames. And so we are come to a fair
Resolution of this Difficulty concerning the Love of GOD.

As to what you say concerning the Inferior and Superior Part of the Soul,
that you the rather used this Distinction because you learnt it from my
Christian Blessedness, I confess that I do there make use of this Scheme of
Speech, not intending thereby two parts of the Soul Really and Physically
distinct, but only the same Soul diversely considered, with respect to different
Objects and ways of Operation, In consideration of which it is usually divided
into Parts in a popular way of speaking, which in a popular Discourse and where
there was nothing of particular Theory depending upon it, I had no reason to
depart from, but rather to comply with. But when Good or Evil, Grief or Pain
come to be distinguished by their being lodged in this or that part of the Soul
in the Superior or Inferior Part (which must then signify Parts really
Distinct) I then deny that there are any such Parts. In all other Cases I
should not scruple to speak in the common Language, not apprehending that I
should give any one thereby just occasion to think that I held two real Parts
in the Soul, any more than by using another popular mode of speaking of the
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational Soul in Man, that it was my real Opinion
that he had three Souls.

I like your Ingenuity in confessing that you have no Clear Idea of that which
is properly your self, and I further tell you, that you never will have while
you are in this State. We do not know our Souls here by any Idea of them, (as
not seeing them yet in GOD) but only by Consciousness or interior Sentiment,
which is the reason that the Knowledge we have of them is so imperfect. We see
Bodies by their Idea's, but we know no more of our Souls than what we feel to
be done in them. I forbear enlarging upon this matter, though a very noble and
useful point of Speculation, because you may find a most excellent Account
given of it by M. Malebranche in the 7th Chapter of his Third Book de la
recherche de la Verite, page 352. And again more at large in his Illustration
upon that Chapter, page 461. of Amsterdam Edition. And the same most excellent
Person elsewhere, viz. in his Meditations Chrestiennes of Cologne Edition, page
152, gives a very satisfying Account of the Reasons why it has not pleased GOD
to give us an Idea of our own Souls, The first of which is, that if we did see
clearly what we are, we could not be so closely united to our Bodies as is
necessary to the preservation of this Animal Life. We should not look upon it
as a Part of our selves, and unhappy as we are at present, we should not think
it worth our Care to preserve it, and consequently having so little Value and
Regard for it we should have no Sacrifice to offer to GOD, etc. His other
Reason he pursues more at large, and because it is one of the loftiest Strains
of Reason and Eloquence that I ever met with, I shall give it you as near the
Original as I can translate it from the Author, who thus brings in the eternal
Wisdom, speaking to her Disciple. Secondement parce que l'Idee d'une ame est un
Object si grand, and si capable de ravir les Esprits de sa beuate, etc.
Secondly, because the Idea of a Soul is an Object so great and so apt to ravish
Spirits with its Beauty, that if thou had an Idea of thy Soul, thou would
be no longer able to think upon any thing else. For if the Idea of Extension
which represents only Bodies, does so strongly touch Natural Philosophers and
Mathematicians, that they oftentimes forget all their Duties to contemplate it.
If a Mathematician has so much Delight when he compares Bignesses among
themselves thereby to discover their Relations that he often sacrifices his
Pleasures and his Health to find out the Properties of a Line, what Application
would not Men bestow upon the Research of the Properties of their own Being,
and a Being infinitely more noble than Bodies? What Pleasure would they not
take to compare among themselves by a clear View of the understanding so many
different Modifications the bare Sentiment of which, however feeble and
confuse, does so strangely busy and employ them. For thou must know that the
Soul contains in her self all the Beauties and Finesses that thou see in the
World, and which thou art wont to attribute to the Objects that environ thee.
Those Colors, those Odours, those Savours, with an Infinity of other
Sentiments with which thou have not yet been touched, are no other than
Modifications of thy own Substance. That Harmony which so elevates thee is not
in the Air which strikes thy Ear, and those infinite Pleasures of which the
greatest Voluptuaries have but a feeble Sentiment are included in the Capacity
of thy Soul. Now if thou have a clear Idea of thy self, if thou did see in me
that Archetypal Spirit upon which thou wast formed, thou would discover so
many Beauties and so many Truths in contemplating it, that thou would neglect
all thy Devoirs. Thou would discover with an Extremity of Joy that thou
would be capable of enjoying an Infinity of Pleasures. Thou would know
clearly their Nature, thou would be incessantly comparing them among
themselves, and thou would discover Truths which would appear to thee so
worthy of thy Application, that wholly wrapped up and absorpt in the
Contemplation of thy own Being, full of thy self, of thy Grandeur, of thy
Excellencies, and of thy Beauty thou would be no longer able to think of any
thing besides. But my Son, GOD has not made thee to think of nothing but thy
self. He has made thee for himself. Wherefore I shall not discover to thee the
Idea of thy Being, till that happy Time when the View of the very Essence of
thy GOD shall deface and eclipse all thy Beauties, and make thee despise all
that thou art, that thou may think only of contemplating him.

The Account of this excellent Person is so satisfying, that I shall not
pretend to add any thing to it, but shall only observe from it that since it is
so true that we have no Idea of our own Souls, and so reasonable that we should
have none, it would be in vain to go about to define any of the Modifications
of our Spirit, which (since we have no Idea of them) must be learnt by inward
Sentiment, and can no more be made known by Words to those that have not felt
them than Colors can be described to a Man that is blind. And therefore you
must excuse me if I own my self unable to gratify your Request, in giving you
a Definition of Pleasure, which though I know when I feel it, and am able to
distinguish from Light, or Color, or Sound, or from the opposite Sensation of
Pain, yet since I know it by internal Consciousness only or Sentiment, and not
by Idea, I cannot by Words render it intelligible to any body else, but must
remit him that desires the Knowledge of its Nature to Sense and Experience. For
he can never know it till he feel it, and have those Motions excited in the
Organs of his Sense, to which the Author of Nature has annexed this Sensation.

However I may venture to call Pain an uneasy Thought, not that I intend
thereby to define it (for I think it no more capable of a Definition strictly
so called than Pleasure) but only to intimate in general that it is a
Modification belonging to Spirit, and not to Body. For seeing clearly in the
Idea which I have of Extension, that all its Modifications reduce themselves to
Figure and Motion, or certain Relations of Distance, I conclude that Pleasure
and Pain and the rest of those Sensations which I feel in my self by interior
Sentiment, are not Modifications belonging to my Corporeal Substance, but to
some other, which I call my Spirit. And for this reason it is that I call Pain
an uneasy Thought. But then for the reconciling this with my saying that it
anticipates and prevents all Thought, I need only suggest to you that when I
call Pain an uneasy Thought, I take Thought in its utmost Latitude, for all
that we are any way conscious of to our selves, as my most admired Philosopher
does in his Principles of Philosophy P. 2. where he says, Cogitationis nomine
intelligo illa omnia quae nobis consciis in nobis fiunt, quatenus eorum in
nobis Conscientia est. Atque ita non modo intelligere, velle, imaginare, sed
etiam sentire idem est hic quod cogitare; i. e. By the Name of Thought I
understand all those things which we are conscious to be done in our selves, so
far forth as there is in us a Conscientiousness of them. And thus not only to
understand, to will, to imagine, but even to feel is the same here as to think.
But when I say that Pain anticipates all Thought, by Thought I mean all
rational, discursive and reflecting Thought, which it is most certain and
evident by all Experience that Pain does prevent, and as certain that Grief
does suppose, follow and proceed from it.

But to return from these Digressions (for I call all things so that have not
an immediate Connection with Religion) to that which is the principal Subject
of our Correspondence, and ought to be the Subject of all our Thoughts, the
Love of GOD. Our Savior places it in the Head of all Morality, telling us that
it is the first and great Commandment. And his Apostle St. Paul places it in
the Rear of it, telling us that the End of the Commandment is Charity. So then
from both these put together the Result will be that the Love of GOD is both
the first and the last, the Beginning and the End, the Foundation and the
Top-work, the Principle and the Accomplishment of all Moral Perfection. And no
doubt but the first Devoir which in Order of Conception we can suppose to
result from the Being of an intelligent Creature will be to love the Author of
it, and if he who is the Author of our Being be also the Author of all the
Good, Comfort, Pleasure and Happiness of our Being, nay even of our very Power
and Force of loving, than as we begin with him so we must end with him too, and
make him the Term and Object of our whole Love, uniting our selves to him with
all that we are (as when Bodies touch one another according to their whole
Supersicies) with all our Heart, Soul and Mind. But of this already, and
perhaps further hereafter. At present I consider that since our Being is in it
self a Good, and the Foundation and Possibility of all the Good which we do or
shall ever enjoy, it can be no sooner received than it brings along with it an
Obligation of loving our Creator, whose we are, and to whom we are to offer up
our Hearts as a flaming Sacrifice as soon as we enter upon Being, which we are
to pay to him as our first Homage, and as an early Pledge and Earnest of all
the Duty that we owe him. And that which does the more oblige us to this is,
that if we do not thus early pay it to our Creator, we shall pay it somewhere
else where it is not due. For no sooner does a Creature begin to be, but he
begins to love, the intellectual Pulse commences its Movement which the first
Inspiration of Life as well as the natural, and the Desire of Happiness
immediately succeeds the Capacity of it. As Soon as we are we desire to be
happy, and as soon as we desire to be happy we must seek for this Happiness in
some Object or other. If therefore we seek it not in GOD, we must seek it in
the Creature. But if we seeek it out of GOD, we seek it where it is not, and we
err and transgress in our Search, GOD only being our true Good. We are
therefore obliged to seek Union with GOD as soon as we desire to be happy, that
is, as soon as we desire at all, that is, as soon as we are. Our Obligation
therefore to love GOD bears Date from the first Moment of our Existence, and is
therefore the first Duty that we owe him, as thus immediately resulting from
our having a Being. And thus is the Love of GOD the first Commandment, and has
the Precedence in the Scale of Morality.

The other Character that our Savior gives of it is, that it is also the Great
Commandment. And the Scripture speaks of its Dimensions, adding one more than
we attribute to Bodies, telling us of its Breadth and Length, and Depth and
Height; but not how broad, nor how long, nor how deep, nor how high. And indeed
with what Line could the Apostle measure such an immense Vastness? How could he
Paint Light and Flame, or put that into Words which passes not only all
Description, but even all Knowledge, and indeed every thing but Sense and
Experience. Well might our Savior call it the Great Commandment. It is great
in the Matter of it, being of the most weighty and concerning importance to the
final Happiness of Man. Great in the Obligation of it which is absolutely
indispensable, it being not possible that GOD should Create any one Spirit
without obliging him to Love him, or that he should ever discharge him from
that Obligation. Great in the Equity and Reason of it, it being highly
reasonable that we should Love GOD who is so infinitely amiable, so altogether
lovely. Great in the Power and Virtue of it, as being the most Fruitful and
Prolifick Principle, the Root and Seed of all Excellency and Perfection, such
as draws on with it the Observation of all the Commandments, and is therefore
the shortest Line, the most compendious way to GOD and the enjoyment of him.
The Love of GOD is indeed the general seisin, the universal ingredient of all a
good Man's Actions; It Is that precious Tincture, that Chemical Spirit that runs
through all, and that Noble Divine Elixir which gives Worth and Value to all,
and converts even our meanest and most indifferent actions into Religion and
Devotion. Great lastly, in the Pleasure and Duration of it. As Love is the most
pleasant Passion, so the Love of GOD is the most pleasing Love. A Love that
rewards it self, a Fire that is its own Fuel. He that Loves GOD as he ought, as
he cannot, so he need not Love any thing else, so great delight and
entertainment will he find in the Love of GOD. Which will also go along with
him into the other Life, and be the Life of that Life. Then all the
instrumental and ministerial Virtues shall expire and be of no further Use.
Whether they be Prophecies they shall fail, etc. Even the Fear of GOD which is
now so highly magnified as the Beginning of Wisdom, shall then cease, for
perfect Love shall cast it out. Faith shall vanish, Hope shall be swallowed up,
and Prayer it self shall be silent, only Love and Praise shall endure, and vie
with each other to all Eternity. Thus much of the Love of GOD in general,
concerning which all I have said seems little when I compare it with the
Greatness of the Subject, and your most exalted and seraphick Strains upon it.
I intend in my next to add something to the Reason of our loving GOD so
entirely as I state it in my Sermon. In the mean time I deliver up this noble
Subject to a better Hand, desiring you to communicate what further thoughts you
have upon it, and to believe him that writes this to be in all Sincerity

Madam, Your most humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, Jan. 11. 1693.
LETTER VII. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
I Am glad we are come to so good an issue in the matter of our Debate, and
shall therefore immediately apply my self to that most necessary and delightful
Theme, which is the noblest entertainment of our Thoughts, the best improvement
of our Minds at present, and will be the inexhaustible Spring of our Joy
hereafter, the Love of GOD. I cannot but admire the sottishness of those dull
Epicureans, who make it their Business to hunt after Pleasures as vain and
unsatisfactory as their admirers are Childish and Unwise, and in the mean time
turn their Backs on this vast Repository of solid and substantial Joy. A Joy
whose perpetual Current always affords a fresh Delight, and yet every Drop of
it so entertaining, that we might live upon it to all Eternity! Whilst our
Souls are inebriated with its Pleasures, our very Bodies partake of its
Sweetness: For it excites a grateful and easy Motion in the animal Spirits,
and causes such an agreeble Movement of the Passions as comprehends all that
Delight, abstracted from the Uneasiness which other Objects are apt to
occasion. Our Passions (although they have both their Use and Pleasure, yet) as
we usually feel them are blended with so much Pain, that it is hard to determine
whether the good or evil they do us be the greater, and a Man sometimes
over-pays for his Mirth, by that Sting of Sorrow which attends it. However, I
am not for a Stoical Apathy, I would not have my Hands and Feet cut off lest
they should sometimes incommode me. The Fault is not in our Passions considered
in themselves, but in our voluntary Misapplication and unsuitable Management of
them. And if Love which is the leading and Master Passion were but once wisely
regulated, our Passions would be so far from rebelling against and disquieting
us, that on the contrary they would mightily facilitate the great Work we have
to do, give Wings to this Earthly Body that presses down the Soul, and in a
good Measure remove those Impediments that hinder her from mounting to the
Original and End of her Being What is it that makes our Joys tumultuous and
flitting, our Fears tormenting, our Hopes disquieting, etc. but the
Irregularity of our Desire? If we love amiss we shall both fear and hope,
grieve and Rejoice without Reason and in a wrong Measure, we shall lash out
into a thousand Extravagancies, and be as unhappy as we are unwise and
unreasonable. Whereas if we tune our Love to the right Key, we need not be
apprehensive of Discord among the rest of our Passions, all their Motions will
be natural and regular, and all Concert in a becoming Harmony. The Divine
Nature is a Field in which our grateful Passions may freely take their Range.
If we make GOD the Object of our Desire, our Hopes will neither delude, nor our
Joys forsake us; there is no Serpent lurks in this Grass, all is calm and
placid, secure and entertaining. And yet, unwise that we are! How hard is it to
drive us to our Felicity, how difficult to convince us of our Happiness? How
many Evasions do we find to withold our Love from him who requires it, not
for his own but our Advantage! When shall we be, I need not say so just to GOD,
but so kind to our selves, as totally to withdraw every straggling Desire from
the Creature, the very best of which is not able to satisfy the Longings, and
fill the Capacities of the Mind. The Boundlessness of Desire is a plain
Indication to me that it was never made for the Creature; for what is there in
the whole Compass of Nature that can satisfy Desire? What but he who made it
can replenish and content it? I need not bring Arguments for the Proof of this,
every one has Experience enough to confirm it. For after all our Researches
after that which is good for the Sons of Men, where is the happy Person who has
not been defeated in his Hopes, or frustrated in his Enjoyments? Though he has
obtained his Object, has he satisfied his Desire? For how amiable soever
created Good may appear at a Distance, a closer Inspection and intimate
Knowledge, declares it to be vain and empty, and a very improper Quarry for the
Soul of Man.

Indeed the Soul of our Neighbor has the most plausible Pretense to our Love,
as being the most Godlike of all the Creatures, but since it is as indigent as
our own, how can it supply our Wants, or consequently be the proper Object of
our Desires? And if you will forgive a Remark which perhaps is not so solid as
the Subject requires, I am apt to think that that Bashfulness and Unwillingness
we feel in our selves to declare Love though never so pure and so refined from
base and low Designs, and which shows it self in most, but especially in the
best and most generous Tempers, proceeds from hence: The Soul blushes to
declare her Indigence, and to go out of her self to seek for Happiness in that
which is not, cannot be the proper Object of her Desires. It Is true, a Sister
Soul may give somewhat better Entertainment to our Love than other Creatures
can, but she is not able to fill and content it. She must seek her own Felicity
abroad, and if she cannot be her own Good, there is little Reason to expect she
should be ours. And being I have heard some Object against your Account of the
first and great Commandment, that it is prejudicial to the second, and because
I am of a quite contrary Opinion, and think nothing does more effectually
secure and improve it, I will therefore offer to your Consideration and
Correction such Meditations as I have had about it.

It were I confess a strong Prejudice against your Way of stating the Love of
GOD, if it were in any Measure injurious to the right Understanding and due
Performance of the Love we owe to our Neighbor. For since the Precepts of the
Gospel are an exact and beautiful System of Wisdom and Perfection, every one of
whose Parts are so duly proportioned to the other, that the Result of all is
perfect Harmony and Order, I must needs conclude, that when such a Sense is put
upon one Precept as causes it to clash and interfere with another, it cannot be
the genuine Meaning of it. And if I cannot make over the whole of my Desire to
GOD, without defaulking from that Portion of Love he has assigned my Neighbor,
I must of Necessity set the Signification of that Precept to a lower Pitch, and
find out some other Medium to interpret the first and great Commandment. But
there is no Necessity for this: So far is your Account of the Love of GOD from
being prejudicial to the Love of our Neighbor that (if I think right) it is the
only solid and sure Foundation it can rest upon. For if I may lawfully bestow
any Share of my Desire on my Neighbor, why not on the rest of GOD's Creatures
that are useful and beneficial to me, provided my Love be not inordinate, but
contain it self within those Bounds that Reason and Religion have prescribed?
For those who contend for a Love of Desire toward our Neighbor, will not deny
but that that Desire may be inordinate, and in that Respect unlawful; and
therefore, according to them, it is not the bare desiring, but the Excess and
Irregularity of that Desire that makes it peccant. But does not Reason plead as
much for the Lawfulness of desiring one Creature as another? And what Arguments
can be fetched from thence for the Love of our Neighbor, that will not be as
concluding for the Love of other Creatures in their Degree and Proportion? If
it be alleged that we have a Command to love our Neighbor, but none to love
other Creatures, this seems to me a begging of the Question, for the Matter in
Debate is, Whether that Command ought to be understood of Love of Desire or
Love of Benevolence. But if we once permit our Desire to stray after the
Creature, we open a Bank to all that Mischief, Malice and Uncharitableness that
is in the World. And indeed, what can be so destructive to the Love of our
Neighbor as these Desires? For the Creature being finite and empty too, and
therefore unable to satisfy the Desire of a rational Soul, how is it possible
but that a Multitude of Lovers who all desire the same thing, which is very far
from being able to satisfy one, much less all of them, should cross each other
in these Desires and Pursuits, and consequently destroy that Peace and mutual
Benevolence which ought to be cherished among rational Beings, and to which the
Precepts of the Gospel so strictly engage us? But the Divine Nature is an
inexhaustible Ocean of Felicity, in which every one of us may satisfy his most
enlarged Desires, without the least Diminution of its Fullness! We need not
grudg nor envy each other's Portion, for here is enough for us all. And
therefore the Soul that centres all her Love on GOD, has no Temptation to those
Sins that obstruct her Benevolence to her Neighbor. She does not make Gold her
Hope, nor the fine Gold her Confidence, and therefore can very readily part
with it to supply her Brother's Necessities. She does not place her Felicity in
the Pomps and Pleasures of this Mortal Life, and therefore does neither envy
him who possesses them, nor seeks by injurious Practices to deprive him of
them. And as she has no Pleasure, no coveting, no Ambition, but to partake of
the Divine Nature, so the Excellency of that Good on which she feeds
assimilates her into its own Likeness, and inspires her with such a generous
and diffusive Benignity, that she is willing to spend and be spent for the good
of others, and in Imitation of the Divine Philanthropy, expands her self in
Acts of Kindness and Beneficence, as uncircumscribedly and universally as the
Capacity of her Nature will permit.

What has been said I hope is sufficient to authorize me without Suspicion of
Injustice, to withdraw my Heart from my Neighbor and fix it entirely on him
who has Merit enough to deserve, and Kindness enough to embrace and requite the
highest and most arduous Degree of Love I can possibly bestow on him. But it
may further be considered, that our Savior commands us to love our Neighbor
as our selves, and to love one another as he has loved us. Now our Love to our
selves is a Love of Benevolence, and consequently such a Love to our Neighbor
does fully discharge the Obligation of that Command. Nor does it appear that
our Savior loved with a love of Desire, as he was GOD he could not, and as he
was Man he need not, for a Love of Benevolence will answer all the End of his
coming into the World. The Scripture it is true, mentions some happy Favorites
who had a greater Interest in his Love than others. We read that JESUS loved
Lazarus, and of the Disciple whom JESUS loved, but there is no Necessity to
understand this of a Love of Desire, and whatever other Reason may be assigned
for this particular Kindness, I am apt to think the main Design of it was for
our Example, that as our blessed Lord has left us a Pattern of every Virtue, so
he might especially recommend to us that most noble and comprehensive one
Friendship, which next to the Love of GOD has the Precedence of all the rest. I
am therefore very far from designing any Prejudice to Friendship by what I have
offered here, I rather intend to assert and advance it. For he who permits his
Desires to run after his Friend, will in the End neither please himself nor
advantage his Friendship. How often do we force the Almighty to deprive us of
these dear Idols that have usurped our Hearts? That so he may convince us how
improper it is to permit our Souls to cleave to any Creature, which, allowing
it to be able to entertain us at present, can give no Security for the future.
And therefore he who would secure his Felicity, and have the Current of his
Delight perpetual, must not suffer his Love to fix on any object but that which
is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. Besides, the Defects which we find
in Friendship, owe their Original to this misplaced Desire. It Is this, that
knowing the Narrowness of Humane Nature makes us endeavor to monopolize a
worthy Person to our selves, whereby we do him a great Injury by contracting
and limiting his Benevolence. This is it that hoodwinks our Souls, and makes us
blind to our Friend's Imperfections; for wherever Love sixes it either finds
or fancies Excellency and Perfection: To discover a Defect embitters its
Delight, wakes it out of its pleasant Dream, and is an uneasy Monitor that it
ought not to rest here, since what is defective is so far not good, and
consequently not lovely. But he who will not see his Friend's Infirmities is
not like to inform him of them, and so frustrates the great Design of
Friendship which is to discover and correct the most minute Irregularity, and
to purify and perfect the Mind with the greatest Accuracy. What is it but
Desire that creates those Jealousies and Disquiets which sometimes creep into
this refined Affection? For pure Benevolence delighting in doing good, and
having no Regard to the receiving it, would not be disgusted at the Kindness
which is shown to a third Person, but rather rejoice at the Exercise of its
Friend's Virtue. From Desire proceeds that unbecoming Excess of Grief which is
apt indecently to transport us when GOD translates our Friend from our Bosom
into his own. A generous and regular Friendship after it has paid that Tribute
of Tears which Nature and the Worth of the Person requires, will rather prompt
us to sympathize with and rejoice in his Happiness, than to regret and complain
of our own Loss. There is yet another Indecency that would be prevented were
our Love only benevolent; and that is, that strong Antipathy which usually
succeeds Affection whenever it comes to a Rupture, as it is odds but it may,
considering the great Weakness of Humane Nature, and how seldom a Man is in
every Stage of his Life consistent with himself, for a rightly constituted
Friendship will incline us by all the Arts of Sweetness and Endearment to win
upon the Offender, who has so much the greater need of our Benevolence, by how
much he does the less deserve it. Our Kindness when he no longer returns it is
the more excellent and generous, because more free: And though it cannot be
called Friendship when the Bond is broke on one side, yet there may be a most
refined and exalted Benevolence on the other.

After all, methinks Benevolence is the most great and noble Kind of Love, and
I wonder what should make us so fond of Desire, and so unwilling to withdraw it
from the Creature, since so placed it is a continual Reproach to us, and
perpetually upbraids us with our Weakness and Indigence. To need and desire
nothing out of himself is the Prerogative and Perfection of the Divine Nature:
And though a Creature need not blush to languish after GOD's Fullness, and to
thirst for this Fountain of Living Water, yet methinks it should, to long after
broken Cisterns, Creatures as dry and empty as it self; did we therefore
consult either our Honor or our Interest, we should without Reluctance banish
the Creature from our Hearts, abandoning all other Desires but that which has
all the Pleasure and Advantage of Love, without any of its Pain and
Imperfection.

And thus Sir, I have endeavored in this and my last, to point out, though
very imperfectly, some of the Prerogatives of Divine Love. And I hope 'twill
appear from the Utility as well as from the Reasonableness of the thing, that
we ought to fix the whole of our Love on our Maker. And in Truth, if we think
it reasonable to love GOD at all, I know not how we can with Safety permit our
Hearts to love any thing else. For though we may fancy that the Love of the
Creature is not contradictory, but subordinate to the Love of GOD, yet Love
being the most rapid of all Motions, if once our Desire be set a moving, in
vain do we think to stop and circumscribe it; and therefore as it is unjust, so
it is unsafe to give it the least Tendency toward any Object but him who is
the only proper and adequate one.

I am exceedingly pleased with M. Malbranch's Account of the Reasons why we
have no Idea of our Souls, and wish I could read that ingenious Author in his
own Language, or that he spoke mine. However I have some Queries to make about
the Matter, but must refer it to another Opportunity. You tell me I must not
expect a Definition of Pleasure, all I desire is only such an Account as we
have of some other things, which strictly speaking are not capable of a
Definition; that Notion which I have entertained of Pleasure is, That it is
that grateful Relish or Sensation, which every Faculty enjoys, in the regular
Application of it self, to such Objects as are agreeable to its Nature. Or if
you please, Pleasure I take to be, the Gratification of Natural Appetites
according to, and not exceeding the Intention of Nature, and I pray be so kind
as to tell me wherein I Mistake, whereby you will further engage me to be

Sir, Your very humble and thankful Servant.
February 15. 1693.
LETTER VIII. Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
I Am no less pleased than your self that my great Argument for the entire Love
of GOD taken from his being the only true Cause of our good, is so well
discharged of that Difficulty which you urged against it, because (as I told
you in my first) I think it the only material one to which it stands exposed,
and because it has received from your skilful Hand the utmost Advantage it was
capable of. So that now I cannot but conclude the Bottom I go upon to be very
sound, not expecting to be attacked by a stronger Objection, or by one better
managed. The same occurred to my own Thoughts while I was composing my
Discourse, but I thought it would be time enough to consider it when it came to
be objected, and I have since met with a little flying Touch of it in a modern
Philosopher of very considerable Note, Monsieur Regis a Cartesian, who in the
16 th. Chapter of his Metaphysics contends upon this very Ground that GOD is
not the Moral Good of Man, GOD (says he) is not the Moral Good of Man neither
because he produces those things which are agreeable to him, nor because he
causes those Pleasures which he feels. Not the first, because GOD would then be
the moral good of all other Creatures as well as Man, because he does as much
produce what in agreeable to them as what is so to Man. Not the second, because
GOD would then be no less the moral evil of Man than his moral good, because he
does no less produce the Pain which he suffers, than the Pleasure which he
enjoys. From which without adding a Word more, as if this had been a most clear
and incontestable Demonstration, he positively concludes that GOD is not the
moral good of Man. Not only that he is not so for this Reason as the Cause of
our Pleasure (as your Objection runs) but that he is not so at all. For he
concludes that if he be so, it must be upon one or other of the forementioned
Accounts, which since he is not, therefore he will not allow him to be so at
all. A strange Paradox by the way, but what Force there is in the Proof of it
may be determined from the Measures premised.

The other Difficulty against the entire Love of GOD taken from its
Inconsistency with the Love of our Neighbor (which you say you have heard some
urge against my Account of the first and great Commandment) is indeed in one
respect more pressing than the former, though easier to be resolved, because it
is directly levelled, not against the Reason only of the Proposition, but the
Truth of it. But I wonder to hear of this Objection as pertinent as it is,
since I thought I had already laid in a sufficient Caution against it in the
Discourse it self. For it is most certain that the most entire Love of GOD
enjoined in the first Commandment does by no means exclude the Love of our
Neighbor enjoined in the second, in case these two Loves be of two different
Kinds, the former suppose, Love of Desire, and the latter Love of Benevolence,
there being no manner of Repugnancy between the desiring none but GOD, and the
wishing well to Men, and it is only the joining these two different Ideas under
one common Name (Love) that makes it seem as if there were. To love none but
GOD, and yet to love others besides GOD, do indeed seem to be contradictory
Propositions, but it is all because of the Equivocation of the Word (Love) which
when applied to GOD in the first Commandment signifies desiring him as a good,
and when applied to Men in the second signifies not desiring them as a Good,
but desiring good to them. And cannot I thus love GOD only, and my Neighbor
too, and so fulfill both Commands? Cannot I desire but one thing only in the
World, and yet at the same time wish well to every thing else? It Is plain that
I may, and that the Intireness of my Love to GOD does no way prejudice my Love
to my Neighbor, supposing the latter Love to be of a different Kind from the
former. Those therefore that will have one of these to be exclusive of the
other, ought first to prove that the Word (Love) used in both commands is taken
according to the same Sense in both, that by Love of our Neighbor is meant
Love of Desire as well as by the Love of GOD, without which their Objection is
precarious, and instead of proving, they do but beg the Question. And I should
be glad to see any of our Objectors prove what hitherto they are pleased to
presume, that by Love of our Neighbors is intended Love of Desire.

If they on the other hand demand what Proof I have that the Love of our
Neighbor here is not Love of Desire, I answer, first that according to all the
Laws of Dispute I may reasonably take leave to suppose that it is not, till my
Objectors prove that it is. Since my Account of the first Commandment does not
overthrow the second but only upon Supposition that Love of our Neighbor there
signifies Love of Desire, they that lay that to my Charge ought in all Logic
and Conscience to prove that it has that Signification, till which time I may
fairly suppose that it has not, and that the rather because they themselves
cannot pretend that Desire is the only thing that is called by the Name of
Love, but must needs allow that there is also a Love of Benevolence, and that
these two have very distinct Idea's. But not to infist upon a Privilege I do
not need: I answer again that all those Arguments whereby I prove that GOD only
ought to be loved with Love of Desire, do also implicity prove that that is not
the Love wherewith we are to love our Neighbor, and consequently that that is
not the Love intended in the second Commandment, but only Love of Benevolence.
For since there are but these two Sorts of Love, and since (which is the very
Foundation of the Objection) the entire Love of GOD is not consistent with the
Love of our Neighbor, as Love signifies Desire, if I prove that GOD only ought
to be loved with Love of Desire (as I think I have done) then it must follow
either that our Neighbor ought not to be loved at all, which is manifestly
absurd, or that Love of Benevolence is the Love that must fall to his share,
and that which consequently is enjoined in the second Commandment. And I wonder
how it should enter into so many Men's Heads, as it does, to imagine that any
other Love than this was here intended. For though it were otherwise never so
lawful and allowable to love our Neighbor with Love of Desire, and he
otherwise never so capable of it, yet is it imaginable that this should be made
the matter of a Command, and required of us as a Duty! Is it once to be thought
that God who is an infinite Good, infinitely desirable, infinitely deserving of
our highest Affections, nay of our whole Love; and withal infinitely able to
satisfy and reward it, should Command us to Love or Desire a Creature, and a
Creature as vain and infirm and insufficient, as much a Shadow as our selves,
and that immediately after he had in such Emphatick Terms required us to fix
our Love upon himself? Is it I say to be thought, that GOD when he had laid it
upon us as a Duty to repose our selves upon his own Stable Center, should
immediately after require us to lean upon that which cannot sustain its own
weight? That when he had commanded us to come and quench our mighty Thirst at
his own ever springing Fountain (with whom as the Psalmist speaks is the Well
of Life) he should in the very next Breath send us away to a Cistern, and that
too a broken one? That he should first call us to himself, and then as if he
alone were not able to suffice for us, and to satisfy those enlarged Appetites
which he had given us, should call in the Creatures to bear part of the
Expense, and send us from himself to them? Are these Thoughts worthy of GOD?
But besides, let me Appeal to any of those who contend for Love of Desire as
the Love of the Second Commandment, Do they ever feel any Remorse of Conscience
for having been wanting in Love of Desire toward their Neighbor; or does
their Conscience ever upbraid them for having thereby failed in their regard
toward the Second Commandment; or do they ever think it necessary to Repent
for having been defective in this kind of Love? Our Conscience indeed does
often upbraid to us our Desire of Creatures (as you very well remark from our
Bashfulness and Unwillingness to own our selves to be in Love) but never that I
know of, does it Reproach us for our Indifferency toward them, or prompt us to
Repent of it. And indeed it would be a strange kind of Repentance for a Man to
fall upon his Knees, and Confess to GOD as a Sin, that he had withdrawn all his
Desires from his Creatures and fixed them wholly upon him; that he did not
desire them as his good, though at the same time he wished them, and was ready
to do them all the good he could. I dread to speak the Language of such a
Penitent, when I consider what an absurd Command he Fathers upon God. For can
we imagine that GOD will charge that person as guilty of the Second Commandment
who entirely loves him, and bears a hearty good will to his Fellow Creatures,
merely because he does not also desire them as his good? Is it not enough to
wish and do well to them? For tell me Madam, what you think of this
supposition: I will suppose a Man to place his whole Affection upon GOD, and so
to love him with all his Heart, Soul, Mind and Strength, as to withdraw his
Love from all the Creatures, and not in the least to desire any of them as his
goods, only to desire good to them all, to do them good as far as he has
opportunity, and to endeavor to unite them to the true good. I further suppose
him to persevere in this Disposition of Mind to the very last, and then ask
whether you can think that such a Person has any thing to answer at the Bar of
GOD's Justice for the Breach of the second Commandment, or whether you think
God will damn and eternally separate such an one from his Presence, as
defective in his Measures of Charity merely for not making Creatures his good,
and the Object of his Desire? But I need not put such a Question to you, who I
am persuaded at the first Proposal of it will be so far from judging such a
Person to be a just Object of God's Displeasure, that you will conclude he has
all that is necessary to recommend him to his highest Favor, and to qualify
him to partake of his Sovereign Happiness. But it is a Question very proper to
be put to my Adversaries, who must either say that God will damn a Person of
this Character, or (which therefore appears to be certainly the right) that
Love of Desire is not the Love required of us in the second Commandment, but
only Love of Benevolence, which whoever has does by that alone sufficiently
satisfy the Intention and Obligation of that Law.

Besides, does not the Command sufficiently explain it self? For (as you very
judiciously remark) our Savior commands us to love our Neighbor as our
selves, which by the Way seems to me not only an absolute Measure, but a
relative Character, put in on purpose to distinguish it from the Love of God.
But now, as you will resume; our Love of our selves is not Love of Desire, but
Love of Benevolence. Most undoubtedly so, for whoever reflects upon the Love of
himself will presently perceive that it is not a desiring of himself as his
good, but a desiring of some good to himself, as appears from that vulgar
Expression, Charity begins at home, and from the Vice of Self-love, by which we
mean a craving and seeking after more than comes to a Man's Share without
having Regard to the Community, or a greedy Pursuance of ones own private
Interest in Opposition to that of the Public. Your other Remark is no less
important, that our Savior does also command us to love one another as he has
loved us, that is, say you, not with Love of Desire, but that of Benevolence.
For as God he could not love us with Love of Desire, and as Man he need not,
since Love of Benevolence would answer all the Ends of his coming into the
World, to which I add that neither need he as Man because as such he was
personally united to the supreme good, with which Union I cannot conceive how
the Desire of any Creature should be consistent. For as God himself cannot
desire any thing out of himself because of his own Fullness, so neither can he
that enjoys God desire any thing out of him because of the Fullness of GOD. The
Enjoyment of GOD does certainly put a final Period to all Desire, and utterly
quench the most flaming Thirst of a Creature, and how then can he whose Desire
is satisfied desire any further, or if he does, how then is it satisfied? For
which reason by the way I think it necessary to conclude that the blessed in
Heaven finding all possible good in the Enjoyment of GOD cannot desire any
thing out of him, but that all Love of the Creature does utterly cease, and is
for ever silenced in that Region of Happiness, and that GOD is all in all to
those that enjoy him. But now we cannot suppose any of the blessed Spirits so
united to GOD in Heaven, as our Savior was while upon Earth, who therefore
must be supposed to love Mankind with Love of Benevolence only (as being
capable of no other) and consequently to require the same kind of Love from Men
to one another. But there needs no Argument from without to prove this to be
his meaning. The Text you refer to ( John 13. 34.) sufficiently speaks its own
Sense. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another. As I have
loved you that ye also love one another. Wherein it is plain that our Savior
refers to that signal Instance of his Benevolence in his undertaking the Work
of our Redemption, and in Proportion requires the same sort of Love from his
Disciples, that if Occasion were, they should be ready to lay down their Lives
for the Salvation of their Brethren, as he had done for them, which is the
natural Sense of the Words, and made to be so by the best Expositors that I
know of upon the Place.

But besides, does not the Scripture always express our Love toward our
Neighbor as a Love of Benevolence only? Love (says the Apostle, Romans 13. 10.)
works no ill to his Neighbor, that is, does not hurt or injure him, but do
him all good. Which Character shows it to be truly meant of Love of
Benevolence. I say truly. And that it is meant of that only, as being of it self
entirely commensurate to the full Extent of Charity, is evident from the Words
that follow, therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Of what Law? Not to
be sure of the first Table. For our Love to our Neighbor though never so
perfect, cannot satisfy our Obligation to GOD. It must be therefore of the
second Table, which being thus fulfilled by Benevolence can require no other
Love than that. This is Demonstration. Again, when the same Apostle reckons up
the Fruits of Charity, does he make any mention of Desire, does he not describe
them all by the Expressions of Benevolence? He says, it suffers long and is
kind, that it envies not, vaunts not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave
it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoices not in Iniquity, but in the Truth, that it bears all things, believes
all things, hopes all things, and indures all things, but it seems the Apostle
had forgot to put in Desire, or else he thought it no Part of Christian
Charity. And I must confess that I am of the latter Opinion.

And as the Scripture always speaks of Brotherly Love and Charity in Terms
importing Benevolence, so whenever it speaks of the opposite Vice does it not
always describe it by contrary Characters? Does it ever describe it by want of
Desire? No, but by want of good Will, by Anger, Wrath, Envy, Bitterness, Malice
and such like Terms. And by what Measure of Love it is that Christ will proceed
in his Judgment of the World, whether by Love of Benevolence or by Love of
Desire I shall leave to be determined by what he says himself concerning that
matter in the 25th Chapter of St. Matthew. From all which put together I think
nothing can be more clear and certain than that the Love intended and required
in the second great Commandment of the Law, is not Love of Desire, but only
Love of Benevolence. And I cannot imagine what (besides the Equivocation of the
Word Love) should make the World run so generally upon a contrary Notion,
unless it be that Clause in the Commandment: And the second is like unto it,
whence perhaps it has been concluded that because the first is meant of Love of
Desire, therefore the second must be so too. But he must be either much
prejudiced, or very dull-sighted that does not see that by like unto it is only
meant of equal Authority and Obligation in Opposition to the Pharisaic
Partiality toward the Precepts of the Law. Well then the Result of the present
Considerations is this, since that most entire Love of GOD I stand for in the
first Commandment does not at all interfere with the Love of our Neighbor in
the second supposing that by Love there we are not to understand Love of
Desire, but only Love of Benevolence, and since as I have shown Love of
Benevolence is the Love there solely intended, I may now with Assurance
conclude that the Account I have given of the first Commandment, as high as it
is, is no way injurious to the second, the thing that is generally laid to my
Charge. But you go further, undertaking to show that my Account of the Love of
GOD is so far from being prejudicial to that of our Neighbor, that it is the
only true solid Foundation it can rest upon. I thoroughly approve what you say
upon this Part, but shall not offer to add any thing to it, because indeed you
have said all. I promised in my last that in my next I would add something to
the Reason of our loving GOD so entirely, but having fallen upon a Vein of
other Thoughts, and those of no slight Importance, must beg you to let me be in
your Debt for this until another Opportunity, as also for what you further
desire concerning Pleasure. In the mean time I leave you to that of your own
Meditations, more of which upon this great Subject will be highly grateful to

Madam, Your very humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, March 23.
LETTER IX. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
YOU have so clearly removed the Objection made against the entire Love of GOD,
on account of its being prejudicial to the Love of our Neighbor, that I hope
we shall hear no more of that matter. And truly when our Objectors have once
felt (as they will for certain sooner or later) the Disquiet and Uneasiness, we
may well refer them to their own Experience for a full Conviction of the
Unreasonableness of such Desires. As far as I can perceive the Objection is
founded upon Supposition, That all Human Love is a Love of Desire; a Love that
arises from and terminates in that insatiable Desire we have of our own
Happiness: Which methinks is a very great Reproach to Humane Nature, which as
bad as it is, is not incapable of a pure and disinteressed Benevolence. Had
they duly attended to what you have writ in you Theory of Love, Part 1. Sect.
5. They would have discerned the Falseness of their Supposition. But though all
other Arguments should fail, my own Experience would assure me that there is
such a thing as unmixed Benevolence; for there are some Persons in the World to
whom I could perform the highest Services, without any the least Intuition of
Reward, or Prospect of bettering my own Being.

And now, to proceed in our most excellent Subject, though I am very sensible
how much I depretiate it by my unkilful Management; yet that I may give
occasion to your better Meditations, and because of the just Deference I pay
you, I am contented in Compliance with your Desire, rather to discover my
Ignorance than be wanting in my Respect. I will therefore first declare what I
think may be added to the Unreasonableness of loving the Creature; and secondly
what to the Reasonableness of interpreting the first and great Commandment in
the strictest Notion; all along subjoyning such Remarks as offer themselves,
and seem not to me altogether foreign to the Subject.

For the first, I think it very unreasonable to love the Creature, because it
can never answer the End of Love. We desire only in order to Happiness, nothing
being desirable any further than as it promotes that End; but the Love of the
Creature is more apt to hinder than advance our Happiness which is the End of
loving, and therefore in all reason Creatures ought not to be thought
desirable. It may perhaps be objected that this is metaphysical Nonsense, for
the Creature is so necessary in order to our good, that whilst we are in the
World we are so far from being happy, that we cannot so much as subsist without
it. I do not deny this, provided the Creature be used only as an Occasion of
our good, and with that Indifferency that is due to it. But if we rest in it as
our End, and desire it as the true Cause of our Pleasure, it is so far from
being our good, that it certainly becomes our evil, in that it deludes our
Expectations, shrinks under us when we have laid the Weight of our Souls upon
it, and causes us to fall into Air and Emptiness. That the Creature cannot make
us happy is evident from all those Topics that declare its Vanity, its
Uncertainty, and Inability to fill the Capacities of the Soul. For let a Man
grasp as much of the Creature as possibly he can, he will still find an
Emptiness in his Soul, something that is still wanting to complete his Bliss,
which is the Reason why we are always upon the Hunt after Variety of
Enjoyments, like a Boy at the Foot of a Hill, who fancies if he were at the Top
he should touch the Sky, but when he comes there, finds it as much out of his
Reach as ever. So true is that Conclusion of the wise King, who had both the
fullest Enjoyment of temporal things, and the best Capacity to judge of them of
any we know of, that all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. And therefore unless
Reason require us to place our Felicity in that which will certainly be our
Vexation, it cannot be reasonable to love the Creature; and consequently if
Love be not an unreasonable Passion, and if it be fit to love at all, it is
highly reasonable to love GOD, and him only.

But if abstracted Reasons cannot persuade us to the entire Love of GOD, let it
further be considered, that this is the best way to secure to us that which we
are so very fond of, even the Enjoyment of the Creature. It is most certain
that the Divine Benignity does neither grudge, nor envy, nor arbitrarily deny
us any thing that has a true Tendency toward our Satisfaction, and therefore
when he deprives us of those occasional goods that minister to our Ease and
Pleasure, it is only that he may more fully secure our Interest in our true and
only good, by removing those things that stood between us and it, which
eclipsed our View, withdrew our Affections, and hindered us in the Enjoyment of
it. And therefore to fix our Love warmly and entirely on GOD, is the most
likely Way to be sure of possessing all that is good in other things. For the
Crosses and Disappointments that we meet with are mainly designed to divert us
from our vain Pursuit after the Shadow of good, and to direct us toward the
Substance; to show us experimentally since we will not sufficiently attend to
what Reason suggests, the Emptiness and Unsatisfactoriness of all created good,
that so we may more directly pursue, and inseparably cleave to the uncreated.

I may add, that if we have any Generosity in us, any Sense of the Dignity of
our Nature, we cannot but acknowledge that it is little and low, and unbecoming
the Soul of Man to place the least Degree of its Happiness in any Creature
whatsoever. Since the Soul is capable of enjoying the first and sovereign good,
and since he freely offers himself to her Embraces, it is as injurious to her
Honor as to her Happiness to stoop to a Creature, and to degrade her self to
such mean Enjoyments.

The next thing to be done is to add somewhat to the Reasonableness of
interpreting the great Commandment in the strictest Notion. That our Savior's
meaning was that we should love the Lord our GOD with all the Force and Energy
of our Souls exclusively of all other Loves, may be presumed from the great
Aptitude there is in such a Love to promote the Design of Religion in general,
and of the Christian Religion in particular, which is, to retrieve the original
Rectitude and Perfection of Humane Nature, or rather to improve it; to new draw
and perfect in our Souls that beautiful Image of our Maker, which by our Sins
and Errors we have defaced; in a word, to makes us as Godlike as is consistent
with the Capacity of a Creature; and I know not any thing that does so
effectually conduce to this as the entire Love of GOD. The End of Love is to
unite its self to its Object, every Motion it makes is in order to that End,
and since Heterogeneous Substances can never cordially unite, since without
Similitude of Disposition there can be no Union, therefore Love does ever
endeavor after Likeness; it would if it were possible have an Identity of
Essence, and, as far as the Nature of things will admit, incorporate with the
beloved Object. Hence nothing is so excellent at Imitation as Love, nothing
does so easily assimilate, which by the way, is one reason why we ought not to
love the World, because of the Danger of being conformed to it. If then we love
GOD entirely we shall with all the Powers of our Soul endeavor to be like him,
and according to the Degree of our Love, so will be the Nearness of our
Resemblance. For we cannot make GOD like our selves, if therefore we desire a
Union we must be conformed to the Divine Nature. Love, as the wise Man long
since observed, surpasses all things for Illumination. And wherefore does it
so, but because it fixes the Eyes of our Mind upon its Object, makes them keen
and piercing; causes our Thoughts to dwell upon its Beauties, for they will
always be busied about what we love? And as Love is very sagacious in finding
out every little Punctilio that will recommend it to its beloved, so it is most
restless and unwearied in the Practice of all Endearments, It will regulate all
its Operations by his Models, imitate all his imitable Perfections, that so it
may most powerfully recommend it self, by that which is the great Band of
Affection, Similitude of Nature. Since therefore the Love of GOD has such an
Aptness to promote the great Design of the Christian Religion, it is but
reasonable to think that our Lord upon this very Account did so highly
magnify, and so strictly enforce it. And indeed, since Love does so powerfully
influence all our Motions, since all our Endeavors, all our Operations and
Varieties of Acting tend to nothing else but the Accomplishment of some Desire,
it is but fit and decorous that all our Desires should fix on him, whose we are,
and for whose Glory we were created.

To the Reasonableness of the Love of GOD, we may further add the Necessity of
it, and that upon a double Account. First, because this is the only Vital
Principle of Holiness, the only effectual Means of securing our Obedience, and
consequently of preparing us for the Enjoyment of GOD. There is no way of
uniting our selves to GOD but by keeping his Commandments, for then, and not
otherwise, do we dwell in him and be in us. Since therefore Obedience is
necessary in order to Happiness, that which is the only true Principle of
Obedience must be of equal Necessity. And that without Love there can be no
true Obedience, and wherever Obedience is found it is a certain Criterion of
Love, is plainly evident from our Savior's discoursing in the 14. and 15.
Chapters of St. John; so that to derive universal Obedience from the Love of
GOD, or to argue from that Obedience to the entire Love of GOD, is as sound a
Way of Argumentation as to prove any other Effect by its Cause, or Cause by the
Effect. It were easy to show how every particular Duty is necessarily
consequent to the Love of GOD, how it is founded upon, and does naturally
spring from it. But I shall not here enter into the Detail, I will only take
notice of the Management of our Thoughts, because on them depends our Words and
Actions, and derive the Necessity of the entire Love of GOD, from the
Impossibility of governing our Thoughts as we ought without it. Now this is
most certain, that what we love will be uppermost in our Minds; there is no
better Diagnostick to discover our Love than by observing what is the most
frequent Subject of our Thoughts. For Thought seems to me to be nothing else
but the Determination of the Soul to some certain Object which she desires
either to contemplate or enjoy, a forming in her self the Images and
Representations of what she delights in, or contriving how she may obtain it,
and remove what stands betwixt her and it: And therefore wherever the Weight
of our Desire rests, the Stream of our Thoughts will follow; it is to no Purpose
to drive them away, for though we may for a while put a Force on them, they
will insensibly steal back again. So that if we mean to keep our Hearts with
all Diligence (the only way to secure our outward Demeanor) we must above all
things take care to regulate our Desire, since it is by this that we fall into
Destruction. If therefore our Hearts be too busy about any thing in this
World, I know no other Way to cure that Disorder but by rectifying our Desire:
Let us cease to love it, and we shall easily restrain our Hearts from being
inordinately busied about it.

It is not so much the Force of Temptations, alas! All that the World and the
Devil can offer to bribe our Hearts is paultry and inconsiderable; it is not so
much the unavoidable Infirmity of our Nature, which has not such an Aversion to
GOD as we pretend; but it is the Defect of our Love, our wilful misplacing that
Divine Affection, our voluntary hankerings after the Creature that sets us at
Distance from the Creator.

For let any one who has been intimately acquainted with the Movements of his
own Heart tell me, whether he does not find that all the strong Gusts of
Temptation blow from the Quarter? Whilst he duly contemplates the divine
Perfections, looks on GOD as his true and only good and desires him
accordingly, is not his Obedience prompt and ready, does not his Mind move with
Alacrity and unwearied Vigor, and are not all its Motions regular and pleasing?
But no sooner does his Desire step into a By-path, and he suffer himself to
dote on the Creature, but all is unhinged and falls into Disorder, the Wheels
of his Chariot move slowly, his Thoughts wander, his Devotion languishes, his
Passions grow unruly, his Intentions corrupt, and his good Actions become lame
and broken. Let us not therefore complain of our Listlessness in the Worship of
GOD, our Coldness and Wanderings in his Service, how much Labor it costs us to
raise up our Hearts to Heaven, and put them in a right Tune, but rather let us
complain of our want of Love, for that is the true Cause of all this
Untowardness, all our Sins and Infirmities, our moral Mistakes and
Imperfections proceed from nothing else but this; let us once banish our Idols
from our Hearts whatever they are, and we shall quickly find that all will be
well again. For in vain do we search for Rules to regulate our Manners, and
prescribe Remedies to cure our Infirmities, which do but baffle our Industry
and reproach our Skill, our Prescriptions will do us but little Service till we
have reformed our Love, the Misapplication of which is the true Source of all
our Disorder, the corrupt Root of all our Faults. If therefore we would come up
to our holy Religion, if we would be those wise and excellent Creatures that
GOD designs we should, let us above all things fix our Love on its proper
Object, put it in a regular Motion, and then do but allow it Scope, and
faithfully pursue its Tendencies, and we need not be afraid of doing amiss; we
should run the Race that is set before us with Cheerfulness and Vigor, in a
direct Line, and with an unwearied Constancy. For when Love is arrived at its
Zenith, when GOD is all in all, then and not till then, shall we be consummate;
and the greater Progress we make in this Love whilst we stay on Earth, the
nearer Approaches do we make to Perfection. Could we love GOD as entirely as he
loves himself, we should then be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect.

One way whereby the Love of GOD mightily facilitates our Obedience, and
secures the Performance of it is this, it reduces our Duty to a very narrow
Compass. For it is not the Difficulty but the Multiplicity of our Tasks which
is the Cause that some of them are neglected. We cannot say of any particular
Duty that it is impossible, and yet through the Shortness of our Views, and
Narrowness of our Powers, it frequently happens that some of our Devoirs are
unperformed. But though a Man cannot attend to many things at once, yet sure he
can to this one, to love the Lord his GOD with all his Heart, etc. that is, to
move toward him with all the Force of his Nature. And though I cannot say this
will secure him from all pitiable Infirmities, yet I dare venture to affirm it
will from all imputable Transgressions, and keep him asfree from Sin as is
consistent with the Imperfection of this present State: And certainly to be
fortified against the Venom, and secured from the Shame of Sin, is no
inconsiderable Blessing. Repentance is indeed an excellent Atidote to expel the
Poison, but it is much better not to take it. For though I were sure to be
delivered from the evil Consequences of Sin, I would not commit it merely on
account of its natural Turpitude and concomitant Evil. It Is so exceeding ugly
in its own Nature, and such a Reproach to ours, that though I know GOD (so
great is his Goodness) will pardon me upon my true Repentance, yet I know not
how to forgive my self. Even that very Goodness which frees us from the
punishment, increases the Shame of Sin, and makes it so much the more
abominable in that it is an Offense against so great a Goodness. Ioseph's
Expostulation in my Mind is very emphatick: How can I do this great Evil and
sin against GOD? He does not say how can I expose my self to the Hazard of
Discovery, the Pain of Repentance, and all the evil Effects and Punishments of
Sin? No, that which was most grievous to him, and is so to all ingenious
Tempers, was the Opposition that is in Sin to the Nature of GOD, the Affront
that it offers to his Majesty and Goodness. In his Opinion Sin in its self was
the only considerable Evil, the only thing to be avoided and fled from, for
certainly of all Punishments this is most deplorable, to be given up to our own
Hearts Lust, and suffered to follow our own Imaginations. But to return from
this Digression.

What was observed above is by the way a sufficient Apology for the Strictness
of the Divine Law. For since it is GOD only that does us good, and he only that
is our Good; since all our Happiness consists in a Union with and Enjoyment of
him; and since without Holiness there can be no Union with GOD, and that
without Obedience to his Commands we can never partake of his Nature; therefore
Holiness is of absolute Necessity because it is impossible to be happy without
being holy. To suppose it is to suppose the greatest Absurdity, and to imagine,
either that GOD is not our Happiness, or that it is possible to enjoy him
without being like him. We have therefore no reason to complain of the
strictest Precepts of our Religion. For when we are commanded to cleanse our
selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, to perfect Holiness, to deny
and mortify that Part of us which is the Scene of Temptation, the corruptible
Body which presses down the Soul, to be holy in all manner of Conversation, and
in a word to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect; we are but in other
Words commanded to be as happy as ever we can, no difficult Task one would
think, we may rather wonder why it should be enjoined us, since Nature and the
Reason of things dictate and press it on us. But though we all naturally pursue
after Happiness, though we all constantly desire it, yet we are too apt to
mistake the means of attaining it. And therefore GOD has thought fit out of his
unspeakable Goodness to send his Son into the World, to show us by Precept and
Example the true way to Felicity, and explicitly discover that which we all
blindly pursue. He does not exact of us any Duty, but what if we had a just
View of things we would choose our selves; and only engages us by all that
Deference that is due to his Wisdom, by all that Obedience we owe to his
Authority, to seek for Happiness there only where we are sure to find it; to
make use of such Methods as will infallibly secure us from Delusion and
Disappointment; and therefore we can never answer it either to Reason or good
Nature if we be refractory to such exuberant Kindness and Condiscention.

But secondly, the entire Love of GOD is necessary, because unless we love GOD
only, we do in effect not love him at all, the Desire of GOD, and Desire of the
Creature being in their own Nature incompatible, and by allowing our selves to
love the one, we do by consequence forsake the other. For besides what you have
already very excellently observed to this purpose in the Discourse it self, it
may further be considered, that Love being the same to the Soul that Motion is
to Bodies, as Bodies cannot have two Centers, or different Terms of Motion, so
neither can the Soul have a twofold Desire. We may as reasonably expect that a
Stone should go up Hill and down Hill at the same time as that the Soul should
(...) GOD and any (...) To love is in (...) to make the thing (...) our End: We
move toward good in order to make that good our own, and to embrace and
acquiesce in it. Now he that loves the Creature does it because he expects some
Degrees of Happiness (at least) from it, and so far makes it his End, and
consequently does not center upon GOD as his complete and only Felicity, for if
he did, it were impossible to withold any Degree of his Love from him. Again,
if as you said in your last, he that enjoys GOD cannot Desire any thing out of
him, because of the infinite Fullness of GOD, then certainly he that desires any
thing besides GOD, whatever he pretend, or however he deceive himself, does not
truly love GOD, for if he did, that would quench all Desire of the Creature. He
that has discovered the Fountain will not seek for troubled and failing Streams
to quench his Thirst: He can never be content to step aside to catch at the
Shadow who is in Pursuit and View of the Substance. The Soul that loves GOD has
no occasion to love other things, because it neither needs nor expects Felicity
from them whenever it moves toward the Creature it must necessarily forsake
the Creator, and it can never truly turn to him without a Dereliction of all
besides him.

Perhaps this may be thought a skrewing up things to too great a Height, a
winding up our Nature to a Pitch it is not able to reach; and though it may be
fit and desirable, yet it is not at present practicable to love GOD with such
an intense and abstracted Affection. But I consider, that since we are so apt
to tumble down the Hill, so inclinable to take up with the least and lowest
Measures; since it is impossible we should love too much, and very great Danger
of our loving too little; and that our Practice does constantly come short of
our Theory, our Copy seldom reach the Original; it cannot be amiss to represent
our Duty in the strictest Measures, to excite our Endeavors to do as well as
we can, since we cannot expect to compass what we ought, or pay to the Divine
Majesty what is due to his transcendent Excellencies and infinite Love to us:
And since our just Debt cannot be discharged, is it not fit to raise our
Composition as high as our Stock will bear? Besides, the Design of all this is
only to secure and improve our Happiness, and is it not an odd thing for a Man
to complain of enjoying too much, and of being over happy? His Desire of
Happiness is ever flaming, he may indeed be, and often is mistaken in his
Applications to particular Objects, can it then be thought a Discourtesie to
direct him to that never-failing Spring, that stable Center which cannot
disappoint him? And though perhaps he may think it at first an uneasy thing to
restrain his Desires from their usual Haunts, and to put them in a new and
quite contrary Motion, yet if the Reasonableness of the thing cannot, at least
let his Kindness to himself persuade him to make the Experiment, and I doubt
not but that in a very little time he will be fully convinced that the entire
Love of GOD is as practicable and pleasurable as it is rational and perfective.

And indeed, nothing does so much greaten and enlarge the Mind as the Love of
GOD; for when it has so vast a good before it, it must needs stretch it self to
receive the Fullest Draught that ever it can, and to be covetous and ambitious
of the supreme Good are very laudable Qualities. Farther yet, the Love of GOD
will inspire the Soul with the most generous Sentiments. A noble Mind though it
love never so heartily, will not desire Love again unless it can pretend to
some Merit to recommend it. And though Merit is a thing that Creatures can have
no Title to in respect of their Creator, yet some faint Resemblance of it they
may aspire to. Though they cannot strictly deserve, yet they may do that which
through his gracious Acceptance will entitle them to his Favor, which though
it be not Merit, yet through his Condiscention is equivalent to it. And
therefore an ardent Lover of GOD will consider how incongruous it is to present
him with a mean and narrow Soul, a Heart grovling on the Earth, cleaving to
little dirty Creatures. He will discern that nothing but what is great and best
is fit for GOD's Service, and will strive even to outdo himself that he may
procure an Oblation tolerably fit for such a Majesty. To conclude, when we can
say with David, our Hearts are fixed, when they are entirely fixed on GOD, we
have very great reason to sing and give Praise, for then we are truly and very
happy, but never till then.

And now Sir, you have all that at present occurs to my Mind on this noble
Argument, and when you have added what you promise, I think there will not
remain much more to be said upon this Subject, unless you will please to assign
the Cause why we are so backward to a Love that is both so reasonable in it
self, and so pleasant and profitable to us. It may indeed seem exceeding
strange to a considerate Person, why any one who has the Use of Reason, should
not love GOD, or why he should love any thing besides him. For does not the
Will as naturally and necessarily seek after good and cleave to it, as the
hungry Appetite does to its Food, or the thirsty Heart to the refreshing
Streams? And does not GOD comprehend all possible Good, is he not the very
Fountain and sole Author of it? Is he not Goodness it self, that communicative
Goodness which gave Being to all things, in whom all things are, and
consequently whatsoever is good in them must in a more eminent Manner subsist
in him, as you have fully made out in a just Discourse upon the Subject. And
admitting that he were not the efficient Cause of all our good, of all our
pleasing Sensations; yet, according to the Principles of all Mankind (for they
who deny GOD and his Goodness do not deserve to be ranked in that Number) all
the good that we do or can enjoy, is, if not that way, yet some way or other
derived from him. Whither then can the Will possibly move but toward him?
Where can it quench its insatiable Thirst but in this inexhaustible Ocean of
Delight? And having once tasted of this true and only satisfying good, is it
possible that it should desire or relish any thing besides him? It is indeed
strange, very strange that it should! And no body could imagine it if
Experience did not daily declare it. From whence then does this Absurdity
arise? What Is the reason that we do not all seek for good there, and there
only, where we all acknowledge it does in the most eminent manner reside? Why
the Mischief is, that though we habitually know this, yet we do not actually
consider it, or at least not so thoroughly as to determine us to this Choice.
It Is our Misfortune that we live an animal before we live a rational Life; the
good we enjoy is mostly transmitted to us through Bodily Mediums, and contracts
such a Tincture of the Conveyance through which it passes, that forgetting the
true Cause and Sourse of all our good, we take up with those occasional goods
that are more visible, and present to our animal Nature. Besides, the Mistakes
of our Education do too much confirm us in this Error. We suck in false
Principles and Tendencies betimes, and are taught, not to thirst after GOD as
our only good, but to close with those visible Objects that surround us, to
rest and stay in them. These we learn to covet and call our goods, to value our
selves upon, and be pleased in the Enjoyment of them. And as we grow up we see
the generality of the World pursuing the same Method, and think it our Wisdom
to strike in with the vulgar Herd. Probably we may have been taught to call on
GOD, to acknowledge him the giver of all good things in a formal Address, and
when we have done so we fancy we have paid our Tribute, discharged our Duty,
and therefore enquire no further into the meaning of it, but put on our
Religion as we do our Clothes in Conformity to the Fashion, nay perhaps do not
so much study, or make so many Inquiries about that as we do about the other.
Thus are we insensibly betrayed into a wrong Motion, and blindly follow on in
it, till at length we become so glew'd to the Creature, that it is almost as
difficult to wean us from it, as it is to change the I eopard's Spots, or
whiten the Negro's Skin: And finding the Propension so early and so strong, we
imagine that Nature not Custom is the Author of it, which certainly is a very
gross Mistake. It Is voluntary Error, superinduced Habits, and evil Customs that
sets us in Opposition to GOD, it is not through any Natural Aversion that we
turn from him. For what can Nature desire but a Supply of all her Wants, and a
Union with the Fonntain of all Felicity? And she is not so blind in other
things as to mistake a Stone for Bread, and Poison for Food. Nor would she go
retrograde in this her great and primary Motion, if we did not clap a false
Bias on her, and force her into a By-path. Custom as the Philosopher well
observed is no small matter: It is the most difficult thing imaginable to
recall our Thoughts and withdraw the Stream of our Affections from that Channel
in which they were used to flow. Which is a further proof of the great
Necessity that lies upon us betimes to cut off all Desire from the Creature, to
shut up all the Avenues of our Souls from created good, even from those dearest
Idols that bear the nearest Resemblance to our Maker, to whom our Benevolence
is due, though they ought not to usurp our Desire.

By this Time I have sufficiently tired you, and therefore must not stay to
enlarge upon the Usefulness and consequently the Value of that Book of yours
you were pleased to send me, I can only return my Thanks for it, and all your
other Favors, as it becomes

Sir, Your much obliged and humble Servant.
St. Philip and St. James, 1694.
LETTER X. Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
HAving been so happy in my last as to give you no less Satisfaction concerning
the second Difficulty arising from the seeming Inconsistency of the entire Love
of GOD with the Love of our Neighbor, than concerning the first, suggested
from the Causality of GOD in reference to Pain as well as Pleasure, I shall now
resume that Thread of my Discourse, which in the last save one I begun. but by
Occasion of the Objection crossing my Way was forced to interrupt and proceed
to add to what both you and my self have already offered, such further
Improvement as I think necessary in order to the fuller Establishment of the
entire Love of GOD. The Truth and Reasonableness of which Notion the more I
think of it, seems to me so very evident, that as I cannot withold my Assent
from it my self, so were it not a matter of Practice wherein our Passions and
Interests are concerned, as well as Theory that imploys our understandings, I
should strangely wonder at all rational and considerate Persons that can. But
this in great measure silences my Admiration. For this is the great
Disadvantage that all Truths of a moral Nature lie under in Comparison of those
that are physical or mathematical, that though the former be in themselves no
less certain than the latter, and demonstrated with equal Evidence, yet they
will not equally convince, nor find a parallel Reception in the Minds of Men,
because they meet with their Passions and Lusts, and have oftentimes the will
and affections to contend with even after they have gained upon their
Understandings; whereas the other being abstract and indifferent Truths, and
such wherein they are wholly disinteressed, stand or fall by their own Light,
and never fail to be received according to the Degree of Evidence which they
bring with them. Were I to deal only with the rational Part of Man, I should
think that half of what has been said would be enough to convince that, but
considering the Nature of the Truth I advance, and what a strong Interest is
made against it in the affectionate Part of humane Nature, I cannot expect to
find the generality of Men overforward to receive it. But then on the other
side neither shall I for the same Reason think their Backwardness any
Objection, or measure the Truth of the Proposition by the Number of its
Adherents. For when all is done, Men will believe no further than they like,
and were the Notion never so self-evident, or my Arguments for it never so
convincing and demonstrative, the mere Opposition that it carries to the
Passions and lower Interests of Men, would I doubt not be enough to make it a
Paradox. For what, to have our Hearts that have been for may Years, even from
the first Pulses of them, cleaving and fixing and adhering to the World, taking
Root in it, and incorporating with it by a thousand little Strings and Fibers,
plucked up and torn away from it all at once, and our Hands that had taken such
fast hold of it, at one Blow forced from its sweet Embraces? To be at once
entirely divorced from all sensible Objects, to have all our Idols demolished,
and our high Places taken down, to be divided from the whole Creation, and to
have all the Ties broken which by a numerous Union linked us to it, to be
forced to undergo a mystical Death, a spiritual Crucifixion, to be crucified to
the World, and to have the World crucified to us, in one Word, to die to the
Body and World wherein we live, and withdraw our Love from the Objects of Sense
that we may place it all upon a spiritual and intellectual good, who can expect
that these things should down with the generality of Mankind, or that a
Doctrine that encounters such a strong Tide of Prejudices should find many
Disciples in a sensual and unmortified World? The other Precepts of Morality
cross only some particular Interests of Man, and fight only against some of his
straggling Passions, but this engages with the whole Body of Concupiscence, and
at once encounters the whole Interest of Prejudice, all the Force that is or
can be raised in humane Nature. Which when I consider, however convinced of the
Truth of what I contend for in the Recess of my Mind, I cannot hope by the
clearest and strongest reasoning to reconcile the generality of the World to a
Notion so opposite to the Passions, Customs and Prejudices of it. Only there
may be here and there some liberal and ingenious Spirits who have in great
measure purged themselves from the Prejudices of Sense, disingaged their Hearts
from the Love of sensible Objects, and so far entered into the Methods of true
Mortification as to be capable of Conviction, and of having their Minds wrought
upon by the Light and Force of Reason. And if we have not yet said enough
between us to convince such as these, I would desire them further to consider.

That the natural Tendency of the Will being from the Author of our Natures
must needs be right, it being impossible that GOD should put a false Bias upon
the Soul, and that therefore it is the Perfection and Duty of every rational
Creature to conform those Determinations of his Will that are free to that
which is natural, or in other Words to take Care that the Love of his Nature
and the Love of his Choice conspire in one, that they both agree in the same
Motion, and concenter upon the same Object. Thus far I think I advance, nothing
but what is clear and unquestionable. We are therefore only concerned to
consider what is the natural Inclination of the Will, or, what that Object is
to which it naturally tends and stands inclined. To this the general Answer is
easy, and such as all Men will acquiesce in, who will be ready to confess that
the natural Motion of the Will is to good in general. And that this is the true
natural Term of its Motion is plain because the Wills of all Men how different
soever in their other particular Determinations agree in this, and because we
have no manner of Freedom in this Motion, or Command over it, but are
altogether passive in it, which shows it to be properly a natural Motion. I lay
down this therefore as an evident and undeniable Proposition, that the natural
Motion of the Will is to good in general. But now how can the Will be moved
toward good in general but by being moved toward all good? For to be moved
toward good as good is to be moved toward all good. And how can the Will be
moved toward all good but by being moved toward a universal Being who in
himself is and contains all good? For as the Understanding cannot represent to
it self universal Ideas, but by being united to a Being who in the Simplicity
of his Nature includes all Being, so neither can the Will be moved to good in
general but by being moved toward a universal Being who by reason of the
Infinity of his Nature comprehends all good, that is, toward GOD, who is
therefore the true Term of the natural Motion of the Soul.

And that he is so will be further evident if we consider the Operation of that
Cause by which this natural Motion is produced. This Cause. I here suppose, and
have elsewhere shown to be GOD, and indeed who else should be the Cause of what
is natural in us but he who is the Cause of our Natures. Let us see now how
this Cause acts. GOD cannot act but by his Will, that is most certain. But now
the Will of GOD is not, as in us, an Expression that he receives from without
himself, and which accordingly carries him out from himself, but an inward
self-centring Principle, that both derives from, and terminates in himself. For
as GOD is to himself his own good, his own Center and Beatifick Object, so the
Love of GOD can be no other than the Love of himself. Whence it will follow,
that as GOD must therefore be his own End, and whatever he wills or acts he
must will and act for himself (as I have already represented it in the
Discourse of Divine Love) so also that the Love which is in us must be the
Effect of that very Love which GOD has for himself, there being no other
Principle in the Nature of GOD whereby he is supposed to act. Whence it will
further follow that the natural Tendency of our Love must necessarily be
toward the same Object upon which the Love of GOD is turned. For since Love in
all created Spirits is not produced but by the Will of GOD, which it self is no
other than the Love which he bears himself, it is impossible that GOD should
give a Love to any Spirit which does not naturally tend whither his own Love
does. And since it is evident that the Term of his own Love is himself, it is
as evident that the same is also the natural Term of ours, that as our Love
comes from him, so it naturally tends to him, and that as he is the efficient,
so he is also the true final Cause of the Will of Man; which I take to be
nothing else but that continual Impression whereby the Author of Nature moves
him toward himself. Which by the way may serve to furnish us with the true
Reason of a very considerable Maxim which has hitherto been entertained without
any, as being thought rather a first Principle than a Conclusion, I mean, that
the Will of Man cannot will Evil as evil. Which though a Truth witnessed by
constant Experience, and such as all Men readily consent to, and acquiesce in,
I despair of ever seeing rationally accounted for upon any other Supposition
than the present. But according to this the Account is clear and easy. For
here the Will it self being supposed to be nothing else but that general
Impression whereby GOD, moves us continually toward himself, it is plain that
we cannot possibly will or love Evil as evil, as having no Motion from GOD
toward it, but to the contrary, viz. to himself who is the universal good. And
as we may demonstrate a Priori from this Impression whereby GOD moves us
toward himself, that we cannot love Evil as evil, so from the Experience we
have that we cannot love Evil as evil, we may argue, as a Posteriori, that our
Wills are by their original Motion carried toward GOD, and that he is the
true and sole Object of their natural Tendency.

Which is also further proved by all those Arguments which I have already, and
may more at large produce, for our seeing all things in GOD as our universal
Idea. For since the Will of Man is moved only toward what the Spirit
perceives, as is universally granted, and by Experience found to be true, and
since as it has been sufficiciently proved, we perceive all things in GOD, who
presents to Spirits no other Idea than himself, who indeed is all, it plainly
and necessarily follows that the natural Motion of our Wills is and must be
toward GOD and him only; who having made himself the sole Term and Object of
our natural Love ought also to be made by us the sole Object of that which is
free, since as was laid down in the Beginning, the Determinations of our Will
that are free ought to be conformable to that which is natural.

The whole Sum and Force of this reasoning lies in this Syllogism. That which
is the sole Object of our natural Love ought to be the sole Object of that
which is free. But the sole Object of our natural Love is GOD, therefore GOD
ought to be the sole Object of that which is free. The first of these
Propositions is evident from that moral Rectitude which must necessarily be
supposed in the natural Motions of our Love, as proceeding from the Author of
our Natures, to which therefore the free Motions of it ought to be conformable.
The second Proposition is that which I have professedly proved, and I think
sufficiently. Wherefore I look upon the Conclusion as demonstrated, viz. that
GOD ought to be the sole Object of our free Love, which being the only Love
that falls under Command, and the only one that is in our Power, we must
conclude that GOD requires all the Love which he can possibly require, and all
the Love which we can possibly give, even our whole Heart, Soul and Mind, which
we are not therefore to divide betwixt him and the Creature, but to devote to
him only, and religiously to present as a Burnt-offering entirely to be
consumed at his divine Altar. And thus the whole Motion of our Wills falls
under the Right and Title of GOD, who becomes the just proprietary and adequate
Object of them in their largest Capacity and utmost Latitude. There are but two
Sorts of Motions in our Souls, as in our Bodies, natural and free, and both
these belong of right to GOD, who has taken the greatest Care to secure them to
himself. He prevents that which is natural, and he requires that which is free.
The first he makes his own by natural Instinct, the last by Commands, by
Benefits and Obligations, by his own Example, by bestowing upon us the Power to
love, by directing this Love toward himself, and by all the Reason in the
World. We are therefore to cast both these Loves into one and the same Chanel,
and make them both flow in one full Current toward GOD. We are to make GOD the
only Object of our Love of Choice, as he has made himself the only object of
our natural Love, and so joining this double Motion together to employ the
whole Force of our Nature upon him, and love him with all our Power from whom
we have all the Power that we have to love.

And how happy is that Man that can do so, that can thus order and regulate the
Master and Leading Passion of his Nature, that can thus love the Lord his GOD
with all his Heart, Soul and Mind! How to be envied is that Man who can thus
disingage his Affections from the Creature, who can thus recollect, fix, and
settle his whole Love upon GOD! It may seem that he is not so, and if we will
hearken to the fallacious Reports of our Senses and Imaginations they will tell
us that this is to enter into a dry, barren, disconsolate and withering
Condition, and will represent it as a State of horrible Privation, as a dismal
Solitude. But if it be a Solitude, it is such an one as that of Moses upon the
holy Mount when he withdrew from the People to enjoy the Converse of God, as
that of our Savior when he tells his Disciples that they should all desert and
leave him alone, and yet that he was not alone because his Father was with him.
Happy Solitude, when the Creatures retire from us, and leave us to the more
full and free Enjoyment of God, and thrice happy he that enjoys this divine
Retreat, that can force the Creatures to withdraw, command their Absence, and
wholly empty his Heart of their Love that it may be the more free for the
Reception and Enjoyment of him who is able to fill the largest Room he can
prepare for him there! How ravishing and lasting are his Delights, how solid
and profound is his Peace, how full and overflowing are his Joys, how bright
and lucid are the Regions of his Soul, how entire and undisturbed are his
Enjoyments, what a settled Calm possesses his Breast, what a Unity of Thought,
what a Singleness and Simplicity of Desire, and what a firm stable Rest does
his Soul find when she thus reposes her full Weight upon GOD! How loose and
disingaged is he from the World, and how unconcerned does he pass along through
the various Scenes and Revolutions of it, how unmoved and unaltered in all the
several Changes and Chances of this mortal Life! While others are tormented
with Fears, and Cares, and Jealousies, unsatisfied Desires, and unprosperous
Attempts, while they are breaking their own and one another Rests for that
which when they have it will not suffer them to sleep, while they are tortured
with their Lusts, and with those Wars which are occasioned by them, while they
are quarrelling and contending about the things of the World, hunting about
after Bubbles and Shadows, beating up and down after Preferments, at once
climbing up and falling down from the Heighths of Honor, pursuing hard in the
Chase of Pleasure, all the way along complaining of Disappointments, and yet
(strange Enchantment) still laying in a Stock for more: In one Word, while
they are thus suffering the various Punishments of an irregular and misplaced
Affection, so that the whole World seems to be like a great troubled Sea,
working and foaming and raging, till all below be Storm and Tempest, his Breast
in the mean while like the higher Regions of the Air enjoys a heavenly Calm, a
divine Serenity, and being wholly unhinged and dislodged from the Creature, and
entirely bottomed upon another Center, upon the infinite Fullness and
Sufficiency of GOD, he has no more Part in any worldly Commotions than the
Inhabitants of the Air have in an earthly Earthquake, nor is any further
concerned in the Afflictions of those below him, but only to wonder at their
Folly, and to pity their Misery.

Then as to his moral State, must not the Life of such an one needs be as
innocent and virtuous as it is pleasant and happy? It Is the Love of the Creature
that is the general Temptation to Sin, and what St. James observes of Wars and
Fightings, is as true of all other immoral Miscarriages and Disorders, that
they proceed from our Lusts. And how pure and Chaste then must his Soul be that
is thoroughly purged of all created Loves, and in whom the Love of GOD reigns
absolute and unrivaled, without any Mixture or Competition. How secure must he
needs be from Sin, when he has not that in him which may betray him to it! The
Tempter may come, but he will find nothing in him to take hold of, the World
may spread round about him a poisonous Breath, but it will not hurt him, the
very Cleanness of his Constitution will guard him from the Infection. He has
but one Love at all in his Heart, and that is for GOD, and how can he that
loves nothing but GOD be tempted to transgress against him, when he has nothing
to separate him from him, and all that is necessary, perhaps all that is
possible to unite him to him! What is there that should tempt such a Man to
Sin, and what Temptation is there that he has not to incite him to all
Goodness, and what a wonderful Progress must he needs make in it? VVhither will
not the entire Love of GOD carry him, and to what Degrees of Christian
Perfection will he not aspire under the Conduct of so divine, so omnipotent a
Principle! If Obedience be the Fruit of Love, then what an entire Obedience may
we expect from so entire a Love, and how fruitful will this Love of GOD be when
there are no Suckers to draw off the Nourishment from it, when there is no
other Love to check and hinder its Growth! The Man that harbors Creatures in
his Bosom, and divides his Heart betwixt GOD and them will be always in great
Danger of being betrayed by them, and though he should with great Care and
habitual Watchfulness preserve for GOD a greater Share in his Affections
(which is the utmost such an one can pretend to) yet he will have such a
Weight constantly hanging upon his Soul, that he will be never able to soar
very high, or arrive at any Excellency in Religion. But what is there on the
other side that can hinder him who has emptied his Heart of the Creatures, and
devoted it entirely to GOD from reaching the highest Pitch of attainable
Goodness? How orderly then and regular will be his Thoughts, how refined and
elevated his Affections, how obedient and compliant his Passions, how pure and
sincere his Intentions, how generous and noble his Undertakings, what a forward
Zeal will he have for GOD's Glory, how cheerful, vigorous and constant will he
be in his Service, with what Angelick Swiftness will he perform what GOD
requires of him, or whatever he thinks will be pleasing to him, and how will he
run the Way of his Commandments when his Heart is thus set at Liberberty! At
Liberty not only from this or that particular Encumbrance, this or that Lust or
Passion, but from the whole Body of Sin, the entire Weight of Concupiscence.

But Madam, while I thus set out the Reason and Advantage of the entire Love of
GOD, I still make further way for your Question, how comes it to pass that we
are so backward to a Love which is both so reasonable in it self, and so
pleasant and profitable to us? You might have enlarged your Question with
another, since Men are backward, not only to pay that entire Love which they
owe to GOD, but even to acknowledge the Debt, and are not only loath to obey
the Command, but even to understand it, will use a thousand Arts and Devices to
shift off and evade the genuine Force of it, and rather than fail will say,
that though GOD in the most plain and express Terms calls for our whole Love,
yet he means only a Part of it. Strange and amazing Partiality and Presumption!
But of this general Backwardness to receive the Sense of this plain Command (as
plain as Thou shall have no other Gods but me) I have already hinted an Account
in the former Part of this Letter, and as to the Backwardness of putting it in
Practice that has been so excellently and fully accounted for by your better
Hand that there is nothing left for mine to add upon this Part of the Subject:
And indeed scarce upon any other. I shall therefore conclude all with a very
pertinent Passage out of one of the Prayers of St. Austin, in the 35th Chapter
of his Meditations. Reple semper ( quaeso) Cor meum inextinguibili dilectione
tui, continua recordatione tua, adeo ut sicut Flamma urens totus ardeam in tui
amoris dulcedine, quem and aquae multae in me nunquam possint extinguere. Fac
me Dulcissime Domine amare te, and desiderio tui deponere pondus. Omnium
carnalium desideriorum, and terrenarum Concupiscentiarum gravissimam Sarcinam,
quae impugnant and aggravant miseram animam meam, ut post te expedite in odore
unguentorum tuorum currens, usque ad tuae Pulchritudinis Visionem efficaciter
satiandus merear pervenire. Duo enim Amores, alter honus, alter malus, alter
dulcis, alter amarus, non se simul in uno capiunt pectore, and ideo si quis
praeter to aliud diligit, non est Charitas tua Deus, in eo. Amor dulcedinis and
Dulcedo amoris, Amor non crucians sed delectans, Amor sincere cast que
permanens in saeculum saeculi, Amor qui semper ardes and nunquam extingueris,
dulcis Christ, bone Jesus, Charitas Deus meus, accende me totum igne tuo, amore
tui, Suavitate and Dulcedine tua, Iucunditate and exultatione tua, voluptate
and concupiscentia tua, quae sancta est and bona, casta and munda, tranquilla
est and secura, ut totus dulcedine amoris tui plenus, totus Flamma Charitatis
tuae succensus, diligam te Deum meum ex toto Cord meo, totisque medullis
praecordiorum meorum, habens te in Cord, in Ore, and prae Oculis meis, semper
and ubique, ita utnullus pateat in me locus adulterinis Amoribus.

Fill always ( I beseech thee) my Heart with an unquenchable Love of thee, with
a continual Remembrance of thee, that so as a burning Flame, I may burn all
over in the Sweetness of thy Love, which may not be quenched even by many
Waters. Make me sweetest Lord to love thee, and through the Desire of thee to
lay down the Weight of all carnal Desires, and the most heavy load of earthly
Concupiscences, which fight against and weigh down my miserable Soul, so that
running expeditely after thee in the Odor of thy Ointments, I may be worthy to
arrive to the effectually satisfying Vision of thy Beauty. For two Loves, one
good and another bad, one sweet and another bitter cannot dwell together in the
same Breast, and therefore if any one love any thing besides thee, thy Love O
God is not in him. O Love of Sweetness, O Sweetness of Love, that do not
tormont but delight, Love that for ever remainest sincere and chaste, Love that
does always burn and art never extinct, sweet Christ, good Jesus, my God, my
Love, kindle me all over with thy Fire, with the Love of thee, with thy
Sweetness, with thy Joy, with thy Pleasure and Concupiscence, which is holy and
good, chaste and clean, quiet and secure, that being all full of the Sweetness
of thy Love, all on fire with the Flame of thy Charity, I may love thee my GOD
with my whole Heart, and with all the Power of my inward Parts, having thee in
my Heart, in my Mouth, and before my Eyes, always and every where, that so
there may be no Place in me open to adulterous Loves.

You see Madam, that St. Austin here most expressly prays for the very same
thing for which I argue, the most entire Love of GOD, and who is there that can
justly scruple to say Amen to this Divine Prayer of his? I for my own Part
assent to it most heartily, and so beseeching the holy Spirit, the great
Dispenser of Charity, to shed this entire Love of GOD into the Hearts of you
and me, and all good people; that so we may love him as a GOD, with a Love
truly worthy of him, I leave you to the Correction of these my Thoughts, and to
the Enjoyment of your own; which whether you will further communicate upon this
Subject, that so the same Hand may conclude which begun it, I leave you to
consider, while I justly thank you for the Advantage of your past
Correspondence, and assure you that I cannot express how very much I am thereby
obliged to continue

Madam, Your most faithful Friend and humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, May 25. Your Definition of Pleasure is right as far as it goes, but
that is no further than what we call a nominal Definition.



LETTER XI. To Mr. Norris.
SIR,
THough I intimated in my last that I had concluded my Meditations on this
Subject, yet I find like its divine Object it has no Bounds. And besides the
natural Vastness of the Argument, your convincing and pathetick Discourses so
rouse my Understanding, so chafe my Affections and enlarge my Thoughts, that I
have once more resumed this noble, this pleasing, this perfective Theme, which
is the Solace of my Heart, the Entertainment, not only of my Leisure, but of my
most busy and best employed Hours. For what have we to do, what is it that
deserves to be the Business of rational Creatures but to adore and love their
Maker? It were not worth while to live in the World, were it not to love GOD
and pay our Devoirs to him; and could the Atheists and Hypothesis possibly be
true, our greatest Wisdom would be with all Expedition to hasten out of it.

But though the Account you give of the Love of GOD be so accurate and
entertaining, yet I don't in the least wonder that you comprehend this sacred
Theory so fully, and explain it so efficaciously, since the great Evidence of
divine Love has assured us that he will manifest himself to them that love him;
they shall see him, whilst the blind World has no Vision of his Beauty; they
only can declare the Sweetness of this hidden Manna, who taste and feed on and
are intimately acquainted with it.

Nor need you wonder at my Prolixity which you are pleased to encourage and
commend, because it is an Evidence that whatever my Understanding be, my Will
is right, and though I am very sensible the one is too defective to deserve
Commendations for its Notions, yet you are pleased to overlook its
Imperfections on account of the Honesty and Regularity of the other. Love you
know is talkative, as its Thoughts are ever busied in contemplating, so is its
Tongue in displaying the Beauties of its Object; it would have all the World
admire that which it doats on, and every thing he sees or hears serves to
excite the dear Idea in a Lovers Mind. This we may observe when the Object is
finite, and perhaps unworthy of our Choice, and well may the Observation hold
when our Hearts are united to infinite Perfection, when all the beauteous
things that surround us are but faint Shadows of our Beloved's Excellencies,
when our Loftiest Praises are no better than Detractions, and the highest Pitch
of Love we can possibly skrew up our Souls unto, infinitely unworthy of him,
were it possible to offer more. When therefore in my solitary Musings I
entertain my self with these agreeable Contemplations, I fancy the whole
intellectual World is offering up it self a flaming Sacrifice to GOD, and that
there is no Contention among intelligent Beings but who shall with greatest
Ardor love, praise, and serve the glorious Author of their Happiness! Whatever
it is, I am sure it ought to be so: For who can forbear to admire Beauty when
plainly represented to his Eye? Or to be ravished with harmonious Numbers when
they briskly strike his Ear? Who is so dull as not to desire what is lovely,
and relish what is good? Why then is he not affected, nay, why is he not
transported when caressed by all that is good, and all that is lovely! When the
Fruition of Beauty, and Harmony, and Goodness in the Abstract are offered to
him? Why we shoud withold our Hearts from GOD, when it is not more our Duty
than our Interest and Happiness to offer them to him, I confess I cannot yet
discern. And though much has been said to account for this Absurdity, yet I
must needs own it still employs my Wonder. For why should even our Affections
oppose the Love of GOD, since it does not deprive them of any real good, why
should they not rather close with it, since its only Design is to satisfy and
perfect them? Our very lower Appetites will find more true Satisfaction in the
Service of GOD and Reason, than in their own irregular and exorbitant Sway.
Sure I am that a Man may be much happier by withdrawing his Heart from the
Creature than he can be in cleaving to it. Nay, (let it look never so much like
a Paradox) it is impossible for him to be in any Degree happy, whilst misplaced
Affections do so far prevail as to denominate him an irregular Lover and wicked
Man. So true is that saying I have somewhere met with, that there is no Joy but
in GOD, and no Sorrow but in an evil Conscience. But admitting the Creature
were able to entertain us, what wise Man would think much to relinquish a
lesser for a greater good, or show any Inclination for lower Delights when
courted to the Enjoyment of the highest? Why then do we relish any other
Pleasure? Since there is as much Difference betwixt this and all other
Delights, as between the Quintessence and the Faeces, the kindly Work of
Nature, and the preternatural Operations of Medicine? Other Loves, even the
very best, have somewhat of Grossness in them which offends even whilst they
please, and have always their Pleasure mixed with Pain; whereas Divine Love is
so connatural to the true Taste and Relish of the Soul, that although the
Sentiments it excites are highly ravishing and entertaining, though they fill
every Faculty with a full Tide of Joy, they are withal so pure and undisturbing
that they are Sweets that know no Bitter, Joys without Allay, Pleasures that
have no Sting, such as I would fain describe, but that I am not Mistress of
Eloquence enough to express them. But whatever it be in which a Man finds the
greatest Delight, let him abstract from it all that is uneasy and disgusting,
let him double and treble the Joy, let his working Fancy exalt it to the utmost
Height, and perhaps it may afford him some faint Idea of this delightful Love,
which yet Experience will convince him falls as short of it as artificial
Fruits do of the natural and true. All which does only increase my wonder why
there are so few Votaries to this only real Bliss! For why a Man should reject
his Happiness is a Question we can never answer, but that he does, is what we
daily see. Well then may it repent GOD that he has made Man, since Man has made
himself such an absurd, irrational Creature! Well may the Divine Goodness
passionately exclaim, O that they were wise! O that there were such an Heart in
them, since it is impossible, even to an Almighty Power to make him happy who is
resolved he will not be so. And herein methinks appears the Devil's greatest
Masterpiece, that he can give such a false Representation of things, and so
much to our Disadvantage as to put us upon the violent Pursuit of good where we
can never find it, and to blind us so that we may not discern it where it is,
and our own most notorious Folly in being so wretchedly imposed on by him. For
certainly the Ways of Vice are as toilsome and uneasy as they are foolish and
absurd; they are not only unprofitable but unpleasant too, the Consideration of
which is the reason why I was so desirous of a Definition of Pleasure from your
accurate Pen. For Pleasure as I take it is the grand Motive to Action, and
after all the Thoughts I have employed about the matter, I am not able to
conceive how there can be any such thing as Pleasure in ought but Virtue, nor
consequently what Inducement to any other Course: It Is as irrational to look
for Pleasure from eccentrick Actions, as to expect Harmony from an Instrument
unstrung and out of tune. As therefore the Love of GOD is the Sum of our Duty,
so by consequence it is the Height of our Pleasure, the Joy of the whole Man;
and were we not strange unaccountable Creatures, it would be the Business of
our Lives, the End of all our Actions. I will not therefore search for
Arguments to enforce this Love, after those incomparable ones you have so well
inculcated, which are indeed unanswerable, and not to be opposed by any thing
but that which is as unconquerable as it is unaccountable, wilful Folly, for if
we are resolved not to practice, the Wonder is the less that we are averse to
admit the Truth of this Theory. Certain it is, would we but make the Trial, our
own Experience would supersede the Trouble of Dispute. The Fruition of so
perfect and all-sufficient a Being, would convince us that he who is altogether
and infinitely lovely is worthy of all our Love. For after all the Arguments we
can urge, after all the Swasives we can offer, there is none like to that of
the Psalmist, O taste and see that the Lord is gracious! Would we but open our
Souls wide to receive his Influences, we should need no more Conviction that
it is he, and he only who can replenish and content them, and therefore it is he
only who ought to possess them. And were I writing to the World, to Persons not
sensible of their Obligations, I would desire them only to open their Eyes, to
fix their Thoughts steddily on the Divine Beauty, and then tell me if there be
any thing fit to rival him, or if that Creature be worthy of his Love who can
divide the least Grain of his Affections from him, or can discern Amability in
any thing besides him? I would entreat them if they will not be active in
kindling this Divine Fire, to be passive at lest, not to skreen themselves from
his Beams, nor put a wilful Bar to exclude the natural Operations of his
Excellencies (for this stubborn Will of Man, weak as he is, does often check
Omnipotence) and then let me ask them if they do not feel the Rays of his
Goodness sweetly insinuating into every Part, clearing up the Darkness of their
Understandings, warming their benumbed Affections, regulating their oblique
Motions, and melting down their obstinate, ungrateful, disingenuous Wills? Do
they not feel these Cords of a Man as himself is pleased to call them, these
silken Bands of Love, these odoriferous Perfumes drawing them after him,
uniting them to him by the most potent Charms? Can they any longer refrain from
crying out, Thou have overcome, O Lord thou have overcome, ride on
triumphantly, lead my Soul in Triumph as thy own Captive, thy Love has
conquered and I am thine entirely and for ever. And blessed is the Man that is
so overcome! He never lived till now, nor knew what Pleasure meant; some Shows
of it might tantalize and abuse him, but now he is delivered from that
Enchantment, and has free Access to the Ocean of Delight, he may now take full
Draughts of Bliss, without fear of want or Danger of Satiety! He may -- what
shall I say? He may be as happy as his Nature will permit, and has nothing to
hinder him from being infinitely so, but that he is finite and a Creature!

And now if our happy Man be so sensible of his Bliss, that he is desirous by
all means to confirm and secure it; I know no better way than by frequently
contemplating the infinite Loveliness and Love of GOD. For as it was this that
begat Love, so this must preserve and continue it, nor is it possible it should
ever go out so long as he supplies it with this Fuel. And if for the greater
Security of his Happiness, and that he may not deceive himself in a matter of
so vast Importance, since most Men will take it very ill to have it said that
they are not Lovers of GOD, and yet there are but few who really are so, if on
this Consideration he be inquisitive after the genuine Properties of Divine
Love, (besides what has already more loosely been hinted at,) the great
comprehensive and inseparable Effect of it is universal Obedience, as I
intimated in my last. But to be more particular; a flaming Love to GOD will
create the greatest Indifference imaginable toward the World and all things
therein. For since all those Ties are broke that glewed us to it, we are no
longer moved or affected by it. I need not tell you Sir, that a passionate
Lover is careless to all things but the Object of his Desire; if that smile, no
matter who frowns on him. Those Objects which other Persons pursue with
Eagerness, enjoy with Complacency and lose with Regret, are unmoving and cold
to him, he is not sensible of their Charms, nor are the Avenues of his Soul
open to any thing but what he loves. Other things he beholds at a distance,
they may slightly touch and pass away, but cannot penetrate. But wherever his
Beloved is interessed his Soul is all on fire, he does not pursue his Service
with a languid and frozen Application, but with the Diligence and Zeal of Love.
He will not for the petty Interests that self proposes, connive at the Injuries
that are offered to his better self. He will not see his Beloved affronted, his
Laws contemned, and his Designs opposed, and tamely stand by and hold his
Peace; nor does he regard what himself may suffer, but only what Service he can
reasonably hope to do; and never is chary of any of those things we usually
call our own, whether Fortune, or Fame, or Life it self, but only deliberates
how he may reserve them for the most opportune Season of expending them freely
in his Beloveds Service. There Is nothing bitter and uneasy in Love, the
greatest Labors are Delights, for what so grateful to a Lover as the
Difficulty of a Service, because it eminently recommends that Passion which
could surmount it? On which account Love by making Religion our Business and
Interest, our Joy and Pleasure, takes off that Uneasiness, which though really
we do not find we however fancy to be in it, by viewing it only in the
unpleasant Prospect of mere Task and Duty.

Again, Love cuts off all narrow and illiberal Thoughts, gives the most genteel
and generous Temper to the Soul, it extinguishes all Jealousies and Suspicions,
tormenting Cares and desponding Fears; it has a Salve for every cross Event,
and a Sagacity to read GOD's Kindness in such Providence as are vulgarly
resolved into his Displeasure. Hence it is the Parent of the most entire
Resignation, and exact Conformity. A true Lover neither questions GOD's
Revelations nor disputes his Commands, deliberates no further than to obtain a
good Assurance that such and such things are really his Will and Pleasure. He
does not only submit to his Dispensations how disagreeable soever to Flesh and
Blood and his own Expectation; this a Man must of necessity do, and therefore I
cannot discern wherein the Virtue of a bare Submission consists, such a passive
Obedience to GOD is like the new Notion some have got of passive Obedience to
their Governors, a being content to suffer when we know not how to help it; but
our Divine Amorist has an entire Complacency in whatever GOD allots, he in a
manner goes forth to meet it, chooses, justifies, and rejoices in it.

But I must not omit what the holy Scripture makes a peculiar Character and
special Effect of Divine Love, and that is the Love of our Neighbor. That it
is so needs no Proof, being expressly affirmed by our Lord himself and his
beloved Disciple, let us inquire a little into the Reason why it is so, which
seems to be this. GOD by the Prerogative of his Nature, his infinite
Beneficence and Love to us, having a Right to all our Love, whether it be Love
of Desire or Love of Benevolence, but withal, being no proper Object of the
latter, by reason of his infinite Fullness, has therefore thought fit to devolve
all his Right to that Love on our Neighbor, and to require as strict a Payment
of it to his Proxy, as if he were capable of receiving it himself. By this
Notion we may fairly understand St. John's reasoning in his 1 st. Epist. Chap.
4. 20. a Text which those Expositors that I have met with give methinks but a
crude Interpretation of. And besides, the Love of GOD pressing us to such an
exact Imitation of him (as I showed in my last) and GOD being in nothing more
imitable than in his Charity and Communicativeness, our Love to him will
require us to transcribe this most lovely Pattern, and to do all the good we
can to those whom he is constantly pursuing with his Benefits.

It likewise teaches us the true Measure of Benevolence, which is to bestow the
greatest Share of our Love on those who are dearest to GOD and do most resemble
him: I cannot forbear to reckon it an irregular Affection, and an Effect of
Vicious Self-love, to love any Person merely on account of his Relation to us.
All other Motives being equal, this may be allowed to weigh down the Scale; but
certainly no Man is the better in himself for being akin to me, and nothing but
an overweaning Opinion of my self can induce me to think so. I should therefore
choose to derive the Reasons why we are in the first place to regard our
Relations, rather from Justice, and the Rules of Economy, than from Love. For
since the Abilities of Man are finite and determinate, and he cannot
universally extend any Act of Benevolence but Prayers and Wishes, it is
therefore reasonable he should begin to communicate his Benefits to those
within his own Verge and District, whose Wants he is best acquainted with, and
can most conveniently supply; whose Benefits to him are presumed to require
this Return, or else their Necessities bespeak him the fittest Author of their
Relief.

I further observe, that Resignation and Charity are the Tests by which GOD
explores every Man's Love. By the one he tries the prosperous, by the other the
afflicted. He therefore who has this Worlds good, and withholds his Assistance
from his Brother who needs it; and he who because he has not the good things of
this World murmurs and grudges at their Dispensation, and envies them that
have, cannot be said to have the Love of GOD in him.

In the last place, a true Lover of GOD is always consistent with himself, one
Part of his Life does not clash and disagree with the other. He that has many
Loves, has by consequence many Ends; whence it is that we too often see many
who in the main are good People, lash out into some particular Irregularity,
which like a Fly in a Box of Ointment, marrs the Sweetness, and destroys the
Loveliness of their Virtue, and brings a Reproach on Religion it self. The
vulgar and Men of carnal Appetites partly out of Ignorance, and partly to
lighten as they fancy their own Crimes, being too prone to reflect that Dash of
secular Interest, that time-serving or overgreat Solicitude for the World, or
perhaps their too great Opinion of themselves, or Censoriousness on others,
which zealous Pretenders to Piety are sometimes apt to slip into, even on that
unblemished Beauty, whose Livery they wear, which I am sure gives no Allowance
to such unsuitable Mixtures, however her Votaries happen to admit them, But
when we act by this one grand Principle, the Love of GOD, our Lives are uniform
and regular wherein the great Beauty of Piety consists. For I am apt to think
that be Men's Pretenses what they will, that Life only is truly religious which
is all of a Piece; when a Man having deliberately bottomed on well-chosen and
solid Principles, without Fear or Favor acts constantly and steddily according
to them.

To conclude, this Divine Love is the Seal of our Adoption, the Earnest of the
Spirit in our Hearts, it being impossible that the Soul that truly loves GOD
should ever fail of enjoying him. It Is the Antipast of our Happiness here, and
the full Consummation of it hereafter. Thrice happy Soul that can look
through the Veil, and notwithstanding that thick Cloud of Creatures that
obscures thy View, discern him that is invisible, live in the Light of his
Countenance all the Time of thy sojourning here, and at last pure and defecate,
with a Kiss of thy Beloved, breath out thy self into his sacred Bosom!

And now Sir I have done; for what have I further to add, since I cannot
sufficiently express how much I think my self obliged to you? As for all your
other Favors, so particularly that you give me Occasion to declare my self

Worthy Sir, Your most unfeigned Friend, As well as humble Servant.
June 21. 1694.
APPENDIX. Two Letters by way of Review.
To Mr. Norris.
You Will wonder Sir, that I look back upon a finished Subject, but because you
have in these Letters answered most of the Objections that are made against
your printed Discourse, and because I am very desirous your Hypothesis should
appear in its full Light, though in my first I conceded one of the main things
you contend for, viz. That GOD is the only efficient Cause of all our
Sensation; yet since very many object against this Proposition, and something
has offered it self to my Thoughts, perhaps not altogether Impertinent, give me
leave to examine the matter a little furrher. And methinks the main Stress of
the Objections lies in these two Points. First, That this Theory renders a
great Part of GOD's Workmanship vain and useless. Secondly, That it does not
well comport with his Majesty.

For the first, That this Theory renders a great Part of GOD's Workmanship vain
and useless, it may be thus argued. Allowing that Sensation is only in the
Soul, that there is nothing in Body but Magnitude, Figure and Motion, and that
being without Thought it self it is not able to produce it in us, and therefore
those Sensations, whether of Pleasure or Pain, which we feel at the Presence of
Bodies, must be produced by some higher Cause than they; yet if the Objects of
our Senses have no natural Efficiency toward the producing of those Sensations
which we feel at their Presence, if they serve no further than as positive and
arbitrary Conditions to determine the Action of the true and proper Cause, if
they have nothing in their own Nature to qualify them to be instrumental to
the Production of such and such Sensations, but that if GOD should so please
(the Nature of the things notwithstanding) we might as well feel Cold at the
presence of fire as of water, and heat at the Application of Water or any other
Creature, and since GOD may as well excite Sensations in our Souls without
these positive Conditions as with them, to what end do they serve? And then
what becomes of that acknowledged Truth that GOD does nothing in vain, when
such Variety of Objects as our Senses are exercised about are wholly
unnecessary? Why therefore may there not be a sensible Congruity between those
Powers of the Soul that are employed in Sensation, and those Objects which
occasion it? Analogous to that vital Congruity which your Friend Dr. More (
Immor. of the Soul, B. 11. Chap. 14. S. 8.) will have to be between some
certain Modifications of Matter, and the plastic Part of the Soul, which
Notion he illustrates by that Pleasure which the preceptive Part of the Soul
(as he calls it) is affected with by good Music or delicious Viands, as I do
this of sensible by his of vital Congruity, and methinks they are so symbolical
that if the one be admitted the other may. For as the Soul forsakes her Body
when this vital Congruity fails, so when this sensible Congruity is wanting, as
in the Case of Blindness, Deafness, or the Palsy, etc. the Soul has no
Sensation of Colors, Sounds, Heat and the like, so that although Bodies make
the same Impression that they used to do on her Body, yet whilst it is under
this Indisposition, she has not that Sentiment of Pleasure or Pain which used
to accompany that Impression, and therefore though there be no such thing as
Sensation in Bodies, yet why may there not be a Congruity in them by their
Presence to draw forth such Sensations in the Soul? Especially since in the
next place, it seems more agreeable to the Majesty of GOD, and that Order he
has established in the World, to say that he produces our Sensations mediately
by his Servant Nature, than to affirm that he does it immediately by his own
Almighty Power.

Nor will this be any Prejudice to the Drift of your Discourse, which is to
prove that GOD only is to be loved because he only does us good, for the
Creature has as little Right to our Affections this way as the other. If a
bountiful Person gives me Money to provide my self Necessaries, my Gratitude
surely is not due to the Money but to the kind Hand that bestowed it, to whom I
am as much obliged as if he had gone with me and bought them himself. For there
seems no Necessity to conclude that every thing that does me good, that is,
that produces Pleasure in me, though it be but the contemptible Pleasure of a
grateful Odor, has on that account a just Title to some Portion of my Love,
since in some Cases the occasioning a moral and durable Good does not
necessarily challenge our Love. As for Instance, my Enemy does me very much
good by his greatest Injuries and most virulent Reproaches, because he gives
Opportunity of exercising my Charity, and makes such a Discovery of my Faults,
that thereby I come to know and amend them. But I suppose you will not say I am
obliged to him for all this, or that I ought to desire those Injuries, or admit
him to my Bosom who offers them? Though perhaps my dearest Friend could not
possibly do me a greater good. We do not therefore owe Love to any Object
merely on account of what it produces, but in Proportion to that voluntary
Kindness whereby it produces it. Agreeably to what you say in your first
Letter concerning Pain, that GOD occasions it only indirectly and by Accident,
it is not his antecedent and primary Design, he does not will it from within,
or for it self, but from without, and therefore for these Reasons is not the
Object of our Aversion. And so say I, allowing that Bodies did really better
our Condition, that they did contribute to our Happiness or Misery, and did in
some Sense produce our Pleasure or Pain, yet since they do not will it, do not
act voluntarily but mechanically, and all the Power they have of affecting us
proceeds entirely from the Will and good Pleasure of a superior Nature, whose
Instruments they are, and without whose Blessing and Concurrence they could not
act, therefore they are not proper Objects of our Love or Fear, which ought
wholly and entirely to be referred to him, who freely acts upon our Souls, and
does us good by these involuntary and necessary Instruments.

For certainly that Being only deserves our Love, even our whole Love, who has
it always in his Power to better and perfect our Nature, and who does
voluntarily and freely exert that Power. Which former Clause I add to cut off
our Love from all rational Creatures, who may be instrumental to our good
designedly and freely, but since their Power is not originally from themselves,
neither are they always in a Capacity of exerting it, seeing they may, and very
often do, want either Power or Will to help us, therefore they are not the
proper Objects of our Love. For that Being only is so who constantly and
chusingly pleasures and perfects our Natures, or at least is always ready to do
so, and actually does it, when not prevented and hindered by our Indispositions
and wilful Incapacities.

These Sir, are at present my Thoughts, though hastily huddled up, for I had
but a few Hours to examine and digest them, and was not willing to remain any
longer in your Debt for this Letter, having trespassed too much already. And I
am confident you are such an unfeigned Lover of Truth, that you will on that
Account easily pardon her Boldness in objecting thus freely against your
ingenious Discourse, who is with all Respect and Gratitude

Your faithful Friend and Servant.
Aug. 14.
Mr. Norris's Answer.
Madam,
YOU are no less happy in this your Review than in your first Overture to pitch
upon the only material Objection to which the Proposition you attack is liable.
But before I set my self to answer it, give me leave to suggest to you that
it is a Proposition of the most incontestable and philosophic Evidence, and in
the Discourse you refer to most clearly demonstrated to be so, that the Bodies
that are about us are not the true Causes of those Sensations which we feel at
their Presence, but that GOD only is the Cause of them, who being the Author of
our Beings has the sole Power to act upon our Spirits, and to give them new
Modification. I say Modifications, for that well expresses the general Nature
of Sensation. And it is a new Modification or different Way of existing of the
Soul that makes this or that Sensation, which is not any thing really distinct
from the Soul, but the Soul it self existing after such a certain Manner.
Wherein it is distinguished from our Idea's, which are representative to us of
something without us, whereas our Sensations are within us, and indeed no
otherwise distinct from us than Modalities are for the thing modified.
Accordingly there is a vast Difference between knowing by Sentiment and knowing
by Idea. We know Numbers, Extension, and Geometrick Figures by Idea, but we
know Pleasure and Pain, Heat and Color, etc. by interior Sentiment. To know
Numbers and Figures there is need of Ideas, for without an Idea the Soul can
have no Perception of any thing distinct from it self, as Numbers and Figures
are. But to know or perceive Grief there is no need of an Idea to represent it.
A Modality of the Soul is sufficient, it being certain that Grief is no other
than a Modification of the Soul, who when in Grief does not perceive it as a
thing without and distinct from her self (as when she contemplates a Square or
a Triangle) but as a different Manner of her own Existence. Sensation then
being a Modification of the Soul, this single Consideration setting aside all
other Discoursings will furnish us with a demonstrative Argument to prove that
not Bodies, but GOD alone is the Cause of our Sensations. For who else should
either have Power or Knowledge to new modifie our Beings, but he who made them
and perfectly understands them? But I shall not enter upon a further
Demonstration of this Point, since I have abundantly proved it in my printed
Discourse of the Love of GOD, and since you do as good as allow it in your
present Objection. This therefore appearing to be a clear and certain Truth,
give me leave again to remind you of a certain Maxim that I observed to you in
my first Letter, That we are to stick to what we clearly see, notwithstanding
any Objections that may be brought against it, and not reject what is evident
for the sake of what is obscure. Supposing therefore that there are, or might
be Objections raised to show that GOD is not the Cause of our Sensations which
I could not answer, yet since my Reason as often as I consult her does most
convincingly assure me that he is, I ought to rest here, and not suffer that
which I do not perceive, to hinder me from assenting to that which I evidently
do.

But to consider your Objections, I observe in the first place that having
granted that sensation is only in the soul, that there is nothing in Body but
Magnitude, Figure and Motion, and that being without Thought it self it is not
able to produce it in us, and therefore those sensations, whether of Pleasure
or Pain which we feel at the Presence of Bodies, must be produced by some
higher Cause than they (all which well agrees with the Conclusion I contend
for) you afterterwards object against their being only Conditions serving to
determine the Action of the true and proper Cause, which Objection seems to
come a little unexpectedly after such a Concession. For if they are not true
and proper Causes of our sensations, what else can they be but Conditions
serving to determine the Agency of him who is so? Yes, you seem to point out a
middle Way, by supposing that as they are not so much as proper Causes, so they
are more than mere Conditions, viz. That they have a natural Efficacy toward
the Production of our Sensations. But if I am not mightily mistaken this middle
Way will fall in with one of the Extremes. For to have a natural Efficacy for
the Production of a thing, is the same as to have a Causality, and that again
is the same as to be (at least a partial) Cause. If therefore the Objects of
our Senses be not true and proper Causes of our Sensations, then neither have
they any natural Efficacy toward the Production of them. But if they have any
such natural Efficacy, then they are true and proper Causes, which though it be
a Proposition which you formally and expressly deny, is that however which your
Objection in the true Consequence and Result of it tends to prove. And to prove
this, That Bodies have a natural Efficacy toward the Production of our
Sensations, or that they are true Causes of them (for I take them to be
Propositions of an equivalent Import) you argue from a twofold Topic, first,
That the contrary Theory renders a great Part of GOD's Workmanship vain and
useless. Secondly, That it does not well comport with his Majesty. Now to set
you right in this matter, and to acquit our Theory from both these very
threatening Inconveniences, we need only fairly propose it. The Case then is
this. GOD has united my Soul to a certain Portion of organized Matter, which
therefore for the particular Relation it has to me I call my Body. This Body of
mine is placed among and surrounded with a vast Number and Variety of other
Bodies. These other Bodies according to the Laws of Motion established in the
World strike variously upon mine, and make different Impressions upon it
according to the Degree of their Motion, and the Difference of their Size and
Figure. These Impressions have a different Effect upon my Body, some of them
tending to the Good and Preservation, and some to the Evil and Dissolution of
its Structure and Mechanism, even as in the greater World some Motions tend to
the Generation and Perfection, and others to the Corruption and Destruction of
natural Bodies. Now though it be not necessary that my Soul should know what is
done to other Bodies, yet for the good of the animal Life it is very necessary
she should know what passes in her own, whether such or such Impressions make
for its good or hurt. Now there are but two Ways for this, Light and Sentiment.
My Soul must know this either by considering and examining the Nature of other
Bodies, the inward Configuration of their Parts, the Difference of their Bulk
and external Figure, the Degree of their Motion, and withal the Relation that
all these bear to the Configuration of her own Body, or by having some
different Sentiment raised in her according to the Difference of the
Impression, or in clearer Terms, by being differently modified her self,
according as the Modification of her Body is altered by the Incursion of other
Bodies. The first of these Ways, besides that it would employ and engage the
Soul which was made for the Contemplation and Love of GOD (her true and only
good) in things altogether unworthy of her Application, is withal, considering
the Narrowness of our Faculties and the frequent Return of such Occasions, not
only infinitely tedious, painful and distracting, but utterly impracticable.
For after all if I were not to take away my Hand from the Fire till I had
entered into the Philosophy of it, examined the Figure and Motion of its little
Particles, and considered the several Relations they had to the Configuration
of my Body, I should be burnt before I had a quarter ended my Speculation. It
is necessary therefore that there should be a quicker and a shorter Way of
advertizing the Soul of the several Relations that other Bodies bear to her
own, and of the Convenience or Disconveniency of their Impressions. Which can
be only by a suitable Sentiment either of Pleasure or Pain according as the
Impression happens to be. But this is an Advertisement I must in vain expect
from Bodies. They can give me no Intelligence of what even themselves do to me.
They can indeed change the Situation of the Parts of my Body, but they cannot
give any Sentiment to my Mind, or new modifie my Soul. GOD only is able to do
this, and accordingly being willing that I should know the Relations that other
Bodies bear to mine with as little Trouble as may be, (it being not fit that a
Soul made for the Contemplation of an infinite Good, should be occupied and
taken up with anxious Disquisitions about Bodies) he leaves it not to my Reason
to explore and sift out the Congruities or Discongruities of other Bodies with
mine (which would not only be a laborious, but after all a very fallacious and
uncertain Way) but in Wisdom thinks fit to go another way to work, and to give
me due Information of these things by the short incontestable Proof of
Sentiment. And because Pleasure and Pain are the natural Marks of Physical good
and evil, and withal the strongest and most quickening Motives to incline me to
seek or shun the Use of Bodies, accordingly these are the two general
Sensations he raises in my Soul according as the Impressions are which are made
upon my Body. Thus for Instance, when the Motion of the Fire is moderate and
temperate upon my Body, and serves only to open and supple its Parts, to
quicken my Blood, and to cherish and recreate my Spirits, I feel a Sentiment of
Pleasure. But when it comes to be intemperate so as to endanger the Rupture of
any of its Fibers, I feel a contrary sentiment of Pain, which admonishes me of
the imminent Evil, and in a Language that even Children and Idiots understand,
bids me remove my self at a greater Distance. And all this with a great deal of
Reason. For though there be nothing in the Motions themselves resembling those
sensations which attend them, and though the Motion which occasions Pleasure
differ only in Degree from that which occasions Pain (which by the way is a
plain Argument that those Motions do not properly cause or produce those
sensations) yet since as far as they respect the Preservation of the Machine,
and the good of the Bodily Life or State they differ essentially, or in their
whole Kind, it is fit they should be attended with sensations essentially
different, such as Pleasure and Pain, which therefore GOD raises in the soul in
Consequence of those general Laws of Union which he has established between it
and the Body, touching it as it ought to be touched in relation to the
Difference of sensible Objects. The Wisdom and Goodness of which Conduct we can
never sufficiently meditate upon or admire.

And now Madam, I can no sooner suppose you to have gone over in your Thoughts
this account concerning the Manner of sensation, than to have formed within
your self a satisfactory solution of the Difficulties you propose. For though
these sensible Objects are not the true Causes of those Sensations which we
feel in our Souls upon the Impressions they make in our Bodies, but only
Conditions determining the Agency of the true Cause, yet it does by no means
follow from hence that therefore they serve for nothing, and are wholly
unnecessary. No, the contrary appears from the Account before given. For though
these Objects do not act upon our spirits, or truly and properly speaking,
produce any sensation there, yet they do really make an Impression upon our
Bodies, and according to the different Measure or Manner of that Impression
minister to GOD (the true efficient) an apt and proper Occasion to act upon our
spirits, and so in this respect are not merely positive and arbitrary
Conditions. It Is true indeed if by positive and arbitrary Conditions you mean
that there is no real Analogy or necessary Connection, abstracting from all Will
or Constitution of GOD about it, between such Impressions and such sensations,
so they are mere positive and arbitrary Conditions. For most assuredly there is
nothing in those Motions that either answers the following sensations, or
naturally and necessarily infers them. But if by positive and arbitrary
Conditions you mean that there is no greater Reason why GOD in Consideration of
the Welfare of the Body should give the Soul such a Sentiment, rather than
another upon such an Impression, so they are not mere positive and arbitrary
Conditions. For though that Motion which is followed with Pleasure, has no
Physical Analogy with Pleasure, as differing only in Degree from that which is
followed with Pain (whereas Pleasure and Pain differ essentially) and so though
GOD might if he pleased exchange sensations, giving me suppose, a sentiment of
Pain, when the Motion of the Fire is temperate, and according to the present
Order of things ought to be followed with a sentiment of Pleasure, and so
likewise giving me a sentiment of Pleasure when the Motion of the Fire is
intemperate, and so according to the present Establishment ought to be followed
with a sentiment of Pain, I say though he might thus transpose cur sensations
for any Physical Proportion or Connection that is between them and their
respective Motions, yet in regard to the good State of the Body it is not so
fit and reasonable that he should, as is obvious to conceive. And this is all
the Sensible Congruity I can allow you. For in short, if by sensible Congruity
you mean only, that considering the Good or Evil that arrives to the State of
the Body from such an Impression there is an antecedent Aptness or Reason in
the thing why GOD should touch the Soul with such or such a Sentiment rather
than with its contrary, I readilly acknowledge that there is such a sensible
Congruity. But if by sensible Congruity you mean (as you seem to do) that there
is any natural similitude or Proportion between such an Impression and such a
sentiment as to the things themselves, or that by virtue of this Analogy such
an Impression has any natural Efficacy to produce, or (in your Language) to
draw forth such a sentiment, in this sense I deny that there is any such thing
as a sensible Congruity, that is, I deny that sensible Objects have any such
Congruity with our sensations as to be able to contribute any thing by way of a
Physical Efficiency toward the Production of them. No not so much as by way of
Instruments. For even Instruments belong to the Order of efficient Causes,
though they are less principal ones, and it is most certain that GOD has no need
of any, since his Will is efficacious of it self. If therefore this be meant by
sensible Congruity that the Objects of our senses have any real Part or Share
in the Production of our sensations, though it be only in an instrumental Way,
I utterly disclaim it as an absurd and unphilosophical Prejudice, and that
without any Danger of rendering the Workmanship of GOD vain or unnecessary, that
Inconvenience being sufficiently salved by the first kind of sensible
Congruity, as you may easily perceive.

This Madam, I think gives full Satisfaction to your first Instance. As to your
second, That it seems more agreeable to the Majesty of GOD to say that he
produces our sensations mediately by his servant Nature, than to affirm that he
does it immediately by his own Almighty Power, I reply briefly, First, That
Arguments from the Majesty of GOD signify no more here against GOD's being the
immediate Author of our sensations than in the old Epicurean Objection against
Providence. And indeed they seem both to be built upon the same popular
Prejudice and wrong Apprehension concerning the Nature of the Deity, as if it
were a Trouble to him to concern himself with his Creation. If it were not
beneath the Grandeur and Majesty of GOD to create the World immediately,
neither is it so to govern it, and if his greatness will permit him to order
and direct the Motions of Matter, much more will it to act upon and give
sentiments to our Spirits, though with his own immediate Hand, which is
necessary to hold and govern the World which it has made. For, after all,
secondly, we have no reason to think it beneath the Majesty of GOD to do that
himself which can be done by none but himself. Which as I have sufficiently
shown to be the Case in reference to our Sensations, so I doubt not but that if
you carefully read over Mr. Malebranch, Touchant l' efficace attribuee aux
Causes Seconds, you will find to hold as true as to all things else. I mean
that GOD is the only true efficient Cause, and that his Servant Nature is but a
mere Chimera.

As to what you say lastly, That the Supposition of Bodies having an immediate
Causality in the Production of our Sensations will be no Prejudice to the Drift
of my Discourse, the entire Love of GOD, because of the mechanical and
involuntary Way of their Operation, I do not know whether this Supposition will
be so harmless or no. But this I am sure of that the safest Way to bar the
Creatures from all Pretensions to my Love, is to deny that I have any of my
Sensations from them, or that I am beholden to them for the lest Melioration or
Perfection of my Being. And besides, if we should once allow them in a true and
Physical Sense to cause our Sensations, I am inclined to think that this may
justly be used as an Argument a Posteriori, to prove that they do not do it so
mechanically and involuntarily as you represent it, but rather knowingly and
designedly, since it is impossible that any thing but a thinking Principle
should be productive of any Thought, as all Sensation certainly is.

And thus Madam I have endeavored to give you the best Satisfaction I can upon
this great and noble, but much neglected Argument, and shall think my self very
happy and sufficiently rewarded if by the Pains I have bestowed I may deserve
the Title of

Madam, Your sincere Friend and humble Servant J. NORRIS.
Bemerton, Sept. 21.
FINIS.
Books printed for S. Manship, at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
MR. Norris's Collection of Miscellanies, in large 8o. -- His Reason and
Religion. The 2d. Edition in 8o. -- His Theory and Regulation of Love. The 2d.
Edit. in 8o. -- His Reflections upon the Conduct of Humane Life. The 2d.
Edition, in 8o. -- His Practical Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Vol. I. The 3d. Edit. in 8o. -- His Practical Discourses
upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. II. The 2. Edit. in 8o. -- His Practical
Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. III. in 8o. -- His Charge of
Schism continued, In 12o. -- His Two Treatises concerning the Divine Light, in
8o. -- His Spiritual Conusel, or Father's Advice to his Children, in 12o.

Books sold by R. VVilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Proposal to the Ladies for the Advancement of their true and greatest
Interest: By a Lover of her Sex, in 12o.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Christian Religion, 8o.

Mr. Edwards's farther Enquiry into several remarkable Texts of Scripture, the
2d. Edit. 8o.

-- His Discourse concerning the Authority, Style and Perfection of the Books
of the Old and New Testament, 8o.

Bishop Patrick's glorious Epiphany, 8o.

-- His Search the Scriptures, 12o.

-- His Discourse concerning Prayer, 12o.

Dr Goodman's Old Religion, 12o.


