Reason and Religion: OR, THE Grounds and Measures OF DEVOTION, Considered from
the NATURE of GOD, AND THE Nature of Man. In several Contemplations. WITH
Exercises of Devotion applied to every Contemplation.

By John Norris, M. A. and Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Manship; at the Bull in Cornhil. MDCLXXXIX.

To his Grace the DVKE of ORMOND, CHANCELLOR OF THE University of Oxford.
May it please your Grace,
IT IS not that I affect the Patronage of great Persons, that this Philosophical
piece of Devotion is now commended to Yours, but because I thought none so fit
as your Grace to Patronize a performance that so well agrees both to the
Character of your Person, and to the Station whereby you stand related to us.

Reason and Religion, which make every Page in this Volume, as they are the two
greatest Perfections of Human Nature, so do they both conspire in your Graces
Person, and that to such a degree as would too much employ our wonder, were
they not both so Hereditary to your Noble Blood, as to seem rather entailed
upon you by descent, than to be of your own acquiring.

But, besides your own Personal Eminency in these two Noble Qualifications of
Mind, your Grace has already undertaken to be their Patron and Protector.
Reason and Religion may very fitly be inscribed as a Motto upon the Gates of
our University; and every one of our Colleges is a School of Piety, as well as
of Philosophy. The accomplishment of our Intellectuals and Morals, is the
peculiar designation of this Place, and our proper and almost only business in
it. And in pursuance of this end, your Grace has (...) lately pleased to (...)
the honor, and yo^^ self the trouble of being our Chancellor. I could not
therefore but presume, that a Person by disposition of Mind so much a lover,
and by place so much concerned, to be a Protector of Learning and Piety, would
be easily inclined to countenance a performance, whose direct aim is the
promotion of both. And now that your Grace may receive as much Benefit from the
perusal of these Meditations, as they will receive honor and reputation from
your Graces Favor and Protection, is all that is further desired

By your Graces most humble and devoted Servant, J. Norris.

To the READER.
THere having been several Excellent things of a Devotional Nature Written for
the Use and Benefit of Ordinary and Unlearned Persons, but little or nothing
for the pious entertainment of more refined and elevated Understandings, I
thought I could not employ my Pen to better purpose than in writing something
of the like Kind for the use of the Learned Reader, who, perhaps needs as much
to be assisted in his Devotion as the more Ignorant; and whose Heart may want
as much to be Inflamed, as the others Head does to be Instructed.

It must be acknowledged therefore that I now write only to those of the
Learned Order, and not to all of them neither, but only to those who are not
spoiled by their Learning, and whose understandings are not Cramped by the
cleaving Prejudices of Scholastic Education, To those who have a genius for
the the Contemplative Way, who have Patience enough to pursue a long train of
thoughts, Acuteness enough to discern their Order and Dependence, and (which is
worth all) Indifferency enough to use and allow Liberty of Thinking, and not to
startle, and be affrighten'd at a New Notion.

By these few hints the Reader may easily perceive both what kind of
Compositions these are, and how I would have him come Prepared and Qualified to
the Reading of them. What further concerns him to know, in reference to the
Subject and Design of the Book, he may learn from the Introduction.

I. N.

The General CONTENTS of the whole.
PART I.
INtroduction. Page 1 Of the general Idea of God. p. 12 Contemplation II. That
God is a Being absolutely Perfect, proved from the Preceding general Idea of
God. Contemplation III. That therefore all the Perfections of particular Beings
exist in God, and that after a more excellent manner than they do in particular
Beings themselves. Contemplation IV. Of the Attributes of God in general;
particularly of the Unity of God: which is proved from his Idea. p. 56
Contemplation V. Of Omniscience and Omnipresence of God. 67 Contemplation VI.
Of the Omnipotence of God. p. 113 Contemplation VII. Of the Divine Justice and
Veracity. p. 120 Contemplrtion VIII. Of the Divine Goodness and Philanthropy.
p. 132
PART II.
Contemplation I. Of Man, considered as a Creature. p. 163 Contemplation II. Of
Man considered as an Intelligent Creature. p. 181 Contemplation III. Of Man,
considered as an Amorous Creature. p. 228 Contemplation IV. Man considered as
an Irregular Lover.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. for or read of: p. 61. for inconsistant inconsistent: p. 71. for
Divisition r. Division p. 82. for his r. this: p. 83. for add r. and ibid. for
Signi r. Gigni: p. 92. for Discartes r. Descartes: p. 187. for the r. their: p.
190. for Sensures r. Censures: p. 217. for Charity r. Clarity: p. 231. for
Proposition r. Proportion: p. 239. for will r. nill: ibid. for willing r.
nilling: p. 250. for (...) r. (...).

The Introduction.
I.
THERE being nothing of greater consequence, to the highest Interest of Man,
than the knowledge of God and Himself, I thought I could not better employ my
Solitude, either for my Own or for the World's advantage, than in exercising my
severest Contemplations upon these two great and important Subjects, the Nature
of God, and the Nature of Man.

II.
It must indeed be confessed, that there is nothing whereof we have or can have
so little knowledge, as of these two things; and it is much to be lamented that
there should lie our greatest Ignorance, where we are most concerned to know.
But thus it is: That of our selves, which we are best acquainted with, is least
of all our selves: and the unknown part of this little World is much greater
than the known. We know but little of our Bodies, but infinitely less of our
Souls. God has not given us any Idea of the latter, and whatever we can borrow
from our Senses will never be able to supply that defect. For there is a
greater distance and disproportion between an Immaterial substance and a
Sensible, than between one sensible and another. But now the understanding the
nature of one sensible will not suffice to make us understand the nature of
another. For a Man born Blind will never from his understanding of Sounds come
to understand Colors. Much less therefore will our understanding of Sensible
things help us to understand the nature of Immaterial substances.

III.
And if not of Immaterial substances in general, much less will it serve us to
understand the Essence of the great God, which infinitely transcends all other
Immaterial substances. The Idea of God is least capable of all Spiritual
Beings, to be formed out of sensible phantasms. For I consider that by how much
the more our Mind is raised to the Contemplation of Spiritual things, by so
much the more we always abstract from sensibles. But now the highest and last
term of Contemplation is, the Divine Essence. Whence it follows necessarily,
that the Mind which sees the Divine Essence, must be totally and thoroughly
absolved from all commerce with the Corporeal Senses, either by Death, or some
extatical and rapturous Abstraction. So true is that which God said to Moses,
Thou can not see my face, for there shall no man see me, and live, Exodus
33.20.

IV.
So far therefore are we from deriving any Idea of God from our Senses, that
they are our greatest Impediment in Divine Contemplations. So great, that we
cannot any other way clearly apprehend the Essence of God while we are lodged
in the Prison of our Senses. God cannot give us a distinct view of himself
while we hold any commerce with our Senses. For he that knows exactly what
proportion our present condition bears to his own Divine Glories, has told us,
That no Man shall see him, and live. We must therefore for ever despair of
conceiving the Divine Essence clearly and distinctly, not only from our Senses,
but even with them.

V.
Not that there is any darkness or obscurity in God. No, God is the most
knowable Object in himself. For he is the First Being, and therefore the First
Truth, and therefore the First Intelligible, and consequently the most
Intelligible. One Apostle says that he dwells in light; Tim. 6.16.
and another, that he is light, and that there is no darkness at all in him.
John 1.5.
God therefore considered in his own Nature is as well the most Intelligible,
as the most Intelligent Being in the World.

VI.
The difficulty therefore arises not from the obscurity of the Object, but from
the disproportion of the Faculty. For our Understandings stand affected to the
most manifest Objects, as the Eye of a Bat to the light of the Sun, as the
Philosopher observes in his Metaphysics. God dwells in light, Tim. 6.16.
as the Apostle says, but then it is such as no Man can approach unto; (...) he
inhabits unapproachable light, or a Light which cannot be come at, not for its
distance (for he is not far from every one of us) but for its brightness. Act.
17.27.
The very Angels are forced to veil their faces when they see it, but for
Mortals, they cannot so much as come nigh it. The short is, God is too
Intelligible to be here clearly understood by an Imbody'd understanding; and
too great a Light hinders vision, as much as Darkness.

VII.
But though we cannot here have a clear and distinct knowledge either of God or
our Selves, yet we may know so much of both as may serve the ends of Piety and
Devotion. We may by attending to that general Idea of God, which is by himself
imprinted on our Minds, learn to unfold many of the Perfections of his Glorious
and Invisible Essence; and though we cannot see his face and live, yet his
back-parts (we know) were once seen by a Mortal capacity, and so may be again.
And for our selves, though God has not given us any Idea of our own Souls, yet
the powers and operations, the condition, circumstances, and accidents of our
Nature, are things that may fall within the Sphere of Human consideration. And
from both these we may derive Measures for our due behavior toward the Great
God. And this is the design of the present Contemplations, viz. to consider so
much of the nature of God, and the nature of Man, as may afford sufficient
Grounds and Measures for true Piety and Devotion.

VIII.
By Devotion here I do not merely understand that special disposition or act of
the Soul, whereby we warmly and passionately address our selves to God in
Prayer (which is what is commonly meant by Devotion) but I use the word in a
greater Latitude, so as to comprehend under it, Faith, Hope, Love, Fear, Trust,
Humility, Submission, Honor, Reverence, Adoration, Thanksgiving, in a word,
all that Duty which we owe to God. Nor by this acceptance do I stretch the
word beyond what either from its rise it may, or by frequent use among the
Learned it does signify. Devotion is a devovendo, from devoting, or giving up
ones self wholly to the Service of another. And accordingly those among the
Heathens who delivered and consigned themselves up to Death, for the safety of
their Country, were called Devoti. And so in like manner for a Man to give up
himself wholly and entirely to the Service of God, and actually to demean
himself toward him in the conduct of his life, as becomes a Creature toward
his Creator, is Devotion. And in this Latitude the word is used by Aquinas, 22
dae Q. 82. A. 1.
who defines Devotion to be, A will readily to give up ones self to all those
things which belong to the Service of God.

IX.
This is what I here understand by Devotion, and of which I intend in the
following Contemplations to assign the Grounds and Measures from the Nature of
God, and the Nature of Man. But before I proceed to enforce and direct Devotion
from these two particular Subjects of Contemplation, I think it not improper to
consider a little by way of preparation, how much Contemplation or Meditation
in general contributes to the advantage of Devotion.

X.
They that make Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, cannot suppose Contemplation
any great friend to it. For the more a Man Contemplates, the more he will know,
and the wiser he grows, the less apt upon their supposition he will be for
Devotion. But I would ask the Men of this fancy this one Question. Is Devotion
a Rational thing, or is it not? If not, Why then do they recommend Ignorance or
any thing else in order to it. For it may as well, nay better, be let alone.
But if it be a Rational thing, then they must either say, that the more a Man
considers, the less he will discover the Reasons of it; or that the more he
discovers the Reasons of it, the less he will be persuaded to the practice of
it. Both which propositions are absurd and ridiculous enough to be laughed at,
but too ridiculous to be seriously refuted.

XI.
But to show how much Contemplation serves to the advantage of Devotion, we
need only consider, that Devotion is an act of the Will, that the Object of the
Will is good apparent, or good understood, and consequently that every act of
the Will is influenced and regulated by consideration. Devotion therefore is as
much influenced by consideration as any other act of the Will is: And therefore
I cannot but admire at the Disposers of the Angelical Hierarchies, for making
the Seraphim excel in Love and Devotion, and the Cherubim in Knowledge. As if
Knowledge were not the best preparative for Devotion.

XII.
I deny not but that Knowledge and Devotion often go assunder, and the Wisest
are not always the Devoutest. But then this is not owing to the natural and
direct influence of Knowledge, but comes to pass only occasionally and
accidentally, by reason of some other impediment: suppose Pride, Lust,
Covetousness, or some such indisposition of Mind, which is of more force and
prevalency to let our Devotion, than Knowledge is to further it. And then no
wonder that the heavier Scale weighs down. But still Knowledge has a natural
aptness to excite Devotion, and will infallibly do it if not hindered by some
other cause. So that we may take this for a never-failing Rule, That all other
things being equal, the more knowing and considering, still the more Devout.
And in this sense also that of the Psalmist will be verified, Psalm. 39.
while I was musing the fire kindled.

The Great God so inlighten my Mind, and so govern my Pen, that by these my
Meditations I may illustrate his ineffable Excellence, and kindle holy flames
of Devotion, both in my Self, and in my Reader. To him therefore I Pray in the
words of Moses, I beseech thee, show me thy glory, Amen.

Contemplation I. Of the general Idea of God.
I.
GOD never at any time discovered so much of himself in so few words, as when
he said to Moses, enquiring by what Name he should style him, to make him known
to the Children of Israel, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I
AM has sent me unto you, (...) i. e. not as we render it in English, I am that
I am, but, I am that am, or, I am he that am. And so the Seventy read it,
(...), I am he that is.

II.
This is the Sacred and Incommunicable Name of the Great God, that which
contains in it (...), all the Fullness of the Godhead, all the Treasures of the
Divinity. By this Name he is distinguished not only from false Gods, but from
all other Beings whatsoever. I am he that am, says God, implying that he is
after some very Eminent and Peculiar Manner, and that nothing else besides him
truly is. This therefore denotes the great Eminence and Peculiarity both of the
Essence and of the Existence of God. Here therefore I shall take my ground, and
shall hence deduce and unfold, 1. The general Idea or Notion of God. 2 ly. Some
of those chief Excellencies and Perfections of his which may have a more strong
and immediate Influence upon our Piety and Devotion.

III.
In the present Contemplation I am concerned for no more than only to six the
general Idea or Notion of God. This is of extraordinary moment to the clearness
and distinctness of our following Contemplations, for unless we take the right
thread at first, the whole progress will be nothing else but error and confusion.

IV.
Now as to the general Idea or first Conception of God, this has been
Universally understood to be, that he is a Being absolutely Perfect. This I say
has been made the general Notion of God in all the Metaphysics and Divinity
that I have yet seen. And particularly it has been embraced by two Authors of
extraordinary Speculation, Cartesius and Dr. More, whose Authority in this
matter claims a peculiar deference, because they are Men that Philosophize with
a free and unaddicted genius, and write not as they read, but as they think.

V.
This Opinion, because embraced by many, and some of them great Patrons, I once
took for a Theorem of unquestionable Truth. But upon a more narrow inspection,
I find it necessary to dissent from it, though it be called singularity to do so.
For however plausible it may at first view appear, I think there is no less an
Objection than plain Demonstration against it. Which I make out upon these
grounds.

VI.
First I consider that the Idea of a thing is that formal conception or inward
word of the Mind, which expresses or represents the Essence or Nature of a
thing. Then again, by the Essence of a thing, is meant that which ought to be
first conceived in a thing, and to which all other things are understood as
superadded. I say which ought to be first conceived, because in fixing the
Essence of a thing, not the arbitrary or accidental, but the natural order of
Conception is to be attended to. Whence it follows, that the Idea of a thing is
that which expresses that which is first of a thing in order of conception.

VII.
This being granted, it does hence evidently follow, That that which is not
first to be conceived in the nature of a thing, but supposes somewhat there
before it in order of conception, cannot be the Idea of that thing, though it be
never so necessarily and inseparably joined with it. For if it were, then
something would be the Idea of a thing, which is not first in order of
conception; which is against the definition of such an Idea.

VIII.
For, to illustrate this by an example, Who will say that the Idea of a
Triangle consists in this, that any two of its sides, taken together, are
greater than the third remaining? This is, indeed, a necessary affection of a
Triangle, but it must by no means be allowed to be its Idea, because it is not
what we first conceive in it, that being this, viz. that which is comprehended
by three right Lines. Which being the first thing conceived, is therefore the
true Idea of a Triangle.

IX.
Now that to be a Being absolutely perfect, is not the first conceivable in
God, but supposes something before it in the Divine Nature, is plain from
hence, because it may be proved a priori, or by way of a causal dependence from
something in the same Divine Nature. That it may be thus proved I shall make
appear in my second Contemplation, where I shall make it my professed business
actually to prove it. At present I suppose it, and upon that supposition do, I
think, rightly conclude, that to be a Being absolutely perfect, cannot be
properly the Idea of God. For the Consequence of my Argument will, I suppose,
be acknowledged by all, the only difficulty is concerning the Proposition it
self: but the Proof of this I reserve to the next Contemplation.

X.
If it be in the mean time objected, That to be a Being Absolutely Perfect, is
involved in the Notion of God; and that it is an Idea that can belong to no
other Being, and that therefore it must be the Idea of God. To this I answer,
1. That a thing may be involved in the Notion of a thing either Formally and
Explicitly, or else Vertually and Implicitly. Whatever is involved Formally and
Explicitly in any Idea, is Essential to that Idea. But not what is involved
only vertually and implicitly. Thus it is vertually and implicitly involved in
the Idea of a Triangle, that it has three Angles equal to two Right ones, and
yet we don't therefore make this the Idea of a Triangle, because it is not there
Formally and Explicitly, but only Vertually and Potentially. But now to be a
Being Absolutely perfect is not involved in the Notion of God Formally and
Explicitly, but only Vertually and Potentially (as will appear in the next
Contemplation) and consequently it is hence more rightly concluded, that the
Idea of God does not consist in this, that he is a Being Absolutely Perfect.

XI.
To the second part of the Objection I answer, that it is not enough to make a
thing the Idea of a thing, because it can belong to no other Being. For then to
be Circumscriptively in a place must be the Idea of a Body, and to be Risible
must be the Idea of a Man, for these are supposed to belong to no other Beings.
No, the most that ought to be concluded hence, is, that such things are (...)
strict properties, such as immediately and necessarily flow from the Essence of
the subject; not that they are the very Essence it self. When therefore it is
said that to be a Being Absolutely perfect can belong to no other but God, all
that may be hence concluded is, that it is an Essential, and consequently
Incommunicable Property of God to be a Being absolutely perfect, but not that
therein the Idea of God does consist.

XII.
If then this be not the Idea of God, wherein shall we fix it? It must be in
something which we first conceive in God, and which is the Basis and Foundation
of whatever we ascribe to him, whatever we think or say of him. It must be in
something that in some measure expresses and represents his Essence. And where
shall we look for this but in his Name, that great Name whereby he revealed
himself to Moses, and whereby Moses was to make him known to his own people,
who were then ignorant of him? In this Name of God I suppose his Essence and
Idea to be couch't.

XIII.
Here therefore I find my self engaged in these two considerations. First, Why
the Idea of God should be lodged in his Name. Secondly, What this Idea of God
is, which is there lodged. That the Idea of God is lodged in his Name, I am
induced to believe upon these grounds. First, Because I think it highly
reasonable to suppose in general, That whenever God gives a name to any thing,
it is such as expresses its nature. Not that words signify naturally, but that
God makes choice of such a word whose signification naturally expresses the
thing, though 'twas through Arbitrary institution that it first came by such a
signification. In this sense, I say, it is highly reasonable to believe, that
God always names things according to their natures. For is it consistent with
the Accuracy of Infinite Wisdom to mis-call any thing? No, as he knows the
number of things, so is he as well skilled in their natures. And therefore,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 147.
He tells the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names. That
is, by such significant names as express their several Powers and Influences.

XIV.
Secondly, I consider, That as it is highly decorous and reasonable in general,
that God should call things by such names as express their natures; so there is
here a particular reason why he should express his own Essence in this his
name. For thus stood the case: The Children of Israel had been now a long while
conversant among the Egyptians, who were the greatest Idolaters and Polytheists
in the World, there they had been used to variety of Gods, who were also called
by variety of names. Hereupon, says Moses to God, Behold, when I come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent
me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his Name? what shall I say unto
them? Implying that it was necessary (as indeed it was) that God should notify
himself by such a Name, as would distinguish him from all the Gods of the
Heathen, that is, by a Proper and Essential Name. Whereupon, says God to Moses,
I am that am. Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has sent
me unto you.

XV.
It being therefore concluded, that the Idea of God must be lodged in this his
Name; let us now consider what this Idea of God is which is there lodged. And
for this we must attend in the first place to the true sense and signification
of this Name of God, I am that am, or, I am. Now this can signify no other,
but Being it self, or Universal Being, or Being in General, Being in the
Abstract, without any restriction or limitation. As if God had said, You
enquire who I am, and by what Name I would be distinguished. Know then, that, I
am he that am, I am Being it self. This therefore must express the Essence, and
consequently this must be the Formal Conception and Idea of God.

XVI.
But this must be further explained, before it be further confirmed. In order
to which, I consider, that as, in every particular order or kind of Being there
is a Universal Nature, under which all singulars are comprehended, and whereof
they all partake: as for instance, there is the Nature or Essence of a Circle
or Triangle in common, as well as this or that particular Circle or Triangle.
So in Beings considered as Beings, there is Being in general, Universal Being,
Being it self, or the Essence of Being, as well as this or that Being in
particular.

XVII.
Again I consider, that all other Universals or Abstract Essences are really
distinct from, and exist out of those singulars whose Essences they are. This
must of necessity be allowed, whatever the Peripatetics remonstrate to the
contrary. Things must exist in Idea before they do in Nature, otherwise 'twill
be impossible to give an intelligible account of the stability of Science, and
of propositions of Eternal Truth. But this I have already demonstrated in my
Vid. Collection of Miscellan.
Metaphysical Essay, and shall have an occasion further to discourse of it when
I come to treat of the Omniscience of God. Here therefore supposing it, I say,
That as all other Universals or Abstract Essences are really distinct from, and
exist out of those Singulars whose Essences they are; so in like manner there
is Being it self, or the Essence of Being, really distinct, and separately
existing from all particular Beings.

XVIII.
And now that the Essence and Idea of God does consist in this Being it self,
or this Essence of Being, will be further confirmed from this Consideration,
That as all other Universal Natures or Essences are nothing else (as I have
already elsewhere, Metap. Essay.
and shall hereafter again prove) but the Intellect of God, which as variously
imitable, or participable, exhibits all the general Orders and Natures of
things; so this Being it self, or this Essence of Being, what can it be else,
but the very Essence of God, containing in it the whole Plenitude and
Possibility of Being, all that is, or can be?

XIX.
And that this is the true Idea and Essence of God, to be Being it self, is
further plain, because it is the first conceivable in God. For the proof of
this, That it is the first conceivable in God, I might appeal to experience.
For, let any Comtemplative Person try whether this be not the first thing he
conceives when he hears the Name of God. But I demonstrate it thus. The first
thing which is conceivable in God, must be the first thing that can absolutely
be conceived. But Being it self is the first thing that can absolutely be
conceived. Therefore Being it self is the first thing which is conceivable in
God.

XX.
The Assumption, I suppose, will pass unquestioned with all. For what can we
possibly conceive before Being it self? The Proposition I prove thus. God is
the first; or, there is nothing before God And therefore the first thing which
is conceivable in God, must be the first thing that can absolutely be
conceived. Otherwise there would be something before God, which is against the
supposition. The conclusion therefore follows, That Being it self is the first
thing which is conceivable in God; and consequently, that the true Idea God, is
Being it self; which was the thing to be proved.

The Use of this to Devotion.
IF then God be Being it self, there is Infinite reason why we should Love,
Fear, Reverence, and Adore him. For what an enlarged, indeterminate,
transcendental, universalized thing is Being it self! There is a vast Amplitude
in the degrees of particular Beings, and inconceivable almost is the
disproportion between an intelligence of the highest order, and a piece of dead
impoverished matter. But what is this to the disproportion between the highest
particular Being, nay all the particular Beings that are or can be, and Being
it self? This is that which truly is, all other things are but shadows and
phantasms. Being it self is its own Basis and Foundation, the great contrariety
to nothing, the steady and inmost support and establishment of all things that
have Being, and the fountain of all that can be. It Is an Ocean without a Shore,
a depth without a bottom. In short, it is such an immense Amplitude as a Man
cannot duly think of without the profoundest impressions of awe and reverence,
humility and self-annihilation, love and wonder, fear and great joy.

The Aspiration.
O Thou whose Name is Jehovah, who art the very Essence of Being, who art Being
it self, how can I ever sufficiently Love, Fear, Reverence and Adore thee! Thou
art above all the Affections of my Heart, all the motions of my Will, yea and
all the conceptions of my Understanding. No sooner do I begin to think of thee,
but I am plunged beyond my depth, my thoughts are all swallowed up and
overwhelmed in their first Approach to thy Essence, and I shall sooner lose my
self than find thee.

O dreadful Excellence, I tremble to think of thy Essence, my soul turns her
self from thee, She cannot look forward, She pants, She burns, She languishes,
is beaten back with the light of thy Glories, and returns to the familiarity of
her own Darkness, not because She chooses it, but because She is Weary.

O sovereign greatness, how am I impoverished, how am I contracted, how am I
annihilated in thy Presence. Thou only art, I am not, Thou art all, I am
nothing. But it is well, O my God, that I am nothing, so thou art all; it is well
I am not in my self, so I am in thee.

O Being it self, it is in thee that I live, move, and have my being. Out of
thee I am nothing. I have nothing, I can do nothing. I am but little and
inconsiderable with thee, and what then should I be without thee? To thee
therefore I devote and dedicate my whole self, for I am wholly thine. I will
ever live to thee, since I must ever live in thee. And oh let my Beloved be
ever Mine, as I am, and ever will be His. Amen.

Contemplation II. That God is a Being absolutely Perfect, proved from the
Preceding general Idea of God.
I.
FRom the Essences of things slow all their Attributes and Perfections. Having
therefore in the preceding Contemplation fixed the Essence and Idea of God in
Being it self, I shall now in the first place hence deduce that he is a Being
absolutely perfect. This has been hitherto taken for the very formal conception
and Idea of God, and accordingly has been made the ultimate ground and
foundation to prove all his other Perfections, but has rather been supposed
than proved it self. But now I make this the first general Attribute of God, to
be a Being absolutely Perfect: The proof and deduction of which from his Idea
is the concern of the present Contemplation.

II.
Let us therefore reassume the Idea of God, which if we attend to, we shall
discern that absolute perfection is vertually involved in it, and consequently
that God is a Being absolutely Perfect. The Idea of God, as we have shown, is
Being it self. Now I consider in the first place that Being it self contains in
it all the degrees of Being, and consequently all possible Perfection. The
Argument in form runs thus. Whatever has all the degrees of Being has all
Perfection.

But Being it self has all the degrees of Being.

Therefore Being it self has all Perfection.

III.
The proof of the first proposition will depend upon this, that Perfection is
nothing else but degree of Being. If this be once made out, then it plainly
follows that whatever has all the degrees of Being has all Perfection. Now to
prove that Perfection is nothing else but degree of Being, I consider first
that all Perfection is by Addition. For the more Perfect any thing is, the more
it has. But now all Addition is by the Accession of something that really is.
For nothing, though never so often repeated, will add nothing. And therefore
Perfection is nothing else but a further degree of Being.

IV.
This I confirm by considering further that every thing is perfect just so far
as it is, and according to the mode of Being, so is the mode of perfection.
Thus virtue is no otherwise the perfection of a Man than as he is virtuous, nor
strength than as he is strong. And so in all other instances according as any
thing is, so is its Perfection. And so on the contrary, all imperfection is
want of Being, and every thing is just so far imperfect as it is not, some way
or other. Now if every thing be so far perfect or imperfect respectively as it
either is, or is not, then it clearly follows that perfection it self is
nothing else but degree of Being.

V.
Again I consider, that it is impossible that perfection should be any thing
else but degree of Being. For there is nothing in the world but Being. If
therefore one thing be more perfect than another, it must be, it can be for no
other reason but because it has more degrees of Being, there not being any
thing else whereby it may exceed. For I think the case is here as in Numbers.
One number excceds another not by any virtue or quality of another kind, but
only by the multiplication of the same units. And so one Being exceeds, or is
more perfect than another, not by any thing which is not Being, but only by
having more units or degrees of Being. Bare, mere Being is as 'twere an unit,
the lowest perfection; and the only way to make it more perfect is
multiplication, by adding to it more of the same units. And consequently
perfection is nothing else but degree of Being.

VI.
This Proposition being sufficiently cleared, that Perfection is nothing else
but a Degree of Being, and consequently the other, that whatever has all the
degrees of Being has all Perfection; let us now consider whether Being it self
has all the Degrees of Being. That it has so, will thus appear: Being it self
is indeterminate in being, and consequently has all the degrees of Being. The
Argument reduced to Form is this: Whatever is indeterminate in being has all
the Degrees of Being.

But Being it self is indeterminate in being: Therefore Being it self has all
the degrees of Being.

VII.
And first, that whatever is indeterminate in being has all the degrees of
Being is certain, for the whole Power and Plenitude of Being can be but
indeterminate or infinite, there is nothing beyond that, and therefore that
which is indeterminate in being, is adequate to the whole Power and Plenitude
of Being; and consequently has all the Degrees of Being.

VIII.
And now that Being it self is indeterminate in being is as certain. For what
should bound it. Nothing can be bounded but by something that is before it:
Which I thus demonstrate. To bound or limit a thing is to give it such a
definite portion of Being and no more. Now to give such a definite portion of
Being and no more, implies giving of Being Simply, and that is the same as to
be a Cause, and every Cause is before the effect, and consequently nothing can
be bounded but by something that is before it. But now what is before Being it
self? Being it self is the first thing that can be conceived: And therefore as
that which is First in any kind, cannot be bounded by any thing in that kind,
so Being it self, which is Absolutely First, cannot be bounded by any thing at
all, because it is before all things. Indeed this or that particular Being may
well be bounded, because it partakes so much and no more of Being it self, or
the Essence of Being. But Being it self having nothing before it from whence it
might receive limits, must of necessity be unlimited in being, and consequently
have all the Degrees of Being.

IX.
And that Being it self has all the Degrees of Being, I further deduce from
this Consideration; All Absolute and Universal Natures or Essences, have all
the Perfection of their respective Orders and Kinds. And it cannot be
otherwise, since they are abstracted from particular Subjects, whose deficiency
in receiving is the ground of all that defect and imperfection which is in all
Concrete Entities. Thus this or that particular Musical Composition, or this or
that particular Virtuous Man, are of a limited excellence, because they partake
of Harmony and Virtue to such a certain Measure. But now suppose Harmony it
self, or Virtue it self, should exist Separately in the very Essence, they
would necessarily have all the possible degrees of Harmony and Virtue. And
accordingly it is as reasonable to conclude that Being it self has all the
degrees of Being. Whence it follows, that Being it self has all Perfection, and
consequently that God, who is Being it self, is Absolutely perfect.

X.
Now if to this it be Objected, That those things which only are, are the most
imperfect, and that therefore Being it self is most imperfect; and that
therefore if God be Being it self, he will be so far from being Absolutely
Perfect, that he will be the most imperfect Being of any. I answer, That if
those things which only are, were therefore imperfect because of the
imperfection of Being Absolutely, as the Objection supposes, the Consequence
would then be as is objected. But they are therefore only imperfect, because
they partake of Absolute Being, according to its most imperfect degree, which
is only to exist. They are not therefore imperfect as they are, but as they are
not. As they are they are Perfect, for to be is to be so far Perfect, and to be
Absolutely is to be Absolutely Perfect. God therefore who Absolutely is, is
Absolutely Perfect.

XI.
The same Conclusion I further demonstrate by this Order or Reasoning: That
must needs be Absolutely Perfect which has no imperfection: All imperfection is
want of Being, and therefore that must needs have no imperfection which is
utterly removed from not being, and that must needs be utterly removed from not
being which has all Being, and that must needs have all Being, which is Being
it self; and therefore that which is Being it self must needs be absolutely
Perfect; God therefore who is Being it self, is also an absolutely Perfect
Being. Which was the Proposition to be proved.

The Use of this to Devotion.
IF then Perfection be only degree of Being, and if God be Infinite in Being
because being it self, and consequently has all the degrees of Being, and
consequently all Perfections, it will hence follow, that we own and acknowledge
this absolute Perfection of his by a suitable exercise of all our Powers and
Faculties. For this is but strict Justice. And that therefore we contemplate
his Superlative Excellence with the deepest Awe, Reverence, and Admiration;
that we love and desire him with the full bent and spring of our Souls; that we
fix and concenter upon him all our Passions and Affections; that we make him
our end and center, the center of our desires, and the end of our actions; that
we despise our selves and the whole Creation in comparison of him; and that
lastly we so study to please this absolutely Perfect Being, that we may at last
be admitted to the glorious communications of his Infinite Perfections.

The Aspiration.
MY Lord and my God, with what awful apprehensions do I contemplate thy
Perfections! how am I struck, dazzled, and confounded with the light of thy
Glories! Thy Being stands like the strong Mountains, and thy Perfections are
like the great deep. How can I think of thee without wonder and astonishment,
and how can I think of any thing else but thee!

O thou Circle of Excellency, thou endless Orb of Perfection, where shall I
begin to love thee? Thou art altogether Lovely; oh that I were also altogether
Love. My God, I desire nothing but to love thee, and to be loved by thee. Thou
art all Fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee. My beloved is Light, and in
him is no Darkness at all; Let him therefore kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, for his love is better than wine.

My Great God, how do I despise my self and the whole Creation when I once
think upon thee! Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth
that I desire in comparison of thee. Thou alone do so fill my Thoughts, so
ravish my Affections, that I can contemplate nothing but thee, I can admire
nothing but thee, and I can love nothing but thee. Nor do I think my Soul
straightened in being confined to thee, for thou, O my God art All.

O my God, Psalm. 63.
I have looked for thee in holiness, that I might behold this thy power and thy
glory. I can now see it but in a Glass darkly, but thou have told us that those
who are pure in heart shall hereafter see thee face to face. Grant therefore I
may so love fear, and serve thee here, that I may behold thee, and enjoy thee,
as thou art in thy Infinite Self, for ever hereafter. Amen.

Contemplation III. That therefore all the Perfections of particular Beings
exist in God, and that after a more excellent manner than they do in particular
Beings themselves.
I.
IN the preceding Contemplations it has been shown, that the Essence and Idea
of God consists in Being it self, and that therefore God is a Being absolutely
Perfect. I now further consider, that from the same ground it may be concluded,
that all the Perfections of particular Beings exist in God, and that after a
more excellent manner than they do in particular Beings themselves. And first
that all the Perfections of particular Beings do exist in God.

II.
This I collect thus from the Idea of God. If Being it self be therefore
absolutely Perfect because it has all the degrees of Being, as has been proved,
then by the same proportion it plainly follows, that if Being it self has all
the degrees of Being that are in all particular Beings, it must have all the
Perfection that is in all particular Beings. This consequence I say is
undeniable, because Perfection is nothing else but degree of Being. And that
Being it self has all the degrees of Being that are in all particular Beings,
might be sufficiently concluded from this, That it has all the degrees of Being
Simply and Absolutely; which was proved before. But I further infer it thus:

III.
Being it self is the cause of all particular Beings, for all particular Beings
are what they are by partaking of Being it self: And if Being it self be the
cause of all particular Beings, then it must be also the cause of all the
degrees of Being that are in particular Beings, for these can no more rise up
into act from themselves, than the particular Beings themselves can. And if
Being it self be the cause of all the degrees of Being that are in particular
Beings, then it must have in it self all those degrees; for nothing can
communicate what it has not. The short is, Whatever is in the effect must
pre-exist some way or other in that cause upon which it wholly depends. But now
if Being it self be the cause of all the degrees of Being that are in
particular Beings, then particular Beings wholly depend upon Being it self; and
consequently whatever Perfection is in particular Beings, must exist in Being
it self, which was the first proposition to be proved.

IV.
The next is, That the Perfections of particular Beings do exist in God after a
more excellent manner than they do in the particular Beings themselves. For the
Prerogative of God above his Creatures does not consist merely in this, That
there are more Perfections in God than he ever did, or will, or can communicate
to his Creatures, but that he has also those very Perfections which they have
in a more eminent manner.

V.
There is indeed a great deal of Perfection and Beauty in the World, enough to
affect the Curious with the greatest Pleasure, and the Religious with the
greatest Devotion. And therefore St. Austin discoursing upon that place of St.
Paul to the Romans, Sermon. 149.
where the Gentiles are said to know God, but yet not to glorify him as God;
Whence could they know him? says he, From the things which he has made? For do
but ask the Beauty of the Sea, ask the Beauty of the dilated and diffused Air,
ask the Beauty of the Heavens, ask the Order of the Stars, ask the Sun
clarifying the Day with his Brightness, ask the Moon tempering the darkness of
the following Night with her Splendour, ask the Animals which move in the
Waters, on the Earth, and in the Air. The Souls which lie hid, the Bodies that
are perspicuous, the visible things that are to be governed, and the invisible
Governors; Ask all these, they will all of them give Answer, Behold, look upon
us, we are Fair. Their Beauty is their Confession. Who made these Mutable
Fairs, but the Immutable Fair? But he that would be more sensibly affected with
the Beauty of the Universe, let him consult that excellent Draught which the
Roman Orator has given of it, De Not. Deorum. Lib. 2.
which I take to be as fine a Description as ever was made, either by his, or
any other Pen.

VI.
And it is highly reasonable, that there should be a great deal of Beauty in the
Creation, since the World was made by him who is Being it self, and
consequently Beauty it self, and who must needs imprint his own likeness upon
the things which he has made. For if God must have all the Perfections which
are in the Creature, then God can communicate no other Perfections to the
Creature than what he has himself, (he himself having all) and consequently the
Creature must partake of the likeness of God. And therefore it may be said,
That God made not only Man, but the whole World, in a larger sense, after his
own Image: and as Art imitates Nature, so Nature imitates God. The short is, If
God has All of the Creature, then the Creature must have something of God, and
therefore must in some degree resemble him. And says Plato in his Timaeus,
(...). He would have all things come as nigh himself as might be. And to the
same effect Aquinas, Lib. 3. Con. Gent. cap. 19.
Res omnes Creatae sunt quaedam imagines primi Agentis; All craated things are
certain Images of the first Agent.

VII.
But though Nature imitates God, yet it happens here, as in most other
imitations, the Extract comes far short of the Original. God does not only
excel the Creatures in having degrees of Being, which he will not, cannot
communicate to them, but also in having their Perfections in a more excellent
manner than they have themselves. Thus that Beauty which charms the Eyes of the
Amorous, exists more excellently in God than in the sweetest Face which they
admire. And that Harmony which dissolves the Soul into Raptures and Ecstasies,
has a much more perfect Existence in God than in the most agreeable Sounds that
can possibly conspire together. The Creature is very unlike God, even where it
resembles him, and accordingly the Scripture sometimes makes mention of a
likeness that is between God and his Creatures, as when it says, Gen, 1.
Let us make man after our own likeness. Again at another time it utterly
disowns it, as when it says, To whom then will ye liken God, or what likeness
will ye compare unto him? Isai. 40.18.


VIII.
And that things should thus fall short of God, even in that very respect
wherein they resemble him, is no more than what Reason will conclude necessary.
For God being the very Essence of Being, or Being it self, and therefore
indeterminate in Being, and therefore also in Perfection, it follows that he
has not only all Kinds of Perfection, but that every Kind of Perfection which
he has must needs be as excellent as is possible in that Kind. Thus for
instance, The Beauty that is in God must be as perfect as it is possible for
Beauty to be, and so the Harmony that is in God must be as perfect as it is
possible for Harmony to be. That is in other words, The Beauty which is in God
must be Beauty it self, and the Harmony which is in God must be Harmony it self.

IX.
But now it is impossible that things should exist in the Creature after such a
rate as this. As they are not Being it self, but Particular Beings, so every
Perfection that is in them is not that Perfection it self, in the Abstract, but
only Particular, Derivative and Concrete. They are Beautiful and Harmonical,
but not Beauty it self, not Harmony it self. Beauty it self can no more be
Communicated to the Creature than Being it self can. All the Essences and
Abstract Natures of things are in God, or rather the very same with God (as I
shall show when I consider the Omniscience of God) and they are but One, they
cannot be Communicated, or Multiplied. Their Images indeed may, but they
themselves cannot, for they are the same with God. There may be many
Beautifuls, or Particular Beauties, but there can be but one Beauty it self.

X.
The Beauty therefore that is in the Creature is only a slender Shadow or
Reflection of that Beauty it self which is in God, who is the Idea or Essence
of Beauty. And as it is Derivative from it, so it exists continually by it, and
in it, and is every way as much depending upon it as the Reflection in the Glass
is upon the Face whose Reflection it is. And as Beauty has a more excellent way
of existence in the Face it self, than in the Glass, so has it a far more
perfect way of subsisting in God than in any Face or thing whatsoever. For all
things are Reflections from him, and the whole Creation is but as 'twere one
great Mirror or Glass of the Divinity.

XI.
I end this Contemplation with a very remarkable passage to this purpose out of
St. Austin. Lib. 11. Confess. cap. 4:
Tu ergo Domine fecisti ea qui pulcher es, pulchra sunt enim. Qui bonus es,
bona sunt enim. Qui es, sunt enim. Nec ita pulchra sunt, nec ita bona sunt, nec
ita sunt sicut tu Conditor eorum, cui Comparata, nec pulchra sunt, nec bona
sunt, nec sunt. Thou therefore O Lord have made these things, who art fair, for
they are fair. Who art good, for they are good. Who Art, for they are. But
neither are they so fair, neither are they so good, neither are they so as Thou
their Maker, in Comparison of whom, they are neither fair, nor good, nor are
they at all.

The Use of this to Devotion.
THis may be very much improved to the advantage of Devotion. For the great Let
to Devotion is our Love of Particular and Sensible good. It Is a Charge that may
be fastened upon the best of us all, more or less, that we are Lovers of
Pleasure more than Lovers of God. And the Love of Pleasure Naturally alienates
us from the Love of God. And therefore says St. John, Joh. 2.15.
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. And to show the
great inconsistency that is between the Love of the World and the Love of God,
he further tells us, If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not
in him. But now if we could be but once persuaded that all the Perfections of
Particular Beings exist in God, and not only so, but after a more excellent
manner than they do in Particular Beings themselves, we should certainly be
very much taken off from the love of Particular and Sensible good; we should
not be such gross Idolaters as we are in adoring Created Beauty, but should
adhere to God with more Unity and intireness of Affection. Sure I am that there
is great Reason we should do so, when we consider, that let the good of the
Creature be never so Charming, the very same we may find in God with greater
Perfection. We can propose nothing to our selves in the Creature, but what God
has more perfectly and more abundantly. To what purpose then should we go off
from him, since Change it self can give us no variety, and we can only Court a
New Object, not find a New Happiness.

The Aspiration.
NO, My Fair Delight, I will never be drawn off from the Love of thee by the
Charms of any of thy Creatures. Thou art not only infinitely more excellent
than they, but have their very excellencies in a more perfect manner than they
have or can have. What Temptation then can I have to leave thee? No, O my
Fairest, I want Temptation to recommend my Love to thee. It Is too easy and too
cheap a fidelity to adhere to thee, My first Love, when by Changing I can gain
no more.

Thou, O Sovereign Fair, have adorned thy Creation with a Tincture of thy
Brightness, thou have shined upon it with the light of thy Divine Glory, and
have poured forth thy Beauty upon all thy Works. But they are not Fair as Thou
art Fair, their Beauty is not as Thy Beauty. Psalm. 45.
Thou art Fairer, O my God, than the Children of Men, or the Orders of Angels,
and the Arrows of thy Love are Sharper than theirs. They are indeed, Psalm. 45.
My God, thy Arrows are very Sharp, and were we not too securely fenced about
with our thick Houses of Clay, would wound us deeper than the Keenest Charms of
any Created Beauties. But these every day Wound us, while we stand proof
against thy Divine Artillery, because these are Sensible, and thine only
Intelligible, these are visible to our Eyes, thine only to our Minds, which we
seldom convert to the Contemplation of thy Beauties.

But, O thou Infinite Fair, did we but once taste and see, did we but
Contemplate thy Original Beauty, as we do those faint Images of it that are
reflected up and down among our fellow Creatures, as thy Charms infinitely
exceed theirs, so would our Love to thee be Wonderful, passing the Love of
Women.

Contemplation IV. Of the Attributes of God in general; particularly of the
Unity of God: which is proved from his Idea.
I.
COncerning the Attributes of God in general, I have no more to offer than what
is commonly taught in the Schools; from which I find no reason to vary, and of
which this I think is the sum and substance, first, That the Essence of God is
in it self, one only general, simple and entire Perfection, and that therefore
the Divine Attributes are not to be considered as Accidents really distinct
from the Divine Essence, and if not from the Divine Essence, then not from
themselves neither.

II.
But however, Secondly, Since this Divine Essence which in it self is one and
the same general Perfection, does exert and display it self variously in its
Operations, by reason of the Diversity of Objects, the Attributes of God are by
us conceived distinctly. Not that they are so in respect of God, with whom they
are really one and the same, and consequently so also among themselves, but
only with respect to our manner of conception.

III.
For, Thirdly, The Essence of God displays it self variously (as was observed
before) according to the diversity of Objects. But now the narrowness of our
Faculties will not permit us to represent such a various and manifold display
of Perfection in one, simple and adequate conception. We are fain therefore to
supply this defect, by framing several inadequate conceptions, whereby we
represent God partially and imperfectly; and which we found upon his different
Operations; every one of which is conceived as proceeding from a different
Perfection in God, corresponding to that particular Operation.

IV.
Now though this diversity be not real with respect to God, who is one and the
same Nature, without composition or complication of Being, but only with
respect to variety of Objects and Modes of Operation, yet this is a sufficient
ground for distinct conceptions; every one of which may admit of a peculiar
definition or explication. The sum is, The Attributes of God are all one and
the same as to the thing signified, but not as to the manner of signification.
Or, to word it more Scholastically, they may be mutually affirmed of one
another in sensu identico, but not in sensu formali. And thus must we be
contented to think and talk of God while we see him here in a Glass darkly,
till he shall reveal himself to us more perfectly, and we shall see him as he
is, and know him as we our selves are known.

V.
This being premised concerning the Attributes of God in general, I proceed now
to Contemplate some of those particular Attributes of his, which may derive the
greatest influence upon our Piety and Devotion. And among these, I first
consider the Unity of God, by which I understand not a Generical, or
Specifical, but a Numerical Unity, in opposition to Plurality or
Multiplication. That is, That there is One, and but One Only God.

VI.
The Unity of God has been ever more questioned than his Existence, and there
have always been more Polytheists than Atheists. But for my part, I should
sooner be an Atheist than a Polytheist, for I think it a greater absurdity,
that there should be more Gods than one, than that there should be none at all.
And I cannot imagine how such a wretched absurdity as Polytheism should ever
obtain so much as it has both in the Gentile and Christian World, since without
the assistance of any other considerations, it may abundantly be refuted and
concluded impossible from the very Idea and Formal conception of God.

VII.
The Idea of God, is Being it self, and Being it self can be but One; which I
thus demonstrate. Whatsoever is Infinite in Being, can be but One, but Being it
self is Infinite in Being; therefore Being it self can be but One. That Being
it self is Infinite in Being, we have proved in the Second Contemplation. The
Proposition, That whatsoever is Infinite in Being can be but One, is plain. For
if there were more Infinites, one must be distinguished from another, otherwise
they could not be more: for not to be distinguished, is to be the same. And if
one must be distinguished from another, then one must have some degree of Being
which the other has not; For by what else can any thing be distinguished? And
if one must have some degree of Being, which the other has not, then to every
one of these supposed Infinites, some degree of Being must be wanting namely,
that whereby they are destinguish'd. And if so, then none of them would be
infinite in Being. Therefore Plurality of Infinites in Being, is a
contradictious self inconsistant Notion, and such as cannot be admitted by any
person that knows what he affirms.

VIII.
But further, Being it self has all the degrees of Being, as all other Abstract
and universal Natures have all the perfection of their respective Orders. But
now what has all the degrees of Being cannot possibly be multiplied. For it is a
flat contradiction that more than one should have all the degrees of Being.
Indeed it may be communicated, and there may result as many Particular and
Derivative Beings, as Being it self is capable of being Participated. But it
cannot be multiplied, because it has all the degrees of Being. And thus it is in
all other Abstract Essences, they may be Communicated, but they cannot be
multiplied. Thus there may be many Particular Beauties by the various
participation of Beauty it self. But suppose Beauty it self to exist, it could
not be multiplied; there can be but one Beauty it self, because it has all the
degrees of Perfection belonging to its Nature. And beyond all there is nothing.

IX.
For to him that would add another Beauty it self, I would propose this
Question. Has this superadded Beauty all the Perfection of the first, or has it
not? If not, then it is not Beauty it self, for that is supposed to have all the
Perfection belonging to Beauty. If it has, then it is the very same with the
other, and consequently it is impossible there should be any more than one
Beauty it self. And why is the multiplication of Individuals impossible, but
only for this reason, because every Individual has all the Perfection belonging
to that Individuated Nature. Which therefore does not admit of Plurality or
Multiplication. And consequently Being it self having as much all the degrees
of Being as any Individual has all the Perfection of that Individuated Nature,
is no more capable of Plurality or Multiplication than any Individual is. There
is therefore but one Being it self, and therefore but one God. Which was the
thing to be proved.

The use of this to Devotion.
SInce then there can be but one God, as we have reason in the first place to
admire and adore that universal Perfection of his Nature, which renders him
incapable of multiplication, so in the next place we may be hence admonished
how reasonable it is that we should rest and depend wholly upon him,
disclaiming and renouncing all false Gods. And that lastly, we should love him
entirely and undividedly, with all our Heart, Mind and Strength, without
admitting any other into Partnership or Rivalship with him: which unity and
intireness of Devotion we could not maintain, were there more Gods than one.
For no one could then have right to exact all our services, nor could we be
obliged, or able, to direct all our services to any one of them. And much less
could we do so to all, since (as our Savior tells us) no man can serve even
two masters. Mat. 6.24.

The Aspiration.
O Thou Mighty One-All, who art too great to be multiplied, and yet too full
not to be communicated, what a Greatness, what a Fullness is this of thine! O
Rich Solitude, how unlike is all Created Excellence to thine! Other things are
to be admired for their Numbers, Thou for thy oneness and singularity, they
glory in their multitudes, but it is the Prerogative of thy Perfection to be
Alone.

In thee, my only Center, I rest, upon thee I wholly depend, for I have none in
Heaven but thee, and none upon Earth in comparison of thee. I utterly renounce
therefore all absolute Power and Supremacy besides thine, and I will fear none
but thee, and obey none but thee. Thou only shall have Dominion over me, I am
only thine, and thee only will I serve.

Many, O God, are the Beauties which thou have made, and thy whole Creation is
filled with thy Glory. Cant. 6.
There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number; But my love, my undesiled, is but one. Take then to thy self the Empire
of my Heart. For all that deserves the name of Love there shall be thine. O
that it were more enlarged for thy reception: But thou shall have it all, and I
will love thee with my whole Heart, though that whole be but little.

O my only Delight, other Gods besides thee, and other Lords besides thee, have
often usurped a Dominion over me. But my Heart is now fixed, O God, my Heart is
fixed. It is fixed upon thee, and how can it ever wander out of the Sphere of
thy Beauty! Or what Beauty is there whose influence may vye with thine? Or how
can I love any but one, when that one, and none but that one, is Infinitely
Lovely.

Contemplation V. Of the Omniscience and Omnipresence of God.
I.
THE unity of God I have demonstrated in the preceding Contemplation. And now
to obviate a scruple that may thence arise, namely, how one single solitary
Being should be sufficient to preside over all the Motions of the Natural, and
all the Affairs of the Moral World, I thought it convenient to proceed next to
some of those Attributes, which, when well considered, will make it plain, that
this Being, though but one, is abundantly qualified for the Government and
Management of the whole Universe. And among these, the Omniscience and
Omnipresence of God are most eminent and conspicuous, which I shall here
therefore jointly Contemplate.

II.
And first of the Omniscience of God. This is a most wonderful and amazing
Attribute, consider it which way we will, for it denotes no less than a full
knowledge and thorough comprehension of all the things that either are, have
been, or shall be. But in the way that I shall now consider it, 'twill appear
clothed with peculiar Circumstances of Admiration, and is indeed a Theme more
sit for the Contemplation of an Angel, than for the Pen of a mortal Theorist.
Here therefore I must beg the peculiar Attention of my Reader, and above all
the peculiar assistance of that Spirit which searches all things, yea, the
Deep things of God. 1 Cor. 2.


III.
Now in treating of God's Omniscience, I shall do two things, First, prove that
he is Omniscient, Secondly, represent the manner of his Omniscience. To show
that God is Omniscient, I must first consider what Knowledge is in general. Now
this I define to be in short, a Comprehension of Truth. For the clearer
understanding of which, the Distinction of Truth must be attended to. Truth
then is either of the Object, or of the Subject. And both these are again
subdivided. For Truth of the Object is either Simple, whereby a Being is really
what it is. Or Complex, which denotes those necessary Habitudes or Respects,
whereby one thing stands affected toward another as to Affirmation or Negation.
Then as for Truth of the Subject, we understand by it either a just Conformity
between the Understanding and the Object, which is Logical Truth, or between
the Words and the Understanding, which is Moral Truth or Veracity.

IV.
The Truth with which we are here concerned, is Truth of the Object. For to
know is so to comprehend things both as to their Simple Natures, and as to
their Habitudes and Relations, as to Compound what is really Compounded, and to
Divide what is really Divided. To have our Understandings thus accommodated to
the Respects and Habitudes of things, is Knowledge. As for Truth of the Subject
in the second sense, as it signifies a Conformity between the Words and the
Understanding, we have here nothing to do with it, as being altogether foreign
to our present purpose. And in the first acceptance, as it signifies a just
conformity between the Understanding and the Object, it is but another word for
Knowledge. For Truth of the Subject in this sense is the conformity of the Mind
to Truth of the Object. And so also is Knowledge. To Know therefore, is to
think of things conformally to their Simple Natures and Mutual Habitudes, or,
as I first defined it, to Comprehend Truth.

V.
This being premised, That Knowledge is nothing else but a Comprehension of
Truth, that is, the having things in the Mind with the same Relations of
Composition or Divisision, as they stand mutually affected in themselves, I
thus argue: That Being which Comprehends all Truth is Omniscient.

But God Comprehends all Truth.

Therefore God is Omniscient.

The first Proposition is plain from the Definition of Knowledge. The
Conclusion therefore depends wholly upon the proof of the Second; namely, that
God comprehends all Truth.

VI.
Now for the Demonstration of this Proposition, I desire but this one
Postulatum, that there are Eternal and Necessary Truths, that is, that there
are eternal and immutable Relations and Habitudes of things toward one another,
by way of Affirmation or Negation. This is what, I suppose, any body will give
me for the asking, tho I have no great reason to be over-thankful for it, it
being a thing so very unquestionable, and withal a Proposition of this unlucky
Quality, that it is as much established by the Denial of it, as by the Affirming
it. For should any Skeptical Person be so hardy as to say that there is no such
thing as Eternal and Necessary Truth, I would ask him this Question: Was that
Proposition always true, or was it not? If it was not always true, then there
was once Eternal and Necessary Truth, and if once so; then ever so: But if it
was always True, then by his own Confession, there is such a thing as Eternal
and Necessary Truth. This therefore must be allowed.

VII.
It being therefore supposed that there are Eternal and Necessary Truths, the
next Proposition that I shall lay down is this, that the simple Essences of
things must be also Eternal and Necessary. For the proof of which Proposition I
consider first, that as Truth of the Subject depends upon, and necessarily
supposes Truth of the Object, so Truth of the Object Complex depends upon, and
necessarily supposes Truth of the Object Simple: That is in other Words, The
Habitudes and Relations of Simple Essences, depend upon and necessarily suppose
the Reality of their respective Simple Essences. As therefore there can be no
such thing as Truth of the Subject, without Truth of the Object, to which it
may be conformable; so neither can there be Truth of the Object Complex without
Truth of the Object Simple, that is, there can be no mutual Habitudes or
Relations of things as to Affirmation or Negation, without the Reality of the
things themselves.

VIII.
For I consider that these Habitudes and Respects, as to Affirmation or
Negation, wherein consists objective Truth Complex, do result from the Simple
Essences, and can no more subsist by themselves than any other relations can;
for the existence of which the Schools themselves make it necessary that they
have their subject and term, upon the Position of which they immediately
result, and upon the destruction of which they as immediately cease. As other
relations therefore cannot subsist without the existence of subject and term,
so neither can these habitudes as to Affirmation or Negation, subsist without
the real existence of the Essences themselves so related.

IX.
But this perhaps will be better illustrated by a particular Instance. Let then
this be the objective Truth Complex, Two Circles touching one another inwardly
cannot have the same common Center. This is a true Proposition. But I here
demand, How can it possibly have this certain habitude of Division or Negation,
unless there be two such distinct simple Essences as Circle and Center.
Certainly there can be no Reference or Relation where there is nothing real to
support it.

X.
This Point therefore being gained, That truth of the Object Complex depends
upon, and necessarily supposes truth of the Object Simple, and that there can
be no mutual habitudes or relations of Essences, as to composition and
divisition, without the Simple Essences themselves: hence it will necessarily
follow, that whenever the one does exist, the other must exist also; and
consequently, if the one be Eternal, the other must be also Eternal. And thus
(to recur to the former Instance) if this be a Proposition of Eternal Truth,
viz. Two Circles touching one another inwardly cannot have the same common
Center, then the two distinct Simple Essences of Circle and Center must have an
eternal and necessary existence. The short is, there can be no connection or
relation between things that are not, or that do not exist, for being with this
or that habitude to another thing, implies simple Being, and for one thing to
be another, infers and supposes it to be simply. And if there can be no
connection or relation between things that are not, then also there can be no
Eternal connection or relation between things that have not an Eternal
Existence. For things cannot be related before they are. But there are such
Eternal habitudes and relations, therefore the simple Essences of things are
also Eternal. Which was the Proposition next to be proved.

XI.
I know very well this is not according to the Decrees of the Peripatetic
School, which has long since condemned it as Heretical Doctrine, to say, that
the Essences of things do exist from Eternity. But I have Meditated much upon
these things, and I must needs say, that I think it a very certain and very
useful Theorem, and that it is utterly impossible to give an intelligible
account of the Stability of Science, or how there should be Propositions of
Eternal Truth, but upon this Hypothesis. And I should be thankful to any of the
Peripatetic Dissenters who would undertake to show me how there may.

XII.
I know they endeavor to do it by telling us (and it is the only Plea they have
to offer) that these habitudes are not attributed absolutely to the simple
Essences as in actual being, but only Hypothetically, that whenever they
shall exist, they shall also carry such relations to one another. There is,
says the Peripatetic, only a conditional connection between the Subject and the
Predicate, not an absolute position of either. This goes smoothly down with the
young Scholar at his Logic Lecture, and the Tutor applauds his distinction, and
thinks he has thereby quitted his hands of a very dangerous Heresy.

XIII.
But now to this I return the same Answer (for I need give no other) that I
have in my Metaphysical Essay. First, I say, that these habitudes are not (as
is supposed) only by way of Hypothesis, but absolutely attributed to the simple
Essences, as actually existing. For, when I say, for instance, that every part
of a Circle is equally distant from the Center; this Proposition does not hang
in suspense, then to be actually verified when the things shall exist in
Nature, but is at present actually true, as actually true as ever it will or
can be; and consequently I may thence infer, that the things themselves already
are. There is no necessity, I confess, they should exist in Nature, which is
all that the Objection proves, but exist they must. For of nothing there can be
no affection.

XIV.
But, Secondly, Suppose I grant what the Objector would have, that these
habitudes are not absolutely attributed to the simple Essences, but only by way
of Hypothesis. Yet I don't see what he can gain by this concession. For
certainly thus much at least is attributed to the simple Essences at present,
that whenever they shall exist, such and such habitudes will attend them. I
say, thus much is attributed actually, and at present. But now let any
Peripatetic of 'em all tell me how any thing can any way be said of that which
is not. And besides, it is a weak evasion to say that things are not related
thus or thus as actually existing, but only conditionally, supposing their
existence. For I deny that any thing can be any way related that does not
actually exist. And it is as good as a contradiction to say otherwise. When
therefore the Peripatetick talks of a conditional connection between the Subject
and the Predicate, and that neither is put absolutely, I say, that the
connection is as absolute as it can or ever will be, and that a non-existing
subject cannot have any Predicate, or be any way related. And all this I bind
upon him by a principle of his own, that of nothing there can be no affection.
And let him unwind himself if he can.

XV.
Having thus far cleared our way by making it evident, that the simple Essences
of things are Eternal. The next thing that I consider is, that since they are
not Eternal in their Natural subsistencies, they must be Eternal in some other
way of subsisting. And that must be in some understanding, or by way of Ideal
subsistence.

XVI.
For there are but two conceivable ways how any thing may exist, either out of
all understanding, or within some understanding. If therefore the simple
Essences of things are Eternal, but not out of all understanding, it remains
they must have an Eternal existence in some understanding. Which is what I call
an Ideal subsistence. There is therefore another way of existing besides that
in Rerum Natura, namely in the Mundus Archetypus, or the Ideal World, where all
the Rations rerum, or simple Essences of things have an Eternal and Immutable
existence, before ever they enter upon the Stage of Nature.

XVII.
I further consider, That this understanding wherein the simple Essences of
things have an Eternal existence, must be an Eternal understanding. For an
Essence can no more Eternally exist in a Temporary understanding, than a Body
can be infinitely extended in a finite space. Now this Eternal understanding
can be no other than the understanding of God. The simple Essences of things
therefore do Eternally exist in the understanding of God.

XVIII.
But the mode of this must be further explained. For it being an unquestioned
Truth, that God is a simple and uncompounded Being; and consequently, that
there is nothing in God that is not God himself: as the Schools also rightly
have pronounced, We must not conceive these simple Essences as accidents
inhering in God, or as Beings really distinct from God, this not comporting
with the simplicity of the Divine Nature.

XIX.
These simple Essences of things therefore can be nothing else but the Divine
Essence it self considered with his Connotation, as variously representative or
exhibitive of things, and as variously imitable or participable by them. As the
Divine Essence is thus or thus imitable or partakeable, so are the Essences of
things distinguished specifically one from another; and according to the
multifariousness of this Imitability, so are the possibilities of Being. From
the degrees of this Imitability, are the orders and degrees of Being, and from
the variety of it, is their multiplicity.

XX.
The simple Essences of things, thus existing in the Divine Essence, according
to these modes of Imitability and Participation, are what we are taught in the
Platonic School to call Idea's. These, in the Language of the Divine
Philosopher, are (...), the first Intelligibles, and (...), the measures of the
things that are, and (...), the things that truly are, and (...), Eternal
patterns, and (...), things which are always the same add unchangeable, and
(...), things that are not generated, but are always; and again (...), that
were neither generated, nor will be destroyed. Concerning which, thus Cicero,
Haec Plato negat signi, sed semper esse, and ratione and Intelligentia
contineri. These, Plato denies ever to have been generated, but that they
always are, and are contained in Reason and Intelligence.

XXI.
Further, These Essences of things, or Ideas thus existing in God, are the true
and proper Objects of all Sciences, and (if I may use the Apostle's expression
in another case) (...), 1. Tim. c. 3.
the pillar and ground of truth. These supposed, it is easy to account for the
Stability of Science, and for Propositions of Eternal Truth, but without them
it is absolutely impossible. For all things in their Natural Subsistencies are
Temporary, Flux, Mutable and Corruptible, and what is so can never stand under
Eternal and Immutable relations.

XXII.
Further, These Essences are the Specifical Models and Platforms of all the
things that are in this Ectypal World. According to these Eternal Exemplars
were they made; and as is their Conformity to these Measures, so is their
Perfection. For it is impossible that God should make a World with Counsel and
Design, unless he make it according to something, and that can be nothing else
but something existing within himself, something in this Ideal and Archetypal
World. For as Aquinas well observes, In all things that are not made by chance,
the Form must necessarily be the end of Generation. But now the Agent does not
act for the Form, Prim. Part. Q. 15. Ar. Prim.
but only as far as the Similitude of the Form is in him.

XXIII.
And what if I should further say, that this Ideal World, this Essence of God
considered as variously exhibitive and representative of things, is no other
than the Divine (...), ths Second Person in the ever Blessed Trinity. This I
think highly agreeable to Reason, for I know of no Hypothesis that would so
intelligibly make out the Eternal Generation of the Son of God; For according
to this account, the Son of God must be a Substantial and Multifarious thought
of God the Father, and how this may be generated, and yet be coeternal with
God the Thinker, is not very hard to conceive. Since, if an Angel had been
Eternal, his thought must have been so too.

XXVI.
I shall add in confirmation of this Notion, a signal passage of the great
Platonist Marsilius Ficinus, thus discoursing of the Eternal Generation of the
Son of God. Omnis vita prolem suam, Tom. 1. page 18. cap. 13.
etc. Every Life first generates its offspring within it self before it does
abroad without it self, and by how much the more excellent the Life is, by so
much the more inwardly to its self does it generate its offspring. So the
vegetative life both in Trees and in Animals generates first the Seed, and the
Animal within its own Body, before it casts forth either abroad. So the
Sensitive, which is more excellent than the Vegetative life, brings forth by
the fancy an Image or Intention of things in it self, before it moves the
Members, and forms them in External Matter. But this first Birth of the fancy,
because it is in the very Soul, is therefore nearer to the Soul than the Birth
of the Vegetative life, which is not in the Soul, but in the Body. So again,
the Rational life, which is more excellent than the Sensitive, brings forth in
it self the Reason both of things, and of it self, as it were an offspring,
before it brings it into the light, either by Speech or Action. This first
Birth of Reason is nearer to the Soul than the Birth of Fancy. For the Rational
Power is reflected upon its own Birth, and by that upon it self, by seeking,
knowing, and loving its own act and it self, which is not done by the Fancy. So
again, the Angelical life, which is more excellent than the Rational, brings
forth in it self, by a kind of Divine Instinct, the Notions of it self and of
things, before it discharges them upon the Matter of the World. This Birth is
more interior to an Angel, than Reason is to her, because it is neither derived
from External Objects, nor changed. Wherefore the Divine life being the most
eminent and fruitful of all, must needs generate an Offspring more like her
self than any of the rest: and this it generates in it self by understanding,
before it brings forth any thing without. God therefore perfectly understanding
himself, and in himself all things, he conceives in himself a perfect Notion of
himself, and of all things, which is the equal and full Image of God, and the
more than full Exemplar or Pattern of the World, etc.

XXV.
Thus is this Notion of the Ideal World, or of the Essence of God, being
variously exhibitive and representative of the Essences of things, made use of
by this great Theorist, to explain both the Nature of the Second Person of the
Trinity, and the Mode of his Eternal Generation. And I think it does both much
better than any other, and indeed as far as conceivable by human understanding.
So highly useful is this Doctrine of Idea's, when rightly understood, to unsold
the profoundest Mysteries of the Christian Religion as well as of Philosophy:
And so great reason had St. Austin to say, Tom. 4. p. 548. Q. 46.
Tanta vis in Ideis constituitur, ut nisi his intellectis, sapiens esse nemo
possit. There Is so much moment in Idea's, that without the understanding of
these, no Man can be Wise.

XXVI.
And I further consider, that this is no less according to the Voice of
Scripture than of Natural Reason. St. John speaking of the second Person of the
Trinity, says, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
the word was God. He says also that all things were made by him, or according
to him (...). And he further says that he is the true light, that lightens
every man that comes into the world. Now what can this signify but this Ideal
World, or the Essence of God as variously exhibitive and representative of
things? For observe, he calls him (...), which here signifies the same as the
inward conception or Idea, he says that he was in the Beginning, and that he
was with God, and that he was God, and that all things were made by him; Thus
far it must be allowed that the agreement is very exact. As for the last part
of the character, How this can be said to be the true Light which lightens
every Man that comes into the World, this I shall explain when I come to
consider the Nature of Man, who as I shall show, sees and knows all that he
sees and knows in this Ideal World, which may therefore be said to be his Light.

XXVII.
Again, this second Person is said to be the Wisdom of his Father, to be the
Character of his Person, both which expressions denote him to be the same with
this Ideal World. And by him God is said to have made the Worlds: Heb. 1.
that is according to the eternal Exemplars or Platforms in this Ideal World.
To which I may add by way of overplus, that noble Description of the Eternal
and Substantial Wisdom given us in the 7. Chap. of the Book of Wisdom. (...).
The Breath (or Vapor) of the Power of God, and an Efflux (or Emanation) from
the glory of the Almighty, a clear Mirror (or Looking-glass) of his active
Energory virtue, and the Image of his goodness. And what can all this be but
the Essence of God as Exhibitive, the Ideal World? Lastly, I would have it
considered how what our Savior says of himself, I am the Truth, and what the
Apostles says of him, that he is the Wisdom of his Father, can be verified any
other way but by this Hypothesis.

XXVIII.
I have the longer insisted on this to show not only the Truth of this Ideal
World, and that the Essences of things have eternal Existence in it, but also
how very useful this Notion is for the Establishment of the Divinity of Christ,
and for the explication of his Eternal generation from the Father, which is
also a further confirmation that the Notion is true and Solid. So great aguard
is true Platonism against Socinianism.

XXIX.
Hence also we may be instructed how to understand that common Axiom of the
Schools, that the Truth of every thing is its conformity to the Divine
understanding. This must by no means be understood of the Mind of God as
Conceptive, that is, as reflecting upon himself as Exhibitive, for the Truth of
the Divine Intellect as Conceptive, depends upon its conformity with the truth
of things, not the truth of things upon that. But it must be meant of the Mind
of God as Exhibitive, that is, of this Ideal World, for upon this all Truth
depends, and every thing, and every Proposition is so far true as it is
conformable with it. For indeed the Intellect of God, as Exhibitive is the
Cause and Measure of all Truth.

XXX.
And, 'twas for want of the help of this Notion that that Keen Wit, Discartes
blunder'd so horribly in stating the dependence of Propositions of Eternal
Truth, upon the Intellect of God. He saw it 'twas necessary (as indeed it is)
to make God the cause of Truth, and that truth must some way or other depend
upon him. But then he makes it depend upon the Mind of God as Conceptive, and
that things are so only because God is pleased so to conceive them. And this he
carries so high, as to say, that even in a Triangle, three Angles would not
have been equal to two Right ones, had not God been pleased so to conceive and
make it. Now I am for the dependence of truth upon the Divine Intellect as well
as he, but not so as to make it Arbitrary and Contingent, and Consequently not
upon the Divine Intellect as Conceptive, but only as Exhibitive. That is, that
things are therefore True in as much as they are conformable to those standing
and immutable Ideas, which are in the mind of God as Exhibitive, and
Representative of all the whole Possibility of Being.

XXXI.
Now if after all, this Ideal way of things subsisting from all Eternity in
God, should seem strange (as I suppose it will to those who are unexercised in
these Contemplations) I shall only further say, First, that it must be
infinitely more strange that there should be Eternal Truths, that is, Eternal
Relations and Habitudes of simple Essences, or things, without the Coeternal
existence of the things themselves so related. For what should support such
Relations? The simple Essences therefore must exist eternally, if their
Relations do? and where can that be but in the Mind of God?

XXXII.
Secondly, I say that this Ideal way of subsisting, ought not to seem such a
Bugbear as some make it, since it is necessary not only for the salving of
Propositions of Eternal Truth, before their Subjects exist in Nature, but even
when they do. For even while things have a Natural subsistence, the
Propositions concerning them are not, cannot be verified according to their
Natural, but according to their Ideal subsistencies. Thus we demonstrate
several Propositions concerning a Right Line, a Circle, etc. when yet in the
mean time it is most certain, that none of these are to be found in Nature,
according to that exactness supposed in our Demonstration. Such and such
Affections therefoe do not belong to them, as they are in Nature, and therefore
they must belong to them as they are in the Ideal World, or not at all.

XXXIII.
And if this be true in Propositions, whose Subjects exist in Nature, much more
is it in Eternal Propositions, whose simple Essences have not always a Natural
existence. These can no otherwise stand, but by supposing the Coeternal
existence of Simple Essences in the Ideal World.

XXXIV.
I shall add but this one Consideration more upon this Head, that there is no
greater sign of the soundness of a Truth, than when its professed Adversaries do
unawares fall in with it. And this I take to be the case here. The Schoolmen
who stand devoted to the Authority of Aristotle, do notwithstanding by a kind
of blind Parturiency, light oftentimes upon such Notions, which if thoroughly
sifted must needs come to the same with what we have hitherto contended for.
For I would fain know what they can mean else by the celebrated Glass of the
Divinity? What can this be but the Ideal World representing all the Essences of
things? And what else can they mean when they say (as they commonly do) of
Science, that it is not of Singulars, as being flux Temporary, mutable and
contingent, but of Abstract and Universal Natures? What is this but in other
words to confess the necessity of Eternal Essences or Ideas existing out of and
before those Singulars whose Essences they are, in order to the salving the
stability of Science? Thus do these Men stumble upon Truth blindfold, but not
discerning her through he veil, they let her go again.

XXXV.
Nay, even Aristotle himself after all his zealous opposition of Plato's Ideas
has in the fourth of his Metaphysics come about to him again, and crossed the
very Road which he studied so carefully to avoid. For discoursing against the
Skeptics who allowed no certainty of Science, he first shows the ground of
their mistake to consist in this, that they thought Singulars and Sensibles
existing without, to be the only Objects of Science. His words are, (...), etc.
The Original of these Men's mistake was this, because Truth is to be looked for
in things, and they conceived the only things to be Sensibles, in which it is
certain there is much of the Indeterminate Nature. Wherefore they perceiving
all the Nature of Sensibles to be moveable, or in perpetual flux and mutation,
since nothing can possibly be verified or constantly affirmed concerning that
which is not the same, but changeable, concluded that there could be no Truth
at all, nor certainly of Science. Those things which are the only objects of
it, never continuing the same.

XXXVI.
Thus having opened the grounds of this Skeptical Doctrine, in opposition to
it, he thus adds, (...), etc. we would have these Men therefore to know, that
there is another kind of Essence of things, besides that of Sensibles, to which
belongeh, neither motion, nor corruption, nor any generation at all.

XXXVII.
Observe here, that Aristotle does not deny the Consequence of the Sceptic's
Argument. No, he allows if the Essences of things are not steady and immutable,
that there can be no certainty of Science. But he denis his minor Proposition,
and tells him that he goes upon a wrong Hypothesis, in supposing that there are
no other Essences of things but Singulars and Sensibles, in opposition to which
he says, that there are other Essences of things which are immovable,
incorruptible, and in generable. And that it is upon these that all Science is
founded. Now who would desire a better Establishment of Platonic Ideas, than
what Aristotle himself has here given? Let any Intelligent Person judge whether
this be not a plain giving up the cause. So hard is it for a Man not to
contradict himself, when once he comes to contradict Truth.

XXXVIII.
It being now from the Premises sufficiently concluded, that the Ideas or
Simple Essences of things have an Eternal existence in God, and the manner of
this their existence being sufficiently explained, the next advance of my
Contemplation is this, that since all the Simple Essences of things do exist in
the mind of God, there must also be the Repository of all their several
Habitudes and Respects, these naturally arising from the other, by way of
Natural Result. For as the Relations of Essences cannot exist without the
Essences themselves, so neither can the Essences exist without being
accompanied with such their Essential Relations. And as before we argued from
the Position of the Habitudes to the Position of the Simple Essences, so now we
may as well argue from the Position of the Simple Essences to the Position of
their Habitudes.

XXXIX.
Thus for instance, as from this Eternal Habitude, viz. that a Circle of such a
determinate Circumference will have such a determinate Diameter, I may
conclude, that the Essence of such a Circle does eternally exist, so again
supposing such a Circle to exist, it is as necessary it should retain such a
Diameter. And so in all other instances, the Essence argues and infers the
Habitude, as well as the Habitude does the Essence. For it is here as in all
other Relations which immediately result upon the position of the Subject and
Term.

XL.
This admitted, I now consider that there is now nothing wanting to infer the
Omnisciency of God. For since the simple Essences of things do all exist in
God, and since these are ever accompanied with all their Habitudes and
Relations, and since these are nothing else but Truth, it follows that all
Truth is in God. I say God comprehending within himself all the Ideas and
Essences of things with all their possible references and Respects, comprehends
all Truth, the whole field of Truth within himself, which is the same as to be
Omniscient, Knowledge being nothing else but a Comprehension of Truth, as was
before defined.

XLI.
And thus we have not only proved the Omniscience of God, but in a great
measure represented the manner of it. Concerning this therefore I shall only
further remarque that the manner of the Divine Knowledge is the most Noble and
Perfect, that can possibly be conceived. For it is not by any derivative
Phantasms, or Secondary Images of things, but per (...), by the very immediate
and essential Presence of the things themselves. He has all his Knowledge at
the first hand, he sees, nay he is possessed of the very Essence of things, he is
the very Source and Fountain of all Truth, nay he is Truth it self. And
besides, his Knowledge is all simple and uncompounded, without Reasoning and
inferring, premising and concluding, for he has ever before him in one simple
view the whole Field of Truth, and with one single Act of Intuition glances
through the whole Possibility of Being. For this Word of God, this (...), who
is the Essential Wisdom of his Father, is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any twoedg'd Sword, piercing even to the dividing assunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the Heart. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight.
Heb. 3.12.
But all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to
do.

LXII.
Thus is this one single solitary Being; God, qualified for the government of
the World upon the account of his Knowledge. He is so also in respect of his
being Present to the World he is to grovern. For he is Omnipresent, as well as
Omniscient: which is the next Attribute of God, which in this Contemplation I
undertook to consider.

XLIII.
The Omnipresence of God has been more questioned than any one of his
Attributes, both among the Ancients, and among the Moderns. Aristotle in his
Metaphysics says that the first Mover must necessarily be either in the Center,
or in the Circle or Circumference. That is, according to him, either in the
middle of the Earth, or in the Extreme Heaven. And the latter has by most of
the old Philosophers been assigned for his Residence. In the Church, the more
Ancient Jews confined him to the Temple of Jerusalem. And of late years this
Doctrine of the Partial and limited Presence of God has been renewed by
Vorstius, Professor of Divinity at Leyden, who asserts that God is only in
Heaven as to his Essence, and elsewhere only in respect of his Wisdom, Power
and Providence.

XLIV.
But that God is every where Essentially Present, both in every part of the
World, and also in all Extra mundan Spaces, is most certain from the very Idea
of God. It Is impossible that Being it self should be excluded from any part of
Being. For every part of Being partakes of, and subsists in and by Being it
self. And besides Being it self is indeterminate in being (as was proved in the
second Contemplation) but now what is indeterminate in Being, is also
indeterminate in existing, for existing follows Being as the Act of it, and to
exist indeterminately is the same as to be Omnipresent. God therefore who is
Being it self, is also an Omnipresent Being.

XLV.
Cncerning the manner of this Omonipresence of God I think I may safely
determine that he is every where present, not only Vertually and Efficaciously
by his Wisdom and Power, but also Substantially and Essentially. For Power and
Wisdom is not any thing really different from the Essence of God. Neither can
the Power of God be conceived to be any where, but his Essence must be there
too. But after what special manner this Essence of God is Omnipresent, whether
by way of an Infinite Amplitude and Extension, as some think, or else by way of
a Point, so as to be whole in the whole, and whole in every part of the World,
as others will have it, I neither know, nor shall offer to determine. Such
Knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it. It Is
sufficient to know, that God is so every way Immense and Omnipresent, as not to
be included in any place, nor to be excluded from any. For the rest, we must
say with the Psalmist, Great is the Lord, Psalm. 145.
and greatly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable.

The use of this to Devotion.
THE Consideration of the Divine Omniscience and Omnipresence, is of excellent
use to all the purposes of a Christian life, as well as to the Interest of
Devotion in particular. Genesis 17.
I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect, says God to
Abraham. Implying that the best Method of Perfection, was to live as in the
sight and presence of God. And so the Psalmist, Psalm. 16.
I have set God always before me, therefore I shall not fall. Implying, that if
any thing would keep him from falling this would. For can there be any greater
restraint upon our actions, any stronger preservative against sin, than duly to
consider the Presence and Inspection of God? In virtutis oculis vivendum; so
said the Ancients, We must live as in the Eyes of Virtue. They thought it an
excellent expedient against Vice to have the Idea of Virtue always before one.
And so no doubt it is. Nay, we see less will do, and that the Morals of Men are
very much secured by living in the Eye of the World. Epist. 11.
Nay, Seneca goes lower yet, and tells us, That Magna pars peccatorum
tolleretur, si peccaturis testis assisteret. A great deal of our wickedness
would be prevented, if as Men were about to sin, one single witness were to
stand by. But, alas, what are such expedients as these to the Omniscience and
Omnipresence of God? No consideration certainly is comparable to this. Will a
Man commit Murder in the open Court, before the Face of his Judge? Nay, shall
the presence of a Child divert thee from sinning? A Child that knows not the
difference between good and evil, that wants understanding to censure and
condemn what he sees, and has neither Authority nor Power to punish thee. Shall
such a one deter thee from sin, and dash in pieces the frame of thy ill
designs, and dare thou sin before thy God? Dare thou do works of Darkness
in the presence of him who is pure Light, and in whom there is no Darkness at
all? Dare thou rush on when the Angel of God's Presence stands in the way
with a drawn Sword? The Psalmist says, Tremble thou earth at the presence of
God, Psalm. 114.
and dare thou sin in his Presence? No, thou would not dare, if thou did
well consider it. It Is a consideration, this, That if well heeded, and attended
to, would give a Law to our privacies and retirements, compose the inmost
recesses of our Minds, and not suffer a Thought or Passion to rebel. We should
then stand in awe and not sin, and be as composed in our Closets as in a
Theater, or a Religious Assembly. For, indeed, to him that considers God as
every where present, and a strict observer of him and his actions, every place
is a Temple, and accordingly he will put off his Shoes from his Feet, cleanse
and purify his affections, because the place whereon he stands is Holy Ground.

Thus advantageous is the influence of these two Considerations to good life in
general; as for their special usefulness to Devotion, we may hence collect,
First, That we ought to have our Minds always in a Divine Frame and Temper, and
always composed with the greatest Awefulness and Reverence, Seriousness,
Gravity and Silence of Spirit, as being ever in the Presence, and under the
direct Inspection of the Great God.

Secondly, That we ought to pray to him with all Humility and Reverence, both
of Soul and Body, and with an humble confidence of being heard by him
wherever we are, or however we deliver our selves, whether by Vocal or Mental
Prayer.

Thirdly, That we ought in our Prayers to use great fixedness and attention of
Mind, without any wanderings, or impertinent mixtures of foreign thoughts, which
are never more ready to crowd into our Minds, than when we are at our
Devotions, and yet are never so absurd as then.

Fourthly, That we ever commend our Cause to God, who sees and knows all
things, and be well satisfied with his Judgment and Approbation, when ever our
Innocence is falsely charged by the World.

And, Lastly, That we ought never to repine, or be discontented at the Affairs
of the World, but rather trust and rely upon the All-wise conduct of him who
sees from end to end, knows how to bring Light out of Darkness, and disposes
all things sweetly.

The Aspiration.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down-sitting,
and mine up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts long before. Thou art about
my Path, and about my Bed, and spiest out all my ways. For, lo, there is not a
word in my Tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it altogether. Thou have fashioned
me behind and before, and laid thine Hand upon me. Whither shall I go then from
thy Spirit? Or whither shall I go then from thy Presence? If I climb up into
Heaven, thou art there, If I go down to Hell, thou art there also. If I take
the Wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even
there also shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. If I say,
peradventure the Darkness shall cover me, then shall my Night be turned to Day.
Yea, the Darkness is no Darkness with thee, but the Night is as clear as the
Day; the Darkness and Light to thee are both alike.

Do thou then, O my God, so imprint the Sense of this thy Omniscience and
Omnipresence upon every Faculty and Power of my Soul, that I may ever think,
speak, and act as in the Light of thy All-seeing Eye, and as immediately
surrounded, and intimately possessed with the Glory of thy Presence. O fill me
with the profoundest Awe and Reverence, compose my levities, confirm my
doubtfulness, and fix my wanderings, and make me ever satisfied with the Methods
of thy Wise Providence.

And when by the Meditation of this thy Knowledge and Presence, I shall learn
to demean my self in any measure as I ought: grant that upon the same
consideration, I may content my self with thy Divine Approbation and Allowance,
whatever I am thought of in Man's Judgment. Finally, O my God, Grant I may so
set thee before me here, that I may not be afraid to appear before thee
hereafter. Amen.

Contemplation VI. Of the Omnipotence of God.
I.
THE next Attribute, whereby this One God becomes qualified for the Government
of the Universe, is his Omnipotence. Whereby may be understood, and commonly
is, a Power of doing whatsoever is possible to be done. But in this there is
some difficulty, from which we must disengage our Notion.

II.
For, whereas every thing that is possible, is made the Object of the Divine
Power, a nice enquirer may here demand, What do you mean by Possible? For
Possible has its denomination from Power, and therefore must be measured either
in relation to created Power, or in relation to increated Power. If in relation
to the first, then for God to be able to do all that is possible, will amount
to no more, Than that he can do whatever a Creature can do. But, if in relation
to the second, then for God to be able to do all that is possible, will be the
same as to say, That he can do whatever he can do. Which would be a very
notable discovery. And, besides, according to this measure, a Man might truly
say, that God were Omnipotent; though at the same time he should deny that he
could Create any thing besides the present World: because he could then do all
that is possible, there being nothing then but this World so denominated from
the Divine Power, Disp. 30. Sect. 17.
as Suarez rightly infers.

III.
To satisfy therefore this difficulty, we must find out another sense of the
word Possible, than what is taken from denomination to any Power. I consider,
therefore, that a thing may be said to be possible Absolutely and Negatively,
from the habitude of the simple Idea's themselves, as well as from relation to
any Power which may so denominate it. My meaning is, That there are some Idea's
whose habitude is such to one another, that they may admit of composition:
there are others, again, whose habitude is such that they cannot admit of
composition, but stand necessarily divided. The first of these I call Possible,
the second I call Impossible. Possible, therefore in this sense, is the same as
that which involves no repugnance. And therefore, to avoid all Ambiguity,
setting aside the Word Possible, I shall choose rather to express the
Omnipotence of God by calling it a Power of doing whatever involves no
repugnancy or contradiction.

IV.
Now, that God is thus Omnipotent (not to seek out after other Arguments) I
thus demonstrate from the Idea of God. Being it self is the proper, full and
adequate cause of Being, for whatever is, so far as it is, it partakes of Being
it self, as was before proved. Now if Being it self be the proper, full and
adequate cause of Being, then its effect must extend to all those things which
are not repugnant to the Nature and Reason of Being. For if it did extend only
to some certain Ones, then Being it self would not be the proper, full, and
adequate cause of Being, as is supposed, but only of this or that particular
Being. And if it extends to all things that are not repugnant to the Reason of
Being, then it must extend to all but not being: For not being only is
regugnant to the Reason of Being. God, therefore, who is Being it self, can do
all, that does not involve in it the Reason of not being; but these are only
contradictions: God therefore can do whatever does not imply a contradiction,
and is therefore Omnipotent. Which was the thing to be proved.

The Use of this to Devotion.
FRom the Omnipotence of God, we may take occasion to make these Conclusions.
First, That we ought to revere and fear him above all the things in the World,
and endeavor by the utmost services of a well-ordered life to make him our
Friend, considering what a fearful thing it is to fall into the Hands of an
Omnipotent Enemy. I will forewarn you whom you shall fear, Luke 12.5.
says our Savior, fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into
hell, yea I say unto you, Fear him.

Secondly, That when once we have made God our Friend, and engaged him on our
side, we then fear no Created Power, whether Human or Diabolical. For if an
Omnipotent God be with us, what need we care who is against us. We ought rather
to say with the Psalmist, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, Psalm. 23.4.
I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

Lastly, We ought upon Consideration of this great Attribute of God, to repose
a firm trust and confidence in all his Promises, though never so contrary to the
Ordinary Laws of Nature, and to the common Measures of Human Probability. Since
our concern is with him, who is the God of Nature, and with whom (as the Angel
tells us) nothing shall be impossible. Luke 1.37.


The Aspiration.
WIth thee, O my God, is Power and Strength, and with thee ought to be Dominion
and Fear. My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy Judgments.
Thou art Terrible, O my God, as well as Lovely, but thou art also Lovely in thy
very Terror. Turn away thine eyes from me, Cant. 6.5.
for they have overcome me; they have overcome me with their Dread, as well as
with their Beauty; For, as thou art Beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah, Comely, as
Jerusalem; so art thou also Terrible, as an Army with Banners.

O my Omnipotent Love, with what safety, as well as delight, do I sit under thy
Shadow! Thou have brought me into thy Banqueting House, and thy Banner over
me, is Power as well as Love. Thy Love is stronger than Death; what need I
sear, thy left Hand is under my Head, and thy right Hand does embrace me; And
why then should any dread approach me? The Lord is my light and my salvation,
whom then shall I fear? He is the strength of my life, of whom then should I be
afraid.

O, my God, why is not my Faith like thy Power? Thou can do all things; And
why is my Faith limited? Let me imitate thee, O my God, in this thy Infinity:
and grant me such a Victorious, such an Omnipotent Faith, that as to thee
nothing is too hard to do, so to me nothing may be too hard to believe. Amen.

Contemplation VII. Of the Divine Justice and Veracity.
I.
FRom the Omnipotence of God, I proceed to the Consideration of his Justice,
this being as necessary a qualification in the Governor of the whole World as
the other. Now, by Justice in this place, I understand particular, not
Universal Justice. And of particular Justice, not that which is Commutative
(for this has no place in God; for, Romans 11.35.
as the Apostle says, Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed
to him again?) but that which is Distributive, and consists in a constant will
of dispensing to every Person according to his deserts.

II.
This Justice of God is the same in the moral World, as Order and Proportion is
in the Natural. It Is giving to every thing its due place and station, and
disposing it according to its Nature and Condition. For as the Beauty of the
Natural World arises from Proportion, so does the Beauty of the Moral World
arise also from due Order and Proportion; and as God has strictly observed this
Rule in the making of the World, having made all things in Number, Weight and
Measure, so we may be sure he proceeds by the same Standard in the Government
and conduct of it, though the exactness of this latter is not so obvious to our
observation, as that of the former, nor are we so well able to judge of the
Moral, as of the Natural Geometry of God.

III.
Now that God is thus Just, always acting according to true Order and
Proportion, may sufficiently be made out from this single Consideration. All
Order and Proportion (as every one I suppose will readily grant) is, in it self
considered, lovely and desirable. If so, then it cannot be nill'd or refused
for it self, or as such. If so, then whenever it is refused, it must be refused
for the sake of some other greater good. If so, then this other greater good
must be, either the private interest of the Refuser, or some other Private
Interest, or the Public Interest. But neihter of these can here find any
admission. It cannot be for the Private Interest of the Refuser, who is here
supposed to be a Being absolutely Perfect; and consequently not capable of
proposing to himself any self-end. And cannot be for the Public Interest, for
the greatest Interest of the Public consists in Order and Proportion. Neither
can this Order be violated for the Interest of any other Private Person,
because that is not a greater, but on the contrary, an infinitely less good,
Order and Proportion being the good of the Public, which is always greater
than any Private whatsoever. Since therefore Order and Proportion cannot be
violated by God for any of these ends, nor for its own sake, it being as such
lovely and desirable, as was supposed, it follows that Order and Proportion
cannot possibly be violated by God at all, and consequently it is necessary that
God should always effectually Will Order and Proportion, which is the same as
to be Just.

IV.
By this Justice, or Will of following Order and Proportion, God stands engaged
not to punish an Innocent Creature, or to afflict him with any evil greater
than that good which he has conferred upon him: Within that compass indeed he
may, for that is only to deduct from that Happiness, every degree of which was
a free favor. But he cannot impose the least grain or scruple of evil upon him
beyond the good conferred, without some demerit of the Creature. Much less will
this Justice of God permit that he should predetermin an Innocent Creature,
without respect to any Crime, merely for his own will and pleasure, to
everlasting misery. He that can make this consistent with God's Justice, or any
Justice in the World, had need be a very good Reconciler.

V.
But now whether God's Justice obliges him to punish the Sinner, as well as not
to punish the Innocent, is a thing that will admit of more question. This has
been argued with great Contention between some Schools, and is too disputable
to be positively determined. For my part I am more inclined to think that the
Nature of God obliges him to punish sin some where or other, and that
vindicative Justice is Essential to him.

VI.
That it is so far Essential to him that he cannot but punish an impenitent
Sinner, few I believe will question. For nothing in the World can be imagined
more against Order and Proportion than that a Sinner should be pardoned without
Repentance. But further, it is highly probable that sin could not have been,
pardoned even with Repentance, had there not also been Satisfaction made to God
for it. It Is plain de facto, that God would not remit sin without satisfaction,
and that too the highest imaginable: Which makes it very probable that he could
not. For is it reasonable to think that God would deliver up his only and
beloved Son to that bitter dispensation, if, with the safety of his Justice, he
could have pardoned us, merely for our Repentance, without such a costly
sacrifice? And that he could not, does not that Prayer of our Savior argue,
which he used in his Agony? Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me: Which is as much as if he had said, Father if the sin of Man may be
remitted any other way than by way of suffering, I desire I may not suffer.
This I think is the Obvious sense of the Words. But this Prayer of his, was not
granted by the removal of the Cup, and may I not thence conclude that 'twas
impossible it should be removed?

VII.
And I further consider that God necessarily hates sin with an infinite hatred,
as a thing that is diametrically opposite to his own Essential sanctity, and to
those great Ends which he cannot but propose in the regulation of the universe.
But how he should thus hate it, and yet not show this his hatred by punishing
it, is not easy to conceive. And besides, it seems agreeable to the Laws of
Order and Proportion, that so great a Dis-harmony as Sin, should never go
wholly unpunished, but that the Public happiness, of which Sin is a violation,
should be both repaired, and secured by the exaction of some satisfaction.

VIII.
If it be said, that every one may remit as much as he please from his own
Right, and that then much more may God. I answer, that Right, is either Right
of Dominion, or Right of Office. From Right of Dominion, when alone, no doubt
any person may remit what he pleases, but not from Right of Office, or from
Right of Dominion, when joined with Right of Office. Now there is great reason
to believe that the exacting of Punishment for sin, is not in God a Right of
Dominion only, but also a Right of Office; that is, that God does not punish
only as supreme Lord, but as a Judge; and as a Judge, it is congruous to suppose
that he may be obliged to punish. Obliged, not by any Law or Power superior to
himself, but by the Essential Rectitude of his own Nature and Will: Which by
obliging him to regard the Public Order and Interest, may by consequence oblige
him to animadvert upon those who transgress against it.

IX.
And thus far of the Justice of God, whereby he deals uprightly and equally
with all his Creatures, and renders to every one his own, according to their
Works, good or bad, without any Partiality or Respect of Persons. The next
thing I consider in God is his veracity, whereby all his words are conformable
to his Mind and Intention, and all his performances conformable to his words:
Whereby he most assuredly makes good all his Covenants, Promises and
Threatenings, and cannot possibly deceive his Creatures any more than he himself
can be deceived.

X.
That there is this veracity in God we may be assured from the All Sufficiency
and Perfection of his Being. For all Fraud and Deceit is grounded upon Inigence
and Infirmity. No Man deceives merely for deceivings sake, but to serve a turn,
to relieve a Necessity. And such a Necessity too as cannot be relieved any
other way. For Fraud is not only a Remedy, but the last Remedy; men never
betake themselves to tricks, but when they cannot compass their Ends by
Plain-dealing. But now none of these things can be incident to God, who being
above all Indigence and Infirmity, must of consequence be as much above all
Falsehood and Deceit.

The Use of this to Devotion.
COnsidering then that God is thus strictly Just, True and Faithful, it is
rational hence to conclude, first, how much it concerns us to Fear him, and to
beware how we render our selves Obnoxious to this his Justice.

Secondly, That we ought always to rest entirely satisfied in the Divine
Dispensations, knowing that it is impossible but that this Judge of the whole
Earth should do Right.

And lastly, That we ought readily and firmly to believe him in all the
Manifestations of his Mind and Will, and particularly that we ought to repose a
strong Confidence in his Covenants and Promises, being well assured that he is
Faithful who has promised.

The Aspiration.
MY God, My Judge, who art Righteous in all thy ways, and Holy in all thy
works, I delight to think of thee, though I am too guilty to contemplate thee, in
this thy Attribute, without Fear and Trembling. For there is Judgment as well
as Mercy with thee that thou should be Feared. O enter not into Judgment with
thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be Iustify'd.

My God, how strangely Impious are they who dare say or think that the way of
the Lord is not equal! My God, I am none of those, nor will I ever be of that
profane number. I will ever acquiesce in the Equity of thy Dispensations,
whether I am able to comprehend it or no. For I know though Clouds and Darkness
may sometimes be round about thee, yet Righteousness and Judgment are always
the Habitation of thy Seat.

I readily and firmly assent, O my God, to all the Declarations thou have made
of thy Mind and Will. I believe all thy Predictions, all thy Promises, and all
thy Threatenings, that they shall be fulfilled all in their Season. I know that
nothing but Truth can proceed from thee who art Truth it self: I know that
thou, O God, can not deceive us, O grant that we may not deceive our selves.
Amen.

Contemplation VIII. Of the Divine Goodness and Philanthropy.
I.
I shall now close up these my Considerations of God, with a Meditation upon
the Divine Goodness, by which I understand a Propension of doing good to his
Creatures by the Communication of his own good or happiness. But here upon my
first entrance, I find my self plunged beyond my Depth. It is an immense Ocean
which no Line can fathom, and where the Sight loses it self in a long boundless
Prospect. This is that Attribute which in a peculiar manner adorns and
accomplishes the Divine Nature, and renders it Amiable and Lovely, as well as
Venerable and Adorable. This is the highest Repast of Angels, and the peculiar
entertainment of Contemplative Souls, many of which who had no other guide to
follow but the Clue of their own Reasonings, have long since observed that
Goodness is the Principal; and, as I may say, the Divinest Attribute of the
Deity.

II.
This the Gentile Theology intended by making Love the most ancient of all the
Gods. And accordingly we find in the Platonic Trinity (which is (...) and
(...)) that the first place is assigned to the (...) which they conceive after
the manner of an immense and most pure Light, continually dissusing and
Communicating its invigorative Beams. And this was that which the fine
Platonist Boethius alluded to, in that celebrated and graphical description of
God, when he called him Fons Boni Lucidus, the Lucid Fountain of Good. And
there is an ancient Cabalistical Table supposed to be borrowed from the
Pythagoreans, which represents in a visible Scheme the Order of the Divine
Perfection, wherein it is observable that Goodness is seated in the Supreme
Circle, which they call Chether or the Crown, thereby intimating that goodness
presides over, and gives Laws and Measures to all the other Attributes of God.

III.
And indeed it does so: For thus God's Power serves to execute the Dictates of
his Wisdom, and his Wisdom is employed in finding out Objects, Methods and
Occasions, for the exercise of his Goodness. Nay, even Justice it self, which
at first seems to thwart and reprimand the inclinations of Goodness, will
notwithstanding be found upon nearer inspection, sweetly to conspire and accord
with it, nay (what seems a greater Paradox) to be one of the Instances and
Exemplifications of it. For God never punishes but when Order, that is, the
good of the Universe requires it, and consequently never but when upon the
whole it is best to do so. So that God's goodness will still be the Chether, the
Crown of all his Perfections.

IV.
Plato calls God (...), the Idea or Essence of Goodness. A very high
expression. But says not the Scripture also the same? For when it defines God,
it does not say he is Wisdom or Power, but that he is Love. Not Loving, but
Love it self. And our Savior in Answer to him that called him good Master,
tells us, There is none good but One, that is God. As if this Divinest
Attribute were that Honor, of which God is said by the Prophet to be so
Jealous, that he will not give it to another: Isa. 42.8.
not to any of the Sons of Men, no not to the Son of Man.

V.
And indeed God may well be Jealous of this his Honor, since goodness is that
Attribute which does not only render the Deity most lovely to us, but is also
most peculiarly beloved by Himself. It Is his Favorite and darling Excellence,
that which he seems most of all to delight in, and to value as the very Flower
and Beauty of all his Excellence. And therefore when Moses desired to have a
sight of his Glory, his Answer to him was, I will make my goodness pass before
thee.

VI.
And how much God is in Love with this his Attribute, we may conclude from the
great use and exercise of it. God has exercised his goodness more than all the
rest of his Attributes, so that the Stream rises almost as high as the
Fountain, and the Instances and Exemplifications of it are almost as infinite
as it self. The Material Fabric of the World is the Emanation of the Divine
goodness, and who can tell how large that is, or where the utmost boundaries of
it are fixed? Then as for the Intellectual part of the Creation, how fruitful
has the Divine goodness been, and what a Numerous Progeny has it brought forth!
Who can number the Lords Host? Dan. 7.10.
Thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stand before him. All these drink of the same inexhaustible Well of Life, of
this Lucid Fountain of good; and with perpetual Anthems of Praise celebrate the
bounty of their Maker.

VII.
But although those higher Orders of Spirits, who are seated near the Springhead
of Bliss, enjoy a greater share of the Divine Goodness, and being as it were in
a direct Position to that All-glorious Sun, must needs drink in more plentiful
and more vigorous Effusions of his Light, yet Man, the Younger Brother, seems
in some respects to be the Darling of Heaven, and to be Priviledg'd with some
peculiar Tokens of Favor. I shall choose to instance in two. One is, That Man
is admitted to the Grace of Repentance, and has the advantage of Second
thoughts, whereas God spared not the Angels that sinned. Pet. 2.4.
The other is, That Man had the Honor to be Hypostatically United with the
(...) the Second Person of the B. Trinity. So that what was figuratively spoken
by God in the Case of Adam, is here in some measure really verified, Behold Man
is become as one of us; Heb. 2.16.
whereas he refused to take upon him the Nature of Angels.

VIII.
These indeed are the two greater Lights that shine most conspicuously in the
Firmament, and such as when alone considered, would wind up a contemplative
Spirit to that Extatic Admiration of the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.
Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou
visitest him! But there are also a multitude of lesser Stars, many of which we
do not observe, tho we feel and thrive under their Influence; and those which
we do we cannot number. God's Favors are too quick for our Accounts, and the
Heavenly Manna falls so thick about our Tents, that we want opportunity to
gather it up.

IX.
But that I may Sail by some Compass in so wide and boundless an Ocean, I
consider that the Effects of God's goodness to Man may be distributed into
these two Kinds in general, Giving and Forgiving. Those of giving again are of
two sorts: Either such as are to be conferred upon us after our Work is done,
by which I understand the Rewards of Heaven, or such as are given us by way of
Earnest, or Anticipation.

X.
I begin with the last of these, where the first thing that offers it self to
our consideration is the Collation of our Being; which I do not understand as
it is generally taken in the Schools, namely, For naked and abstract Existence,
For thus to Be Absolutely has no manner of intrinsic good in it, but is only a
Foundation or Capacity of a good or evil State Indifferently. And this methinks
is so very plain, that I should much wonder how so many Metaphysical Heads
could espouse the contrary, were it not found to be a convenient Device for the
Maintenance of that absurd Paradox, that it is better to Be, tho in Extreme
Misery, than not to be; which Proposition was also intended for the support of
another, every whit as absurd, viz. That God may consistently with his Goodness
and Justice, inflict eternal Misery upon an Innocent Creature. For since he may
(as all grant) Annihilate an Innocent Creature, 'twill follow that he may with
less appearance of Injustice, inflict on him eternal Misery, Annihilation
(according to these men's Metaphysics) being the greater evil of the two. And
that for this notable Reason, because he that is, tho never so miserable,
enjoys some good, viz. that of Existence, whereas he that is not, has none at
all.

XI.
But now, besides that the good of Simple being, may be outweigh'd by
Super-induced evils, and that then to Be all considered, would not be good but
evil, as I could easily show were it my present concern further to engage in
that Controversy; I say, besides this, I do not allow the Truth of the first
Assertion, that to be has any intrinsic good in it. And therefore when I begin
the Catalogue of the Divine Favors, with the Collation of our Being, I do not
understand by the Phrase merely our being brought into Act indefinitely
(existence as such including neither good nor evil in it) but our being made
such certain Essences or Natures, consisting of such Powers and Faculties as
are requisite to constitute such an Order of Beings as according to such a Mode
of Imitability or Idea, is represented in the Divine Understanding, and which
we distinguish by the Name of Mankind.

XII.
Now the Nature of Man involves much good and perfection in it, and
consequently for God to give it Existence is an Act of Goodness as well as of
Power. For tho there be (as I suppose) little or no deference to be paid to
that popular Argument, which would derive an Obligation of gratitude upon
Children toward their Parents, from their receiving their Being from them,
because there is no kindness here designed to those Persons who in the Event
(perhaps) are profited, but before were not so much as known; yet our case is
quite otherwise, as to our receiving our Being from the Father of Spirits. For
he both knew whom he was to oblige, when he gave us Being, and intended it as a
kindness to us, having no Interest of his own to promote by it. Which are the
two Qualifications required by Seneca, in his Book De Beneficiis, to make up
the Nature of such a Benefit as shall lay an Obligation upon the Receiver.

XIII.
Now both these Requisites being eminently found in God, it follows that his
Kindness in giving us Being, receives its Estimate from the value and
excellency of the thing bestowed, which cannot appear little if we consider,
that such was the Dignity and Excellency of Humane Nature, that it occasioned
deliberation in Heaven, and was thought worthy of the Council of the Trinity.
If we consider, that Man is the most Noble part of all the visible Creation,
the Abstract and Compendium of the Universe. That he is a Creature formed after
the Image of the Great God, endowed with an excellent and immortal Spirit, and
resembling his Maker, as in other respects, so in some measure in this, that he
can and must needs be happy both in the direct Operations of his Nature, and in
the reflexive acts of Contemplation upon the dignity of his Essence. To give
therefore Being to such an accomplished Creature as this, is ipso facto,
without Consideration of any further design, a very signal act of Love and
Beneficence.

XIV.
Another very signal instance of the Divine Goodness to Man is our
Preservation, whether we consider it in the more Metaphysical way of the
Schools, as that uninterrupted Influx, which they call Continued Creation,
whereon we depend as Essentially as the Image in the Glass does upon the
Object; or whether we consider it after the more popular acceptance, as it
denotes the Conduct and Superintendency of God's Providence, whereby he so
disposes of the Events and Issues of things as either to keep off from us what
would incommode our welfare, or to work out a more important good from those
evils which he suffers to befall us.

XV.
And here it would be matter of wonderful curiosity, and pleasing astonishment,
could we but discern from end to end those manifold turns and fetches, those
Stratagems and Intrigues, that Plot of Providence which is engaged for our
preservation through the various Occurencies of Life. Could we but see what a
Labyrinth, what a Maze we tread, and what reason there is for every turning, 2
King. 6.17.
were but our Eyes opened (as the Young man's were at the Prayer of Elisha) to
see the Bright Host of Auxiliary Spirits that incamp about us, to see with what
care and concern the good Angels contest on our behalf against the Powers of
Darkness, Dan. 10.
as the Guardian Angel of the Jews did against the Prince of Persia, and how
many dangers both Gostly and Bodily we escape through their Protection, could
we I say see all this -- But we may be content to want the curiosity, so long
as we enjoy the Benefit, and rest satisfied with what the Psalmist assures us
of in general, that the Angel of the Lord tarrieth about them that fear him,
Psalm. 34.
and delivers them.

XVI.
Another considerable instance of the Divine Goodness to Man, is seen in the
Provision made by Providence for the necessaries and Conveniences of Life, such
as Food and Raiment, and the like. This was first exemplifi'd in the Order of
the Creation, wherein it is to be observed that the Creation of Man was reserved
for the work of the Sixth day, till the World was both Created and Furnished
for his reception; till the Heavenly bodies were prepared to guide him by their
Light, and the Earth to feed him with her Fruits, and then God brings in Man
into the World, like a Noble guest to a Table richly spread and set out with
Delicacys.

XVII.
I dare not heighten this consideration so far as some do, who affirm all
things to have been made merely for the use of Man. For although (as it is well
noted by the French Philosopher) upon a moral account, Princip. Phil. p. 50.
it be of good use to say that God made all things for our sakes, it being a
consideration that would serve to excite in us a greater Love and Gratitude
toward him, and although in some corrected Sense it be true, in as much as we
may make use of all things to some good purpose or other, either as Objects to
employ our Philosophy upon, or as Occasions to Magnify the goodness and Power
of our Creator, yet to say that all things were so precisely made for us as to
exclude all other purposes, besides that it is too boldly to determine concerning
the Ends of God, and to indulge a fond opinion of our selves, it is also plainly
absurd and unphilosophical, there being questionless many things in the World
so far from affording any real use to Man, that they never have been or shall
be so much as seen or understood by him.

XVIII.
However thus far we may venture to determine, and more we need not require,
that God had a special regard to Man in the Creation of the World, whom he has
constituted Lord of the inferior part of it, that (as the Psalmist says) he
covered the Heavens with Clouds, and prepared Rain for the Earth, and made the
Grass to grow upon the Mountains, Psalm. 147.
and Herbs for the use of Man.

XIX.
But besides this general and Primary designation of things for the use of Man,
there is a more Particular and Seconday work of Providence to be observed in
the so managing and Ordering of Affairs, that every Man may have a tolerable
Portion of the good things of this Life. And this is effected not by leaving
all things in Common, or giving every Man a right to every thing, for this
would be of pernicious consequence, as tending both to the perpetual
disturbance of the Public Peace, and to the utter neglect and Disimprovement of
Nature; but by the limits and enclosures of Property, whereby care is taken
that every Man shall either have something of his own, or be maintained by the
Provisions of those that have. So that some way or other God provides for every
member of this his great Family, and though he does not always at our desire
bring Quails, Psalm. 105.
and fill us with the Bread of Heaven, yet he furnishes every one that travels
in this Wilderness with a Viaticum sufficient to carry him through his Journey;
and though he does not grant him his own wish, yet he grants him that of a
Wiser Man, and feeds him with food convenient for him. Pro. 30.


XX.
But these are but Prefatory Favors, Dawnings of goodness, and little Essays
of the Divine Love if Compared with those last displays of his Bounty, those
Consummations of Kindness which attend Man in the other World, when God shall
give him everlasting felicity, and make him glad with the joy of his
Countenance. Psalm. 21.
When he shall withdraw his hand from the Clift of the Rock, Ex. 33:
and show him all his Glory. When he shall remove the Bounds from the Mount of
his Presence, and admit him to the Comprehensions of an Intuitive Beatitude.
This is that great Portion; that Final Patrimony which is laid up for Man, and
which (as our Savior says) shall be given to those, Matt. 10.
for whom it is prepared. To those, who do not by their own default forfeit
their Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

XXI.
And thus far of those effects of the Divine Goodness to Man, which are
manifested by giving. The next is that of forgiving. This is that peculiar
Instance of Favor, whereby Man stands distinguished from the rest of the Sons
of God, as the great Favorite of Heaven. For though the Angels were all
Partakers of God's Love and Bounty, yet 'twas Man alone that was made choice of
to be the Object of his Mercy. (...) Says Nemesius. De Not. Hom. p. 22.
For 'twas Man alone, among all Rational Beings, who had the Privilege of
being p^^don'd by Repentance. A Favor extraordinary, whether we consider the
great Benefit that accrues to Man by it, in being freed from the Curse of the
Law, and restored to a capacity of arriving to that Happiness, for which he was
first designed, or the wonderful means of effecting it. For that God should bow
the Heavens and come down, empty himself by taking upon him the Form of a
Servant, and humble himself yet further, by becoming Obedient even unto Death,
this is that Stupendous unutterable instance of Mercy, that Mystery of
Goodness, which the Angels desire to look into, which they admire and cannot
Comprehend, Sound and cannot Fathom, and which while they Contemplate, Man
enjoys.

The use of this to Devotion.
HAving now tasted and seen in some Measure how good and gracious the Lord is,
let us now apply this speculation to the advantage of Devotion. This I shall
do, First, by considering what may be collected to this purpose from the
Goodness of God in General; Secondly, by the showing how the several Instances
of the Divine Goodness point out to us the exercise of several Devotional
virtues. And first since God is so good a Being, and so good to Man, 'twill
become us in the first place to banish all superstitious slavish Fears and
jealous apprehensions of him, considering that it is more for the Honor, and
more according to the Will of so Good a Being, to be heartily loved, than
servilely feared, and that it is Love and not Fear that has the Honor to fulfill
the whole Law.

Secondly, God being so Good, and having shown so much Goodness to us, 'twill
highly become us in the next place to acknowledge this his Goodness by all the
ways we can, especially by these Three, Praying to him, Depending on him, and
Praising him. By every one of these, we acknowledge God's Goodness, either
directly, or by consequence; but most of all by the last, which ought therefore
to be principally regarded. This I the rather take notice of, because it is a
thing wherein we are generally defective, for we are all apt to be more
zealously affected in our petitionary Prayers, than in our giving Thanks. And
the reason, I suppose, is, because our Prayers are for our selves, but giving
Thanks is to God. But certainly this is a great fault, and proceeds from that
root of all evil, self-love; we ought rather to address our selves to God with
more Application and Devotion in our Praises than in our Prayers. For he that
Praises, glorifies God more than he that Prays; for he that Prays, does only
hope that God will be good to him, but he that Praises, does actually
acknowledge that he is already so. There is more excellence in Praise than we
are commonly aware of. To Believe, Pray and Trust is the work of Earth, but to
Adore and Praise is the work of Heaven. But not so as to be reserved till we
come thither. No, we must begin it here, or we shall never do it hereafter.
It Is the only retribution God expects from us for all his Goodness, to be
blessed for his Blessings; and unless we do this, we shall be guilty of the
highest injustice and ingratitude imaginable, and of such a vileness, as all
the Praying in the World will never countervail.

But as we are obliged to act thus from God's Goodness in general, so the
several Instances of the Divine Goodness point out to us the exercise of
several Devotional Virtues. For example, when a Man considers God as the Author
and Preserver of his Being, what inference can be more natural, than that he
should present unto him himself, his Soul and Body to be a reasonable, holy and
lively Sacrifice, that he should employ all his Powers and Faculties in the
Service, and to the Glory of him that gave them, and love him with all his
Heart, Mind, Soul and Strength? Again, when he considers the guard which Gods
Holy Angels keep over him, and the many Deliverances vouchsafed him through
their Protection, What inference can be more obvious than that he rest secure
under this defense of the most High, and abide with confidence under the shadow
of the Almighty, that he sing Praises to God in the multitude of these his
strong Mercies, and be ever mindful of that saying, Grieve not the Angel, lest
he smite thee: do nothing against him, lest he forsake thee. Again, when he
considers the plentiful provision God has made for him as to this life, that
his Lot is fallen to him in a fair ground, and that he has a goodly Heritage,
what is more naturally to be inferred than that he offer up to God the
Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, for all the Methods, Conveyances and Instruments of
his Bounty, and that he trust his Providential care for his future
maintenance. Again, when he considers that weight of Glory prepared for him in
the other World, What can be more natural for him, than with Angels and
Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, to Laud and Magnify his Glorious
Name, and to press forward to some degrees of excellency, in the Service of him
who has thus prevented him with such excesses of Kindness, such depths of
unsearchable Love. Lastly, when he considers those astonishing Miracles of the
Divine Mercy and condescension in the Redemption of the World, in the
Assumption of our Nature, and the humble submission of our Blessed Lord to the
Pains and Dishonours of the Cross, what can be more natural, than that after an
Hymn of Praise and Adoration to him that sitteh on the Throne, and to the Lamb,
he look upon himself now as no longer his own, 1 Cor. 6.
but as bought with a Price; and accordingly glorify God in his Body and
Spirit, which are God's, that he dishonor not that Nature which is made one
with the Divinity, and advanced above the Seraphims; and that lastly, he
endeavor to copy out some of the imitable strokes of his Saviors Humility,
and (in the Apostle's Phrase) let the same mind be in him which was in Christ
Jesus.

The Aspiration.
O My great and good God, who art good in all thy Greatness, and whose chiefest
Greatness is to be Good, How can I possibly think amiss of thee, distrust thee,
or harbor any jealous apprehensions concerning thee? And how unworthy should I
be of this thy Goodness if I should!

But, O God, my Love, it is my infirmity to be afraid of that Excellence which I
should rather love, for my love of thee is not yet perfect enough to cast out
all fear; but blessed be thy Goodness, who in the midst of my fears and
doubtful surmises art pleased to remind me of thy Nature, and to say to my
Soul, as thou did once to the dissident Disciples, It is I, be not afraid.

The Voice of my Beloved! I will therefore turn my fears to love, and love more
than I ever yet feared or loved. Psalm. 145.
I will also magnify thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy Name for ever
and ever. Every day will I give thanks unto thee: and praise thy Name for ever
and ever. For I have tasted and seen how gracious thou art, and I find it is a
good thing to Praise thee: and that it is a joyful and pleasant thing to be
Thankful. I know, O my God, that thy Goodness is as much above my Praise, as
thy Greatness is above my Comprehension. My Praises can add nothing to thee,
neither can I Praise thee according to thy Goodness. But, O my God, I will
Praise thee according to my strength, and I know that the same Goodness of
thine, which is too great to be praised worthily, is also too great not to
accept our unworthy Praises.

My God, I know thou requirest from me only the Praises of a Man, but I am
troubled that I cannot Praise thee as an Angel. O that I were now in Heaven, if
'twere only that I might Praise thee as thy Angels Praise thee: This, O my God,
I will do hereafter, my gratitude shall run then as high as theirs, and it
shall be as lasting too; it shall last as long as thy Goodness and my Being
lasts; and as thy Mercy, so my Praise shall endure for ever.

THE SECOND PART. Wherein the Grounds and Measures OF DEVOTION Are Considered
from the Nature of Man.

By John Norris, M. A. and Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

Contemplation I. Of Man, considered as a Creature.
I.
IN Man, as thus considered, I find these four things involved, First, That he
was once Nothing. Secondly, That from Nothing he became Something. Thirdly,
That he was made Something, and is what he is by and from God. Fourthly, That
he so depends upon Gods continual Influence for the continuation of that Being
which he received from him, that should God but never so little withdraw it, he
must necessarily fall back into his first Nothing.

II.
First, then I consider that Man was once Nothing, which is the same as to say,
That once he was not, or that he was not always. This is too acknowledged a
Proposition to need any laborious Proof, but however for satisfaction sake, I
thus demonstrate it. If Man were always he would be a necessary Being. For
since every thing is necessary while it is, and since there is no assignable
Point of Duration wherein that which always is, is not, it follows that if man
were always, he would be a necessary Being. But now that Man is not a necessary
Being, I prove thus.

III.
Man has not his Being from himself, but from some other Being; For if he had
it from himself, he would never have limited his own Being, and consequently
would have had all other Perfections as well as Existence. But that he has not
is plain, because he is an Amorous and Desiring Being, and is continually
reaching out and aspiring to some further Excellence, which is a certain
Argument of Indigency. Whence it follows that he had not Being from himself.

IV.
He must therefore have it from some other Being, that is, He must therefore
exist, because some other Being will have him to exist. If then the Ground and
Reason of man's existing be the Will and Pleasure of some other Being, then Man
must so far exist necessarily, as it is necessary that that other Being should
will his existence. Since the necessity of the Effect depends upon the
necessity of the Cause: To show therefore that Man does not necessarily exist,
'twill be enough to show that it is not necessary that any such Being should
will his Existence; which I do thus.

V.
It Is not necessary that any Being should effectually will that which is not
necessarily Lovely. But Man is not necessarily Lovely; therefore it is not
necessary that any Being should effectually will the Being of Man. The first
Proposition is Self-evident. The second will be made so, by considering that
necessary Loveliness is the highest degree of Loveliness, and the highest
degree of Loveliness, supposes the highest degree of Excellence; that which is
lovely in the highest degree, must be excellent in the highest degree, every
thing being lovely so far as it is excellent. But now man is not Excellent in
the highest degree, because he aspires to higher excellence (as was said
before) and therefore neither is he Lovely in the highest degree, and therefore
not Necessarily Lovely. Which was the Minor Proposition. The Conclusion
therefore follows, that it is not necessary that any Being should effectually
will the being of Man. And therefore also it is not necessary that Man should
exist, the reason of Man's existing being founded upon the will of some other
Being, as was supposed. And if Man does not exist necessarily, then he did not
exist always; and if not always, then once he was not, which was the thing to
be here made out.

VI.
The next thing to be considered is that Man became Something from Nothing:
Which is the same as to say that he was not made out of any Pre-existent Matter
or Substance. This, tho it be more strictly verified of the Soul of Man, which
in no sense was raised into being from any pre-existent substance, but came
immediately from Nothing to be what it is, yet it is also verified to all
intents and purposes in respect of his Body, which tho it be not immediately
from Nothing as the Soul is, yet Mediately it is, it being formed not from
matter eternally Pre-existing, but from Matter which once was Nothing, it being
impossible that there should be any eternally pre-existing matter, or that
Matter should always have been, for the very same Reason that Man could not
have been always; which having already set down, I shall not again repeat it.

VII.
The third thing involved in Man's being a Creature, is that he was made
something, and is what he is by and from God. This will be thus Demonstrated.
All Being is either Being Essentially, that is, Being it self, or Being by
Participation. Now Being it self is God, as has been shown before: And there
can be but one Being it self, as was also shown before. Therefore all Beings
besides this one Being it self, besides God, are Beings by Participation. Now
whatever is in any thing by Participation, is caused in it by that to which it
Essentially belongs. Man therefore being a Being by Participation, must
necessarily be from and by Being it self; that is, from and by God.

VIII.
Should it be here Objected that Nothing hinders, but that a thing may be found
without that which is not of the Reason or Essence of it, as a Man suppose
without Learning. And that this Habitude of being caused by Being it self, or
God is not of the essence of Beings, because they may be conceived without it.
And that therefore nothing hinders but that there may be some Beings that are
not from God. To this I answer, That tho this Habitude does not make any part
of the Idea or Essence of those beings which are caused, yet it is necessarily
consequent to it. For to be a Being by Participation does as much vertually
involve its being caused, as a Triangle involves this Affection, that any two
sides of it taken together are greater than the third. So that such a Being can
no more exist without being caused, than a Triangle can exist without this
Affection. But whereas the Habitude of being caused, is not of the Reason of
Being Simply, or as such, therefore there is a Certain Being that is not
caused, which is God.

IX.
The same Conclusion, that Man has his Being from God, may be further proved
from this Consideration, that none can possibly Create but God, The truth of
which Proposition is generally founded upon the Distance that is between Being
and not Being, which they say is infinite, and therefore it must require an
Infinite Power to educe a thing from one to the other. But this is an obscure
way of arguing, and I must profess that I do not so clearly understand it as to
be satisfied whether it be conclusive or no; and therefore I shall rather choose
to say, that the most universal effect must have the most universal cause. But
now among all Effects, to make a thing to be Simply is the most Universal. And
this is Creation, which implies not only a production of this or that Being, or
of a Being according to this or that Nature or Quality, (for this is also done
in Generation and Alteration) but also of Being Absolutely: For the immediate
Terms of Creation are from not being to be, and then afterward comes in to be
this or that, thus or thus. Creation therefore is the most Universal Effect
that is, and consequently it must be reduced into the most Universal Cause that
is, which is God. Therefore God only can Create, therefore all Creatures are
from God, and consequently Man receives his Being from no other but God.

X.
It Is now further to be considered, that as man receives his being from God, so
he depends upon God's continual influence for the continuation of it, insomuch,
that should God never so little withdraw it, he must necessarily fall back into
his First Nothing. For besides, that to continue in being is as much an
Universal Effect as to make to be, and consequently must be resolved into the
same Universal Cause, which is God. I further consider, that Being by
Participation is wholly and entirely from Being it self. Now every Effect
depends upon its Cause as far as it is its Cause. If a Partial Cause, then it
depends upon it Partially, if an Entire Cause, than it depends upon it
Entirely. Since therefore Being by Participation is wholly and entirely from
Being it self, it follows that it must depend wholly and entirely upon it, and
if so, then it must depend upon it for every minute of its Existence, as well
as for the very first Instant of it; otherwise it would not depend upon it
wholly and entirely (as is supposed) there being something in reference to
which it would be Independent.

XI.
Medit. De Prima Philosop. Medit. 3.
I further consider with Cartesius, that since the Time of our Life consists of
innumerable Parts, every one of which does by no means depend upon that which
went before, from our existing a little before it, does no way follow that we
shall exist Now. I say, it does no way follow, that because we existed a little
before, we shall therefore exist now; or that because of our existing now, we
shall exist afterward, there being no necessary Connection between the Moments
themselves, whereof our Duration is made up. If therefore we do exist in
several Instants or Nows of Time, this must be from some Cause which conserves
us, and as it were gives us being in every one of those Nows or Moments. But
this cannot be our selves, first, for the reason alleged by Cartesius, because
we are not Conscious of any such Power, which undoubtedly we should be, if we
had it. And Secondly, because we might then have given our selves the First Now
or Moment of existence as well as any of the Rest. For the First Now of
Existence differs no otherwise from any of the rest but only as to Novitas
Essendi, or the Newness of existing, which is only an extrinsical Relation, and
such as adds nothing to the difficulty or greatness of the Effect; which being
the same on both hands, the Cause must also be of equal Force and Virtue. But
we could not give Being to our selves (as was before proved) and therefore
neither are we able to Conserve our selves in being. The Cause therefore by
which we are Conserved in being, must be the same which gave us Being, that is,
God; without whose continued Influence we can no more go on in our Existence,
than we could at First Be.

XII.
This I cannot better illustrate than by that dependence which an Image in the
Glass has upon the Face whose Reflection it is. The Image is not only caused by
the access of the Face to the Glass, but does also so necessarily and
substantially depend upon and subsist by its Presence, that at the first
removal of it, it immediately vanishes and disappears. And so it is with us, we
are not only at first brought into being by God, but do also all along so
depend upon his Influence for the carrying on our being through the several
Distinct Moments of time, that should this Influence but never so little be
withdrawn or intercepted, we should immediately sink down into our First
Nothing.

XIII.
And were it not thus, 'twould be impossible that God should ever Annihilate.
For Annihilation cannot be done by any Positive Act, because the Term of
Annihilation is, not being Simply. But now every Positive Act tends to being.
So that even Physical Corruption is not a Positive Motion, but only in as much
as at the Exclusion of one Form another is introduced by way of Concomitancy.
Much less therefore can Annihilation be Positive. If therefore God be able to
Annihilate it can be only by Privation, that is, by suspending that Influence
upon which we depended for every Moment of our Existence; and without which we
cannot exist. And thus Job expresses the Mode of Annihilation, when he says,
Job 6.
O that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand,
and cut me off.

XIV.
As for the Particular Mode of our dependence upon God, and what this Divine
Influence is whereby we are Conserved in being, this is a Theory much above our
Capacity to Comprehend, and therefore I shall not much employ my Curiosity
about it. But might I have leave to Divine, I would say, That the Creature
depends upon God after some such way as the Image in the Glass does upon the
Face. That this Ectypal World is only the Image or Reflection of the Archetypal
or Ideal World, and so depends upon it, and subsists by it, as all other Images
do upon their Originals. And that the Presentialness of this Ideal World must
be supposed to be some way or other intercepted in order to the Annihilation of
either this whole Ectypal World, or of any particular Creature in it. And this
seems to have good foundation in Scripture, which says, that all things are
upheld, or born by the Word of God's Power, that is, by the Divine (...), Heb.
1.
the Ideal or Archetypal World; by whom also in the same place, the Worlds are
said to have been made.

The Use of this to Devotion.
GReat is the advantage that may be made hence, to the purposes of Devotion.
For, first, if Man was once nothing, this lays a very proper and reasonable
ground for Humility and Poverty of Spirit. It Is usually thought a very humbling
consideration, to remind a Person of the meanness of his Original. But, now,
what Original can be so mean as to come from nothing? Now this is the condition
of Man. He had his Rise from nothing, and derives his Pedigree, by his Mothers
side, from Darkness and Emptiness. And tho^ now by the Omnipotence of his
Creator he is something, yet still he holds his being as precariously as he
first received it, and depends as much for his existence upon the Will of his
Creator, as Light does upon the Sun. God spoke the word, indeed, before he was
made; but to unmake him, he need only be silent, and not sustain him by the
Word of his Power. And shall that Being be Proud which was once nothing, and
needs only a mere Negative to bring him to nothing again? No, says the wise
Man, Pride was not made for man: nor furious anger for them that are born of a
woman.

Secondly, As this affords us grounds of Humiliation, as to our selves, so we
have hence reason to adore and magnify that Power which was so great as to be
able, and that Goodness which was so great as to be willing to bring us from
nothing to something.

And since all this proceeds wholly from God, to whom we not only owe our
beings, but our whole perseverance in being; hence in the last place appears
the great equity of giving up our whole selves, our Soul, Body and Spirit, to
the Service and Glory of that God in whom we live, move, and have our being;
which, considering the great Benefit of Creation, and the Right which God
thereby acquires over us, must needs be a very reasonable Service and Sacrifice.

The Aspiration.
MY God, my Creator, how can I be ever sufficiently humble, when I consider
that I once was not; when I consider that even thou with all thy Omnipotence
can not reduce me to a lower degree of nothing than that from whence thou
took'st me! When I consider that I still so depend upon thee, that I cannot
subsist one moment without thee! What a vanity, what a shadow, what a nothing
then am I, who once was not, and now am only because Thou art, and can no
longer stand in being than supported by the Arm of thy Power!

O my God, I know not whether of the two I ought more to Adore and Magnify,
either that Power that could raise me from nothing, to be what I am, or that
Goodness which could determine that Power to so strange and wonderful a
Production. One deep, O my God, calls upon another, and my thoughts are all
lost and swallowed up in both.

Praise and Adoration be to thee, O my great and good God, for 'twas from thy
Power and Goodness that I received my Being. Thou art he that took me out of my
Mothers Womb, and then also wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my Mothers
Breast. I have been also left unto thee ever since I was born: thou art my God
even from my Mothers Womb. My Soul still hangs upon thee: thy right Hand does
uphold me. Thou hold my Soul in life, and suffer not my Feet to slip.

To thee then, O Father of Spirits, I give up and devote my whole self, for I
am entirely from thee, entirely by thee, and therefore entirely thine. How then
can I ever offend thee, or rebel against thee, with those Powers which thou
have given me, and do still uphold and maintain in me! My God, I will not,
but as thou art he whose I am, so thou shall be he whom I will ever serve. Free
me therefore, O God, from my Passions, and make me but once my Own, and I will
then ever be Thine. Amen.

Contemplation II. Of Man considered as an Intelligent Creature.
I.
IN the Creation of Man there are two things chiefly to be remarked, First, The
Council and Deliberation of the Blessed Trinity, expressed in these words: Let
us make man. Secondly, The immediate Pattern or Platform, according to which he
was to be made, expressed in these words, In our Image, after our own likeness.
Now both these denote the peculiar excellency of human Nature; but especially
the latter: for what can make more for the excellency of Man's composition,
than to say, that he was made after the Divine likeness.

II.
This Divine likeness, not to mention any other instances of resemblance, I
take to be most conspicuous in this, that as in the Divine Nature there are two
Processions; one by way of Intellect, which is the (...), or Word, and the
other by way of Love, which is the Holy Spirit. So likewise in the human Nature
there are as it were two Processions, and that of the same kind too as in the
Divine, Understanding and Love. By these two Noble and Divine Powers branching
forth from the Soul, Man chiefly resembles God, and becomes a little Image of
the Trinity.

III.
My business at present is only with the first of these, namely, the
Understanding of Man, or to consider Man as an Intelligent Creature. Here
therefore I shall show, first, the Kinds of human Knowledge; Secondly, the Mode
of it. Now, as to the Kinds of human Knowledge, I consider, that since
Knowledge in general (as was before noted) is a Comprehension of Truth,
Contemp. 5.
as many ways as a Man may comprehend Truth, so many ways he may be said to
know. Now a Man may comprehend Truth, either as to Simple Essences, or as to
their Complex Habitudes, or as to the Dependence that is between one Habitude
and another. The first of these is what we usually call Apprehension, the
second is what we call Judgment, and the last is what we call Discourse. Thus
we are authorized to speak by the Schools, who ascribe Judgment and Discourse
to the Understanding; though I am rather of Monsieur Malebranche his mind, De
inquirend. verit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that there is no other Operation of the Intellect but only Perception, and
that Judgment and Discourse more properly belong to the Will, as being an
embracing of, and an adhesion to Truth. But then, withal, it must be
acknowledged, that there is a threefold Perception. One whereby I perceive a
simple Object, without any relation which may be called a simple Perception.
Another, when I perceive the relations of simple Essences, which may be called
a Judicial Perception. And a third, when I perceive the relation that is
between those relations, which may be called a Rational Perception. This is the
whole Latitude, and full Compass of the Intellect, and that which belongs to
Intellect in common, whether Human or Divine.

IV.
For I think it no absurdity to say, that in this sense God has Reason and
Discourse. For it is most certain that he does not only perceive the simple
Essences of things, and their relations, but also the relation that is between
those relations. Only there is this difference, that God perceives all this at
once, with one entire simple view; whereas Man is fain to open his prospect by
degrees, by advancing step by step from one proposition to another in the field
of Truth. Which, though it has appropriated to it self the name of Reason, yet I
think it does not belong to the nature of Reason in general, but is rather an
accidental defect of it, such as proceeds from the narrowness of created, or of
such or such created Capacities. This must not therefore be made necessary to
Reason (that being sufficiently salv'd in perceiving the relation that is
between the Habitudes of things) but only to human Reason.

V.
And thus much as to the Kinds of human Knowledge. I come now to explain the
Mode of it, by showing how Man understands. This perhaps will appear a
desperate undertaking at first sight, but I think the difficulty proceeds more
from the prejudices of our Education than from the remoteness of the Theory.
For were we not otherwise prepossest from the Principles of the vulgar
Philosophy, what would be more familiar and obvious than to conclude that we
see and know all things in God? This is a Notion which I very early lighted
upon, by the Natural Parturiency of my own mind, before I had consulted with
any Authors that might imbue me with it. But afterward I met with some that
confirmed me in it. For it is a Notion very frequently touched upon by
Platonists; by Plotinus, by Proclus, by Marsilius Ficinus, by St. Austin, by
the late French Philosopher Du Hamel, in his Book De Mente Humana, and is
sometimes glanced at by Aquinas himself, but by none that I know of so
copiously, so purposely, and so dexterously managed, as by the incomparable
Monsieur Malebranche, who, I think, has established the truth of it beyond all
cavil or exception, as well as reasonable doubting. I shall therefore, for the
clearing of this Argument, first give a short and summary account of what that
excellent Person has meditated upon it, and then subjoin some further
considerations of my own to the same purpose.

VI.
Pe inquirend. verit. l. 3. part. 2. c. 1.
First then Monsieur Malebranche lays down this preparatory Position, that those
Objects which are without the Soul, cannot be perceived by themselves, but by
the Mediation of Ideas. This Proposition is most unquestionable, taking Ideas
in a large signification for Images or Representations of things. For things
that are perceived must be some way or other Present to the Soul, either by
themselves or by the Representatives. And since they are not by themselves,
they must by their Ideas. And so much is acknowledged on all sides. Here
therefore being no Controversy, there needs no more Proof.

VII.
This premised, he thus proceeds. It is therefore necessary that these Ideas
which we have of Objects without, should either proceed from those Objects: Or
that our Mind has a Power of Producing those Ideas. Or that God should produce
them with the Mind when he creates it, or that he should produce them as often
as we think of any Object. Or that our Mind should possess in it self all the
Perfections which it sees in things. Or lastly, that it be united to some
Absolutely Perfect Being, that includes in himself all the Perfections of
Created Beings. By one of these ways we must necessarily perceive whatever we
perceive.

VIII.
The first is according to the vulgar Philosopy, which teaches that external
Objects send forth certain Species like themselves, and that these Species are
carried by the external Senses to the common Sensory, and that then they are
resined, and spritualized by the help of that which they call Intellectus
Agens, and so become Intelligible, then are received into the Intellectus
Passivus, and then are actually understood. This certainly is either very
profound sense, or very profound nonsense, one of the two, and is rather like
the Anatomical Account how the Chyle is turned into Blood, than like a
Metaphysical account of the way of understanding. But that this Hypothesis
cannot be true, our Author shows from the impossibility of Objects sending
sorth such Species, which he proves first from the Impenetrability of Bodies.
Which must needs hinder that these Species which are nothing else but Corporeal
effluvias, should possess the same Vbi, which yet must be, if, by them Objects
are rendered visible, because the whole Medium, and every part of it, must be
supposed full of them.

IX.
This he proves, Secondly, from the change or variation of the Species. For
it is most certain, that the nearer the Object, the greater it shows. But now
what should afterward diminish this Species, and what is become of those parts
whereof it consisted, when it appeared greater? And what is it that so suddenly
augments it, when it is beheld through a Telescope?

X.
The same he proves further from the consideration of a perfect Cube, all the
Species of whose sides are unequal, and yet the sides themselves are equally
square. And Lastly, he sensures it as an unconceivable supposition, that a Body
should continually send forth Species every where, so as to fill every Point of
such vast spaces, and yet not be sensibly diminished. This first Hypothesis
therefore cannot be true,

XI.
The second is, that our Mind has a Power of Producing these Ideas. This he
also shows to be false from the Absurdity that would thence follow, which is
that Man would then be able to Create. The consequence he proves by showing
that these Ideas are Real Beings, because they have real Properties, and differ
one from another, and represent things really different. And that they are also
Spiritual Beings, and that then Man would be able to Create more Noble Entities
than the Material World, which is the workmanship of God.

XII.
Our Author further shows that our Mind would not use this Creative Power,
though She had it, from the Instance of a Painter. For as a Painter, though
never so skilful, cannot represent a Creature which he never saw, and whereof
he has no Idea; so a Man cannot form the Idea of an Object, unless he first
knows it, that is, unless he has an Idea of it, which does not depend upon his
own will. Now if he already has the Idea of that Object, certainly he knows it,
and then it is to no purpose for him to form again a new Idea of it. 'This
Power therefore of Producing Ideas is given to Man in vain, therefore it ought
not to be given, therefore this second Hypothesis is not true.

XIII.
The third is, that God produces these Ideas, either with the Mind, or whenever
we think of any Object. That this cannot be true as to the first part, he shows
from the Infinite number of Ideas which must be supposed in proportion to the
Infinite number of things, which he exemplifies in Mathematical figures, and
the Combinations thence arising. It Is not in the first place probable that God
should create so many things with every Soul; But Secondly, suppose he should,
and the Mind, were a Magazine of all manner of Ideas, yet 'twould be an
invincible Difficulty to show how the Mind among such an Infinite number of
Ideas, should be able, and that so readily, to pick out those which it has
occasion for. It ought not therefore to be said that Ideas are Created with us.

XIV.
And there is as little ground to suppose that God does every moment produce in
us as many several Ideas, as we conceive things. For besides that this has
already been sufficiently overthrown in the other, it is further to be
considered, that we must then always actually have in us the Ideas of all
things, seeing that at all times we can will to think of all things: Which we
could not do if we had not already a confuse Perception of them, that is,
unless an Infinite number of Ideas were continually before our Minds. For we
can not be willing to think of that whereof we have no Idea. But we cannot have
all this Infinity of Ideas at once in our selves, therefore this third
Hypothesis is not true.

VX.
The fourth is that the Mind needs no other thing but it self for the
Perception of Objects, and that by Contemplating it self and her own
Perfections, She can perceive all External Objects. This is the boldest
Assertion of all, and is full of Impiety as well as Absurdity. They that will
maintain this must be obliged to say that the Mind of Man has in it self the
Perfections of all things, since it cannot see in it self what it has not in it
self, and then they would do well to consider whether this be not to make a God
of the Soul; For it is God only who has in himself the Perfections of all
things, and who therefore sees by his own Light.

XVI.
Having thus overthrown these four Hypotheses concerning the Mode of our
understanding, Our most Ingenious Author proceeds to the remaining one, that we
see all things in God. Which though it be sufficiently established in the
overthrow of the rest, yet he goes on to a more immediate and direct proof of
it. In order to which he premises two Postulatums which he had before proved,
First, that God has in himself the Ideas of all things. This he had before
concluded from Gods creating all things, which he could not do without having
in himself the Ideas of all things. And this I have also demonstrated in my
fifth Contemplation, by a distinct Argument taken from the being of Necessary
and Eternal Truths. The second Postulatum is that God is intimately by his
Presence united to our Minds, so that God may be said to be the Place of
Spirits, as Space is the Place of Bodies. These two things being supposed, it
is most certain that the Mind may see all things in God, if God will be pleased
to display these Ideas to her, there being then nothing to hinder it. And that
it is the will and Pleasure of God so to do, rather than create an Infinite
number of Ideas in every Mind, he thus proves.

XVII.
First, from the general Economy of the universe, wherein it is observable that
God never does that by difficult ways, which may be done by simple and easy
ways: that is, God never does any thing in vain, and without Cause: When
therefore God may by himself open and exhibit to us all things barely by
willing that we should see those Ideas which are in him, it is no way probable
that to obtain the same end, he should produce such an infinite Multitude of
Ideas as are necessary to that variety and multiplicity of Knowledge, that is
in all Created Minds.

XVIII.
This Mode of Intelligence our Author further recommends, by considering that
by this way Created Minds are placed in the greatest dependence upon God that
can possibly be. For upon this Hypothesis we cannot only see nothing but what
God will let us see, but we can also see nothing but what God exhibits to us to
be seen. Neither can our Minds be said sufficiently to depend upon God in all
its operations, if they are supposed to have all that is necessary for action,
that is, to have in themselves the Ideas of all things always present.

XIX.
This again he more strongly inforces by an Argument taken from the Manner of
our Minds perceiving all things. For we all find by certain experience that
when we are minded to think of any particular thing, we first cast our eyes
about upon all Beings, and then at last, adhere to the consideration of that
Object, which we intended to think upon. Now it is past all question that we
cannot desire to see any Object, but we must see it already, although
Confusely, and after a general kind of a way. So that since we can desire to
see all Objects, now this, now that, hence it will certainly follow, that all
Beings are Present to our minds. But now all Beings cannot any other way be
present to the mind, but because God is present to it, who in the Simplicity of
his Being comprehends all beings. The same may be further confirmed from the
Perception of Vniversals. Which the mind could not well be supposed able to
represent unless it saw all Beings included in One. For since every Created
thing is an Individual, no one can say that he perceives any thing Created,
when he perceives, suppose, a Triangle in general. This well deserves to be
considered.

XX.
Again our Ingenious Author argues from the Idea which we have of Infinite. For
it is plain that we perceive Infinites, though we do not comprehend it, and that
our mind has a very Distinct Idea of God, which it could not have but by its
union with God. Since it is absurd to suppose that the Idea of God should be
from any thing that is Created.

XXI.
He further Considers that the Mind has not only an Idea of Infinite, but that
it also has it before it has any Idea of finite. For we conceive Infinite
Being, barely by conceiving Being, without considering whether it be finite or
Infinite. But now to conceive any finite Being, we must detract something from
that general Notion of Being, which by consequence must be Antecedent. Our mind
therefore perceives nothing but in the Idea which it has of Infinite. And this
Idea is so far from being formed from a Confuse heaping together of the Ideas
of special Beings, as Philosophers commonly pretend, that all those Special
Ideas are nothing else but Participations from the general Idea of Infinite.
Even as God does not hold his Being from the Creatures, but all Creatures
subsist only by him.

XXII.
He adds one Argument more which he thinks will go for Demonstration, with
those who are used to Abstract ways of Reasoning. It is impossible that God in
any of his actions should have any Principal End different from himself. This
is a Common Notion with every Attentive Thinker. And the Scripture suffers us
not to doubt but that God made all things for himself. It is necessary
therefore that not only our Natural Love, that is, the motion which he produces
in us, should tend toward himself, but that moreover that Knowledge and Light,
which he bestows upon our mind should open and exhibit to us something that is
in himself. For whatsoever comes from God cannot be for any other besides God.
If God should Create a Mind and give it the Sun, suppose, for its Idea, or
immediate Object of Knowledge, God would then make that Mind for the Sun, and
not for himself.

XXIII.
God therefore cannot make a mind to know his Works, unless that mind do in
some manner see God when it sees his Works; so that I may venture to say, that
if we did not some way or other see God, we should see nothing at all. Even as
if we did not love God; that is, if God did not continually impress upon us the
love of good in general, we should love nothing at all. For since this Love is
the same with our will, we cannot Love or will any thing without him, since we
cannot love Particular goods but by determining toward those goods that motion
of Love which God gives us toward himself. We love therefore nothing but by
that necessary love by which we are moved toward God, and we see nothing but
by that Natural Knowledge which we have of God. And all those Special Ideas
which we have of the Creatures, are nothing else but Limitations of the Idea of
the Creator, as all the motion of our Will toward the Creatures are nothing
else but Determinations of that motion which is toward the Creator.

XXIV.
He appeals last of all to Scripture, which in diverse places gives abundant
confirmation to this Hypothesis. As when we are said, 2 Cor. 3.5.
not to be sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but
that our sufficiency is of God. Again, God is said to have shown unto the
Gentiles what might be known of him. Romans 1.19.
Again, God is called, James 1.17.
the father of lights. God is also said, by the Psalmist, to teach man
Knowledge. Lastly, He is said, Joh. 1.9.
to be the true light, which inlightens every man that comes into the world.

XXV.
From all which, he concludes, that God is the Intelligible World, or the Place
of Spirits, as the Material World is the place of Bodies. That these Spirits
receive their Modifications, or Sensations, from his Power, and find their
Idea's in his Wisdom, and by his Love are moved by all orderly motions; and
that in God we have our Life, our Motion, and our Being. According to that of
St. Paul, Act. 17.28.
He is not far from every one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our
being.

XXVI.
And thus in as short a compass as I could comprize it, have I given a summary
account of what the excellent Monsieur Malebranche has at large delivered upon
this Theory, of our seeing all things in God. I shall now further establish it
by some other considerations of my own.

XXVII.
That all our Intellectual Perception is by Ideas, that is, not by the
immediate presence of things themselves, but by something that intimately and
immediately represents them to our mind, is a thing plain in it self, and by
all so acknowledged. And that all the Idea's of things, with their respective
habitudes and relations are in God, I have abundantly proved; and also as to
the manner, explained in my Contemplation of the Divine Omniscience. The thing
now to be considered is, whether we do not see and know whatever we see and
know in God; that is, whether those Idea's which are in God, be not the very
Idea's which we see, and the immediate Object of our Knowledge and Perception.

XXVIII.
That it is so, besides what Monsieur Malebranche has offered upon this
Argument, I further prove by considering, first, That since Knowledge is
comprehension of Truth, if the Truth which I comprehend be in God, and in him
only, then I must be said to see and know whatever I see and know in God. This
is a plain and easy consequence. And that the Truth which I comprehend is in
God only, I thus make out.

XXIX.
The nature of Truth consists in a certain mutual respect or habitude of simple
Essences one to another. But these relations which I comprehend, and which are
the same with Truth, are not verified of the simple Essences, as they are in
their External and Natural subsistencies, but as they are in the Divine Idea's.
I deny not but that there may be relation between things in their natural
subsistencies, but I say that is not the relation which I primely and directly
behold when I contemplate Truth. For, first, things according to their Natural
subsistencies are Temporary, and once were not, but the relation which I behold
is Eternal, and was from everlasting; and consequently cannot be the relation
of things according to their subsistence in Nature. Again, the Essences of
things, as to their Natural subsistence, may cease to be, but the relation
which I behold is Immutable and Immortal, and will be ever the same. Again,
things as they are in Nature, are not, even while they are, according to that
exactness according to which we discern some certain relations to belong to
them. Thus for instance, when I define a right Line to be that which lies
equally between its two Points, is there, can there be any such Line in Nature
to which this relation may belong? This relation therefore is not the relation
of any Line in Nature, but of a Line in Idea. And so it is in all other
instances; the relations which we behold are not the relations of any Natural,
but of Ideal Entities. These are the things which are properly related, other
things are so only by accident and reductively as they come under these. And
it is the relation of these which we properly discern, and which are the prime,
direct, and immediate object of our Perception, the relations of other things
come under a secondary discernment, and they are only so far beheld, as they
are beheld in these.

XXX.
And this is what the Schools themselves must of necessity come to, if they
would but attend to the consequence of what they affirm, when they say, That
Science is not of Singulars, but of Universal and Abstract Natures. For where
are these Universal Natures? Not in this Ectypal World. Whatever is here, is
Singular, this or that. It must be therefore in the Ideal or Archetypal World,
that is, in the Divine Nature, as exhibitive of that which is created, where
these Universal Natures, which are the proper objects of Science, are to be
found. And consequently, it is in God that we know all the Truth, which we know.

XXXI.
And this very Notion Aquinas had once plainly light upon, however he came
afterward to lose it. For, says he, in express terms, It is necessary to say
that the human Soul knows all things in their Eternal Reasons, by the
participation of which we know all things. For that Intellectual Light which is
in us, is nothing else but a participated similitude of that increated Light in
which the Eternal Reasons are contained. Part. 1. Q. 84. Ar. 5.
This is almost as plain an acknowledgment of our seeing all things in God as
one would wish; and differs little or nothing from that celebrated Definition
Plato gives of Knowledge, which he calls, A Participation of Ideas.

XXXII.
But to proceed, if the Truth which we see be not in God, I would fain know
whence has it its Unity and Identity, its Steddiness and Immutability, its
Everlastingness and Perpetuity? Whence is it that it is alike discerned by
different minds, and by the same mind at different times? We have nothing in
our selves but what is flux and mutable, and the things without us are as
mutable and uncertain as we our selves. Again, whence is it that Truth is
present in all places, and that independently upon our thinking or knowing?
For, suppose all the Men and Angels in the World should suspend thinking, yet
the existence of Truth would not be thereby suspended, but remain as it was
before. For by thinking we do not make Truth, but only perceive it as it is in
it self, by attending to that Light which shines upon us, and is intimately
present with us. Truth therefore will exist and be always the same, whether we
think or no; which is a plain Argument that though it be in us, yet it is nothing
of ours, nor is at all dependent upon our understandings, but only upon his who
is necessarily, and is in all places, and is Truth it self.

XXXIII.
This conclusion may be further inferred from the Permanency and Immutable
Stability of simple Idea's. I find in my mind certain Idea's of a fixed and
unalterable Nature, such as I can neither add any thing to, or at all diminish
from. Thus for instance, the Idea of a Triangle has a determinate and immutable
Nature, such as is not in my power any way to alter. I can, indeed, cease to
think of a Triangle, and convert my mind to the speculation of some other
Figure. But whenever I do think of a Triangle, I cannot help representing it
to my mind after one and the same determinate way. Which is a certain Argument
that this Idea is not of my own raising or forming, for then it would be
Arbitrary, and I might vary it at pleasure; but that it is an absolute Nature,
distinct from, and independent on my Understanding; and, indeed, that it is no
other than the Divine Essence it self, after a special mode of Exhibition or
Imitability: for nothing but God himself is absolutely Immutable. He only being
that Father of Lights, in whom is no varying, nor shadow of turning.

XXXIV.
This, again, may be further argued, from our desire of Knowledge, and from the
manner of our attaining to it. As to the desire of Knowledge, I remark this,
That among all the things which are knowable, there is not one which I may not,
nay, which I do not actually desire to know. But now I cannot have any desire
of that whereof I have no manner of Knowledge. For desire proceeds from
Knowledge, and consequently pre-supposes it. I must therefore be supposed to
have already some Knowledge of all that I desire to know; that is, I must have
a confuse Knowledge of that which I desire to know clearly and distinctly. And
therefore since I desire to know, or may desire to know every thing clearly and
distinctly, I must be allowed to have a confuse Knowledge of every thing. But,
now, how can this be, but by my having all things actually present to my mind?
And how can this be, but by my having a confuse glance of that Being in whom
are all things, and who is All?

XXXV.
Then as to the manner of our attaining to Knowledge, it is a thing in the first
place worth considering, How a Child comes to learn his first Language. To know
a Language, is to know that such a word is to go as a sign for such a thing.
Now of words there are some to which the thing that answers is material and
sensible. Others, again, there are to which the things that answer are purely
Intellectual. This premised, I demand how a Child comes to understand the first
Language which he learns? You will say, by frequent hearing the word repeated,
when at the same time the thing is pointed to, he begins at length to collect
that such a word is to go for such a thing; and so to call a Table, a Table,
and a Stool, a Stool. True, this serves well enough to explain how we may learn
the meaning of such words to which something sensible answers. But this will not
at all help us out in accounting for the understanding words which signify
pure Intellectual Notions. For these cannot be pointed at when I hear the word,
as in the other case, because not present, nor sensible, and therefore should
the word be never so often said over to me, I might indeed grow familiar with
the sound, but I should never be able thence to understand that this word is to
be joined as a sign to such an Idea. As for instance, should I hear this word
Virtue repeated to me daily, I should in a little time come to be acquainted
with the sound, so as to know it again from any other sound; but sure were I to
hear it to Eternity, I should never thence be instructed among all those
Intellectual Idea's which I have, which was signified by that word, neither of
them being to be pointed to when I heard the sound. And yet we find by
experience that Children do make a shift to find out this, and that they learn
the meaning of such words whose Idea's are Intellectual, almost as soon as they
do the other, and that at an Age when their observation is next to none at all.
But how they come to do this is an amazing thing to consider. And truly I have
no other way to solve the difficulty, but by supposing that as often as they
hear such words to which the Notions that answer are purely Intellectual; and
consequently not be pointed at when the word is spoken: God then, who is never
wanting in necessaries, supplies the part of the Teacher, by exhibiting such a
part of the Ideal World to the mind of the Child, as is signified by such an
arbritrary sign. And this exhibition being thus occasionally vouchsafed by God
whenever such words are repeated, has the same effect to make the Child
understand the meaning of words, whose Notions are purely Intellectual, as
pointing to the sensible Object has to make him know the meaning of words which
signify things material and sensible.

XXXVI.
Pass we next from knowledge of words to knowledge of things. This knowledge we
get and increase by Study. Now Study is nothing else, but a close application
of mind to the speculation of Truth. The more intent we are in our view of
Truth, the more we discover of it. And not only so, but the more intensly we
speculate it, the more uniform we are in our judgments about it. The more we
think, the more we come to agree in our thoughts. Now this plainly argues, that
Truth is one absolute and separate Nature, independing upon our understandings;
and, yet withal, intimately and constantly present to them: For, otherwise, how
could it be thus in our power at any time to apply our minds to the speculation
of it? Now, what can this one independing, and ever-present Nature be, but God?
To know Truth therefore is to know God: and Divinity is a larger Study than we
are aware of.

XXXVII.
Further, I consider, that since God has made Man after his own Image and
likeness, it is highly rational to believe that we imitate him in our
Understandings; Understanding being one of the principal parts of Man. And how
can we duly imitate him in our Understandings, unless we be supposed to know
and perceive after the same general way that God knows and perceives. But now
the mode of the Divine Understanding, is by consulting the Ideal World, that
is, himself as variously imitable and exhibitive of things. Thus it is most
certain God knew and perceived before the Production of this Ectypal World,
there being then no other mode of Perception imaginable. And thus he must be
supposed to perceive now and ever, there being no varying or shadow of turning
in God, much less from better to worse, as it would be, should God be supposed
before the Creation to know by and in himself, and afterward by any created or
foreign Ideas. It is therefore congruous to suppose that as God knows and
perceives all things in himself, so Man who is after the Divine image knows and
perceives all things in God.

XXXVIII.
Again, it is highly rational to believe that we Know and Perceive Now after the
same manner, though not in the same degree, as we shall hereafter in Heaven. As
the eye sees after the same manner, though not in the same measure, by night as
it does by day. For the state of Glory is not the Destruction, but only the
Perfection and exaltation of the state of Nature. But now it is certain this
shall be the mode of our Vision and Preception hereafter, we shall then see all
things in God, for says the Psalmist, With thee is the well of life, Psalm. 36.
and in thy light shall we see light. And therefore we may with reason conclude
that this is the mode of our Present Intelligence, and that now also we see
Light in the Light of God. And accordingly says the Apostle, now we see through
a glass darkly, but then face to face: where observe that our Present Vision
does not differ from our Future as to the Object, but only as to the Degree of
Charity. God is the Object of both, only now he is seen through a Glass, that
is through the Veil of our Mortal Flesh, whereas then the Veil shall be
removed, and our vision of him shall be Clear and Perfect.

XXXIX.
Lastly, I consider that I always think of Being in general. Particular Beings
indeed I think of, or not think of at Pleasure, but Being in general is ever
before my mind, and I cannot possibly remove it from me. For there is the same
Proportion in our understanding that is in our Love. There is variety and
vicissitude in our love of Particular goods, sometimes we love them, sometimes
we do not love them, sometimes we love this, sometimes that, sometimes more,
and sometimes less; but our love of good in general is necessary, constant, and
uniform. And there is the same measure in our Thinking. Particular Beings we
think of by intervals and with variety. But we always and uncessantly think of
Being in general. And when we think of Particular Beings, we don't so much
depart from Being in general, as confine and determine our minds to some certain
Perfections of it. Nay when we think that we think of nothing, our mind is then
most full and Pregnant of wandering, Indeterminate, Indefinite Idea of Being in
general. This I evidently experiment in my self, and I question not that
whoever attends to the operations of his mind will find the same: Now I demand
whence should this come to pass that I am thus necssarily determined at all
times, and in all Places to think of Being in general, but only from this, that
Being in general is inseparably united to my mind, and intimately Present to
it, as being always, and every where.

XL.
But now Being in general is the same with God, as has been shown in the Former
part. If therefore Being in general be united to my Soul, then God is united to
my Soul. And not only so, but also more intimately united to it than any thing
else can be, because there is nothing else that I necessarily think of, whereas
I do necessarily think of God. And if God be so intimately united to my Soul,
how can I otherwise conclude but that it is in him that I see all that I see?
For in what else can I see it, nothing being so intimately Presential to me as
God? And in what else need I see it, God having in himself the Ideas of all
things, as was before proved.

XLI.
Now as to Scripture-Authority, besides what Monsieur Malebranche has alleged,
I further offer to be considered, First, that God is not only said to enlighten
our minds, and all our Illumination is every where ascribed to him, but it is
also particularly ascribed to the second Hypostasis of the Blessed Trinity, who
is (...), the word or inward conception of God, or the Ideal World. Thus in the
8 th of the Proverbs, there is described a Substantial Wisdom (which can be no
other but the Divine (...), who is the Wisdom of the Father) concerning which
it is said, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works
of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the Beginning (and so St. John, In
the Beginning was the word) or ever the earth was: When there were no Depths I
was brought forth (there is the Eternal Generation) when there were no Fountains
abounding with Water. Before the mountains were settled; before the Hills was I
brought forth. While as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the Fields, nor the
highest part of the dust of the World. When he prepared the Heavens I was
there, when he set a Compass upon the face of the Deep. When he established the
Clouds above. When he Strengthened the fountains of the Deep. When he gave to
the Sea his Decree, that the waters should not pass his Commandment, when he
appointed the Foundations of the Earth. Then was I by him, as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. This I
think will readily be acknowleg'd to be a plain and Graphical Description of
the Divine (...), or Ideal World. Now of this same Divine (...) it is also said
in the same Chapter, Ver. 14.
Counsel is Mine, and sound Wisdom, I am understanding. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth. And again v. 20. I lead in the way of Righteousness, in the midst of
the Paths of Judgment. And again chap. 9. says the same substantial Wisdom,
whosoever is simple let him turn in hither, (that is, to the Intellectual Feast
which she is there said to have prepared) and to him that wants understanding
she says, Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.

XLII.
By this it is as plain as any thing can be, that is figuratively expressed,
that all our illumination proceeds from the Divine (...), the substantial
wisdom of God. But St. John speaks more plainly; This is the true light which
inlightens every man that comes into the world. Now true Light, is here the
same as only Light, and implies that all other pretended lights are false ones.
Again says our Lord, I am the light of the world. And, I am the way, the truth,
and the life. And again says our Lord in his Prayer, Sanctify them through thy
truth, thy word is truth: Which is not meant of the written Word, but of the
Substantial and Eternal Word, as appears from the Context. Lastly, the Apostle
says expressly of this Divine Word, that he is made unto us Wisdom. 1 Cor. 30.
Which is exactly according to our Hypothesis that we see all things in the
Ideal World, or Divine (...).

XLIII.
I might add a great deal more to this purpose, but I think that from these
considerations, joined with those of Mr. Malebranche, it is clear, even to
Demonstration that Man is not his own Light, or a Light to himself, and also
that no other Creature can be a Light to him, but that he sees and knows all
things in the Divine (...), or Ideal World, which is that true Light within him
so much talked of by Enthusiasts, who by a kind of blind Parturiency of mind
have confusedly glanced at what we have here more distinctly explained. That
all our Light and Illumination proceeds wholly from him who at first said, let
there be light, that we see so much of Truth as we see of God, that the Ideas
which are in God are the very Ideas which we see, and that the Divne (...) is
our Wisdom, as well as the Wisdom of his Father. So absolutely necessary is the
Doctrine of Ideas, when rightly stated to the explaining the Mode both of
Divine and Human Knowledge, without which I shall venture to affirm that they
can neither of them be explained or understood.

The Use of this to Devotion.
SInce then God is that Intelligible Light, in which we see and know, and since
we see and know so much Truth as God is pleased to discover to us of himself,
we may hence collect to the advantage of Devotion, First, What little Reason
the Wisest of us all have to be proud of our understanding and knowledge. We
are generally more apt to be proud of our understandings than of any thing else
about us, but this we have least reason to be proud of, there being according
to the preceding Hypothesis no other difference between a Wise Man and a Fool,
but only that God is pleased by his in-dwelling Ideas to illuminate one more
than another, or to discover more of himself to one than he does to another.
And if so, then to be proud of my knowledge, is to be proud that I am more
dependant upon God than another Man is, which indeed is a very proper Argument
for Humility, but a very Absurd one for Pride.

Hence again we may collect how reasonable it is that we should Bless, Praise
and Adore God as the sole Author of all our Light and Knowledge, as our
immediate Teacher and Instructor, and that to him we should always address our
selves in Prayer for further illumination.

Lastly, 'twill hence follow that we ought always most carefully to attend to
the Dictates of this Light within us, that we ought to look upon all Truth as
Divine Revelation, and on as our Reason a Divine Monitor, as the Angel of God's
Presence. And accordingly to be very careful how we transgress any of his clear
Dictates, that we grieve not this Angel lest he smite us, that we do nothing
against him, lest he forsake us.

The Aspiration.
MY God, my Light, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man
that thou so regardest him? But much more, What is Man that he should so regard
himself? that he should regard himself for that which is least of all his own,
his Knowledge and Wisdom? For, O God, we are not a Light to our selves, but
it is thou, O God, art our Light, and in thy Light do we see Light.

O my Wonderful Counselor, with what Humility and Poverty of spirit ought I
to reflect upon the richest endowments of my mind, since I see only by thy
Light, and depend upon thee for what I Know, as much as for what I am: And how
unworthy should I be of thy Divine Light, should I be puffed up through the
Abundance of this thy Revelation.

Not unto me therefore, O my God, my Light, not unto me, but to thy greatness
and goodness be the Praise and the Glory. For it is thy Word, thy Eternal Word,
that is a Lantern unto my feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light unto my paths. The Lord is my light and my salvation, Psalm. 27.
and it is he that reaches Man Knowledge. I will therefore thank the Lord for
giving me warning, Psalm. 16.
my reins also chasten me in the night-season.

Lighten my Darkness thee, I beseech, O Father of Lights, and shine upon me
more and more with the Brigthness of thy glory. Heb. 1.
O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, Psalm. 43.
and bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy dwelling.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, Psalm. 119.
and teach me thy Statutes. O let the Angel of thy Presence go always before me
in this my Pilgrimage, and grant that I may always attend and give heed to his
Counsel and Direction, that so walking in thy Light here, I may for ever live,
and for ever rejoice in the full and open Light of thy Countenance hereafter,
Amen.

Contemplation III. Of Man, considered as an Amorous Creature.
I.
TRuth and good Employ, the whole capacity of Man, who seems to be purely
designed and made for the contemplation of the former, and for the desire and
fruition of the latter. Having therefore considered Man as an Intelligent
Creature, or as he is a Contemplator of Truth, I shall now proceed to consider
him as an Amorous Creature, or as he is a desirer of Good.

II.
The management of this subject ingages me upon the consideration of these four
things. First, What love or desire is, or wherein the general Nature of it does
consist? Secondly, That Love or Desire is in Man, or that Man is an Amorous
Being. Thirdly, Whence Man has this Affection, or what is the proper cause of
it. Fourthly, and lastly, After what manner this Affection has it self, or how
it stands proportioned to that cause.

III.
Now as to the First, I say that the general nature of Love consists in a
motion of the Soul toward good. Vid. Theory and Regulation of Love.
But this I have sufficiently explained in a distinct Treatise upon this
occasion, to which I shall choose rather to refer my Reader, than to trouble him
or my self with needless repetitions.

IV.
As to the Second, That there is such a motion in Man, I need say no more, but
that we are intimately conscious of it, as much as we are of the motion of our
Heart, or Lungs, or of any other Physical Impression in or about us. All
therefore that I shall further insist upon shall be the two last things: First,
What is the proper cause of this motion in Man. And, Secondly, After what
peculiar manner this motion has it self, or stands proportioned to that cause.
To these two Enquiries I shall confine my present Contemplation.

V.
As to the cause of this motion in Man, which we call Love or Desire, I
consider that it must be the same that is the cause of all the Physical motion
in the Universe. Now Physical motion is resolved into a double cause, an
occasional cause, and an efficient cause. The occasional cause of Physical
motion is emptiness or vacuity. For in that which is absolutely full there can
be no motion, because of the Impenetrability of Bodies. The efficient cause of
Physical motion is either particular or universal. The particular is, the
pressure or impulse of particular Bodies one against another. The universal is,
no other than God himself, who in the Creation of the World (as the Cartesian
Philosophy rightly supposes) dispensed a certain portion of motion and rest to
matter, which he still preserves the same by his Almighty Power. So that if one
part of matter cease to be moved, so much motion as was in that is transferred
to another part: And if the motion of one decreases or be diminished, it is
compensated in another. And so the same measure of motion is always conserved
in the Universe. And unless God be supposed to be the Author of motion, 'twill
be impossible to give any account of the Original of it. For neither can Bodies
move themselves, nor can they be moved by one another on to Infinity. We must
therefore at last come to a first Mover unmoved, which is God. And so Aristotle
calls God, (...), the first Mover unmoved.

VI.
And thus in the same Proposition, the motion of Love is also resolvable into a
double cause, an occasional cause an an efficient cause. The occasional cause
of this motion, as of the other, is emptiness or vacuity. For Love or Desire is
founded upon Indigence and Self-insufficiency of the Soul, which having not
within it self enough to content it, is forced to go out of it self for
supplies. And so Aristotle in his Ethics, (...), Desire is the fulfilling of
Indigence. And accordingly we find that the more weak and indigent any Person
is, still the more abounding in desire. Thus Children are more profuse in their
desires than Adult Persons, Women than Men, and the Sick more than those who
are in Health. This is well shadowed forth in Iotham's Parable, wherein the
Bramble is represented as more ambitious than either the Olive Tree, Judge. 9.15.
Fig Tree, or the Vine. For he presently accepted of that Empire which they had
all declined. Where there is no Indigence there is no room for Desire; and
accordingly God, who is an absolutely full Being, can no more admit of desire,
than a place that is absolutely full can admit of motion.

VII.
As to the efficient cause of this Moral motion, it is also double, as in
Physical Motion. It is either Particular or Universal. The particular efficient
cause, are particular goods, whether Sensual or Intellectual. Which act upon
the Soul, and answer to the pressure or impulse of particular Bodies in Natural
motion. The Universal efficient cause, is the Universal Good, or God, whom we
suppose to have imprinted a certain stock of motion upon the Intellectual
World, as he did upon the Natural. Which he also conserves and maintains by his
Omnipotence, as he does the other.

VIII.
For, I consider, that there is the same necessity of a first Mover in Moral,
as there is in Natural motions. And upon the very same grounds. But now it is
impossible that there should be any other first Mover besides God. And
therefore whatever intermediate causes there may be of this motion, it must at
last be resolved into an impression of God upon our Souls, whom therefore I
call the Universal efficient cause of Love.

IX.
And so much for the cause of this motion in Man. I come now to consider the
last Enquiry, namely, after what peculiar manner this motion has it self, or
how it stands proportioned to its cause. I do not mean its occasional cause,
that being not so properly a cause as a condition, but its efficient cause. Now
this being double, Particular and Universal Good; the question in more
explicit terms will be, after what peculiar manner our Love stands affected or
proportioned to Particular and Universal Good.

X.
Now in answer to this, I consider, first, That since God is the first Mover in
the motion of Love, he must necessarily determine this motion toward himself,
or make himself the term of this motion. And the only term too; it being
impossible that God should act for any end different from himself. Whence it
follows, that Universal good, or good in general, is the only good to which we
are directly and properly moved by God.

XI.
Hence again it follows, that good in common, or God, must be the Primary and
Adequate Term or Object of Love. This being the only good to which we are
directly moved by God. I say directly, for God moves us to particular goods
only by moving us to good in general, which is not to move us to them directly,
but by accident and indirectly. God cannot move us directly to any thing but
himself, that is to Universal good, or good in general, which therefore must be
the Primary and Adequate Term or Object of Love.

XII.
And this we sensibly experiment as well as rationally conclude. For it is plain
that we are conscious to our selves of our loving good as good, or good
according to its common Nature, before we love this or that good in particular.
And we are further conscious, that when we do love any particular good, it is
only for the sake of the Universal good. We love it only because we find in it
something of the common Nature of good, and the more we find of that, the more
we love it. So that it is by that love whereby we love good in common, that we
love any particular good. And were it not for this Universal good we should be
able to love nothing. Which by the way is a plain argument of the real
existence of such Universal good, and consequently that there is a God.

XIII.
For, indeed, to speak out in short what I would have, as we understand all
things in God, so it is in God we love whatever we love. And as when we
understand, the Divine Ideas are that which we directly and properly perceive,
and Created Beings are only so far perceived as they are of a similar nature
with those Ideas, and so vertually contained in them. So when we Love,
universal good, good in common, or God is that which we directly and properly
love, and Created goods, or Particular goods are only so far loved as they
resemble and participate of the nature of that universal good, to which the
motion of our love is Directly and Primarily determined. So that Particular
goods are as much loved in the universal good, as Particular Beings are seen
and perceived in the universal Being.

XIV.
I further consider that as we are determined to good in general Primarily and
Directly, so also the motion whereby we are by God determined to it is
necessary, invincible and irresistible. There is nothing in nature more
necessary, no nor so necessary and invincible as that motion whereby we are
carried forth to good in general. Here the Soul must not pretend to the least
shadow of Liberty, having no more command over this motion, than she has over
the motion of the Sun. It Is not easy to conceive how God himself should fix
this motion, but it is plain that Man cannot any way command it.

XV.
But there is not the same necessity of Determination in our motion toward
Particular good. I say not the same. M. Malebranche will allow none, but it is
plain that some there is. For since we are invincibly determined to the Love of
good in general, we must needs love good as such, and consequently in every
degree of Participation, the general Reason of good being in some measure or
other found in every degree of Particular good. Loving therefore good as good
we are necessarily determined to love every degree of good, and consequently
every particular good, with a Natural Love, so far as we consider it as good.

XVI.
But because this Particular good is not the Greatest good, and consequently in
some junctures may come into competition with a greater, hence it comes to pass
that we may upon the whole have more reason to will and refuse it, than to will
and embrace it, and so are not determined necessarily to an Absolute, effectual
and thorough love of it, though yet we must love it as good with a natural love
as before.

XVII.
For it is impossible that we should ever nill Good, as we nill Evil, any more
than we can will Evil as we will Good. But as our willing of Evil is always
with a mixture of willing, though willing may in some junctures prevail, so our
nilling of good is always with a mixture of willing, though in some junctures
nilling may prevail: we cannot hate good with a Pure Hatred, though it be only
a lesser good, any more than we can love evil with a Pure Love, though a lesser
evil.

XVIII.
Whenever therefore by the Competition of goods we are engaged to nill any
Particular good, we do also will it at the same time. But in different
respects. We will it as good, and we nill it as a lesser good, we will it
secundum quid, according to a certain respect, and we nill it simply and
Absolutely: that is in other words, though we have some reason to will it,
namely its proper good, in which respect we necessarily will it, and
consequently always, yet we have more reason to nill it in the present
juncture, as standing in competition with a greater good, and the stronger
motive takes place as to Absolute and Effectual love or choice.

XIX.
This I cannot better illustrate than by the example of Weights in a Balance.
For though that Scale which has most weight in it, weighs down, yet it must
needs be allowed that the other Scale does also weigh and press downwards,
though not effectually, because otherwise as much weight would be required to
make it weigh effectually down as if it were quite empty. And thus it is in the
present case. Though for the Prevalency of Reasons in some junctures the Scale
may weigh down for the nilling of good, yet the other Scale also presses,
though not effectually. And this is what the Schools term a Velleity, or
Natural Inclination. And it is with this Velleity, or natural inclination, that
we are necessarily determined to love even Particular good; but we are not
necessarily determined to love it absolutely and effectually, because there is
no particular good, but what may come in Competition with a greater, and then
there will be more Reason to nill it than to will it, and the heaviest Scale
will weigh down.

XX.
And thus have I shown after what peculiar manner our Love stands affected or
proportioned to Particular and Universal good. The difference consists in these
two things. Universal good is the Primary and Direct Object of our Love, but
our Love tends toward Particular good only secundarily and indirectly, for the
sake of what it has of the Universal. Then again there is Difference as to the
Necessity of the Determination, as well as to the Primariness of it. There is
indeed Necessity on both sides, but not in like manner. We are necessarily
determined to Love universal good Absolutely and Thoroughly. The Scale does not
only weigh here, but weighs down. But we are not determined to love any
Particular good Absolutely and Thoroughly, but only to love it with a Natural
Inclination or Velleity. And to such a love of it we are as necessarily
determined, as we are to the love of universal good; but the Actual Choice of
it is not necessary, there being no Particular good to the Absolute and
Effectual love, of which we are invincibly determined.

The Use of this to Devotion.
THE Amorousness of Humane Nature, as we have here considered it, contains in
it many and great incitements to Devotion. For First, since the Occasional
Cause of our love is Indigence and Emptiness, we have great reason to be humble
and lowly in Spirit, especially considering that we are continually admonished
of this our Indigence, as often as we are Conscious to our selves that we love.

Again, since God is the Principal Efficient Cause of Love, and the first mover
in all Moral as well as Natural motion, it is highly reasonable that he should
be Principally loved by us from whom we receive our Love, and that we should be
mighty careful how we pervert this Divine Impression to any undue object.

Again, since God moves us Directly and Primarily only to himself, and since
universal good is therefore the Primary and Direct Object of our Love, hence it
will follow that we ought also to make God the Primary and Direct Object of our
Love, and that we ought to Love nothing for it self, but only in and for God.

And lastly, since we are necessarily determined to love good in general,
Absolutely and Effectually, by such a motion as we can neither resist, nor any
way Command or Moderate; hence it appears how highly necessary it is that we
should expllicitly fix all that Love upon God, as having all that good in him
to which we aspire with a Blind, Confuse and Indefinite, though Necessary
Appetite.

The Aspiration.
MY God, My Love, how absurd a thing is it that an Amorous Creature should be a
Proud Creature! My Love is occasioned by my Indigence, and I cannot Love, but I
am minded of that Indigence; how ill then would Pride become me, having so much
reason to be humble, and that reason so continually set before me!

Divine Fountain of Love, it is from thee I receive all my Love, and upon whom
should I place it but upon thee? The fire that descends from Heaven, where
should it be spent but upon the Altar? Thou have a Right, O my God to all my
Love, for I cannot love thee with any Love but what is thy own. O then do thou
Regulate this thy own Divine Impression, and grant I may never sin against
thee, by the abuse of that Love which thou have given me. I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for doing so much toward the guidance and
Regulation of my Love, as to carry me Directly only to Universal good, thereby
teaching me that I ought to make thee the only Direct and Primary Object of my
Love. My God, I will love as thou teach me, the First and Direct Motion of
Love shall be toward thee, and whatever I love besides thee, I will love only
in and for thee.

I thank thee, also My God, for that thou have made it so necessary for me to
love universal good. Thou, O God, art this universal good, and I ought to love
thee with the very same Love wherewith I love Happiness it self. O that I were
as necessarily inclined to love thee, as I am to love Happiness! I do not
desire to be trusted with any Liberty in the Love of thee. But this, my God, I
cannot hope for, till I shall see thee as thou art. O let me therefore love
thee to the utmost Capacity of a Free Creature. Thou, O God, have set no Bounds
to my love of thee, O let not me set any. My God, I do not, I love thee with
all my Heart, Soul, Mind and Strength. Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee.

Contemplation IV. Man considered as an Irregular Lover.
I.
HItherto we have considered Man as God made him. He was made by God, a
Creature, an Intelligent Creature, and an Amorous Creature. The two first of
which import the Perfection of God actually participated by him, in as much as
in him he not only lives, moves and has his Being, but in him has all his
Understanding also. The last imports in him a tendency to the Divine
Perfection; which is also an actual Perfection of his own Nature, and such as
God also has therein implanted. And thus far is Man wholely the Divine
Wormanship, and carries in him the Image of him that made him. Let us now
consider him as he has made himself, and is as it were his own Creature.

II.
Now thus to consider Man, is to consider him as an Irregular Lover. And to do
this fully, and to the purpose intended, Three things will be requisite. First,
To show what it is to be an Irregular Lover. Secondly, Hw prone and apt Man is
to Love Irregularly. Thirdly, That Man himself is the Author of this proneness
of his to Irregular Love.

III.
In relation to the first, if it be demanded, What it is to be an Irregular
Lover? I answer in one word, That it is to be a Fool. Sin and Folly, Sinner and
Fool, are words in Scripture of a like signification, and are indifferently
used one for the other. And we are taught in the Schools of Morality, that
every Sinner is ignorant. (...), says the Socratical Proverb. Indeed, Sin has
its Birth in Folly, and every step of its progress is Folly, and its conclusion
is in Folly. But this will appear more distinctly from the consideration of
these two things. First, Of the absurdity and madness of the choice which every
Irregular Lover makes. And, Secondly, The error and mistake that must
necessarily precede in his Judgment, before he does or can make it.

IV.
As for the absurdity of his choice, it is the greatest that can be imagined.
For what is it that he chooses? It Is to do that which he must and certainly will
repent of, and wish he had never done, either in this World, for its illness
and sinfulness; or, in the next, for its sad effects and consequences. It Is to
despise the Authority, Power, Justice and Goodness of God: it is to transgress
his Commands, which are good and equitable, and in keeping of which there is
present, as well as future reward. It Is to act against the Frame of his
Rational Nature, and the Divine Law of his Mind: it is to disturb the Order and
Harmony of the Creation, and by Extra-lineal motions to violate the Sacred
Interest of Society. It Is, lastly, to incur the Anger of an Omnipotent and Just
God, and to hazard falling from his Supreme Good and the last end of his Being,
and the being ruined in his best Interest to all Eternity.

V.
All this the Irregular Lover partly actually incurs, and partly puts to the
hazard in every wrong motion of his Love. And for what is all this? Is it for
any considerable interest, for any thing that bears something of proportion,
and may pretend to competition and a rival Weight in the opposite Scale of the
Balance? No. it is only for a shadow, for a trifle, for the gratification of
some baser appetite, for the acquirement of some little interest, which has
nothing to divert us from adhering to that which is truly our best, but only
that poor advantage of being present, though at the same time its vanity be
present with it.

VI.
And now is this a choice for a wise Man, for a Man of common Sense? Nay, is it
a choice for a Man in his right Wits to make? Were a Man to beg an Estate,
would one need a better demonstration of a Man's being a Fool, than such a
procedure as this? If therefore absurdity of choice be any argument of folly,
the Irregular Lover is certainly a very great Fool.

VII.
But his folly will further appear if we consider, Secondly, the error and
mistake that must necessarily precede in his Judgment before he does or can
make such a choice. All irregularity of Love is founded upon ignorance and
mistake. For as it is impossible to choose evil as evil in general, so is it no
less impossible to choose or will any particular kind of evil, as evil; and
consequently, it is impossible to will the evil of sin as such, (the Devil
himself cannot love sin as sin.) If therefore it be chosen, it must be chosen
under the appearance of good, and it can have this appearance no otherwise than
as considered as a lesser evil, (for that is the only way whereby an evil may
appear good or eligible.) And so it must be considered before it be chosen.

VIII.
He therefore that chooses sin, considers it at the instant of commission, as a
lesser evil. And therein consists his error and mistake. He is either
habitually or actually ignorant. He either has not the habitual knowledge of
all those things which should preserve him in his duty, or at least he has not
the actual consideration of them. For it is that which must bring him to
repentance. And it is impossible a Man should sin with the very same Thoughts,
Convictions and Considerations about him, as he has when he repents. This I say
is no more possible than for a Balance to move to contrary ways with the same
Weight, and in the same Posture. He therefore that sins, wants that
consideration at least to keep him in his duty, which when he repents, brings
him to it. And is therefore ignorant and mistaken.

IX.
The sum of this matter is, whoever thinks sin a lesser evil, mistaken in his
judgment. But whoever commits sin, does then think it a lesser evil: therefore
whoever commits sin is mistaken in his judgment; so great is the folly of
Irregular Love, both in reference to the absurdity of the choice, and to the
error and mistake of the chuser. And so great reason has every Irregular Lover
to take up that confession of the Psalmist, So foolish was I, and ignorant: and
even as a beast before thee, Psalm. 73.

X.
Having thus considered what it is to be an Irregular Lover, let us now in the
Second place consider how prone and apt Man is to be guilty of Irregular Love.
It Is the grand disadvantage of our Mortal condition, to have our Soul consorted
with a disproportionate and uncompliant Vehicle, and to have her aspiring Wings
pinned down to the ground. We have a mixed constitution, made up of two vastly
different substances, with Appetites and Inclinations to different Objects,
serving to contrary Interests, and steering to opposite Points. A compound of
Flesh and Spirit, a thing between an Angel and a Beast. We lug about with us a
Body of sin; and the Earthly Tabernacle weighs down the mind. We are at
perpetual War and Defiance with our selves, divided like the Planetary Orbs,
between contrary motions and imperfect tendencies, and like a factious State,
distracted and disturbed with a swarm of jarring and rebellious Passions. The
Spirit indeed is willing, but then the Flesh is weak. We have, it is true, a Law
in our Minds, but then we have also another in our Members, which wars always,
and most times prevails against that of our Mind, and brings us into captivity
to the Law of sin; so that as the Apostle says, we cannot do the things which
we would.

XI.
But, notwithstanding this strong invigoration of the Animal Life, pushing us
still on to the enjoyment of sensible good, were our Intellectual part always
awake, and equally attentive to that Divine Light which shines within her, Man
would always love regularly, though with the reluctance of an imperfect motion to
the contrary. But it is far otherwise. We do not always equally attend to the
Divine Illumination, but the light of our Understandings is often under an
Eclipse, and so does not shine upon our wills with an equal and uniform
brightness. Hence it comes to pass that our judgments and apprehensions of
things are various and changeable. And from this variety and changeableness of
our Judgments, proceeds great variety and changebleness in our Wills.

XII.
Now this being the condition of Man, he must needs be very prone and liable to
Irregular Love. For being always strong inclined to sensible good, and not
having the Eye of his attention equally open and awake, he will be often apt to
be actually ignorant of what he habitually knows, and (especially in the heat
of a temptation) to judge sensible good a greater good than that which is Moral
and Divine, and consequently the want of sensible good to be a greater evil
than sin, and so rather than want the enjoyment of sensible good he will
consent to the commission of sin, which through want of due attention he then
erroneously thinks the lesser evil of the two.

XIII.
Thus apt and obnoxious is Man to Irregular Love. But that which most of all
aggravates the badness of his condition, is that it is all owing to himself, and
that he himself is the sole Author of this his proneness to Irregular Love.
It Is a point Universally received, That the present state of Man is not that
state wherein God first made him, but a state of degeneracy and depravation.
And, indeed, it is no way congruous to suppose that God could with the Honor of
his Attributes send such a piece of Work immediatetly out of his Hands, as Man
is now. And if God could not make Man at first in such a state as he is now in,
then neither could he subject him to it without sin. For, if he could subject
him to it without sin, then he might as well have made him so at first; but,
it is supposed that he could not make him so at first, and therefore neither
could he subject him to this condition without sin. And if not without sin,
then not without sin really and truly committed by him. For, to subject him to
this condition for the sake of sin arbitrarily imputed only, is the same as to
do it without any sin at all. It Is necessary therefore to pre-suppose some real
sin or other in Man as the cause of this his depravation and great proneness to
Irregular Love.

XIV.
But, now whether every Man sinned in his own Person for himself, and so was
his own Adam, according to the Hypothesis of the Pre-existentiaries; or,
whether one common Person sinned for all the rest, as it is more vulgarly held,
I shall not here take upon me to determine. It Is sufficient to say, in general,
that it is necessary to presuppose some Sin or other in man, truly and properly
Speaking, as the Cause of this his Depraved and Miserable Condition. And they
that can Intelligibly make out Original Sin, as it is usually termed, to be
such, may make use of that Hypothesis. But, if that be not intelligible, then
we must of necessity come to Pre-existence. However it be, this only I contend
for at present, that some sin or other must be supposed in Man antecedent to
this his condition, and that it is through his own fault that he is so prone to
Irregular Love.

The Use of this to Devotion.
THIS whole Contemplation serves very much to the greatest Humiliation and
Mortification of Man, both before God, and all his Fellow Creatures. For, if
Irregular Love be so monstrous a deformity, and so great a folly, and if Man be
so very prone to Irregular Love, and is also himself the Author of that
proneness, what stronger Combination of Argument can there be imagined, for
Humility and Lowliness of Spirit. For this is the worst that can be said of any
thing, and is the Sum and Abstract of all that is base and vile.

It may also, Secondly, be argued from the great evil of Irregular Love, and
from our great proneness to be guilty of it, that it highly concerns us to have
constant recourse to God in Prayer, for his Divine aid and assistance, against
falling into that which is so great a Folly, and so great a Mischief, and which
by an Infirmity of our own contracting we are so very apt to fall into.

The Aspiration.
TO thee, O my God, belongs Praise and Adoration, for endowing me with those
excellent Powers of Understanding and Love, but to me Shame and Confusion of
face, for misapplying the one, and not attending to the Dictates of the other.

I blush, O my God, and am ashamed to think that my nature should stand so much
inclined to irregular Love, a thing so full of Mischief and Folly, but much
more that I my self should bring my self into such a state of impotence and
depravation. My heart shows me the great Foulness and Abominableness of Sin,
and yet I find my self over prone to commit it. So Foolish am I and Ignorant,
and even as a Beast before thee.

But I desire, O my God, to be yet more vile. I am not vile enough in my own
eyes, though too much so in thine. Nor can I ever be vile enough in my Opinion,
for being so vile in my Nature. Strike me then I beseech thee with a deep, and
with a lively sense of my own Wretchedness, and make me as Humble as I am
Wicked.

And since, through the Infirmity of my flesh, I am so apt to err in the
conduct and application of my Love, O hold thou up my goings in thy Paths, that
my Footsteps slip not. Make me always to attend to that Divine Light of thine
within my Breast, and let the victorious sweetness of thy Grace out-charm all
the relishes of sensible good. But above all, Keep thy Servant from
Presumptuous sins, lest they get the Dominion over me. And let all these words
of my mouth, and this whole meditation of my heart be always acceptable in thy
sight, Psalm. 19.
O Lord, my strength and my redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel Manship, Bookseller, at the Bull in
Cornhil, London.
ODes, Satyrs and Epistles, of Horace, done into English; the 2d Edition, in
Octavo, price 4 s. The Injured Lovers, or, the Ambitious Father, a Tragedy:
Acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal, by W. Meuntfort. A Cap
of Gray-hairs for a Green Head, or the Fathers Counsel to his Son, an
Apprentice in London, containing wholesome Instructions for the management of a
man's whole life; 4th edition, a 3d part enlarged by C. Trenchfield, Gent. in
Twelves: price 1 s. The Gallant Hermophrodite, an Amorous Novel, translated
from the French, of the Sienr de Chauigny, in Octavo; price 1 s. A Treatise
enumerating the Most Illustrious Families of England, who have been raised to
Honor and Wealth by the Profession of the Law; together with the Names of all
the Lord Chief Justices of each Court, and Barons of the Exchequer, from their
first Institution, in Octavo; price 2. s. 6 d. The Lives of the most famous
English Poets, or the Honor of Parnassus, in a brief Essay of the Works and
Writings of above two hundred of them, from the time of K. William the
Conqueror, to the Reign of His present Majesty King James the Second, in
Octavo; price 2 s. 6 d. Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems,
Essays, Discourses and Letters, occasionally written by I. Norris, M. A. Fellow
of All Souls College, in Oxford, in Octavo: price ^ s.

