Allowed to be Published, this 13 th, day of July, 1688.

Dr. Burnett's REFLECTIONS Upon a Book, Entitled, Parliamentum Pacificum: (The
First Part) ANSWERED, By the Author.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Matthew Turner At the Lamb in Holborn,
1688.

Dr. Burnet's REFLECTIONS Answered, etc.
SECT. I.
IT could not be expected but that Dr. B. would bestir himself to Reflect, and
Revy upon a piece that so nearly touched his Person: It Is natural for men, when
they are pressed, to be uneasy; and since the Dr. will not put himself upon his
Trial, and our English Law cannot reach him for standing mute; it is Argument
alone that must press him to yield up his Cause, or submit it to the Decision
of Sense and Reason, and the Judgment of Persons impartial and Vid. His Letter
to my Ld. M.
unprovoked: For my own part, I must avow to the World, That no Prejudices or
Provocations conceived against his Religion, or received from his Person,
prevailed with me to pass upon him those just Animadversions; nothing but that
Duty I owe to the Best of PRINCES libelled and defamed; (and as ill as he makes
mine, that his Crimes may be the more illustrious) I will not say by the worst
of Pens: This innocent Impartiality he does utterly disown, and declares
himself, under hand, an a vowed Enemy to the Persuasion of his PRINCE, and His
Person too; this I hope, with men of sober and sedate Judgment, or men of
common Sense and Reason, will have this weight, that I deal more fairly with
the Dr, than he does with his own Sovereign; that my Reasonings must be more
the Result of the Merit of the Cause, and that, besides, his highest
Misdemeanor against His Majesty, his greatest Insolency to the Sovereign
Authority, (and what perhaps we may prove, not only from the Municipal Laws of
Scotland, but those of most Nations) his High Treason: I have nothing against
him (and desire no more) of Resentment, Prejudice, or Provocation.

For his Revenge and Reflections on my Work, were it not for the Affront,
Scandals, and Indignities, that none but he, and those that were ever famed for
it, the Defenders of him, and (as he will have it) of his Vid. Reflect. Sect. 7.
Faith too, do continually cast upon the KING, I would have saved the Pains of
a Revy, my former Reasons should have stood by their Weight, or have fallen
with it too: And let the Reflecter (to return him his affected Air, acquired
from his most accomplished Travels) have retained his Opiniatre, applauded his
own Vid. His Reflect. on Oxford Relation page 1.
Works and Originals, and commended this his most elaborate Cavil, for a solid
Answer and Confutation, which how far it is from it, from every Paragraph,
every Particular shall appear.

His contentious Spirit, and most implacable Zeal, sets up here indeed for the
Doctrine of Resistance, Vid. Reflect. Sect. 1.
had he not given us Evidence before in the Fate of a Lord that fell by it too;
as also in some of his Vid. Six Papers, page 4. It will look on, etc.
Papers penned for that purpose since: Such an Antipathy appears in him against
Peace, that according to the Philosophical Definition of that unaccountable
Passion, there is no Cause to be given for it; such an Aversion, that he must
needs quarrel at the very Word; that his Enemies contended for War, Vid.
Reflect. page 1.
when the Royal Psalmist labored for Peace; was the Complaint too even of a
King, after GOD's own heart; and if this be His Majesty's Case thus to suffer,
His Piety, (on which the Dr. so profanely drolls) with that Primitive Pattern,
Sect. 3.
may be as much admired, as well as all such Originals of Sedition, and
Disturbance, detected and abhorred: It has been so far our Authors Task to
verify the Application; that he has taken the most pernicious Pains, been
industrious, even to Sedition, to apply it: At Our Anointed he has shot his
Arrows, even bitter Words, he has encompas't him with Words of Hatred, and
would have us fight against Him too, without a Cause: If these are his best
Expedients for Peace, our Nation has just as much occasion to thank Him, Page 6.
as (he says) some of their neighboring Countries have his New Masters for
their Management of that of Nimmeguen: I cannot see why we should not have as
good a Notion of Peace here in England, as the Dr. has in a Country that has
been so much the Seat of War; and if Implicit Faith, if Absolute Slavery, be
the only Peace he is so much afraid of, they are but ill coupl'd with an
Apoplexy too, that being a Disease sudden and unforeseen, when the former
Maladies, even from the Dr's Confession, have been invading us this Hundred
Years; and if we believe him, ever since the Reformation: No, to all impartial
People, the Peace we aimed at, will appear still the same; however, he would
disfigure and disguise it; the Tranquillity of the State, the Quiet of a Nation,
composed by the gracious Favor of an indulgent Monarch; and confirmed by the
reciprocal Happiness of a grateful and obedient People.

SECT. II.
IN the next place it will as plainly appear, how vainly he cavils at the
Constitution of that Parliament which was Assembled for the Coming in of the
KING; Vid. Sect. 1.
I am sure he had once a better Opinion of it, when he and Mr. Baxter were
better acquainted; and he then had milder Thoughts of these moderate
Presbyterians; but now that Gentleman is become his Enemy, and perhaps only for
telling the Truth, for offering to be an Evidence against the Dr. in High
Treason. The Restoration of His Late Majesty, was by this Dr. in his moderate
days, imputed to these moderate Presbyterians, whom he will not now allow to be
Vid. His Reflect. on the K's. Indulgence in Scotland, Par. 5.
moderate at all, no not in his own Kirk of Scotland; these sort of People for
the most part composed that Convention, which we must not now call a
Parliament, and of which he once had a much better Opinion; I believe he could
now wish too, from his kindness to that KING's Memory, that there had been no
such Convention at all for the calling of him; and such is the Contrariety of
some Men's unsettled Sentiments and Thoughts, that are subjected to the
prevalency of Passion and Prejudice, that there is a Proverbial saying, which
for Civility sake I will not tell him in terminis, That the sound of the Bell
does sometimes solely depend upon some Peoples Thoughts and Preconceptions: But
the Dr. is very much deceived, when he thinks his Author did not consider the
defect, that according to the ancient constitution of Parliaments attended the
Convention (if he will call it so) of that assembled State. He, I Will assure
him, sufficiently foresaw it, pondered upon it when he put Pen to Paper; but
could never foresee, or imagine, that even the Dr. could have been so
improvidently peevish; as in such a point, to have made it an objection; why
for GOD's sake, does it follow from a necessitated imperfection in nice Law;
that unavoidably attended that Session, that therefore now none of its sober
debates, or wholesome constitutions can be recommended to posterity for
imitation, and when His Late Majesty commanded that it should; when even we are
governed at present by some of the very Laws that it made: if only the passing
an Act, assented to by the King, made it a Legal Session, and which did
determine but by express proviso against it; sure then the Parliament must be
reputed Legal too in which it was Past; so that necessity which might occasion
a defect, did not make an Essential Nullity (as he is pleased to name it more
by Metaphysical Phraseology, than any term of Law,) for then all its Acts must
have been Nulled too, which by the next we saw were only Confirmed.

But besides (if among my many Slips, Reflect. Sect. 9.
which the Dr. leaves to others to find out, I mistake not now too;) the
Continuance of the Parliament, Vid. Keebles Statute.
the Dissolving it self, the Calling Another without the King's Writ was
assented to by special Act of Car 1. which could not be Repealed, till C. the
Second was assembled amongst them, 16, 17. Car. 1.
to Repeal it; and there to give it His Fiat Royal, to make it more forceable;
or if it could, it is somewhat improbable from the unhappy Junctures of those
Affairs, that it could be expected before; and therefore by the very first Act
of the Session; (as if made to silence such Drs.) it was declared, Vid. 12. Car
2 d. Cap 1.
That the Lords and Commons, then Sitting, were the Two Houses of Parliament;
and that notwithstanding the King's Writ of Summons, as much as if His Majesty
had been Present at its Commencement, and Called It; and though by the next of
the 13. Car 2. cap. 1.
same Reign, it was made Praemunire to defend what was done without the Royal
Assent; yet the Act for perpetuating the Parliament, was past by the Car. 1.
King Himself; they continued till Military force pulled them out of the House;
they met again after Secluded, dissolved themselves, and therefore 'twas made
Criminal too, Vid. Ibid. cap. 7.
by the foresaid Act, to say they were still in Being; and if the bare
Confirmation of former Acts, shall imply an essential Nullity to the foregoing
Parliaments, the Dr. has ruined all his Reformation of King Edward, by the
Confirmations of Queen Eliz. and therefore the very Act that Confirmed what was
enacted by this convention before, Vid. 13. Car. 2 cap. 7.
never questions it for a Parliament, and calls it one; but only dissipates all
doubts, from the difficulties that occasioned the manner of its assembling. I
have met with heretofore, some Lawyers that would not allow it to be such a
formal Parliament; but none ever yet went so far (to continue his Metaphysics)
as to question it for an Actual one; I wish the Dr. would labor a little more
in his own Province, and prove to the World the Series of Our Protestant
Ordination, instead of the Succession of Parliaments; not that I so much doubt
it, or that we may be ashamed to be obliged for it to the Church of Rome; but
because some people of late have taken so much pains to Impeach it, and that I
think from the faculty of the Dr. he would do better at the Naggshead, than in
Westminster Hall.

But their is no need of any further defense to an Objection that is so
needless, and ill offered, to baffle Dr. B. by imitation, would be in a manner
but abusing of my self; it is plain, that the designs which some people had for
power and Oppressing the Innocent (even from his own confession) more than the
desires and distrust of some that were Guilty; or the necessity that was for
it, hastened this dissolution of that peaceful Assembly, and for his
inconsiderate suggestion, that the setting it for an example, was a design of
placing the Sovereignty in the people, and courting a Commonwealth; he will see
now we make it solely depend upon a sanction of the Kings; and would he visit
the Author, he should see his error in a refutation of his, of that pernicious
Principle, of perfect confusion, by which he is bound to defend the very
foundation of his state; and it is strange we must be reproacht for Page 1.
Courting a Commonwealth, at the same time we are so vainly menaced for having
expressed against one too much of Page 5.
resentment.

SECT. III.
IT is no wonder, to see the Dr. make His Late Page 2.
Majesty so Ill a Man, when he had long before made Him so Bad a Christian:
were it not his Peculiar to Libel KINGS, his Church might be mistrusted for
that Loyal Deportment she ever paid him; but as she had ever better thoughts of
him in his Life time; so she cannot be brought to entertain such Bad ones after
his Death: common Morality, even with a Proverbial Authority, commands us to
speak well of the Dead, it is hard if a King too, and the Sacred Dust of Princes,
cannot put in for the privileges of common Clay; and Mortality, to make him a
man of Treachery and Design, is too grossly invidious for a Prince that was
Famed for good Nature, even to a Fault; it looks so much like one of the
Meddals of the Dutch upon His Late MAJESTY, (and they, you know always have
their Reverse) that it is among them I believe he learnt to value his Memory. I
much fancy these his Mysterious Designs were never so clear to the Dr, till
this transport and passion had enlightened his Eyes; for Choleric people are
apt to see with Fire and Indignation, and so fancy all Things in Flames that
are about them; this makes him fly so much to Smithfield Arguments, and the
Conversion of Dragoons, under the easy Reign of a Merciful Monarch, manifested
in his inclinations to Mildness and Indulgence.

The late Celebrated Loyalist of the Long Parliament, whose Meritorious
Services he would magnify; yet at the same time libels and defames them: They
will live and last in our Annals, without his writing their History, nor be
much blemished by his defamations: those honorable Representatives, that had
sat so long at the Helm, and steered so well, that we still owe to them about
Twenty Years quiet and tranquillity; who, had they concurred with what was their
only defection, their KING's Inclination to Indulgence (and for which obstinacy
by his own Maxims he must condemn them too) had continued the repose they
enjoyed, and perhaps prevented all the Distempers that have since disturbed us;
these Gentlemen are so little obliged to this Dr. at Amsterdam, as they were
formerly to that of Salamanca, and indeed the Obligation is just the same.
Oats accused them long ago, long before Dr. B. who it seems now begins to see
with his Spectacles, Designs more clearly; that they were all Pensioners, Page
1. Par. 2
Creatures merely Depending on the Crown, though it appeared even from the very
List that was printed, that it was only a malicious Libel, and a Ly, that not
Ten of the Two Hundred had really received the least Allowance; and even some
of that was known to be for public Services, which then, forsooth, must most
politickly be called secret, only to countenance the scandalous Imposture of
the Plot of the Papists; this Design was then also clear to some, and I think
now is so to all: My self knew, and still do many of those Members most falsely
to suffer under that malicious Imputation, whom the Dr. has no reason to
reproach for the Selling of their Country, and betraying their Trust, when they
truly served both that and the King; but sure it is but a bad Return he makes
them, when I am sure it was all the same Peers, if not the same Parliament,
that Complemented Him for His Mighty Performances, which perhaps they might
have omitted, had they known what Amends He would have made them, or thought
him so good at Commending of Himself; but this is a Kindness He kept in
Reserve, and a Sublime acquired since his Travels and Accomplishments.

I cannot call this a Controversy with the Dr. when he gives up the Cause, when
he seems to take pains to appear on my side: He shows us how the Late King was
continually inclined to a Liberty of Conscience; Par. 2.
he declares the Act of Uniformity a severe Thing, the Terms of Conforming,
Rigidity; and those that required it, Angry Men: Was the Dr. always of this
mind? Why then it seems he only Conformed, fell in with the Church, for the
sake of her Benefices, for officiating at the Rolls, just as he fell out with
the State, because he lost it; but this cannot credit much the Reputation and
Integrity of such a Celebrated Writer, and the Church of Englands Chief Men are
just as much obliged to him for his Characters, as the Loyal Members of the
long Parliament; he has sufficiently attainted their honesty, and so most
modestly taxes the Indiscretion of all his Clergy, that so the State, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, may more handsomely make up that excellent
Composition of Knave and Fool: It Is strange that no party can escape the Fury
of his enraged Pen; this doughty Wight may make a good Champion for the Truth,
but will a much better in the Rehearsal. The Character of that Hero, as high as
it is, may be more naturally applied to Dr. B, than it is by him to the Late
Bishop of Oxford: Vid. his Enquiry.
If you consider him elevated to such an Hogen, or naturalized; for hectoring
of KINGS, invading of Kingdoms, fighting of France, combating England, defying
of Papists, Presbyterians, Dissenters, Churchmen, and almost all Mankind: but
if the Loyal Parliament (as he calls it in derision) were such arrant Knaves,
(for if he is in earnest, then their Compliance with their KING is the best
Test of their Loyalty, and it would be well His Present Majesty had more proof
of it) and the Chief Men of the Church were such infatuated Fools as he makes
them, to be wrought upon by the Roman Catholics for introducing their
Religion; why here then, was a perfect Conspiracy for four and twenty Year, of
the whole Kingdom, (some poor suppressed Dissenters excepted) for bringing us
back into Popery; and what is more strange, could never bring it to pass.

All our Power Civil and Ecclesiastical was concerned; all our Forces by Sea
and Land; King and Successor on their side, and in his own dreadful
Description; A Parliament of chosen Creatures, all depending upon Himself; and
this for near Twenty Years together, and yet not one step toward Popery, unless
what appeared in Andrew Marvels Growth of it; but on the contrary in this very
Interval of Time, the Two severe Tests set up to prevent it, and that by this
Parliament of Creatures, and this Treacherous designing King of his, (that he
makes always to the very last contriving, to betray the Protestant Religion)
from his own mere Motion, Marrying (that he may see I can use the Word) his two
Neeces to two Renowned Princes of the Reformed Religion; Vid. page 8.
the greatest Security they could desire of his Sincerity, to preserve and
protect it; and if I might add one thing more, which I wish as well as the Dr.
might be forgotten, prevailed upon, from the tumultuous Proceedings of a
Parliamentary Power, to part with a Brother that had done nothing, but to be
more dear, a palliated Exile, that even the necessity of State could not so
well excuse; and if neither Counsels, Force, Interest, Time, nor Religion it
self could hitherto bring about all this Formidable Revolution, I must confess,
notwithstanding the Discoveries of Dr. B, to sober Men, and honest, this Late
King cannot be suspected so false, or any Catholics so designing.

The Reformations in Henry 8 th. Time, King Edward, Queen Mary, Queen
Elizabeth, were certainly Four as great Changes and Revolutions, as any we now
fear, and as I think, somewhat like the same; and yet we find they were not
working for it underground for above Four and Twenty Year together; (to confine
it only to his Reflections on the Late King) and if we must credit all such
Historians Plot, we must add above an Hundred more, marching their Invisible
Army, and Ammunition in the Air, on the Sea, under Earth; PLOTS! That Our
Selves have blushed at, and even judicially baffled their Belief. But we still
saw then, that as soon as there was any new Succession to the Throne, or any
Prince of a different Sentiment, that designed to make any Alterations in the
Church or State, they were sooner compast with Ease and Expedition; certainly
these plotting Papists have been a long time very unlucky, or very innocent,
when our happier Protestants had ever better Fortune, and could Reform here,
more easily and openly, in some few Years, in the face, and in the sight of the
Sun; and this I think, is as clear too, as some Peoples Designs, which even at
a season, when they need not fly the Light; the Dr. says we must still suppose
in the dark.

His secret of the Dissenters having been encouraged to stand out against
Nonconformity, even by the Court that pursued them with such Rigidity for not
Conforming, I am persuaded is another peculiar among the many Mysterious
Intelligences of the Dr, and not much inferior to his wonderful Discoveries of
the Conference at Dover, his foreign Negotiations, and His Majesty's being so
Vid Reflect. Page 4.
nearly allied to the Society, when he might so well prove him from the same
Evidence, A Priest in Orders, for the Authority of his Liege Letter lies only
at that Authors door, who framed the other from Father Petre, to Pere le
Chaise, both which will appear to those that have not abandoned themselves to
folly, as entire Fictions, he ought to discover him for once a Prophet too,
that having been essential of old to the Kingly Office, and then he will have the
better security for his Religion, and may take his Word for an Oracle, but the
Dissenters will not thank him for thus making out their secret Correspondence
with the Court and Jesuits, but rather believe that he searched no other
Records for it, than the Original Manuscripts of Dr. Oats his Evidence: If
this Advice to their standing out, was only in order to introduce a Toleration,
how came it to pass, that when they had one actually granted, that those who
had Interest enough to procure it, could not by the same Power have continued
it to them too? Had the Late KING been so designing, so resolute to introduce
this Religion so much contended against, He must from the Drs. Argument have
stood to His Toleration, and which he might have done too, notwithstanding the
Clamours of the Ensuing Parliament to suppress it; and if an Army alone alarms
the Dr. with this Absolute Power, and must absolutely make any Monarch
Arbitrary, with which such fearful Authors have made such a formidable Noise;
then 'twas about that time too there was a standing one afoot; and it is but an
Argument against him, for the quieting of all Minds, and assuring of Men they
may the better acquiesce, when amidst an Army; and under an Indulgence; the
Protestant Religion was entirely preserved, nothing was altered in the
established Church; nothing in the Constitution of the State.

His bitter Reflection, that Dissenters were pawned to the Rage of the Church,
like the Jewels of the Crown for want of Money, was only an Allegory forced in
for a better inveighing against his Prince in a severer Sarcasm, and a more
invidious Expression by way of Figure; it is only a sublimer touched of his
Kindness to the Memory of His Majesty that is to be forgotten; it is but the
Language of one that loves the Crown, like the Famous Author of the March.
Needh. Merc.
Mercurius Politicus, who as politickly knew how to render it contemptible, by
representing of it poor, and so plainly called His Late Majesty the King of
Beggars: I confess the practicing upon the necessities of the Prince, was once
a pretty Prologue, and expedient to promote a Rebellion; but I am sure the
Church of England never liked it so well, and will think Her self but little
obliged to this precious Jewel, Her most gracious Son, for exposing Her for
such a Pattern, that Her Loyalty was only a Pander for Oppression, and for
giving no Money, till His Majesty had given Her up the Dissenters; however, the
Observation as malicious as it is, will do now no Mischief, since our present
Sovereign is as safe from the Consequences of it, as above the Fears.

SECT. IV.
ANd now we are come to the true Province of Dr. B, that looks indeed like one
of his Seventeen, defying of his Prince, and reproaching of Him, for faithless,
Vid. Page 2.
perfidious Designs to falsify all His Protestations, and waiting but for an
Opportunity to break through all his Promises: I confess Liberty of Conscience,
and the Writ de Comburendo cannot consist, and are as contrary things, as the
Dr. is sometimes even to himself; but what occasion the King has given us to
have the least suspicion, or shadow of such an injurious Thought, that after
Liberty for a little while allowed, we shall come to the worst of Poenal Laws,
I cannot comprehend: Is it because his Word was ever Sacred, and was never
violated, but in Dr. B's. Mouth? Was it to be relied on, even with an implicit
Faith, when he was but a Subject, and a Successor? And must it be the less
believed now, because his Character is much greater? Does His Person partake
more of Infirmity, and human Nature, when the Church styles him next under GOD,
and nearer to the Divine? Is it because it is His Interest so to do, when the
Quiet and Tranquillity of the State will depend upon his not doing it, the Love
of His Subjects, and the Ease of Himself? And Lastly, Is it probable he will do
all this, because possible to be done? No, the Dr. knows all this is good
Sedition, but bad Argument: he knows with what difficulty the King is
compassing for all His Dissenting Subjects, an Established Toleration, as sure
any Prince would, that was not himself of the National Church Established,
unless He could delight to see himself, and his persuasion Criminals to the
State, and made obnoxious for their Faith to his Satutes and the Law, sentenced
in some Cases, even to Death, by some of those Sanctions, to which in a Legal
Sense, himself is supposed to give their Life: he knows that only for
cancelling these Severities, and some other absurd Inconsistencies in the
present Constitution of our State, his Prince Condescends to solicit the Repeal
of these Laws, and for it, to gratify and indulge all his Subjects.

And yet even this the Dr. sees, he knows will not be compas't, but with much
time, care, and caution; and what these invidious Authors would observe, but by
extraordinary Methods, and extrajudicial Proceedings, does he think it so easy
then, when only the Laws and Tests are repealed with such difficulties to find
a Parliament after a Session or Two, that will establish severer Acts of
Uniformity to the Church of Rome, when that of England has but just lost Hers?
And another formal Repeal must be made before, of the Toleration Established: I
need not take notice, that the Number of Catholics of Quality, and Note, was
never yet enough to make an House, and may be a long time before they be, that
the National Religion will be ever that which is the most generally received;
the former Treatise has superseded for it my Pains in this; but it is easy for
the Dr, and a Man of Art, that Iuggles with the Government, with the turn of
his Hand, or the shaking of his Box, to shuffle upon us, from a preceding
Protestant, a very Loyal Catholic Parliament: No, it is not the Proof that His
Majesty has given, that his Promises to this established Church are not to be
relied on; it is not the Apparancy of his visible Interest, that obliges him to
Ruin and suppress the Protestant; it is not the possibility of doing it so
easily, were it so injuriously Designed to be done; it is none of this that thus
disturbs him; no, it is his Zeal for his Religion, Vid. Par. 3.
it is his Love for a particular Society, it is the Popes Power to dissolve these
Promises, and some private Doctrines that will instruct him in Aequivocations:
But will this Illuminato say, that all this Calumny is new too, his own
peculiar Notion taken from Originals? -- His Majesty's Zeal has long been known
to the World, as well as His Courage, and that to none more, than his new
Masters, the Dutch; and who have too much Honor in them to deny it. His
constant perseverance in a Faith, which he too believes the True One; Maugre
the many Temptations to a Change, and the Dangers that threatened his
Continuance: This I confess, shows a well- settled Zeal, and somewhat like that
which inspired some Primitive Professors of a Religion, which we all agree to
have been the True Catholic Faith: A Zeal, not subject to Flattery, and as
much above Fear; it is not Christian to make this Criminal, and if he will
introduce this Doctrine among the Dutch, we must Vid. Par. 8. Page 8.
in his own Words, believe there are Bramans there. That His Majesty's Favors
are only extended to a particular Society, is an invidious Assertion more
dogmatically laid down, than absolutely true, of which himself might even cease
to wonder, did he believe his Whimsey, that His Majesty was a Member of it, but
the Dr. is at too great a distance to make good Observations, and must needs
commit most horrid Mistakes, should his Intelligence chance to be bad. I hope
he will have a care how he writes History upon hearsay; this would lay him open
to himself, and even Varilla's; some People that see here without Telescopes,
can observe that His Majesty's Favors are not so confined, but extended even
to some Persons, and Orders, that have not been adjudg'd such intimate Friends
to that of Jesus; or if some of the Drs. Vid. his Travels.
Letters don't ly, or he believes them himself; a sort of Enemies too; some
that have contended with them are no such Strangers at Court; and though that
Learned Person, Father P. a Man of a liberal Education, and no mean Extraction,
whom this Dr. B's. Lines can never let pass without an Asterisk, or Mark of his
Favor, has truly so much of His Majestys, as his Worth and Merit may deserve,
does this monopolize the Favor of the Prince to that Party; or should we not
hear Catholics themselves complain, if it were so Partial? Yet these are the
Drs. Premises, these his Conclusions, these his Discoveries, in which he so
prides himself; but should it prove so which is yet but Insinuation; and
indeed, as the Dr. intends it for Disturbance, Sedition; did he never remember
any Protestant Princes, that countenanced more especially, though not different
Orders, yet a set of Divines of very different Opinions, even in their own
Church? sure he does, or else our Books of more modern Reformation are very
much belied: In King James the First's Reign he was sure to run himself up to
Preferment, that could best baffle and run down Arminius; or (if he is pleased
with the new Relation) his Countryman: The Old Arrians never seemed to them
such Arch-hereticks, and if he will have it more to the purpose, he may call
this an Order too, or the Order of the Synod of Dort: But when the Tide turned
again in K. Charles the First's Days, not many Bishops were made, but what
would stand stiff, and stoutly to His Principles; and preached down the other
for a Doctrine, uncharitable, impious, blasphemous, damnable; this is so sadly
true, that some wise People think it occasioned the War; but were this Society
so solely, so zealously in Favor, they might be envied for it, but not abused;
their Learning, and more liberal Education, by the little that I have seen
abroad in most Catholic Countries comes up (to speak in the Drs. Dialect) more
to a sublime, than is commonly observed in some other Regulars; their
Foundations more sumptuous, their Revenues richer, their Libraries larger, and
I believe the Dr. himself more obliged in the Progresses he made to their
Courtesy and Communication: but what Reason Protestants have to upbraid their
Prince here with Partiality, I cannot apprehend; who proposes not only an
Universal Indulgence to all, but practices equal Dispensations and
Distributions of his Favors, even among themselves: Are not the Protestants
much the majority in His Council, in Employments, Civil, and Military? Are not
some particular Loyal Peers of that Persuasion, known to have no little
Interest and Influence? Does not their Chapel stand as quietly within his own
Walls, as His own wherein he worships? And that perhaps, in spite of some
Provocations upon the place; for as I heartily wish the continuance of it
there, so I could wish too, a more prudential decency would attend it; Persons
of great Learning, and good Lungs, may exercise themselves, and to much
Edification, without thundering against Rome, to the shaking of the Church of
England, and where now rests this partial Imputation of Zeal, of Bigottry, and
Opinion? What must become of all this malicious Stuff? Must not the World be
ashamed of it, I could almost have said the Dr.?

But now for his invincible Arguments of the Popes Dispensing Power, Par. 3.
page 2.
and the monstrous Doctrine of Mental Reserves, and cunning Aequivocation; does
this affect His Majesty any farther, then he submits to be governed by it, and
has the Dr. proved in any single Instance, that he ever made use of such
Evasions for a Salvo to his Sacred Word? So that supposing an unquestionable
Verity in the Drs. Depositions, it is but a bad inference from the Principles of
any Persons to calumniate the Prince, and to assert him actually affected with
such Sentiments, only from a possibility of being so: But has this good
Christian then the Charity to believe, to think, that all Romanists imbibe
these Doctrines, suck them from the very Milk of their Mother Church? That the
Pope can dissolve any solemn Promise, Contract, or Oath; certainly the
Catholic Countries must have but bad Commerce, since so dangerous security;
and yet I cannot see but we keep a good Correspondence with those Climates,
true Returns made us in our Trade, and the Traffic for their Commodities, as
secure upon the place; Contracts in themselves unlawful, are in some Cases de
Facto void, and in others resolved so by some equitable Construction in the
Law; Oaths necessitated, and in Illicitis, our Sanderson will satisfy us, we
can Dispense with, without a Pope; and I cannot apprehend, either from Reading,
Vid. Popery Represented, etc. Vid. Bish. of Con^.
or Conversation with any Catholic, that the Papal Power pretends to Dispense,
but upon some such Considerations: The Reservs, by which all Jesuits must so
unreasonably suffer, have as often by themselves been as solemnly renounced, not
only in some elaborate Writings, but sealed, even with their latest Breath; and
if any particular Persons have positively asserted it, it is as injurious to
paum it upon a whole Society; it is such a Reserve to their Enemies, such a
Refuge, I confess, to those that will accuse them, that it is morally
impossible to defend themselves from the Imputation, if when they sacrifice
their Lives for it, invoke the Almighty, renounce these Reserves, even with a
dying Imprecation, and they shall still be supposed to be dispensed withal for
this; their Accusers Malice in common Charity, must be more presumed on, and
suspected, than any such Principles in a Christian Faith; so that in short, the
Papers of Dr. B. deal no otherwise with the Promises of the KING, than their
old Descants did upon the Dying Speeches of the Jesuits, when their
Animadversions superseded all possible Defense of their Innocence, and were the
most infallible expedients for the fastening of Guilt; and where the Interest
of State, and the Sacred Resolutions of the Prince dispose him to maintain his
unviolable Word, or his solemn Oath; it cannot but be the profanest Thought, to
make his Religion betray his Morality; and even a fervent Faith and Vid. Par.
3.]
Piety, to be but a perfidious Pander to a more deliberate Perjury.

SECT. V.
IT is a hard Fate for a Prince to be argued out of His Integrity, and to be
made an ill Man with artificial Inferences and Insinuations: It is an
acknowledged hardship, even to a common Prisoner at the Bar; and the Dr. in his
Trial would be loath so to suffer; Constructive Treason, in the Case of a
Subject, notwithstanding the 25 th. of our Edward, has been much Complained of;
and I think, Vid. Sidney's Paper.
Dr. B. has made it his Complaint, and shall his KING be called to an Account,
as unaccountable as he is, for a Violation of His Faith, and that only by
Construction; it is as great a Crime, as can blemish a Monarch, and ought to be
as tenderly treated, as His Subjects Lives; the Greatness of His Person
aggravates the Guilt, and from the Meanness of his Condition, is more
excusable, or less conspicuous in a common Man, Breach of Promise, or Faith; in
the Sovereign Authority is as much the highest Violation, as Treachery against
it, by a Parity of Reason, the greatest Guilt; I hope Dr. B. does not deal with
His Majesty, as Vid. Trial of the Regicides*
Harrison did with his Father they Martyred, study to blacken him: But I cannot
but observe, That his Charge seem somewhat to savor of Cook the Solicitor; and
Looks as if he was Retained Council against the KING, to prove this betraying
of His Trust, and does every thing but call Him Traitor; I do not think the
Drs. Intentions so bad, but must needs think that he seldom considers the
Consquences that may be drawn from his own Discourses; The Calumniators of that
King would only have proved an actual Violation of his Trust; and the Dr.
deliberately studies here, from Reason and Religion, Politics, and Example, to
prove in his Sovereign, a necessity to betray it; what is this, but the
rendering Him odious and criminal, with the worst of Innuendo's, or to make him
suffer by Anticipation; and what to a Subject no Laws will allow, by bare
Presumption condemn him: I cannot in common Charity to the Dr. imagine this
mighty Malice is directly meant to His Majesty, though too much I am afraid among
such a deal of it must stick, but that his Transport and Passion against this
Society, provoked him to such inconsiderate Reflections upon his Sovereign; and
we have heard, I know, in our own History, of a Subject that in the heat of his
Game, shot his Arrows at a Deer, but killed the King, I wish it were not
applicable too to his bitter Words; and with them we have done here at present,
having refuted them so far, as by pretense of Reason they would persuade us of
the necessity of His Majesty's violating of His Word and Faith; but for fear
lest that should fail in its Effects, or a Specimen of his Excellency in Speech
and Declamation, he brings Presidents for it, and Examples, which we are now
come to Consider.

And the First, is the Famous Edict of Passaw in Germany, which the Dr. had
much better omitted, than touched upon; it shows plainly the Disposition, and
Inclination of no less than Four of the Emperors that were strickt
Roman Catholics, and followed one another, for granting Indulgence, and
Liberty to those that differed from them in Religion: In the First place,
Ferdinand the First, from his own Confession did this, and this Edict by him
was chiefly procured; and that, notwithanding the President that was set him by
the Preceding Emperor, Charles the Fifth, who ruined the League made by the
Protestants at Smalcade, and took Prisoners the Elector of Saxony, and
Landtgrave of Hassia, and was so zealously addicted to the Devotion of the Sea
of Rome, that he renounced the Crown, settled himself among the Monks, and died
in a St. Just. Cloister in Spain.
Monastery. This Ferdinand setting aside the Relation of his Blood, Vid.
Schultz. Chro. Lubeck.
had so great an Obligation to this CHARLES, and His Religion, that he had no
reason to recede from those Severities, that our Author would make us believe
both did require; and this does only more eminently show, That a Catholic
King, notwithstanding the Ties of Blood and Religion, may think himself never
the more obliged to persecute and oppress; for it was by the Procurement of
Charles, that this Ferdinand his Brother, was chosen King of the Romans, and
his Zealous Recess, his Devout Retirement, that facilitated to the other, his
soonner and more easy Ascent to the Empire; so that both his Brothers Kindness,
as well as Devotion, had very much obliged him: I know that Charles the Fifth
is said by some, to have designed his Son Phillip to succeed in his Empire; but
that does not extenuate his Kindness to his Brother Ferdinand; and I mention it
only for fear the Dr. should make another unnecessary Objection: after this,
Ferdinand succeeded him, and as others say, even among the Schultzen's Chron.
printed in High Dutch. Lubeck a Protestant.
German Writers, according to his own Intentions, giving the Low Countries to
his Son Philip, and leaving the Empire to this his Brother, 1558.
who upon his First Advancement to it, contended with the Pope, Paul the
Fourth, for not confirming him, and that only for his Ibid.
Indulgence to the Protestants, and taking upon him the Imperial Crown without
his Permission: In the very next Year of his Reign, 1559.
he Called a Convention at Ausburg, to have settled the Disputes in Religion,
but the Protestants beginning to Clamor, that they would not submit it to be
determined by the plurality of Voices, but by the Rule of Gods Word, he
confirmed to them again, that Pacification of Passaw, which he even in his
Brothers time had so helped to procure, and had sent them upon their Liberty to
return, Two Hundred Protestant Preachers out of Bohemia, and during his Reign
all things were quiet, the Protestant Princes subscribing again the Ausburg
Confession at Newburg; and he as peacably leaving them a Confirmation at his
Death, and his Throne to his Son Maximilian the Second, after Six Years Reign.
And the Clemency that He showed to those of the Reformed Religion you see is
such, that Par. 4.
Dr. B. would insinuate that himself was really a Professor of it, or at least
much suspected, though none before has made what he is so wonderfully good at,
the Discovery: Two Daughters that he had, he married to the then most Zealous
Princes of the Romish Religion; the most Christian, and most Catholic Kings,
Phillip of Spain, and Charles of France: He did not only maintain the Edicts of
Passaw, but permitted the Confession of Ausburg to all the Protestants of
Austria, and that for the very same Idque ob hanc Rationem; quod iniquum est
and impium Conscientijs imperare. Gutberlet. Chron.
Reasons that His Majesty has expressed in His Declarations, viz. That
Consciences could not be forced: And it was in his Reign, that the Reformation
of Maygdeburg an whole Archbishopric was as entirely completed, and that the
Doctor may see how the Protestants were obliged to him too, as well as Matthias,
he himself laboring to compose the Differences for the Low Countries then both
under Reformation, and a Revolt. After 12 Years Reign, which, our German Author
calls the most happy days for the Protestants, Rudolphus his Son before King of
Hungary, Romans, and Bohemia, succeeded him; in the beginning of his Reign, all
things had as good success among the Protestants; the Reformation went on, the
Ausburg Confession confirmed, a Convocation was called at Lubeck, in which it
was resolved they should submit themselves with all Obedience to the Emperor;
and that their Religion should be permitted to them without any molestation or
opposition; 1579
Pope Gregory the Thirteenth sent to him a new Calendar, as they called it,
which the Protestant Princes opposed, 1582
entered their Protestation against it, and were Countenanced in it by the
Imperial Power: About the Year 1600 at Regenspurg, there was a Conference again
about Religion, Divines deputed on both sides, but the Differences about the
Rule of Faith dissolved the Assembly; the Emperor no way interrupting the
Dispute, the Proceedings were printed by the Protestants at Wittenburg, and by
the Papists at Ingolstadt; and I hope this will show that Rudolphus himself had
no other design, but that all things should be determined according to the
strength of Reason and Authority.

About this time the Landtgrave of Hassia renewed again the Reformation, and
went farther than the Germans are wont to carry it, by throwing down Pictures,
and Images, which even among the Lutherans my self have seen allowed of, and
applauded, and in all of their Eminent Churches, I could almost have said
adored: so far was this Rudolp. from Severities and Oppressions in matters of
Religion, that if he had been inclined to it, from his Zeal to a Persuasion,
common Policy, and Interest of State, would have obliged him to the contrary,
he being then in War with his Brother Matthias, and indeed both sides striving
which should most secure to them the Protestant Party, as by the Sequel will
appear; for upon his Brothers being in Arms, the States of Bohemia took a
solemn Oath to assist the Emperor with their Lives and Fortunes; upon this he
granted to them a further Confirmation of the Confession of Ausburg, and though
Matthias was prevailed upon afterward by the Bishop of Passaw, and the Pope's
Legate, Cardinal Melini to make an Edict to forbid it; yet he soon found his
Error, and took occasion afterward to revoke it; for finding the Protestants
more favored by his Brother, 1608
and the Troubles they had created him by their entering into an Union,
occasioned by his Prosecution, which we will say with the Dr. was set on by the
House of Grats; why he presently thought it the wiser way to take a more
moderate Course, and so permitted that the Pacification of Passaw should be
indulged not only to the Nobility and Gentry, but the meanest Plebeians: The
Emperor Rudolphus, when he saw some of the Protestant Party fall off to his
Brother Matthias, and himself somewhat in a Condition not to value them, was
animated so far, as for a time to forbid the public Profession of their
Religion, and the Meeting of the States at Prague, thinking himself not obliged
to maintain the Privileges that was granted then by Maximilian; but when he
saw what a Disturbance it created, he soon Confirmed to them, their Ancient
Privileges, and new Exercise of Religion, and that in a more extraordinary
manner, viz. that none of the Popish Bishops should oppose the Protestants in
Prague, that both Religions should live peacibly together, and that those that
disobeyed, should be prosecuted as Disturbers of the Peace: (how near this
comes to His Majesty's Proportions, even his Enemies must acknowledge) upon
this, Protestant Churches were built, both in Germany and Bohemia, and little
of Disturbance created to the Church, all the days of Rudolphus.

And now after these Alterations for Empire and Opinion, the Emperor himself
dies after six and Thirty Years Reign; a time, long enough to have rooted out
all the new sown Seed of the Reformed Religion, 1612.
had Rudolphus ever resolved it, or could have been prevailed upon for its
Extirpation; it being long before the Swede, that Famous Defender of the Faith,
or rather Invader of the Country, had entered Germany: I cannot but observe how
injuriously the Dr. deals here with those very Princes, Vid. Reflect. page 3.
whom he cannot but confess to have been famed for their Justice and
Gentleness; for the Fury and Violencys which Ferdinand of Gratz and his Family
showed to the Reformed, how comes it to affect these gentle Dispositions, and
who we see confirmed to them, so often their former Privileges, and
Pacifications, which if they had wholly violated and evacuated, it still shows,
that Catholic Princes can be supposed inclined from the Principles of Nature,
to Toleration and Indulgence; and it must be somewhat extraordinary, and
preternatural, that prevails with them to Tyrannise (to make use of Maximilians
Words) over Consciences, Nihil aliud est quam Coeli arcem invadere, Gutberlet.
ut supra.
and invade the very Prerogative of the Court of Heaven; what ever other Kings
or Emperors have done and acted against the Rules of Religion, or Justice, must
certainly be most injuriously imputed to those that have been guilty of no such
doings, or not known whither they will ever do so, much less to such who do
declare against it, and show that most evidently they disapprove it; the Dr.
would fasten Persecution I fancy upon Catholic Princes, not only as a
Principle of Merit, but a Species of Original Sin, and so make all Contract the
Guilt of it by Imputation; for otherwise Arguments drawn from particulars, can
never conclude universally, much less from the single instance of the
severities of France to infer an absolute necessity for its being so here in
England, when even among the Primitive Persecutions, there were those Emperors,
that favored the Christians; and it can never be admitted to conclude from the
rage of a Nero, a Dioclesian, that never a Titus, a Vespasian, did ever reign
at Rome; both CHARLES, and Ferdinand of Gratz may be condemned in History, for
their severe Proceedings, when a Maximilian as much famed for his mildness, and
gentle Disposition.

But to follow our celebrated Author in his next Historical Instance, Matthias
mounted the Imperial Throne, as soon almost as Rudolphus left it; he had a
Disposition to mildness, as the Dr. himself observes; and in the First Year of
his Reign, 1631
received the Protestants Petition about the Confirmation of their Religion at
Regenspurg; and when afterward by Matthias his means, Ferdinand the Second of
that Name, that succeeded him, was made King of Bohemia, he was forced to
confirm to them all their Privileges, and to promise the continuance of them
after the death of Matthias, and that which truly influenced this Emperor, or
rather incensed him to the Proceedings that followed, Was not the Jesuits,
whom the Dr. cannot spare, even where they are unconcerned; or the Violences of
the House of Gratz; for Chronicles of theirs can tell us, that even a Cardinal,
and one of the Emperor Matthias his Privy-Counsellors was on the very
Coronation day, when this Ferdinand of Gratz was Crowned King of Hungary, 1618.
sent Prisoner to Tyrol, for endeavoring to stir up those Divisions that after
followed: The first Begininngs of which, (as a Schultz. Chron.
German and a Lutheran observes, and which from such an impartial Author, for
the sake of the reformed Religion I am so sorry to relate) were occasioned by
this Disorder: The Protestants held a Consultation at Prague, where among some
of their Grievances was proposed, That the Edicts of Rudolphus which we recited
before, not being by the Catholics stricktly kept, for their being bound to a
better Observance, the Reformed did agree to represent it at a Meeting of the
Imperial Ministers to be redres'd; but finding there SmirsanzKy* and St. Labata.
two Men of Note to withstand them, and to make much of Opposition, they were so
incensed, that they took occasion to throw both these Persons out at Window, as
they stood next to the Secretary Fabritius himself, Firing at them as they
fell; upon this great Outrage, which could not but with more force be defended,
they united immediately into a League of Lives and Fortunes against GOD's, the
King's Enemies, as they called them, and their own; went straight to the
Listing of Soldiers, ordered 30 Directors or Administrators for the management
of the Affairs of the Kingdom, and as if incensed with Dr. B. against the whole
Society, banished all the Jesuits out of Bohemia, and published a Manifesto to
justify these Outrageous Proceedings; the Emperor Matthias as mild as he was;
as gentle even as our prejudiced Dr. can allow him, could not but resent these
great Indignities, be alarmed at the Disturbances that were made and provide
against a total Revolt and Rebellion, that did more than threaten him by being
already commenced, those of Silesia siding with them, sent under the Marquess
of Brandenburg a considerable Force to their Assistance; Count Mansfield set up
for their General; and it was time then for the Emperor to seek out for his;
his mildness had tried to make them before to lay down their Arms; and so for
their persisting in Hostility, had the more right to declare them Rebels; they
had besieged the Budeweis before the Emperor had ordered to proceed against
them as such, and taken another Town by Storm, and even of his Intentions to
attack them, gave them timely notice, when nothing could prevail with the
Bohemians, and the Emperor bear nothing more; the Count de Bucquoy marched
against them, and in Battle beat them, and in this, in thus manner, began that
cursed Disturbance, as our Author calls it, that cost all Germany so dear: This
Account I have faithfully translated from our Dutch Authors Chronology, Vid
also Sleidan.
their own Countryman, their own Protestant; who laments the very Disturbance
themselves created, and all the Miseries and Misfortunes that so justly
followed; Dr. Heylin, an Historian, as famed too for Reformation; as our
Reflecter we Revy on, as much a Member of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and whatever
are the Censures he must suffer, an Author as honest and sincere, and only more
impartial, he gives us his sense of these Transactions, to this effect:
Discoursing of that more Memorable Battle of Prague that followed afterward in
Ferdinand the Seconds Time, to which he even himself was forced; for he before
had admonished them to lay down their Arms; says, he cannot decide who had the
juster Cause neither ought success of War to decide it, Vid. his Geography of
that Country.
but of this he is sure that ever since the erecting of that Kingdom by the
Sclaves, or Croatians, it depended upon the disposal of the Emperor, and
observes that on the day that the Battle was decided, the Gospel appointed for
it, had in it that Memorable Text of rendering unto Coesar the Things that are
Coesars; but such is that inconsiderate Zeal, praepossession or downright
Sedition of some that set themselves only to contest it with a Crown, that the
specious names of Reformation and Religion must sanctify any sort of Rebellion
and Revolt; it is too much one would think, that it should excuse it, much less,
make it lose its Nature, and forget its Name: The good Emperor Matthias, soon
after the first Defeat was given them, to which he was by their own Confession
forced, departed this Life, and left Ferdinand a more furious Prince in
Military Matters, and more zealous in Ecclesiasticals, to follow and pursue it.

This producing of such a Popish Prince for a president of Perfidiousness, and
Persecution, whom himself confesses so mild, and relenting as to become a
Protector to the Distressed States, even to revolting Protestants against a
revengeful Prince, will make men distrust the weight of such an Argument that
carries Contradiction and Boldness in triumph before it. The Dr. does not
deserve the Protection of the Dutch for defaming thus their best of Protectors;
Fam. Strad. de Bello Belg. Page, 56.
but he deals with him as kindly here for the sake of his Religion, as the
Dutch, his new Masters themselves did, when he assisted them in the defense of
their Liberties, for they fell upon him and his Followers, in a solemn
Procession at Antwerp, on Ascension day, killed some upon the place, forced
their Defender to fly to the Church, Nullam ab ordinibus gratiam consecutus
est. Ibid. p. 210.
and take sanctuary for his Life; it is hard I confess, to decide whither it was
the result of Zeal in the Reformation; I will not say of the spirit of
Rebellion, but this is certain this Protector was very scurvily treated, and
but ill used, insomuch, that he protested if they served him so, he would leave
them to themselves, and return into Germany; which afterward for other
Indignities Offered, he was forced to do.

But this Author I cite, being one of the Society, will supersede all Credit
with the Dr.; for Prejudice with some people will spoil the best of Authority;
but then the most impartial Neque magnam gratiam ob delatam ultro copiam ab
ordinibus consecutus est Tom. 3. Page 514. B. Genev.
Thuanus, whose sincerity, even himself has applauded, I hope will be better
believed, and truly he says but the same, that this Catholic Defender of the
Protestant Cause, had but little thanks for that Assistance, which of his own
accord he brought the States; if Protestants will not be obliged to
Roman Catholic Princes for Redress, or Preservation, pray don't let the Fact
be libelled, and their Principles traduced against positive Proof, as if they
were always ready to root them out, and studied to destroy them. Here are
Presidents from History, and such too, as that to some of them, himself does
give a sort of Approbation, that in former Reigns, in foreign Countries, Vid.
par. 3.
where the Catholic Religion has been generally received, that by Princes of
that Persuasion, the Protestants too, have been countenanced and protected; and
the Peace we here do now enjoy at this present, in this Kingdom, in the same
Circumstances, and the thankful Acknowledgments that are so universal for its
Enjoyment, is an Additional Evidence, That the Dr. may be mistaken in his
Arguments from Fact, as well as malicious in his Inferences, when they truly
will appear both spiteful and false; so that his seditious Insinuations against
His Majesty's Indulgence, Vid. Vindicat. of himself against the Parliam.
Pacific. page 7,
and his ungrateful Dealing with the KING, that as he says, advised him once of
his approaching Danger, helped him to prevent it, and perhaps, protected him
too, are no more an Argument against the Mildness and Clemency that may be
expected under the Reign of our merciful Monarch, then his Masters Ancestors
ill usage of Archduke Matthias, can be made use of to prove they never had such
a generous Protector.

But setting aside these Presidents of the German Princes that were so
favorable to Protestants; consider but the Cases and Circumstances of those
Emperors that were condemned for such Severities to them; those that are said
so much to have violated their Faith; and for that you will find even Charles the
Fifth, and Ferdinand the Second, if impartially examined, not to deserve so
much of Reproach; in the Reign of the First, the Protestant Religion began to
be received in Germany, and with that Monarch might be said to commence; for
tho Luther was born long before in Frederick the Third's Time, it was but a
Year or two before Charles the Fifth, 1517
that he began to write against the POPE, which whether the result of Passion,
or Conviction of Reason, we shall not now examine; but only the Princes Usage of
him, and his Proselites. The most impartial Author among the Thuan. Tom. 1. p.
762. Neminem latere quantos labores in concilio procurando suscepit.
Papists tell us, that upon the propagating of his Doctrine, and the Troubles it
created in the Empire; that the Emperor labored to compose the Differences
with all the Mildness imaginable, promised them a Council, and that 'twas known
to all, what Pains he took to procure it; Sleidanus a German himself, one of
the Primitive Proselytes, a Protestant, that lived all along that Reign; and so
had all the Qualifications in the World, that can recommend him to those of the
reformed Religion for a sincere Historian (since some People will believe
nothing but what is writ on their side): I cannot see that he represents even
that Emperor for such an Oppressor of the Protestants; though any impartial
Person would consider that any Sovereign Authority will for its own
Preservation oppose any Novel Opinion in the Dr. B. him excuses this, Vid.
Preface to Lanctan. against the first Reformation.
Church, to prevent the Disturbances that will unavoidably follow from the
Propagating of it in the State, and whatever were the good Effects of the
Reformation, that some of these bad ones did ensue, cannot certainly with any
modesty be denied: The Emperor was so mild upon Luther's first appearing
against Indulgences that were made too venial in Germany, by being too commonly
sold, (which even sober Catholics in those times could condemn, Sleidan. lib.
1.
where they were abused) he writ to the Pope, Dr. B. owns the Emperor granted
a Toleration, and pressed the Council of Trent to Reform Abuses. Reform. part
2. p. 21. And notwithstanding this, the Protestants Combined at Franckfort.
that for avoiding of Controversies, and sophistical Disputes, these Matters
might be Reformed by a general Council; which certainly was a much better way,
all Protestants must allow then, that which Luther took by making but an
unhappy Breach in the Church; for Reformation with Authority and Warrant will
ever be built on a better Foundation; and then too much sooner defended, than
any good that is done, though the greatest; by any ill and indirect means; why
Friar Tecell's selling of Pardons so indiscriminately, even to a scandal,
should make him renounce his Religion, or Sylvesters a strict Thomist, too
zealous defense of the Popes Authority, make Rome presently the Seat of
Antichrist, as he A Discourse like his Table Talk, printed with Authority in
High Dutch.
calls it, and warrant him to forsake the Church, if these escape with
impunity, as himself did with Threatenings declare, I cannot comprehend; yet
though upon these Foundations, we still see the Emperor permitted it to go on
peaceably, He stopped the Process at Spire; the Bishop of Toledo pressed a
condescension from the Papists; and the Emperor persuaded the Protestants not
to demand too much. Vid. Dr. B's Reformation.
though he labored too, that it might more regularly; for doubtless the Pope's
condemning of Luther's Works to be burnt, did not empower him to burn the
Pope's Decretals, no more than if a Libel of Dr. B's. should receive such a
Sentence, it would authorize him in the same manner to serve the KING's
Proclamation. The Churchmen, doubtless then, (as it concerned them, being then
of the only Church established) were very zealous for the suppressing of
Luther, and his Proselytes; but we do not find the Empr. too so furious in
their Prosecution; he told them to their Applications that they made him, that
he chiefly coveted the Quiet of the Empire, and that he had taken pains no
Force should be used to any man; National Councils he called them several, to
which they would never submit, and did wisely to protest, since they were sure
to be out Voted: he allowed Luther a public Disputation at Leipsig, sent him
an assurance of Security to come to Worms, 1521.
and when some Zealous Churchmen persuaded the Emperor to order him his
Process, Schultz. Chro.
they were so far from prevailing, that he smartly told them, Though there was
no Faith in the World, it should be found in his Breast: I suppose the Dr.
would not use this too, as an infallible Argument for all Catholic KINGS being
compelled by their Religion, to violate their Faith: His Ausburg Confessions
were at that Town graciously received by him, and ordered to be taken into
Examination; he himself condescended to the Interim; in which were two Points
gained, or granted, though obstinately refused, the Marriage of the Priests, and
the Sacraments in both kinds; Bucer in his Zeal, would not submit to this, though
some of the Electors liked it, and modest Melancthon moderated for an
Accommodation: A Conference was appointed, Lutherans, and Zuinglians fall out
among themselves, which Dr. B. calls a popish Contrivance. Part. 2. L 2.
and such a Favor it was too to the Protestants, so highly resented by the
Pope, that he threatened the Emperor for usurping his Authority, and offering to
reform the Church; and as the Ausburg Confession was confirmed, so the
Pacification of Passaw was in his Reign procured; and if we reflect on
Ferdinand the Seconds Reign, the Protestants were in Arms, when he came to the
Crown, he commanded them to lay them down, they oppose his being Emperor,
protested against his Election, choose their King of Bohemia; and thus they
fanned the Fire that set all the Country in a Flame, and to continue it too; at
the Diet of Leipsig, league themselves to War with the Swedes, when at the same
time the Emperor at another at Ratisbone, had made Proposals for Peace; and the
Violations that at any time followed, were occasioned by mutual Jealousies on
both sides; the Protestant Party growing powerful, and Princes falling with
them into Leagues, made the Emperors look more to the preservation of their
Authority, than their Subjects Privileges; and they thinking themselves
injured in them, would remonstrate their Grievances; and the Emperors complain
their Preachers were the occasion of Commotions, that they sided with their
Enemies, Vid. Sleidan. Com. Lib. 7. and 17.
and those of Christendom, and as Teckely now, with the Turks; and perhaps,
each Party having its real Faults, Dr. B. owns the Emperors declared they made
no War upon any Religious Accounts, but only for the maintaining of the Rights
of the Empire. 1 st. Part. L. 1.
as well as human Infirmities, fell from inward Fears of one another, to open
Hostility, even to the lamentable Effusion of too much Christian Blood; this is
sincerely the substance I can Collect from Authors of all sorts of Complexions,
which the Dr's. Endeavors to defame His Majesty's Person and Religion, has in
this Point given me occasion to Consult.

SECT. VI.
AS these Instances were foreign to our Nation, Vid. Reflect. Page 3.
and his Purpose too, for they make against him; and since so unlucky, he had
better let it alone; so we will consider his more domestic Examples, and
examine how far these Presidents of Perfidiousness and Falsehood which he would
fix on the Popish Princes of Great Britain, make for his Purpose.

The Promises of Queen Mary of England, whatever they were, were only made to
the Suffolk Men, if any made; for besides what are related They all borrow it
from Fox, who himself recites no Declaration that She Published to that
purpose; but only Oral Tradition, and That with some People has no Authority.
in History, no public Act under Her hand appears; and the Dr. knows His
Present Majesty in the very First Act of His Reign, and in several repeated
Proclamations since has solemnly signed it, and so signified it to the whole
Kingdom, and the World; though his sacred Word was sufficient without such an
Overt Act to secure us: But besides, I know Dr. B. values himself so much upon
his understanding of History, especially about Reformation, that the Times to
which he would apply his Comparative Reflections, as they are very distant, so
too of a quite different Face and Complexion to what they were in Her Days;
will the Dr. make no difference in the settling of the Protestant Religion,
between the settlement of the Six Years of King Edward's Reign; and about an
From A. D. 1558. to the present.
Hundred and Thirty that have followed since, sure he is satisfied of the vast
Disparity; he seems almost assured that his elaborate Writings will secure us
against the repealing the Tests, (or else they are penned to no Purpose;) and
then can he expect that an Act for Re-establishing Popery, should pass (as in
her Reign) in the First Parliament. The Reformation in the former Reign was
really a force, and what all impartial Protestants, can apprehend, carried on
even sacrilegiously by the Court to serve some secular designs; though the
consequences of their ill means might be truly good; and perhaps in my opinion
will ever be so; 'twas easy then for her, without any breach upon Laws,
Statutes, and Constitutions, to retrieve and establish a Religion that had been
from all Ages received, and only for six years discontinu'd, yet still we saw,
as appears from her Published 18. Aug. 1553.
Proclamation, she so far adhered to any promise she might have made that she
declared, she would never compel any of her Subjects in Matters of Religion,
till by their common consent they had obliged themselves, that they did so, is
too well known, both Houses putting up a Petition in the Name of the Kingdom,
to the Cardinal to be received again into the Church of Rome; and this a
Parliament that none have yet offered to prove, was procured by any indirect
means; so that it plainly appears, that Laws will always depend upon the general
opinion of the People; and as they could not find then an House of Commons to
restore the Church-Land; so it will as hardly be got now, for restoring the
Religion.

The Reflection he makes on the Queen-Regent of Scotland for breach of Promise,
comes after examination of her History, and the Transactions of her Reign; in
which she was then but a Princess subordinate, to the Criminating of those her
very accusers; and the substance of it, sincerely this: After the death of
Cardinal Spotswood l. 2.
Beaton (who by the way was as barbarously murdered;) the sufferings of some
persons The Burning only of Mills; an old Priest; vid. Dr. B's 2. Vol.
for Religion, which himself from his function in the Church, had too Zealously
set a foot, many of the Commonalty began to Conspire against the Government;
and at last Seven or Eight of the Nobility, took upon them to make an Act of
Reformation: I confess had it been done in a more Parliamentary way, it might
have been more Authentic: this Queen-Regent was so far from proceeding against
them as Criminals, which doubtless she might have done, it being a manifest
Usurpation, if not plain Rebellion; that she gave a favorable ear to their
proposals, though the Clergy that were then Established, you may be sure persuaded
her to the contrary; she offered all things to be redressed in a Parliamentary
way; but Zeal being seldom attended with the greatest Prudence and
Deliberation, they fell into open Ryots before she could find a way to please
them; disturbed a Procession, to which her self was present; demolisht
Monasterys, pulled down Images, and overturned Altars; till at Perth they
appeared in open Rebellion, and up in Arms; what promises the Queen there made,
are as well known, as the manner how she was forced to make them. They
threatened her, if she would not accept of their Accord, Vid. also Foulis
History.
or did ever violate and break it, they would join unanimously to depose her;
Knox the Great Incendiary setting them on, and made them confederate into a
perfect League: and I believe this too was as absolute a Power as was ever seen
in Scotland, or into the Low Countries, Vid. Reflect. Parag. 4.
sent from Spain. After this pacification at Perth, the Lords of the
Congregation, who were always the first in the field convene their forces again
at Coupers-Moore; Besiege the Town of Perth, force it to surrender, sack Abbys,
subvert Monasterys, and sacrilegiously spoil all that was sacred; and all this
without any regard of any Duty to their Sovereign, or Reverence to their GOD.

The strictest of our Casuists, even in a common person ever resolved all
obligations void, that are occasioned by terror and Constraint, and the Dr.
need not have recourse again to the society; I know the lewdness of some
Matchiavel and Hobbs.
Politicians have extended the Obligations of Kings and Princes to a greater
latitude from their public Concerns, than in Conscience can be allowed to
Common Subjects: I am so far from that Sacrilegious thought, that I think the
Sacred, and exalted Characters they bear, obliges them only more highly; and
that to a stricter Observance, though still where Subjects cannot be said to sin,
it is hard to make our Princes Peccant; why does not the Dr. prove that this
Regent, or her Daughter the real Queen did break their promises too, when they
assumed their just Authority, after they had both been so injuriously brought
to renounce it; but in this very case the Reflector had better spared his
Animadversion, since it was one of the Articles too at Edinburgh, that there
should be no injury done to the Catholic Churches, which the Queen complained
of, was as soon violated; but since nothing will please some People, but
arguments, such as the Schools call ad hominem; nor even those neither, when
the man's mind is altered; does the Dr. think, that if King Charles the First,
had been forced to the Nineteen Propositions, to the utter Subverting of the
Church of England, it would by their Casuists have been adjudg'd an
Indispensable Obligation, they could not think it so in the case of the
Covenant, which the King (to whose memory the Dr. has such a Kindness) even in
those Countries is said to have taken. But to see how these faithful Reformers
dealt with their Queen, that must be upbraided for the violating of her Faith.
After they had been the occasion of breaking some of those Accords (for which
none but their Sovereign, it seems must suffer;) they left this Queen so little
power to break her promise to them in matters of their Religion, that she had
none left to maintain her own; for at a Conference at Preston she desired only
the celebration of the Mass in the place where she resided, and even that was
denied her. But to go further yet; though Allegiance be a sort of Faith too, and
a most profound promise, which either the Municipal Law requires us, or our
Birthright commands us to obey, that being also an old Oath observed in our
Court-Leets, if we were not tied to our more modern ones, made since for some
more Designing Ends; (setting aside those slight obligations to their
Sovereign) they consulted for such Oracles of the Law, those Reformers of the
Gospel, Knox, and his followers, about the deposing of this Queen from her
Regency; insomuch, that Spotwoods Hist.
this Reverend Author, a Metropolitan in this Church established, honestly
represents it as a Scandal to the very Reformation; they burlesqu'd the very
Bible, to place the Power in the People; so that if their Religious
Interpretations of the New Testament were not more agreeable to the Truth, than
their political Constructions upon the The Cases of Acha. and Macha. Iehu, and
Ierom. Cited then by Willock. and Knox, for deposing of the Queen. Ibid. Lib. 3.
Old, Protestants would be ashamed of the very Doctrines they professed; they
deposed this Queen Regent with a Iure Divino, and the Prince instead of that
was denied to have any at all; and to save the Dr. another Reflection, the Case
was the same here, as if She had been an absolute Queen, themselves
acknowledged it in the very Fact, for the other being out of their hands, they
were forced to have recourse to another Principle of Democracy to proceed upon,
By Virtue of that Authority of their Queen in France, with which She had never
yet empowered them; they deposed that Queen-Regent in Scotland, which Her self
had authorized; and this perhaps might be truly called the Courting of a
Commonwealth Party; but if that will not serve the Turn, it is as well known
their Hereditary Queen was served so too; it is too much to upbraid a Princess
with a Breach of Promise to such Subjects who violated almost all that was
Sacred, and only to sack the Town wherein their Sovereign resided, turned their
very Temple into an Armory, and Magazine, made the Church truly Militant, and
their Doctrine in the literal Sense, an Evangelium Armatum; but yet to add after
all this Dr. B's Aspersions, Lib. 3.
the better Authority of a Bishop of his Church; he that writes the History of
it, gives this Regent a more agreeable Character, and honestly represents Her
as one that avoided always giving any Occasion to those Troubles of the
Kingdom, That her Dexterity was chiefly in Composing the Tumults, Vid.
Spotswood. Lib. 3.
and pacifying the North, and that She was the greatest Lover of Justice and
Equity; and condemns mightily the History of Knox, from whose Work our Author
borrowed the Blemishes that he has cast upon Her, and who in abusing of his own
Prince and Country, cannot have better Associates, than Burnet and Buchanan.
This habitual Excellencies of our Adversary, consisting so eminently in the
Defamation of Princes, and especially his own, I wonder how his Hereditary
Queen of Scotland could escape him; and that the Breach of Promise had not
brought about all her Misfortunes too: by his way of writing, he had not been
bound to consider, That when She was coming over from France, though so solicited
by the Queen of England, She would not ty her self to any Promissory
Obligations to confirm any of the former Ratifications, and so justify Her
Rebellious Subjects, which She told to Throgmorton for a Message to his
Mistress, and it is to be wished for the Credit of our English Nation, and the
Protestant Religion, that That Princess had kept Her Promises too with the
Queen of SCOTS.

SECT. VII.
AS for the Politics of France, Reflections page 3.
as they make a Book by themselves, so this Author might have omitted them for
any Argument they are against mine; for in that I had observed the great
difference that there is Vid. Parl. Pacific.
in the Constitution of that Government, and our own; the vast Disparity
between the Temper of the Two Princes, that at present govern: the Multitude,
and mighty Majority of Catholics in the One, and of Protestants in the Other;
these sort of Suggestions with sober Men, and unprejudiced, may be so
prevalent, as to satisfy them, that a Protestant Persecution is not so soon set
afoot here, where we see even those that fly from it there so graciously
received, and by the supreme Authority more especially provided for; let but
Dr. B 's. Concessions that secure the Vid. Reflect. Parag. 4.
Grisons, the Switzers, and some Principalities in Germany take place, and from
his own Arguments they are safe, since the Want of Power, and the Circumstances
of Affairs will prevent any Danger.

The Massacre of Paris the Dr. knows was by most of the Roman Catholics
condemned, and the truest and best Account we have of it, is from one of their
own Authors, and of that Religion too; it was, as from him will appear, the
deplorable Effects of a long Civil War, and the passionate Revenge that was
coveted by some great Persons; with an eternal Animosity between the Two
Houses; that inspired them first with such Bloody Thoughts, which afterward was
turned against the Protestants in general, and like a Flame, dilated it self
into Destruction before it could be stopped: The Occasions of this vast Effusion
of Blood, the Dr. will repent that ever he touched upon, and even against my
will has forced me to repeat; it will be none of the greatest Credit to their
Reformation in France, to recapitulate the manner of its carrying on, and we
had better be contented with its Establishment, than examine the manner how it
came to be thus established; but since by his unjust Reflection, Princes and
their Religion; their Sacred Person, and Christianity it self is brought to
suffer; I must confess it has extorted from me that Truth, which from the
Circumstances of our Affairs, and in kindness to some People, I could have
sooner concealed: The Dr. must know then that I will not Justify Kings, and
Countries, just as he Libels; them only with a Reflection; but as the forgoing
Defenses I have made, are founded upon their Epitomy, and impartial Histories,
and Matter of Fact; so he will find perhaps France too, may much in the same
manner be defended? we shall not have recourse to their Antiquated Reformers,
A* D. 1250.
those of Waldo, or the Albigenses, though shedding of Blood was brought up in
their time too, when with no little Barbarity countenanced by the Earl of
Toulouse, they basely murdered their Viscount in the City of Beziers, dashed
out the Teeth of their Bishop, and almost his Brains too, to whom his own
Church could hardly be a Sanctuary; for which Insolences, to give it the
softest Term, (and as Protestant Authors Dr. H.
say, many more of the same sort) Lewis the Ninth, was necessitated by force of
Arms to suppress them; of a long War, and the much Blood that it cost; the
Catholics alone, cannot with any Justice be brought to bear the blame, since
there were no promises then made by the Prince, nor any Society to teach him
Reserves.

The times we shall touch upon, were when Luthers Opinions first took place
there, but not without as great a disturbance to the State; A. D. 1517.
for Innovations though introduced for improvement, and Reformation; must
unavoidably create Troubles and Confusions; nay, though there be nothing really
new, but only some alteration of Old Customs, by bare Omission; and receding
from former Opinions hitherto received; these sorts of Mutations, being looked
upon as Novel, attract the consideration of those whom it may Concern; forms
imediately a Party or a Sect, which sets up in opposition to that which is
Established; and political bodies, like to those that are truly natural; having
this common principle, to endeavor for their own preservation, there must
unavoidable be great conflicts between that Party that would retain its Power,
and that which in spite of it would aspire to it: our Henry the Eighth in's
Reign, the first great Example amongst us, of such a scene of Change and
Animosity, did himself best experience and describe it too; and had some
occasion to say, that some peoples standing so stiff to their old Mumpsimus,
and others so Zealous for their new Sumpsimus, had occasioned a great deal of
confusion in his Kingdom; and I think so too, though himself too was the most
improper person in the world, to pass the Animadversion; for certainly, if any
Party can be answerable, for the Ill consequences, that attend an Alteration,
though the pretense be never so good, it must in Justice be charged on that which
gives the occasion to the Change; there can be no Innovation either in a Church
and State, without Invading somewhat of a right, either of Antiquity, and
Prescription; Possession and the Law: now I never met with a Legislator yet,
but what did allow him to be always in the wrong, that invaded another man's
Right; and the Notion we have got in our Noddles of our Parliamentary power
being able to do all this, and almost any thing; I believe some people will at
present be loath to allow, though very well pleased with the Latitude it took in
our Original Reformation; our Common Law did ever justify a Layman in the
defense of his Inheritance, and his House; and if I mistake not, our Magna
Charta made That So that his relying on that Charter for the present Church,
does it the greatest disservice. Vid. Apolog.
Church to have her Privileges and Patrimony too, and provides especially that
they be kept unviolate; when a strong man Armed keeps his Palace, his Goods
are in peace; but when a stronger man shall come upon him, and overcome him, he
takes from him all wherein he trusted, and divides the Spoil, and I wish I
could not apply it here to the Revenues of our Church. And this, perhaps you will
find was like to have been the Case in France too: Francis the First of that
Kingdom, having a mind to be Famous, took the wisest way to make himself so; by
sending abroad for Men of Learning, whose Pens might transmit his Fame, with
more advantage to Posterity; expecting I suppose, no Authors, could then be met
with, that would write the Memoirs of their Monarch only to vilify him to
Future Ages: this encouragement, you may be sure, drew a great concourse from
all Countries, upon promise of being incorporated too, into a University at
Paris; Luther was then a Reforming in Germany, where already they had The P.
Palatine from Luther to Zuing. from Suing. to Luther, etc.
fallen out amongst themselves, as well as with the Emperor: He takes this
occasion to send Bucer, and some of the best of his followers thither, to
propagate the Doctrine; where for about ten Years they Flourished, under the
countenance of the Kings Margueret de valoys.
Sister, and Wife to the King of Navar, who, you may be sure, could have no
kindness for the Pope, that had deprived her Husband; but the troubles these
Innovations created to the Kingdom, and the contumacious carriage, and attempts
they showed against the Church, from the Countenance of that angry Queen,
provoked the King so far, that even her Power could not protect them from
feeling his Resentment; so that by several Edicts their Preachers were expelled,
and the name of Luther very nearly lost and exstinguish'd; but Calvin comes on
and had better success; for he being so debonair, as to be able to write to
them in French; their own idioms, and the Vulgar tongue, and it could not but
tickle the common sort, from hardly understanding it, to be made Judges in
Religion; so that all his doctrines could not but go down, as indeed they did;
and spread so fast, that Hen. the Second was alarmed at it, as any Prince would
to find a Party become so formidable, as to oppose the Church that was then
established by Law: This made him endeavor to suppress them. Amidst these
Troubles the King dies, and the Minority of his Son Francis soon raised them
again to their former Vigor, and that the whole Kingdom did afterward
sufficiently feel; for in this Conjuncture, the Greatness of the House of Guise
animating that of Bourbon to Rebel; the Duke of Vendosme, 1559.
and Prince of Conde disgusted and slighted, drew in the Two Chastilions,
Admiral Coligny, and Mr. D' Andilot; these discontented Courtiers Consulting
together, found no expedient so agreeable to promote their Designs, as the
drawing in of the Hugonots into the Conspiracy, and by making themselves the
Head of them; and though the Duke de Vendosme did for a long time dislike it;
it was so carried on by Conde, Coligny, and his Brother, that in short, the
Hugonots were drawn in to Unite, and League themselves under the Princes of
that House; and this is that League or Union; (our Author shall call it which
he pleases) that by me was plainly meant, into which the Protestants entered;
and not that of the Papists which was long after; and I wish Dr. B. only more
foresight, when he would Libel Vid. Reflect. parag. 4.
and Invade my Sincerity, they raised Men, Moneys, and Ammunition, come to
Blois, with Petitions in one hand, and Swords in the other, with an intent to
seize the King and Queen, and put the Guises to the Sword; this would have been
a little Massacre too; but the Court having intimation of it, Vid. Heylin's
History of Presbyt. l. 2.
was removed to the strong Castle of Amboise; there they come too, to pursue
the design; but the D. of Guise, being made Lieutenant, ordered the matter so,
that they were all routed, and Renaudy the chief of the Rebels killed: Mark,
that this business of Amboise is by Meteren, whom our Author admires so much,
as to quote none other, made only a matter of Petitioning of unarmed People,
where it is plain, that though the Petitioners went into the Castle without
Arms, their armed men attended them to the Gates, and were afterward by the
Duke of Guise defeated, and some Protestant writers can magnify the Clemency
of the King to the Prisoners, and the discreet temper of the Guises.
this, though of their own seeking, set all the rest of the Neighboring
Provinces in a flame; they seized upon Catholic Churches by force, which if
Calvin himself could call rashness, the Romanist's might well Rebellion, the
same outrages they committed at Avignon; so that at an Assembly at
Fountainbleau, it was thought best to make some favorable Edict in their
behalf; but this, I hope will not excuse them from the blood that was spilt
before, or the Insurrection that was made, since they prided themselves in it,
and gloried in the Consternation they had cast on the Kingdom; and without
considering their Obligation to the Edict, presently after, concluded to seize
upon some of the most considerable Towns in France, and even Paris it self, to
depose the Queen, remove the Guises, and get Navar, and Conde to be Governors
to the KING: This Plot was carried so far, that they mutined in most Towns
against the Magistrates; and the Prince almost had made himself Master of
Lions; but his Project being discovered, he was made Prisoner at Orleance, his
process formed, himself condemned, and had as certainly been executed too, had
not Francis the Second at the same time died, and so altered the Constitutions
of the State, and the Measures of the Court; for the Queen Her self now began
to be as much afraid of the growing Greatness of the Guises, comes to an
Agreement with the King of Navarr, that She should be Regent, and himself
Lieutenant of the Realm, that all Prisoners for Religion should be released,
all Prosecution forborne; but these Favors to these Reformers made them more
rebellious; insomuch, that they set upon the CATHOLICS at their Sacrifices,
pulled them out of their Pulpits; insomuch, that at last the King of Navarr
could not find in his heart any longer to defend them; and so it was resolved
in a general Assembly at Paris, that their Ministers should be expelled; and
none but the Catholic Religion allowed; after this they prevailed at last at
10 Aug. 1561
Poissy for a Dispute, though the Council of Trent was then a foot for deciding
any Differences, which as fairly as it is represented, and perhaps impartially,
by Father Paul; and as foully by some that were more zealous and concerned; yet
certainly was a much better expedient for settling the Disputes in the Church;
then a private Assembly amongst themselves, where the Objection of pact,
partiality, contrivance; the Clamours against that Council must needs with
Aggravation recoyl upon themselves; but the Result of this Divinity -
Disputation was what usually attends such Polemical Debates, like a trial of
Skill, both sides boasted they had the best; but certain it is the King of
Navarr, upon seeing the Differences among the Reformed; some favoring the
Augustan, others the Helvetian Confession, was the more confirmed in the
Catholic Faith: but the other side by their Boastings growing so popular,
insomuch, that it was thought dangerous almost to disturb them, another Edict
was granted or forced for a Pacification, which juncture of Affairs made the
cunning Queen fall to favoring of them too; that even as the sense of a
Protestant Author observes, a dignified Member in the Church of England, this
Prosperiny of the Reformation was the Cause of all the Miseries and Misfortunes
that befell the Kingdom of FRANCE, to the Ruin almost of the Realm; their
increasing in strength, increased so far the Power of the Prince of Conde, that
his former Partner, the King of Navarr, made no Figure at all, which made him
call in the Duke of Guise for his Assistance; and the Duke coming up, by the
way, a Fray was commenced, by some of his Servants at a Protestant Sermon; the
Duke coming to interpose, and part, was wounded by them himself, which so
enraged some of his Soldiers and Followers, that about Sixty People were
killed, the rest put to Flight; their Ministers being much of Dr. Burnet's
Make, gave this out as a Design, and in all their Representations made it a
Massacre; and for this occasional Fray, the most furious Outrages must be
justified, Monasteries pulled down, Altars and Images defaced, and the whole
Land filled and polluted with blood; and it may be also observed here, that
this too is made by Meteran a designed Slaughter; and that the Duke came
purposely to disperse and destroy them; Vid Lib. 1. Page 28, 29. Turbat,
trucidat, fugiatque
but this Author confessing in his Preface his Prejudice against this most
Catholic cause; it had been more consistent with our Authors sincerity in
these Matters not to have meddled with him.

And now both Parties labor to keep or get the KING into their Power; the
Prince of Conde took Orleance, and the Catholics the KING, and the Protestants
in their New Conquest, Spoil all the Churches in the Town, but upon none more
furious than that of St. Cross, as if the Badge of their Profession were the
Scandal of Christianity; then this Religious Violence must be justified with a
Manifesto, criminating the Catholic Lords for detaining the King and Queen,
when both of them declared they did them no Violence, but assisted them with
their Service and Duty; though the forementioned Author in the same place
represents the Queen in the name of the young King, writing Letters to Conde,
that they were under Restraint and Confinement, and that he should come in and
relieve them, when it is known too, that She exhorted them to come in and
return to their Obedience; and so far complying they were, that the Duke of
Guise offered himself to a voluntary Exile, if they would but return, as the
Queen desired, to their Obedience; and for that they had their Pardon offered
and Favor too; but for all this, the Reformers go on, seize most of the chief
Towns, sack the Churches for Silver for their Mint; and thus defaced, made them
fit for their Stables and Magazines; insisting upon insolent Demands, they were
declared Traitors if they did not desist by such a day: The Queen that had no
such abhorrence of them before, now detested them, and began to think how She
might break and dissolve them; for this She prevails with the Constable, and
Duke of Guise, to go and retire from the Court; they so did, and Conde having
promised the Queen to return to his Obedience if ever they did so, was now as
much confounded at their unexpected Retreat, advised with his Casuists, the
Calvanist Doctors what to do in the case, who honestly told him, That he having
made himself Head of their Union and League, no Obligation could bind him to
any Promise; that Promises were not to kept that did hinder the Preaching of
the Truth; the Queen not bringing over the King to him as She promised; he was
bound to keep none of his Promises to Her, and so could not be said to violate
his Faith: These I think are Promises too, not very well kept, or as ill
expounded; the Dr. might spare us for it some of his Animadversions on the
Reserves of the Society, and the keeping no Faith with Heretics, for they
found out the best expedient of Aequivocation, that the Duke might seem to keep
his Promise, they ordered him to meet the Queen, and surrender himself; but
withal, that the Admiral by Ambuscade should be ready, and surprise him, and so
bring him back to the Camp. They resolved it too, that for the Reformation
sake, no regard was to be had to their Country, and so invited in our English
Aid of Queen Elizabeth, who had nearly made her self Master of Normandy. About
this time the Duke of Guise was treacherously murdered by Poltrot, one of the
Reformers that had insinuated himself into his Service and Family; and after
another Edict granted in their Favor, they tumult again to come up to the
Pacification of January, and so fall again to their seizing of Towns, and
overturning of Churches; the zealous Queen of Navar encouraging them so far,
that at Pamiers, Magis de Valor.
on a Corpus Christi Day, upon a solemn Procession, they put themselves in
Arms, fell upon the unarmed Catholics, made a great Slaughter among the
Churchmen; 1566. 1567.
these escaping with impunity, encouraged the like Bloodshed in several other
places; this may be called a little, though not such a famous Massacre; and this
day of Corpus Christi almost as dreadful as St. Bartholomew; which from the
abhorrence I have of both, I can hardly think that Providence could permit such
severe Retaliation: and to match the Dr's Observations on the deposing Power;
about that time, a Book came out, and was published by them, maintaining it
lawful to kill the King if he turned an Idolater, and was followed by the most
Antimonarchical Pieces, such as I am sure the Society never penned, or ever
saw: and some Catholic Writers assert from the Confession of Prisoners that
were racked, that they once had a Design to kill the King and Queen, and place
the Crown on the Head of Conde; which from the partiality of the Authors, and
the extortion of the Evidence; and our Charity to the Hugonots, we will hope to
be False, and rather disbelieve: After all these Revolutions of Revolt and
Pacification, they join at last with the Rochellers to maintain the War, when
other Towns had submitted to Peace; after all this Obstinacy, can their Kings
be condemned for not keeping their Edicts, which themselves would never observe
and obey: All foreign Forces were invited in, to the hazard of the whole
Kingdom; and even our Queen Elizabeth a second time prevailed upon to succor
them after they had betrayed her in the First; yet such was her Zeal or
Interest of State, that She could never deny assistance to any of her Dutch,
french s^ors.
Neighbors, when in Arms against their Prince; but this to France proved very
unlucky, for besides her Charges, and being beaten out of Normandy by those She
had befriended; they sent her back the Plague for the Service She did them in
the Civil War, I will not say a just Reward, since it fell upon a People, for
whose Prosperity I had rather pray; but it must be remarkable, though we may
not call it a Judgment, for She had a League with the King of France at the
same time, and which She had sworn too not long before; when She lent Money,
Men, and Arms, to his Subjects to fight against him, but it was not to be
called a Breach of it, because it must be supposed that the Forces of the
Reformed were only raised to Fight for his Service, and the true Religion,
though against his Person, Crown and Dignity; this Distinction I think must
have in it some favor too of the Mental Reserve, and be an Instance of another
Promise that was not very well kept.

In short, with this Assistance they held out a long War, which ended at last
in the Death of the Prince of Conde, at the Battle of Iarnar, and let the World
judge whither the Condemning the Admiral, and Confiscating his Estate for
Rebellion was just; after this, there continued a dissembled Reconciliation on
both sides, such an one as the most open Hostility had been less dangerous,
which afterward that dismal 1572.
Day of Death and Marriage did discover, some zealous on the Catholic side
will tell us this Tragedy was Acted only to preserve them selves, that a Plot
of the Hugonots was found out, for which purpose Edicts and Proclamations were
published, and Meddals stamped for the Deliverance; which whether only to
palliate so many Murders, or that those who had all along been so restless, had
further Machinations, must be left as a secret to the Searcher of Hearts: Most
certain it is, it was more Cruel and Universal than that by the Protestants at
Pamiers; the greatest Dangers could never justify so black a Deed, and Fate
seemed to Revenge the Effusion of so much Blood in that of the KINGS, who
poured out his own, and his Soul together, in some Two Years after: From this
abstracted Narrative will appear to all impartial People, what was the
Original, what occasioned the Continuance, and what promoted the end of all
this bloody War; it is hard that Catholics should be condemned alone for it,
and their Princes upbraided for those Transactions, which some Dr. H.
Protestants have looked upon as the very Scandal of the Reformation: And from
hence will appear too his Sincerity, as I observed before, how disingenuously
the Dr. would fasten upon my meaning, his own Malice and Mistake, as if I had
taken the Holy League of the Papists, for that which these Protestants entered
into so long before: If he will Quarrel with me for the Word, we will not call it
a League, but an Begun in Francis 2 d. Reign, 1559.
Union of the Protestants under the Prince of Conde, begun about Twenty Year
before the The other in Hen. 3 d. about 1579.
League of the Papist under the Duke of Guise: It Is plain, that I referred to
this, and the Dr. in his Chronology as is much out now, as Mr. Varillas.

Prepossession and Prejudice, whether the result of Education, Interest, or
Religion, are all the same Inconsistencies with the Faithfulness of an
Historian, and which in these Relations I have wholly abstracted; and taken
these short Extracts from the comparing the different Complexions of Catholic
and Protestant Writers; for the Light of Truth is so much a Spark too, that it
is best Struck from the most solid and disagreeing Bodies, and is the sooner
discovered from such a Collision; and such is my Charity too, that whatever
were the Faults of the First Reformers in France, which themselves must own
were too many, it can by no means justify the furious Proceedings against them
at present, either with prudence or safety from the Maxims of the State, or any
great Credit to the Doctrines of this Gallican Church; for as it cannot be
supposed but that any Government Established will endeavor to Vid. Dr. B's.
Preface to Lactant. p. 47.
suppress all growing Opinions in their Original Productions, especially,
should the Novelty, or but supposed Innovation threaten, not only the Religion
of the State, but even the Subversion of the Constitution of the Government it
self, as we see it did in this Kingdom, and in the Low Countries, as hereafter
will appear was actually completed; so a general Indulgence is as naturally
requisite, where such different Sentiments have prevailed, and for a series of
Time been settled and confirmed, especially, where the Professors of such a
different Faith have comported themselves so long with all deference to the
civil Magistrate, and even to the support of the Crown; and it is far from
Reason and Justice, a Vengeance peculiar and assumed only by the Almighty
Judge, to visit to the Third and Fourth Generation: Imputation of Guilt was
never transferred but in Original Sin; and those unfortunate Calamities, that
by the Reformation were occasioned, can no more warrant that King's
Persecutions, than they could excuse our Charity to those that he persecutes.

SECT. VIII.
WE will examine now the last Instance of his famous List, which he concludes
with a Remark, taken from the Revolt of the Low Countries; which, if the Terms
of their own Historians may be allowed us, we must still call so; and what with
our Adversaries own Authority, we shall ex Confesso conclude, that Vid.
Praeface to Lactant, ut supra.
those Severities were the more excusable, because these Reformations were
looked on (as indeed they were) a Revolt then made from established Laws; the
Doctor's Allegiance may be so far transferred, as in true Fidelity, to falsify
for them Matter of Fact; and in an History of his own assure us they were never
Subjects to Spain; but it is more than METERAN, or GROTIVS have done yet. Their
Author that gives us the Account of their Country in French, confesses how
Charles the Fifth resigned them to his Son, in these Terms; Ie vous supple de
luy obeir, de retenir la vieille Religion Orthodoxe.
The kindness that I have for that Kind Country of the Dr's, I confess is no
more than what I have ever had to most Republics, and Commonwealths, that is,
to think the Constitution of their State to be the result of some Revolt and
Defection from their Ancient Prince, and their Lawful Lord; and that, though we
could not trace in History their Beginnings, and date the Epoche of their
usurped Government and Authority; an Imperfection, from which perhaps, that
complete, and celebrated, and most ancient Aristocracy of Venice, will hardly
be defended, though it retains still the shadow of that more Imperial Sway,
from which their Aborigines might be said to Revolt, or by expulsion from their
Country fall into: but the Defense of this so criminal Expression, we shall
refer to it is proper place: The Dr. at present is in his own Province, and
affords us what is still his Kindness to Crowned Heads, a better Subject to
defend, and that is King Philip the Second, from the Calumnies of an injurious
Character that would defame him; for the Foundation of which Reproach, or the
unreasonableness of it, there can be no more fair and candid Procedure, then to
refer you, as in the former Essays to to the rest before, to some short
Representation of Matter of Fact.

It is known then, and beyond Dispute, that the Belgic Provinces in former
times were first united under the Dominions of the Dukes of Burgundy, and from
them by lineal or lawful Descent devolved to the Kings of Spain: after they
came into their Power, they were all priviledg'd so far, that there was no
great need to fear they should fall under Oppression; and the miserable
Condition, as the Dr. makes it, of absolute Slaves, so long as by their
Obedience they only continued good Subjects: To tell us of their Privileges
under the Goths, Vandals, and Gauls, their barbarous and confused Constitution,
even About a 1000 Years agon, about An. 860.
before their Counts, so long before the Emperor Lewis the Second had regulated
and civilized them with such a Title; and that this Philip the Second forfeited
his Right, for not maintaining them; is no more than if His Majesty were now to
forgo His Three Kingdoms, for not observing the Rites and Rules of our old
Druids, and the obsolete Customs of our antiquated Britains: The Notion is so
extravagantly wild, that with sober men it will pass only for the fancy of some
of their First Governors and Legislators, who had no other Name but that of
Forresters. Yet this Notion was entertained so far, and mixed with several other
pernicious Principles, truly Democratical; that it served to dress up that Vid.
Grot. Annal. Lib. 3.
Oration which was afterward made in their Famous Senate by themselves
assembled for the renouncing their Allegiance, and deposing of the King of
Spain; which whether an Act of Justice, or popular Outrage, from the subsequent
Discourses will appear. Under the Dukes of Burgundy we do not find them
tumultuous, though perhaps, As in the Time of Char. the Hardy.
discontented, when under any great or more frequent Contributions: Charles the
Fifth was too fortunate, and powerful to fear them; and no foreign Forces were
then the Grievance, though most of all by him maintained; he knew his absolute
Power, as well as Philip that followed after: In matters of Religion, and
Reformation, though he was a little more moderate, it must be remembered the
Reformers were then also more few, yet finding some Disturbance, he published
an Edict against Innovation there, about the time that Luther's was condemned
in Germany, he finding according to his old Aphorism, and Opinion, Caesari
persuasum; proculcata Sacerdotum reverentia ne ipsi quidem mansurum Obsequium,
Grot. id. L. 1.
That those who had no Reverence for the Church, would think they owed as little
Obedience to himself, their KING; this put him indeed upon some Execution of
the Laws, as Grotius observes, but with such ill success, that many times, when
some of Note were brought to suffer, such Multitudes would meet, as with open
Sedition to hinder and oppose it; but the Progress of such seditious
Insurrections by his presence, and residing with them was soon interrupted; but
when Philip the Second succeeded his Father, and the Fugitives from Foreign
Parts began to fill those of Flanders, the Reformed began to be very powerful
there, and could never be thought good Neighbors (if ever there were any
Insurrections) to the Church Government that there was then Established, and to
which they had expres'd so great an Aversion: Philip the Second foresaw this,
and fearful of what followed, was forced to leave those Foreign Soldiers (as
he told them) for their Defense, but indeed for his own; but for all this
supposed strength, they finding he had left too the Government in the hands of
a Woman, they soon discovered an apparent Weakness, and one of their Nobility,
then the greatest Subject, and without any Detraction from his mighty Deeds, as
greatly discontented too, whom out of Reverence to his Royal Dust, and respect
to his Noble Line, we will leave without a Name, thinking himself as Vid.
Heylin's History of Presbyter, page 86. L. 3. Edit. 2 d. London, 72. Vid. Fam.
Strad. Lib. 1. Dec. 2 d. Grot. Annal. Lib* 1. Decessu Philippi, de summa
praefectura certatum est, sed omissus uterque; perpetuis simultatibus Rempub.
distraherent.
injuriously disappointed of the Government of those Provinces, which upon the
King's returning into Spain, he had promised to himself, and indeed from his
Merit and Desert might very well expect, was animated so far as to think upon
an expedient for the heightening of his Power to make himself Head of the
Protestant Party, which upon the absence of their King, began to multiply
apace: for this purpose he Consults with the Counts of Egmont, and Horn, about
redressing some Grievances that were necessary for them to be eased of, and
that was first the three thousand Spanish Soldiers, though so far from being
any thing dangerous to the People, that they themselves had the Command of
them: They petition for their Removal, the King grants graciously their
Request, but withal thought fit to detain them there, until the new Number of
Bishops that he had instituted, were settled for fear of any further
Insurrection; but they influence the People so, that no Contribution could be
got to pay them; and the Duchess of Parma now empowr'd by the King, transports
them all away for Spain: This one would think should have been sufficient to
pacify them, but no sooner was this Grievance redrest, but Discontent like an
Hydra from her Amputation, rises with another Head; Granvel then the greatest
Minister of State, was then as great a Grievance too, and from his single
Person, they now apprehended more danger, than from the whole disbanded Army: A
Person from whose Worthiness and Abilities to govern, even Vid. Heyl. Histor.
Presb. Lib 3. Sir W.T's Observations. Hug. Grot. l. 1.
Protestant Authors and his Enemies dare not detract; his removal is obtained
too; but the want of him, the Governess soon found when it was too late; for
presently after his dismission, the Tumults began at Tourney, Valenciens, etc.
rescuing of Prisoners; threatening of Magistrates, and at last clamoring against
their new Bishops; though persons all eminent in Learning, and of as excellent
Lives; alarmed with these many Tumults, that like tumbling Waves, tossed, or
tumultuated too upon one another; the King of Spain (as even an Historian of
our Reformation too, if we may compare his sincerity with Dr. B, does honestly
observe) did then first send to his Sister, the Governess, Dr. H. Hist. ibid.
to see his Father's Edicts severely executed, and to command a strict
observance of the Canons of the Council of Trent. Encouraged even under these
severe Injunctions which were more formidably menaced and commanded, than truly
executed, the Lords declaring against it at the Council Table, and the
Governess, with a great deal of difficulty got them past; which when done, the
opposite Party so incensed the People, as to make it almost dangerous to put
them in execution; and the Executive power was soon opposed, when they had
intelligence given them, that the Prince Elector had promised them assistance
if ever it should come to be decided by the Sword; and that they then, soon
made it come too: For presently, they dispersed no less than five thousand
Seditious Libellos proponere tentamenta vulgi. Grotius An. l. 1.
Libels against the Government and the Governess; and open Sedition, when once
it appears bare faced, has no other Helmet of Salvation, but by putting on
complete Armor, and that you shall see they soon did; for immediately, amidst
these Tumultuous Proceedings, nine of the Lords, without any Law or Authority,
no Officers in the concerns of the State, assemble themselves at Breda:
Marnixius, one of the best Abilities among them, makes them subscribe a
Covenant of his own Composing; and so associate themselves with a solemn Oath,
not to desert one another, send it about the several Provinces for
Subscriptions, and some time after make an essay of their Fidelity to one
another, by entering Brussels armed with Swords and Pistols, and Count de
Brederode at the head of them, a Body of two hundred, which now might well be
called Confederates; Grotius himself, as concerned as he is for his Country,
cannot but call it a Conspiracy, though he would excuse them from the Guilt;
diminishes their number, and makes them come unarmed to the Court, Ibid. Lib. 1.
and no further design than the suppressing the Inquisition: Sir W.T. makes
them 200 strong.
the severity of which when laid aside, could never appease them; for by his
own confession, Malorum metum hoc magis attollentes, Obtendant turbas Civiles
partim and ipsi faciunt. Ibid. Grot.
they made their fears greater, than indeed they were; pretended the danger of
Civil Dissentions, and partly created them themselves, make their Marriages,
Feasts, and Assemblies, but so many Meetings of Conspiracy to carry on the
Plot; and when a Commotion was raised among the Common People, came out to
animate it, by showing themselves unable to suppress it. Other Authors that
will speak more liberally, represent these designed Conventions as the deepest
Debauches, to draw in the most Dissolute Rabble, which was accomplished too with
a great deal of Tumult and Acclamation; and so far were they seduced by them,
that all the Declarations of the Governess could never resettle them in their
Obedience; and so far were the Reformed inspired with these Proceedings, that
at St. Omer's they Qui timuerunt hactenus territare incipiunt, says Grotius
himself. Ne Saevitiae quidem in sacerdotes and simulacra divum temperabatur;
eadem in Libros and sepulchra rabie. L. 1.
force all the Doors of Churches and Religious Houses, demolisht Altars,
defaced Shrines, pull down Images, and pursue with the same Zeal all that was
sacred; so also at Ipres, and several other places, expelling the Bishops, and
as if all Learning were Superstition and Idolatry too, sacrificed their books,
and best of Libraries, in the same flame; neither sparing things inanimate, nor
the Unviolable Dust, and Sepulchers of the dead: The Mischief, Sacrilege, and
Murders that were committed at Antwerp, were such, that they seemed to make a
Massacre almost of all that was Sacred; assaulted the Procession and Image of
the B. Virgin upon her very day of Assumption; fall upon them in the Church,
drive out the Catholics, secure the doors, fall to that abominable work of
rooting out Abominations; pull down all the Crucifixions of our Savior, all
the Saints from their Pedestals, deface all the Pictures, and even painted
glass: and that this Zeal against Idolatry, might be sublimated into the
highest Atheism, and lewdest Impiety; the Consecrated Host was taken out of the
Pixes, and trampled upon with their feet; the Wine in the sacred Chalices, most
solemnly drunk off in debauch; and their Holy Oil in derision applied to the
greasing of their Shoes; certainly this was a sort of Zeal that would have
past better in Iapan, and with such Christians as can show more reverence to an
Heathen Idol at Pegu; but this Brutal rage was not confined to the Limits of
the Town, it so spread through the Country, that in ten days time, no fewer
than four hundred Consecrated places, were destroyed or defaced; a Zeal so
truly incensed, that it seemed to delight in flames, especially such as could
consume any Sacred Pile; it seemed to defy any Heaven; and dare all the
Terrors of Hell, and Everlasting burnings. And was it criminal now, and the
Violation of Faith, or breach of Promise in the Prince or Governor, to think of
subduing such Subjects by force of Arms; but no sooner had they intelligence of
such a design; but they managed it so as to be before hand with their King, and
to let the World know they could carry their disobedience further, (since
Rebellion is looked upon as a term too injurious for the Confederates;) they
contrived how to transfer their Allegiance to some Neighboring Princes for
Protection; in order to that, they first erect a supreme Consistory at Antwerp;
and some inferior Judicatories in other Places, and so choose their own
Magistrates, and at last alarmed with the News of their King's coming to give
them a Visit, they were up in Arms before the Governess had got together any
Horse or Foot for to suppress them besides the Train-Bands, they seized upon
several Towns, turn their Canon against the King and his Commission; and all
this before the Duke of Alva was arrived, whose cruel Disposition could not be
the cause of those Outrages and Rebellions, that were committed, and commenced
before his coming: Vid. his Trial.
Mr. Sidney's Papers were never seconded, or outdone in this point, till these
of the Doctor's appeared; so unjustly do some people impute the disturbances in
which those States were involved to the Tyranny of that cruel Man, that all
things were in a Flame before ever he came to his Government, it is true, the
King found that the mildness of the Duchess of Parma could not prevail to
reduce them to Obedience, and so thought it high time to send a more severe
Minister; for Diseases that are desperate, commonly require Remedies as
dangerous too; though I must say as Grotius observes, That had been the season
for Philip himself to have come to suppress them; for such necessitated
Severities are sooner born with, and have better success when they come from
the Prince himself, than from any common Subject, though the greatest Minister of
State, especially when from one that has contracted a popular Odium: The Duke
comes with a powerful Army of good old experienced Soldiers, to restore his
Sovereign to that his Country, which as he had left, so that had almost
entirely deserted him; the Duke seizes two of the chief of the Faction, Egmont,
and Horn; they were Tried, Condemned, and Executed publicly at Brussels,
judicially proscribes the Prince of O --: seises upon his Eldest Son, sends him
Prisoner into Spain, confiscates his Estate, and all this proceeding of
Absolute Power, I conceive, among Civilians, will be still called Law; a
Judicial Process against Disobedient Subjects, for Conjurationis reus est cum
alicujus dolo malo jurejurando quis adactus quo quid adversus rem publicam
facit. D. 48.44.
Conspiracy, Seditiosi sunt* C. 9.30. and 48. qui plebem audent colligere,
cujus dolo malo consilium initum est.
Sedition, Qui in Ecclesia tumultum facit, and ministeria perturbat capitali
supplicio afficiendus, C. 1.12.4.
Sacrilege, and Perduellionis reus est qui adversus principem est Armalus vel
cujus dolo malo contra eum consilium initum est, D. 48.4.11. D. 48.4.1.
High Treason.

These were the Laws by which he was to Govern; these Laws of Nations were then
too those of all the Land; by which, most parts of it at this very time are
governed; and how many of those were violated by that multitude of Tumultuous
People, and whether every one of them was not in the highest manner broken, I
hope, from the foregoing Relations, will appear; not one of these Crimes but
was ever reputed by the Imperial Law, Capital, and no wonder then so many lost
their heads; so general was the Defection, that an incensed King might well
declare, the Provinces had forfeited their Liberty, and almost every Man his
Life: Whatever were the Obligations of the Prince, they themselves had Violated
all the former Pacifications, and indeed, without any regard to the mildness of
the Duchess of Parma: she had got the Soldiers removed, Cardinal Granvell to
be sent away, and connived at their Tumultuous Assemblies, and Religious
Meetings: It Is true, these Pacifications and Condescentions did somewhat
appease them, but no longer till they had an opportunity, and encouragement to
demand greater Freedoms, or Licentiousness; and that offered it self when Lewis
Count of Nassaw was returned from Heydelberg, with assurance that the Elector
Palatin would lend them assistance; for then you see, as in the foresaid
Relation, they fell to Libelling of the Government, the Lords associate
themselves at Breda: Brederode comes in that bold manner to the Court; the
Governess (as she could not well avoid in such a Seditious Juncture) gave them
good hopes that the Emperors Edicts should be moderated, and the Inquisition
taken away, but it was fit the King should be first acquainted with it; but for
this, it seems they would not stay, but run out into all those Extravagant
Mischiefs we have repeated before; so when Egmont was somewhat before this sent
into Spain, to sift the King's Inclinations, and to mollify him: From Grotius
himself, I cannot discover, that the Duchess had therein granted them any
public Edict of Pacification, nor indeed from any other Author: It appears
from all, that she connived at their boldness till better times could come to
suppress it; all that the King told the Count from his Annals, does appear to
be only this, Spem quoque nonnullum fecerat, etc. is all what Grotius says,
Lib. 1. and Meteran-says no more. L. 2. 1565. Grot. Lib. 1.
That there might be some hopes of the moderating the severity of such Edicts;
but it seemed to depend too upon the submissive Comportment of the People, for
whom he expressed a great deal of Affection; but when he received an account of
the several Tumults before recited, and especially the Seditious Carriage of
the Senate of Bruges, who had imprisoned some of his Officers, only for
Executing of his Justice; it was then that he thought them to deserve no mercy,
and so sent to his Sister to let her know all what he had promised Count
Egmont; and that she should see the Edicts of the Emperor, and those of Trent
put in Execution. The Dr. says, King Philip the 2 d. did ratify to Count
Egmont, the Duchess of Parma's Edict of Pacification, if his Friend Meteran
were not mistaken, and all other Authors; the Count's Negotiation in Spain, was
two years before the Pacification at Brussels was penned or heard of; for he
was sent away immediately after Granvel's Removal, in the year 1564/5, and the
Dutchess's Edict bears date 23 d. August 1566; neither is there any mention of
his confirming made, nor could well be, for she sent out to all the Provinces
her Pacificatory Letters by the 26 th. of the same Month; but the Dr. depended
upon the license of a Traveller, and thought no one would offer to go so far as
to disprove him: And the business of Bayonne, that presently ensued, and all
that famous Conference between the two Crowns of France and Spain, for
extirpating the Protestants, has no other foundation, than the Story of the
King of France's confessing it to the Prince of O --: as a Secret when he was a
Hunting; where if we consider what a weakness it must argue in the King, and
the prejudice that might dispose the Prince to such a representation, it being
his interest to make Spain as odious as he could, we may have some reason to
suspend our belief; Grotius and those that have it from Sir W. T. Vid. Meteran
Lib. 2. cum nihil certi de hac re potuerit rescisci multis vana suspicio visa
fuit. An. 1564.
him, have themselves no other foundation for it, but the Princes own Authority
and Confession; it was otherwise received by the World; ( Philip himself not
appearing at it) only for an enterview, for a kind Correspondence between the
Mother of France and her Children, and perhaps nothing but the Duke of Alva's
being present at the Conference, has given occasion to the countenancing the
report of such cruel Intentions, where if a Subject of so great concern to the
two Crowns had been to be debated; it is somewhat probable, the Queen Mother
would have brought with her one of the greatest Ministers of State, and brought
the Duke of Guise to have matched that of Alva, for her Son Charles the Ninth
was too young to be such a Counselor, though if they really had (what is yet
left so uncertain) consulted how to preserve themselves against a growing and
formidable Party, that infested both their Kingdoms, and Praeface to
Lactantius. page 47.
mutually assisted one another, as Conde did the Mutineers in Flanders: It
comes to no more than this, that those two Monarchies like mere natural Bodies,
did Conspire for their own Preservation; for Princes in Prudence are obliged to
preserve a Religion that has been long established in their Dominions; though the
same Policy did at first oblige them to oppose its Establishment: And i will
engage Dr. B. to be of the same mind, when he says, If Persecution can be at
any time excused, it is in the first beginning of Heresies, the Heats that were
raised in the first Formation of the Breach, may take away from the Guilt of
the Sacrifices that were made; but always when Princes meet, especially with
some jealous people, such an interview, though but a Complement, is improved to
an Intreague of State, and their business can be thought no less than
answerable to the great Characters that they bear: I wonder Dr. B. (it being so
much to his purpose, and he so good an Historian) had not stumbled in upon this
piece of Importance, to prove the Perfidiousness of King Philip, who procured
this cruel Conference immediately after Egmont's civil Entertainment; and
besides, it being a business somewhat like the Discovery he has made of the
Negotiation at Dover, he might have had an Opportunity to have vouched it for
his own Original; but after all his smart Animadversions on this King's
Commission, and his bandy'd Observations through all his Papers upon those two
poor Words, Absolute Power; I hope the Dr. will allow us, that it is ill
applied to the Power of Spain; for where any Imperial Law obtains, the Princes
were ever reputed as Absolute, and by the very Constitution of those Decrees,
are absolutely made so; for those tell us, That the For this purpose, Vid. C.
1.14.12. D. 1.4.1. C. 1.23.5.
Prince is ever esteemed both the Maker and Interpeter of all Laws; that which
is his sole Pleasure has the Force and Sanction of a Law, and that it is
equivalent to sacrilege it self to resist it; and to this Absoluteness,
perhaps, the House of Austria has the best of Pretensions, since in that is
preserved the more immediate Right and Succession to those Imperial
Constitutions, and all the poor Remains of the Roman Empire: But why this
bloody Commission should be paralleled with his Majesty's most merciful
Declarations to Scotland, I cannot comprehend, unless the Dr. by tranferring
his Allegiance, has translated his Senses too, and so learnedly confounds a
Liberty of Conscience with the Spanish Inquisition; but Malice, as it will
always make the worst of Applications, so it seldom considers that Inconsistency
that commonly attends them; but since the Dr. has vouchsafed us to quote one
Author for his Justification, among the many Reflections that he makes, and that
is Meteran, It must be known too, that from him alone can never be expected a
most impartial Relation of those Transactions, and that from his own Confession
in the very Preface; for he professes himself to be too True to his Country,
Vid. Praefationem ad Historiam.
and too much an Enemy to the Tyranny of Spain; that he only writes and
rehearses to us most of the Acts of the Reformers and Defenders of his Country:
and that, because he had the greatest Opportunity to Consult and Converse with
them, but still would not be thought to conceal any thing that made for his
Adversaries, (though I think the Injury to the Truth will be still the same,
whether the Author abuses it out of design, or for want of understanding; such
a Writer was a proper instrument in the hand of such a Reflecter; and the
Hatred of the one to the Tyranny of Spain, may come in Competition with the
others Malice to this Absolute Power of Scotland: The Dr. would not have
pardoned us, should we have paum'd upon him the same piece of Partiality, and
taken out our Accounts only from Famianus Strada, for whom I am sure he must
have no great Kindness, being a Member of the Society; but yet in the Relation
that Lib. 2.
Meteran gives us of Count Egmont's Reception; he does not tell us of any
Edict, or Pacification confirmed, but only as Lib. 1.
Grotius tells us, that the King gave him some hopes of Indulgence, which
doubtless was to depend upon their good Behavior; and for the business of
Bayone, represents it (you see) only as the vain suspicion of the Reformers,
which for want of Foundation did as soon vanish: It Is no wonder then he refers
us to Meteran, to judge of the Proceedings of the Duke of Alva, which though
severe in themselves, were but Acts of Justice still, though that when
strein'd, is the highest Injury; the distance of time will not permit us to
examine the critical Minutes of the State, but after so much Insurrection, the
severest Executions, if we respect the political part of Government, may pass
for necessitated Acts, though perhaps sometimes too, they may have as ill
success; but it is no wonder to see men that are seditious themselves, to
animadvert on the Justice of a Nation, after a Rebellion suppres'd: Meteran
calls such an Administration among them, the Council of Blood; and the Dr's
Authority among us has made it the Vid. Reflex. on Varill, 3 d. Tome.
Bloody Campaign. But because in common equity we are bound to carry the Case a
little further, let us see whither, after all their Tumults and Insurrections
that provoked an injured, and incensed KING, to send them such an odious and
severe Minister of State; they did not proceed to far greater Enormities,
against that Subjection they owed to their lawful Sovereign; then himself could
be said to transgress in any irregularities of his Government: whatever were
the Concessions of the Duchess of Parma, (for I do find she was indeed so far
necessitated, as to be brought to Article with them;) they were only Terms, or
good Words extorted from Her by the terror of their Tumults; for Brederode came
so well interested or attended, that she could not but give him good Language,
and a civil Reception; though he had made Her but an ill Complement, and as bold
an Address; also at an other time, when she had assembled her great Council,
they gave out a Report, that if the Governess did not consent to their Demands,
She should immediately see all the Churches in Brussels fired, the Priests
murdered, and Her self imprisoned; So that Her indulging them for the present,
was thought the best expedient: These Disorders were such, for which you may
consult even METERAN himself at Antwerp; Delph, and the Hague, that the
Duchess even then feared the general Defection that followed, (and as he calls
it) Rebellion of all the Country, from a Factious and Seditious Crew, that the
Governess her self was afraid of her Life, was going to leave Brussels, but
being prevailed upon by some of the Lords, who promised to stand by her; She
stayed, though She was told that Night, that there was a Plot to have killed two
of Her Trusty Nobles, and make Her a Prisoner; so that when She writ to the
Lords about an Edict of Pacification, She declares it the Result of Violence,
Violentiae and inevitabilis necessitatis nunc graffantis ratione habita,
Meteran, Lib. 2.
and inevitable necessity; but no one will infer from thence, besides the Dr,
that this Edict for Pacification was to continue, and be a perpetual Indemnity
to all ages for any disorders they should hereafter commit; for she was so
provoked with these Indignities repeated, that She had resolved to suppress
them by Force of Arms, before that Alva was arrived, had several, and good
Successes against them at Lisle, Tourney, and Valenciens, insomuch, that this
progress of Her affairs, and the News of Alva's March, or Arrival, confounded
them all, and put the Confederates into as much Consternation. In short, Alva's
Dr. B. his admired Meteran is forced to confess a bold Conspiracy and Attempt
against Alva, for which there was but one suffered. Nemine eam obCausam praeter
hunc solum poenas passo. Meter. Lib. 3. An. 1568.
Severities were as severely returned by three or four several Invasions, by
the Forces of the Confederates, the Depredations of their Neighbors, and the
United Assistance of some of the Princes of Germany; whatever were their
pretended hardships before, it was no more than what their own Disobedience and
Sedition had deserved; and supposing they had suffered injuriously, that is, by
some excess of Justice; it could no more warrant their incursions into their
own Country of Flanders; Than the Rebellions of Monmouth and Argile could be
justified by their being obnoxious to the King of Great Britain before; but
interest, and opportunity, are too strong Temptations, to come in competition
with Loyalty and Allegiance; Ludowick invades Friesland, Luma seises upon the
Brill, the Prince with his Germans and other Auxiliaries, designing upon
Brabant, was by the Duke of Alva diverted, and forced to retire; but Flushing
following the Fate of the Brill, these Seaport Towns drew after them the
Defection of some of the most considerable Towns in Holland: this success
animated the P. of O. to enter his Country once again; and though his Army was
less, his Success was more; he possessed himself of some of the principal Towns
of Brabant; and because the Dr. delights so much in the dismal Representations
of Popish Cruelties, Vid. Heylin's History of Presby. Lib. 3.
so enraged were these Reformers, that under the Conquest of Luma, none
suffered worse than the poor Priests, they did not only make them die, but in
tortures too, and as if their lives could not appease their deadly Fury, nor
their languishing Deaths defeat their Malice, it was extended even to their
Carcasses too; and their mangled Limbs hung up as bloody Trophies of their most
triumphant Cruelty; and that it may be beyond contradiction, that the
Severities of Alva, were not the sole Cause of their defection, after his
removal, the heat of their fury still continued, as well as before his coming,
the flames of it were broken forth; the many misfortunes, Vid. Strad. Grotius,
Meteran.
and Defeats of their German Forces did not cool it; they Reformed so fast,
till they fell out amongst themselves, tired at last, with their own
Confusions, they fell into the Pacification of Gaunt; that is, they associated
to make Peace among themselves, without any regard, or consideration of their
King, which they seemed to salve afterward with an Explanation, and so by the
name of perpetual Edict, was confirmed by Don John; but all this did not quiet
them, or that Governors easiness and Popular Affectation; they frame an Oath to
renounce all Obedience to him too, from thence proceed to the union of Vtrecht,
though the very Contradiction to that of Gaunt, and then second it with the
deposition of their King, declaring he had forfeited his estate and interest in
the several Provinces; and so out-did the Drs Commission of their Liberties and
Lives: This is a Relation that does not lie for a Cause or Religion, for God,
or Man, but shows how far the enraged Catholics were concerned in the
Rebellion, upon which, the reforming Protestants proceeded to a Revolt, and
entire defection.

I shall not insist on our AUTHORS malicious Application of the Duke of Alva's
Commission; to the Terms of Absolute Power expressed in our KING's Declaration;
it is such a professed Talent of Dr. B's, to make the most odious Comparison of
the King's Proceedings, that People will not be surpised to see him make the
Dukes Reign cruel and bloody, only to represent his own Prince a more absolute
Tyrant. The limitation of the Spanish Monarchy is as much the Mark of our
Authors popular affectation, as the Reflection on our absolute Power, and
indeed he cannot but in common Gratitude be for Courting a Commonwealth; but
this express Proviso in their Constitution, that if the Prince broke such
Limits, they might resist him, was rather a principle of Democracy that was
then zealously contended for the limiting all Monarchies, as well as that of
Spain, published in those Populi ordines jus sibi reretinuisse fraenandorum
principum de jure. Mag. Quest. 6. p. 73. Edit. Frankfort. Intelligimus
magistratus, quasi Regum Ephoros, etc. Vid. Iuni. Brut. vind. contra Tyrannos.
Vid. Also Calvinus Inst. Rex qui pactum violat, etc. hujus faederis seu pacti,
Regni officiarii vindices and custodes sunt. vind. cont. Tyran. Quaest. 4. p.
69.
pernicious Pieces, in those very Times, for that very purpose, in France, in
Scotland, in Flanders, by those very people that made all those Commotions,
though it proceeds upon the most unjustest Principle, of making the same
Persons judge and Party; against the Rules of common Equity, common Law, and
that of all Nations, as in a particular Treatise I Have shown: but I hope it does
appear from this impartial Relation, that the perfidiousness he would have fixed
upon the Promises of the King of Spain, had it been proved, would in a great
measure have been excused by the Provocations of his most disobedient, and
rebellious Subjects: I cannot help it, if History, the most impartial Authors,
and even their own represent it so, without respect to any Religion whatsoever:
Thuanus tells us, That it was partly upon that very Account that Archduke
Matthias deserted them, as well as for the Indignities he had received from
those he had without any return of Gratitude so eminently served; for when he
came to examine their Cause, upon which they had put so good a Color as to
procure some compassionate Assistance, he soon saw how much their injured
Sovereign was abused, and that he could not Cum defectionem ab Austriaca
Familia honest non far poterat; Thuan. Genev. Edit. Tom. 3.540. B.
honestly defend their Defection, and Revolt from their Lawful Lord; Vid.
Grotius Lib. 3. Ut Superiores singulis, ita infra universos, id.
Grotius himself lets us know that they proceeded to the deposition of their
Prince upon these old Principles of the Supreme Authority, being always
radically in the People, that the King was accountable to them, that as he was
above any single Subject, and individual, so he was inferior to them all in
the State Collective, and that they could judge and punish him too; this was
all agreeable to that Democracy they then designed to raise, and the Doctrines
of those Vid. Brutus. Vindiciae contra Tyrannos de jure Magistratus. Eusebius
Philadelphus. Buchana, de jure regni.
pernicious Pens that were at that time employed (as the Dr. is now, for the
Libelling of all Monarchy, and advancing the glorious Cause of a Republic and
a Commonwealth. The modern To Grot. Annal.
Preface to that excellent Author, glories in the Dedication of the Book upon
that bold Attempt of their Ancestors, that could venture upon an Insurrection
against the Power of Spain that had been formidable even to Kings and Princes,
and even his most Admired and Authentic Vid. Lib. 2. Lib. 10.
Meteran is forc d to confess them to have been extraordinary seditious in
their Tumults and Insurrections, and gives us a full Relation of all those
Reasons and Aphorisms, purely Democratical, by which they pretended to justify
the deposing of their King, which are contained at length in that 26. Iulij, A.
D. 1681. Subsign. Joan. Asseliers.
Instrument of defection, Dated from the Hague, the Metropolis of the
Constituted State.

I hope the Dr. does not now think this is in order to the Courting of the
Common-wealth-Party; but if it be taken ill, I do not make my Court better;
they must be angry with their own Authors, or their Ancestors; fall out with
the Truth, or fall foul upon themselves; he is too much a man of integrity to
desire, though it be for a National Concern, that History should be corrupted;
and the vast Reputation, as he tells us, his own has got, I hope was never
acquired by any Falsehood or Forgery: I could have heartily wished he had never
brought us these unhappy Presidents to prove the Perfidiousness of Catholic
Princes, and the lewd Principles of their Religion, since it must so unluckily
lay open the Scandalous Progress of the Reformation abroad, which our
Protestant Authors, and Dignified Churchmen have been themselves blushed at,
and ashamed; and he may seem to deserve as severe an Execration for forcing me
to revive so much of the Faults of the Reformers, the Protestant Church, and
his Mothers Shame, as that undutiful Son that discovered too much of his
Fathers Nakedness; it is to be lamented, to see what dissolute, debauched, and
Atheistical Opinions the Licentiousness of Reforming produced in those
Low Countries we last treated of, that of George of Delph, and Nicholas of
Leyden; Grotius bewails, as produced by this Liberty of the First Reformers;
and this Family of Love that set up there first, were of Opinion, that it was
lawful to deny upon Oath, any thing, before a Person that was not of the same
Family and Society; this is such a Mental Reserve, as the Dr. among the
Jesuits cannot easily discover: It Is to be deplored, as well as admired, and
animadverted on; the Miseries, the Confusions, and the Rebellions that the
Reformation brought with it in all places abroad, where ever it was carried on;
and as great an Enemy as they make the Pope and Society, to all Monarchs and
Sovereigns; the most Antimonarchical Works you see, that ever were published,
did in that very juncture of time appear; neither could it in common policy be
avoided; for the Changes in Church Government, and Religious Worship, being for
the most part made in opposition to the Supreme Authority of the State; the
villifying of that was unavoidable, and the deposing POWER the most politic
Position that could be maintained. Those Innovations that could not be made
with their KING's Consent, were best carried on by that pretty Expedient of
tranferring Allegiance; and when this Philip the second would not allow his
Subjects all the Liberties they asked; they had no other Recourse, but to tell
him, he had forfeited his Right.

SECT. IX.
THe Dr. tells us he could carry this view of History much farther, but I think
it is carried already a little too far for his Credit; for the Faith of Roman
Catholics I am afraid in those times will abide a better Test, than the
Protestants Loyalty, which is easier to be deplored and lamented than disproved
and denied: This Author found himself pressed in the former Treatise with
matter of Fact, where the Protestants in Germany, find at present both Faith
and Protection under Catholic Princes; but that his malice must impute to
their want of Power to do Mischief, Vid. Reflect. Parag. 4.
and the Circumstances of Affairs; this Circumstances of Affairs, I do not see
but may serve our turns here too, and hinder their power of doing Mischief,
since we have the Kings Word there shall be none done, and the PROTESTANT Party
so strong a Circumstance to prevent it.

Vid. Reflect. Parag. 5.
His Propositions, and Expedients of Pension, and Indemnity for the Papists are
pretty projects; and worthy of such an Undertaker; but they would thank him
more, would he undertake too, that when such Laws shall continue in force, they
may not hereafter be put in execution with a Non Obstante even to a Statute of
Impunity, and they be told beside with an Insulting Sarcasm, you are rightly
served; their Pensions will do them or their posterity but little good; when
once they get them again within the praemunire of the Tests; and if the
Legislators chance to have no more Charity for them, than such Reflecters, they
may be hanged by those that are so afraid of burning, ruined with
interpretation, and most constructively destroyed, by those that will be too
willing to void any Law that shall be made for their preservation, (and the Dr.
himself does Menace as much in the very next page) an Act of Oblivion, will be
made truly so, by being it self forgot; so that the sum of this hardiness of
proposals, comes to this handsome, and easy definition; they are always to
continue the condemned Prisoners to the State, to live upon the Basket, and the
favor of a Reprieve.

The Contest for Religion, I confess, is too great; but I can see none that
contend so much to prevail, but such who are so contentious as to depress all
different persuasions, for fear of Usurpation; if the Test is the sole security
against the Catholic Religion; The Doctrine of the Church will much suffer in
having only such a secular support from the State, when even that can hardly
defend it self for establishing such an unreasonable Law, enacted merely by the
contrivance of such that then sat at the Helm, whose Conduct was condemned by
All, whose Proceedings by themselves represented as seditious, and that Zeal
that animated such unjust undertakings, found to have no other foundation, but
upon Falsehood and Perjuries; so that if the Question were impartially put, it
would come to this, whither these Tests ought sooner be repealed, than the rest
of the Penal Laws; they being more eminently framed from mere malice and
mistake; this prevailing Religion, which he would now bring to this very period
of time, has been too long a prevailing to have so short an Epoche for its
commencement and date, and for almost this hundred and fifty year was never
prevalent, and whatever is the Prospect and Face of the State, while the Church
still continues in that station she would be (as she has the best of Securities
from so Gracious a King) and a Toleration Established as well as the Church,
this Protestant Religion will not be so soon prevailed upon, but must needs be
maintained in the mighty numbers of the free Professors of it.

Rest. Parag. 6.
The disservice he would insinuate we have done in putting the Justices in mind
of their Oaths, one would think I had superseded the thoughts of, in the same
Treatise, where I had appealed to himself to make an Essay in the point of the
Dispensing Power, where his malice might be manifested in the prosecution, and
his revenge frustrated by the Royal Authority's suspending of all the penalty;
Vid. Six Papers.
and this a Resolution of those twelve men in Scarlet, the deepness of whose
Crimes he would so maliciously represent by the badge of their Office; if he
will persuade the Justices of the Peace to prosecute Dissenters,
notwithstanding His Majesty's Gracious Indulgence, I am afraid he will do them no
acceptable piece of Service, and give them more perplexity, than the trouble of
repealing can create, which doubtless, must take off all Scruple about their
execution; the Members of the Coll. he is pleased to Caress with their adhering
to their Oaths, were perhaps, more true to their Zeal, and an Obstinate
Disobedience; a Protestant Prince might have never met with that
refractoriness, and a Catholic Founder, I fancy, did never more directly
design his Statutes against the Prerogative of a Catholic King; but to show
that a stubborn obstinacy was a great ingredient in this Conscience Plea;
Nothing is more plain, than from this late Revolution in the Death of the
President; where if there had been but a submissive applicacation made to an
offended Majesty, and an humble Petition to be restored to favor, if I may be
forgiven the boldness of Imagination, as well as the Dr. would be pardoned the
hardiness of Propositions; I fancy many might have met with as much of the
King's mercy, as now they suffer under the effects of his Justice, and might
have hindered a Society from returning to its Primitive Institution; where some
that possess it now, may upon another score, be too ready to observe, that in
the beginning it was not so.

The Dr. tells us we are to be governed by Law, and not by the Excesses of
Government; Ibid. Parag. 6.
but if he can tell me from any Reign since the Conquest of the Normans, that
there were not greater Excesses of Government complained of, and greater used,
(as in a particular Treatise I have proved:) I Will grant him the Dispensing
Power to be the greatest Grievance; Discontents, and Jealousies, under any
Revolution of State, do only shift sides, and are never wanting in a Government
where the People can but make a Party; had those Presidents of Excesses, which
I cited from our former Reigns, but made for the Doctors purpose, that had been
Law, which is now Excess, and a Dispensation for the great Outrages that were
committed upon the Church in Edw. 6 th's Reign, before any Parliament had
authorized it, it seems was truly Law; which as it was a power to save Men from
being hanged for Sacrilege; so many will tell us too it was a sort of
destroying the Government.

The R. Cath. I am confident, will be glad to hear, that the Severities, by
which they have so unreasonably suffered, and that so long, have been only the
result of the Protestants fears, and not so much their deserved Punishments for
any perpetrated Crimes: When the Elector Palatine had moved the King of France,
that he would tolerate all the Hugonots, to Preach in Paris, he returned him
the like motion, that all the Catholics might be allowed to say Public Mass
in his Capital City; 1566.
if we must exclude them from all employment, because of the dangerous
Consequence under a Catholic King; must not they think themselves as much
beset with dangers, when they shall have none but their Enemies in Office under
a Protestant Successor? and if they then should move to be the only persons
employed; would it not be as strange a Request as what is made now, that none
but Protestants must be so? neither will this Establishment, and Constitution
of the State, make any great disparity in the Parallel, unless it be to the
disadvantage of those that would make the difference; for if Protestants will
plead their Penal Laws, their Tests, their prescription of an hundred and fifty
years possession and enjoyment; in bar to their Pretensions, it will put
Papists upon the retrospect; how they came to be thus excluded, and discover
that they had for above five hundred years before, all the Laws of Church and
State on their side, and none others heard of, or admitted into Office and
Employment; and therefore, when the Doctor tells us, that in Holland the
Government is wholly in the hands of Protestants; Papists will be apt to
return, they know how it comes to be so; that both Holland and Zealand, sided
with those of Flanders at first in the Pacification of Gaunt, to leave the
governing part both of Church and State in the hands of the Catholics, but
that when they came to Reform farther, and grew more powerful, nothing less
would serve the turn than the Union of Utrecht, by which they were to be left
to govern themselves as they pleased, and when their famous City of Amsterdam
that now privileges all Subjects as well as all Religions, to its immortal
honor made the stoutest resistance for the sake of their old Laws and Religion
Note, this was but about an 100 years agon.
(and its neighbor Harlem never resisted their King so stoutly, as this fought
for him) for it was Besieged by Sea and Land, and at last yielded only upon
these honorable Terms: That their former faith should continue established,
their Magistrates confirmed, yet were forced to admit against their
Capitulation, a Garrison, against their Articles of War, new Articles of Faith,
and for their old Magistrates of the Peace to be governed by the standing
Officers of the Army; so it is not fit it should be known how the Government
came to be wholly there in the hands of Protestants, for fear it should reflect
too much upon Promises too, that were not well kept, and that the same should
become the seat and refuge for all sort of Sectaries, that was once such a
Celebrated City for being at Unity with it self.

I need not take much pains to show why my Presidents from the reign of Edward
3 d. might be recommended to the practice of this; since he gives no reason why
they should not, unless his Authority be such in History, as some Dogmatists
are said to have had in the Schools; a Dixit, and indisputable; if I mistake
not our British Annals, cannot boast of a more Glorious and Auspicious Reign;
both for our Foreign Expeditions, and victorious returns, two Neighboring
Kings a sort of Prisoners to our own; two Kingdoms but little better than our
Tributarys; the Misfortunes of Scotland, the Fate of France will furnish us
with too much matter to make those times for ever famed, and his present
Majesty's most Heroic mind, and military disposition may tell us too, that
they can be imitated; I cant discover why the latter end of this King's Life
may not be recommended as much for imitation; the recovering of the Kingdom of
Castile, for its lawful Lord, and another expedition into France, were both
such Actions of the renowned Prince his Son, by which the Nation cannot suffer
much in the Consummation of his reign: but if any thing may make the latter end
not to be imitated; it may by some people be thought to be the Disturbances in
the Discipline of the Church, which was like to have made as great a Commotion
in the affairs of the state, for it was in this latter end, that Wicklift
divulged his new doctrines, drew in a great many Proselites among the Common
People; and made a Party among some of the greatest Nobility too; which
terminated in this unhappy issue, to show us too soon the dangers and
disturbances that always must attend any Innovation in Religion: for the
suppressing of this, Gregory the XI. wrote the Archbishop, and Bishop of
London; who cite Wickliff to appear at Paul's, whither he comes well attended
with the Duke of Lancaster, and Piercy Lord Marshal; where they were no sooner
come, but the Spiritual Lords fell out with the Temporal, the Temporal with the
Spiritual; all about Wickliff's sitting down before his Ordinary, which the
Reforming Lords in contempt to the Bishops contended for, and the Proselited
Duke was so Zealous as to tell the Prelate he would pull down the Pride of him,
and all the Bishops in England, pull him out of the Church by the Hair of the
Head; Vid. Baker.
I think fit to recite this, for fear the Dr. should find fault with me, as
well as Varillas, for not telling him the occasion the Bishops found to leave
the Court, and I think 'twas time for them to be gone. If the Doctor remembers,
this seems somewhat of those Sparks that afterward sat both Bohemia, and
Hungary in a Flame; to one of which places, if (I mistake not) this very person
here cited, did in his Banishment repair, Vid. Reflect. p. 3.
and to its missfortunes perhaps contribute, and as I think upon occasions like
this, might be said to be begun that long War of Germany; and I do most
professedly avow, that upon serious Reflection upon those miseries that
attended the Reformation, which the Doctor has given me too much, and too sad
occasion to consider and consult; I look upon this Juncture of the latter end
of this Reign, very near that unfortunate Crisis of falling into all the
Desolation and Calamities that afterward befell those miserable Countries,
Bohemia, Hungary, Germany, France, and Flanders, but though fate for a while
suspended our misfortunes, or the Military King that Reigned then, suppressed
those more early divisions; yet alas, the Diversities of Religion did too soon
lay us waste, and not long since made us as sad a Spectacle to our Neighbors,
as they had been to us in the same Civil Wars: A Body would have thought Dr. B.
might have sooner found fault with the beginnings of this King's Reign, than
his latter end; for I must confess it began in the deposition of his Father, or
at best, but a necessitated resignation; he being a Prince as ambitious of a
Crown, as well as one that truly deserved to wear it; but this is a President
that cannot but please him, the transferring Allegiance is such a singular
piece of Politics, in the Opinion of this Statesman, and helps so mightily to
the constituting of some States, that he may be very desirous it should be much
imitated.

But to come to another Instance of his Excesses, in which he does so
exceedingly delight himself, and that is, those of Richard the 2 d's Reign. I
confess, Vid. Reflect. par. 6. page 5.
it is another President of Allegiance transferred, but that with good Subjects
does not presently prove Excesses; neither warrant their Disloyalty if they
were proved; if the Proceedings of his Reign must not be mentioned because of
its Tragical Conclusion, we shall be at a great loss for any Argument that may
be drawn from the more Lamented Misfortunes of King Charles the First; I
suppose the Doctor will say too, it was Excesses produced that Tragedy, (and
some People will say the Excesses of Conformity;) but yet, I hope there might
be good Laws made in his Reign, and what was there called Excesses, has been
since found, but so much Invasion of the Prerogative; and perhaps, an Impartial
Account of this King Richard's Reign will make that appear so too; I had
obviated this Objection before upon the very place, in observing that the
tumultuous proceeding of the Rebellious Barons, Vid. Parliam. Pacif.
(for I hope, by his leave, we may be so bold at home) and the ambition of the
designing Duke of Gloucester, could no more criminate that King's Reign, than
excuse them from being Rebels.

But since he will not be contented, let us examine what some Authors as honest
as himself say of these Excesses, when the Parliament, or rather the Party of
the Duke of Lancaster was assembled at his deposition, Excesses indeed were
alleged, and so will ever be by those that prevail; but even among those
there, some that thought them far from being so; the Loyal and Learned Bishop
of Carlisle, Vid. Daniel and Trussel. Vid. Baker.
made such a bold Speech in his defense, that his very deposers were silenced,
and nothing but each man's private prospect of some public favor, hindered
their Conviction; the new King himself was very cool in the prosecution of the
grave old Prelate, and could hardly be said to be warm in his acquired
Government; but for all this, they thought fit to confine the Loyal Bishop for
the Liberty that he took, his Crime being only a bold Indiscretion, for showing
them so soon the badness of their Cause: This King as exceeding criminal, as
the Doctor would make him, had so strong a Party, though deposed, that they
thought fit to deprive him of his Life too, and to send him to his Eternal
Crown, for fear he should take up again his Temporal; these are no good
Arguments of his Excesses, or ill administration: Chron. 3 d. vol.
Hollinshead that has somewhat of Renown for an Historian, though he does not in
his work exalt his own Reputation with our Authors; he tells us, this poor
Prince was most unthankfully used by his Subjects, in no King's days were the
Commons in greater Wealth, or the Nobility more cherisht, and as these Tragical
Conclusions were not imputed to Excesses by most of his Subjects at home, so it
was as ill resented by Princes abroad; the King of France was so provokt with
these Injurious Proceedings, that he acquainted his Lords with his Resolution
of Revenge, and they showed themselves as ready to take it too, but were too
soon prevented by their taking away his Life, and then it was as much too
lateto serve him after his death. I am afraid the Doctor will be found to be
exceedingly out here in his Excesses; but as Excess must serve his turn in one
Reign, so it seems defect must do it in another. Henry the 6 th's feeble Reign
must support his Arguments against what he calls Excesses of Government in
Richard the 2 d. I am glad to see he has no stronger ones, and it is but a tacit
giving up the Cause, to have recourse to such Subterfuges: H. the 6 th. I hope,
as weak as he was, was to govern according to Law, and for that, the more
concerned so to govern; so that the force of the Prerogative in such a feeble
Reign, is but an Argument a fortiori.

The Excesses in H. the 8. time indeed were such, (since he is resolved to call
them so) and came somewhat near that absolute Power, Vid. Dr. B's. Praeface to
the History of the Reformation, where he calls him the Postilion of the
Reformation, driving thorough thick and thin.
with which he so much affrightens and alarms us in his Libels; but I hope he
will allow and think the Protestant Religion very much obliged to his Excesses,
since they made the fairest Step to the Reformation, and were as well followed
in the Reign that came after; some Writers will say, that those Parliaments
that confirmed his Excesses, were so far from free ones, that they were hardly
allowed the Liberty of Debate, much less to stand up for the ancient
Establishment of the Church: It was Criminal then to deny the Court, even in an
House of Commons, and though King CHARLES the First coming to the House, only for
Members accused of High Treason, was made such a Crime, as the Breach of
Privilege: It was looked upon here as a Point of Prerogative, to come and
command their Votes, or else certainly, such an Assembly supposed of the
Wisest, as well as the greatest Men in the Nation, could never have been
prevailed on, Vid. 25, 28, 35. Hen. 8.
for passing such Absurdities and Contradictions into Law, for the making
lawful Heirs illegitimate, and then to legitimate again, the self same unlawful
Heirs, to make one Daughter spurious, and then another; and at last, to make
them both to be legal Issue with the single Charm of, Be it Enacted. It is said
of that Assembly, that it can do every thing but make a Man a Woman; Vid Stow,
Annals. p. 581.
but here I think they went pretty near that too, and made Women what they
pleased: In the First Ann's Case, Incontinency was made the Cause to divorce
Her; In the Second, the Defect of natural Inclination, and only upon sending
down some Lords to the Lower House; what Marriage he pleased was declared
unlawful: It was not the Roman Consistory that was Lords of the Articles then,
or else they had hardly parted so soon with the Supremacy, though Vid. Letter
to a Dissenter.
that invidious Reflection on that Honorable Constitution in Scotland, must
come a little unkindly from Protestants, since if we believe the Bishop, to
those Lords they are much obliged for the helping on the Reformation;
Spotswood's History of the Church.
in short, since the Dr. lays such a mighty Weight upon his getting all
warranted, or confirmed by Parliament, it is but a weak Support for the
Confirmation of his Cause, for it will give some People the more occasion to
observe, that such was once our KING's Authority over Parliaments, that they
could obtain from the Civil Sanctions of the State, to sacrifice the Sacred
Authority of the Church, Wives and Children, Women, and Men, to his Lust and
Anger: His Parliamentary Warrant will do him but little Service in such
Excesses, since His present Majesty's Proposals, I think are much more
reasonable, which he desires only so to be Warranted; and if these Excesses are
so ordinary in great Revolutions, some Persons may think this unexpected
Indulgence, and Toleration, as great a Turn.

The Dr. very wisely passes by without any Consideration, all the Proceedings
of Edw. the Sixths Reign, in which some may think that some Excesses were
Committed too, and that even in the very two Points that His Majesty has
solemnly declared to Defend us in, Property, and Religion: In the very First
Year of that Reign, which the Dr. cannot be unacquainted with, it being so of
the Reformation too: Did the Protector only by his Proclamation order all
Enclosures to be laid open, which for some time had been enjoyed by the Lords
and Gentry, and was partly possessed by them, by Virtue of those Abby-Lands
they had from the Crown: The Duke knew this would gratify the Common People,
and being desirous to be popular, he issues out this Commission of Absolute
Power; (for all the Lords and Gentry looked upon it as an Invasion of Property,
Vid. Heyl. Reformation Ed. the 6 th.
especially when they were in such a Tumultuous manner thrown down): were Abbey
Lands to be thus invaded now by a Proclamation, we might well complain of
Excess. In the same Year were Injunctions sent forth, only the Order of the
Council Board, over all the Kingdom, for altering all the Old Ceremonies, and
way of Worship in the Church of Rome; several for opposing these Commissions
and Injunctions, as something like Excesses, were punished, or sent to Prison:
Vid. Acts and Monuments.
The Bishop of London was clapped up in the Fleet, only for scrupling an
Obedience, and that, though he made most solemn submission, which is more, some
People will say, than what has been done by some Successor since, upon a milder
Test of Obedience, and a Process, less severe: Gardener was Committed to the
Tower, only for wishing these Proceedings might be delayed till the King was
more capable of the Government; Durham, Rochester, and Chichester for the same
Disobedience were so served; all of them dispossessed of their Bishoprics, and
what was worse, the Bishoprics, and Sees themselves dispossessed, and reformed
from their Revenues: These Excesses could not but create great Disorders in the
State, when they saw that what was called the King's Proceedings, was allowed
to be Law for the regulating of the Church; the several Rebellions of the West
and North, that followed merely upon these Excesses of Reformation, had too
Tragical Conclusions to relate, and so the Dr. took care lest they should be
mentioned; the suppression of which, did not end without a Western and a
Northern Campaign, and a great deal of Blood and Severity: Sir Will. Kingston's
pleasant Cruelty in the West, his Landlords, and the Millers Tragedy, do
declare: and Northumberland in the North, is so well known, that I Will engage,
the Doctor confesses it a thing which helped to facilitate Q. Mary to the
Throne. On Varilla's 3. and 4. Tom. page* 120.
In short, it appears plain from the History, that the Protector saw that
Reformotion could not be carried on without Arms, that therefore he made the
War in Scotland, a Pretense to take them up, and for this, he brought in
Germans, and Walloons, though the coming over of our own Irish now is made a
Terror and Astonishment; the Elections of the Bishops was then given to the
KING, for the Ends of Reformation, of which it is now too late to repent.

In the next President we are reflected on again, because Q. Elizabeth's Power
in Ecclesiastical Matters was founded on an Act of Parliament, which the Dr.
says was in a great measure repealed in King Charles the First's time, and that
Repeal again in Charles the Second's ratified; this Authors Argument of a
Parliamentary power was little to his advantage in his Reign of Hen. 8. not at
all for his purpose in the First of Edward the Sixth; for there those great
Alterations in Church and State were made before the Parliament was called,
merely by Injunctions, Orders of the Protector, or the Council Table, and that
absolute power authorized by the specious Name of the King's Proceedings: This
was the Original of that Arbitrary Law; and Queen Mary might well write after
such a Copy; but the Dr. does most designedly misapply to our Presidents in
Queen Elizabeth's time this Parliamentary power, as well as he designedly, and
wisely omits it in K. Edw. Reign, because he knew he could not apply it; for if
he will but examine one of the Cases I put him in the Queens Reign, about Her
dispensing with the Latin Service to be read in Collegiate Chapels, and the
Universities, contrary to an express proviso of an Act of Parliament, for the
sake of Reformation; and the applauded Opinion of Moor, that the Queens power
of Non Obstante was good, even against the Non Obstante of an Act of
Parliament, to that Her Power; he will find that some of Her Affairs and
Proceedings were so far from being founded on Acts of Parliaments, that She
acted without them, and upon Resolutions that were given to illude and
invalidate their power: so that in short, the Dr. would apply the Case of the
Court of Commission, founded by the First of Her Reign, to justify the Legality
of all that She did, even to those things that She confesses, She dispensed
withal contrary to Law: were we to play like Children at Cross-purposes, the
greatest nonsense, and most insipid Answers would serve, and pass, for the
more Ingenious Diversion; I told the Dr. what She dispensed with, contrary to
the very Parliaments Act. It is Answered of something She did that was rounded
upon an Act of Parliament; but now, because we'll keep to the purpose, we'll
examine this Her power in Ecclesiasticals, founded on the First of Her Reign,
and see how far it makes for our Authors Apology: he says this was in a great
measure Repealed in the Year 1641. the Dr's Excellencies lying more in
Chronology, 17 Car. 1. Vid. Keeble.
than the Statute-book. It is a known Act of 17 th. Charles the First, that
does in some measure, as he says, (and I am glad he keeps to any) repeal it; I
will not insist on the occasion of such a Repeal, and the juncture of Affairs
that forced it, though I must confess the Reasons of Laws, can never be
recollected, but by Reflection on the State of those Times, in which they were
made; and that makes a sound Historian somewhat of the necessary part of a good
Lawyer; and from History it is most deplorably known, that this Repeal was
procured in the Year that this Rebellion commenced by a Parliament, Vid. 12*13.
Car. 2. Vid. Colleges Trial.
the defense of which has been made Proemunire and High Treason; by that which
enforced the Triennial Parl. into a perpetual one, and which was afterward with
so much abhorrence, and such an ignominious Character repealed: But all that
appears of this Repeal, of the 1 st. of Elizabeth, from the Opinion of the
Lawyers, and the examining the Act, is the power of the Commissioners fining
and imprisoning, which was looked upon as oppressive; 4. Inst.
and therefore my Lord Cook in his Argument upon that case (who for a time was
no great Prerogative Lawyer, or would not be so) says, that this Act was only a
restoring to the King, His ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which the
Commissioners extended so far, as injuriously to fine Offenders upon it beyond
their Power; this usurped Power some people are of opinion, is only by that Act
repealed, 17 Car. 1.
though I do not doubt but that Parliament would have willingly comprehended in
it, all the Inherent, Ancient, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that ever
appertained to the King and Crown, Vid. Stat. Carlisle, etc.
and even by special Act here, under Catholic Princes has been declared so; so
that indeed, as the Dr. says, it is but in a measure repealed; and by express
Words in the Repeal, of Abuses of the Power only prevented; so that it could
not take away, or deprive the Royal Authority from that unquestionable
Prerogative of Commissionating any number of Persons in Ecclesiastical Matters
that do not exercise such an extensive Jurisdiction: and therefore to reflect
upon the present Court that is of another nature, and a new Creation, as put
down and repealed with that of Queen Elizabeth's, is no more an Argument, than
that Queen Elizabeth's Commission was revived, when but so lately King Charles
the Second delegated His Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and Disposal of
Preserments to some Persons, that are most now living, though perhaps, some of
them the readiest to Dislike their present Proceedings: It is plain, that the
King's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters was never meant should be infringed from
that Repeal by this Ratification of it in the Late King's Time, whatever the
First Factious Legislators in it might intend; for as you see this Late King
did in a sort make use of it, so in this very Ratification, as the Dr. calls
it, is Provided, 13 Car. 2.
that as it shall not extend to the Jurisdiction of Archbishops, Bishops, so
neither to Vicar-Generals, or Persons exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
the King's Commission: If the Dr. will cavil, only because the Word Court of
Commission is not expres'd, his Cause will hardly be the better for such a
peevish Exception, since the Constitution of a Vicar General would be as little
Kindness to the Church, as it was in the Excesses of its first Establishment
under Henry the Eighth, which we see His Majesty, as excessive as the Dr. would
make Him, has not hitherto revived; but should a Parliament restore the very
Court of Queen Elizabeth, it would be reckoned among such men, as illegal, and
only the King's Excesses in the Government.

I here shall help him to another Set of Excesses, since such Prince's
Proceedings must be called so, when they do not quadrate with our Authors
Subject and Design, which at another time must pass for good Law, when they
make but the least for His purpose; some People perhaps are of opinion, That
the Two Tests were past after a sort of Excess in the Government; the World now
knows one of them was made, when the Parliament was exceedingly imposed upon
with Falsehoods and Perjuries; and as exceedingly transported with a Zeal that
looked too, so much like Fury; so that if a man consider their origination, and
the Circumstances of Affairs, when these Laws were made, instead of keeping
them upon the File after the rest are repealed, there will appear more Reason,
even from the Doctor's Excesses, for repealing them the First.

The Conquest of the Kingdom gave a great Latitude to the 1 st. William in
point of Government, which his Arms having acquired, he found himself the less
limited by the Laws, though he professed to Rule by it; and few of his
Successors since, that by their own Acts have obliged themselves, but afford us
Instances in greater Excesses of Government than any we can now complain of. He
is said to have invaded the Jurisdictions of the Prelates, and seized their
Treasures, not sparing his own dear Brother Odo. William the Second taxed his
Subjects at pleasure, by the Power of his Prerogative, was as severe upon the
Clergy; and Westminster Hall, since the Seat of Justice, was looked upon by the
People, as built on purpose to countenance his unjust Taxations. The Ne exeat
Regnum was repined at as a Grievance, and in that Reign might be said to
Commence. The making Mutilation, and Corporal Punishment, Pecuniary in Hen. the
First's Reign; the Confiscations, and Bishop of Salisbury's Case, in King
Stephen's, were made matter of Excesses, in such Vid. Bacon's seditious Book of
the Government os England.
Authors too. Henry the Second resumed by his own Act, Lands, that had been
sold, or given from the Crown, by his Predecessors; and against this Excess I
think His present Majesty has given us good assurance in His last Declaration,
since the Dr. labors so much upon the absolute Power of the Former. Of Richard
the First it is Reported, That he feigned his Signet lost, and so put out a
Proclamation, That those who would enjoy the Grants by the former old one, must
come and have it confirmed by the New; he pawned some of his Lands for the
Jerusalem Journey, and upon his Return would have resumed them without Pay. The
Exactions of King John, and his exercising such a severe Authority over the
Church, Fining severely for supposed Crimes, I suppose our Author thinks should
be least mentioned, because it produced the Barons Wars; but no one will say
they were the better Subjects, whatever were the King's Excesses. Henry the
Third, some say, was so like his Father, that he succeeded him (if they must be
called so) in his Excesses too, in resuming alien'd Lands, in Fines, in making
advantage of the Vacancies of the Church. The Proceedings of Edward the First
against his Clergy, Vid. Reflect. Parag. 6.
putting them out of his Protection, seizing upon their Goods; and Edward the
Second's Confiscations after the Defeat of the Earl of Lancaster, this Author
will call Excesses too; though I cannot see why they may not all have the more
moderate Names of the King's Proceedings, as well as when all things were so
warranted in the Reign of Edw. 6 th.

As we had begun with these Observations on our King's anciently Exercising of
an Unlimited Power, (which in other Treatises I have shown, and which our
Author (if he will) shall call Absolute) from the Reign of Edward 3 d. So here
the Dr. may observe these Presidents deduced down to that Time too; and so
cannot but see that such Excesses are inseparable from the Government, and
perhaps a Prerogative that Sovereignty cannot well, or will not be without; and
if Subjects must be allowed to Censure and Reflect on their Princes
Proceedings, it is morally impossible that they can provide against all their
Clamours and Complaints: the Necessities of State will many times force them to
some Excesses: and Diversities of Opions and Parties, and now the too much to
be lamented Divisions in Religion, will ever make those Proceedings seem just
to one side, that are looked upon as injurious by the other. Our Author will
oblige the Roman Catholics very much, if he will justify for Law, all the
Proceedings of Queen Eliz.; and I Will engage he shall have the Thanks of the
Society, as heartily as he had that of the House; for in the First Year, before
any Act of Parliament had past for Alterations, Images were defaced, and Altars
demolished; by Her Proclamations She put down all public Preachers, but such
as were Licensed by Her Authority; the business of the Reformation, and
Altering of Religion (if we believe Baker) was Carried in Parliament but by Six
Voices, Bakers Chron. p. 330.
and will give Catholics occasion to say, That notwithstanding the present
Clamours about Regulating Elections, great Artifices were used then too, to
bring it about, and but by Six Votes, at last the Weighty Cause of Religion was
over-ballanc'd: It Is certain, that Excesses were then Complained of too, and it
was murmurred about, even in the Lower House it self, that the Parliament was
packed, that the Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Cecil, Id.
p. 331.
for their own Ends had solicited Votes, and made a Party: These
Irregularities may serve to silence some Peoples unreasonable and indiscreet
Clamors at present, since they can be so soon retorted, and which I urge only,
to show the Consequence of such ill-manag'd Objections, and not to justify and
defend them.

SECT. X.
ANd now that I may be grateful in my Acknowledgments, as I shall ever be for
any Favors: I must confess this Author has assisted me with one President
more, Vid. Reflect. Parag. 6.
and the Dr. would do well to be so fair in some of his Writings, as to own his
Authorities: It is the Case in the Late King's Time, where he repeals an Act
about the size of Carts, and Wagons: To Answer this, our Author Appeals to the
Lawyers, and the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, though he will not stand by the
Judgment of the This Sarcasm was Marvel's before it was Burnet's.
Twelve Men in Scarlet, that to their knowledge, some Laws are understood to be
Abrogated without a special Repeal, when some visible Inconvenience enforces
it: when this comes to be impartially considered, it will be a granting of all
that he contends against, and the Tests and Poenal Laws will expire of their
own Accord; by this Authors inconsiderate Resolution: It is one of the very
Arguments of a late Catholic Lawyer upon the Dispensing Power, Vid. Langh.
Consideration. page 6.
and so as the Dr. wisely appeals to them; they as civilly answer him, that he
is in the right: The Dr. did not foresee the Dangerous Consequence amongst
Lawyers of his visible Inconvenience; for the Law has such an Aversion to this
Inconvenience, that it maintains as a Maxim, that a Mischief is better suffered
than an Inconvenience; now putting the Case thus, That a Legislative Power may
possibly pass into Law, what may prove a visible Inconvenience to the whole
Kingdom, or a great Part of it; that a great part of the Kingdom, and the King
himself do judge the Test and Poenal Laws very inconvenient, that they have
been really found so to the Subject, that the KING has in this Case too
declared Himself satisfied of this Inconvenience, and the People addressed
against it, as intolerable, then from his own President and Concession it must
be concluded, that either these Laws must expire of themselves, that there must
be some Sovereign Power, such as the KING's to dispense with them, and that it
is very fit for a Parliament to repeal them; for certainly it must conclude a
Fortiori, that the Inconvenience that is found in forcing of a Conscience, is
of a greater Consideration than an inconvenience in a Cart Wheel; neither does
that abrogating of his without a special Repeal, make any difference; for their
expiring by disusance, is indeed the self same thing as the Royal
Disspensation, for in Laws once made, the Sovereign Authority is solely
entrusted with their Execution, and where the KING does not command the Judges
to execute, or expressly forbid it, no man of sense but will say that this is a
perfect Dispensation.

Our Author is very unlucky in touching upon some Instances that do him some
Disservice, and in this more especially, since I cannot but observe, that when
these Poenal Laws about Carriages, and Encouragement of Navigation were so
erroneously made; and People solicitous about the repealing them, one of the
designs of the greatest Ministers of State that they then had in Holland, was
for embroyling us at home, upon the same Account, that they might appear the
more formidable abroad, as well as we weakened by those Severities that
occasioned our Divisions, which visible Inconvenience was then too in the same
manner, upon the same Maxims dispenss'd with, and prevented, only it is somewhat
strange, that this darling Liberty of theirs, by which they were so gloriously
founded, and for so long time have so finely Flourished, should seem so
dangerous in our Country, and from the goodness of the Soil, could only prosper
in theirs; but where Trade seems a sort of Religion, it is time to be jealous of
such Neighbors that would also learn this Ecclesiastical Policy to make of
their Godliness, a Gain too.

Our Author says it is our saying, that the KING's Dispensing Power has put an
end to the Dispute, whereas if he will but Read Books before he Answers them,
he will find that we vouched his own Authority for so saying; and if he Consults
his Six Papers, Vid. Six Papers.
he will find himself to say so, and that this Dispensing of the King's, is an
actual Repeal, so that the Justices Oaths are unconcerned indeed, as he states
the Case, and their Sins of Omission entirely remitted them by this Divines
Authority; but I must confess, notwithstanding his forced Application of it,
which was only offered to fasten the greater Odium upon the King's Absolute
Power; I must really think those more understanding Gentlemen in Commission
would have a less Obligation from their Oaths, should they conspire to get a
Parliamentary Repeal notwithstanding the Dr's Representing it as a Royal One.
That the Dispensing Power has no Refeence nor Analogy to the Power of
Pardoning, is but a single Dr's Opinion; for the saving of Men, and the
destroying of Government, are in this point (whatever he fancy's) truly the
same; for destroying of the Government does not consist in any particular
Persons thinking such a thing will destroy it: want of executing this
dispensing Power (some will say) has helped to destroy it once already, and it
continues a good Government still, after three Years practicing it; but pray,
would not the continual saving of men for Felony and Murder, embolden them so
far with their Impunity, as to destroy the Government, and make it more
monstrous than any Part of Africa: private Crimes are always punished for the
public Good, and for that Reason, Felony is made so Capital, which otherwise
for the Loss of a little Goods, could never forfeit a Life: And Lastly, for his
mighty MENACES, with his Vid. Reflect. Parag. 6.
Dispensing Power, for the future, the Dissenters, I suppose, and the Jesuits,
that he so sacrifices to his Fury, will thank him for his Warning, consider
what they are to expect from Men of his Mildness, and Moderation, and how he
abuses those Id. Parag. 5.
Heroic Spirits, which but just before were above all Cruelty and Revenge.

My Kindness to his States Generals (as I have confessed to him before) is no
more than what I have in general; for all such States, whose Constitution is
what is commonly called a Republic, or a Commonwealth; and if I have any more
particular Aversion to that of Holland (since he will needs put it upon me) I
must own it to be only for this Reason, That there is so little Reparation
made, His Majesty for those Indignities that Himself, with the greatest
Insolence has offered; a Connivance at such Affronts against Majesty was
always accounted among Princes and Allies, as injurious a Violation, as an
open Defyance and Justification; and I hope his Masters will not excuse
themselves, because they are of no Royal Extraction: It is the sense of
Civilians, (and by their Imperial Law, and its Construction, all Treatises and
Alliances are regulated and maintained) that a Body Politic in general does
espouse those Offenses and Provocations, which in any particular Person, it
does not Qui non prohibent tenentur.
prohibit and suppress; and that Vid. Albert. Gent. Si Universita negligit
illud factum emendare illaqueat ipsa se. Grot. de jure belli.
Injuries that are offered by private Subjects, do then affect the Prince and
People. And with all submission to these learned Authors, and of undoubted
Authorities: Dr. B's Case can be carried farther, and so with less Reason to be
justified; some of these Lawyers (as we have shown) are of Opinion, as well as
our Common ones, That no Allegiance is transferable; Zouch. our own Professor
at Oxford. De jure fecial. Part. 2.
and none will allow that it can be transferred any more, than for a time, and
that though there be an Allegiance due for such a Temporal Protection, that will
not divest of him that Duty he still owes to his Native Country, and his Liege
Lord, which Case we shall prosecute farther, when we come to his second Parcel
of Reflections, made in his own Justification; but this will greatly aggravate
the Injury that His Majesty suffers in the permitting one that has an
unalienable Relation to his Native Subjection, to disturb the public
Government, and defame the very Person of his Sovereign, only because he has
acquired the new Denomination of an Enfranchised Citizen, and a Subject
naturalized; and if the Natives of any Nation are obnoxious to the public for
Reflections upon their peaceful Allies, how accountable are those that suffer an
Alien so grossly to reflect upon the Proceedings of his Prince, and the
Transactions of that Country, in which He was born.

The Veneration I ever had of that Awful Constitution of Divine Government,
that is visible in a state of Monarchy, does indeed make me have less Esteem
for a Republic; and though I am not possessed with such a Patriarchical Piece
of Speculation, as to prove the Pedigree of every King to be by Descent, in a
Right Line, to Rule by a Right, Divine; for that would be indeed to un-King a
great many Princes, and set up what they would persuade the most Christian did
design, an universal Monarch; yet still without such absurdity we may maintain
it for Sense, that a single Sovereignty seems to be of Divine Institution, and
Democracy the Result of some Revolt and Defection from it; that this has been
my sense, the World has long since seen in some Animadversions upon Mr.
Sidney's Papers, and so this Author is most injurious to me, as well as
inconsistent with himself, Page 1.
when he would insinuate my Courting of a Commonwealth.

As I Have given some little Reason of this my kindness to Republics, and his
Case has given me much to have the less for that of Holland; so I must let them
know too, that the Respect and Regard any good Subject ought to have to all
that are in Alliance with his Sovereign, has hindered me from saying many
things that would have more severely reflected, and which after all this
Provocation of this Authors Pen, might have past for a just Retribution. I am
not so ignorant my self, as not to know that Lincenses and Imprimaturs are not
so frequently in use among the Dutch, and that the Licentiousness of the Press,
is as popular and plausible there, as that most applauded Policy of Liberty of
Conscience; the most Christian KING is as sensible of this, as His MAJESTY of
Great Britain: The Writings of some of His protected Subjects, affect His
Honor as much; as our Authors have endeavored to blast His Majesty's
Reputation; and it is well known to those that travel, if they will find any
Libels upon any Crowned Heads, they must look for it in Holland; and our Author
(I think) has helped the curious Enquirer there, to a great deal of this lewd
Speculation. The Considerations of the State of the united Netherlands, That
was printed there before the last War; no man will say but that was an Act of
the State, and that had no more public an Imprimatur, than Dr. B's Papers, so
that such Writings as are permitted to be published there, without any
animadversion on the Printer, or the more Celebrated Author, is as much an
Allowance of the State, as any License from one of our Secretaries, or the Lord
President himself, especially, when Reparation for such Injuries has been
demanded in a public memorial, and manifesto, and instead of punishing such
Offenses, the Offenders are encouraged to farther and severer Reflections, and
that perhaps, with a promise of Impunity. Since this Author will make his
Quarrel a National one, (which I should think a wise People would not suffer to
gratify but a single man's Malice;) It is but just that we show too, what Party
were the first Aggressors, and how easy it is for our English to make their
Justification: I must profess, that while our Author is permitted there so
scandalously to reflect upon His Majesty's Proceeding, Common Justice will
oblige us to return the same Animadversions, while no Memorial of theirs can
with any Modesty represent it as Injurious: In the mean time, I shall confine
my self to these more particular Vindications of the KING and Kingdom, where
the Calumnies of his most malicious Papers have sufficiently affected both; and
let him know that I as little fear the Resentments of his States, as he seems
to do the juster Indignation of the King of England.

To put us in mind of the Circumstances of our State, before the beginning of
the Dutch War, and to parallel it with the present time, is another unlucky
Topic of our Authors; Vid* Page 7.
and a wise man would think, might have been better let alone; It will make us
recollect that indefatigable Industry of one of their D. W.
Greatest Ministers against the slackning of these Laws, that our Divisions
amongst our selves might the sooner sacrifice us a Prey to our Neighbors, and
the more secure some of them from His Majesty's asserting of His just Rights. I
hope our Author has no Commission for the denouncing War, nor any design upon
the Chain at Chattam, that he talks of Invading a State, and threatens us with
their Resentment and Preparations; If Time must show that, it is time too to
look to our selves, but I dare not detract so much from the Wisdom of their
Lordships, his new Masters, as not to think they will not call him to an
Account now, for abusing themselves, though with greater Decency they might
suffer it against his Sovereign; this is intermedling with Peace and War; nay,
even a denouncing it before the States Generals, I am confident have taken it
into Consideration, we do not hear yet, they have agreed to any extraordinary
Contributions for it; there has been no Pole yet, nor the hundredth Penny, nor
any Imposition upon Travelers, but as formidable as our Author would make
them, whose Interest it is to magnify his Protectors; this Historian must
remember too that the Valor of his repudiated English, has heretofore as
victoriously engaged them, and that when assisted with two Crowns in
Conjunction, and in that juncture too, when we had more merciless Enemies at
home, when the Almighty made himself indeed a consuming Fire; and the Destroyer
walked before it in darkness, and a devouring Plague: Two entire Victories were
returned us from the Sea, to triumph over the Misfortunes that the land lay
under, and in the third Attack as unequal as we were in strength, was by the
weakness of both sides, left undecided; an Action, in which 'twas Glory enough,
only to have been the Aggressors: The Courage of the Dr's deserted Nation was
then confessed by some of their great Ministers that would have so fomented our
Divisions, and found too much the Effect of the slackning of these Laws; one
would think that the Iealousy of such Neighbors should weigh with Men of
Sense, that it is a sincere Design to establish and continue with us both
Liberty and Religion, since it appears so much a visible Interest, and almost
an unavoidable Necessity: If a Refl. par. 6,
visible Inconvenience will warrant a Repeal, why will not an Interest as
visible, secure us after it; and it is strange, that a Protestant People can
make no difference between an invisible Establishment of the Catholic
Religion, and a visible Necessity that the Papist have to preserve themselves
from a Vid. Reflect. p. 6. ibid.
threatened Ruin.

It is such a peculiar Confidence, that it becomes none but our Author, or is
no where but in him to be found, to tax us so unreasonably for Reflecting on a
State, to which we have nothing of Relation, and that only in Matters of
Tradition and Truth; at the same time that he vilifies a Crowned Head, to which
he owes an Obedience, and that with Forgery and Falslehood: The Defense of KING
and Country (I think) is every Subjects Concern by Nature; if it were not
commanded also by municipal Law; and that leads me to justify our selves, both
in the Tripple Alliance, and the Business of the Smyrna Fleet, both which he
upbraids us with as naturally, as if he had been a Native of Holland, and no
need of being naturalized, though I cannot but think that those that revile
their Allies for old Breaches, betray too much their willingness to make new:
That Alliance that was between Them, Us, and the King of Sweden, had in it this
Conditional Clause, That the Confederates were to assist one another, if for
the sake of their entering into such a League, they were at any time by any
other Party invaded; the King of France declares a War soon after against the
Dutch, it did not appear from his Declaration, that their entering into this
Alliance was the Reason he declared it, and that it was therefore his
revengeful War, which are Words expressed in the Articles; for then he had the
same Revenge to take against the rest of the Allies, against whom he denounced
no war at all, and it is a Rule in such Leagues as well as a Maxim among the
Qui se subjecit in quibussdam videtui se servasse in reliquis liberum, Alber.
Genesis de Iure. Belli, lib. 1.
Civil Lawyers, that an Obligation that is conditionally specified, must not
extend as if it had no condition, and were unlimited; and for this Reason did
the Dutch Vid. their Considerat.
insist so much upon that Point, that the War which threatened them from France,
was only upon the Account of that Alliance, which as it did not appear, either
from any Discovery that could be made, or the Declaration that was published,
so it could not oblige England, unless she would have been so forward to have
engaged in the War upon presumption, and that the Swedes were of the same
opinion, appeared from their neutrality and indifference: This is that famous
Violation, for which we must be so much reflected on; this is what the Dutch
were pleased to call a Breach, and which if it were in the least to be looked
upon as such, they were only obliged for it to their famed Friend that fled to
them too for Protection, who was naturalized also, after the deepest Conspiracy
detected against our KING, and who was celebrated for the only Author of that
uncharitable Aphorism, Delenda est Carthago.

SECT. XI.
IN the next place, for his Heroical Attempt (as he calls it) on the Smyrna
Fleet; Refl. parag. 7.
it seems his Memoirs must not omit any thing that will afford (as he thinks)
matter to deface the Memory of a Prince, to whom the Church of England had the
greatest Obligation; the Life of the late Lord Rochester was not so severely
Examined, as this King's Actions are by this most faithful Historian: It Is a
compendious way to Libel with a Reflection, and Abuses may be easily fastened,
when the Authors Credit must pass muster for an Accusation. One would have
thought the Dutch might have been contented with their own Advocates, and that
the Considerer of their State, had in these matters made as much of Apology for
them, as the Case could bear; but it is with an ill Grace indeed, and somewhat
unnatural, to see a sort of human Vipers, work their Wits and their Way
thorough the Bowels of their own Mother Country; Englands Appeal, and Marvel's
Popery, were the first and only Reflections that Libelled these Actions, till
our Author came in with another Supplement, but those being all such
discontented Creatures, Creatures depending on the Little Lord, that then lost
the greatest Place in the Law, the Credit of such Authors, is as much to be
believed, as the Conspiracy of the Court? But this Attempt upon the Fleet; when
it comes to be examined, has so much Color for the Justice of that Encounter,
19. Artic. of Breda, and others of the same Treaty.
that there was first broke several Articles of Peace, before that ever we
could be said to begin the War; those very Ships refused us in our own Channel,
the Right of the Flagg, by which it was lawful for ours to seize, or destroy
them; and the Captains that then Commanded, had it for Express Commission to
stand upon that Ancient Regality; and besides, it is known that the Dutch had
defended Van Ghent in the like obstinate denial before; so that now it could
not be excused as a private Persons inconsiderate Default, since whole Fleets
were resolved to maintain it, and their Masters had given them encouragement so
to do; this was (I think) an Heroical Breach too upon one of the Articles of
Breda; and all Leagues and Unions (if I am not out in my Reason and Law) are
such Acts, as are Aggregate in themselves, though the constituent Clauses that
compose them, have a great deal of individual Variety and Texture, to the
twisting them together, of which, if but one Twigg is taken out, it presently
loosens the whole Band: We had been upon a long Accommodation, and all
fruitless, Embassyes and Applications could not prevail; so that even declaring
of a War, had it been actually designed, was never required by the Laws of it
in such a Case as previous; and i will engage i will get their own Countryman,
Grotius de Jure Belli, lib. 3. cap 3.
Grotius himself to tell us so, that the denouncing of it, is many times
conditional; and then a Violation of Articles on one side, is a sufficient
Indiction, without any necessity of declaring it on both: we had demanded the
Right of the Flagg, and it was denied us: This was by the Ancients, called a
Vid. Pliny. Lib. 22.2.
Clarigation, and superseded ever rhat pure and absolute Denuntiation, which
himself confesses needless too, when satisfaction is demanded from those that
are resolved to offend; and Servius his Exposition on the Leges Foeciales
appears to be the same.

But since he desires ibid.
Instances too, the Romans in the Third Punick War, without denouncing it,
surpised the Carthaginians for some of their Violations, so Cyrus did the
Armenians; David for Indignities, the Ammonites, and for more modern Examples,
the Great War of Sweden was carried into Germany, before it was heard of on the
Continent, that an Army was Landed on the Isle of Rugen, because contrary to
Articles, the Emperor had opposed him in his War with the KING of Poland.

The reviving of old Differences was far from my Design, but since the Dr. will
not have such Actions to be forgotten, it is a Duty I owe to the pious Memory
of our deceased Prince, to the Reputation and Honor of the Present, to that
Native Country that he so injuriously reproaches, to defend them from those
Calumnies, that such a Deserter has cast upon them.

The Revolt and Defection of some States, for which he so furiously pursues me,
I am afraid from the foregoing Relations of the Fact that he has forced me to,
will appear in spite of History to disguise it, Id. Parag. 7.
when even their own Authors do not pretend to excuse them from it; but this
Dr. thought he must do somewhat extraordinary for his new Masters to merit such
a generous Protection; and yet in this very Passage that he so pursues, we only
put it in the case and words of a Commonwealth in Vid. Parl. Pacific. p. 66.
general, without specifying the particular Country, to which we would apply
it; which for decency's sake, and deference to that Alliance, and Authority, we
did designedly forbear; but since our Author is so unquiet, I am afraid it was
from the Result of the Application being so easy, which himself (perhaps) made
the sooner, when he saw that somewhere it must needs touch; but as Subjects are
obliged to a real Friendship to all that are allied to their Lord and
Sovereign; so the necessity of such Obligation is somewhat superseded, where
such Authors are suffered to defame and defy him.

Id. Parag. 7.
What other Authors have observed, as we are neither obliged in Justice to
Answer or defend; so does it argue a defect of Matter, fit for a Reflection in
our own Treatise, when he forces in Another, to fill up the measure of his
Animadversion; But this (I hope) will appear too, from the History of the
States; That if there were Roman Catholics concerned in the First Formation of
their Government; it was only so far, as that they fought with them once for
what was called their Ancient Privileges, which as soon as they were confirmed
to them, they were satisfied, and returned peaceably to their former Obedience.

In the Pacification at Gaunt, though there was was omitted that Reservation of
the deference that was due to the KING's Authority; yet it was afterward by
Explication annexed, and for that Don John of Austria, then the Governor,
confirmed it, under the Names and Title of the Perpetual Edict, and that with
the King's Consent and Approbration; who after so many Troubles and
Revolutions, was glad to see his subjects tender their Obedience, and by that
their own Act, thought it sufficiently secured: But it seems there were those
that designed further; some of the Eminent among the Calvinist's, refused to
subscribe that Article of Obedience to the KING's Authority, which was
afterward annexed, and so spoiled all the good Effects of this hopeful
Pacification, created such Jealousies and Disturbance, that the Governor was
forced to fly for his preservation to the strong Castle of Namur; they choose
their Ruar, model the Government anew, frame an Oath to renounce all Obedience
to Don John the Governor; and so zealous were the Reformers, that the Jesuits
of Antwerp for refusing it, were plundered, whose Loyalty then, was the only
Crime of this Society, to which our Author has such a constant Recourse for his
Reflection. Soon after, they associated themselves into what they are now so
famed for, the United Provinces; by that Union of Vtrecht, which was made in
order to the throwing off all Obedience to the King of Spain, which soon
followed in Three Years after in that Famous Instrument Dated at the Hague, 25
Ian. 1581.
the Substance of which we recited before; so that in short, the Catholics
foreseeing the designed Revolt, took occasion to withdraw (as he words it) that
is, to return to their former Obebedience; and those ill Inclinations, which
(he says) they showed, and which put them out of the Government, was indeed the
Jealousy, Ibid.
that they had of their Reserves of Loyalty, and the Fear that they had, that
they might spoil this New Formation of the State; the Obstinate Resistance of
Amsterdam, and the foul Usage it met with after it had Compounded; show us how
they were put out of the Government, and how inclinable some Catholics were to
maintain the poor Remains of the Kings Authority: This is what our Author calls
a Betraying the Country to the Spanish Tyranny; ibid.
such Aversion there is in a Commonwealth, against the Name of Monarchy, that
our Reflecter must keep it up for to merit, and make amends for his
Naturalization.

The Dr. is indeed unlucky in his Old Delenda, upon which, if he will rely, as an
invidious Instance of the Malice of our English against his New Masters, the
Dutch; it is nothing less than a Libel upon the Late Lord, whom not long since
they looked upon as their greatest Friend, who lovingly came to ly down his
Life in that Carthage, which his Rhetoric once did design to demolish: That
Noble Lord who was a great Instrument for Promoting in the House, to help our
Author to the Thanks of it; the greatest kindness, to whose Memory in such
Matters, would indeed have been to have forgot him: And such an Amnesty there
was amongst them then, of all That Heroes ill Inclination; that their study was
only, how to Endear him with the greatest Demonstrations of Kindness and
Courtesy; so that our inconsiderate Author falls still upon the most
unfortunate Touches, such as abuse the very Cause he would so willingly defend;
and gives us another Occasion to Consider of another Subject to the KING of
Great Britain, fled for High Treason, Protected from his Justice, by the
kindness of the Commonwealth.

The Inconsistency of Transubstantiation is most unseasonably insisted on; at
the same time that our Author is taking such Pains to be so inconsiftent with
himself; for as in this p. 6.
Page he would persuade us how easy the Roman Catholics are under their
Government, so in the very next, he lets us know, (intimating their Hardship)
that it is they that can best tell us, that all Religions are not alike
Tolerated: p. 8.
It Is strange, that a Man should be so unlucky at Reflection, and yet write so
much: Mr. Varilla's Copy (it seems) can transcend the Original: We know,
(though the Dr. would disguise it) that considering their Services, or for fear
of their Loyalty, the Catholics there are but hardly dealt with; the
Pacification of Gaunt was got to be broken by those that formed afterward this
Union of Vtrecht, and though by both, a Liberty of Worship, and by the former,
all civil Offices were reserved to them; yet by that taking of Amsterdam, we
saw that Promises were too, either kept or broken; and by the late Banishing of
Priests, that this Religion is not to be equally tolerated, though it was above
all Articled for and Compounded. It is a pretty Piece of Prescription to say
their KING's Predecessors acknowledged them a State almost an Age ago: It is
not much above an Age, that they made themselves so, yet such an Acknowledgment
(I hope) will no more warrant the Revolt, than the Late King's taking the
Covenant at Skeen, could be said to Confirm and Authorize the Rebellion of the
Commonwealth of England: This forced Acknowledgment was made but about Forty
Year agon, An. 1648. by the Munster Peace; and this unfortunate Vindicator
falls upon another unlucky Touch; this Munster Peace (I am afraid) will want
not only a little Excuse, but as much as that of Nimmeghen; Spain was drawn in
to that Acknowledgment, when some People by their separate Treaty, betrayed
France; by their Plenipotentiary Niederhorst and his Superiors of Vtretch,
themselves Condemned, and of this Peace, the Spanish Ambassador, Le Brun,
avowed, That in a little time they violated no less than 17 Articles.

All that know their History too, must know, That the Privileges that were
pretended, were never any Compact with the House of Burgundy, and so could not
oblige Spain; they were united into that House by Marriages and Descent, and so
descended to that of Austria: How the Provinces came first to be United in
Philip the Good, who under one Government first began them, our Authors admired
Meteran does fully describe; but though his peaceable Disposition, and the
finishing his Quarrel with France, gave him no occasion to make use of the
Excesses of his Power, yet his Son, Charles the Hardy, that succeeded him, the
same Author lets us know, was indeed as his Name imported, Subditis suis
exactio number onera graviora imposuit, etc. Imperii propagationem meditans. id.
lib. 1.
a little more bold, and laid very great Impositions upon them: we do not hear
then, of any Seditions that it occasioned, or any Privileges that they pleaded
to resist. When Mary his Daughter was Married to Maximilian, by which Match
they first fell into the Hands of the Austrian Family; to which, doubtless,
descended too all the Power and Prerogative that ever was Lodged in the House
of Burgundy; yet their Allegiance (you will see) did not follow the
Translation, which ought doubtless, as justly to have devolved; for it was then
old Privileges and Immunities were first pretended; and discontent arose, which
more probably that devolution did promote, more than any usurpations of the
Prince did warrant or necessitate; for it is natural for Subjects to acquiesce
more under the Administrations of such Monarchs, to whose Government they have
by some Discents, lineally been accustomed, than with those Princes Sway, to
which, by Collateral Discents, and Intervening Marriages, they look upon
themselves somewhat unfortunately reduced and subjected; and (perhaps) this
piece of Policy occasioned that Salique Law in France, for which they may
better plead this Political Expedient, than give us any just Reason for its
Original Institution; for (doubtless) the Title to a Crown may be as justly
tranferr'd by Marriage, and its Issue, as the Lawful Discents of common
Inheritance, and with that too, be translated all the Power and Prerogative
that ever was enjoyed by any of the Predecessors; and it is a Maxim, almost of a
divine Authority, That all things are not Lawful that are Expedient; but
(doubtless) this Alienation of the Crown, whatever Privileges were pretended,
gave occasion to their first Discontents, and Seditions in those Provinces in
the Reign of Le mesine Maximil. receut un notable affront de Flamans, qu'ils le
garderent Prisonnier dans un Chateau, cet attentat n'a pas ete sans punition,
sa mort fut regrette le de tous, a Cause de son Louable Government.
Description de Holland, p. 308.
Maximilian, which Meteran compares to those that followed in Philip the
Second's Time: But this Prince (notwithstanding his many Criminations) had no
other Fault, than the bringing down the German Troops, which he was forced to,
to preserve himself from the French; and when those old States Generals of
Burgundy had Rebelled, and imprisoned him upon Pretense of those Privileges:
their Proceedings were so highly resented by Princes abroad, that the Pope
threatened the Country to Excommunicate them, and the Emperor, with all the
Princes of Germany, came down to his Assistance: This appears from this very
Meteran; This Prince, the describer of their own Country (you see) represents
as one, whose Death was regretted by all, because of his most Commendable
Government and Administration; and yet, even then there were not wanting those,
that upon this Pretense of Privileges, had imprisoned this PRINCE, as well as
those, that upon the same Account our Author would defend for taking Arms
against his Successor, and Grandson, this Philip the Second; so that this
dangerous Doctrine of Resistance (our Dr's peculiar) for breaking such Limits
(you see) will serve the turn, to the worst of Subjects, at any time, to Rebel
against those that themselves confess to have been the Best of Princes.

Charles the 5 th. kept them quiet enough; his Fortune, his Fame, and his
Forces, were sufficient security to so great a Monarch; who if he was not
loved, knew how to make himself feared: Foreign Troops might have given them
then a better Pretense to Clamor and Insurrection, than ever it could in the
forgoing Reign of Maximilian, or in that of Philip's that followed; and yet as
powerful as he was, he governed them with as much Clemency too, and then left
them to his Son and Successor, not disputing of their Privileges, but united
too in Obedience, as well as they were afterward in Rebellion and Revolt. But
supposing such Privileges broken and violated, had warranted such a defection,
how comes it to pass, that so few of these Provinces were Qualified by these
Stipulations to throw off their Allegiance? And if this dernier Resort by that
Principle of Democracy, must be resolved into the general Concurrence of the
Subjects, how comes a particular part of them to be empowr'd to alter the
Monarchy? How comes an Instrument at the Hague, to be more Legal than the
Pacification at Gaunt; or seven Provinces to exceed seventeen? This will credit
much the Catholic Party, who for the most part returned to the Obedience of
their lawful Lord; and these Reformers that persisted in the Revolt, even to an
entire defection, will have but little Pretensions to the Privileges of the
Constitution of their Government, after they have entirely It is a question
among Civilians, An idem populus censendus sit mutato Imperio, Zouch de Iure
foecial. p. 2. Sect 1. and Aristotle absolutely denies it*
changed it: This pleasant (I will not say frivolous) Plea of our Authors
Privileges is somewhat like what the Dutch made for themselves to King James
the First, for the Liberty of Fishing, they pleaded a Treaty for it, between
Philip of Burgundy, and our Henry the Seventh; between Charles the Fifth, and
our Henry the Eighth, when by the Instrument at the Hague, they had renounced
all relation both to Burgundy and Spain.

But since our Author has not confined himself to give Reasons, we will show in
short, how this came to pass: I am afraid this unfortunate Author will find
that this his Zeal in the Defense of the Protestant Cause in general, will do
it the greatest Disservice, as well as his particular Doctrine of Resistance did
once disgust the particular Church of England: The Reason why the Treaty of
Colen took no better Effect, was only from the force of the Faction that
opposed it, and that merely for sake of Reforming further: after all the
Confirmation of their Privileges was so freely offered, Lib. 2.
Grotius himself tells us it was not only the Aemulation and Ambition of some
great Men among them, that hindered an Accommodation; but the perverse Zeal of
the Reformed for their New Religion, which never sufferr'd them to keep Faith,
never to be contented with their Condition; this was the Reason, and our Author
confesses it, that when the Walloon Provinces capitulated, and all things
seemed to face toward a dutiful Return; that some saw that such a Peace would
prove in their Opinion worse than the War; and though they were ashamed openly to
refuse such a Glorious Mediation as that of the Emperor himself, yet they
secretly order the Matter so, that such Terms should be insisted on, which they
knew their King could never grant; and that celebrated Author says it was then
more than probable, that any reasonable Conditions might have been obtained,
Grot. id.
if some people had not set up their private and packed Caballs, for an
interrupting of the public Peace.

Our Author is as unhappy in this point too, as well as in all those unlucky
touches he has made; this insisting so much upon ancient Privileges, and
Immunities, as it lost the King of Spain so great a part of his Country, so
from the same Faction that occasioned this Revolt: andupon the same Principles,
it cost themselves as dear; Barnevelt that might be said to build this
Republic, pretended to a great knowledge of these Privileges from his Study
at Lovain; and the Law, or the Boldness of his Speeches and Undertakings, and
upon that pretense, formed the First Party for the renouncing their Allegiance;
and though by the Union of Utrecht, and another Vid. Deduct. Ordin. Holland.
Part. 1. c. 4. Sect. 1.
League that was made between Holland and Zealand, there was to be joint
Consent and Communication of Councils, these privately swear among themselves,
that they will never acknowledge the King of Spain, and then by a negative
Suffrage of one Province, involve the Rest in the Revolt, and absolve one
another of their Oaths and Fealty, and all this a Holland. decrees it Apr.
19.1581. The States generals not till 1582. Leo Aitzs. Revolut. p. 166.
good while before the Deputyes of Holland could persuade Zealand to consent to
it; so disordered are always the Affairs of Church and State, upon any
Innovation and Defection from their ancient Establishment, that it is
impossible to make them stand to their own Articles and Agreements.

This Faction of Barnevelt's, as it did profess for their first Formation, the
Vindicating Old Liberties, alleged obsolete Customs, or pretended
unaccountable Privileges; so did this Celebrated Legislator, and Leader, set
afoot the same Pretenses, even to the Subversion of the same Government they
had Established; His Party ruled in the Provinces of Holland, and so Holland
must rule the rest of the Provinces, and enforced Zealand to admit of the Truce
against an Express Article of Vtrecht: When the Royal Authority (by our Authors
Principle of Privilege and Resisting Power) was wrested from the King, and
placed in the States Generals, by the same Party, and Pretenses, it was pulled
out of these same hands, and placed in the People: This same popular Pretext of
the same Person, ruined the Authority of Prince Maurice, entirely, and was but
a bad Retribution to the Son of him that had been so much their Defender: This
Faction, and these Principles after Olden-Barnvelt's Decease, were followed and
continued by the De wits, (always the Greatest Enemies to our English
Interest, as well as their own) and so eager by their Pensionaryes pursued,
that they had almost introduced an utter Anarchy, and entire Desolation in this
famed Republic, and never ceased, till by the perpetual Edict, they did so
basely abolish that Office of the House of Orange, Leo Aitzm. revolut. p. 310.
which as it was Established by the Union, so their First Prince predicted they
could never stand without.

The Prince's Highness, whose Office and Authority amongst them, we wish may be
ever continued and augmented; for his own Honor and the States; and the
necessity that it shows for some Resemblance of Monarchy, even in a Republic,
and a Commonwealth, and that too, from the remarkable Prediction of one of his
famous Predecessors; and their First Founder as well as in the Constitution of
some Venice, Genoa.
other Commonwealths; but this Prince and that State is but little obliged to
such a Defender, who forces in such Arguments for their Defense, as their
intestine Enemies had almost made use of for their utter subversion: they that
sacrificed these popular Pretenses to their popular Outrages, in the sad
Obsequies of those Vid. The Tragedy of the De Wits in the Netherland Historian,
and Holland Mercur.
tumultuous Men, even to a Resentment, that might be called cruel and inhumane,
can never have any great Obligation of kindness to such an Apologist, that for
want of Foresight and Consideration, would only befriend them upon the
Principles of their most dangerous Enemies.

In the next place, supposing that Resistance had been as lawful from the
Constitution of their State, as it was ever from the Doctrine of this Casuist
and Divine; does it therefore justify a Revolt to be so too; is there no
difference between an endeavor to preserve their Privileges in the Government,
and an actual Subversion of the whole frame of it: Alva's great Severities were
almost forgotten under the Reign of three milder Governors, that had almost
composed all this distraction, when their particular defection was designed:
The General insurrections (as from the History has appeared) were before the
arrival of this severe Minister; and if Rebellion will forfeit Privileges, (as
our Laws and those of all Nations do declare) I am sure it is no Tyranny to
seize them. Vid. Reflect. ibid. Sect. 8.
How some of the States of Europe did esteem this a Justifiable Action, our
selves can best testify to our shame; but that all did, is only the want of
it, or excess of Confidence in our shameless Author: Arch Duke Matthias left
them (as appears) when he saw it was coming to that, the mild Emperor
Maximilian, though he mediated for a Peace, yet could never justify the War; and
those Princes of Germany that sent them aid from abroad, were only such as were
in the same circumstance of disobedience at home: the Rebellions in Scotland,
and the deposition of the Q. were no more Justified by the States of Europe,
than was her murder we committed here; and yet we saw, and from our Acts of
Subsidy too, that the Scots were assisted to Fight against their Sovereign.
It Is still the constant misfortune of our Author, and now it must fall at last
upon his own Church, to be Libelld in a friendly argument; and sure such
Actions of that Queen had better be forgotten, which we'll believe her forced
to, from the necessity of State, and the condition of the Church, though to the
loss of her reputation; and no little blemish to this Established Religion, sure
she believed the King of Spain had some Right to his revolted Subjects, when
she so Sed prudens Foemina detrectavit invidiam interversae dominationis,
Grotius Annal. lib. 5.
wisely refused that Dominion they so Ut principatus conditiones non tam
ferrent, quam acciperent Grot. An. 1.5.
frankly offered: And the King of France was somewhat of the same mind, when he
so generously rejected that rash and In manus tradunt foederatorum nomine
Belgium, Strad. Dec. 2. lib. 7. In Gallia tua est Belgium, Strad. lib. 5.
rebellious Overture; and this French King, when some of his Calvinists, and
Malcontents were running into Flanders to their Assistance, pursued them, and
thought it such a justtfiable Action, that he cut them all to pieces.

But to keep only to the Queens Case, ibid. Reflect. parag. 7.
it is another of his unlucky Touches to talk of her assisting them; it looks as
if our Author had a mind to rub up the Memory of their ungrateful Returns; the
Tricks that the Barnvelt's.
Faction we have mentioned before, put upon their Deliverer, Leicester, the
Collusions of their Councils, with the good Intentions of Her Majesty, the
secret Treatys with France, and treacherous Aid, and the refusing to repay Her,
and to come homer to the Case; it was protested by one of the famed Deputies of
that time, and that upon his Knees, to some of his Companions, that those
Submissions made to the Q. of England, was only to draw Her into a War with
Spain, which when She was ashamed of, and would have mediated a Peace, A. D.
1598.
a Peace, which by the very Articles She was to conduct them to, and not to a
Republic; and by which She was made an Arbitress of That, as well as of the
War: Gravissimam hanc injuriam, etc. Reidan. Annal. Belg. An. D. 1517.
They sent Her a solemn Embassy to dissuade Her from it; which when it was not
likely to prevail, She urging that Arbitration, to which they had agreed; they
took upon them to expound solemn Articles for Words of Verba tantum honori
data, Grot. Lib. 5.
Course; and that they had made Her an Umpire only out of Complement and
Respect. Posterity is taught only to remember the Spanish Invasion, with an
Abhorrence, as if it were a Popish Plot; and our Author does no service to the
Protestant Religion, to let them know, that Spain was first Invaded by the most
Protestant Queen: Id. Lib. 5.1585.
Five Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse; and that three Year before that
Formidable Armado came to face our Coast, were carried over there, to keep that
sinking State from a certain falling into their former Constitution; and
returning by force to the Obedience of their Lawful Lord. That most impartial
Author (whom we cannot but call so, since their own Countryman) gives but
little Countenance to this Queens good Opinion of this Iustifyable Action; for
when She was again 1586 Novitrajecti Magistratus, etc.
offered the Dominion of these Dutch by some of their Magistrates, and the
people of Frisia; he observes, that it Nec tamen quorundam suspiciones* quasi
publico consensu delatum honorem and recusatum; plebis ac militum seditionibus
debere mallet. Id. Lib. 5.
was much suspected, That if they had tendered her the Government, as got into
their hands by the Mutiny of the Common People, and the Sedition of the
Soldiers, She might sooner have accepted of it; which, when offered, as from
the public Consent, She cunningly refused: She knew that Mutiny had made them
what they were, and that the same was the surest way to make them Hers;
whereas, an Act of State from those that had made themselves so, was of no more
Authority than the Revolt, by which they were made; and that at any time would
give to her self as Just a Title: So true it is, that a Defection from Princes,
unhinges all Right of Sovereignty, and Property it self, warrants Sedition from
the Constitution of the State, and lies a Land open, like those of our Lawyers,
to be Primi Occupantis.

But because this Author does give us a Touch of his more modern Politics, as
well as of his excellency in ancient History; (which if we'll believe some of
his late Works, none ever can equal) we'll for once venture to examine that too;
he lets us know, Ib. Sect. 7.
That as to the Rebellion, the Prince that is only concerned in that, has found
them of late to be his best Allies, and chief Supports: I do not know what they
are under this present Peace, but they have not been long so, when Flanders was
invaded with a War; and succor, and supports are better seen upon necessity,
than when they are needless, this chief support of the Crown of Spain, and that
improvident Abandoning of Luxemburg, the strongest Fortress in all Flanders,
have sure no Chain of Thought, though they come so close together, and as
little as it is to be excused (I am afraid) will want much of Excuse; a little
of this chief support, with the Courage of the then Governor Chimay, and the
Strength of the Place, (if my judgment, or Eyes han't deceived me) might have
kept it out of the hands of the French, who find it now so convenient for their
Affairs thereabouts* and their Conquest in Lorrain, that by the fine artificial
Fortifications they are now making, though Nature gives it more than enough,
they have already made it look, as if they would never let it go: Andfortheir
being his best of Allies (if my little Politics do not fail me, or that of
wiser Heads) it is not long since they were like to lose the best Part of their
Country, for want of an Alliance with him: Had they been but so wise (or if you
will) we'll call it so fortunate, as to close with Spain, before the French
fell into Flanders; or when he threatened them with a War, as their chief
support in their Rise was once from the French and English, against the Power
of Spain, so that Spain, and England, would have been their best Defense
against their Fall, by the Power of France: A defensive Alliance, with those,
to whom they are now such good Allies, was then desired by Spain it self, by
all those that coveted a Peace in Christendom; by some of their own Ministers
of State, by all of them, when they saw it was too late; this was looked upon
as the falsest Step they ever made, since their Revolt, and Formation, that was
the foulest; and this was thought then by a most ingenious Politician, to
proceed only from their old Hatred against that Government, from which they
revolted, which, as it had begun them, so it had almost made an end of them
too; and therefore, in the Second War, they were wiser, and suffered their
Interest to prevail against that ancient Resentment they had to Spain; then
indeed, they first became these good Allies to that Crown, and found the
benefit of it too; for it forced for them a Peace, which (perhaps) without the
Mediation of the Marquis de Fresno, had never been got so easily from England,
and France: The Peace of Nimmeguen, as well as the Loss of Luxemburg, for
which, in a friendly Rebuke, our Author will reproach them, should never have
been repeated by us, or revived to upbraid them; but since, he will so
unreasonably fasten the Original Guilt upon his own Country, it must merit a
little modest Reflection: Since our Author will call this Peace of Nimmeguen,
one of the single Instances in their History, that needs a little Excuse: Some
People think that the Munster Peace will go near to overmatch it, and want as
much: whatever was our English Conduct, it was not the Conduct of the French
that drove them there to act separately for themselves, 1644.
when by a League of Guaranty they were obliged to conclude no Treaty, but in
Conjunction with France, whom they excluded after several sums extorted; and
singly by their Plenipotentiaries conclude first a truce, Vid. Leo ab Aitzma's
Revolutions.
and then a firm peace with Spain, and that against the consent and
remonstrance of several of their own Provinces; to which Zealand never at last
consented; and one of the Plenipotentiaries himself would never sign, and was
(as we observed) justified in it by his Superiors of Vtrecht that sent him.

In the Reign of Lewis the XIII. several Leagues were made by these the best
Allies, with the Crown of France, against that of Spain, 1635.
whereby he was to invade Flanders with a mighty Force; Peace never to be made,
but by mutual consent, and the War never to cease till the Spaniards were
driven out of all the Netherlands, which like their Lions skin, they had
divided among themselves beforehand; but nevertheless, the Treaty of Craneberg,
was like to have eluded the French, had not the haughty Spaniard stood upon
such Arrogant demands; this was as bad almost, as that of Munster which
followed; and like that of It seems secret, and separate Alliances, with some
people, was ever an expedient in Reserve to betray France to Spain, or Spain to
France.
Nimmeguen, needs to be a little excused; and our Author cannot with any good
grace paum these ill steps too upon our English Conduct.

I come now to the last touch of his Historical Reflection (for other People
may be allowed to understand a little History as well as Dr. B.) and that is;
for the Credit of our Nation to clear a little further this Heroical Attempt
upon the Smyrna Fleet, with which he does again attack us; I Have taken pains to
consult not only Authors in this matter, but some that were eminently concerned
in the Action; it appears even from their own The Netherland.
Historian, that Sir. G. Downing our Ambassador had his Audience of Leave,
after he had declared he could have no answer to his demand of the Flag, after
he had protested it was his positive order to insist upon it, and and all this
and he returned, was three Weeks Feb. 4. Ditto
before this 22.
Hostility was acted; and before this attempt made, Meerman their Envoy was
arrived here to make up this breach which they feared, knowing in what
Violations of Articles they had offended, and by their own Confession, a War
was in some sense declared to him at his coming, or at least, that he could not
long expect peace; which I Have showed before, upon refusing to satisfy for
Articles violated, from the Laws of Nations, needs no such Solemn Declaration.
It is but consulting his Majesty's Declaration, Vid. His Majesty's Declarat.
Dat. 17. Mart. 1672. A. D. 1667.
that for further satisfaction, was immediately published; though for the Fact
there needed no justification; where it will appear, that immediately too after
their former Peace, they fell to violating those very Articles that had
confirmed and established it. By the Treaty of Breda Commissioners were to be
sent to London, for the regulation of our Trade in the East Indies, which was
never done, though by our Ambassador purposely sent, it was so condescendingly
solicited; and so our Subjects suffered there without redress: The West Indies
was a business only of greater abuse, denying the King the return of his
Subjects, at their leisure from Surinam, though expressly provided for by the
same Treaty, and made Banister a Prisoner only for desiring to remove according
to the Articles of it: Some would apply this to the present juncture, and the
denial, and punishing of some Soldiers for offering to return, after his
Majesty's Proclamation for it, and some Stipulations and Conventions of their
own for the permitting it; My Lord Ossory's Capitulation, 1678.
which because it Symbolises so much with our Author's case of transferring
Allegiance, and themselves have made use of that as an Argument for their
Detention, we shall transfer it too to another place, when we come to consider
his particular defense.

The Right of the Flag, it is not our present business to justify, though we
have matter enough by us to make out the Argument; it is sufficient that it was
one of the Articles in the Treaty; the violation of which, 19 Art. Ereda.
the King insisted on in this Declaration, that it had been broken by their
Commander, justified at the Hague, Van Ghent.
and ridiculed by them in foreign Courts; and I may add too, maintained by
this Smyrna Fleet, so that here was three Solemn Articles, very seriously
broken, and no satisfaction offered after several Demands, whereas one of them
violated, and reparation denied, had been sufficient to have justified by the
Law of Arms, by the Authority of their own Lawyer, any Hostile Attempt, Hug.
Grot. de jure Bell. etc.
without a Public Denunciation; so that here besides, a private Intelligence
was given to Meerman, and over and above, the Fleet could be attackt for not
striking; and all these Provocations, and absolute Rupture, praecedaneous to
this Heroical attempt that our Author does reproach us with; but that neither
he, nor any Dutchman may doubt of our Authority, I Will engage I Will get the
States themselves to acknowledge every Tittle of it to be true, from their own
Memorials, the mouths of their own Ambassadors, from their own Mediators; and
this I press not to reproach them, but to vindicate the Honor of our Nation in
this single instance against a Deserter, and that from matter of Fact, without
any eloquence or affectation.

When in the last Dutch War, the Treaty of Cologne was on foot, (which was
another too, that his late Majesty complained of) where separate Alliances were
set forward again as in former with the Fr. they sent us by a Trumpeter, some
Overtures for Hague 15.25 October 1673. Vid. King's Speech to the Parliament,
6. November. Ditto, as also his Answer to the Missive 17. November. -- 73.
Peace, in which Missive, it is mentioned, they had willingly agreed to all what
the K. had before asked about his Subjects in Surinam; and the business of the
Flag, they were willing to submit to judgment of the World, and that whereas
the King had complained, that their Answer was insufficient, they had
Commissioned an Ambassador to add any thing that was needful; this was enough
of confession in the beginning of the War, that they had broke those two
Articles of Peace; though by the way this extraordinary Ambassador, if I mistake
not, had Credentials of an extraordinary Nature, which were; that he was come,
to do nothing. To this Missive, though it was not so full, yet sufficient to
evidence fully the violation of the Treaty at Breda, did the late Vid. King's
Declaration 17. Mart. 72.
King send in return a smart Answer; to which they Dutch Answ. dar. Hag. 9.19.
-- 73.
replied in such a submissive manner, as I hope will justify that they were in
the Fault, before this attempt upon the Fleet; that they were ready fully to
renew the Treaty of 1667. 19 th. Art.
Breda; and to give a clearer Exposition of the Article of the Flag; they
solemnly promise to repair all wrongs and injuries offered since that Treaty to
the beginning of the War; this was what our Ambassador could never obtain,
before it was began by this our Authors Heroical Attempt.

But to prosecute this a little farther, for the information of our Reflecter,
and satisfaction of the World, in the Proceedings of the Peace at Vid. Answer
to the Missive as above.
Cologn, they came up so far, to confess the justness of the King of England's
Cause, that they strongly endeavored to give us satisfaction, and promote an
Union, above all the rest; that it should be referred to our own project of the
seventeenth of November, upon which the King stood, I am sure like a King, to a
Commonwealth, on as high terms, and spoke to them in as big words, insisting
upon all that before had been urged without the least Abatement; and besides
their offers in answer to this, as is before related, the Spanish Ambassador,
on behalf of the States Generals, had made these Vid. Their own Netherland,
Hist. page 355.256.
Overtures: That this point of the Flag (which was one of the points that
occasioned this Heroical Attempt) should be ordered and adjusted to the full
content of his Majesty: And that also, 800000 Pattacons, or 20 Tuns of Gold,
that is, 200000 l. Sterling English, should be given him; this reparation I
suppose, had it been sooner made, might have hindered this Heroical Attempt;
they refer themselves now wholly to the English Nation, to the Judgment of the
Parliament; making them the full Arbitrators in their own Cause; that cause
which our Author, and Subject, has now so scandalously in his Reflections given
up, (and what he was ever good at) betrayed.

Once more to justify it a little further, these tempting offers of the
Spanish Ambassadors Sums, (and sure there must be much Honor in the Cause,
where the Court refuses so much Money) and threatenings that he used of a
Rupture with Spain, were refused, and slighted, because the business of
Surinam, the regulation of Trade in the East Indies were not included; the
Violation of which Articles, were both insisted on for Reparation, before this
Heroical Attempt was offered at. And so the King proceeds to prosecute the War,
which occasioned presently the Marquis de Missive of Marq. de Fresno, Hague,
24. Ian. 1674.
Fresno, Ambassador of Spain, to present another Missive, wherein was Consented
to,

That the striking the Flagg to the least English Man of War, which was once in
wantonness, by some Authors, called the KING's Vid. Considerat. growth of
Popery, Englands Appeal. Though they have done it to a Barge, and both that and
Ballingers are Ships of War, if Armed, and Equipped.
Pleasure-Boat; was just, that the Ceremony should be regulated, even according
to the Project, which His Majesty's Plenipotentiaries themselves had sent from
the French Army, in such a time, as their Common wealth was brought into the
greatest Encumbrance.

That Commissioners should be sent to treat of Regulating the Trade To which we
will not now compare the Business of Bantam.
in the East Indies, according to the same Project, and their Propositions at
Cologn.

That as to Surinam they are ready to suffer any of his Subjects to transport
themselves, and return when they please.

That by these Propositions for Peace, ditto.
Articles it was agreed and confessed, that their whole Fleets of Ships of War,
or Merchants, were obliged to strike to any single Man of War of ours, which
was the Case of this Fleet that is contested, and which was denied us before in
the Case of Van Ghent, to a single Ship.

That their Commissioners for the East Indie Trade, were to meet at London,
which before could never be obtained; though it was by an unnecessary
Condescension, and sending of our Ambassadors desired.

That for the Affairs of Surinam, they confessed in their Third Proposition,
Fifth Art. of Krynsen, 6. March, 1667.
that it was founded upon Krynsen's Fifth Article; That our Inhabitants should
have Liberty to sell their Estates, to return, That the Governor should take
Care their Transportation was provided for at a moderate Price; and that by
another Article, 19. Artic.
Krynsen was to give them Passports, and permit their Slaves to follow them.

All this was now consented to, all that was desired before this Heroical
Attempt, which Articles, this their Obstinacy in defending the business of Van
Ghent, and Banister; and not sending their Commissioners to London, do from
Confession appear to have been violated: Upon these, and more advantageous
Expressive Terms, was Concluded the Famous Peace of Seventy Four; where in the
Breach of Articles is so plainly confessed by themselves, before our Attempt on
the Fleet, Vid. our Articles, Dated Westminster. 9/19 Feb. 1671/4.
and the denouncing of War from the Laws of Nations; and their own native
Lawyer is shown unnecessary after such Violation: I do nothing to reproach the
Dutch, but to defend our English from the Pen of a Deserter; and it is somewhat
considerable, that in all their Missives to His Majesty, themselves never
insisted on this Heroical Attempt; though I confess it was reflected on in a
Pamphlet, and an unlicens'd one of theirs, called Considerations; and by such
Treacherous Authors of ours, that were then disgusted at the Court; severely
Libelled, and exposed. And yet even those invidious Pens, that reproached us
with their Guaranty of Aix, Growth of Popery, Englands Appeal.
our Triple League, our Confederacy with the French, and suffering (as they
would suggest) our Agent to the Switzers Marsilly to be sacrificed to their
Fury; Even those Deserters that seemed to have sold themselves like ours to the
Dutch, did not offer to defend (though so willing to excuse) their Fleets refusal
of the Flag, which exposed them to an Attack, and occasioned the Heroical
Attempt, and are forced to confess, and condemn the Pensioner de Wit, for
influencing his Masters, to demurr so long upon that satisfaction we had so
much reason to demand.

SECT. XII.
ANd now we must change this expatiated Scene of History, wherein our
Celebrated Author thought himself the only Actor and Comoedian; for his
Historical Reflections upon our impartial Observations, are indeed no more than
the making of History, a Romance; and his Readers to laugh like the Spectators
in a Play, with a Touch and a Witticism: Mr. Varillas with all his Florimond,
will never afford the World so much of Diversion; for if Matters of Fact, must
stand and fall with every passionate Touch and Representation; it is better
going to a Play, than consulting such an Author, who with a dash of his Pen can
give you a dismal Character; and of a merciful Monarch, with the turn of his
Words, make a Tyrant and Oppressor: That makes the Catholic Religion to
traduce all Princes, though their Princes Actions appear (perhaps) the greatest
Credit to the Catholic Religion: This is no more consistent with the gravity
of an Historian, than it is with his honesty, Vid. His Reflections on Mr. Var.
History of Heresy.
and (perhaps) Mr. Varil. and Mr. Dry. both, may modestly yield him the Bays:
It Is an easy Defamation that depends upon a Paragraph, or is confined (perhaps)
to a malicious period: To prevent that disingenuous Proceeding, we have
returned almost an History instead of a Reflection, and that drawn from the
most impartial Authors; or an Extract from such Writers of the two opposite
Persuasions, that an indifferent Person might suppose to be partial.

This Strein of Pert Boldness, that (he says) runs through the whole Paper,
Vid. Parag. 8.
must be pardoned us, since it publishes so much of the Reflecters Impudence,
and that against Persons of a Royal Character; not a Paper of His Majesty's
from those of the Late King's, to the last Declaration of Assurance; but what
by him, with a Perter Boldness has been libelled, and even that (doubtless)
does at presently under his severe Examination; and can any Common Confidence
upbraid us for being too bold with such an Author? But for its appearing more
eminently on Mr. Ibid.
Fagel's Letter, with submission to his gravity; persons of a greater Character
than himself, or the Pensioner, are not of that opinion; it is more modestly
handled than any Paragraph that has past his Pen, and the Author was
sollicitous, that it should be so, as surreptitious as it was here, for the
sake of the sacred Title that it carried.

For an impropriety of Term, this Reflecter makes us Accost a Princess with the
name of Vid. 1b.
Reverend, as if we had been talking to one of his Coat; but if he consults, as
he seldom does, what he reflects on, he will find it in the Originals, for which
he would be so famed: Reverd, a more awful expression of dread, and deference
to Royal Authority, than I hope his Cassock can pretend to, a Name that we
shall truly Revere, for the peculiar goodness of that excellent person, as well
as the greatness of the Character that makes it so illustrious: And may she
ever have as much the hearts of a people, as is consistent with the Allegiance
to a Sovereign; the respect to a Successor, and the double duty of Daughter and
Subject to receive.

For our defense against Mr. Fagel, as our Author threatened us with a method
that was taken to clear off Imputations, so we shall take as sure measures to
justify our self, not only to our English, but the World; we may send them a
Latin Missive, since our English is so ill writ, and with the like translation
into some other Languages, and their own too, to which we may not be altogether
a stranger: As I hope I have cleared our Authors Heroical Attempt, by that
precedaneous Vid. Car. 1. Car. 2. Jacob. 2.
Clarigatum of our Ambassadors; so since I have to do with such an Enemy as Dr.
B. I shall also in a sort of Civil Clarigation, and the Romans return of
Talionis, justify my self, and desire of Mr. F. to accept the clearing of my
innocence for a satisfaction: It Is sufficient to say at present, that I am a
Subject to the King of Great-Brittain, never transferred my Allegiance, never
naturalized, or had need of it; that by that, if it was not my bounden Duty, to
reflect, or Animadvert on any dangerous practices, industriously spread to the
disturbance of the State; yet at least, I may be allowed the Liberty to do it;
that we have three several Acts of Parliament, or one, twice revived, Car. 1.
Car. 2. Jac. 2.
that make any Paper or Print, without a private, or public Imprimatur, a
Libel; the dispersers of it punishable by Law, (though their Presses too may have
a Liberty there) for Printing, and dispersing a defense of this very Paper,
were some persons examined, (and as they justly might be) prosecuted: Mr.
Fagel, is better acquainted with their own Constitutions, than our Tests, or
any other Laws; yet his Qui dolo malo crimen intendit reus esto.
Civil Institutions will tell him it is somewhat absurd for a Man to be an
Offender for speaking his thoughts of a thing, which as published here, was
Seditionis reus est cujus opera dolove malo consilium initum est ut homines ad
seditionem Commoventur.
Criminal; and therefore he might have spared his application, that the Author
should be punished, as he Seditionis reus est cujus opera dolove malo consilium
initum est ut homines ad seditionem Commoventur.
deserves: And why? Because our Law says, he does not deserve it; but only
those Vid. his Missive.
that published the Paper: Whatever application had been made Mr. Fagel for
finding out opinions; what ever Authority that Statesman had to Communicate
Princes Thoughts; D. 48.44.
he had surely no orders for the Printing and Publishing it in our State, only
to make the more disturbance, to disperse it through the City, only that there
might be complaining in our streets; was it not free then for every one to tell
of it his Sense and Opinion, or will those that allow all things Liberty in
Holland, confine an English man's Thought? Or, did he think it as requisite,
that every Reader of the Letter (surreptitiously printed) was to consult the
Secretary's Office, whither Mr. Fagel had feigned it?

This Honorable Gentleman from his high Station that he has in the State, and
his celebrated Abilities in managing the Affairs of it, could not imagine, that
it was the Duty of every Subject to the King of Great Britain, to examine at
his Peril; whither a Paper printed and Published without any License, were
exactly the same with a Letter that was sent from the Pensioner of Holland, our
Animadversions were on a piece, that by its Publication, was an offense to the
Public; and by being Surreptitious, a Transgression of the Car. 1. Car. 2
Jacob. 2.
Laws; and so cannot by any prudent Statesman be improved into a Negotiation of
State; and our Ministers no more accountable to Mr. Fagel, for our
Animadversions, than Mr. Fagel to our Ministers, for his Publication: Whatever
was the knowledge, and thoughts of other People, this unauthoriz'd Publication
empowred me to tell mine as far as I knew, and that with Authority; so that Mr.
Fagel must be angry with those, and punish them as they do deserve, that thus
published his Paper; and not with those, who without a Liberty of Conscience,
might be freely allowed to tell their thought, and I Will engage to prove Mr.
Fagel himself was of that Opinion when he made his Vid. Missive against the
Parliament. Pacificum to Mr. D. Albevill.
Missive to our Envoy, or else his Hand and his Heart do not go together, for
he tells us there, That he finds himself very little concerned in what is said
in this Book, that he foresaw well enough from the beginning, that he should be
attackt upon the account of His Letter, in which it was indifferent to him,
what any Man thought of it: But it seems, these words have somewhat in them of
the Reserve, for the Close of the Letter explains it thus; that the Author
deserves to be punished for an Attrocious Calumny, was Mr. Fagel indifferent
what any man thought of it, and is the man to be punished now for telling his
thoughts? Or does he mean, a Man might have told his thoughts with Impunity? if
he had not been authorized; but deserves to be punished now, because he tells
them with authority? or would he have the Missive of the Pensioner of Holland
be of more Force against the Parliamentum Pacificum, and their Foreigner; than
a Memorial of His Majesty of Great Britain against his own Subject, and the
Author of so many Libels and Reflections: The celebrated Prudence of this great
Minister, will not suffer me to suspect a person of such a Character (as the
defensive Vid. Reflect. on Mr. F. Letter.
Reflection on this Letter gives him) of so much inconsistency even in sense,
reason, and the Rules of Government, but I must submit it to the consideration
of others, since it seems, at first sight, not so agreeable with himself, with
their Civil, or our English Law; and he will not find from their Vid.
Inleydinge tot de Hollantsche Rechtgeleertheyt beschre ven by Hug. de Groot.
Dutch, that any thing that is in Print with a Lawful Authority, can be called
a Libel, a Defamation, or in their Language, a Lastering; much less, the Author
to be punished as a Lastereer; neither is the Imperial Law so little concerned
for the honor of its Legislators; neither can it be imagined so absurd, as to
make those Jus, sive Obligatio criminis est, ex quo quis ob delictum in
Rempublicam, supplicio est obnoxious. Zouchaei Element. Jurisprud. pars 4: de
Jure Criminis. Edit. Amsterdam.
Criminals to the State, that act with its Authority, and are only zealously
concerned in its Convitium ex cusatur quod aliquis vindicandae Republicae
gratia objecit. Julii Pacii Anal. Inst. L. 4. Tit. 4.
defense and Justification.

In short, Mr. Fagel's Letter, and Mr. Fagel's Authority, are both alike
unknown to me; and so is that Authority by which the Paper was Published here (I
hope) to himself; but it may be observed here, and that without Telescopes,
that these two Planets (suppose of Mars and Saturn) that have, with such an ill
aspect looked upon; a Treatise that seems only a Plea for Peace, were very near
in Conjunction; the Reflections, and the Missives were clearly the Result of
their Authors good Correspondence; they look like Vouching for one another's
Children at the Font, for the Minerva of the Brain we know is the mother of
Productions too; but the best of it is, the malice of both must miscarry, and
this Author would then only be Paena tene tur qui Libellum inventum Divulgavit.
punishable as he deserved, had he been found L. un C. d. Tit.
divulging and dispersing such a dangerous Paper, to make a Division amongst
His Majesty's Subjects: Neither can this Terrible Reproach of being an
Attrocious Calumniator; that is, by the Lex D. 48.16.1.
Remnia of the Romans, to be burnt in the Forehead for a Rogue, frighten me
from my Duty; or affect me in Injuria dicitur quod non Iure fit Inst. L. 4.
Tit. 4. de Injur.
Law, I cannot find that Civilians call any Calumnies or Injuries Atrox injuria
est vel ex loco vel ex persona, veluti in foro vel in Senatorem, Ibid L. 4.
Tit. 4. and convitium excusatur, etc. ut supra.
Atrocious; but from the Circumstances of the person or place, where your own
Magistrate is affronted in himself or his office, and I having not yet
translated my Allegiance, (and as I hope, never shall) cannot be said to offend
Mr. Fagel so Atrociously, unless I should become their Subject too, assault him
in their Senate House or affront him as a Pensioner.

And yet after all this unaccountable resentment of this mighty Minister, his
Remonstrance against this Book; looks in truth as if he had never read it; and
it is very probable the person that is so concerned in it, might make it his
business to give him a false account; for so far was the Author from accusing
the Pensioner of Holland Vid. his Missive and Letter.
for forging their Highnesses Names, that in more places than one, he reflects
upon it, as if himself had been abused; and his own was forged; he calls it a
Parliam. Pac. page 65.
paper that must pass for the Pensioners, and says that the Ibid. page 74.
Presses of London did more probably produce, what perhaps was expedient to
paum upon the Hague; and if Holland had the honor to bring it to light, this
Pensioner of the States might be more likely the Dr. of Amsterdam. And these
Remarks were made, to the best of our knowledge, and which I can assert upon
the Faith of a Christian, so far was it from the Artifices of one (as our
Author says) Reflect. p. 7.
that knew they had ordered the Letter, that he had some reason to believe,
besides the confidence of this Author, that he himself had forged it; so that
this Missive of Mijn Here the Pensioner, would have come better from our
Monsieur the Doctor, though it would, indeed, have been but with an ill Grace for
him to have desired our being punished, who so little deserved it, that perhaps
has much merited, as well as exposed himself to the highest punishment that
any Vid. our Stat. 25. of Edw. and 1, 3.4.10. King I. 6. of Scotland. Vid. Leg.
juliam. I. 4.18.3.
Laws can inflict.

Ibid. Sect. 8.
The Reflecter's malice is in nothing more remarkable, than in endeavoring to
pervert in the end of his Discourse, that tender regard this Author had to the
goodness and excellency of that Noble Princess, into Arguments of ingratitude,
and disrespect; but it is the Nature of Venom to assimulate, and such Vipers
can attract a Virulency even from the most innocent Air; if we may be allowed
the liberty of Scriptural expression, and the Profession of our Author does not
engross that Sacred Phraseology, as he desires to be free from the Reflect. 2
part. page 8.
strife of Tongues, so I wish we were too, from that of deceitfal one; and
where the Poison of Asps is under his Lips, nothing I fancy less infective,
could taint such sincere Expressions of Honor and Esteem (as are apparent in
that very part of the Paper) for that excellent Princess; nothing but the
greatest bitterness could turn them into Gall: And that makes him quarrel at
that very term of the Parliam. Pacificum page 64.
sweetness of her temper, as if it were a touch that stirred up his envy to the
Author of it; but when this Reflecter among his Voluminous Tracts, truly
Polemical; can show so much of sincerity and Zeal in the defense of the
Succession and the Crown, as perhaps the Person can produce that he so much,
and so invidiously reflects on; I Will forfeit my Reputation of a Loyal Man, and
what will be a greater Paradox, put in him for a good Subject.

It is like the rest of his unfortunate Reflections, and unlucky Touches, when
he would introduce us, as betraying the Lineal descent of the Crown; which with
the hazard of our little fortune, and a forwardness (as some would have had it)
even to a fault, we argued for, and defended; but it is of late, the Peculiar
affectation of some people to press in this point, the mighty performances of
their Pulpits, even to the Lay-man's civil Excommunication, as if Learning and
Loyalty were only to be confined to the Cassock, and no where to be found, but
with those that officiated in the Church. I am confident, Dr. B's Passive
Obedience did not much contribute to the Succession, though he would represent me
now as invading it: I don't know what his Resistance might do to my Lord R --
l's Ruin: I am afraid, that dark misterious expression, with which our Author
labors so much, may easily, and without Spectacles be brought to light. The
words which he so injuriously Reflects on, though he does not wrong me in the
Repetition, are truly these, discoursing of her Highnesses Relation to the
State; it follows, Vid. Parliam. Pacificum, page 64, 74.
to which she still seems so nearly related, the Doctor will be still unlucky
in his Animadversions, or else he had more wisely let it alone; he finds me in
the same part of the Papers Apologizing for the late Prayers of the Church, for
her Majesty's happy Deliverance; and reflecting on the indiscreet Zeal of some,
who (to my knowledge) for that reason refrained the Church; and on others, that
in the lewdest Sonnets, had profaned the Service, hoping that such Prayers
could never displease so generous a Princess, since they were only offered for
perpetuating that Royal Line, of which there were but few in remainder; and I
hope I might add, in which she still seems the next Successor? So far was I
from detracting from her Right, that I made her there even an Apparent Heir,
though there was then more prospect of Issue that might intercept her Title, than
when my late Lord Shaftsbury denied it to his Majesty; I know Apparent is put
for an Absolute Heir, where no other can Intervene, but it is but at best a
Catachroesis, and abuse, as commonly as it is used; and her Royal Highness to
me should be still Apparent; did I not see another Heir appear, that by the
Laws of our Land can intercept her Title: Was this Author assured of what Issue
we might expect from her Sacred Majesty? Or, had he a design of supplanting a
Prince of Wales, whom Providence has since provided us? but it seems he had
made his Reflections upon this seems still before he came to see his error; and
then like such Reflecters, was loath to retract it; or else, what is as
probable, made his Remarks here like the rest, by picking out Sentences without
considering Coherence, or Relation: But may Heaven dispose of Crowns and
Scepters, as it shall seem best to the King of Heaven; bless the Fruit of the
Royal Womb, and preserve her Highness (if it be her fate) for a throne, for a
Blessing to three Kingdoms: But it must move a little pardonable passion, to
see an approved Loyalty and Zeal to Succession so much abused, and so unjustly,
by one whom from his own Vid. Parliam* Pacif. p. 44.
works we have plainly proved to have Libelled the whole Line.

But I must pardon the disingenuity of a person in perverting my words, that
presumes with a greater confidence to tell me my Vid. Reflect. Parag^ 8.
Thoughts, that they are the Artifices of one that knew that she ordered the
Letter; when I can solemnly profess, it is more than I yet know:

For the late King's being so deserted, Vid. Reflect. Ibid.
when the dependence was on the Successor, it seems only forced in for somewhat
of a Reply; I am sure it was in a most scandalous manner that his Succession
was struck at, his Friends banished the Court, and I cannot imagine how he came
then to be so well accompanied, himself sent into two several Exiles, with but
few Attendants, besides his faithful Consort; Ibid.
who from a Partner in affliction may well share in a Crown.

His Reflection on my making her Highness so nearly allied to the Prince,
instead of Married, is so ridiculous, that it is too much of an Answer to
repeat it: I have often seen the Service, and said my Prayers with the Dutch,
as well as the Doctor; and if the Princes way of Worship in Holland be the same
with the National here, then most of our Dissenters are of the Church of
England.

In the last place, Vid. Sect. 9.
after this Author has been so much in the wrong, he very Magisterially tells
us of Informing the Public aright; but that His Majesty's last Gracious
Declaration has better done, Vid. The K's last Declarat. about the Elections.
and superseded even the Delusions of the deepest and darkest Contrivance, the
Doctor's Malice and Deceit; I could almost have said of Jealousy and Fear it
self: His Majesty's condescending expedient, that Roman Catholics shall still
remain incapable to be Members of the House of Commons, silences even suspicion
and thought, and what I ever imagined would some time appear, to some Peoples
shame and Confusion: I don't know what my Vid, Ibid. Dr. B. Reflect. Sect. 9.
understanding might have done, but my faith in the King, has not mislead me;
His Majesty has taken off all doubt instead of all Tests, and I hope, is now
as happy in the Love of all his Subjects, as they in his protection must be
most secure: The Church Established, is too great a pattern of Obedience, to
resist so much goodness; and will be so far from being discountenanced by its
Prince, that I hope to see her surprised at her own distrust and apprehensions:
whatever has been the forward Zeal of some, and the foolish fears of others,
His Majesty's Gracious interposition (and who alone could be the Mediator) like
David's Harp, has calmed, I hope, even men's minds too; united the divided
Tribes of our Israel and Judah, will truly do well unto Sion, and build the
Walls of our Jerusalem, and may Peace be within them, and Plenty within his
Palaces: It must now be our own inexcusable fault; if we fear where no fear is,
if the Parliament be now no Healing one, the wounds of the Nation will be ever
open, they must bleed afresh upon those that refuse to close them, and with as
much resentment, as those of the Dead on their Destroyers.

The only Plausible Argument, that after so many popular ones has been offered,
could never amount to more than this, that it is but prudence to provide
against, and oppose a possibility of danger and destruction; and then it must
be an unaccountable madness to resist this Peace, when our Ruin is made
impossible: This trusting can never ruin us, Vid. The Anatomy of the
Aequivalent. Page 16.
when distrust may, or rather, it puts us above the Chance, and only to such a
Trust that is the same with an Insurance. It Is such an Equivalent, that we must
not be laughed out, no more than some would be out of the Tests; and it is but
an exchange of one Act of Parliament, the most unjust, for another that is
altogether as much safe. The Birthright of the Peers of England is no such an
inconsiderable Subject, as not to be worth the Consideration of the House. It
was never so much struck at as in these Acts, and perhaps, for that reason,
above twenty Bishops once opposed the passing them* Had the Reformation
introduced this Exclusion of the Peers from their highest Properly; it would
have been an hardship they could have better born, but this was a violation of
Right, too great to be invaded, even when the Patrimony of the Church, In Edw.
6. Reign.
in spite of Magna Charta, was not looked upon inviolable, when Sacrilege
obtained, their Honors were safe, and that, though there was a more certain
prospect of a Popish Successor, of the rage of a Woman, instead of an Heroic
Prince, whom they had reason to suspect, as they say they soon found, most Vid.
Dr. B.
cruel and Zealous.

Let it not be said to the true Reproach of Justice, and the Laws, the Honor
of the Nation, and the Great Council of it, that it can act against the common
Rules of Equity; Excluded Members, were an Opprobrium and shame even to a most
odious Usurpation; neither did that offer to exclude Lords too, till it had
made the whole House Precarious and useless; the same Parity of Reason will
empower us as well, to dissolve the whole, as to Exclude a part: Mere Religion
never yet forfeited an Estate, and with such Persons, their privilege of
Peerage is more valuable: But their Property, I confess, might as well have
been seized, with the same Justice that these Rights were invaded; believe your
King in Honor, in Equity bound to restore them, believe it but common Justice
for them to desire it: Credulity is neither a Folly nor a Crime, when well
grounded, and then you can never believe your King so false and designing, or
your fellow Subjects to have any other Plot, but to regain their just Rights,
their Inheritance, and the only Badge of their Honor, that can make them look
like Lords, or maintain their Peerage; it is plain, while this their incapacity
lasts, they are no longer Peers. It is but a more Civil sort of an Attainder,
the Construction of Law will not allow it, no more than the Latin Aphorism: Nec
sumus ergo Pares, they may truly say, neither can they judicially pass a
Verdict upon their fellow Subjects, and equals, that are to be tried by their
Peers; when this Parity of Privilege is denied them, their very denomination
is ridiculous and absurd; And another of those Inconsistencies among the many,
I have observed the present Constitution of our State is exposed to, so vainly
ridiculous are our fears, that it makes us value our selves, and Celebrated
Laws, in their Injustice, in the most shameful Absurdities and Contradictions.

What could a Gracious Monarch do more to oblige a Jealous People? If
Discontent is always shifting Partys, what possible expedient is there besides
this, of pleasing all: How have we been Har'd by that reproach, even Holland,
and Scandal to the very Dutch, that In his Enquiry it is Englisht.
(...), and Pulpit Politician, that has put himself upon Divinity with as ill
Grace, as he has upon the States, for Protection; but all Reverence and Regard
to that Sacred Function, is superseded, where such a Mungrel Divine, this
Theologo-Politicus, with such foul Language, shall fall upon Vid. six Pap.
His Majesty, his Vid. Ibid. and his Apology.
Ministry, and some of his own Vid. His Enquiry.
Clergy: How has he to obviate this Happy Union, alarmed the Nation with
Irregularities in Elections, and undue Proceedings? How does he in these very
Papers pursue the People with the Jealousies of Reflect. on Parl. Pacif. 1
part, Sect. 9.
a new set of Charters, and Bold Returns? But that His Majesty might baffle
Malice it self, and make us ashamed of fear, his Declaration has assured us,
and that as far as his Commands can, that the Members chose, shall be as fairly
returned, according to the true Merit of the Choice; but bold Returns is at
best but a bad excuse with those that do not care to acquiess with its
Determinations, and does serve the turns of such Doctors in Divinity, as
Hypochondriacal, or Scorbutic do, some other Doctors in another faculty, when
they have a defect of some Specific fortune in their Diagnosticks, it resolves
it self into some General Distemper of the Body Politic; and from, perhaps,
one disordered Member, would make a dissolution of the whole House.

But it is time to have done with this reproachful piece of Ecclesiastical
Policy, that has been so lavish in his Opprobrious Language, and Reproaches,
upon all sorts of People, all Orders of Men, Sovereigns, and Subjects, things
Sacred, and Civil, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; and even as the Viper in the
Fable, stings his very Countrymen that warm him: The Generous Protection of
the States is but ill* deserved, and as basely returned by one that can upbraid
them with the Vid. Reflections, Paragraph 7.
Abandoning Luxemburg, and their Peace of Nimmeguen, which perhaps, in
Civility, we might have past by; and it is but an odd sort of kindness, the
discovering of great faults, only for the making a little Excuse. This Pompous
Author with his wonted Vanity, Prides, Reflect. 2 part page 7.
and values himself upon the Dispute with his Adversary Mr. Varilla's (and as
he says) his being ordered to insist no more on it, by the Fren. K. and I think
it is high time now, for the Honor of the States of Holland, to silence him
too: It Is time for him to silence himself, since His Majesty has superseded the
Mischief, that his utmost Malice and Calumny can do; as angry as he was at his
being told the worst thing he could do, Vid. Enquiry p. 1.
it may be told him now he may do his worst. The King of Great-Brittain, as in
the Constitutions of His Royal Predecessor Constantine the Great, will
establish himself in all his Subjects Hearts too, will take for his Great
Example, that Primitive Hero: The first Centurys, to which we Vid. our Homilies
against Idolatry.
all recur for Purity, for true Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, shall be his
Pattern: That Prince is said by Mr. Seldom, first to have made our Crown
Imperial; and perhaps, His Majesty is the first too, that from the general Love
of all his Subjects, affected so much this Universal Empire.

May all his People enjoy that universal ease that he aims at; may Peace of
mind within, which chears even the outward Form, Unite us in one Common
Interest, in a cheerful and vigorous Resolution to maintain it against all
force, and opposition from abroad; Let us take Counsel together, and though we
cannot walk in one House of God, we may still meet like Friends, when no Nation
is secure from an Hannibal, that may be at the Gates; it is too miserable a
madness, that a Man's Enemies should be those of his own Household. May the
Liberty to all Churches, make us flourish like Holland, and the Protection of
the Established one, as Happy as we would be here.

And thus have I run through the First part of his Reflections, Vid. his
Reflections, Sect. 9.
not by picking out pieces, but answering the whole; which being made up of so
much Malice and Mistake, I could not possibly confine to that compass I could
have wished; and at the same time, to give it a thorough Confutation: Page 1.
For as in the beginning I promised to consider every Paragraph; so before I
end, I hope the whole will have its due Consideration: I do not deal with the
Doctor, as he does with those he Reflects on; produce no other Authority,
besides the Sayings of the Satyrist, and his Ascendant on his Reader: It Is
easy in such Reflection, to Libel the Fact both with falsehood, and Calumny,
it is a Sententious sort of defamation; and the Dr. indeed is so dextrous at it,
as to do it most Concisely. -- But a Dogmatical Assertion will never do with
such as have Sense, and sufficient opportunity to consult Originals; and that
is one reason why our Author would engross that Vid. his Enquiry.
excellency, and so secure himself from any Contradiction; I have therefore
given at large the History of those things he so concisely touches on, and so
submit it even to the Judgment of those that are resolved, perhaps, to be our
Enemies, and his Admirers.

FINIS.
ERRATA, Dele Second Marg. Note, page 133.

Advertisement.
THere is at present also in the Press, an Answer to Dr. Burnet's second Paper
of Reflections upon the Parliamentum Pacificum; being a pretended Vindication
of Himself.


