PRACTICAL DISCOURSES UPON THE BEATITUDES Of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

VOL. I.

Written by JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

To which are added, Reflections upon a late Essay concerning Human
Understanding: With a Reply to the Remarks made upon them by the Athenian
Society.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON: Printed for S. Manship at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1699.

To my much Honored Friend and Patron JOSEPH LANGTON, Esquire
SIR,
IT IS a Maxim of Prudence given by some of the Nicer Describers of the Bounds
of Gratitude, That it ought to be tempered between a total Neglect and a full
and just Requital. To strike off all Scores is, they say, as uncivil as to
discharge none, and every whit as disingenuous not to suffer, as not to
acknowledge an Obligation.

Now, Sir, it is one of the proper Happinesses of my little Fortune to be
necessarily cast upon this Measure. I am got too far in your Accounts to be
able to requite to the full; some part of them I must ever leave uncrossed as a
standing Hold upon me; and tho my Gratitude it self be never so strong and
pregnant, yet the most forward Instance of it can rise no higher than an
Acknowledgment.

And as this is the utmost I can do, so of doing this too I have so few
Capacities and Opportunities, that I am the less willing to let go any that
offer themselves; which indeed has given a speedier Issue to my Deliberation,
whether I ought to Address these Discourses to your Patronage or no, which
perhaps without the Formality of a Dedication, would of right belong to you, as
falling within your District, and as being the Fruits of that Retirement which
by your Free Bounty I enjoy.

As an Acknowledgment therefore of this and your other constant Favors, I
presume to put these Discourses into your Hands, which I hope will be able to
do both You and Me that Justice, as to convince the World, that as you
proceeded by generous and incorrupt Measures in disposing of this Public
Trust, so you was not altogether mistaken in your Choice, when you thought fit
to Oblige

Your Humble Servant, John Norris,
Newton St. Lo. April 21. 1690.
TO THE READER.
I Here commend to thy serious Perusal a Set of Select Discourses upon the
Beatitudes, which were at first undertaken, and are now published for the
Public Benefit of all well-disposed Christians. The Subjects themselves are as
Great and Noble as any perhaps that occur in all Practical Divinity, being the
Prime and Capital Aphorisms of our Savior's excellent Sermon upon the Mount,
and containing the Fundamental Principles of all Christ's Practical
Instructions, and of a true Christian Temper and Life.

Here we may see (what the Philosopher so much desired) the true Living Idea of
Virtue and Goodness; nay more, what it is to be a Christian, an Interior
Christian, a Christian indeed. And I heartily wish that those whose Orthodoxy
is chiefly employed in giving out Marks and Signs of Conversion and Saintship,
wherein their end seems rather to be the distinction of a Party, than any real
Promotion of Godliness, would choose rather to dress their Interior by this
Glass, and afterward try it by this Measure. For here they will find that Real
Christianity consists in Poverty of Spirit, Humility, Self-denial,
Mortification, Meekness, Mercifulness, Purity of Heart, Peaceableness, and such
like inward Dispositions of Soul, and not in a few outward Formalities, Sighs
and Groans, Looks and Postures, Words and Phrases, and such other affected
Badges of a fond Distinction.

And as the Subjects themselves are Great and Noble, so I hope these Discourses
will be found in some measure to rise up to their Dignity. I am sure there has
been no care wanting on my part to make them worthy of their Subjects, to which
I have endeavored to do the utmost Justice. But however I may fail of that,
yet I hope the Reader will not be altogether disappointed of his Expectations,
or repent of his Labor, but will find here sufficient Entertainment both for
his Speculation, and for his Devotion.

It may perhaps be a Surprise to some to see me appear again so soon in
public. To this, if there needs any Apology, that which I shall offer is, That
if these Discourses be not worthy of public View, then it is not fit they
should ever be sent abroad; but if they be, I cannot understand how they can be
published too soon. The Truth is, considering the shortness and uncertainty of
Life, I have been lately very much of Opinion, That a Man can never live too
fast, (the Heathen will tell you Never fast enough) nor make too much haste to
do good; especially when a Man's Sphere is such, that he has but Few ways and
Opportunities of doing it, which by Experience I am all convinced to be my Case.

I am afraid (wherever the fault lies) that it will not be my Happiness to be
able to do that good where I am, which I might have done in some other Station.
Which makes me the more frequent in Public, that I may supply this Defect by
the Service of my Pen, having some reason to hope that my Discourses will meet
with better liking Abroad, than they usually do at Home; and that there are
some in the World to whom I shall not be a Barbarian.

What has been here the performance of my Pen, was (as I learn from Dr. Rust)
intended, and in part performed by the Excellent Bishop Taylour, who while he
was meditating upon the Beatitudes, was received up into the Enjoyment of them.
And I have lately spoken with a Gentleman, who told me, That he himself saw a
Manuscript of it in the Bishop's own Hand. I am very sensible how much the
Subject has lost by the Change of its Author. All that I can say is, That I
have done my Best, and I hope God will accept of my good Intention, and that
the World will be something the better for my Peformance.

John Norris.

THE CONTENTS.
DIscourse the First, on Matthew. V. Ver. iii. page 1 Discourse the Second, on
Matthew. V. Ver. iv. p. 25 Discourse the Third, on Matthew. V. Ver. v. p. 47
Discourse the Fourth, on Matthew. V. Ver. vi. p. 74 Discourse the Fifth, on
Matthew. V. Ver. vii. p. 101 Discourse the Sixth, on Matthew. V. Ver. viii. p. 120
Discourse the Seventh, on Matthew. V. Ver. ix. p. 145 Discourse the Eighth, on
Matthew. V. Ver. x. xi, xii. p. 169 The Conclusion of the whole, in a Discourse
concerning the Beatitudes in general. p. 196 Cursory Reflections upon a Book
called, An Essay concerning Human Understanding. p. 1
Remarks upon the Athenian Society in the Supplement to the Third Volume.

Christian Blessedness: OR, DISCOURSES UPON THE BEATITUDES.
VOL. 1.
Discourse the First.
Matthew. V. ver. iii. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven.
THus the Divine Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, begins that Great and
Noble Institution of Christian Philosophy, his Sublime Sermon on the Mount.
This was he that was pointed at by the eminent Prophecy, I will raise them up a
prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him, Deuteronomy. 18. And
now it was that this Prophecy had its full Accomplishment; Christ was now
entering upon his Prophetic Office, and was to show himself a Prophet like unto
Moses. This great Trust he discharged with as great Care and Fidelity, and (as
the Author to the Hebrews observes) was faithful to him that appointed him, as
also Moses was faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 2. As therefore Moses gave a
Digest of Laws to the People with whom he was entrusted, so it became this
Divine Prophet also to give Laws and Precepts for the Instruction and Order of
his Disciples. He was to be a Lawgiver, as well as Moses; and, to carry on the
Proportion yet farther, he thought fit to imitate him in the very Manner and
Circumstance of delivering his Law, and accordingly ascended up into a
Mountain, from whence he showered down his Heavenly Manna upon his Hearers: So
also making good another Instance of Resemblance relating to Moses, who speaks
thus of himself, My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as
the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the
grass, Deuteronomy. 32. 2.

But the Parallel will not run throughout: For the Divine Oracles were not now
accompanied with Thundrings and Lightnings; with Blackness, and Darkness, and
Tempest; but were delivered in the small still Voice of Blessing and
Consolation. 'Twas with a Beatitude that David began his Collection of Divine
Hymns; and in like manner does the Son of David usher in his sublime
Instructions. And this was very suitable and agreeable, both to the Character
of his Person, and to the Genius of his Doctrine. As to his Person, Blessing
became the Mouth of him, who was the Reconciler of God and Man, the great
Ambassador of Peace, the Author of Salvation and Happiness, and at whose
Nativity the Angels sang Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men. And as to
his Doctrine, The Precepts he was to deliver were of so refined and high-raised
a Nature, so little agreeable either to the Maxims of the World, or to the
grosser Relishes of the Animal Life, that they would have found but cold
Entertainment, had they not come recommended with a Reward, and been guarded on
each Side with a Beatitude.

'Twas requisite therefore that the Duty and the Blessing should go hand in
hand; and accordingly, our Lord, who well understood the Temper of the Sons of
Men, how passionately we pursue any thing that looks like Happiness, and how
apt we are to ask that Question, Who will show us any Good? thought it
expedient to join them both together in his Discourse, as they will be in the
Event; and to pronounce them Blessed here, whom he intends to pronounce so
hereafter, when he shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the World, Mat. 25.

And the better to win us over to the Practice of his Divine Sermon, our Lord,
like a wise Master Builder, lays the Foundation of his Discourse where we must
lay that of our Obedience, and assigns the first Place among his Beatitudes to
Humility, and Poverty of Spirit; for Humility is the Foundation of Obedience:
We must be first poor in Spirit, before we can be rich in Good Works; first
humble, before we can obey; and first obey, before we can reign. And therefore
with good Reason does our Lord lay down this as the first Principle and
Groundwork of his Institution, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.

In my Discourse upon these Words I shall,

I. Resolve what we are to understand by Poor in Spirit.

II. Show that this Poverty of Spirit is a Christian Duty; and the
Reasonablness of it.

III. Show the Happiness of those who are so disposed.

As to the Resolution of the First, I consider, that this Poverty of Spirit
here recommended by our Savior, is not a State of Life, but a State of Mind;
and we may take it either in Opposition to Covetousness, or in Opposition to
Pride and High-mindedness. If in Opposition to Covetousness, then to be poor in
Spirit, is, to have our Souls so disposed, as, First, Not to be eagerly carried
out in our Desires after any created Good; particularly, the good Things of
this lower World, whether Honors, Pleasures or Profit; especially, not to be
greedy and craving in our Desire of Riches. But Secondly, To be so moderately
and indifferently affected toward all these, as to be well contented without
them, and also ready to resign and part with them when either God shall think
fit to deprive us of them, or when we can no longer retain them with a good
Conscience. This is to be poor in Spirit, considered in Opposition to
Covetousness.

But it may also be considered as opposed to Pride or High-mindedness; and then
to be poor in Spirit will denote, First, A just, that is, a low and mean Sense
and Apprehension of our own selves, of our Souls, and of our Bodies; of our
Intellectuals, and of our Morals; of our Acquirements, and of our Performances.
And Secondly, As a Consequent of this, a Contentedness whenever any or all of
these are disesteemed or disparaged, either tacitly and interpretatively, by
Affronts, and dishonorable Treatments; or else directly, by express
Undervaluations, a Readiness to prefer others before our selves, and a
Willingness that the same Preference should be given them by others; an utter
Captivation of our Understandings to the Obedience of Faith, and a modest
Submission of them, in all doubtful Cases, to the Dictates of our Superiors; a
declining of Fame and Popularity, and a studious Concealment of our own Praises
and Excellencies; but when either the Glory of God, or the Good of our Brother
is concerned in the Publication. In short, (to use the Description of the
Psalmist) he is truly poor in Spirit, who from his Heart can say to the
Searcher of Hearts, Lord, I am not highminded, I have no proud looks; I do not
exercise my self in great Matters, which are too high for me; but I refrain my
soul, and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from his mother: yea, my
soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131.

Having thus briefly shown what it is to be poor in Spirit, both with respect
to Covetousness, and with respect to Pride and High-mindedness, I come now, in
the second Place, to show, that this Poverty of Spirit is a Christian Duty; and
withal the great Reasonableness of it. And, First, That Poverty of Spirit,
according to the first Acceptance of it, is a Christian Duty, 'twould be
Conviction enough to consider how often we are called upon in Scripture to
withdraw our Affections from the Creature, Colos. 3. 1. to seek those things
which are above; to set our affection on things above, not on things of the
earth; to mortify our members which are upon earth, among which is reckoned
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
Again, We are bid to beware of Covetousness, Luke 12. 15. and to have both our
Treasure and our Hearts in Heaven; Luke 12. 33. to be as indifferent in the
very Enjoyment of any Worldly Good, as if we enjoyed it not, 1 Cor. 7. 29. and
if in the Enjoyment, then certainly much more in the Desire. Lastly, to add no
more, We are cautioned by St. John not to love the World, neither the things
that are in the World. And lest we should take this only as a Matter of Advice
and Counsel, not express Command, he farther adds, If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.

But that it is a Christian Duty to be thus poor in Spirit, will be farther
evident from the very Nature and Design of the Christian Institution. The grand
thing intended in the Christian Religion was, to reduce straying Man to his
true Good and Happiness, to sublimate, refine and spiritualize his Nature, to
loose him from the Cords of Vanity, and from his fast Adhesions to created
Good; to purge him from all Earthly Concretions and Alloys; to dis-engage and
separate him, not only from the World about him, but even from one part of
himself: In one Word, to raise him from Earth to Heaven, not only by a Local,
but by a Moral and Mental Elevation.

Indeed, 'twas much otherwise under the Jewish Dispensation: There was then
great Indulgence afforded to the Animal Inclinations and Worldly Affections of
Men; and their very Religion was indeared to them by Temporal Promises and
Blessings. Not that God intended hereby to express any Liking or Approbation of
Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness, but only to comply with the Infirmity of
that gross, stupid People, which renderd them incapable of being won upon by
more noble Proposals. And besides, Dr. Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus.
it being a received Notion among the Idolatrous Inhabitants of the Land, (as
is observed by a late learned Author) that the Worship of their Idols, and
false Gods, did procure them fruitful Seasons, and Increase of all manner of
Store; it was in proportion requisite, that God also should promise his
Votaries the like Worldly Affluence, to keep them from running over to the
Gentile Superstitions.

Upon these, and the like Accounts much was indulged to the Jewish State and
People: They were never expressly required to abstract their Desires from the
Things of the World; nor, unless they proceeded to covet unjustly, that is,
what belonged to another, were they ever taxable for a too Earthly and downward
Disposition of Soul. Not but that Earthly-mindedness was as much an
Imperfection in it self as it is now, and was really forbidden according to the
more retired and involute Sense of the Law; but the Letter did not reach it,
because then was the Time and State of Imperfection; and it was the only Handle
which that People could be took hold of by, whose Hardness of Heart was the
Occasion of this, as well as of some other Indulgencies.

But now, they that shall think themselves obliged to no higher Measures of
Perfection under the Christian State, know not what manner of Spirit they are
of. Christ, as he has introduced a Better Hope, Heb. 7. 19. so has he annexed
to it more excellent, and more exalted Precepts; and as his Kingdom was not, so
neither is his Religion of this World. The Christian Law is Lex Ignea, a Law of
Fire, a Law that purifies and refines, that warms, actuates and enlightens,
that separates also and dissolves those strong Ties whereby the Soul sticks
glued to the Earth. And therefore the Apostle calls the Christian Institution
the law of the Spirit of life; Romans 8. 2. and in another place, the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. And what our Savior said of some Words
of his, may truly be applied to all, The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life, Joh. 6. 63.

This therefore being the Design of the Christian Dispensation, to perfect
Holiness, to advance the Interest of the Divine Life, to elevate us to the
utmost Degree of Moral Perfection our Nature is here capable of, and, as far as
is possible, to make us Partakers of the Divine, it is utterly inconsistent with
the End of such a Law as this to suffer us to lie grovelling with our Faces on
the Earth, to seek Rest and Happiness in things more ignoble than our selves,
and to grow one, as it were, with the dirty Planet upon which we live: We ought
rather, (as the Philosopher speaks) (...), aspire to the Measures of
Immortality, shake off the Clogs of Earth that weigh us down, and make haste to
be Angels as fast as we can. We are obliged by the Design, as well as by the
Rule of our Religion, to be as loose from the Creature as may be, not to love
the World, nor the Things of the World, whether the Lust of the Flesh, or the
Lust of the Eye, or the Pride of Life; but to be poor in Spirit, and empty of
the Creature, that we may be rich toward God, and filled with the Fullness of
him that fills all in all.

And now that to be thus poor in Spirit is a reasonable Duty, as well as a
necessary one, will sufficiently appear upon these two Grounds:

I. Because these Worldly Enjoyments are not our True Good.

II. Because they hinder and divert us from that which really is so.

That they are not our True Good is certain; for, if they were, we should then
find Rest and Satisfaction in them. But this we are so far from doing, that we
are as dissatisfied under our Enjoyments, as without them. For, though by
Fruition our Appetite be abated as to that particular Object which we
prosecuted, yet still we desire on farther, and our general Thirst after
Happiness is as unsatisfied as ever: Which plainly argues, that our True Good
is not to be found in these things, but that they are altogether Vanity and
Vexation. To place therefore our Happiness in such Objects is utterly absurd,
and against Reason, and argues us to be grossly ignorant of one of the two
Things, either of our selves, or of the Things of the World. We are either
ignorant of the Dignity and Excellence of our Natures, of the Designs and Ends
of our Creation, and of the Strengths and Capacities of our Appetites, which
can be satisfied with nothing less than Infinite: Or, if we do know and
consider all this, then are we so much the more grossly ignorant of the World
about us, to think there is any thing to be had in this Circle of Vanity, that
may satisfy the Importunity of such craving and capacious Appetites. Poverty
of Spirit therefore is reasonable, because the Things of the World are not our
True Good.

But this is the least part of their Charge: They are not only insufficient to
be our True Good themselves, but they also, Secondly, hinder and divert us from
that which really is so. For, not to mention the many Snares and Temptations of
a great Fortune, and what a dangerous thing it is to be always furnished with
all the Possibilities and Opportunities of Sin and Folly; I only observe, that
the very Desire of these Earthly Things diverts us, and takes us off from the
Love of God. When our Love is divided, even among Created Objects, the Force of
it will be much abated in respect of each; but much more will the Love of the
Creature diminish from the Love of God: For there is so vast a Disproportion
betwixt the Kinds, as well as the Degrees of the two Goods, that he that once
comes to relish one, will find but little Taste in the other. And therefore,
says St. Austin, Monemus ne mundum ametis, ut eum qui fecit mundum libere
ametis: Our Advice is, that you love not the World, that so you may love its
Maker freely. The Truth is, to love God freely, we should love him entirely;
for, every Advance we make toward the Creature, so much we recede from God;
for these are two contrary Terms of Motion: And there is so great a Contrariety
between the Love of God, and the Love of the World, that they do not only abase
each other, but are in some Degrees utterly inconsistent. For so St. John, if
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, Joh. 2. 15. And
if this be the Consequence of loving the World, I think the less we have to do
with it, the better; and that there is a great deal of reason to be Poor in
Spirit.

Thus far have we considered the Duty and Reasonableness of Poverty of Spirit,
as it signifies an Indifferency of Desire to the Things of the World: I come
now to consider it, as it denotes Humility, and Lowliness of Mind; whereof I am
also to show, I. The Duty. II. The Reasonableness.


The Duty of Humility is plain in all the Scripture, but more frequently and
earnestly inculcated in the New Testament; insomuch that it may be reckoned
among the distinguishing Doctrins of the Christian Religion. The Heathen Morals
almost overlooked it, and in the Old Testament Writings it is but sparingly
recommended; but in the Christian Institution we every where meet with it in
Capital Characters, as a Precept of the first Magnitude, Jam. 4. 6. God
resists the proud, says St. James; and, 1 Pet. 5. 5. be ye clothed with
Humility, says St. Peter. And our Lord himself, who was a perfect Example of
all Moral and Divine Perfection, and in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt
bodily, seems yet to commend himself to our Imitation, chiefly upon the Account
of his Humility; Learn of me, says he, for I am meek, and lowly in heart,
Matthew. 11. 29.

But there needs no Multiplication of Scripture for the Proof of this. I shall
therefore only farther observe, That the greatest Personages that ever were in
the World were always most eminent and conspicuous for this Excellency. Out of
many, I shall select three Instances, which may well deserve our Consideration.
The first shall be the great Forerunner of our Blessed Savior, the Holy
Baptist. This Great and Holy Person, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites
from Jerusalem, to demand of him who he was, not only disclaimed the Titles of
Christ, of Elias, and of that Prophet, (this his humble Spirit was not content
with) but went farther, and gave this strange and mortified Account of himself,
I am, says he, the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Joh. 1. 23. The
Prophet David, indeed, had said before of himself, That he was a Worm, and no
Man, Psalm. 22. 6. And this, one would think, was a sufficient Stretch of
Humility: But the Baptist speaks in a Strain below him, allowing himself to be
no more than a Voice. The same holy Person thought himself unworthy to baptize
his Savior; nay, what makes that less admirable, not worthy so much as to
unloose the very Latchet of his Shoes.

The next Instance I shall mention, is the ever-blessed Mother of our Lord.
She, if ever any Creature, had Cause to be proud: It Is impossible even to
imagine a stronger Temptation. She was saluted by an Archangel, said to be a
Person highly favored with God, and blessed among Women; and, in particular,
That she should be Mother to the Son of the Highest, and that too by the Power
of the Most High. Was not here enough to betray a poor innocent Virgin into
Pride and Vanity? Had the Angels half so much Reason for their Pride and
Haughtiness, when they fell from the Heights of Glory? Well, how did she behave
her self under the dangerous Salutation? Why, she seemed to make it rather
Matter of Obedience and Resignation, than of Triumph and Boasting. Behold, says
she, the handmaid of the Lord: be it unto me according to thy word, Luke 1. 38.

But the most stupendous Instance of Humility that ever was, or can be, was in
the Person of our Blessed Lord; whether we consider him in the Mystery of his
Incarnation, or in the mean Circumstances of his Birth, or in the humble Method
of his Life; whether we consider him as emptying himself of his Eternal
Glories, and drawing a Cloud over his Brightness; or as forbidding the Devils
to publish his Divinity, and Men to declare his Miracles, and his Disciples to
tell of his Transfiguration; or as washing his Disciples Feet, or as riding
upon an Ass, or as conversing among Sinners; and lastly, choosing to die between
Thieves. These, and many such other Instances of Condescension, argue the most
profound Humility that can be imagined; and withal, how concerned our Lord was
to commend and endear this most excellent Duty to the Practice of Men. Of all
the Virtues and Excellencies in the World, one would have thought this of
Humility least capable of being practiced and exemplified by the Son of God.
Commend it, indeed, he might by Precept, as well as any other; but sure, one
would think, not by Example. But see what rare Arts and Mysteries God has found
out, to teach us this Lesson. And therefore we may well conclude, that there is
Excellency and Necessity in it, as well as Difficulty; and how much it concerns
us to learn, what God has been so peculiarly sollicitous to teach.

It is then a Christian Duty to be thus Poor in Spirit: And the Reasonableness
of it is as great as the Obligation. This I might show from the good
Consequences, and happy Effects of this Disposition of Spirit; but this falling
in more properly under the Third Partition of my Discourse, I shall for the
present content my self with some other Consideration, taken from the Condition
of Man; whom I shall consider.

I. As a Creature.

II. As a Sinner.

First then, Man is a Creature, and this is a very reasonable Ground for
Humility, and Poverty of Spirit. We usually think it a very humbling
Consideration to re-mind a Person of the Meanness of his Original. But now,
What Original can be so mean, as to be from Nothing? It is enough to take down
the Spirit of the brightest Intelligence, to consider, that nothing was his
Original; a State more vile and dishonorable than the Chaos it self. Now, this
is the Condition of Man: He had his Rise from nothing, and derives his
Pedigree, by his Mother's Side, from Darkness and Emptiness: And though now, by
the Omnipotency of his Creator, he is something; yet still he holds his Being
as precariously as he first received it, and depends as much for his Existence
upon the Will of his Creator, as Light does upon the Sun, or the Image in the
Glass upon the Presence of the Body. If God does but turn his Face from him,
and cease to behold him, he will vanish into nothing. God spoke the Word,
indeed, before he was made, but to unmake him there needs no contradictory
Fiat; he need only be silent, and not sustain him by the Word of his Power. And
shall that Being be proud, which was once Nothing, and has still such a Natural
Bent toward Annihilation, as to need only a bare Negative to make him Nothing
again? No, says the Wise Man, Pride was not made for man, nor furious anger for
them that are born of a woman. Man must forget his Extraction, to give the
least Admittance to Pride; and he need but study and consider that, to have the
most inward and feeling Sense of Humility.

This Consideration is yet farther improveable, if we admit the Hypothesis of
those who say, that to be a Creature involves a State of Nothing, as well as an
Origination from Nothing; that there is nothing Real or Positive in any
Creature, but what is from God; and that though a Creature be Something as of
God, yet he is nothing as of himself, nor can exert any positive Act or
Operation from himself, as a distinct Principle of Action; being still, as to
that, as much a Nothing as before. If this be true, (and he that shall
consider, and well understand, Lib. 4. Cogitat. Ration. de Deo, p. 574.
what is alleged by M. Poiret, in Defense of this Notion, will scarce find it
in his Power to think otherwise) certainly Man has infinite Reason to be poor
in Spirit, and to descend into the lowest Abyss of Humility and
Self-Abdication, as becomes a Being that not only was once, but is still a mere
Nothing.

Man therefore, as a Creature, has sufficient Reason to be humble, and poor in
Spirit. But if we consider him 2ly, as a Sinner, he has Cause, not only to be
humble, but to lie down flat upon his Face, and look upon himself to be more
base and vile than the very Dust whereof he was formed, and whereon he treads.
To be a Sinner is much more vile than to be the meanest Creature; and the
Nonentity of Sin is more dishonorable than that of Nature. This latter, though
it cannot actually conform, yet it is not disobedient to the Will of God: But
the former Nothing contradicts and resists his Will. This is, as I think one of
the Fathers calls it, Nihil Rebelle, and in Deum ar matum, an Armed Nothing.
Indeed, to be a Creature, involves Weakness and Imperfection in it; but then it
also involves Good, because nothing can be, but by partaking of the Perfection
of God. But now, to be a Sinner involves nothing but pure and unmixt Evil; and
is withal, a farther Remove from Good than to be nothing, since it is, not only
negatively, but contrarily opposed to it. It Is indeed the greatest Monstrosity
and Deformity in the World, the greatest Contradiction to Order and Harmony, to
Reason and Proportion, to Wellbeing and Happiness: In one Word, It Is the only
Thing which God hates. What great Reason then has Man to be humble, and poor in
Spirit; poor even to Emptiness, and Self-Annihilation, who is not only a
Creature, but a sinful Creature!

Having now shown the Duty and Reasonableness of Poverty of Spirit, in the full
Latitude of the Word, I proceed to show, in the Third Place, the Happiness of
those who are so disposed. Blessed are the poor in spirit, says our Savior,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. That Is the only Blessedness which is here
expressly mentioned: But they are happy also in other Regards: For, in the first
place, What an happy Disposition of Soul must it be, always to carry about one
such a strong and lively Conviction of the Vanity of all created Good, as not
to run out into vehement Desires after it? For, Desire it self, to go no
farther, is always a great Torment: It Is the same to the Soul, that Thirst is
to the Body; and Hope deferred (as the Wise Man tells us) makes the heart sick,
Prove. 13. But that is not all; for here will come in the Trouble of
Disappointment, as well as of Desire: Not that which the World generally
understands by Disappointment, the not compassing what you designed, (though that
also will often happen) but the not enjoying what you have compassed, the
Disappointment of Fruition.

But now, to be poor in Spirit is the Way to avoid all this. Such a Person
expects no Happiness from the Creature; and consequently, not to find it there,
will be to him no Disappointment. He does not lean upon any created Good with
any Stress; and therefore, though it should fail under him, his Fall will be
but slight and easy. And, indeed, it is not to be imagined what a deal of
Anxiety, Care, Restlesness, Disappointment, Sorrow, fruitless Labor and
Endeavor are saved by this Poverty of Spirit. And I think this is no small
Degree of Happiness.

Again, Is it not a great Happiness to be so moderately and indifferently
affected toward the World, as to be contented with any Condition in it? To be
of a quiet, sedate, resigned and dis-interessed Disposition? He that is thus
disposed, is above, or rather below the Reach of calamitous Accidents. The
Storm flies over his Head, he has nothing for Fortune to take hold of: Nor will
he be under the Hazard of parting with his Religion, to secure his Worldly
Interest. No; he can do his Duty, though at the Expense of Martyrdom; and though
highly deserving of the best Times, may yet be trusted in the worst.

Then as to the Happiness attending upon Poverty of Spirit, as it stands for
Humility, there is no one Virtue that is more her own Reward than this: Pride
is the most uneasy thing in the World; and withal, the most odious; uneasy to
the Patient, and odious to the Observer. And, as it is uneasy in it self, so
is it the Parent of many troublesome and uneasy Passions; such as Anger,
Contention, Revenge, Envy, Impatience, etc. So that it is hard to determine
whether the proud Man be more ridiculous or miserable.

But now, to be humble, is to be wise, to understand the true Proportion and
Measure of a Creature, to be serene, to be contented, to be thankful, to be
pleasant and cheerful, to be calm and untroubled, to be dispassionate and
unconcerned. In short, No Man enjoys what he really is, so much as he that does
not fancy himself what he is not. And besides, The humble Man is sure to get
that very Honor which he declines, and because he declines it. I end this with
the Observation of Plato, That a Man that does not rightly know himself can
neither be prudent, good, nor happy; which is all that goes to the Perfection
of Man: And he that does, is sure to be all this.

Thus far of the Happiness belonging to the two Kinds of Poverty of Spirit
severally. There remains yet one more belonging to them both in common; and
that is, the Kingdom of Heaven, which I suppose to comprehend both Grace and
Glory. As to Grace, we are told by the Apostle, that God has chosen the poor in
this world to be rich in faith. And in the same place where God is said to
resist the Proud, he is said also to give Grace to the Humble, Jam. 4. 6.
Indeed, Humility is the proper Foundation of Grace, and the Theater of all
Divine Operations. This State of Nothingness, and Self-emptiness, is as much a
Preparation to the New, as the Void and Inform Space was to the Old Creation:
It Is the true and proper first Matter in the Spiritual World, into which the
Form of the New Creature will be introduced: And if Man does but contain
himself in this Nothing, God will not fail to work all, and to be all in him;
having promised his Special Presence to the Man of an humble Spirit, Isa. 57.
15.

Then, as for Glory, it is highly equitable, that they who have humbled
themselves here, should be exalted hereafter; and that they who have renounced
this World, should have their Portion in the next. And to convince the
slow-hearted and distrustful World, that thus it shall be, God has already
given a Specimen of it, in the Example of his Son, who was particularly eminent
for this double Poverty of Spirit; for Renouncing the World, and for Debasing
himself; whom therefore God has highly exalted, giving him a name above every
name; Phil. 2. 9. and has also placed him on his own Right Hand, Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Discourse the Second.
Matthew. V. ver. iv. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
THEY are the Words of him who was himself a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted
with Grief; and who was also acquainted with Happiness too, with the Joys of
Religion, with the Refreshments of Angels, with the Antepasts of Glory, and
with that Peace of God which now passes all Understanding, and shall hereafter
satisfy all Desire: He had tasted of both Cups, the Cup of Trembling, and the
Cup of Salvation: He had tried both the Miseries of Human Nature, and the
Glories of the Divine; and so well knew what Proportion the Consolations of God
have to the Infelicities of Man; and how little the Sufferings of this present
time are, in comparison of the Glory that shall be revealed to them that with
Meekness bear them, and with Fruitfulness improve under them. He therefore
having tried both the Worst, and the Best, must needs be a proper Judge in the
Case, whether Happiness may consist with Affliction, or no. And he is so far
from discouraging his Disciples from treading in the same thorny, rugged Way
that he did, that he rather gives them all the Invitation in the World to do
so, casts a Glory round the Head of the Sorrowful, and represents Grief as a
very lovely thing, by telling them, that Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted.

But are all those blessed that mourn? And does Grief entitle all that are
under its Dominions, to Happiness and Consolation? This, indeed, would be good
News to this our World, where there is so much of it; which is a Valley of
Tears, and a Region of Sadness; where there are a thousand Sighs, for one
Smile; and where the mourners go about the streets, Eccl. 12. 5. But it is not
all Mourning that comes within the Circle of this Beatitude; nor shall all that
sow in Tears, reap with Joy. As there are some that sorrow without Hope, so is
there some kind of Sorrow, concerning which we can hope nothing. There is a
Sorrow that proceeds from no Human and Moral Principle, but from Natural and
Necessary Causes; as, from the Influence of External Impressions, from the
Grosness of the Spirits and Blood, from Melancholy, and the like. Again, There
is a Sorrow, which though of an Human and Moral Extraction, yet springs from no
good or laudable Principle, but is altogether of a neutral and indifferent
Nature. Again, There is a Sorrow that proceeds from an ill Principle; as, from
Malice, Envy, Covetousness, Ambition, Servile Fear, and the like: And which
tends also to an ill End; as, to Revenge, Impatience, Despair, etc. Accordingly
the Apostle tells us of a Worldly Sorrow, and of a Sorrow that works Death, 2
Cor. 7. So far is all Mourning from being Christian Mourning, or from giving us
a just Title to this Beatitude.

Here therefore it will concern us to consider Three Things: I. That there is
such a Thing as the Duty of Christian Mourning. II. Who these Christian
Mourners are. III. Wherein consists their Blessedness.


And First, I say, that there is such a thing as Christian Mourning. This must
needs seem a strange Paradox to the Philosophy of those who make the Pleasures
of the Animal Life the End of Man, and think that now we have nothing to do but
to enjoy them, and that God sent Man into the World to the same purpose as he
placed the Leviathan in the Sea, only to take his Pass-time therein. 'Twould be
but a cold Employment to go about to convince such Men, either of the
Necessity, or of the Blessedness of Mourning; whose Answer would be in the
Language of those Sinners in the Book of Wisdom, Come on, let us enjoy the good
things that are present, and let us speediby use the creatures, as in our
youth. Let us fill our selves with costly wine, and ointment; and let no flower
of the spring pass by us. Let us crown our selves with rose-buds before they be
withered, let none of us go without his part of our voluptuousness, let us
leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place; for this is our portion, and our
lot is this.

This is the Style of the Epicurean School. And there are also some Christians,
who, though they do not make the Pleasure of the Animal Life their End, Lot and
Portion, as do the other, yet they think they may allow themselves a great
Scope and Compass in it, that they may indulge themselves to the full in all
the Mirth and Jollity of the World, and that there is no need of any such thing
as mourning in Sion. These Men seem to have the same Notion of Christ's
Religion, that the Jews had of his Person. They looked upon him under the
Character of a great Temporal Prince; and dreamt of nothing under his Reign but
Victories, and Triumphs, and Festivals, and Vine-yards, and Olive-yards. And so
some think of his Religion. They look upon it as a fine, gay, secular, jolly
Profession; as a State of Freedom and Emancipation, of Ease and Pleasantness;
as if the Children of the Kingdom had nothing to do, but to eat, drink, and be
merry, and that Mourning had no more place in this, than it is to have in the
New Jerusalem, wherein, as the Evangelical Prophet tells us, All tears shall be
wiped away from men's eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, nor any more pain, Rev. 21. 4.

It is, indeed, most certain, that Religion has its Joys and Pleasures, and
that the Christian Religion has the most of any, and that they are such too as
by far transcend all others; that the best Life is also the most pleasant Life;
and that it is worth while to live well, if it were only for the mere pleasure
of doing so. And there is a great deal of Truth in that noble Saying of
Hierocles, Comment. in Aurea Carmina, p. 177.
(...), etc. The good Man excels the wicked Man, not only in Goodness, but also
in Pleasure it self; for whose sake only the other is wicked. Nay, farther; The
Pleasures of good Men are not only greater than those of ill Men, but such as
they cannot enjoy or relish, and have no manner of Notion of. As there are some
Things of God, so there are Pleasures of Religion, which the Animal Man does
not perceive: For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and the
stranger does not intermeddle with their joy. Nay, farther yet; No Man has any
Ground or Pretense for Rejoicing, but a good Man. It Is the most usurping and
daring Piece of Impudence in the World, for an ill Man to laugh, or be merry.
What has he to do with Mirth, who has the Wrath of God abiding on him, and Hell
open to receive him? It does not belong to him, it is none of his Part. Mirth is
the Reward of a good Conscience, the Prerogative of Innocence, and the peculiar
Right of good Men: And they not only may be joyful and cheerful, but are also
commanded to be so. Thus in the Law, Deuteronomy. 16. 11. Thou shall rejoice before
the Lord thy God, says Moses to the Jewish Votary. So again the Psalmist, Psalm.
33. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; for it becomes well the just to be
thankful. Again, Psalm. 68. Let the righteous be glad, and rejoice before God:
let them also be merry and joyful. And again, Psalm. 100. Serve the Lord with
gladness. And says our blessed Lord, in his Farewell-Discourse to his
Disciples, Joh. 15. 11. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might
remain in you, and that your joy might be full. And we are exhorted to rejoice
evermore by the Apostle, 1 These. 5. who also reckons Joy among the Fruits of
the Holy Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.

Now all this is true, and I not only confess, but also recommend the thing
hitherto pleaded for. But then it is also to be considered what the Wise Man
says, that to every thing there is a season; and that there is a Time to weep
and mourn, as well as a Time to laugh and dance, Eccles. 3. And this not only
from Natural, but also from Moral Necessity: For the Circumstances of Human
Life are such, as make it our Duty, as well as Fate, to mourn, and be
sorrowful. Religion has its gloomy, as well as bright Side; and there are to be
Days of Darkness, as well as Days of Light, in the Christian Calendar.

This is intimated to us by several Expressions, and by several Examples, in
Holy Scripture. Thus the Church in general is, in the Divine Song of Solomon,
compared to a Dove; which, though considerable for some other Qualities, is yet
for nothing so remarkable as for her continual Mourning. So far was that Wise
Man from the Opinion of those who make Temporal Prosperity, a Mark of the True
Church. Again, says the same wise Preacher, It is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to the house of feasting. And again, Sorrow is better than
laughter. Where you see he not only inculcates the Practice of Mourning, but
also expressly prefers it before its Contrary. And he gives this Reason for it,
because by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better, Eccles. 7.
3. And therefore he makes this the Measure of Wisdom and Folly, by telling us
in the next Verse, That the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but
the heart of fools in the house of mirth. This Practice of Mourning is every
where inculcated in the Writings of the Prophets, but especially of the Prophet
Jeremy, who has writ a whole Book of Lamentations. But, above all, it is
remarkable what our Lord himself says of Mourning, in the 16th. of St. John,
where he seems to make it the great Mark of Difference between his Disciples
and the Men of this World, Verily, verily, says he, I say unto you, that ye
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice.

Nor do there want Examples of this holy Mourning in Scripture. Thus the
Devotion of Hannah is expressed by her being a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, 1 Samuel 1. 15. The Royal Prophet spent his whole Time almost in Mourning and
Sorrow, which he also indulged and fomented with Music and Divine Hymns: And
yet he was a Man wise and learned, and a Man after God's own Heart; and withal,
a Man of great Business, and public Occupation. Thus again the Prophet Jeremy
was a great Mourner; a Man as insatiable in his Sorrow, as some are in their
Luxury. He was so full of Grief, as not to be satisfied with the natural and
ordinary Ways of expressing it: And therefore says he, Oh, that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night,
Jer. 9. 1. More I might instance in, but I close all with the great Example of
our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who, as the Text says, was a Man of Sorrows,
and acquainted with Grief; and that not only in his last Passion and Agony,
when his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and when, as the Author
to the Hebrews says, Heb. 5. 7. He offered up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears; but also throughout the whole Course of his Life. We
oftentimes read of his Weeping and Sorrowing, as upon his Prospect of the City
Jerusalem, at the Grave of Lazarus, and a little after his last Supper, when,
as the Text says, Mat. 26. he began to be sorrowful, and very heavy; and in the
Garden, where he wept Tears of Blood. But we never read that he ever laughed.
Once, indeed, it is said, Luke 10. that he rejoiced; but then it was not with an
outward, sensitive and tumultuous Joy; but with an inward, spiritual and silent
Exultation: He rejoiced in Spirit. And what was it for? Not upon any Animal or
Secular Account, but upon an Occasion altogether Spiritual and Divine. 'Twas
for the abundant Grace of his Father, bestowed upon his Disciples; and for
their good use of it, and improvement under it.

I do not intend in all this, such rigid Measures as are practiced and exacted
by some of the Religious Orders of the Roman Church; where a Man is not allowed
so much as to laugh, or to say any thing but Frater memento mori, for several
Years together. This would be to turn Society into a dumb Show, to make Life a
Burden, and withal, to bring an ill Report upon the good Land of Promise, and
to discourage Men from the Christian Religion. But that which I stand for is
this, That we ought not so to give our selves over to Secular Mirth and
Jollity, but that we are still to remember that we are in the Vail of Tears;
that there is a Time for Mourning, as well as for Rejoicing; and that this is
that Time, now we are in our Exile, and in the midst of Dangers and Fears; and
that therefore Sorrow must sometimes have its Turn, as well as Joy; and that
there is such a Thing as Christian Mourning.

Nor need we be troubled that we have discovered such an ungrateful Duty, since
there is a Beatitude annexed to it. But because, as was before remarked, all
manner of Mourning will not come within its Compass, it will concern us, in the
second place, to consider who these Christian Mourners are. This, I think,
cannot be resolved by any better Measure, than by considering what are the true
and proper Causes why a Christian ought to mourn. Now to this I shall answer,
I. In General. II. In Particular.


In General, I say, that then a Christian mourns for a due and proper Cause,
when the Principle of his Sorrow is either Zeal for the Honor and Glory of
God, or a Concern for the Good of Mankind: Nothing less than this can either
deserve his Sorrow, or derive any Virtue or Excellency upon it. So that, in
short, Piety and Charity will be the two Principles into which all true
Christian Mourning must be at last resolved.

But because this may be exemplified in variety of Instances, it will not be
amiss to consider some of the more remarkable of them. I answer therefore more
particularly, That one very proper and reasonable Cause why a Christian should
mourn, is, the Consideration of Sin. For a Man to consider seriously what a
great and strange kind of Evil Sin is; how contrary to God, to his Nature, to
his Will, to his Commands, to his Goodness, to his Justice, to the wise Order
of his Grace and Providence, and especially to the great Mystery of Godliness:
Then to consider how contrary it is to Man, to his Nature, to his Reason, to
his Rational Instincts and Inclinations, to his inward Peace and Satisfaction;
and lastly, to his Interest, both Temporal and Spiritual, Private and Public,
Present and Future: Then again, to consider, how prone we are to commit it, and
that we our selves are the Authors of this Proneness: And Lastly, How much of
this great, strange Evil there is in the World; how Iniquity abounds, and the
Love of many waxes cold; that the whole World, as St. John says, Joh. 5. 19.
lies in wickedness; that there are but few that pretend to any Strictness or
Regularity of Living, and yet sewer that discharge their Pretensions truly and
sincerely. I say, For a Man to consider all this, to consider it seriously and
thoroughly, must needs be a sad Scene of Contemplation, and such as will justly
call for his Sorrow and Mourning. It was so to God himself, who is brought in
by Moses as grieved at his very Heart for the Abundance of Wickedness which he
beheld in the Old World. And I question not, but that, among the bitter
Ingredients of our Lord's Passion, this was none of the least, to foresee that
there would be so many, who by their final Impenitence, and persevering in
Wickedness, would receive no Benefit from it. And, if we may judge by
Proportion, the Angels in Heaven, who rejoice at the Conversion of one Sinner,
do also mourn and lament for the irreclaimable Wickedness of so many Millions
as are in the World. It Is a Thing worth our Considering, and worth our
Lamenting. And therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. Rivers of waters run
down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law. And again, It grieveth me when I
see the transgressors. This is a virtuous and laudable Sorrow, as proceeding
from a good and noble Principle, from Piety and Charity: And he that mourns
upon this Consideration, is a true Christian Mourner.

Again, Secondly, Another very proper and reasonable Cause why a Christian
should mourn, is the Consideration of the Miseries of Human Life. It Is a most
deplorable thing to consider what a deal, and what Variety of Misery there is
in the World at once. Many Things must concur, to make us tolerably happy; but
one Thing alone is oftentimes enough to make us very miserable. And how unhappy
then must Human Life be, among such a Multitude of Evils as are incident to it!
I shall not go about to re-count or describe them: They are too many to be
numbered, and too various to be reduced to any Method. This only I say, That
should a Man, by some compendious Device, have an united Prospect of the
Miseries of the World, as our Savior, by the Devil's Artifice, had of the
Glories of it, 'twould be the most dismal Landscape that ever was drawn, or can
be imagined. 'Twas for this that some of the Ancients reckoned an early Death
among the greatest Blessings of Heaven. Quem Dii diligunt, Adolescens moritur,
The Favorite of the Gods dies young, says the Comedian. But Solomon goes
farther, Eccless. 6. and prefers an untimely Birth before a Man that has spent
many Years in this World. To be short, Such is our Condition here, that we see
God has not thought fit to trust us with the least Foreknowledge of what is
coming upon us, lest, like Men upon a deep Precipice, we should be amazed,
confounded, and fall down at the dreadful Prospect. And if the private
Circumstances of each single Man's Life be so black and disconsolate, that it is
thought fit he should see no farther than he goes, what shall we think of the
Miseries of all Mankind put together? If any thing be worth our Sorrow,
certainly this is. Our compassionate Savior wept over the approaching Ruin of
perising Jerusalem: And shall not a Christian mourn for the Miseries of the
whole World? We suspect the Good Nature of him that can endure to sit out a
deep Tragedy with dry Eyes: And can we stand and look upon a miserable World
without mourning? There are some Men of Rocky Hearts, and impassible Tempers,
that could stand by, and see the whole World in Flames without any Concern,
were but their own little selves secure from the Ruin. And this some are
pleased to call Philosophy. But certainly, Christian Charity, that obliges us
to sympathize with the Miseries of each particular Man, to weep with those that
weep, as the Apostle speaks, does much more require us to lament the common
Miseries of Human Life. This therefore is a very proper Cause of Christian
Mourning.

As is also, in the Third Place, the Consideration of the Vanity and Emptiness
of all Worldly and Created Good. The general Cause of most of the Discontent
and Melancholy that is in the World, is because Men cannot get so much of
Worldly Good as they desire; not at all questioning its Vanity. But, on the
contrary, supposing that if they could compass such and such Things, they
should be happy; and their only Trouble is, that they cannot get them. Now this
is properly Worldly Sorrow, and comes from an ill Principle, either from
Covetousness, Lust, or Ambition. But now there may be a virtuous and laudable
Discontent, as well as a vicious and sordid one: And that is, When a Man
mourns, and is troubled; not because he cannot compass such and such Created
Goods: No; perhaps he would not eat of the Fruit, if he could reach it, but
purely because they are all empty and vain, and cannot satisfy. He does not
grieve because he wants them, for it may be he chooses to be without them; but
because they are wanting in themselves, and have not that in them which can
ever make him happy. And, indeed, it is enough to cast a Damp upon the Spirit
of any Considering Man, to think that what is substantial and satisfactory is
out of his Reach, and that all is Vanity and Vexation that lies within it; that
the former he cannot enjoy, and that the latter cannot satisfy. To be
thoroughly and inwardly convinced that all Fruition is a Cheat, and so to have
nothing in Expectation, no one Glimpse or Prospect of Enjoyment before one, to
invite one to live longer: This is a sad Reflection, and such as must needs
cause Sorrow and Mourning. But then, it is a very laudable one, and such as
proceeds from an excellent Principle. It Is a Sorrow that arises from Increase
of Wisdom, Eccles. 1. 18. from a right Notion and Understanding of Things, from
Contempt of the World, from a due Consciousness of our own Powers and
Capacities, and from the more than ordinary Aspirings of the Soul to God, who
alone is able to satisfy her. And, to be sorry upon such Principles as these,
is to sorrow in a Rational Way, and after a Godly Sort.

To instance one more: Another very proper Cause why a Christian should mourn,
is the Consideration of the Uncertainty of our Salvation, and the infinite
Misery of those who shall miscarry in so momentous a Concern. As to the
Certainty of our Salvation, it is not so great as some are apt to imagine: For,
though I can be assured of this Proposition with a certainty of Divine Faith, it
being Matter of express Revelation, that the Faithful and the Penitent shall be
saved; yet that I believe and repent, can be known to me only on the Grounds of
Experimental Knowledge, which is an Human, and therefore Fallible Testimony:
And consequently, the Conclusion always following the weaker Part, I cannot be
assured of my Salvation with a Certainty of Divine Faith, but only with an
Human and Moral Assurance; which, indeed, to call it by a right Name, is no
more than an high Probability, a strong Presumption.

But yet, if even this Moral Assurance were Absolute and Irreversible, and were
to take in the Future, as well as the Present, 'twere yet a considerable Stay
and Security. But it is not so with us: That Assurance which we have is
absolute only for the Present, and reaches not the Future, but only upon
Condition, supposing that we persevere in the present Disposition; which,
considering the Multability of our Wills, and the Multitude of our Temptations,
and the frequent Examples of Apostasy, is a thing not only of uncertain, but of
hazardous Consquence.

And as we are not, cannot be absolutely sure that we shall not miscarry, so,
on the other hand, it is most certain, that we shall be unspeakably miserable if
we do. For a Man to fall off from his last End, and only true Good, without any
hopes or Possibility of Recovery, is a thing that can hardly be thought of
without Confusion and Amazement. Now let a Man put these two things together,
That whether he shall be saved, or no, is a Matter of a depending and uncertain
issue; and that if he miscarry, his Case is intolerable; and then tell me
whether this be not a just Cause for Trouble and Sadness; and whether this
Salvation, this uncertain Salvation, be not to be wrought out with Sorrow and
Mourning, as well as with Fear and Trembling?

Certainly it is: And were it not for this, it would be no easy thing to give
an Account, why Gravity, Seriousness, and Sobriety of Spirit should be such
decent and commendable Qualities in Men. For otherwise, Why should not a Man
give himself up to the utmost Gaity and Jollity, and express it in all manner
of odd Postures and Gestures, up to the height of an Antic Dissoluteness? I
say, Why should not a Man do this? But only because this is not agreeable to
the Part he is to act; who being in a State of Probation and Doubtfulness, and
having so great an Interest depending, ought rather to temper and correct the
Luxuriancy of his Spirit, with some Grains of Sadness, and Pensiveness; and
beware of laughing too much here, lest it should be his Turn to weep and mourn
hereafter.

These are the principal Causes of Mourning. And from hence we may gather, who
the Christian-Mourners are, who are concerned in this Beatitude; those, namely,
whose Mourning proceeds upon these, or such like Grounds; which are at last
reducible to either of these two Principles, Zeal for the Honor and Glory of
God, or a Concern for the Good of Mankind. They who mourn upon the Score of
Piety or Charity, are true Christian-Mourners.

It remains that we now consider, in the last place, wherein consists their
Blessedness. St. Austin, in his Confessions and Meditations, very frequently
speaks of the Grace of Tears; and as often prays for it: And well he might,
since it is attended with such happy Effects, and has such a Blessedness
intailed upon it. Its Blessedness is both present, and to come. What the
present Blessedness is, we may learn from the Wise Man, who tells us, That by
the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. It is so; for by this
it becomes more soft and tender for all Divine Impressions, for the Love of
God, for Devotion, for Charity to our Neighbor, for Mercy and Compassion, for
Repentance, and the like. It is also hereby made more serious, more
considerative and reflecting, more recollected, more settled and composed; which
is to be considerably better. For, as Sorrow is the Principle of Consideration,
so is Consideration the Principle of Repentance and Well-living, according to
that of the Psalmist, I considered my own ways, and turned my feet to thy
testimonies, Psalm. 119.

And of all this we have a very signal Example in the Nation of the Jews, who,
till the Time of the Babylonish Captivity, were very gross and carnal,
notwithstanding so many Miracles of God, both in their Deliverance out of
Egypt, and in their Passage through the Wilderness. And when they were brought
into the Land of Canaan, though they had such open and clear Testimonies of the
Divine Presence among them; so many Prophecies, so many Miracles, and so many
Apparitions of Angels; yet we find them ever now and then relapsing into
Idolatry. But after the Captivity, when they had gone through a Course of
Sorrow and Affliction, they presently began to behave themselves more orderly;
and seemed, like Gold, to refine upon the Trial of the Furnace: For we do not
read, that after that time they ever fell into Idolatry. And accordingly, God
began to deal with them now no longer as Children, but as Persons of some
Maturity, by withdrawing from them his Visible Presence, and the Spirit of
Prophecy; thinking them to have learnt enough already in the School of
Affliction, to supersede all other Methods of Instruction and Discipline. And
from that Time forwards, the Minds of Men began to be more generally erected
toward Heaven, and the Good Things of a better Life; when they saw, that the
strictest Observers of the Law fell oftentimes into those Evils which were
denounced against the Transgressors of it. By which means they were, by
degrees, prepared for the Reception of the Gospel.

This is the present Blessedness of those that mourn: What the Future is, we
are told by our Savior; who says, they shall be comforted; that is, shall be
received into a State or Place of Bliss and Happiness, Joy and Delight; and be
infinitely rewarded in Heaven for all their pious and charitable Mourning upon
Earth: According to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 126. He that now goes on his
way sorrowing, and brings forth good seed, shall, doubtless, come again with
joy, and bring his sheaves with him. They shall be received into the City of
God, the New Jerusalem, where there is no more Mourning, nor Cause of Mourning;
and where not only all Sin, but even those very Virtues which are founded upon
the least Imperfection, shall be done away. Here therefore there will be no
Room left even for Godly Sorrow; but all shall be Joy and Gladness, Harmony and
Thanksgiving. And, Blessed are they who so mourn here, that they may enter into
this Joy of their Lord hereafter.

Discourse the Third.
Matthew. V. ver. v. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.
THE Judgment of God differs so very widely from that of Man, that his Thoughts
are seldom as our Thoughts, nor his Ways as our Ways. But in nothing is the
Difference so signal, as in the Conclusions concerning Good and Evil, Happiness
and Misery. Our Judgments are seldom conformable to the Divine in Matters of
mere Truth and Notion, but much seldomer in Practical Maxims, and Moral
Resolutions. Here, if any where, is chiefly to be found that Vain Philosophy,
which we are cautioned against by the Apostle; Col. 2. 8. and that Tradition of
Man, and those Rudiments of the World, which are not after Christ. Herein it is
that the Wisdom of God, and the Wisdom of the World, which seldom meet in one
Point, stand yet most divided and opposed to each other; and though the latter be
always, in some Respect or other, Foolishness to the former, yet never so much
as in her Resolutions concerning Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery; the
World, for the most part, calling that Evil which God calls Good, and those
Miserable whom God pronounces in an especial manner Happy. This is very
remarkably verified in the Matter now before us: For, though there has been great
Diversity of Sentiments in the Gentile-Philosophy, about the Objects of Human
Happiness; some placing it in one thing, and some in another; yet, among all
their Variety, we do not find any that placed it in Humility or Meekness These
they scarce acknowledged as Virtues much less to be such as wherein the
Happiness of Man should in great part consist. Nay, they rather looked upon
these as mean, servile Dispositions, such as were fit for Men o^ low Fortunes,
and lower Minds; and which were so far from conducing to Happiness, that they
rather exposed Men to Misfortunes and Miseries. But now, these are the
Dispositions of Mind which our Lord and Savior* who was the Wisdom of his
Father, and the Light of the World, singles out, and marks for a peculiar
Excellency and Happiness.

Nor need we wonder overmuch at the Singularity of this Christian Paradox,
since the whole Course of our Savior's Life and Doctrine was a direct
Contradiction to the Maxims and Practice of the World. Thu^ Men hate to unsay
or undo what they have either done or said, and to confess their former Folly
by an After-Retractation. But now, this is the principal thing of our Savior's
Institution, whose whole Gospel is a Doctrine of Repentance, which is a
Retractation of Judgment and Choice. Thus, again, Men love Riches, but Christ
chose to be Poor: They are altogether for Honors and Greatness, but he hid
himself that he might not be made a King: They, again, greedily pursue after
Pleasures, but both his Life and Doctrine was all over Rigor and Mortification.
The World thinks Affronts intolerable, and it is reckoned a piece of Gallantry
and Honor to revenge them; but our wise and good Lord chose to be reviled, and
spit upon: They are impatient of Calumnies and Slanders, but he chose to be
condemned being innocent: They, Lastly, (as the Prophet complains) Mal. 3. 15.
call the Proud happy, and despise the meek Man, as a miserable Slave and Fool;
whereas, says our Lord, in Opposition to the former, Blessed are the poor in
spirit; and, in Opposition to the latter, Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth.

From the Words, I shall discourse of these two Things in general; the Duty,
and the Blessedness of Meekness. In treating of the first it will be requisite,
1. To consider what Meekness is. II. To show that it is a Christian Duty. III.
To state the Measures of its Obligation in its more general Cases. IV. To
enforce the Practice of it, as far as it obliges.


First therefore, As to the Notion of Meekness. Aristotle has long since
defined it to be a Mediocrity about Anger: (...), are his Words in the Fourth
of his Ethics. This Difinition, though it be true as far as it goes, yet, like
the rest of his, it runs in such general Terms, that a Man is little the wiser
for it: And, indeed, it rather serves to tell us the Meaning of the Word, than
to discover the Nature of the Thing. To do this therefore I should rather think
fit to say, That it is such a Temper, or Disposition of Mind, whereby a Man so
moderates and commands the Passion of Anger, as not to be carried to any such
Degree of it, as may either discompose himself, or injure his Neighbor. Call
this a Definition, or Description, or what you please, I think it is such as
may give a sufficient Idea of the Thing we are discoursing about.

This therefore being settled, our next Business is, to show, That to be thus
meek, is a Christian Duty. That it is so, might sufficiently appear from this
General Consideration, that it is an Instance of Charity, which, as we well
know, is the Life and Substance of the Christian Law. And it is a very
considerable Instance too: For, since Charity obliges us to promote both our
own, and our Neighbor's Happiness, it must, by Consequence, oblige us to
moderate and govern those Passions which have any Influence upon either of
them. Now, among all the Passions, there is none, in the Exercise of which,
either our own, or our Neighbor's Happiness, is so often, and so much
concerned, as in this of Anger. So often, it being a thing of daily Incursion.
So much, because upon this depends all the Strength and Stability both of
Private and Public Peace. And consequently, such a due Moderation of this
Passion as may secure both (which is what we call Meekness) is a very
considerable Instance of Charity, and therefore also of the Christian Law,
which is so much a Law of Charity, that, as the Apostle tells us, Gal. 5. 14.
it is fulfilled by it. And accordingly we may observe, that among the several
Excellencies and Properties of Charity, reckoned up by the Apostle, these are
particularly insisted upon, that it suffers long, and is kind; 1 Cor. 13. that
it is not easily provoked; and that it bears all things, which are also some of
the chief Properties of Meekness.

But that Meekness is a Christian Duty, and one of the first Order too, may be
more particularly shown from the express Doctrine and Example of our Divine
Lawgiver. As to his Doctrine, he not only commands it, but seems to resolve all
that Moral Excellency which he either had in himself, or would have in us, to
these two, Humility and Meekness: Come unto me, says he, and learn of me. But
what? Not to make Worlds, not to cure the Sick, not to restore Light to the
Blind, or Life to the Dead, (to use the Remark of the excellent Cardinal Bona)
but learn of me, Manuducto ad Coelum, c. 32. p. 40.
for I am meek and lowly in heart.

What! Was it that our Lord had no other Virtues; or that he excelled in these
two more than in any of the rest, that when he bids us learn of him, he
proposes no other to our Imitation? Neither of these can be said. Not the
former, because in him dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead, which is not
consistent with the Absence of any one Grace or Virtue. Not the Latter, because
he was uniformly, as well as entirely good, and had every Virtue in its utmost
Perfection, having (as the Scripture says of him) received the Spirit of God
without measure. It Is true, indeed, he might be, and was more remarkable for
the outward Exercise of one Virtue than another, according as Opportunities and
Circumstances might require: But as to the inward Habits and Dispositions
themselves, he was equally perfect in them all, and did not excel in one, more
than in another. Why then does he recommend only these two to be learnt by his
Disciples? It must be partly because he was the only Master that could teach
such Divine Dispositions, and partly because of some special Excellency in the
Virtues themselves, above any other of the Christian Law. And therefore also
our Lord puts them for the whole of it, by calling them his Yoke: Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek, and lowly in heart, Mat. 11. 29.

Nor are we less obliged to this by the Example, than by the Precept of our
Lord: For, as his Example was a Living Law, so was the Practice of his Virtue a
very eminent part of his Example. This he himself intimates to us, by assigning
this for the Reason why we should learn of him. And of this we may be farther
informed from the whole Story and Process of his Life. Never was any Man's
Meekness so much tried as his was: For, as the real Excellency and Dignity of
his Person heightened every Affront and rude Treatment that was offered him, to
an incomparable Pitch, so the outward Lowness and Meanness of it exposed him to
a great many of them: And yet, notwithstanding the Number and Heinousness of
his Provocations, we do not find that he was ever in the least discomposed, or
put into a Passion by them.

Moses, indeed, was a Man very eminent for this Virtue; insomuch that the
Scripture gives this Character of him, That he was very meek, above all the men
which were upon the face of the earth, Numb. 12. And yet we find that, with all
his Meekness, he could not bear with the Crossness and Perverseness of that
untractable People the Jews, who (as the Psalmist's Observation is) so provoked
his spirit, that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106. Now our Lord
had to deal with the very same stubborn and cross-grained Generation of Men,
only now under infinitely greater Prejudices and Disaffections; and suffered
more Indignities from them, than either were, or could be offered to Moses; and
yet none of all their ill Usages could ever raise such a thing as Anger or
Resentment in him, though they did so in those who stood by, and beheld his
Abuses. Thus the Unkindness of the rude Samaritans could not so much as strike
a Spark into his Divine Breast, when at the same time it made his two zealous
Disciples, James and John, kindle to that Degree, as to desire Fire from Heaven
to consume them, Luke 9. 54. And so again, the rough Seizure of his Sacred
Person by the Soldiers could not extort from him so much as an angry Look, when
yet the very Sight of it made his warm Disciple draw his Sword.

And with the same Meekness he went on with his Sufferings, with which he begun
them; as may appear from that mild Answer which he returned to the Officer that
struck him, Joh. 18. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if
well, why smitest thou me? What could have been said more mildly and
dispassionately, or that could argue a more sedate and well-governed Spirit?
His greatest Apostle could not be half so moderate under a far less urging
Occasion: For, when not actually smitten, but only commanded to be so by the
Order of Ananias the High Priest, he returned him this sharp and warm Answer,
God shall smite thee, thou whited wall. For sit thou to judge me after the
law, and command me to be smitten, contrary to the law? There was, indeed,
nothing in his Answer, but what, perhaps, might have been justified by the
Oddness of the Provocation; but yet you cannot but observe a great Difference
between the Behavior of the Disciple, and of the Master.

But if you would see a perfect Example of Meekness, look upon him under the
Shame, and Dishonor, and Pains of the Cross; encountering at once with the
Agonies of Death, the Contradictions and Revilings of Sinners, and the
Vengeance of an Almighty God; and all this without any the least Show of
Impatience, or Discomposure of Spirit. So that I think I may well enlarge the
Question of the Prophet, and to that, Is there any sorrow like to my sorrow?
add this also, Is there any meekness like to my meekness?

And here I cannot but make a Stand, and with Sorrow reflect upon a certain
Order of Men, how little they have of the true Spirit of Christianity, how
little they have learnt, either by the Precept, or by the Example of him whose
Religion and Imitation too they profess, and by whose venerable Name they have
thought fit to distinguish themselves; who, instead of this Meekness and
Gentleness, are all made up of Passion and Violence, Fury and Out-rageousness;
mere Firebrarnds in Society, that kindle and lay waste wherever they come, and
seem more like Granada's shot into a Town, than Inhabitants of it, by thus
raging where they light, by thus burning, destroying and tearing all about
them. How unlike are these Men to the Temper of the meek Lamb of God! As
unlike, certainly, as Wolves, and Tigers. And yet it is an Unlikeness they are
so little sensible of, that they will yet pretend to the Name and Practice of
Christians; yea, to the very Name of Jesus: And he had need be a bold Man, or
at a good distance from them, that shall dare to contradict them.

But certainly, as Wrath works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20. so
neither is such an allowed Course of it consistent with it. And as he cannot be
a good Man who is so inordinate in the Use of a Passion, wherein both his own
and his Neighbor's Peace and Quiet is so much concerned; so much less can he
be a good Christian, who is of a Frame of Spirit so directly contrary to that
of the Holy Jesus, and who wants this great Christian Qualification, the Spirit
of Gentleness and Meekness, which is so considerable an Instance of Charity,
and so strictly enjoined by the Precept, and so strongly recommended by the
Example of Christ.

But because the Limits of this Duty are not so plain as the Obligation of it,
I proceed, in the Third Place, to state the Measures of its Obligation in its
more general Cases. And here, in the first place, it may be demanded, Whether
all Anger be contrary to Meekness, and consequently unlawful? The Affirmative
is stiffly contended for by the Stoic; but I think the Negative sufficiently
warranted by the Apostolical Caution. Be angry, and sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. Which
plainly implies, that there may be Anger without Sin: And it is also plain,
from the Nature of the Thing, that there may; for Anger is a Natural Affection,
implanted in us by God, from whom nothing can proceed that is simply, and as
such, evil. And besides, the Office of Meekness is not utterly to destroy this
Passion, but only to regulate it; whereby it is supposed that it is not, in its
whole Kind, evil; for, what is so, cannot be regulated, and must be destroyed.

Since then Anger is supposed not wholly to be destroyed by Meekness, as being
Evil, but only to be regulated, lest it become so, the next thing to be
considered is, by what Measures. Now, these Measures may either respect Anger
as to the inward Passion, as within a Man's own Breast, or as to the outward
Acts, Effects, and Expressions of it.

And First, As to those Measures which respect Anger as to the inward Passion,
as lodged within a Man's own Breast. These, I think, will be sufficiently
comprised within these four Circumstances; the Cause or Occasion, the Object,
the Degree, or the Time. As to the Cause, to render that justifiable, it will
be requisite, First, That it be something weighty and considerable, something
wherein either the Glory of God, or the public Good, or else some very great
private Interest is concerned. It Is not every little impertinent Trifle that
can warrant our Anger. Secondly, 'Twill be requisite that our Anger owe its
Birth to some competent Measure of previous Counsel and Deliberation: For, if
all our Actions are to be governed by Reason, certainly our Passions ought not
to be wholly exempted from it: I am sure they need it most of all. And if a Man
thinks not before he gives himself leave to be Angry, though the Ground of it
should prove never so just and proper in it self, yet, as to him, his Anger was
brutish, and unreasonable. As it will also be if, Thirdly, it be not conceived
for a due End; such as either the Vindication of the Divine Honor and Glory,
the Procurement of Good to our Neighbor, or the Prevention and Suppression of
Sin. And so much to qualify our Anger, with respect to the Cause.

But Secondly, To the farther Regulation of it, 'twill be requisite that it
have a due Object; for all are not so. There are some Things that cannot, some
that ought not to be the Objects of Anger; that cannot with Reason, and that
ought not for Religion. Thus we ought not to be angry with God, as it is said
Caligula was; who being vexed at the Thunder for disturbing his Banquet, rose
up from the Table, and provoked Jupiter to fight with him. Neither ought we to
be angry with inanimate, senseless Things; as Cyrus was with the River, for
drowning one of his sacred Horses. It argues a Mind overcome and blinded with
Passion, to be so prodigal of it where it can signify nothing. Nor ought we to
be angry with those, who, either by Chance, or Necessity, or probable
Ignorance, or common Frailty, have offended us. Nor are we to be angry with
those, who, though they have none of these Excuses to qualify their Trespass,
yet acknowledge their Fault, beg our Pardon, and promise Amendment. Repentance
is the Measure of God's Forgiveness; and so it ought to be of ours. Nor,
lastly, should we let loose our Anger against Brute Creatures, Children, Fools,
or Madmen, or any other that are under any great Defect or Disorder of
Understanding. But we are to be angry with such only as are impious and wicked,
and that are neither ashamed nor repent of their wickedness. And even here also
we ought rather to be angry with the Fault, than with the Person. For so Moses
was exceeding angry at the Idolatry of the Israelites, when at the same time he
prayed for the Idolaters.

And thus far of the Object. The two last Circumstances whereby our Anger is to
be qualified, are, Degree and Time. As to Degree, this may receive a double
Measure; one from the Person who is the Object of Anger, and another from the
Person who is the Subject of it. That with reference to the Object is this,
That our Anger should not exceed the Quality of the Offense committed. That
with reference to the Subject will be this, That it should not be so great, let
the Offense be what it will, as to discompose the Mind of him who conceives it,
and thereby unfit him for the Discharge of such Offices as he owes either to
God, his Neighbor, or himself.

Then as to the Time of our Anger: This we find already stated by the Apostle,
who limits it within the Compass of a Day. It Is a Passion that ought to be so
short-lived, that the Sun must not go down upon it, Ephesians. 4. 26. For, indeed, it
is not safe trusting our selves with such a dangerous Guide in the Dark, nor to
nourish a Passion which, though in its own Nature innocent, borders so nicely
upon Hatred, that with a little keeping it will grow so stale, sour and
inveterate, as to commence Malice.

And thus far of those Measures which respect Anger, as to the Inward Passion.
Proceed we now to those who respect it as to the outward Acts, Effects and
Expressions of it. And here, among other things too obvious to be insisted on,
two Enquiries offer themselves more principally to be considered. One is,
concerning the Propulsation or Repelling of Injuries; the other is, concerning
the Revenging of Injuries already done. Of both these it may be demanded, how
far they are consistent with the Virtue and Duty of Christian Meekness.

As to the Former, it is to be considered, that Injuries are either Public;
as, when the Magistrate oppresses his Subjects; or Private, when one Subject
injures another; or, Lastly, such as are on both Sides Public, as when one
King or State injures another. This premised, I answer, First. That an Injury
offered from one Kingdom or State to another, may, and ought to be repelled by
that other; this being one of the main Ends and Uses of the Civil Sword, to
protect those who are subjected to it; which when it does, it is duly employed.
To which it may be added, that distinct Kingdoms, being under no common
Jurisdiction, have no other Expedient whereby to right themselves: Either
therefore they must always suffer, which would be intolerable to Society, or
they must right themselves by the Sword. Secondly, That in case the Supreme
Magistrate oppress his Subjects, it is by no means consistent with Christian
Meekness for them by Force to repel the Injury. We are, indeed, to obey him
only in some Cases, but to resist him in none. This is certainly a true, though
to some an hard Saying; wherefore ye must needs be subject: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation, are as plain Words as any in the
Bible. But Men are very slow to understand what they have no Mind to practice;
otherwise one would think there should need no other Decision in the Case, than
the Example of our meek Lord and Master, who patiently submitted himself to an
ordinary Magistrate, commanded his rash Disciple to sheath his Sword, and would
not suffer his Angelical Legions to draw theirs, Mat. 26. 53.

But Thirdly, As to private Injuries between Man and Man, I answer, First, That
these are never to be forcibly repelled by a private Defense, when a public
one may be had; in defect of which, a private one may be used. But then we are
to consider Secondly, That either this private Injury reaches only to our Goods
and Possessions, etc. without hazard of Life; and here a good Man would go very
far in yielding from his Right, and in patiently undergoing Injuries: Or else
it is with extreme Danger of Life; and then, indeed, he not only may, but
perhaps is obliged by the Law of Self-preservation, by the utmost Force to
repel the Injury. And thus much to be observed in Repelling of Injuries.

I come now, in the Second Place, to consider the Vindication of Injuries
already done. And here I take notice of a Twofold Extreme. One is, of those
who stand for the highest Vindication of Injuries, without any Measure, or
Moderation: Which seems to have been the Fault of the Jews of old, who, by the
Law of Retaliation, thought they might exact any thing; an Eye for an Eye, or a
Tooth for a Tooth. The other is, of the Anabaptists and Socinians; who so extol
the Law of Charity, as not to allow any place for the Vindication of Injuries;
not permitting it either to private Persons, or public; and so taking from the
Magistrate both the Right and the Use of the Civil Sword.

These I take to be Extremes; and that the Truth lies between them, which I
suppose is, That public Vindication of Injuries is not only lawful, but
necessary; so far from being against Charity, that it is a great Instance of
it, and required by it: For, without this there would be no living, and Human
Society could never stand. But as to private Vindication of Injuries, that
which we more especially call Revenge, this I shall readily allow to be utterly
unlawful, and so make appear upon these Grounds. First, Because Vengeance is
proper to God, and therefore to be committed either to him, or else to those
whom he has empowered, who are therefore styled Gods. Secondly, Because
Vengeance is an Act of Judgment, and consequently a public Act, and therefore
not to be exercised by a private Person, who also must not be allowed to be a
Judge in his own Cause. Lastly, Because Vengeance cannot belong to them, by
whom the Ends of it cannot be obtained: But now, by a private Hand they cannot,
as may appear by considering what these Ends are; which I suppose to be chiefly
these Three; To amend him that is punished, To better others by his Example,
and To procure to the injured Party, and others, Security for the future. But
now private Revenge reaches none of these Ends. For, First, It does not amend
or reform the Adversary, but rather provokes him farther. Nor, Secondly, Does
it tend to the bettering of others, but rather corrupts and scandalizes them by
an ill Example. Nor, Lastly, does the private Avenger procure Safety either to
himself or others, but rather Danger to both; and to himself Vexation and
Trouble for the present, and Fear for the future, lest his Enemy should revenge
himself again. Private Revenge therefore is universally to be condemned, as
utterly unlawful, and altogether inconsistent with the Duty of Christian
Meekness.

And thus have we stated the Measures of this Virtue, in its more general
Cases. But this is a thing that needs to be enforced, as well as explained.
Consider therefore, First, That God has expressly forbidden us all undue Anger,
and has prescribed the contrary Offices of Charity and Meekness. Consider
again, that all Injuries befall us by God's special Providence, and may, if we
hinder not its Course, turn to our greater Good. Consider again, that God uses
an incredible Patience and Long-suffering toward the worst of men, and
particularly toward our selves; by the former setting us an Example of Lenity,
and by the latter making it very reasonable for us to follow it. Consider
again, that all Vengeance belongs to God, who has said, Vengeance is mine: And
that therefore, he that avenges himself, assumes the Part of God; yea, withal,
of a Judge, of an Accuser, of a Witness, and of an Executioner, all at once;
against all Sense and Reason, Equity and Justice. This may be considered with
reference to God.

Then, again, as to our Neighbor. Consider, that he is nearly related, both to
God, and to our selves: To God, as made after his Image; and to our selves, as
cast in the same Mould with us, and partaking of the same common Nature.
Consider again, what we would have done by our Neighbor, to our selves; and
how reasonable it is that we should do the same to him. Lastly, Consider what
we have already done to him; whether we have not been guilty of the same, or
greater Injuries toward him, than those which we so warmly resent from him.

Then Lastly, With reference to our selves. Consider, First, how much by our
unjust Anger we expose our selves to the just Displeasure of God, who, by his
Son, has told us, that Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment, Mat. 5. 22. Consider again, That we may
easily, and do often mis-interpret Men's Minds and Intentions by their outward
Demeanor; and think our selves affronted by them, when there is no such thing
intended; and that therefore, even upon this Account, it is very reasonable we
should be slow to wrath. Consider again, How much causless and intemperate
Anger unfits us for all the Parts of Divine Worship, which can neither be well
performed by, nor will be accepted from a Heart flaming with this strange Fire.
And therefore, says the Apostle, speaking of Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. Lifting up holy
hands, without wrath; implying, that a Vacancy from Wrath is a necessary
Qualification for Prayer. To which purpose it is very considerable, that when
King David would have erected a Temple for the public Worship of God, though a
Man otherwise of a sweet and gentle Disposition, and only accidentally, and
innocently too, engaged in Circumstances of Anger and Contention; yet he was
refused, and the Work imposed upon one not of a more meek Spirit, but only of a
calmer and more serene Life. And if God would not accept an House of Prayer
from a Man of a Military Way and Character, much less will he accept those
Prayers which proceed from a Soul disturbed with Anger. Consider again, how it
unfits us for the Business of our Calling, how it hinders the free Exercise of
our Thoughts, how it prejudices our Health, disturbs the Tranquillity of our
Minds, renders us odious and uneasy to all about us; in one Word, how utterly
it unfits us, both for enjoying our selves, and from being delighted in by
others. Consider, Lastly, to what mean and sordid Principles within us this
Passion owes it Rise; such as Pride, Selflove, vain Curiosity and Suspicion,
rash Credulity, Negligence and Inadvertency, Ambition, Lust, Envy, and the
like. So that, besides its own proper Illness, it is farther to be detested upon
the Scandal of its Parentage.

Having thus far discoursed of the Duty of Meekness; First, By showing what it
is. Secondly, By showing that it is a Christian Duty. Thirdly, By stating the
general Measures of its Obligation. And Lastly, By proposing such
Considerations as may recommend its Practice. I come now briefly to discourse
of its Blessedness; which may also serve as another distinct Consideration to
enforce the Practice of it. Blessed are the meek, says our Savior, for they
shall inherit the earth: The only Beatitude which has a Temporal Promise
annexed to it; wherein our Lord seems to imitate Moses, who in his Law had also
one Commandment with a Temporal Promise. And there seems to be great
Resemblance between them: One is, That thy days may be long in the earth; and
the other, They shall inherit the earth. Here therefore we are to do two
Things: First, We must enquire into the Sense and Meaning of the Beatitude.
Secondly, Into the Truth of it. That is, We must First enquire, What is meant
by the Meek's inheriting the Earth; And Secondly show, That they do so inherit
it.

And First, By their inheriting the Earth, I suppose, cannot be meant, that
they shall have large Portions of it, that they shall raise great Estates, that
they shall take Root, and spread, and, as the Prophet expresses it, Isa. 5.
join house to house, and lay field to field. This, I suppose, cannot be meant:
I. Because this is not true: The Meek do not inherit the Earth according to
this Sense. II. Because if they did, this would not be a proper Ground for
their being pronounced Blessed.


And First, This Sense is not true; the Meek do not thus inherit the Earth. We
rather find that the World is made for the Bold and the Violent, for the
Rough-spirited and Turbulent, for the Furious and Boisterous; and that they
have commonly the greatest Share of it, who deserve the least. And therefore we
commonly urge this as one Argument against the Goodness of Riches, That they
frequently fall to the Lot of the worst Men. And therefore, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 74. Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world, and these have
riches in possession: While, in the mean time, the Meek are oppressed and
devoured by these Beasts of Prey; and are so far from inheriting the Earth,
that it is as much as many of them can do to live upon it, and more than some
of them can do to find Room under it.

But Secondly, Suppose they did thus inherit the Earth, by having great
Portions of it, yet this would not be a proper Ground for their being
pronounced Blessed: For, Are Clods of Earth a suitable Good for Man? Or, Is
Happiness to be measured by the Acre? Do we find that rich Men are so very much
happier than others? Or, Do we think that the Earth has Mines of Happiness, as
it has of Gold? But, whatever we think, Is it at all probable, that our Blessed
Lord, who himself made choice of Poverty, who but in a Line or two before
pronounced the Poor blessed, who tells us that his own Kingdom was not of this
World, who bids us beware of Covetousness, and warns us of the great danger of
Riches, by telling us how hard it is for one that has them to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; who dehorts us from laying up Treasures on Earth; and who,
lastly, recommends to his Disciples nothing more than the Contempt of the
World, by assuring them, that the Life of Man does not consist in the Abundance
of Things which he possesses: I say, Is it imaginable that our Lord, after all
this, should therefore pronounce the meek Man blessed, for having great
Possessions?

This therefore cannot be the Thing meant by the Meek's inheriting the Earth;
which I take, rather to signify the Manner of Possessing, than the Greatness
of their Possessions; and to import thus much, That the Meek shall enjoy what
they have, be it little or great, with Comfort, and Satisfaction, and
Tranquillity of Mind; whereas those of a contrary Disposition, though they may
possess a great deal, may yet be truly said to enjoy little or nothing. And
this seems to be the Sense of the Psalmist, when, in Words directly parallel to
these of our Lord, he says, The meek-spirited shall possess the earth, and
shall be refreshed in the multitude of peace, Psalm. 34. 11. That is, They shall
have Comfort and Pleasure, Peace and Content, with whatever they have; which,
how little soever, shall yet carry a true Relish, and yield more real
Satisfaction to them, than the otherwise-affected can reap from their ample
Revenues. According to what the Psalmist, in the same place, immediately
subjoyns, Psalm. 34. 16. A small thing that the righteous has, is better than
great riches of the ungodly.

This I take to be the Sense and Meaning of this Beatitude. As to the Truth and
Reality of it, there is this double Security for it; the Natural Tendency of
the Virtue of Meekness, and the Blessing of God upon it. As to its Natural
Tendency, Meekness is a very decent, amiable and winning thing; and,
accordingly, the Apostle calls it, The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit. And
by this, in all probability, the meek Man will sweeten and indear even his very
Enemies to him, and so gain himself Peace without by his quiet and inoffensive
Behavior. But however this be, yet he is sure to have Peace within, with
himself, and with God. And having this, he is in a very fit Condition of Mind
to enjoy himself, and to take Comfort in what he possesses.

Which he will be farther enabled to do, Secondly, by the Blessing of God. And
this again the Psalmist takes notice of, some few Verses after the forecited
ones: Verse. 22. Such as are blessed of the Lord shall possess the land, says
he; implying, that as the Meek, whom he just before spoke of, should possess
the Earth, so it is through a special Blessing of God that they should do so.
And these are two great Securities for a Life of Comfort, and Self-Enjoyment;
the Peace of a sedate Spirit within, and the Blessing of God without. And both
these the meek Man has, whom therefore we may venture to pronounce Blessed; and
therefore Blessed, because he shall thus inherit the Earth: Which yet shall be
but a Type and Pledge of his future Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

Discourse the Fourth.
Matthew. V. ver. vi. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.
THO God has provided Entertainment for all the Appetites which he has made,
yet there are but two Appetites of Man which he intends to gratify to the
height, and to bless with a full and lasting Satisfaction; and those are, the
Desire of being happy, and the Desire of being good. There are some Appetites
of Man which are never satisfied; for, says the Wise Man, Eccl. 1. 8. The eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. Seeing and
Hearing are the most refined of all the Senses; and those Appetites which are
most spiritual and refined, and come nearest to the Elevations of the
Intellectual Nature, are always hardest to be satisfied: And the Intellectual
Nature it self, when it is more raised and elevated, as in the State of
Separation, will have a more enlarged Appetite, and a sharper Edge of Desire,
and so will be harder to be satisfied than it is now. Which, by the way, I take
to be the Reason why those Sensual Spirits, which now feel no great Uneasiness
from the Absence of the Supreme Good, will, notwithstanding, hereafter be
extremely miserable, in being exiled from his Beatifick Presence. As for the
grosser Appetites of the Animal Nature, such as Hunger, Thirst, and the like;
these, indeed, have this Advantage above the Finer, that they may be satisfied
for some time, (and such is the Brutishness of Man) are too often overcharged.
But then they will return again in certain Periods, like the Tide, and be as
importunate as ever for new Supplies; and, as our Savior told the Woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4. 13. Whosoever drinks of this Water shall thirst again. The
Appetite may be laid asleep for a while, but it will infallibly awake again
into its former Eagerness.

But it is not the Unhappiness of Man to have all his Appetites like these,
such as will either never, or not finally be satisfied. There are two that are
designed for a full and lasting Satisfaction; the Desire of being happy, and
the Desire of being good and virtuous; but still with this material difference
between them, That the Desire of Happiness is not absolutely secure of
Satisfaction, but only upon Condition. The Satisfaction of this Desire is
suspended upon the Quality of our Moral Conduct: But now, the Desire of
Goodness and Virtue has, by the Grace and Indulgence of God, an absolute Title
to Satisfaction, and is sure to be thoroughly gratified: For, says our Savior,
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled. Shall be filled, without any farther Condition, or Reserve.

That we may the better comprehend the Sense and Truth of this Beatitude, it
will be necessary.

I. To enquire what Righteousness that is, which if we hunger and thirst after,
we shall be filled. II. What kind of Hunger and Thirst that is, to which this
Promise of Repletion is made. III. To make good the Proposition it self, that
those who do hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled.
To satisfy the first Enquiry, I shall not critically weigh all the
acceptations of the Word Righteousness in Scripture; thinking it sufficient to
the Business in hand, to consider the general Kinds and Degrees of
Righteousness. This therefore may be considered either in a Judicial, or in a
Moral Sense. Righteousness in a Judicial Sense imports as much as a Legal
Discharge, whereby the Person impleaded becomes Right in the Court, or
Righteous. Which Legal Discharge may be again two Ways, either by remitting a
Criminal, or by acquitting suspected or accused Innocence. These are the two
Ways of a Legal Discharge; and then is a Person judicially righteous, when he
is discharged either of these two ways, either by the Remission of his Guilt,
or by the Declaration of his Innocence. The latter of these is properly
Justification; though the former be that Justification whereby Christians must
expect to stand in the Judgment of God, since, in the other Sense, no Man
living shall be justified: For we are not justified as innocent Persons, but as
Sinners; and, accordingly, are not acquitted, but pardoned.

Righteousness, in a Moral Sense, may be supposed to import all those Divine
and Moral Virtues which are required by the Christian Law, consisting of the
whole Duty of Man, to God, himself, and his Neighbor. This latter kind of
Righteousness may again be considered, either Materially and Abstractedly for
the bare Virtues themselves, as they are certain supposed Actions which
naturally tend to the Good and Perfection, both of Human Nature, and of Human
Society; or else Formally and Concretely for such and such Virtues as subjected
in Man; or for the habitual Will of doing such supposed Actions, which is
formal Virtue, and whereby the Man is denominated virtuous or righteous.

This is not one of those Distinctions which are without any Difference: For
the Difference is very clear and great. As for instance, When it is said, I
love or practice Virtue, and, I am proud of my Virtue, it is plain that the Word
Virtue does not bear the same Notion in both Propositions. For, when it is
said, I love and practice Virtue, there it is plain that Virtue is taken
Materially, for the Abstract Idea of Virtue, which is supposed to be the Object
of my Love. But when it is said, I am proud of my Virtue, here it is as plain
that Virtue is taken Formally, for my Habit of Willing it; whereby I am
denominated virtuous: For I cannot be supposed to be proud of Virtue in its
Abstract Idea, but only of the Love I have toward it. To be short, Moral
Virtue may be taken either for the Things which are fit to be done, or for the
habitual Will of doing them. The former is the Righteousness of the Law,
prescribing what ought to be done: The latter is the Righteousness of the Man,
willing to do what is so prescribed. These are the general Kinds of
Righteousness.

Now to the Question; What kind of Righteousness that is, which if we hunger
and thirst after, we shall be filled? I answer, First, That the Righteousness
here intended cannot be Judicial Righteousness, since the mere Desire of Pardon
or Justification is not of it self sufficient to procure it, or to avert the
Sentence of Condemnation. It must therefore be Moral Righteousness.

If you ask in what Sense? Whether as materially, or as formally taken? I think
either Sense may be admitted. But then there will be difference in the
Proposition, according to the Sense presumed. For, if Righteousness be here
taken materially, than the Hungring and Thirsting after it will be a simple and
direct Act of the Will: But if Formally, for that Righteousness whereby a Man
is formally good and virtuous, then the hungring and thirsting after it will be
a Reflex Act of the Will; that is, a Desire, not of Material Righteousness, but
of the Love of Material Righteousness, which is a Man's Formal Righteousness.
And this Sense of Righteousness I take to be most agreeable to the Exigence of
this Place, because the Desiring Material Righteousness, by a direct Act of the
Will, actually makes a Man formally righteous, and so prevents and anticipates
that Repletion which our Lord promises as a future Reward and Blessing. Whereas
the Desiring Formal Righteousness, or the Love of Material Righteousness by a
Reflect Act, supposes the Man not ye actually righteous, as he is also supposed
in the Beatitude; and so leaves him capable of having the Promise made good to
him, that he shall be fill- led.

Now, as to the Degrees of Christian Righteousness, the Masters of Spiritual
Life usually assign Three. By Degrees, I suppose, meaning not all those
Advances in Righteousness, whereby a Man may exceed either another, or himself;
for then they might as well have reckoned 3000, there being an infinite
Latitude in Goodness: But only such Advances as imply different Periods, and
distinct States of the Divine Life. These they assign to be Three; grounding
this their Division upon the Authority of St. John, who, they say, represents
Christians as under a Threefold State, by bespeaking them under the several
Titles of Little Children, Young Men, and Fathers, Joh. 2. 12. By Little
Children, meaning young or new Converts, who must be fed with the Milk of the
Word, with the plain Doctrins and Principles of Christianity. By young Men,
those who are grown up to some Strength in Holiness, and have made some
Progress in the Mortification o^ the inferior Life. By Fathers, those who are
arrived to a perfect Habit of Goodness, and, as far as Human Nature will admit,
are fully regenerated into the Divine Life.

But I think this Computation must be retrenched: For, with all the Invention
which I have, I can find but three States, or Degrees, for the whole Moral
Condition of Mankind: For all the Men in the World, and every particular Man in
several Periods of his Life, may be reduced to one of those three Orders:
Either he is one of those who do not apprehend Sin as an Evil; who either
through Want of Understanding and Reflection, have not attained to any Sense of
its Malignity; or through Debauchery and habitual Viciousness have lost it, and
so will and choose Sin purely and entirely, with Unity of Consent, and without
any mixture of reluctance, which is the most exalted pitch of Wickedness that a
Creature is capable of. Or else one of those who indeed do look upon Sin as
Evil, and as such nill and are averse to it; but not looking upon it always as
the greatest Evil, do oftentimes nill it only imperfectly, and absolutely
speaking do will and choose it, to avoid (as they then think) some greater Evil.
Or else lastly, one of those who looking upon Sin not only under the Notion of
Evil, but as the greatest of all Evils, nill and refuse it, not only in some
certain respect, but absolutely and thoroughly, so as not by any means to be
persuaded to commit it.

These Three Degrees will comprize the whole Moral State of Mankind. And
accordingly I observe that St. Paul makes mention of a threefold Law. The
first is, (...) The Law of Sin which is in the Members, Romans 7. 23. The Second
is, (...), Ver. 23. The Law of the Mind, or Conscience. The Third is, (...),
The Law of the Spirit of Life, Romans 8. 2.

These three Laws answer exactly to the three Moral States of Human Nature.
Under the first Law, the Law of Sin, are those who will and embrace Sin purely
and entirely. Under the Second Law, the Law of the Mind, are those who nill and
stand averse to Sin in some certain respect, as Evil, but yet will and choose it
absolutely and effectually. Under the third Law, the Law of the Spirit of Life,
are those who absolutely and thoroughly nill the Commission of Sin.

The first of these States is a state of mere Sin and Death, and those of this
Order are they who are said to be Dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. The
Second is a state of Imperfect Life. The Third is a state of Health and Vigor.
The first is a state of Rest and Acquiescence in Sin. The second is a state of
Contention. The third is a state of Victory. In the first state the Mind is
laid fast in a deep sleep. In the second she is between sleeping and waking. In
the third she is broad awake, and well come to her self. He that is in the
first state, is born only of the Flesh, and has no higher Principle in him: He
is that Animal Man that perceives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. He that
is in the second, has indeed some quickening Motions, some ineffective Stirrings
and Endeavors of the Divine Life. But he that is in the third, is born of the
Spirit and of God, and does not commit Sin, because his Seed remains in him,
Joh. 3. 9.

From this Distribution of the Moral State of Man, it is evident that there can
be but two distinct Degrees of Righteousness, or states of the Divine Life. For
the first of the three (as was before remarked) is a state of mere Death and
Sin. Righteousness and Life belong only to the two latter, but with this great
difference, that the first of these two Degrees, tho it has something of Life
and Righteousness in it, yet it is such as is consistent with the final and
absolute Prevalency and Dominion of Sin, and consequently such as cannot
qualify a Man for Pardon, or put him into a state of Grace and Salvation.
Whereas in the last the Principle of the Divine Life is supposed to be so
strong, as not only to resist, but to overcome Sin. And he that is thus
spiritually alive, is alive indeed, alive unto himself, and alive unto God, and
if he abide in this Life, shall live for ever.

There are therefore but two such Degrees of Spiritual Life and Righteousness
as imply different states. And therefore to the Distribution of St. John my
Answer is, That it must necessarily be understood not of three distinct states
of Righteousness (there being no more for the whole Moral condition of Man) but
of three Degrees in one and the same general State. If it be demanded which of
the two states of Righteousness that is? I answer, That St. John must be
supposed to intend the last and best state, because he addresses himself to his
little Children, young Men and Fathers, as those who had their Sins forgiven
them, who had overcome the wicked one, and who had known the Father, Joh. 2.
12, 13. All which Expressions argue one state of Grace in common between them,
tho differing in Measures and Proportions. The reasonableness of which
threefold Gradation I do not think my self concerned at present to enquire into
or justify, it being sufficient to my present purpose to have shown that i^
cannot be meant of three different states o^ Righteousness, but only of three
different degrees in the same state. The states themselves are but two.

Now to the Question, What degree or state of Righteousness that is, which if
we hunger and thirst after we shall be filled: I answer, That it must be no
other than that which puts a Man in favor with God, and qualifies him for the
Mercies of the New Covenant. For if the Righteousness it self be not such as
will render a Man acceptable with God, how can the Desire of it entitle him to
his Promises? It Is a much less Worthiness to desire any Righteousness than it is
to have it; and how then can it be an acceptable thing to desire an
unacceptable Righteousness! The Righteousness therefore here intended must be
such as makes him that has it, acceptable to God; and consequently it can be no
other but the last degree or state of Righteousness: Since nothing short of
that can either reconcile God to Man, or make Man fit for God. And this I take
to be the constant Voice of Scripture, and the Doctrine of our Holy Church,
which every where represents an absolute and effectual Love of Holiness, and
the like Hatred of Sin as necessary to the state of Grace and real Regeneration.

There are, I know, some among us, who notwithstanding their usual and popular
Pretense, That they differ from our Church not in any Doctrinal Points of
Religion, but only about some few Ritual Observances, do yet teach very
differently in this Article, setting the state of Regeneration and
Sanctification so low, that a bare ineffective striving against Sin is reckoned
a very sufficient mark of it: Wherein they conspire with those of the Roman
Church, who make the slightest Repentance by the Accession of Sacerdotal
Absolution to be full and valid; only with this Difference, That what the one
make sufficient in a certain case, and on a certain supposition, the other make
sufficient universally and absolutely, requiring nothing further as of
necessity to Sanctification than a bare ineffective strife against Sin. A state
which a Man may be soon in, tho, according to the same Gentlemen, not so soon
out. For whoever has the least sense of Sin as an Evil (and certainly there are
but few who have not so much) must needs be so far averse to it, and cannot
possibly commit it but with some reluctance: Which yet according to these Men
is sufficient to entitle a Man to the state and reward of Sanctification, tho
at the same time he be the Servant of Sin.

This I confess is a good way to counter balance the Severity of their
Reprobating Decrees, and to stock Heaven as much by one Doctrine, as they
depopulate it by another. But certainly the Gate of Heaven i^ much too strait
both for this Doctrine and for those (I will not say that hold it, but) tha^
live by it. It is a Doctrine too little according to Godliness to be according
to Truth, and such as makes neither for the Honor of God nor for the Safety of
Man. But I need reprove it no further, it being sufficiently exposed by our
most excellent Bishop Tailor in his Preface to the Clergy of England, before
his Vnum Necessarium.

All therefore that I further remark is, Tha^ since the Righteousness of the
first degree is that which these Men make sufficient for Acceptance with God,
the same degree of Righteousness would, I suppose according to these Men, be a
sufficient Title to this Beatitude. But if the last Degree of Righteousness be
only that which can procure us acceptance with God (as most certainly it is)
then that is the only Righteousness, which if we duly hunger and thirst after,
we shall be filled. I say, which if we duly hunger and thirst after. Which
leads me in the second place to enquire what kind of Hunger and Thirst that is
to which this Promise of Repletion is made.

And first, it is plain that Hunger and Thirst here must be taken in a
figurative and metaphorical Sense; since Righteousness is not the Object of a
Natural, but of a Spiritual Appetite. Hunger and Thirst therefore is the same
with willing or desiring. This as to the Kind. But then as to the Degree, it is
to be considered, That every Good does as such necessarily move the Will, as
every the least possible Weight moves the Scale. But it does not always move
effectually, as every Weight in the Scale does not weigh it down. But however
something it does toward it, since otherwise as much Weight would be necessary
to turn the Scale as if it had been quite empty. I shall therefore distinguish
of Willing as a very contemplative Theorist does of Physical Motion, into that
which is impotent, Dr. Glisson de Vita Naturae, c. 19. p. 254.
and that which is prevalent. By impotent willing meaning that natural
Inclination or Velleity we have to every Good as such, which indeed would be
prevalent, if not out-weighed by Reasons of stronger Moment on the other side;
but being overcome by them becomes impotent, not as to the Endeavor (for that
is inseparable) but as to actual Determination. By prevalent willing, I mean
such a Degree of willing as is not a mere endeavor, but passes into actual and
effectual Choice: When the Moral Scale not only gravitates and presses, but
weighs down.

Now to the Question, Which of these Degrees of willing or desiring is here
intended? I answer, the last and highest, that which is peremptory and
effectual, that which passes into Act, and ends in a thorough Determination of
the Will. Since nothing less can either be signified by such strong Metaphors
as these of Hungring and Thirsting, or consist with the sincerity of a
Christian Spirit. It Is not enough therefore to have ones Face set toward
Jerusalem, and to cast some amorous Glances upon the Beauty of Holiness. It Is
not enough to have some faint ineffective Wishes, some kind resentments toward
Righteousness, there being but few so wretchedly wicked and unmoraliz'd as not
to have some such little Velleities of being Good; and no question Balaam that
desired the Death, did also at this rate desire the Life of the Righteous. But
the Desire must be strong and active, vehement and importunate, absolute and
peremptory, without any Reserves or Conditions. It must bear the same
proportion to the Soul, that the Keenest Hunger and Thirst does to the Body,
that is, it must be a great deal sharper, as much as the Appetites of the
Spirit are more quick and exquisite than those of the Body. It must be such a
desire as our Savior had to celebrate the Passover, and institute his last
Supper, when he says, Luke 22. 15. With desire have I desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. Briefly, it must be such a Desire as carries
in it the full bent and stress of the Soul, such as is accompanied with the
most earnest and hearty Endeavors, and with the most Passionate and Devout
Prayers and Aspirations to God. Such as that of the Psalmist, O that my ways
were made so direct, that I might keep thy Statutes! With many more such
throughout the whole 119 Psalm, which I commend to the Meditation of the Pious.

This is that Hungring and Thirsting after Righteousness intended in this
Beatitude. And accordingly it is observable what Solomon in a place almost
parallel to this of our Lord, says concerning the Love of Wisdom, which
generally in Scripture, especially in Solomon's Writings, signifies the same
with Righteousness, Prove. 2. My Son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my
commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thine heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest
up thy voice for understanding; if thou seek her as silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of thy God. Here the Wise Man makes the most searching
Diligence, and the most vigorous exertion of Soul necessary to the finding of
Wisdom. And he that so seeks her shall find her. Which brings me in the last
place to make good the Proposition it self, that those who do thus hunger and
thirst after Righteousness shall be filled.

But before I proceed to this, I beg leave by way of Digression to speak
something of another sort of Hunger and Thirst which all Christians are
concerned to have. Our Savior tells us, that Except a man eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood he has no life in him, Joh. 6. 53. Now if the
Flesh and Blood of our Lord be necessary to the Life, then certainly the
Hungring and Thirsting after it is necessary to the Health and good Habit of a
Christian. There is not a more open sign of a distempered Constitution either
in the Natural, or in the Spiritual Man, than either to long for what is not
his proper Food, or not to have an Appetite for that which is. And therefore
since the Body and Blood of Christ is the proper Food and Aliment of a
Christian, it concerns him as he values the Health and prosperous state of the
Divine Life, not only to feed upon it, but to keep up in himself a due Hunger
and Thirst after it.

More especially this he ought to do, whenever he approaches the Holy Altar to
partake of this Divine and Heavenly Feast. He ought then by all the Arts of the
Spirit, and by all the Methods of Grace, to quicken and raise this Hunger, and
set an edge upon this Thirst. St. Austin (if I mistake not) discoursing of the
Dispositions of a worthy Communicant, reckons this Hunger and Thirst among
them, and makes them as necessary Qualifications as any. And there is a great
deal of reason for it. This Holy Sacrament is generally set out in Scripture by
Meat and Drink. It Is called expressly by the Name of the Lord's Supper. And,
says our Savior to the Jews, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, John 6. And as it is expressed, so also was it prefigur'd by Types of
the like Nature, such as the Tree of Life in the midst of Paradise, the Bread
and Wine of Melchisedeck, the Manna, the Paschal Lamb, the Shewbread, the Bread
wherewith the Angel fed the Prophet, and particularly by the Waters springing
out of the Rock, whereof the Fathers drank in the Wilderness.

Now I consider that as these Figures represent the Nature and Efficacy of the
Holy Sacrament, that it is the Food of the Soul, and the Life and Strength of
the Spiritual Man, so they do also represent to us our Duty, and the proper
Measure and Argument of Preparation: For if Meat and Drink be the
Entertainment, what more convenient Preparation than Hunger and Thirst? We
ought indeed to come to these Springs of Salvation, as the Heart is represented
to do by the Psalmist to the Waterbrooks, panting and thirsty, longing and
impatient. Or rather, to use a nearer Emblem, as those thirsty Israelites did
to the Waters that issued out of that Mystic Rock in the Wilderness. It Is
impossible to give a just Description of this Sacramental Thirst; but if we
could but so far advance our Fancy, as to represent to our selves with what
eagerness and greediness those thirsty and scorched Travelers in the
Wilderness did apply their Mouths to the springing Stone that was now more
indear'd to them by the Benefit than by the Miracle, then and then only may we
have some Notion of that Hunger and Thirst wherewith we are to approach and
receive these Divine Mysteries. For if that Rock and Miraculous Water was a
Type of our Sacrament (as the Apostle assures us it was, telling us expressly,
that that Rock was Christ) 1 Cor. 10. 4. then by the like proportion that
Thirst was also a Symbol of our Duty, a signification of our Sacramental Thirst.

And as he that will come to this Divine Feast, must come Hungry and Thirsty;
so he that is truly Hungry and Thirsty as he ought, will be sure to come, and
not (as too many do) study to find out Pretenses to excuse his Absence. But why
do I say Study to find Excuess? There are some Men that will be hinderd by any
thing; nay, by every thing. There is nothing, there can be nothing so little
and inconsiderable, but what will hinder some Men from the Holy Sacrament: That
which would not hinder them from any thing else, things of much lighter Weight
than what were pretended by those in the Parable, the buying of a Farm, or the
Trying of a Yoke of Oxen, or the Marrying of a Wife. If the Heavens do but
frown, or if they themselves are never so little out of humor; if a Visit be
intended a day after, or if a Domestic Jar happened a day before, then
presently keep off from the Sacrament. Nay, some are so very absurd, that
though they themselves are in perfect Charity with all the World, and have not
the least Tincture of the old Leven remaining in them, yet if another Person
happen to be out with them, they shall think this a sufficient Warrant to stay
away from the Sacrament; which amounts as much as if a Man should say, Because
another Person has sinned against me, therefore I will sin against God and my
self, and so be sure to outdo him.

But there is a Degree of Folly beyond this. There are some that cover over
this gross Neglect, which comes the nearest of any thing to what the Apostle
calls Trampling upon the blood of the covenant, and doing despite to the Spirit
of Grace, with the specious Pretense of Reverence. They have, forsooth, so
profound a Reverence for the holy Sacrament, that they cannot find in their
Hearts to come to it. A very odd Way of expressing Reverence to any Divine
Institution, by turning ones Back upon it. This is such a Reverence as the Jews
pretend toward the Tetragrammaton, or Name Jehovah, which consists in their
never using it. Such a Reverence (if so much) as the Papists show to the Host,
when they carry it in Procession, to be gazed upon, and stared at. But do these
Men, indeed, reverence the Sacrament? Then one would expect, at least, that
whenever they do come, they should behave themselves there with more Devotion
and Reverence than others that are most constant. But there is nothing like to
be observed. Nor do I at all wonder at it, since the Way to Communicate well,
is to Communicate often. And I farther remark, That those who behave themselves
most irreverently at all other Parts of Divine Worship, are the very Men that
stay most away from the holy Altar, upon the Pretense of Reverence.

But how comes it to pass that this is the only Part of Religion that must be
neglected upon the Account of Reverence? Do they do so by any other Part of
Religion? It Is true, indeed, that all the other Parts of Divine Worship are too
much neglected, as well as this; but I do not find that ever any were so absurd
as to pretend Reverence for the neglecting of them; and why then should they do
it here?

But do these Men indeed reverence the holy Sacrament? Why then do they not pay
some Regard to the Command it self, as well as to the Matter of it? Do this,
says our Savior, in remembrance of me. Why should all the Reverence be fixed
upon This, and none upon Do? Or, if they do reverence the Command, how are they
not afraid of breaking it? Or how can a Command be reverenced by not observing
it? Do this in remembrance of me. If the doing this be in Remembrance of our
Savior, then the not doing it is to forget him: And how can he pretend
Reverence to the Institution, that forgets the Author of it?

And here I cannot but take notice of another gross Notion that I find passes
very current among Common People. They think all the Danger lies in Coming
unprepared: If they eat and drink unworthily, then nothing but Death and
Damnation: But if they stay away, all is safe and well, As if a Man might not
destroy himself Fasting, as well as by taking Poison. These Men ought to
consider that there is such a thing as an Unworthy Non-Communicant, as well as
an Unworthy Communicant. And I wish they would read a certain Book that bears
that Title, The Unworthy Non-Communicant: They would then perhaps be sensible
of some other Danger, besides that of Coming without sufficient Preparation. In
the mean time, all that I shall farther say to those Men is, That whatever
Pretenses they make to Christianity, it is certain they have not that Hunger and
Thirst which is so necessary to the Life of a Christian, and which, if they had
it, would bring them oftener to this Spiritual Banquet, and procure them the
Blessing of being filled, and replenished. To the Consideration of which I now
return.

Now there are two Ways of being filled; either Absolutely and Simply, so as
not to be any more in Desires: Or with respect to some certain Object, so as
not to desire any more of the same; though, simply speaking, you do desire still.
The First of these is Satisfaction, the Second is Satiety: And those that duly
hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled both Ways; that is, They
shall be filled with Righteousness, and they shall be filled with Happiness.

First, They shall be filled with Righteousness, Romans 5. 5. For, since the
Spirit of God, which sheds his Love abroad in our Hearts, is a good and loving
Spirit, and knows no other Bounds in his Communications than what are set him
by the Capacity of the Subject, it follows, that he will not fail to replenish
all those with his Graces, who are duly qualified to receive them. But now,
nothing can be supposed to be a greater Qualification, than such Hungring and
Thirsting as I have described. This is the utmost Man can do to dispose himself
for the Reception of the Divinest Impressions. This therefore is that sacred
Lure, that powerful Charm, which draws down the Holy Spirit into the Hearts of
Men; as the Platonists say of aptly disposed Matter, that it sucks a Soul into
it, by a kind of Natural Magic, from the World of Life. This Hunger and Thirst
after Righteousness is the very same to the Life of the Soul, as that Organical
Aptness is to the Life of the Body: It is the Congruity of the Soul, in order
to Spiritual Life. That Soul therefore that is so qualified for Righteousness,
cannot miss, according to the Order of Grace, of being filled with it.

The Short is, God desires the Righteousness of Man, more than Man himself
does, or can do: He delights to see his own Image reflect from him, and stands
ready to sow the Seeds of the Divine Life in every capable Soil; and therefore
we need not doubt but that the truly hungry and thirsty Soul shall be filled
with the Bread of Life, and with the Waters of Comfort, Psalm. 23. Not that he
shall be so filled with Righteousness in this Life, as not to desire any more
of it, (for we are now in a State of Proficiency, not of Perfection) but in the
next he shall: He shall then be so replenished with it, as not to desire any
one farther Degree of it; and shall be perfectly possessed of that Divine Life
and Nature, whereof he is now only Partaker.

Secondly, These hungry and thirsty Souls shall be filled with Happiness. This
is a certain Consequent of the other, there being both a Natural, and an
Established Connection between Righteousness and Happiness. Some, indeed, have
gone so far, as to make them one and the same as to Kind, and distinguishable
only as to Degree. Hence that common Theological Effate, Grace is Glory begun,
and Glory is only Grace finished. But I think there is more Prettiness in the
Expression, than Truth in the Notion. Nay, there is one Instance which plainly
demonstrates it to be false: For it is most certain, that the Human Soul of our
Savior was always in a State of Perfect Grace, having, as the Scripture says,
received the Spirit of God without Measure; and yet it is as certain, that he
was not, while on Earth, in the State of Glory, being then a Man of Sorrows,
and acquainted with Grief: Much less was he in the State of Glory at the Hour
of his Passion, and during his dreadful Dereliction. Which yet could never be,
if perfect Grace and Glory were, as some contend, one and the same thing.

But our Proposition will stand well enough, without the help of this Notion.
For, though Righteousness be not the same thing with Happiness, yet there is such
a Connection between them, that they who are filled with the former, shall
certainly be so with the latter. And this depends upon the Nature of Things, as
well as upon the Order of God: For a righteous Frame of Spirit not only gives
us Admission to the Supreme Good, but also disposes us for the Enjoyment of it;
without which, all the other Materials of Happiness would signify nothing.
It Is the Disposition of the Soul that makes the Vision of God truly Beatifick;
and when we awake up after his likeness, and behold his presence in
Righteousness, Psalm. 117. 16. then, and then only, we shall be satisfied with
his Glory.

And here we may stand still a little, and reflect what a great Privilege those
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness have, beyond all those who make
Secular and Carnal Things the Objects of their Desire. These things can never
fill them absolutely, so as to extinguish all Desire; being neither themselves
the Good of Man, nor leading to that which is: Nor can they always satisfy
that particular Appetite which is conversant about them; sometimes because the
things themselves cannot be had, Nature having not provided enough for the
Covetousness and Luxury, though she has for the Necessities of Men: And sometimes
because they are too deficient when we have them, by reason of their
Disproportion to the Enlargement of the Faculty; as in the Objects of Sight and
Hearing, wherewith neither the Eye nor Ear is satisfied, as was remarked
before. And when these things do fill any particular Appetite, it is only for a
time, till the next Fit of Longing comes; as the Ground is, for the present,
refreshed with a transient Shower. But for those that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, as their Desires are more noble, so their Satisfaction shall be
more abundant. It Is their great and peculiar Blessedness to be filled in all
Senses, and in all Capacities, and to all Eternity.

Discourse the Fifth.
Matthew. V. ver. vii. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
OF all the Passions which God has planted in Human Nature, there is none which
at once carries so bright a Resemblance of God, and is so fitted to the present
Condition of Man, as that of Pitifulness and Compassion. And if, when God made
Man, he consulted his own Eternal Essence, certainly when he drew this Part of
him, we may suppose him to have reflected upon the divinest of all his Ideas,
and to have stamped upon him the most lovely Feature of the Divinity.

All the other Passions are, in their own simple Natures, indifferent, neither
good nor evil in themselves, but equally determinable to either, and, for the
most part, are actually determined to the wrong. They are generally irregular,
either in the Degree, or in the Object; are either mis-governed, or misplaced;
and when most orderly managed, the highest Character they can pretend to, is
only to be Instruments and Servants to Virtue. They are as a gusty Wind and
Sail to a Ship; if she steer right, they prosper, and further her Course; but
if wrong, they serve only to strike her against the Rocks with more Speed and
Force.

But now this Affection of Pity and Compassion rises higher than Indifferency,
and is not content with a bare state of Innocence. It is of it self a virtuous
Disposition, and needs only actual exertion to make it a direct Virtue, and
then its own Native Excellency will place it among the Highest Orders. And
therefore tho our Savior by assuming our entire Nature, justified the
innocence of all our Natural Passions, yet as Mercy was that Attribute of God
which he came chiefly to display, so is that the Affection which he chiefly
commends to Man, by his Practice, and by his Discourses, by open Commands, and
by Parabolical Insinuations; but chiefly by selecting and adopting this alone
of all the Passions into the Sacred Number of his few Beatitudes, by telling
us, that Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

This great and peculiar Honor, done by our Lord to this Affection, will
invite us to consider,

First, The Nobleness and Excellency of it.

Secondly, Its great Reasonableness, and Usefulness.

Thirdly, The particular Blessedness assigned to it.

But before we can well enter upon these Considerations, we must first premise
something concerning the Notion of Mercy, or Compassion. By which, I suppose,
is commonly understood, a Trouble or Uneasiness of Spirit, conceived at some
Evil that has befallen another; with a Desire to help him out of it: Whereby it
may be perceived, that this is a mixed Passion, compounded of Sorrow and Desire:
Sorrow for the Evil of the Patient, and Desire of delivering him from it.

If it be asked, What kind of Evil tha must be, which is the Object of this
Sorrow, or which may recommend a Man to our Pity? I know no Reason why we
should except against any. There are, I know, some considerable Divines and
Moralists (among whom is Curcellaeus) Page 999. who will allow no other Evil to
be capable of Pity, but only Evil of Pain; nor that neither, if it be deserved.
But, for my part, I do not understand why Sin may not fall under our Pity, as
well as any other Evil. Nay, I think that the greatest Object of Pity in the
World is an irreclaimable Sinner. And as for Affliction, though the thing it self
be most pitiable when joined with Innocence, yet, I think, upon the whole, the
guilty Sufferer is more to be pitied than the Innocent, since I can pity him
for his Demerit, and for his Misery too; whereas the later is pitiable only for
his Misery. Indeed, the guilty Patient is not to be pitied so much for his
direct Misery, because he deserves it; but then he is more to be pitied for his
Desert and Misery together, than the other is for his Misery only. And I
question not but that our compassionate Savior, when he wept over Jerusalem,
relented as much for the Sins, as for the Vengeance that was hanging over that
unhappy City. And that, had those two great Tragic Scenes been at once
presented before him, the Slaughter of the Innocents, and the Destruction of
that guilty People, he would have found more to be pitied in the latter, than
in the former Tragedy.

I know that, by the Roman and Jewish Laws, it was forbidden to show any Signs
of Compassion in the behalf of those that suffered as Criminals; and, in
Consequence to this, they were not to sit, (that being the Manner and Posture
of the Hebrew and Roman Mourning) but to stand at their Execution. Which was
the Reason (as a learned Critic of our Church observes) why the Blessed
Virgin, Mr. Gregory in his Notes and Observations, p. 25.
though deeply affected for the severe Usages of her Son, yet, in Compliance with
the Law, chose rather to stand, than to sit near the Cross; and though full of
inward Grief, refused to make any solemn Show of Lamentation.

But I suppose that the Signification of these Laws, in forbidding open
Compassion to convicted Malefactors, was not, that they were not Objects
capable of it, and that therefore to pity them would argue a Sense of their
Innocence, but only to procure the greater Reverence to Judicial Sentences, and
to show their great Satisfaction and Acquiescence in the Adminstration of
Justice. This therefore will not exclude Criminals from the Sphere of our
Compassion, of which I see nothing that should make them incapable. And I would
fain know what would have become of all Mankind, if Suffering Innocence had
been the only Object of Commiseration.

These few things being premised concerning the Notion of Mercy and Compassion,
let us now consider the things that recommend it. The first whereof is, The
Nobleness and Excellency of it. This has suffered much under the
Mis-representation of two sorts of Adversaries, the Stoic, and the
Aristotelian. In the Stoic Morality it is so far from having any Reputation
for Excellence, that it passes for a downright Vice, for an Instance of
Weakness and Littleness of Soul, for such a Piece of Softness and Effeminacy as
does not comport with the Character of their Wise Man; who, indeed, is allowed
to relieve, but not to be troubled for the Afflicted; and to add, if he can, to
the Tranquillity of their Minds, but not to lose any thing of his own. Non
miserebitur, sed succurret, says Seneca: He may help the Miserable, but must
not share in the Misery. This the Gravity of Zeno's School will, at no hand,
permit; which, indeed, should make us the more beholden to them for granting
what they do. But it is no Wonder that they who will not allow a Man to be
sensible of his own Evils, should forbid all Pity to those of other Men.

On the other Side, the Aristotelian; though he does not strike this Affection
out of the List of the Virtues, as does the other, yet he very much cheapens
and depreciates the Worth and Excellency of it, by deriving it only from
selfish Principles, by making this the only ground of pitying others, that we
upon the account of common Nature and Chance are obnoxious to the same Evils
our selves.

In opposition therefore to this Double Reproach I shall maintain and
illustrate the Nobleness and Excellency of this Disposition upon this double
Ground.

I. Because it is found always in the Best of Natures.

II. Because it proceeds from the best of Principles.

And first, It Is always found in the Best of Natures. God as he is the Best, so
is he also the most merciful and compassionate of all Beings. 'Twas the very
Name whereby he proclaimed himself to Moses, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, etc. And our Savior commends this Attribute of God
in particular to our Imitation, Luke 6. 36. Be ye merciful as your Father is
merciful. We read in Scripture of the Tender Mercies of God, or as it may be
more strictly rendered, Luke 1. 78. The Bowels of the Mercy of God. There is a
strange Emphasis and Strength in the Expression. And indeed there is nothing in
Scripture so pathetically expressed as the Tenderness and Mercy of God. 'Twould
be endless to allege Particulars, but there is one place which may go for all.
It Is that famous Expostulation of God with himself upon the disingenuous
Behavior of his People Israel, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim?
How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I
set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me, and my repentings are
kindled together. What moving, melting strains are these! What a lively,
breathing Image of Mercy and Pity! And yet it is but an Image still, vastly
short of the Original, as will always be, whatever is said or thought of the
infinite Mercy of God.

The Doctors of the Talmud (as I am told) speaking concerning the Employment of
God before the making of the World, say, not as he in St. Austin, that he was
preparing an Hell for the Inquisitive, but that he was contriving how to be
merciful to Mankind. And it is true indeed God did from all Eternity contrive to
show Mercy to Man, tho not by way of study or employment of Mind, as they
grossly fancy.

But the Hebrews further Note (what indeed is more considerable) that God to
show his great Honor and Love for this dear Attribute, in all his kind and
merciful Transactions with Men, chose always to be called by that his great and
incommunicable Name, Jehovah, as to Moses in the Clift of the Rock, Jehovah,
Jehovah, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc. But in any Process
of Justice and Judgment, he always styles himself Eloah, or Elohim, a Name
importing Force and Power, and that is not proper to God as the other, but
common to him with the Creatures, being sometimes given to the Angels,
sometimes to Magistrates, and sometimes even to False Gods. The Name Jehovah
was more Sacred, and of higher import than that of Elohim; and therefore God to
show his special regard to Mercy above his other Strange Work, chose in his
milder Addresses to be called by the former, and in his severer Proceedings by
the latter. Which was the reason, (as the forementioned Learned Critic
remarks,) why our Savior at the Point of his Dereliction cried out, not,
Jehovah, Jehovah, but Eli, Eli, my God, my God, as not presuming at that time
and in that Capacity, to call God by his Titles of Paternal Love and
indearment, but as Naming the Judge of the World doing the extremest right
upon his own Son, treading the Wine Press alone in the Person of all Mankind,
as that Learned Author expresses it, Page 7.

But the greatest and most convincing Demonstration of the Mercy of God, is
seen in the mysterious and costly Redemption of Lapsed Man. The greatest
Exaltation of which, is to say nothing of it, but, as the Angels are
represented to do in Heaven, to stoop down and look near into it with silence
and wonder. Which things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. An
Allusion no doubt to the Propitiatory or Mercy-lid upon the Ark, whereupon two
Angels, Cherubins, (who are the Angels of Knowledge) did abide with their Faces
one toward another, and their Eyes bent down to the Ark. Which by the way is
also a sufficient Argument of the Unfathomableness of this great Dispensation
of Mercy, which can still find further Employment for the Study and Curiosity
even of Angels.

But perhaps 'twill be said, that Mercy in God is of another kind than what is
called by that Name in Man, that it comes nearer the Stoical Notion of Mercy,
importing only a bare Will to help the Miserable, without any compassionate
Resentment for his Misery. It may be so, I wont dispute that now, tho I can
hardly believe but that such strong and flaming Expressions of the Divine Mercy
in Scripture must needs signify something more than what such cold
Interpreters affix to them.

But however, to be more convincing, I further instance in the Human Soul of
our Savior Jesus Christ. It Is most certain that of all Human Spirits his was
the most excellent. Adam in his Innocence was not comparable to him. He was
excellent only by way of Nature, but our Savior's Human Spirit to the same or
greater Excellence of Nature had also superadded the Excellency of Grace, not
common Grace, but that great and transcendent Grace of the Hypostatick Union.
And it is as certain that as he had the Best, so he had the Best-natur'd and
most tenderly compassionate Soul in the World. I need not produce Instances,
his whole Life is but one Argument of it. Only one Passage, when he saw the
multitude scattered abroad like Sheep that have no Shepherd, it is said, (...),
He was moved with compassion on them, Mat. 9. 36. so we render it; but indeed
the Expression is too high and pregnant to be verbally translated. 'Twould
require a long copious Paraphrase to drain the Sense of that one Word, which
signifies all that inward Feeling and Yerning of the Heart and Soul at a
pitiful Object, that melts and turns the very Bowels of the Good-natured
Spectator.

And the same Tenderness of Spirit which he had on Earth, he retains still in
Heaven, tho in all other respects Impassible, and incircled with Divine
Glories. Whereupon he is called in Scripture our merciful High Priest; and to
convince any Opposer that this is not meant of Mercy improperly so called, a
bare Will to help without any Compassionate resentment, says the Author to the
Hebrews, we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with feeling of our
Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15.

And these two Considerations by the way give a clear defeat to the Pretenses
of both the forementioned Adversaries. For whereas the Stoic traduces this
noble Virtue for a piece of Weakness and Infirmity, fit only for soft and
effeminate Persons; to him I oppose the instance of our Savior's Human Soul
while on Earth. And whereas the Aristotelian makes the only ground of Pity to
be a fear of falling into the like Calamity; to him I oppose the same Instance
of our Savior, but in another Capacity, when he was altogether Impassible in
his glorified state, and above the possibility of partaking with us in our
Miseries any other way, than by Sympathy and Compassion.

To this I may add, that among mere Men the most generous and brave Spirits,
those whom Paganism has Deify'd, Christianity has Sainted; those Heroes whom
History has marked with Honor, and whom Envy it self is ashamed to calumniate,
have all along been signal for their Mercy and Goodnature. As on the contrary,
the most base, timorous and low-spirited Breasts are always observed to be the
Seats of Cruelty and Hard-heartedness.

But it is no wonder that this Disposition is found in the Best of Natures,
since in the Second Place it proceeds from the Best of Principles. For it
proceeds from Charity, with which the least thing a Man can think or do is
excellent, and without which the greatest, Romans 13. even Martyrdom it self, is
nothing worth. It has that for its Parent which is the Mother of all Virtues,
and which is of it self the fulfilling of the most perfect, that is, of the
Christian Law. And that it proceeds from Charity is plain. For the more we
desire the Happiness and well-being of Mankind, the more we shall be troubled
to see any of them in Misery, and be the more willing to procure them Ease and
Deliverance. And this tho we do not apprehend our selves in danger of the like
Calamity, there being no necessity of making that the ground of Pity, as
appears from the instance of our Savior's Human Soul in its Glorified State. I
deny not but that the generality of Men are moved to Pity upon the
consideration of common Danger, and that it may be their own turn next to
suffer and stand in need of help; but it is not necessary that they should, and
it is their imperfection that they are. I say their imperfection, not that of
the Affection it self, whose Idea involves no such selfish Principle, and which
may really be separated from it, as by the fore-alledged Example is certain and
evident.

And now if to be found in the Best of Natures, and to proceed from the Best of
Principles, be any Argument of Excellence, we may hence conclude what a Noble
and Excellent Disposition of Mind this is, and that when the Roman Orator told
Caesar, That of all his many Virtues, none was either more acceptable, or more
wonderful than his Mercy and Clemency; he might perhaps Complement the
Emperor, but said nothing extraordinary of the Virtue.

As will further appear by considering Secondly the great Reasonableness and
Usefulness of it. As to the Former, besides that all that which may be said in
the behalf of Charity and Universal Love, may be alleged as well for this,
there are these two more proper and peculiar Grounds to prove and enforce it.

I. To consider what Man has Received. II. To consider what he Expects.
And First, if we consider what Man has already received, this Virtue of Mercy
will appear to be highly reasonable. Man has received innumerable Mercies of
God, some of which are so great, so surprising and incredible, that it is made
one of the greatest Trials and Commendations of his Faith to believe them. Such
as the Honor of the Hypostatick Union, the Redemption from Sin and Misery by
the Death of the Son of God, the Grace of Repentance, and the like. All which
are yet improved and hightened by this further Consideration, that they are
proper and peculiar to him, no other Creatures, not so much as the Angels
themselves being Partakers with him. The Angels indeed as all other Creatures
partake of the Goodness of God; but Man alone among all the Creatures has the
Privilege to be the Object of his Mercy. Since therefore Man and Man only has
received so much Mercy of God, it appears very reasonable that he of all
Creatures should show Mercy.

As it will Secondly, if we consider what he expects. Man has not yet received
so much Mercy, but that he expects more. The Mercy that he has received is by
the Redemption of Christ to be put into a Capacity of Salvation, but the Mercy
that he expects is to be actually saved. The Court of Mercy is the only Court
where Man dares appear, or can abide a Trial. Briefly, Man expects Mercy both
from God and from Man, in this Life, and in the next, in Death and after Death,
and therefore there is great reason to conclude, that he of all Creatures
should he merciful, and that Cruelty was as little made for Man as Pride.

Nor is this Affection less Useful than Reasonable. The condition of Man in
this World is such, as makes it as necessary for him to be pitiful, as to be a
sociable Creature. Man cannot subsist without the Guardianship and Protection
of Society; nor is Society any Security without this Affection. For what
signifies Strengh and Ability (and Society as such infers no more) without
Inclination to assist? The Wise Man tells us that Wisdom is better than
Strength; Eccl. 9. 16. and it is very true; but neither of them, nor both of
them signify any thing without a tender and compassionate Temper. Then only
may we expect Happiness and Defense from Society, when there is the same
Sympathy in the Politic as there is in the Natural Body, when there is a
mutual Correspondency and Communication of Parts, like the Sympathetick Answer
of one Lute to another. When the Heaven hears the Earth in the Prophet's
Phrase; or as the Apostle more fully expresses it, when If one Member suffer,
all the Members suffer with it; or if one Member be honored, all the Members
rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. This would make a Millennium indeed; nor is any
thing further wanting, but only that Men would agree together to make the
Experiment.

And because this is a Passion of so great use and necessity to the present
Condition of Man, God has been pleased to take an early and an effectual Care
for the Security of it, not only by giving the Soul of Man an Original Bent and
Inclination that way, but also by disposing him to it by the very Make and
Figuration of his Body, that so the whole Man might stand inclined to show
Mercy and Compassion. For we are to consider that there are some natural
Dispositions in the Brain, whereby we are moved and admonished to be pitiful
and compassionate, since the course of the Animal Spirits is (by I know not
what Principle) directed to those parts whereby we are stirred up to the sense
of others Pain or Misery. For as experience witnesses, whenever we happen to
cast our Eyes upon a Man that is wounded, we find a sudden Tide of Spirits
thronging toward those Parts of our Body, which answer to the Parts affected
of the wounded Man, unless by some Accidental Cause their Course be diverted
some other way. And these Motions by which the Parts of our own Body are
affected by the occasion of those Motions which are excited in others, do raise
that Sentiment within us, which we call Pity or Compassion, which by an Order
of God's Establishment, we can no more help being affected with, than we can
that our Animal Spirits should flow to and affect those parts of our Body which
correspond to those of another which we see wounded. So that you see the Ground
and Foundation of this Affection is laid in Nature. God has bound it upon us by
a Natural as well as by a Moral Law, by the very Figure and Contexture of our
Bodies, which certainly he would not have done, but that he knew how useful and
necessary it was for the Interest of Mankind in their present Posture, which is
a state of Want and mutual Dependence upon each other, whereby we stand in need
of one another Pity and Compassion.

And now if this Divine Affection (for so we may now venture to call it) be not
yet sufficiently recommended from its Nobleness and Excellency, and from its
great Reasonableness and Usefulness, let us further add the particular
Blessedness here assigned to it. Blessed are the merciful, says our Savior,
for they shall obtain mercy. This they shall obtain from Men and from God, here
and hereafter.

First they shall obtain Mercy from Men here. Not that this is to pass for an
absolute Rule, without any Exception, since as long as Men are but Men, Mercy
is capable of being abused and ill-requited, as well as any other Virtue;
otherwise our Savior would have been more kindly treated than he was by the
Jews. But the meaning is, that nothing does more naturally recommend a Man to
the good Will and Compassion of others, than a Merciful and Benign Temper, and
that generally speaking, if Men be but tolerably well disposed, and have any
Sense of Justice and Gratitude, the merciful Man will actually find Mercy among
them. However if not, he has the greater stock of Mercy to come. For,

Secondly, the Merciful shall obtain Mercy from God hereafter. And this does
not depend upon so many Casualties, and such uncertain Suppositions as the
other. Here it is only required that mercy and truth meet together, and that the
Man be sincere and upright in all other moral respects. And so much indeed is
necessary. For it is not to be thought that Mercy alone, any more than any other
Solitary Virtue can qualify a Man for Mercy. No, the Man must be (...),
Perfect and entire, and wanting nothing as to all the Integral Parts of Duty,
to be accepted in the Judgment of God, Jam. 1. 4. Only there may I think be
allowed this further Sense in the Proposition, that no one Virtue shall go so
far toward the obtaining of full Mercy from God, as this of Mercifulness. And
that if the Merciful Man for want of other necessary parts of Christian
Perfection, should not be able to stand in the last Judgment, yet however his
Fall shall be much the milder, and he shall have great Abatements of Punishment
made him for the sake of this one Excellency. To which purpose, it is very
considerable that our Savior in the Description of the last Judgment, makes
all the Favor and all the Severity of that day to proceed according to the
Practice or Omission of this Duty, Mat. 25.

One way or other therefore the merciful shall be sure to obtain Mercy, nor
will God forget this Labor of Love. Pray God we may not forget it our selves,
but may so love, study and practice Mercy here, that we may hereafter not only
receive a milder Sentence, but find such a Degree of Mercy, as may finally
rejoice against Judgment. Amen.

Discourse the Sixth.
Matthew. V. ver. viii. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God.
ONE of the most distinguishing Perfections of the Christian Institution above
any other either Divine or Human, is, that it requires an inward Rectitude of
Mind and Spirit, and makes the Heart the Principle and Seat of Spiritual, as it
is of Natural Life. The Heathen Morality went little further than the
regulation of the outward Behavior, not much regarding the Sanctity of the
Interior. And tho some few raised Spirits among them, moved by a Diviner
Impulse, would now and then, like Men in Ecstasies, talk above the World and
themselves too, recommending certain Purgations and Purifications of Soul, as
the Pythagoreans and Platonists, yet this was not taught or known in the common
Schools of Nature, nor was it any where made the Ordinary Standard of Morality.

The Jewish Religion, as it presented to the World a Second and more correct
Edition of the Law of Nature, so was it in this particular respect more perfect
than the Gentile Morality, there being in the Moral Law one special Precept
which directly concerns Purity of Heart. But yet there was a great defect even
here too, because tho there was a Prohibition of inward Concupiscence, yet it
had no penal Sanction annexed to it. Every other Precept was so guarded as to
be able to revenge it self upon those who trangressed it. Idolatry was
punished, Perjury was punished, Profanation of the Sabbath, Disobedience to
Parents, Murder, Adultery, Theft, and bearing false Witness were all punished,
only Concupiscence had no punishment allotted to it. Which (as a Learned Person
Conjectures) gave some occasion to think, Phillippus a Limborch. Theolog.
Christian, p. 217.
that they might securely indulge their Concupiscence, so it did not break
forth into the outward and grosser Act.

Certain it is, that many among the Jews so thought and practiced, contenting
themselves with external Conformity to the Law, without any regard to the
inward Purity and Holiness, as may appear from our Savior's frequent
reprehensions of the Pharisees upon this very account. And it is very probable
that this their Fancy was occasioned by there being no Punishment assigned to
the Breach of the Tenth Commandment, as that Learned Person conjectures.
However it is certain that it was a great Defect in the Law not to bind so
perfect a Precept with a Penal Sanction. Tho indeed the true reason was,
because 'twas too perfect to be severely exacted in that Infant Age and State
of the Church. The Law therefore did not rigidly exact it, tho it did plainly
command it. Which tho no defect with relation to that Time and State, (the Law
being as perfect as the Gospel, as to all the ends purposes intended by it, and
every way accommodated to the Condition of those on whom it was imposed) yet
absolutely speaking it was a great Defect and Imperfection of the Law.

Then as to the Mahumetan Religion (which indeed is only Heathenism pretending
to Revelation) this, tho the last; and assuming to it self the improvement of
all that went before, is yet really short even of Heathenism it self. This is
so far from requiring internal Purity, that it does not require so much as
external, but allows and recommends too the grossest Impurities; which has
often made me wonder why the Turk should write upon the outside of his
Alcoran, Let no Man touch this Book, but he that is pure. I Am sure the Book it
self requires no such thing, nor can I justify the Reason of the Motto in any
other sense but this, That none but he that is pure is fit to be trusted with
such a corrupt Institution.

But the Christian Law is pure indeed, and none but such as are so are worthy
to unloose the Seals of this Book. This requires the utmost Purity that is
consistent with the Measures of Morality, Purity without, and Purity within,
pure Hands and pure Hearts. It requires it more expressly, and in a greater
degree, than either the Heathen or Jewish Religion, and (what was wanting in
the other) under the Sanction of Rewards and Punishments, and those the
greatest imaginable. It does not only command inward Purity, but encourage it
too by the strongest Proposals that can affect either the Sense or the Reason
of Man. One of the greatest of which Encouragements is, that our Savior
inserts it into the order of his Beatitudes, and gives it a special Title to
the Beatifick Vision in these Words, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.

The Subject to be here discoursed of is Christian Purity, or Purity of Heart.
Whereof I shall represent, I. The Nature, by a Character or Description. II.
The Necessity. III. The Blessedness.


By Purity of Heart in general, is to be understood an inward Conformity of all
the Thoughts and Desires of the Soul to the Will and Law of God. When not only
the external Actions are according to the Rule, but the whole inward Frame and
Position of the Mind stands right and well ordered, and (as the Apostle
describes it) not only the Body, but the whole Spirit and Soul is blameless, 1
These. 5. 23.

And to make it so, these two things are particularly requisite, First, That we
do not consent to any unlawful Desires, no not so much as to the first Motions
of Sin, whether proceeding from the corruptness of our own Nature, or from
Diabolical Suggestion. Secondly, That we do not entertain with any delight the
remembrances of our past Sins.

But more particularly yet, Purity of Heart may be doubly considered, either in
opposition to Pollution, or in opposition to Mixture. In the first Sense it
removes Sensuality, in the Second Hypocrisy. This distinction of the Word Pure
is acknowledged and withal applied to this place by our Learned Dr. Hammond,
Pract. Cat. p. 107.
illustrated by the Instances of Water and Wine, the former of which is said to
be pure, when not mudded or defiled; the latter when not mixed.

But tho the Word be equally capable of this latter Sense, yet I do not think
it to be at all intended by our Savior in this place, there being no such
particular Congruity between this sort of Purity and the nature of the Reward
here assigned. Confining therefore our Discourse to the former Sense of the
Word, as more suitable to the Circumstance of this place, from what has been
premised, we may collect this Idea or Character of the Pure in Heart, That they
are such as regulate not only the external Conduct of their Lives, but also the
inward Frame and Habitude of their Minds, and conform not only their Actions,
but their Wills and Desires, Thoughts and Designs to the Rule of the Law, and
to the Dictates of the Internal Light of God in the Soul. Such as sanctify the
Lord God in their Hearts, compose the inmost recesses of their minds into an
Holy Awe and Reverence of the Divine Presence, set a Law to all their
Intellectual Powers, and suffer not the least Thought or Passion to violate the
Order either of Reason or Grace. Such lastly, as yield no consent either to the
Being or Stay of irregular Motions, nor give any entertainment to the
Allurements of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, nor delight themselves with
any pleasing recollections, any imaginary Scenes of their past Immoralities,
but set themselves at the greatest distance from Sin, resist the very first
Beginnings, and, as near as they can, abstain from the least Appearances of
Evil.

This is the most resembling Idea that I can frame to my self of the Pure in
Heart. And now lest this should be taken for a mere Idea, a thing of Notion
rather than Practice, I proceed in the next place to represent the Necessity of
such a Disposition of Soul.

The Necessity of it is Double in order to a double End, Holiness and Happiness.

And First, This Purity of Heart is necessary in order to Holiness, that is,
there can be no true Christian Holiness without it. This will appear by
considering,

First, That the Christian Law expressly requires it. For this I need appeal no
further than to the progress of this same Discourse of our Savior upon the
Mount. Where among several other improving Expositions of the Mosaic Law, we
find this, Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
commit Adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman to lust
after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart, Mat. 5. 27.
By which Lusting here I conceive must not be understood the bare natural
Appetite of Concupiscence (that being as such indifferent) but the Appetite
irregularly determined; nor that neither as it is a pure Natural and Mechanic
Motion, (for so it has nothing Moral in it, and can only be materially Evil)
but as it has the consent of the Will going along with it. Which consent may be
either to the very Desire it self, or to the Acting of it. If to the Act, then
the Man is in all Moral Accounts a complete Adulterer, and will be so esteemed
by God, who as he Sees, so he Judges by the Heart, and will not think a Man the
more innocent only for wanting an Opportunity of committing what he fully
intended. But if the Consent be only to the Desire, then tho the Man be not a
complete Adulterer, yet he may be truly said in the Style of the Psalmist, to
be a Partaker with the Adulterer, Psalm. 50. to have entered within some degrees
of Unchastity, and to have transgressed against that Christian Purity, which
forbids all Consent not only to the complete Acts, but also to the first
Motions of Sin.

Secondly, The necessity of this Purity of Heart in order to true Holiness,
will appear by considering the Nature of God, who is both a Spirit and a
Discerner of Spirits, and ought therefore for a double Reason to be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4. 24. Our Savior thought the former sufficient,
but the latter adds a further degree of strength to it. God as a Spirit cannot
be worthily served by any thing less than the Sacrifice of the Spirit, which
perhaps was one of the Reasons why our Savior, when he was to become a
Sacrifice to his Father, took upon him not only Human Flesh, as some of the
Ancient Heretics would have believed, but also an Human Soul. And as a
Discerner of Spirits he cannot be put off with a bodily instead of a Spiritual
Service, or accept of a polluted and unsanctified Spirit. The Psalmist had a
due sense of this, when he said, Psalm. 51. 6, 10. Thou requirest truth in the
inward parts, and shall make me to understand wisdom secretly. And when he
prayed, Make me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Thirdly, This Purity of Heart may be further concluded necessary to true
Holiness from the Nature of Man himself, in whom as the Soul is in all respects
the Principal, so in all Moral respects it is the only part concerned. This
Inner Man is that Man who is the Immediate and proper Subject of all Good and
Evil, Virtue and Vice, and accordingly this is the part to which our
Sanctification and Regeneration is always ascribed, and from which the Man
receives his whole Moral Distinction. And therefore says the Apostle, To be
carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, Romans
8. 6. Where you see it is the inward Disposition of the Mind that makes all the
difference. If this be Pure and Holy, the whole Man is so; but if this stand
not right to God and Goodness, it is not all the external Conformity in the
World that can supply the Defect.

'Twas the Conceit of the Ancient Jews (as we are told by Mr. Seldom) that
every Proselyte of Justice at the very instant when he became so, De Jure Not.
and Gent. page 159.
had a new Soul infused into him, to which Opinion our Savior is supposed to
allude in his Discourse with Nicodemus. Now tho Christianity does not
acknowledge a New, that is, another Soul in its Converts, yet it requires that
the same Soul become new, it requires a new Frame and Temper of Spirit. The
Christian Man is to be Born again, and to become a New Creature, a Creature of
another Rank and Order. And it is the Mind and Spirit upon which this great
Transaction is to pass, and which is to be the immediate Subject of this
extraordinary Change. And accordingly our Regeneration is expressed in
Scripture by our being renewed in the Spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. We must
be renewed; and where? Not in our Body or outward Man, but in our Minds. And in
what part of the Mind? not in the Inferior part, whether Sensitive or Plastic,
that which is exercised about Objects of Sense, or that which moves and forms
the Body, but in the highest and noblest part, in the Spirit of our Minds,
which answers to the Platonical (...), the very Flower and Essence of the Soul.
Here it is we are to be renewed, as indeed we must if we be renewed at all, this
being in all regards the Principal, and the only moral part of Man.

To this purpose it must be further considered, that this Intellectual Heart,
the Spirit and Soul of Man is the Fountain and Source of all Action. This is
that which sees in the Eyes, and hears in the Ears. This is that which
understands and wills, loves and hates, Here are all the Springs and Powers of
Life and Motion, here is the last resort of all outward Impressions, and from
this Central Point are derived all the Lines of Action and Motion, even as all
the Arteries and Veins are from the Natural Heart, which it diffuses and
disperses throughout the Body, and has its Pulses in every part. If therefore
this general Head-Spring be not kept pure and clean, how can the Streams run
clear? And upon this was grounded that signal Advice of the Wise Man, Prove. 4.
23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life.
Parallel to which I find a passage in the Meditations of the Royal Philosopher
Marcus Antoninus, Oxford Edition, p. 224
(...), Look within, for within is the Fountain of Good.

Further yet, this Intellectual Heart is not only the Fountain of Action and
Motion, but the most active and most rapidly moving thing in the World. This
Heart is always Beating, the Pulses of it never rest; Thought rises upon
Thought, and Desire succeeds Desire. The Motion is perpetual, constant and
vehement; so vehement, that the swiftest Bodily Motion, no not that of the
Starry Orb is comparable to it; so vehement that it cannot be discerned or
numbered, and comes nearer to a Rest than a Motion, as the swiftest turnings
round of a Globe look like standing still. Now what a dangerous thing is such a
Motion as this, if not rightly determined? Of what vast heights in goodness is
it capable! And to what vast heights of wickedness may it rise, if not well
governed! There is therefore great necessity that this Heart of Man should be
kept with all Diligence, and that it should be kept pure and undefiled.

Fourthly and Lastly, the Necessity of Purity of Heart in order to Holiness
will appear as from the Christian Law, the Nature of God, and the Nature of
Man, so also from the intimate Union that is between the Divine and Human
Nature. All things are full of God, who is therefore called in the Sacred
Tongue (...) or the Place. But there is nothing so intimately united to him as
the Spiritual part of the Creation. God is the immediate Place of Spirits and
Souls, who all live, move, and have their being in him, and are joined to him
by a Central Touch, as the great Plotinus speaks. The Apostle says, that even
our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; our Souls then must be at least
his Sanctuary, and most Sacred Recess. But what? Was not God just now supposed
the Place of Spirits, and are Spirits now made the Place of God? Yes, and
without any Absurdity. For so St. John describes our Union with God, by our
dwelling in God, and by God's dwelling in us, John 4. 16. The Union is Double,
on God's part, and on Ours. God dwells in us by his special Presence, by the
Spirit of Grace and Benediction. But we dwell in God Essentially and Totally.
God dwells only in some certain Spirits, such as are of a Disposition fit to
receive and entertain him; those who (as the Jews love to speak) are worthy to
have the Shechinah rest upon them. But all Spirits good and bad, however
qualified, dwell in him. For where else should they dwell, since he is all, and
fills all? Now both these Unions infer the Necessity of Purity of Heart in
order to Holiness.

For first, if we consider the Soul of Man as dwelling in God, what infinite
reason is there that that part of him especially should be kept pure which is
essentially joined to, touches and inhabits so pure and so awful an Excellence!
Put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, said God to Moses, for the place whereon
thou stand is holy Ground, Exodus 3. 5. And if so much Reverence be due to
the Dewlling Place of God, what Reverence is there then due when God himself is
the Dewlling Place! How dares any Man lodge an impure Soul in the Bosom of so
pure a Majesty! Or how can he in any measure be esteemed Holy, tho in all other
respects never so unblamable, who is polluted in that part which is so inwardly
united to the Beauty of Holiness!

Then Secondly, if we consider God dwelling in the Soul and Body of Man, there
is great necessity of Purity of Heart. And that upon a double Account:

I. Because the Spirit of God which is the Principle of all Grace and Holiness
will not enter but into a pure and clean Heart.

II. Because no other is worthy of so Divine a Presence.

And first, the Holy Spirit will not enter but into a pure and clean Heart. For
this special and gracious Presence of God is not like his General and Essential
Presence, universal and unlimited, but fixed and confined to certain Laws and
depending upon certain Conditions and Qualifications. And tho the, first
Addresses, influential Visits, and distant Overtures of the Holy Spirit prevent
all previous dispositions of Man, who (as our Church expresses it in her 10th.
Article) cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength, yet to
his fixed Dwelling and residential Abode in us, it is necessary that there be an
antecedent Preparation of Heart. Which I conceive to be the reason that tho all
Men are at some time or other Partakers of the common and ordinary Motions of
the Spirit, (who is said to have striven even with the old World) Genesis 6. 3.
yet none but very good Men have the Privilege to be the Temples of his
Residence. And this whole matter I take to be distinctly represented in those
Words of St. John, Behold I stand at the door and knock: If any Man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, Rev. 3. 20.
Where by standing at the Door and knocking, is meant common and preventing
Grace. And this indeed is used to all, without any previous Qualifications. But
he does not come in and sup, that is, take up his Residence and be a familiar
Ghest, till his Voice be heard, and the Door opened, that is, till the Man has
well attended to, and complied with those his antecedent Motions and
Suggestions, till he has swept and made clean the inner Room of his Heart: So
that Purity of Heart is absolutely necessary, tho not for the first preventing
Influences, yet for the residence and in-dwelling of the Holy Spirit, who tho
he visit those that sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, yet he will
not Lodge but in a pure and bright Soul.

Nor Secondly, is any other than such worthy of so Divine a Presence. Indeed
the purest Soul has reason to say with the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy
that thou should come under my Roof, Mat. 8. 8. if we consider the
disproportion that is between the Purity of God, and that of the purest Temple
we can prepare for him. For he puts no trust in his Saints, nor are the
Heavens clean in his sight, Job 15. 15. How much more unworthy then is the
impure and polluted Soul of so pure a Presence! Suppose the Spirit of God would
enter into a Polluted Spirit, yet what Soul that has any sense of Decency would
dare to continue any longer so, when once possessed by so Divine an Inhabitant!
Psalm. 93. Holiness becomes thine House for ever, says the Psalmist, that is, it
is very meet and right, decent and proportionable, that the place of the Divine
Residence should be kept holy and undefiled. The Divine Presence is the
greatest and most solemn Consecration of any place that can be, and wherever he
fixes his Mansion, there the Inscription ought to be, Holiness to the Lord. And
the reason of all this is by the Psalmist rendered elsewhere, For thou art a
God that has no pleasure in wickness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee,
Psalm. 5. 4.

Having thus far shown the Necessity of Purity of Heart in Order to Holiness,
to complete this part it remains that we further represent its necessity in
order to Happiness. Now this Necessity may respect either our Admission into
Happiness, or our Enjoyment of it when admitted. That Purity of Heart is
necessary to our Admission into Happiness is already sufficiently deducible
from what has been premised concerning its necessity to Holiness, whout which
we are expressly told, No man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. We are therefore
further concerned only to show that it is necessary to the enjoyment of
Happiness.

And here not to feign a long Hypothesis of a Sinners being admitted into
Heaven, with a particular Description of his Condition and Behavior there, we
need only consider that the Supreme Good is of a Relative Nature, as well as
any other Good, and consequently the enjoyment of it must necessarily require
some Qualification in the Faculty, as well as the enjoyment of any other Good
does, something that may render that Good a Good to that particular Faculty.
Otherwise tho it may be possessed, yet it can never be enjoyed. This again must
be something that must produce some Likeness or Agreeableness between the
Faculty and the Good to be enjoyed. Which because the Purest of all Beings,
leaves no room to doubt but that Purity of Heart must be that Agreeableness,
without which as a Man cannot resemble, so neither can he enjoy God.

We see that even in this Life it is very tedious to be in the Company of a
Person whose Humor is disagreeable to ours, tho perhaps in other respects of
sufficient Worth and Excellency. And how then can we imagine that an
ill-disposed Soul should take any Pleasure in God, who is to her infinitely
more unlike, and therefore disagreeable, than one Man can be supposed to be to
another? For my part, I rather think that should an impure Soul be afforded a
Mansion in Heaven, she would be so far from being happy in it, that she would
do Penance there to all Eternity. For besides that a sensualized Soul would
carry such Appetites with her thither for which she could find no suitable
Objects, which would be a constant Torment; those that she does find there
would be so disproportionate, that they would rather vex and upbraid, than
satisfy her Indigence. So that this in short would be her Case, That which she
desires and could relish, that she has not; and that which she has, that she
neither desires nor can relish; the result of which must needs be a very high
degree of Misery and Dissatisfaction. So absolutely necessary is Purity of
Heart both to the Acquisition and Enjoyment of Happiness.

And yet there is something that recommends it further yet, and that is the
Blessedness that attends it, the third and last thing to be considered. Blessed
are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God. But before we come so far as
this, there is a Present Blessedness belonging to it in this Life, which I
shall briefly touch upon. And here besides that inward Peace of Mind, that
Satisfaction of Conscience, and Spiritual Joy and Complacency which are the
common Advantages of a good and well-ordered Life, there are these three more
peculiar Advantages of Purity of Heart.

I. That it is more Innocent. II. That it is more Easy. III. That it is more
Safe.
More Innocent, because it is supposed to put a Bar against the very first
Beginnings of Sin, and consequently to be removed at a greater distance from it.

More Easy, because it is easier to abstain from the first Beginnings of Sin,
than from a further Progress in it after you have once begun. Nor is there so
much pains required not to admit, as to eject a Temptation. Which made an
ingenious Person say, That the Prohibition of Concupiscence was not so much a
new or distinct Commandment, as an Instrument of Security for the keeping all
the rest.

Lastly, More Safe, because more Easy; there being not so much danger of
yielding to what a Man can easily forbear, as to that which he must abstain
from with pain and uneasiness.

But the greatest Blessedness of all is the Vision of God. Which I suppose may
be extended beyond that Beatific Vision of him, which is the Happiness of
Angels and Saints in Heaven, and may signify some peculiar Advantage belonging
to the Pure in Heart even in this Life, namely, the clearer Perception of all
Necessary and Ideal Truths (which may well be called seeing of God, they being
one and the same with the Divine Essence) especially such Ideal Truths as are
of a Moral and Spiritual Nature, to the Discovery of which, Purity of Heart is
an excellent Preparative. According to that of the Angel to Daniel, Dan. 12.
10. Many shall be purified and made white, and none of the Wicked shall
understand, but the Wise shall understand. But having professedly discoursed of
this Reflect. on the Conduct of Human Life.
elsewhere, I shall stay no longer upon this part, but proceed to that other
Vision of God which is called Beatific.

Here I remark, that this is the only Beatitude to which the express Promise of
the Vision of God is annexed. This indeed is implicitly contained in some
others, but there only openly expressed. And because it is reasonable to think
that our Lord does suit his Rewards to the Natures of the Excellencies here
specifyed, We may well conclude that he intended some peculiar Honor and
Privilege to this holy disposition of Soul, and to signify that it has a more
than ordinary Title to the Happiness of the Beatific Vision. This will include
two things,

I. That the Pure in Heart shall have a clearer and more enlarged sight of God.

II. That they shall take a greater delight in what they do see of him.

And First, They shall have a clearer and more enlarged sight of God. This will
depend upon two Suppositions.

I. Upon the peculiar Aptness of this Disposition for the Vision of God.

II. Upon the Will of God to afford a greater and clearer manifestation of
himself to a Soul so disposed.

That Purity of Heart has a peculiar aptness in order to the Vision of God, we
need not doubt, if we consider that the only reason why we see not God, now, is
the grossness of this Tabernacle wherein the Soul is incased. This is that
Glass through which we now see so Darkly, and which makes us do so, 1 Cor. 13.
12. This is that black Skreen that parts the Material from the Intelligible
World. The more abstract therefore we are from the Body, and from the Bodily
Life, the more fit we shall be both to behold, and to endure the Rays of the
Divine Light. We find that even now the purer and finer our Blood and Spirits
are, the freer and clearer are our Thoughts. The more bright and transparent
this Glass is, the more the Ideal Light will dart in upon our Souls. And the
same will hold in proportion hereafter. The purer the Soul is, the purer will
all its Faculties and Operations be; the less it will retain of corporeal Gusts
and Relishes, the more recollected and undivided will be its Powers; for Unity
of Thought follows Unity of Desire; and the fewer things a Man desires, the
fewer will be his Thoughts, and consequently the more strong and vigorous upon
the Object where they fix. To which we may add, that the purer the Soul is, the
purer will also be her Resurrection Body, which is of great moment to the
Vision of God, as well as to other Spiritual Operations. For we must then see
through a Glass as well as now; only the Glass will be clearer, according to
the different Purity of the Soul, which even in this Life gives a particular
Brightness of Air to the Countenance, and makes the Face to shine with an
unimitable Luster. Purity of Heart therefore even upon this single account has
a peculiar aptness in order to the Vision of God. But to this may be added
Secondly the Will of God to afford a greater and clearer manifestation of
himself to a Soul so disposed. For it is highly rational to believe, that God
who is so great a Lover, will also be a liberal Rewarder of inward Purity; and
that he who delights to dwell in pure Hearts now, will reveal himself in a very
plentiful measure to such hereafter. So that both from the aptness of the
Disposition and from the Will of God we may conclude, That the Pure in Heart
shall have a larger share of the Beatific Vision.

Nor shall they only see more of God, but Secondly, take a greater Delight in
what they do see of him. And this is the principal Ingredient of their
Happiness: For it is not the mere having, but the delighting in a thing that
makes a Man happy. And this is the Condition of Pure Souls. The same Purity
which procures them a more enlarged sight of God, will also make them to
delight in the Vision of him, so that they shall Taste as well as See how good
God is, Psalm. 34. For the purer the Soul is, the liker it is to God who is
Essential Purity; and the more it resembles God, the more it must needs love
and delight in him.

Likeness is the greatest indearment of Love, and the most natural Foundation
of Delight and Complacency. We see this in all the Orders of Being, and in all
the Degrees of Life. In the Sympathetic Associations of Vegetables, in the
Voluntary Consortings of Animals, and in the chosen Friendships of Men. But
most of all may this be seen in God himself. What is it but the most perfect
Likeness and Conformity of Essences, Understandings and Wills that renders the
Sacred Persons of the mysterious and adorable Trinity so infinitely lovely and
agreeable to each other! This was that which made the Father say of the Son,
Heb. 1. 3. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, because he saw
there the Brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his Person. And
upon this is founded that mutual Delight which the other Sacred Persons enjoy
from each other. That therefore which makes the Persons of the Holy Trinity
delight in one another, must needs make the pure Soul delight in the Holy
Trinity. A pure Soul cannot but delight in a pure God, and the purer she is,
the more she will love and delight in him. Purity of Heart does even here
Anticipate, much more then will it hereafter increase the Joys of Heaven.

It remains therefore, that having this excellent Hope, we study to purify our
selves even as God is pure, and so endeavor to resemble and transcribe the
Divine Perfections here, that we may contemplate them with the greater
Complacency and Delight hereafter. To which purpose, let us now and always Pray
in the Words of our Holy and Devout Church,

O God, make clean our Hearts within us, And take not thy Holy Spirit from us.
Amen.

Discourse the Seventh.
Matthew. V. ver. ix. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God.
THE Words very well become the Mouth of him that spoke them, who was himself
the greatest Peacemaker in the World. He made Peace in Heaven by the Blood of
his Cross, and endeavored to promote it on Earth. He first reconciled God to
Man, and then tried to reconcile Men to one another. He chose to be born in the
most quiet and peaceful state of the Roman Empire, when Augustus in token of an
Universal Peace had shut up the Mystical Gates of Janus his Temple. And when he
came into the World his Proclamation by the Angels was Peace; and when he was
to leave the World, the same was his Legacy, John 14. Peace I leave with you,
my peace I give unto you. The Order of his whole Life was a constant Compliance
with the Peace of the State, whereof he gave two signal Instances, in Paying
Tribute when not obliged, and in Forbidding Resistance of the Officer that
seized him; and his last Prayer was for the Peace and Unity of the Church. And
now, since by this great Love and Study of Peace he showed himself to be the
Genuine Son of God, who is styled the God of Peace, 1 Cor. 14. 33. he might
with the better Decorum make the same Disposition of Mind the Measure and
Argument of our Filial Relation to him; as he does when he tells us, Blessed
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

By Peacemakers here, I suppose, is meant, not only those that interpose as
Moderators, to compose Feuds and Quarrels, (tho that be the more immediate
Sense of the Word;) but more generally those that are peaceably affected, and
that show this their Peaceable Disposition, either by living quietly and
inoffensively, or by endeavoring to maintain Peace where it is, or to restore
it where it is interrupted. The first of these Degrees of Peaceableness
consists in a mere Negative; the two last are of a Positive Nature, and
consequently of a greater Excellence: But the most excellent of all is the
last, it being, for the most part, not only a thankless, but an odious,
difficult and hazardous Undertaking, to bring them nearer together, whom Anger
has set at a distance. It Is like the Business of a Fire-quencher, who, tho he
may, with plying of Engines, and great a-do, rescue the Pile of Building from
the devouring Flames, yet his Eyes will be sure to smart with the Smoke.

Now this Peace, in the not violating, preserving, or restoring of which this
Peaceable-mindedness is concerned, may be either private Peace between Man and
Man, or public Peace between Societies of Men. Again, Public Peace is
distinguishable according to the general Distribution of Human Society into
Civil and Ecclesiastic, that of the State, and that of the Church. The former
concerns Men, not only as subjected to Government, or as under this or that
particular Form of Government; but also as Men, and consequently all Men: For,
even the State of Nature, antecedently to all Human Conventions and
Constitutions, (as has been abundantly proved against the Author of the
Leviathan) is not a State of War, but of Peace. The latter respects only those
who are Members of the Christian Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, and
subject to that Spiritual Government whereof he is the Author. The former kind
of public Peace is opposed to War and seditious Practices, the latter to
Schisms and Divisions.

The Way being thus far cleared by pointing out the general Degrees of
Peaceableness, and the general Kinds of Peace, we may now with the less
Entanglement proceed to fix the Subject and Order of the following Discourse.
And here I do not intend a Casuistical Tract, by entering upon that long beaten
Commonplace concerning our Obligation to Peace, and the Measures of observing
it with reference either to Church or State: For, besides that this has been
the constant Theme of almost every Casuist, and that it is impossible to say
any thing more than All, or better than Some have already said upon it, I
further think that the thing is of it self plain enough; and that, were it not
for the Perverseness of some Men, rather than for any Obscurity in the Duty,
there needed not have been any other Measure given in this Matter than that
general one of the Apostle, If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men. For, when it is enquired, How far we are obliged to
Peace in the State, or Peace in the Church? The Answer is plain and ready from
hence, That we are obliged to both as far as is possible, and as much as in us
lies; and that nothing less than Absolute and Evident Necessity can justify
either War in the State, or Separation in the Church. Which one Rule if well
heeded and practiced, the Condition of the World would be much more peaceable
and quiet than it is, or is like to be.

Instead therefore of treating of this Beatitude in a Casuistical way, by
describing the Measures of our Obligation to Peace, I shall rather choose this
Order of Discourse.

First, To set forth the general Excellency of a peaceable Disposition.

Secondly, To consider that more particular Prerogative of it, in making those
that have it Children of God.

Thirdly, To conclude all with some Reflections upon the present Disturbers of
the Peace of Christendom.

And First, The general Excellency of a peaceable Disposition may be derived
from these two Principles:

First, From what it argues.

Secondly, From what it causes.

And First, It argues a well-ordered Frame and good Habit of Mind; good by
natural Disposition, good by Deliberation and Choice, and good by Gracious and
Divine Operation. It argues a Soul, not only lightly tinctured, but deeply
seasoned, and thoroughly imbued with Goodness. -- Incoctum generoso pectus
honesto. The same may be said of the peaceable Man, that St. James says of him
that offends not in his Tongue, that he is a perfect Man, Jam. 3. 2. Not that
the due Government of the Tongue alone does make a Man perfect; for there is a
Body of Righteousness, as well as a Body of Sin; and to make it perfect, the
Members must have both a just Number and Size; but that, considering the many
Requisites to so great and excellent a piece of Temperance, it argues and
supposes him to be so; and, as it there follows, able also to bridle the whole
Body. And so here the peaceable Man may be said to be the perfect Man; not that
he is so made by this signal Excellence, but that this Disposition argues him
to be so, considering what a various Accomplishment of Soul is required before
a Man can be capable of exercising so noble a Virtue.

There are some Degrees in Wickedness that necessarily suppose others: The Man
must first walk in the Counsel of the Ungodly, and stand in the Way of Sinners,
before he can have the Forehead to sit down in the Chair of the Scornful. And
so there are some Degrees in Goodness, that do also necessarily suppose others.
For there is a Scale of Perfection in both, and we can neither be good nor bad
by Strides and Jumps. And this is such a Degree of Goodness as supposes many
others to have gone before it, being one of the Top-stones of the Spiritual
Building, and one of the last finishing Strokes of the Divine Image of that
Christ which is formed in us: Gal. 4. 19. For the Holy Spirit of God (as was
shown in the preceding Discourse) requires a consecrated Abode, a chaste Body,
and a pure Soul; and will not enter into us till the former be made a Temple,
and the latter a Sanctuary. And yet this Excellence is reckoned by the Apostle
among the special Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. and consequently must
pre-suppose all that Moral Preparation, at least, that the Entrance of the Holy
Spirit does; and must therefore argue a well-ordered Frame and good Habit of
Mind.

But this being only a general (though, to one that attends the Force of it,
sufficiently conclusive) Argument, I will more distinctly show that it does so,
by considering what particular Qualifications of Soul are required, in order to
a peaceable Disposition; whose Presence must needs argue whatever it requires.
Now these Requisites are either Negative, or Positive: The Negative are,

First, That the Man be free from all inordinate Self-Love; it being impossible
that he who prefers his own little private Concerns before the public
Interest, should be at peace with the Public when that tender part comes once
to be touched. No, Such an one will balance Self against all the World, will
not care what becomes of the Public when it stands in Competition with that;
but will embroil all the World in War and Mischief if he can, for the least
Self-advantage.

Secondly, That the Man be free from Covetousness, which though the Root of all
Evil, is yet more so of Strife and Dissension, than of any other. Covetousness
and Peace cannot dwell long together. It Is, indeed, a very Litigious Principle,
and one of the greatest Makebates and Incendiaries in the World. It Is this that
fills the Court with Brawls and Wranglings, and the Field with Blood and
Slaughter. And it is a known Observation, That in all Wars, whether justly or
unjustly undertaken, the greatest part fight only for Plunder.

Thirdly, That he be free from Ambition, which is as great an Enemy to Peace
without, as it is to inward Tranquillity. The ambitious Man is always advancing
his Aim at some higher Mark of Honor; and if Peace will not serve to raise
him, War shall. Take an Instance of this from the Court of Rome. What a World
of Schisms and Disturbances in the Church, and Factions, Seditions, Plots,
Massacres and Wars in the State, have been from time to time occasioned by the
Ambition of that See! But there is an higher Instance than this; for it was
Ambition that made War in Heaven.

Fourthly, That he be free from Envy, which, indeed, spites every thing that is
excellent; but is, of all things, the most direct and sworn Enemy to Peace.
'Twas the Envy of the Devil that first disturbed the Peace and Order of the
World, and set the whole Creation in Battel-Array against Man. And it is the
same envious Being that still raises and foments all the Enmities and
Dissentions that divide both the Church and State; and may therefore be called
the Father of Discords, as well as the Father of Lies. Envy is the greatest
Enmity in the World; and the envious Man is the most universal Enemy: There is
no Man but whom, by the very Principles of his Disposition, he is obliged
either to hate, or to despise. All his Superiors and Equals he hates, and
despises all his Inferiors; which comprize the whole Body of Mankind. And both
Ways is Envy an Enemy to Peace, and very destructive to Kingdoms and States.
Whereof there is a signal Instance in the Case of Hanno and Bomilcar, who,
through Envy to the growing Glories of Hannibal, denied him a Supply of Forces
to carry on his Italian Conquests, and so ruined him, their Country, and
themselves too.

Fifthly, That he be free from Revenge, which is another great Trespasser
against Peace; and without which, the rest would not be so mischievous as they
are. For this continues and foments those Enmities to which the other give
Birth, rivets and fastens Animosities in the Minds of Men, and by fresh Returns
of Provocation, brings in (what has in vain been attempted in Nature) a kind of
Perpetual Motion in Malice, and immortalizes Quarrels and Contentions.

Sixthly and Lastly, To comprize all at once, it is requisite that the peaceable
Man be free from all manner of Lusts, and Irregular Passions, whether of the
Sensual or Intellectual Part; and from all Disaffection and Disorder of Soul;
this being the Spring and first Mover to all the Discords and Disorders that
are without: According to that of St. James, From whence come wars and
fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your
members? Where these reign, there can be no Peace; and therefore the peaceable
Man must be free from these.

These are the Negative Qualifications, in order to a peaceable Disposition.
The Positive I need but just name, the Proof of them being virtually contained
in the other. They are therefore, First, Charity, or Universal Love; that
seeks not her own, but the Common Good. Secondly, Generosity, and a noble
Enlargement of Soul, that sets a Man above the little petty Occasions of
Quarrel and Contention. Thirdly, Humility and Modesty, that makes a Man possess
himself and his Station with Contentedness and Thankfulness. Fourthly, A
candid, sweet and benign Temper, that thinks no Evil, but is well pleased in
the Prosperity of every Man, and every State or Community. Fifthly, a mild,
meek and forgiving Spirit, that does not keep up the Circulation of Injuries,
but lets the Quarrel fall and die. Sixthly and Lastly, A serene and
well-composed Soul, one that rules well her own inward Charge, having her
Passions in Subjection with all Gravity, Peace and Tranquillity of Mind.

All these excellent Qualifications are required to furnish out a peaceable
Disposition, which will not come into the Soul, as the Soul will not into the
Body, till after it be duly tempered and prepared for it. Whence the
Proposition to be made out is sufficiently concluded, that it argues a
well-ordered Frame, and good Habit of Mind: Which is the first Ground of its
Excellency.

The Second is taken from the Consideration of what it causes. The Effects of
it are as great and noble as its Principles and Prerequisites. Its great and
general Effect is Happiness, upon which no one Virtue has so large an Influence
as this. Some Happiness it causes immediately and directly, and contributes to
secure whatever Happiness it does not cause. Some Blessings it originally
procures, and preserves the Possession of all. So that, some way or other, all
our Blessings are Blessings of Peace, since to this we owe either the Blessings
themselves, or, at least, the secure Enjoyment of them. And all this it does by
giving Strength, Beauty and Pleasure to Society.

First, Strength. Peace is as much the Sinew of Society, as Money is of War; and
without it, Society is so far from obtaining any of its just and natural Ends,
that it is a far less eligible State than that of perfect Solitude: For, in
perfect Solitude Men only want the mutual Assistance of one another; but in a
divided and enraged Society, every Man is in the Condition of Cain, in fear
lest the next that meets him should do him a Mischief. It Is Peace that makes
Society a Defense, and that distingushes the Congresses of Men from the Herds
of Beasts, or, which is worse, from the Confusion of the Rabble. And as it
strengthens Society within, so it strengthens it without too: Nor would War be
any Security abroad, without Peace at home. Briefly, It Is Union and Coherence
that makes every thing strong, and Peace is the Cement that holds all fast
together. And what Society is there that can subsist without it, when even a
Kingdom divided against it self, though it be that of the Devil himself, cannot
stand? Mark 3. 24.

Secondly, Beauty. There is, indeed, a certain Beauty in Strength; and every
thing that is strong is so far beautiful. But, besides this, Peace gives a more
proper and peculiar Beauty to Society; the Beauty of Order and Proportion, of
Decency and Agreeableness. For, a peaceable Disposition inclines every Man to
mind his own proper Business, and to contain himself within that Place and
Station wherein God an^ his Superiors have fixed him, and not to aspire to what
is above him, or invade what does not belong to him. For, indeed, Peace it self
cannot subsist without this, any more than Society can without Peace.
Wherever therefore there is Peace, there will also be this Order and
Proportion: The Hand will not affect the Office of the Eye, nor the Foot the
Place of the Head; but every Member will be contented with, and intent upon his
own Office and Place in the Body. The Result of which must needs be the
greatest Beauty and Harmony.

Thirdly, Pleasure. This, indeed, is necessarily consequent to the two former,
since it cannot but be a great pleasure to every particular well-affected
Member of Society to reflect upon the Strength and Beauty of the whole. But,
besides this, a peaceable Disposition derives a more immediate and direct
Pleasure upon Society. For, Who can express the Pleasure that is in Love and
Joy; Sweetness and Dearness in Mutual Kindness and Confidences, in Union of
Minds, and Universal Friendship! They that have had the Happiness to taste of
this Pleasure, know they cannot express it; which made the Psalmist beak forth
into that abrupt Ecstasy, Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity! Psalm. 133.

Having thus far set forth the general Excellency of a peaceab^^ Disposition
from what it argues, and from what it causes. I now proceed, in the Second
Place, to consider that more particular Prerogative of it, in making those that
have it, Children of God.

To be Children of God is, indeed, common to all good Men; who being begotten
anew by the immortal Seed of the Word, do bear God's Image in Holiness,
endeavoring in all things to do their Father's Will. But there are some
Dispositions that give a more peculiar Right to this Title than others, as they
are nearer Resemblances of the Divine Excellencies: Among which is the
Disposition now under our Consideration, whereby a Man becomes, in a special
Degree and Manner, like God, and so evidences himself to be his Child, and may
upon the Consideration of that likeness fitly be so called. And this is the
constant use of this Phrase in Scripture, Joh. 8. 44. Ye are of your Father the
Devil (says our Lord to the unbelieving Jews) and the Lusts of your Father ye
will do. And so again, Luke 6. 35. Love your Enemies, and do good, etc. and ye
shall be the Children of the Highest, for he is kind to the unthankful and to
the evil. And says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of God as dear
Children. They are the Children of God, who are Followers of God, who purify
themselves as he is pure, and who are perfect as he is perfect. So that to be
the Child of God, or the Child of the Devil, signifies as much as to carry a
particular resemblance of either. When therefore it is said, that the
Peacemakers shall be called the Children of God, it comes to as much as that
they carry a particular Character of the Divine Likeness, whereby it may be
known to whose Family they retain, and that they are the True Sons of God.

And so indeed they are. For God is the God of Peace; and the greatest Peace,
that which passes all Understanding, is called the Peace of God. For God is the
greatest Lover of Peace, the Author and Giver of Peace, and the Rewarder of all
such as live in Peace. Indeed under the Jewish State, (which as in other
things, so in this was very peculiar, that 'twas a State of Theocracy) God was
known by the Name of the Lord of Hosts, not as expressing his true natural
liking and approbation, but only his relation to that particular People, whose
immediate King and Leader he was. But now under the State of the Gospel, which
exhibits a more genuine Idea of God (for the only begotten Son, which is in the
Bosom of the Father, he has declared him) Joh. 1. 18. he has changed his Title
from the style of War to the style of Peace,

This indeed was ever his Delight, but now it is his Glory, and inserted among
the brightest Ornaments of his Crown. He is now manifested to be what he ever
really was. God from all Eternity to all Eternity enjoys a profound Peace
within himself, and the Sacred Persons of the Trinity are not more one in
Essence and Nature, than in Will and Inclination. Their Moral is as great as
their Natural Unity. The Kingdom of God is a Kingdom of Peace, and Heaven the
Throne of his Majesty is a peaceful Region. We never read but once that there
was any War there, and those that caused it were quickly banished thence, Rev.
12. 7. To be short, God both enjoys and establishes Peace above, he makes
Peace in his High Places, and he has sent his Son to procure it below, to
reconcile Men to him, and to one another, that so both Worlds might conspire in
Unity, and that this Will of God might be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. And
therefore since God has shown himself to be so great a Lover of Peace, there is
sufficient ground for this particular Prerogative of a peaceable Disposition,
that it makes those that have it Children of God. From which I pass in the
third and last place, to conclude all with some Reflections on the present
Disturbers of the Peace of Christendom.

It Is the Observation of a Great Civilian and Moralist, Pufendorf de Officio
Hom. and Civ. p. 154.
that Peace is a state peculiar to Man as he is distinguished from Brutes. And
so indeed it should be. But could we suppose a Stranger from one of the other
Planetary Worlds to come and take a View of this our little Spot, and of the
Manners of those that live upon it, he would not sure think this of all the
things in the World to be the Character of Man. For he could not but observe,
and perhaps it would be one of the first Remarks he would make, that there are
more Wars and Fightings among Men, than among any other sort of Creatures, and
more among Christians than among any other sort of Men. For at the very first
opening of the Scene, what a miserable face of things would appear both in
Church and State! What Wars and Desolations in the one! And what Debates,
Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings, Whisperings, Swellings and Tumults in
the other! 2 Cor. 12. 20.

But because most of the Disturbances in the State proceed from those of the
Church, I shall confine my Reflections to those that disturb the Peace and
Order of the Christian Church. Where I shall First, Point out who these
Disturbers are. And Secondly, Set some such Considerations before them, as may
make them sensible of their Crime.

There are I conceive these two general ways of disturbing the Peace of the
Church; either by imposing unlawful or unreasonable Terms of Communion, or by
refusing to comply with such as are Lawful and Reasonable. That the first of
these is a Breach of the Church's Peace there can be no doubt, because it
introduces a necessity of Separation. And that the latter is so is as plain,
because it is a Separation without any Necessity for for it. Either of these is
Schism, whose Notion (as all agree) consists either in making a necessity of
Separation, or in separating without necessity.

The First of these will fall heavy upon the Church of Rome, who, (as it has
been sufficiently made good against her) has brought in an Absolute Necessity
of Separation, by imposing such notoriously unlawful and unreasonable Terms of
Communion. The latter will light upon all those who separate from such parts of
the Reformation, where they may lawfully Communicate. More especially it will
light heavier than ordinary upon all those Sectaries among us, who now divide
from the Church of England, the Terms of whose Communion, (as has been
undeniably proved and maintained) are not only Lawful, but highly reasonable,
and of an excellent Constitution.

I need not here, nor is it my Design to set my self professedly to make out
the Charge of Schism against the Dissenters and Separatists from the Church of
England. It has been done over and over, to the utmost Degree of Evidence, and
the whole Circle of the Reformed Churches cry out upon them for their
unreasonable Separation. Only I would desire them to try themselves and their
Cause by that one plain Apostolical Canon before mentioned, and see whether
they can justify themselves by that single Measure. It is this, If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men, Romans 12. 18. If
with all Men, then certainly much more with Bodies and Societies of Men; much
more with our Governors and Superiors; much more yet with the Church, the most
Sacred and most Eminent of all Societies. And if as far as is possible, then
certainly as far as is lawful.

But now I would ask our Dissenters and Separatists this one Question, and
appeal to their Consciences as well as to their Practices for an Answer. Do
they live peaceably with the Church of England as by lawful Authority
established, as far as is possible, and as much as in them lies? So far from
this, that I might say, (were I minded to aggravate things) that they do the
quite contrary, and Divide from us as far as possible, and as much as in them
lies, it being very notorious that they run from us as far they can, measure
their Purity and Sanctity by their distance from us; and condemn and difuse
many things merely because we approve and use them.

But I need not take advantage of this, tho it be too notorious to be denied,
as well as too scandalous to be defended. I only demand, Do they live peaceably
with the Church as far as is possible, and as much as in them lies? They cannot
with any Modesty say that they do. For if they did, not to say that they might
come much nearer to us than they do, they must of necessity conform with us.
Since as they were never able to show any thing unlawful in our Communion; so
they now generally allow it to be lawful, and accordingly will afford us their
company now and then upon occasion, as often as they think fit to do us that
Honor. Well then, if our Communion be lawful, then it is Possible for them to
communicate with us, and if they do not, then it is plain that they do not live
peaceably with us as far as is Possible, and as much as in them lies, and
consequently by virtue of this plain Apostolical Canon stand fully convicted of
Schism, and let them bring themselves off if they can. I am satisfied they will
be able to answer it but ill here, and am afraid worse hereafter.

I have now in general pointed out the Disturbers of the Christian Peace, and I
wish I could now as easily make these Troublers of our Israel sensible of this
their Crime, as prove them guilty of it. In order to which not to insist upon
the Heinousness of the Sin of Schism which is as expressly forbidden in
Scripture as Murder or Adultery, and the great Obligation that lies upon all
Christians to preserve the Unity and Peace of the Church, which the Scripture
every where so earnestly presses and inculcates, and which the Example of the
Primitive Christians so strongly recommends; and for which both our Reason and
our Interest (especially at this time) would suggest to us a Thousand
Arguments; I say not to insist upon these and such like considerations (for a
combination of which I refer to an excellent Discourse of Dr. Barrow's
concerning the Unity of the Church) I would only desire the Persons concerned
to consider how much by their Schisms and Divisions they prejudice the
Christian Religion. I do not mean as to the Life and Power of Godliness, (tho
that be very true, and worty to be seriously considered) but as to the
Propagation of the Christian Faith. And that with respect to the three great
Enemies of it, the Heathen, the Jew, and the Mahumetan.

First, With respect to the Heathen, to whom as the Unity and Agreement of the
First Christians was a great indearment, and a very prevalent Invitation, so as
to occasion that common Speech among them, See how the Christians love one
another! So the Schisms and Divisions of the Present Christians must needs be a
great Scandal and Objection. For indeed how can any considering Heathen be
persuaded to think such a Broken and Divided Religion to be of Divine
Revelation, when that which he takes to by the Light of Nature has more of
Unity and Consent!

Secondly, With respect to the Jew, who may certainly number the Dissentions of
Christians among the greatest Hindrances of his Conversion. For when in the
Prophetic Writings among other Characters of the times of the Messiah he shall
find this to be one, and one of the chiefest, that it shall be a Reign of
Charity and Peace, Isa. 2. 4. that they shall beat their Swords into
Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; That Nation shall not lift up
Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. That The Wolf
shall also dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid,
etc. I say the Jew finding this to be one of the Characteristics of the Messiah
his Reign, and observing withal nothing like it in the Christian State, but
rather a perfect Reverse of all this, and not being able to distinguish with
some between the Design and Natural Genius of the Christian Religion, and the
accidental Event of things; or with others, to have recourse to the other more
glorious Reign of Christ in the Millennial State of the Church, wherein these
great and strong Figures shall have a proportionable Accomplishment, he must
needs be shrewdly tempted to think that the time of the promised Messiah is not
yet come, and that the Religion which now goes for his, is as false, as its
Professors are evil and wicked.

Thirdly and Lastly, with respect to the Mahumetan, who indeed allows Christ to
have been a true Prophet, and his Religion to have been once a true Religion,
only he says it has had its Time as well as that of the Jews, and is now, as
superannuated, to give place to a more perfect Institution, that is, to
Mahumet's, who as he came after Christ, so was he to fill up his Defects, and
to deliver the last and standing Will of God. And will he not find pretense to
be confirmed in this his Opinion, and to prefer his Master Mahumet as much
before Christ as we do Christ before Moses; when he shall perceive (as quickly
he may) that there is not half so much Unity and Agreement among Christians,
even concerning their very Religion which is to be the Bond of their Unity, as
there is among Mahumetans? Certainly he will, and tho he perish in his Error,
yet I fear his Blood will be upon those who administer the occasion of it.
These are great Scandals and Objections both to the Heathen, Jew and Mahumetan,
and Woe be to them by whom this great Offense comes. Our Savior pronounces a
severe Woe against them that shall offend even one of his little ones, Mat. 18.
6. and what then shall be the doom of those that scandalize so great a part of
the World! I heartily wish that the present Disturbers and Dividers of the
Christian State and Church would seriously consider these things, and how they
act the part of Antichrist in thus letting and hindering the Course of the
Christian Religion.

In the mean time I shut up all with this Prayer, that God would give Light to
those Heathens, Jews and Mahumetans that sit in Darkness and in the Shadow of
Death, and that in order to this, he would first guide the Feet of us
Christians into the Way of Peace, Amen.

Discourse the Eighth.
Matthew. V. ver. x, xi, xij. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kindom of Heaven. Or, as it may be read
from the Close, Great is their Reward in Heaven.
IT has been ever a great occasion of Dissatisfaction to some Men that there
should be any such thing as Evil in the World. A greater yet, that this Evil
should often fall upon good, and sometimes upon the best of Men. But the
greatest of all is, that not only good Men should meet with Evil, but that
their very Goodness should betray them into it; that suffering should not only
be the Portion of the Righteous, but that Men should suffer for the Sake of
their Righteousness. It seems hard indeed that a Righteous Man should suffer,
but much more that he should suffer for his being Righteous, and that
Affliction should not only be the Lot, but also the Effect and Consequence of
his Virtue. For if Honesty and Integrity cannot be a Defense and Privilege
against Evil, yet one would expect it should not be a Procurer of it, and that
if the Man were not the better for his Virtue, yet at least he should not be
the Worse.

These have been always as perplexed Appearances in the Moral, as any that arise
in the Natural System of the World; a frequent Trouble and Discouragement to
the Good and Pious, and a more frequent Occasion of Triumph to the Atheistical
and Profane, who have raised from hence their most plausible Objections both
against the Being and the Order of Divine Providence, which by these greatest
Difficulties of it they have been encouraged either to Deny or to Condemn.

With the two first of these Difficulties I am not at present concerned, nor
shall I determine of what force the last and greatest might be, were this the
last state of things, and the All-concluding Scene of the World. Perhaps it
might then be strong enough to conclude what some are now so weak as to wish
and believe. But certainly with the supposition of an After-state the Objection
is so far from being Desperate, that I can see nothing Difficult in it: And I
think it is here sufficiently answered by that ample Compensation promised by
our Savior to all those whose faithful adherence to a good Cause, shall at any
time engage them in Sufferings and Afflictions. For says he, Blessed are they
which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Which last Words (as our Savior afterward explains them) contain not only a
Promise of Heavenly Happiness in general, but of a greater Degree and Measure
of it, and entitle the Sufferers for Religion, those who undergo Persecution
for Righteousness sake, to a more than ordinary weight of Glory. So that hence
arise two Propositions to be distinctly considered:

First, That there are Degrees in that Glory which shall be the Reward of
Saints in Heaven.

Secondly, That one of the Highest Degrees of it shall be the Reward of those
who suffer Persecution for the sake of Righteousness.

That there are Degrees of Glory, tho by some a much contested, is yet I think
a most certain and unquestionable Truth. The certainty of which I shall
endeavor to establish upon these few evident Principles.

First, I consider that this must needs be the natural and necessary result of
things. And here I desire only it may be granted me, That there are some
certain Dispositions of Soul necessary to relish and enjoy the Happiness of
Heaven. This I think is a Supposition that need not be disputed, since even to
the enjoyment of sensible good there is requisite a proportion of Sense. The
Ear must be tunably set to relish the Charms of Music, and the Palate must be
rightly disposed to find any pleasure in the sweetest Delicacies. And if these
grosser Objects that have a more natural Affinity with the Organs of Sense, and
strike hard upon them, will not yet affect them without some more particular
inward Preparation; there is greater reason to think that the Delights of
Heaven that are so far above the Level of our Natures, so pure and so refined,
cannot be tasted but by a suitable Disposition of Soul. The Necessity of which
appears so great, that I am apt to think (as a late worthy Writer of our Church
does) that the whole Moral Excellency of some Virtues is their Qualification
for the Happiness of another State, Practical Discourse of Death, p. 76.
they being of no great consequence to the present Order of this World.

Well then, if certain Dispositions of Soul be required to fit us for the
Happiness of Heaven, then it follows, that the more disposed any Soul is for
the Glories of Heaven, the more happy she must needs be in the enjoyment of
them. And if so, then 'twill be necessary to say, either that all Souls are
equally disposed, which would be to contradict the Sense and Experience of the
whole World; or if one be better disposed than another, then in proportion one
will also be more happy than another. The Consequence is plain and necessary,
If there must be a Moral Qualification of Soul to fit a Man for Happiness, then
certainly the more qualified the more happy. Which has made me often wonder at
the self-inconsistency of those who allowing a virtuous Frame and Temper of
Mind to be a Natural Disposition for Happiness, do yet deny greater Degrees of
Glory to greater Degrees of Virtue. Indeed if a Moral Disposition of Soul did
not fit us for Happiness, the case were otherwise; but since it is allowed to do
that, I cannot conceive but that the Degrees of Happiness must follow the
Degrees of Virtue. And indeed how can he that thinks at all, think otherwise,
but that a Soul well purged and purified, that has undergon a long course of
Mortification, till she is thoroughly awakened into the Divine Life and
Likeness, and is arrived to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. must find more Happiness in the Vision of God, than a Soul
just pregnant with the Divine Form, and that carries away with her only the
first Rudiments of Spiritual Life! Certainly that Soul which is most like God
will be most happy in the fruition of him. This is no more than what may be
concluded from the mere natural necessity of things without having recourse to
any Positive Order of God about it. But neither may that be supposed to be
wanting. For,

Secondly, I consider that the same may be concluded from the Justice and
Goodness of God as well as from the Nature of things. And first, from his
Justice. Not that there lies an Absolute and Antecedent Obligation upon God to
bestow greater Rewards upon greater Saints; for if Eternal Life it self be (as
the Apostle represents it) the Gift of God, Romans 6. 23. no doubt but the
Degrees of it are so too. God cannot become a Debtor to Man, or to any other
Creature but by a free Act of his own. He may indeed oblige himself to us by a
voluntary engagement, but we cannot pass any strict Obligation upon him by any
thing we can do; and to talk of Meriting in this Sense is no less than
Blasphemy, and I can hardly believe that any Man that understood himself, ever
thus held it.

But tho God be not absolutely obliged to his Creatures, but only upon
Supposition, and consequently cannot be Absolutely bound to reward greater
Saints with greater Happiness, yet if we once suppose him to engage himself by
Promise to be a Rewarder of Virtue in general; there will be all the reason in
the World to think that by the same Promise he has also Vertually obliged
himself to crown the greatest Virtues with the greatest Rewards. For since the
reason why he engaged himself to be a Rewarder of good Men was not (as is
already precaution'd) any Absolute Merit of theirs, but only to show his great
Love of Virtue and Goodness, it is reasonable to conclude that by the same
Motives, and in pursuance of the same End, he also engaged himself to be a more
liberal Rewarder of greater Saints. Since this is as necessary a means to show
his Love to Virtue and Goodness as the other. And therefore tho we should grant
(which yet in the sequel will appear otherwise) that God had expressly promised
only to be a Rewarder of Virtue in general, yet since the End and Reason of
this His engagement was to show His great Love to Virtue, this would be warrant
enough to conclude, That he had implicitly and vertually engaged Himself to
have an equal regard to the several Degrees of Virtue, and to reward them after
their respective Proportions.

But to rise higher yet, tho God cannot be in Strict Justice obliged to reward
the best of our Services but by an engagement of his own, much less to reward
them with Eternal Happiness, yet I think there must be acknowledged a kind of
Congruity or Becomingness on God's part so to do, even Antecedently to any
Promise or Covenant. There is indeed no strict Obligation till after some
Covenant; but there may, and I think must be a Congurity even before. For tho
there be no Proportion of Equivalence between our best Works and the Rewards of
Heaven, and consequently no possible room for any strict Merit, yet I cannot
but think with a Person of great Judgment and Moderation, I e Blane Theses
Theolog. p. 590.
that there is a proportion of Convenience; that is, as he afterward explains
it, tho there be nothing strictly due from God to the Services of good Men, yet
it is highly worthy of God to reward them; upon which account they also may be
said to be worthy, according to that of the Apocalypse, They shall walk with me
in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3. 4.

And indeed unless we will admit of this Congruity, I do not see how to justify
the Sense of that Apostolical Maxim, He that comes to God must believe that he
is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.
It Is plain that the Apostle here speaks of the Grounds of Natural Religion, and
what should move and qualify a Heathen Man to make his first Addresses to God.
This he tells you is to believe the Being and the Providence of God, that he
is, and that he is a Rewarder. But now how shall a Heathen Man believe that God
is a Rewarder? By any Revelation of his? But that he is not yet supposed to
admit. He must therefore conclude it by his own natural Reason, by considering
the Idea and Nature of God, the (...), that which may naturally be known of
him, and how becoming it is for so excellent a Being to reward those who apply
themselves seriously and heartily to him.

Well then, if it be reasonable to believe upon the Stock of natural Principles
that God is a Rewarder, without being assured of it by any Revelation (which is
here supposed in the Heathen's Case) then it follows, that even antecedently to
any Promise of God there is a great Congruity, tho not a strict Obligation that
he should be a Rewarder. For otherwise what ground could the Heathen Man have
so to Conclude or Believe? This Congruity therefore must of necessity be
allowed, however apt some may be to startle at it, when the Word Merit is put
before it. This is Prejudice, but the thing it self as I have here stated and
explained it, is both innocent and necessary to be granted. And if there be
such a Congruity that God should be a Rewarder in general, then by the same
Proportion it follows that he should dispense his Rewards according to the
Degrees of Virtue. There being certainly at least as much Congruity in this as
in the other.

And besides this, there is no reason to question but that the Goodness of God
which is in it self infinite, and which is already supposed to exert it self so
liberally as to reward the little and defective Services of a short Life with
Eternal Glories, will also be so consistent with it self, as to reward those
most, who have pressed forward to the highest Degrees of Sanctity. And were it
not for this, I do not see what encouragement there is for Men to Excel in
Virtue, which yet the Goodness of God obliges us to suppose. For what should
move a Man to be eminently good, considering how difficult it is to be so, and
how little recompensed in this World, if it were not in order to a greater
Reward hereafter?

If it be said, that the least Degree of Glory is a sufficient encouragement
for the greatest Degree of Virtue; I grant it is so, were that greatest Degree
of Virtue the necessary Condition of it, without which the least Glory could
not be obtained. But since less will suffice for that (as must be admitted,
unless you will say that all glorified Saints are equally good and virtuous) I
do not see how there can be sufficient Encouragement for higher Seize,
but only upon the Supposition of greatest Rewards. Which therefore from the
Goodness as well as Justice of God there is good Reason to conclude.

Thirdly and lastly, From Principles of Reason I appeal to Holy Scripture,
which I think will be found to speak as fully and plainly to this purpose as
may reasonably be desired. For there we find that God will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2. 6. And again, that every one shall receive the
things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And lest this should be referred to the general Distribution
of Rewards and Punishments, more expressly it is said, that he that sows
sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and that he that sows bountifully shall
reap also bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. The same again is expressly represented
under the Parable of the Talents committed to the Management of Servants, who
were severally rewarded according to their several Improvements, Luke 19. And
tho Parables are not allowed to conclude throughout, yet certainly as to the
thing directly and purposely intended by them they are as conclusive as any
other Forms of Speech, which in this Parable must be the different Dispensation
of Rewards hereafter, or nothing. Again, the Scripture mentions different Seats
of Glory, Joh. 14. 2. In my Father's house are many Mansions, says our Savior,
that is, Mansions of distinct Ranks and Orders; For 'twould have been but a
small piece of News for our Savior to have told his Disciples, that in Heaven
there were a great many Mansions in number. Nor would this be so suitable to
the Introduction of his Discourse, Let not your Hearts be troubled.

Again we read of particular Rewards belonging to Men of particular Characters,
as of a Prophet's Reward, and a Righteous Man's Reward. He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's Reward, says our
Savior, Mat. 10. 41. Why a Prophet's Reward, if there be not some special
Reward assigned to a Prophet? And again, it is plainly intimated that every
Degree, and every Act of Virtue shall have its proper Recompense, where it is
said, Mat. 10. 42. Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little one a
Cup of cold Water only in the Name of a Disciple, shall in no wise lose his
Reward. To which purpose there is also a very express place in the Proverbs,
Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and look
what he lays out it shall be paid him again. Where there is a Reward promised
not only to Charity in general, but to every Degree of it. And if every Degree
of Virtue shall be particularly rewarded, it evidently follows that the greater
our Virtues are, the more abundant shall be our Reward, otherwise some Degrees
of Virtue would go unrewarded, contrary to the Supposition.

To this it may added, that a greater Degree of Blessedness is every where
attributed to Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, etc. when their Glorification
is expressed by their Sitting down in the Kingdom of God, and that of other
Saints, by their sitting down with them in allusion to the Eastern manner of
Feasting. This Privilege of a more eminent Seat is particularly assigned to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by our Savior, when he tells us, Mat. 8. 11. that
Many shall come from the East and the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. And so again to the Apostles, Mat.
19. 28. Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also
shall sit upon Twelve Thrones. It cannot be denied but that this is meant of
the Apostles only, and not of his Disciples at large, because of the Twelve
Thrones. And why should Twelve of them only be specified, if they were not to
be Thrones of an higher Order? Or what Extraordinary would our Savior have
promised to his Disciples? And this is further confirmed by St. John, who in
the Description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, makes the Twelve Apostles the
Foundations of the City. And the Wall of the City (says he) had twelve
Foundations, and in them the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.
14. A place exactly parallel to that of the Twelve Thrones.

To dispatch all in a Word, the Condition of Saints in Glory is expressed in
Scripture by their being made like unto the Angels; Mat. 22. 30. and it is of it
self reasonable to think that the same General Order and Proportion shall be
observed in both these Sons of God, Angels and Men. But now it is most certain
that the Angels have their different Orders and Hierarchies, being
distinguished into Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers, and into
Angels and Archangels, and that some of them sit nearer to the Throne of God
than others. Whereupon the Talmudists call Michael the Archangel, The Prince
of Faces, or the Prince of the Presence, being (as they say) so near to the
King of Heaven, as to be admitted to sit down by him, and register the good
Actions of the Israelites. And says the Angel Gabriel of himself, I am Gabriel
that stand in the presence of God, Luke 1 19. He distinguishes himself as much
by his Station as by his Name. And the Vision of Isaiah represents one of the
Angelic Orders covering their Faces with their Wings, which supposes them to be
nearer than Ordinary to the Presence of God, so as not to be able to abide the
Glory of it, without the help of a Veil.

Since therefore there is such a Variety in the Angelical Stations, and our
future Condition is generally represented by theirs, this alone were enough to
put us upon thinking that our Glorification must admit of the like gradual
Diversity. And it is no more than what natural Order and Decency seems to
require, that the Members of Christ's Mystical Body should retain the same
Diversity in the other World that St. Paul ascribes to them in this, that there
should still be an Eye and an Hand, an Head and a Foot, more Honorable and
less Honorable Parts: 1 Cor. 12. Whereof the Natural Heaven exhibits a very
convenient Emblem, in which one Star differs from another Star in Glory. And
after all, tho there were no plain Proof to be had for this, yet there is such
an obvious Congruity in the thing as would convince where it could not silence.
And I believe there is no Man, tho never so forward to raise Objections against
what has been contended for, and to equalize the Glories of Heaven (for the
other World has its Levellers as well as this) that could yet obtain Leave of
his own Modesty to expect as bright a Crown as the Virgin Mary, or St. Paul.

Having thus far asserted the different Degrees of Glory, which I have the
longer insisted upon, because it is a very practical as well as notional Theory,
being of great consequence to the encouragement of Heroic Goodness, I come now
to consider the second thing proposed, that one of the Highest Degrees of Glory
shall be the Reward of those who suffer Persecution for the sake of
Righteousness, that is, of Martyrs. And here for the Eviction of this, having
already shown that there are Degrees of Glory in proportion to the Degrees of
Virtue, I think 'twill suffice to show that Martyrdom is one of the highest
Degrees of Virtue. For the Argument reduced to Form will stand thus:

An higher Degree of Virtue shall have an higher Degree of Glory.

But Martyrdom is an higher Degree of Virtue:

Therefore Martyrdom shall have an higher Degree of Glory.

The first Proposition is what we have been proving hitherto. To infer the
Conclusion therefore there needs only a Proof of the second. Here therefore my
Business shall be to give a short representation of the Excellency of Martyrdom.

The Honor of Martyrdom was so great in the Primitive Church, that even the
Commonness of it, which depretiates every thing else, could not diminish from
its Veneration. It was then thought of so great Excellence, as to supply the
room of Baptism, and the new Convert, whose early and sudden execution
prevented his solemn Admission into the Christian Church, was yet esteemed a
very good Member of Christ's Mystical Body, and numbered with his best Saints
in Glory everlasting. The same Honor to Martyrs made them choose their Tombs
for the places of their Devotion; St. Jerome against Vigilantious, as I think
Chap. 4.
and God himself was pleased to signalize his special regard to these his
Saints, and to show how precious their Death was in his sight, by making the
places of their Rest the Stage of his Miracles.

Nor is there any thing in all this more strange and extraordinary, than the
Excellency of the Virtue it self which was thus honored. A general
representation of which is thus given by the Pen of a Celebrated Writer of the
Roman Church. Monsieur Senault Christian Man. p. 336.
A Church which, by the way, has made more Martyrs, and has fewer than any in
the World. But she has dealt long enough in Blood, to be able to form an Idea
of Martyrdom from the Martyrs which she has made. We see (says one of her Sons)
nothing in the Church more noble than Martyrdom. It Is the highest form of
Virtue, the last Expression of Charity; and when a Man has shed his Blood and
parted with his Life for Jesus Christ, there is not any instance that can
further be expected from his Love. Justly therefore may we acknowledge nothing
more August in Religion than Martyrs. They are the Heroes of Christianity, the
gallant Men of this State, the Noblest Parts of this mystical Body. There is no
greatness that gives not way to their Dignity; whatever we admire is below
their worth, and according to the Opinion of one of the wisest Fathers of the
Church ( he means St. Cyprian) it is more to be a Martyr than to be an Apostle.
Neither has any thing been ever more Honored in the World. Heaven has wrought
an Hundred Miracles to discover their Innocence, wild Beasts have respected
them, the Flames have spared their Garments, Tyrants have admired them, and
many times their Executioners have become their Disciples, in so much that
these renowned Champions had great reason to be afraid of Vainglory, at the
same time that God delivered them from Sorrow. The Description is handsome and
elegant, but what they Describe, they have left to our Church to Practice.

But more particularly and distinctly, to take the just Height of the
Excellency of Martyrdom, we must first lay down a Measure whereby the
Excellency of any Virtue is to be estimated. Now the Excellency of any Virtue
may be measured either from the Goodness of the Object willed, or from the
Degree of willing it. And two Persons that are equally Virtuous with respect to
the good that is willed, may yet be very unequally so with respect to the
Degree of Willing, because one may will the same Good, and the same degree of
Good more intensely and affectionately than the other. Thus for instance,
Virginity may be said to be more excellent than a Conjugal Life, and that
though you do suppose the States themselves to be equally Pure, because it is
harder to preserve Virginal than Conjugal Chastity: So that tho the Degrees of
Purity be supposed the same in both States; yet because they are more strongly
willed in the one than in the other, the Virgin may be said to be more pure
than the Conjugated Person; not, perhaps as a Lover of greater Purity, but as a
stronger and more pertinacious Lover of the same, which he adheres to under
more disadvantagious Circumstances.

And this I take to be the Case of Martyrdom, whose general Excellency above
other Virtues consists in the Degree of Inclination or Adhesion to good, which
in the Martyr is supposed to be so strong as to determine him rather to suffer
Death, and the utmost Extremity of it, than to transgress what he knows to be
his Duty. And indeed if we consider how sweet Life is, and how naturally averse
we are to Death even in the most easy, much more under the most terrifying
Circumstances, it must needs be a very strong and peremptory adhesion to Virtue
that shall engage a Man to quit his Life rather than his Innocence, and Dye
rather than offend.

But to be more particular yet. To recommend the excellency of Martyrdom there
is a Concurrence of the greatest Virtues. The most eminent of which (for 'twere
endless to reckon up all) are the greatest Faith, the greatest Love, and the
greatest Courage.

First, The greatest Faith. There is indeed no Faith like the Faith of a
Martyr. This is that Faith which overcomes the World, and all that is terrible
in it; That Faith to which all things are possible and nothing difficult, and
that removes Fear, which is more than to remove Mountains. This is that Faith
which is more especially the Substance of things hoped for, and the Argument or
Demonstration of things not seen. This noble Definition of Faith is never so
fully verified as in the Faith of a Martyr. This is that Faith that turns the
End of the Perspective, and shortens the interval of Time, and makes the future
World present, and represents Heaven open, and the Son of Man standing on the
Right Hand of God ready to defend, and receive, and reward those that will be
content to endure the Cross, and despise both the Shame and the Pain of it for
his sake. And all this with such certainty and fullness of Persuasion, that it is
ready to change its Nature, through too much Evidence, and to cease to be any
longer Faith, and commence Science or Revelation. For indeed nothing less than
this, than such a full down-bearing Persuasion can well enable a Man to drink
off this bitter Cup, and to be Baptized at this Bloody Font. It must certainly
be a strange Degree of Affiance and Confidence which that Man has in God, who
can resign up all that is good and pleasant, and submit himself to all that is
evil and terrible in this World, and meet Death with all its Natural and
Artificial Terrors, and trust God for his Reward in another Life. What a
generous, victorious Faith is this! And what a noble Idea must such a Person
have of God! 'The Faith of Abraham is highly celebrated in Scripture for his
readiness to offer up his Son at the Command of God. And no doubt 'twas a very
rare and extraordinary Faith that could reconcile him to such an unnatural
undertaking. But certainly the Faith of a Martyr is very much beyond this, as
much as it is an higher act of Reliance to trust God with ones own Soul, and for
ones Eternal Happiness, than for a Posterity to inherit a promised Land.

Secondly, The greatest Love. There is indeed no Love like the Love of a
Martyr. This is that Love which is properly stronger than Death, and which is
so perfect as to cast out or overcome all Fear. This is a Degree of Love truly
Seraphick, and which comes the nearest of any to the Love of Angels and
beatify'd Spirits. If there be any such thing as Seraphick Love in the World,
this is it. Not only because it is bright and flaming, noble and generous, but
because it is a Love that gets above all the Bodily Passions, silences all the
motions of the lower Life, and makes the Man act as if he were all Soul and
Mind. More particularly, Martyrdom is the greatest Love of Virtue, and the
greatest Love of God.

First, Martyrdom is the greatest Love of Virtue, because that is valued at an
higher rate than Life it self, which the Martyr will rather lose than Sin. Our
Savior makes it the greatest Instance and Argument of Friendship, for a Man to
lay down his Life for his Friend. And so doubtless it is. For it is then plain
that the Man sets a greater value upon his Friend, than he does upon Life. And
the like may be said of the Martyr, that he sets a higher value upon Virtue,
than he does upon Life, which yet is so dear that (as one observes, who for our
safety too well understands the secret Springs and Inclinations of Human
Nature) all that a man has will he give for it, Job. 2. 4. And yet this very
Life for which a Man will give all things, is by the Martyr given as a
Sacrifice to his Innocence.

Secondly, Martyrdom is the greatest Love of God, because the Martyr sets so
high a Price upon him, that he will choose rather to die than forfeit the
enjoyment of his Favor and Blessedness, and may truly say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 63. 4. Thy loving kindness is better than Life. It Is an easy thing for a
Man in a warm gusty fit of Devotion, when the Evil day is far off, and no
probable danger of any competition between his Religion and his Life, to say
that he sets a greater Value upon the loving Kindness of God than upon Life.
You know who did so. Tho I should die with thee, yet I will not deny thee, that
is, (to reduce the Words to a more Logical Order) I would rather die than deny
thee. This is easily said, but not so easily done, as the Event too sadly
showed. But he that says he values the loving Kindness of God more than Life,
and dies rather than forfeit it, may be believed. For what greater Love can
there be than this, or what higher Instance or Trial of it? The greatest Love
of God was to die for Man. God could not signalize his Love to Man by any
higher instance than by dying for him; and the greatest Love of Man is to die
for God.

Thirdly, The greatest Courage. For there is also no Courage like the Courage
of a Martyr. He fears no Evil but only Sin and Damnation, which are just and
reasonable Objects of Fear, and will undergo any other Evils to avoid these,
which is the truest and the greatest Courage. For where is there any like it? I
would not have the Man of Honor or Duelist, of all the Pretenders to Courage
in the World, offer at a Competition here. For it is most certain that he abuses
the notion of Courage as well as that of Honor. His Courage is to dare to sin
and be damned, that he may avoid the Reproach of Cowardice, that is, not to
fear and avoid what with all possible concern he should, and to fear and avoid
what he should not. And if this be Courage, I must then confess that I do not
know what is Cowardice.

But neither may the Military Man be a Competitor here. It Is I confess great
and brave for a Man in a just and laudable Cause, for the Defense of his Prince
and Country, to fall a Sacrifice at the Head of an Army. And the Herald's
Office supposes as much. But there are also some Allays that qualify the Glory
even of this Action. For the Man is supposed to be engaged with Multitudes and
Numbers, which encourage as well as defend; and to fight in a Heat, when his
Spirits are raised, and his Blood runs high, so as scarce to be able to feel a
Shot or a Stab that shall be given him, and to want Opportunity of Retreat, and
to be kept from reflecting upon his Danger by Noise, Tumult and Confusion, and
to have the Spur of Emulation, and the Incentive of Anger, sometimes of Hatred
and Revenge; and which is more than all the rest, the Hopes of a safe come off
at last. Believe me, this goes a great way, and I question whether among those
that venture themselves in War, one of ten thousand would do so, if he knew
beforehand that he should certainly die in the Field. But now to have a Man go
alone and in cold Blood to the Stake, or to the Scaffold; When in every Period
of his Advance it is still in his Power by compliance to recede from his
dreadful undertaking, and there calmly and deliberately submit himself to
certain Execution, and feel himself die with all his Thoughts, Reflections and
Passions about him; this is Courage indeed, and such a Noble Spectacle as might
well deserve to be a Theater to Angels and Men, yea even to God himself.

These are some of those great things that illustrate the excellency of
Martyrdom, and show it to be one of the highest Degrees of Virtue, and
consequently that it is entitled to an higher Degree of Glory: Which the
Scripture also expressly makes to be the Portion of Martyrs, who are said to
endure tortures, and not to accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection, Heb. 11. A Better Resurrection, that is, a Resurrection to
a Better State of Happiness, that being the only Measure whereby one
Resurrection may be said to be Better than another. And says the Angel to St.
John concerning those who are clothed with white Robes, and had Palms in their
Hands, Rev. 7. 14. These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have
washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Therefore are
they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple. And
he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

And now since there is a brighter Crown of Glory prepared for Martyrs, and
those that suffer Persecution for the sake of Righteousness, all that further
remains is to commend from the Premises these two Practical Inferences.

First, That we entertain no hard Thoughts of the Justice or Goodness of God
for suffering so many severe Persecutions in the Christian Church, some whereof
were violent, as under the Roman Emperors; some Fraudulent by Heretics, as
Arius, Nestorius, etc. And some of a mixed nature, consisting both of Fraud and
Violence, when both Temporal and Spiritual Power did combine together (as now
in the Papal See) against the Lord and his Christ. I say we should learn from
hence not to censure the ways of God for this, nor to charge him foolishly,
since there is so plentiful a Reward laid up for those that suffer in the Cause
of Righteousness.

Secondly, That we do fortify our selves with the Consideration of this
Beatitude, That if God should ever honor us so far as to call us to the Trial
of the Cross, we may be so true to God, to Religion, and to our own Souls, as
to suffer courageously and thankfully, ever looking up to that glorious Crown,
that white Robe, and those Triumphant Palms which distinguish the Noble Army of
Martyrs, who eternally sing Hymns and Praise to God for the Blessing of those
Crosses, which now spring up into Crowns, and in bearing of which they find so
great Reward.

Glory be to God on High.
The Conclusion of the Whole, in a Discourse concerning the Beatitudes in
general.
HAving hitherto Discoursed upon every Beatitude particularly by it self, I
think it may not be improper for the further Accomplishment of this Work, to
conclude all with a Discourse concerning the Beatitudes in General. Where there
are three Material Enquiries that seem to demand Satisfaction.

The First is, Concerning the Manner and Way of this Divine Sermon, Why our
Lord chose to deliver his Laws and Precepts by the way of Blessing?

The Second is, Concerning the Number of the Beatitudes.

The Third is, Concerning their Order and Method.

For Satisfaction to the first Enquiry, I consider first, That Christ who came
into the World upon an Errand of Love, the greatest Love that an infinitely
good God could express to a Creature, and who no doubt had also a Soul well
tuned, and a Body well tempered, and both set to the softest Key of Harmony and
Sweetness, was willing to deliver his Laws in the most indearing and charming
manner that could possibly be, that he might the better recommend both Himself
and his Doctrine to the good Will of his Auditors, and reconcile them through the
Love of the Former, to the Obedience of the Latter. Which is a very laudable
affectation of Popularity, first to engage Men's Affections to our Persons,
that we may the better win them over to the Acceptance and Entertainment of our
Doctrins. This indeed ought to be the Care and Endeavor of all Preachers; but
there was this more particular reason for it in our Lord, because the Love of
his Person was not only an Indearment of Obedience, but also a very
considerable part and instance of it. He therefore instead of using an
Imperative Style, by downright commanding such and such things, chose rather
in a more gentle and condescending way to insinuate what was his Will, and our
Duty, by pronouncing them Blessed that do so and so.

Secondly, I consider that our Lord Christ being to act the Counter-part to
Moses, and to relax the rigor of his Law, by being the Author of a milder
Dispensation, thought fit to give an early and a solemn Specimen of his greater
Mildness, by varying the Style of his Legislation from that used by Moses. And
therefore whereas Moses delivered his Law after an Imperatorial way, by saying,
Thou shall not do this, and Thou shall not do that: Our Good Lord chose rather
to express his Law more tenderly and Humanly, by declaring the Blessedness of
those that should observe it. And the rather because Moses had armed and
immured his Law with Curses and Maledictions. First in General, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law
to do them. Secondly, more particularly, by annexing a Curse to particular
Transgressions, as in that famous Commination in the 27 of Deuteronomy, to evey
Clause of which the People were to say Amen. And therefore to show of what a
different Spirit the Christian Institution was from that of Moses, our Lord
chose to administer his Law in a form of Blessing, in Opposition to Moses his
Cursings; thereby verifying those farewell words of St. Peter's Sermon to the
Jews, in a larger sense than he intended them, God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his
Iniquities, Act. 3. 26.

Thirdly, I consider that our Savior was to deliver a Law of Love, a Law that
required Love both as the Matter and as the Principle of Obedience. Love was
both the thing to be done, and the Motive of doing it. The Son of God was to be
the great Prophet of Love. 'Twas reserved for him, as being the Express Image
of him who is Love it self, and therefore the only Master fit to teach it. This
was the Fire which he came to kindle upon Earth, Luke 12. 49. the most ardent
and affectionate Love toward God and toward Men. This was to be the Substance
and Accomplishment of his Law, and the distinguishing Badge of those that
professed Devotion to it. By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples,
etc. But now 'twould not have been agreeable for a Law of Love to begin its
recommendation from such Arguments as should work upon the more Servile part of
Man. Moses indeed delivered his Law with all the Circumstances and Arguments of
Fear, and the Nature of his Law required such an Address, but 'twas fit that a
Law of Love should come recommended to the World by Motives of Love.

Fourthly and Lastly, It may be further considered that this solemn Instruction
of our Lord upon the Mount consisted of Precepts. So very sublime and elevated,
and withal so strange and unusual, as having had not Credit, if Reception, in
the World before, that 'twas but necessary for the Prevention of Prejudice to
set a Beatitude in the Front of every Duty, and to bribe the Passions of the
Hearers with a forward Anticipation of Happiness, lest Men should say of the
Commands of Christ, as the Prophet brings them in saying of his Person, Isa.
53. 2. that there is no Form nor Comeliness, nor Beauty in them that we should
desire them.

For these and other like Reasons that may be added, our Divine and gracious
Lawgiver was pleased to deliver his Laws rather by asserting the Blessedness
than the Obligation of them. Which while I consider, I cannot but enter into a
profound Admiration of the strange Goodness and Condescension of our Lord, that
he should so far lay aside the Majesty of a God and a Lawgiver, that he might
the better act the part of a Friend and of a Redeemer. And to set this
Consideration the more home upon our Minds, let us by the aids of Fancy draw
the Curtains of this Intellectual Scene, and imagine to our selves that we saw
our Savior seated upon the Mount of Blessing, with his Eyes devoutly set
toward Heaven, and his Hands affectionately stretched forth over the adoring
and attentive Multitude, and with Looks full of concern for the Good of Souls,
gravely and pathetically distilling down upon them the Dew of his Heavenly
Doctrine and tempering his Authority with the Style of Goodness Kindness, as
well as his Divinity with the Veil of Flesh. Who can with sufficient Wonder
contemplate so pleasing a Scene of Love and Sweetness! And who, that well
contemplates it, can find in his Heart to transgress a Law delivered with so
much Condescension, or offend a Lawgiver so infinitely, so amazingly good!

Now concerning the Number of the Beatitudes, why our Lord should assign Eight
and no more, it is not easy to offer what shall satisfy all Minds. Were I
minded to amuse my Reader, I could tell him that in the Mystic Philosophy 8 is
the Number of Justice and Fullness, because it is first of all divided into
Numbers equally even, namely into 2 Fours, which Division again is by the same
reason made into 2 times 2, that is, 2 times 2 twice reckoned. And by reason of
this Equality of Divisions it received the Name of Justice. But I do not
believe our Savior intended any Rosie-Crucian Mystery in this matter, Mr.
Heydon Rosie-Crucian Infallible Actions, page 73.
tho a certain Gentleman of that Order would fain insinuate that he did,
reckoning this among other Observations upon the Number 8, that there were 8
kinds of Blessed Men in the lesser World, The Poor in Spirit, the Mourners, the
Meek, they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, etc. But I think all
that can here be warrantably and safely said is, that our Savior intending (as
he signified by his Ascent into the Mount) a Discourse of Perfection and
Excellence, consisting of such Divine Virtues as were most perfective of Human
Nature, and for the Practice of which he himself was most exemplary, was by his
Design concerned to instance only in the most select and excellent Duties both
to God and Man. Whereupon premising Humility as being a Duty common to both,
and withal the Foundation of all the rest, he found remaining three
extraordinary Duties relating to Man, Meekness, Mercifulness and Peaceableness;
and four to God, Mourning for Sin, Hungring and Thirsting after Righteousness,
Purity of Heart, and Suffering of Persecution for Conscience Sake. So that our
Savior seems rather to have been directed by a natural Measure, and to take
things as he found them, than to proceed by any Arbitrary Measure of his own.
And this I think is the only ground of his assigning eight Beatitudes, and not
that he had any Fondness to the Number it self.

Then lastly, as to the Order of the Beatitudes Dr. Hammond in his Practical
Catechism, Page 114. remarks two things. First, That the Grace first named is a
general Principal Grace, and the Foundation of the rest, as he there shows in
particular. Secondly, That there is an interchangeable Mixture of these Graces
one toward God, and another toward Man, so interweav'd, that the first
respects God, the next Man, the next God again, till you come to the last which
respects God again. To verify which Remark, he begins his Computation not from
Humility, which is a general Fundamental Grace, but from Mourning, which is the
first particular one, and respecting God. So that the First and the Last both
respect God, who is the true Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, and those
between divide between our Neighbor and God. To teach us, that to God belongs
the Chief, the First and the Last of our Love, and that our Neighbor is to be
regarded after and in subordination to God. To this I further add, that there
is also a gradual and descending connection between all the Beatitudes, the
latter still depending upon the former, as well as all the rest upon the first.
For from Humility it is an easy descent to Mourning. When a Man takes a just
Survey of his own Nothingness and Unworthiness by contemplating himself as a
Creature and a Sinner, 'twill be so natural for him to mourn and be sorrowful,
that the danger is of being overwhelmed with too much Sorrow. Then from
Mourning it is easy to advance to Meekness, it being one of the chief
Properties of Sorrow to soften and melt down the Spirit, which when meekly
disposed, will also be in a fair disposition to Hungring and Thirsting after
Righteousness, The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, says the
Apostle, that is, is no way a Friend to the promoting of Righteousness; whence
on the contrary we may gather, that Meekness is a Friend to Righteousness; As
it must needs be, since a calm and sedate Soul is most fit for attending to the
Beauty of Holiness, and for admitting the Spirit of Holiness, which as the Jews
say, will not rest upon a turbulent Mind. And when once the Soul is wrought up
to a quick and lively relish of what is Good and Righteous, it is then an easy
step to Mercifulness, it being a very Just and Righteouss thing to show Mercy.
Which also leads a Man to Purity of Heart, as that without which even Mercy it
self will not find Mercy. From whence the very next step is to Peaceableness,
to which nothing more conduces than a Pure Heart, free from those Lusts and
Sensual Affections which are the Seeds of Strife and Contention. And when a Man
has attained to a peaceable Temper, then is he fit for the greatest thing in
the World, to be a Martyr, and will readily suffer Persecution rather than
occasion any Disturbance either in the Church or State, and with the generous
Prophet be content to be thrown overboard to appease the Tempest. So admirably
well contrived and full of Order was our Savior's Discourse, as it became him
who was the Wisdom of God, as well as the Light of Men, and in whom were hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Colos. 2. 3.

Al now that further remains, is that by a strict Conformity to these Excellent
Measures of Christian Perfection we endeavor to bring our selves within the
Number of these Blessed Persons, whom our Savior pronounces Happy here, and to
whom he will say in a more Emphatical Accent, Come ye Blessed, hereafter.

THE END.
CURSORY REFLECTIONS UPON A BOOK CALLED, AN ESSAY CONCERNING Human
Understanding.

Written by JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum,

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON: Printed for S. Manship at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil,
1699.

Cursory Reflections upon a Book called An Essay concerning Human Understanding.
SIR,
YOU obliged me so highly by acquainting me with the Publication of so rare a
Curiosity as Mr. Lock's Book, that should I dispute your Commands when you
desire my Opinion of it, I should hazard the Credit of my Gratitude, as much as
by my ill discharging them I am like to do that of my Judgment. This, Sir,
already reduces me to an even Poise. But to this the just Authority you have
over me, and the Right your other Obligations give you to all the Service I can
do, being added, and thrown into the Scale, do quite weigh it down, and leave
no room for any Deliberation, whether I should obey you or no. Without
therefore any further Demur or Delay I shall apply my self to the Task you set
me, in giving you my Free Censure of Mr. Lock's Essay, which I shall do by
reflecting upon what I think most liable to Exception in the same Order as the
things lie before me.

Introduct. Page 1. Sect. 1. The Understanding like the Eye, whilst it makes us
see and perceive all other things takes no notice of it self. What the
Ingenious Author intends in this Period, or how to make out any consistent
Sense of it, I do not understand. For if his meaning be, That the Understanding
while it is intent upon other things, cannot at that time take notice of it
self; this comes to no more, than that when it is intent upon one thing it
cannot attend to another, which is too easily and obviously true of all Finite
Powers to be any great Discovery. But if his meaning be (as it rather seems,
because of the Particle (All) and the Comparison here used) that the
Understanding like the Eye, tho it makes us see all other things, yet it takes
no notice of it self, then it is a Contradiction to his whole following Work,
which upon this Supposition must needs be very unaccountably undertaken.

Introduct. Page 2. Sect. 3. First I shall enquire into the Original of those
Ideas which a Man observes, etc. But sure by all the Laws of Method in the
World, he ought first to have Defined what he meant by Ideas, and to have
acquainted us with their Nature, before he proceeded to account for their
Origination. For how can any Proposition be formed with any certainty
concerning an Idea, that it is or is not Innate, that it does or does not come
in at the Senses, before the meaning of the Word Idea be stated, and the nature
of the thing, at least in general, be understood? If the Nature of Ideas were
but once made known, our Disputes would quickly be at an end concerning their
Original, whether from the Senses or not: But till that be done, all further
Discourse about them is but to talk in the Dark. This therefore ought to have
been his first, and indeed main Business to have given us an account of the
Nature of Ideas. And yet this is not only neglected in its proper place, but
wholly omitted and passed over in deep silence; which I cannot but remark, as a
Fundamental defect in this Work.

In the Three following Chapters our Author sets himself to prove that there
are no Innate Principles. But before I consider whether there be or no, I
premise this double Remarque. First, That a thing may be false in it self, and
yet not so because, or in virtue of such an Argument. Secondly, That tho a
thing be really false, yet it may not become such a Man to deny the Existence
of it, who by some other Principles of his may be obliged to hold the contrary.
The first of these argues the Writer guilty of Inconsequence. The Second of
Inconsistency. Upon both which Accounts this otherwise very ingenious Writer
seems in this part to be chargeable.

Which from the Sequel I leave to be collected.

His First Argument against Innate Principles is taken from the want of
Universal Consent. There are, (says he,) Page 5. Sect. 4. No Principles to
which all Mankind give an universal Assent. But in the first place how can this
Author say so, since in several places afterward he resolves that ready and
prone Assent which is given to certain Propositions upon the first Proposal,
into the Self-evidence of them? There are then even according to him
Self-evident Propositions. And will he say that Self-evident Propositions are
not universally assented to? How then are they Self-evident? There must be
therefore, according to him, some Principles to which all Mankind do give an
universal Consent. I do not say that this proves them Innate, but only that
there are such Propositions.

Well, but how does he prove there are no such? Why, he instances in some of
the most Celebrated, and says Page 5. Sect. 5. that All Children and Idiots
have not the least apprehension or thought of them; and the want of that is
enough to destroy universal consent. Now I always thought that Universality of
Consent had been sufficiently secured by the Consent of all, and the Dissent of
none that were capable of either. And what then have we to do with Idiots and
Children? Do any or all of these Dissent or think otherwise? No, that he will
not say, because they think not at all, having (as he says) not the least
Apprehension or Thought of them. And how then does the want of their Suffrage
destroy universal Consent, when all Persons that think at all about such
Propositions, think after one and the same way?

The most therefore that this Author can mean by want of Universal Consent, is
that every individual Person does not actually Assent. This perhaps may be
granted him from the Instance of Idiots and Children. But then the Question
will be about the Consequence of his Argument, whether Actual Assent from every
Individual be necessary to the Supposition of Innate Principles? Or, in other
Words, whether from there not being any Propositions to which every individual
Man gives an actual Assent, it follows that there are no Innate Truths. The
Author is of Opinion that it does. For, says he, Page 5. Sect. 5. It seems to
me near a Contradiction to say, that there are Truths imprinted on the Soul,
which it perceives or understands not. And again in the same place, To imprint
any thing on the Mind without the Mind's perceiving it, seems to me hardly
intelligible. And again, Page 12. Sect. 24. That a Truth should be Innate, and
yet not assented to, is to me as unintelligible as for a Man to know a Truth,
and be ignorant of it at the same time. Here we have both the Consequence of
the Author, and the Ground upon which it stands. The Consequence is this. If
there be no Truths actually perceived by all Minds, then there are none
naturally imprinted. The Proof of it is this. It Is impossible that what is
imprinted on the Mind, should not be perceived by the Mind. Therefore if there
be no Truths actually perceived by all Minds, there are none naturally
imprinted. Now on the contrary to this I thus oppose. If there may be
Impressions made on the Mind, whereof we are not conscious, or which we do not
perceive, then (by the Author's own measure) the not perception of them is no
Argument against such Original Impressions. The Consequence is unexceptionable,
not only as clear in it self, but as being the very Reverse of the Author's own
Argument. And now that there may be such Impressions whereof we are not
Conscious, is what the Author himself expressly does own, and what by his
Principles he stands obliged to own.

First, it is what he does expressly own. For, says he, Page 38. Sect. 6. Being
surrounded with Bodies that perpetually and diversely affect us, variety of
Idea's, whether care be taken about it or no, are imprinted on the minds of
Children. And yet they do not perceive them, as he had said before. Therefore
by his own Confession there may be an Impression of Ideas where there is no
Perception. The same he confesses again, Page 61. Sect. 4. How often may a Man
observe in himself, that whilst his mind is intently employed in the
Contemplation of some Objects, and curiously surveying some Ideas that are
there, it takes no notice of Impressions, etc. And again, Sect. 5. I doubt not
but Children by the exercise of their Senses about Objects that affect them in
the Womb, receive some few Ideas before they are born, etc. And if before they
are born, then certainly before they are conscious of them. There may therefore
be Impression without Consciousness. Which he also plainly implies in his
Account of Memory. Which he does not make to be a recovery of Ideas that were
Lost, but a Re-advertency or Re-application of Mind to Ideas that are actually
there, tho not attended to. For, says he, Page 65. Sect. 2. The narrow mind of
man not being capable of having many Ideas under View and Consideration at
once, it was necessary to have a Repository, to lay up those Ideas, which at
another time it might have use of. And accordingly Page 66. Sect. 7. He calls
them Ideas which are lodged in the memory. And Page 67. Sect. 8. He calls them
Dormant Ideas. So that according to him, to remember is to retrieve, not the
Ideas themselves, (for they are supposed to lie Dormant in the Mind) but only
the Perception or Consciousness of them. This he makes to be the business of
Memory, and therefore there may be an imprinting of Ideas without Actual
Perception, which may now, it seems, stand well enough together without any
danger of a Contradiction.

And to the Acknowledgment of this, his own Principles will also oblige him.
For since in conformity to the Aristotelian Philosophy, he makes all our Ideas
to be derived from our Senses, or rather by our Senses from sensible Objects,
he must needs suppose (considering the variety of sensible Objects wherewith we
are surrounded) that there are infinitely more Ideas impressed upon our Minds
than we can possibly attend to or perceive. Which may also be argued from the
Finiteness of our Faculties, as was hinted in the beginning.

Well then, since there may be an Impression of Ideas without any actual
Perception of them, whether there be any Innate Ideas or no (which I shall not
now dispute) it does not therefore follow that there are none, because they are
not universally perceived. Which utterly silences that Argument taken from the
Non-perception of them in Children. And since our Author both does, and is by
his Principles obliged to allow that there are many Ideas impressed upon us
when we have no actual Perception of them, it does not certainly become him,
tho there were really no such thing as Innate Ideas; and tho the Non-perception
of them were an Argument against them, to bring this as an Argument against the
Existence of any such, because they are not universally perceived. This is not
to agree with himself, however he may agree with Truth.

Our ingenious Author further argues, against Innate Principles from the
Lateness of the Perception of such which are presumed to be of that number, in
that they are not the first that possess the Minds of Children. Can it be
imagined (says he, Page 13. Sect. 25.) that they perceive the Impression from
things without, and are at the same time ignorant of those Characters which
Nature it self has taken care to stamp within? This I take to be a very
uncertain way of arguing, and of less Cogency than the Former. For if Nullity
of Perception will not conclude against Innate Principles, much less will the
Lateness of Perception be able to do it. And besides, there may be many Reasons
drawn from the inward, and to us unknown Contexture of Minds, and from the
manner of that Original Impression (if any such there be) which would also be
to us equally unknown, besides the Order of External Circumstances, that may be
the Cause why these natural Characters may not be so soon read as some others.
And therefore I do not see what sufficient ground the Author has for saying,
Sect. 26. That if there be any Innate Truths, they must necessarily be the
first of any thought on. Why? Where is the necessity? The Reason given by the
Author is because, If they are any Innate Truths, they must be Innate Thoughts.
Are then Truths and Thoughts the same? Indeed Truth of the Subject is the same
with a Conformable Thought. But Truth of the Object is not the Thought it self,
but that which is thought upon. And why then must Innate Truths be Innate
Thoughts?

But our Author proceeds to another Argument wherein he places more Strength.
If, says he, Page 13. Sect. 27. These Characters were native and Original
Impressions, they would appear fairest and clearest in those Persons in whom
yet we find no footsteps of them. He means in Children, who, he says, have no
Reserves, no Arts of Concealment to hinder them from shining out in their full
Luster. But how does the Author know but that this Natural Impression may be so
ordered that it shall not become legible till such a certain Period of time,
and without such and such Laws and Conditions? We know very well that we do not
come to the use of Thinking in general till such a certain Period of Time, and
the Author himself confesses Page 12. Sect. 25. That there is a time when
Children begin to think; and why then may there not be a time set for the
arising of such and such particular Thoughts? And how can he tell that
Childhood is that time? Or if it be, why do not the Ideas impressed by sensible
Objects appear fairest in Children for the same Reasons? If there be any force
in this Argument, the Author's own Hypothesis is as much concerned in it, as
that which he would overthrow.

Come we now to his Arguments against Innate Practical Principles, the first of
which is from their not being universally assented to. But what does he here
mean by their not being universally consented to? That they are not actually
assented to by every Individual whether capable or not? Or that they are not
consen^ed to by all that judge any thing about them; if the former, that proves
nothing, as we have shown already; if the latter, then I deny the Proposition,
and affirm that there are not only as Certain but as Vncontested Propositions
in Morality as in any other Science. But our Author demands, Page 15. Sect. 2.
Where is that Practical Truth that is universally received? I answer by
referring him to the 274 Page of his own Book, where he says Sect. 18. That
this Proposition, Where there is no Propriety there is no Injustice, is a
Proposition as certain as any Demonstration in Euclid; I add, and as plain too.
It needed nothing to assure the Truth of it but only the Explication of the
Terms. And I further Remarque that in the same place he says that Morality may
be placed among the Sciences capable of Demonstration. Well then, if there may
be Propositions demonstrated in Morality, then those Propositions must at last
be resolved into Principles evident and incontestable. Since otherwise there
can be no Demonstration. There are therefore incontestable Principles in
Morality. And he confesses as much in express terms; I doubt not, says he in
the same place, but from Principles as incontestable as those of the
Mathematics, by necessary Consequences, the measures of Right and Wrong might
be made out to any one, etc. Here he expressly owns incontestable Principles in
Morality, that is, incontestable Truths, that is, Truths that cannot be denied,
and therefore must be assented to. And how then can he with any tolerable
Self-Consistency say that there are no Moral Principles universally consented
to? If none are universally consented to, then all are by some contested. And
yet he says there are in Morality incontestable Principles. How to adjust this
I no more know, than he does to reconcile Morality and Mechanism.

His next Argument is, That there cannot any one Moral Rule be proposed whereof
a Man may not justly demand a Reason, Page 16. Sect. 4. Well, what then?
Therefore they are not Innate. I do not see the Consequence. Why may not the
same Proposition be Innate, and yet deducible from Reason too, as well as the
same Proposition be the Object of both Faith and Science? Why may not
Conclusions be Innate as well as Principles? Why may not God be supposed for a
further Security of our Virtue to implant even those Practical Propositions
upon our Minds, which are also capable of being demonstrated from Principles of
Reason? Whether he has so done or no I do not dispute; I only say that their
Dependence on Reason is no Argument that he has not.

He argues again, Page 18. Sect. 9. from Men's transgressing these Moral Rules
with Confidence and Serenity, which he says they could not do, were they
Innate. I do not apprehend here the least Appearance of a Consequence. Why may
not an Innate Law be transgressed as well as a Written Law? An Innate Law only
dictates that such a thing ought or ought not to be done, and so does a Written
Law. He might therefore as well have concluded that there is no Written Law,
because it is Transgressed, as that there is no Innate Law because it is
Transgressed.

The Author seems to have been sensible of the Weakness of this Argument, and
therefore to strengthen it, says he, Page 19. Sect. 12. The breaking of a Rule
say you is no Argument that it is unknown; I grant it, but the generally
allowed Breach of it any where, is a Proof that it is not Innate. Here I remark
by the way that he grants that the Breaking of a Law does not prove it not
known, and why then should it prove it not Innate? If a known Law may be
transgressed, why may not an Innate Law, Innate being only another way of being
known? But says he, The Generally allowed Breach of it proves it not Innate. I
do not see the Necessity of this neither. The allowed Breach of a Law is only a
more aggravated Breach of it, and if the Breach of a Law does not prove it not
to be Innate, why should the allowed Breach of it do so? And besides, why may
not an Innate Law be Allowedly broken as well as a Written Law?

But says our Author, Page 21. Sect. 14. Did Men find such Innate Propositions
stamped on their Minds, they would be easily able to distinguish them from
other Truths, and there would be nothing more easy than to know what and how
many they were. Perhaps not so very easy. For I see no absurdity in Supposing,
and it is what I can very well conceive, that a Man may be sensible of a Truth
impressed, and yet not of the Impression, and so may not know that it is
impressed, but think it came some other way, and consequently may not be able
to distinguish it from some other that does so. The truth of this may be seen
in the Instance of Inspiration. Since there have been Prophets ( Caiaphas for
one) Joh. 11. 51. who were not able to distinguish Divine Inspirations from
their own proper genuin Thoughts: It Is therefore no Consequence to say that
there are no Innate Principles, because we cannot distinguish them.

These are the main Arguments, and to which all that is further offered may be
reduced, whereby this Author impugns the Doctrine of Innate Principles; and I
think neither any nor all of them are sufficient for the Cause wherein they are
engaged. And I am so far from being surprised at their Deficiency, that I think
it absolutely impossible for him or any Man else upon his Principles, to prove
that there are no Innate Truths. For since with those of the Peripatetic School
he allows that Ideas are impressed upon the Mind from sensible Objects, he
cannot (as another might) object against the Possibility of such Impressions.
He cannot say they are capable only of a Figurative and Metaphorical Sense;
since according to him the same is literally and really done every Day, every
Hour, every Minute. No, he must grant that it is possible there may be such
Impressions. All the Question then will be concerning the Timing of it, whether
any of these Impressions be Original Characters or no! And why may they not be
at first as well as afterward? How can he or any Man else tell (upon his
Principles) whether the Author of Nature has imprinted any such or no? Or
whether we brought any with us into the World or no? However that be, I am
satisfied it is impossible for any Man that holds Mental Impressions, to prove
the contrary; especially if with that he allows the Possibility of
Pre-existence, which I believe no considering Man will say is Impossible.

For my part, I do as little believe there are any such things as Innate
Principles strictly and properly so called, meaning by them certain Original
Characters written upon or interwoven with the Mind in the very first Moment of
its Being and Constitution, I say I do as little believe this as the Author
himself. Not for the Reasons by him alleged, with the Cogency of which I am
not satisfied; but because I do not allow any such thing as Mental Impressions,
or Characters written upon the Mind, which if it pretend to any thing more than
Figure and Metaphor, I take to be mere Jargon, and unintelligible Cant. You
know Sir, I account for the Mode of Human Understanding after a very different
way, namely, by the Presentialness of the Divine (...) or Ideal World to our
Souls, wherein we see and perceive all things. For a fuller account of which I
refer you to my Reason and Religion, and to my Reflections lately published. I
cannot therefore by my Principles admit of any such Innate Characters in a
strict and proper Sense. Only I may, and am also inclined to admit something of
near Analogy with it. Supposing that God may and does exhibit some particular
Truths of the Ideal World more early, more clearly, and more constantly to the
view of the Soul than others, that by these she may be the better directed to
the Good of the Reasonable Life, as Animals by sensitive Instincts and
Inclinations are to the Good of Sense. This is all that I conceive to be
strictly either Possible or True in that grey-headed venerable Doctrine of
Innate or Common Principles.

Having thus far considered our Author's Impugnation of Innate Principles, I
come now to examine the Original which he gives to Ideas. These he derives Book
2. Chap. 1. from this double Fountain, Sensation and Reflection. Especially
from the Former, telling us again and again, that the Senses let in Ideas and
furnish the yet empty Cabinet, Page 8. Sect. 15. That the Senses convey into
the Mind several distinct Perceptions of things, Page 37. Sect. 3. And that the
Senses do furnish the Soul with Ideas to think on, Page 44. Sect. 20. with many
other such Expressions.

These indeed are Pretty Smiling Sentences. But before we go a Step further I
would wilingly know of the Author what kind of things these Ideas are which are
thus let in at the Gate of the Senses. This indeed I expected an Account of in
the beginning of the Work; but since the Author has been pleased to cast a
Shade upon this Part, I now demand, what are these Ideas? Why you shall know
that presently, Whatsoever the Mind perceives in it self, or is the immediate
Object of Perception, that I call Idea, says he, Page 55. Sect. 8. Very good;
so much my Lexicon would have told me. But this does not satisfy. I would know
what kind of things he makes these Ideas to be as to their Essence or Nature.
Are they in the first place Real Beings or not? Without doubt Real Beings, as
having Real Properties, and really different one from another, and representing
things, really different. Well, if Real Beings, then I demand, are they
Substances, or are they Modifications of Substances? He will not say they are
Modifications. For besides that a Modification of Substance cannot be a
Representative of a Substance, there being no manner of likeness between a
Substance and a Mode; if an Idea be a Modification only it cannot subsist by it
self, but must be the Modification of some Substance or other, whereof also
there may be an Idea; which Idea being (as is supposed) only a Mode, must have
another Substance, and so on without end. As for example, If my Idea of Figure
be only a Mode, then it must have a Substance wherein to exist as well as
Figure it self, which cannot exist alone; and since of that Substance whatever
it be, there may be also an Idea, which is supposed to be a Modification, this
Idea must also have another Substance, and so on to Infinity. He will not
therefore, I suppose, say that our Ideas are Modifications.

He must then say that they are Substances. Are they then Material Substances
or Immaterial? If he says they are Material Substances or Corporeal Emanations
from sensible Objects, I would desire him to weigh with himself, and try if he
can answer, what is alleged by M. De inquirend. Verit. Lib. 3. Part 2 c. 2.
Malebranch against the Possibility of such Emanations. Particularly, let him
tell me how this can consist with the Impenetrability of Bodies, which must
needs hinder these Corporeal Effluvias from possessing the same Vbi or Point,
which yet must be supposed, if these be the Representers of Objects, since
there is no assignable Point where the same, and where multitudes of Objects
may not be seen. This one Difficulty is enough to make this way impassable. But
let him further tell me how any Body can eradiate such an inconceivable Number
of these Effluvias so as to fill every Point of such vast Spaces, without the
least sensible Diminution. Well, but suppose they could, let him tell me how
these Corporeal Effluvias, sometimes of vast Extent and Magnitude, can enter
the Eye; Or if they could, how they can do it in such Troops and Numbers
without justling, refringing, and inverting one another. Or if this might be
avoided, where shall we find room to receive such a numerous Company of
Corporeal Images? And upon what part will you have them impressed? Upon the
Soul? Or upon the Brain? But who can understand either of these? How can an
Indivisible Substance, as the Soul is, receive any Stamp or Impression? And how
can such a fluid Substance as the Brain is, retain any? The least jog of a
Man's Head must needs obliterate such slight and Aerial Traces, as the Wind
does the Figures that are written upon the Sand; Not to say that these
Impressions coming on so thick one upon another must needs work out themselves
almost as soon as they are in, and in a short time consume the very Brain too.
But suppose we could get over all this, the greatest Difficulty is yet behind;
How will such Corporeal Effluvias be able to represent immaterial and
intellectual Objects? They will at the most be able but to represent Material
Objects, and not all of them neither, but only those whose Emanations they are.
And what shall we do with Ideas that will not do their Office, that cannot
represent a quarter of the things which we are concerned to understand?

These and a thousand more Absurdities must he wade through, that will assert
our Ideas to be Corporeal Effluvias derived from external Objects. It remains
then that they must be Immaterial Substances. And so without all question they
are. All of them as to their Essence, and most of them as to their
Representation. But how shall Bodies send forth such Immaterial Species? They
can emit nothing but what is Corporeal, like themselves. How then shall they
commence Immaterial? Body can no more emit Spirit, than it can create it. And
what is there after Emission that shall be the Principle of Transformation?
Some I know talk of strange Feats done by the Dexterity of Intellectus Agens
and Patiens, which they say refine and spiritualize these Material Phantasms;
but I suppose our Author is of too Philosophical a Faith to admit of such a
Romantic Transubstantiation.

The short of this Argument is, if our Ideas are derived from sensible Objects,
then they are Material Beings, because Matter can send forth nothing but
Matter. But they are not Material Beings, for the Reasons alleged above.
Therefore they are not derived from Sensible Objects. Which I think has the
force of Demonstration. And to this purpose it may be further considered (what
I hinted before) that as our Ideas are all of them Immaterial as to their
Essence and Substance, so many, perhaps most of them, are also immaterial as to
their Representation, that is, they represent after an immaterial manner, as
the Ideas of Truth, Virtue, and the like; which Cartesius makes to be the
difference between Imagination and Pure Intellection, Meditat. 6. p. 36.
and whereof he gives an Instance in the Example of a Chiliagon, whose Angles
we cannot represent in a distinct View, but may clearly understand it. But now
how can that which represents after an immaterial manner, come from sensible
Objects? Again, we have Ideas of things that are not to be found in the
Material and Sensible World, as of a Right Line, or an exact Circle, which our
Author himself confesses, Page 283. Sect. 6. not to be really extant in Nature.
And what does he think of the Idea of God? Will he say that that is also
derived from sensible Objects? Yes: For, says he, Page 147. Sect. 33. If we
examine the Idea we have of the Incomprehensible Supreme Being, we shall find
that we came by it the same way, that is, by Sensation. But in the first place,
how does this agree with what he says, Page 341. Sect. 2. That we have the
knowledge of the existence of all things without us (except only of God) by our
Senses? So then it seems we do not know the Existence of God by our Senses. No?
then neither have we the Idea of him by our Senses. For if we had, why should
we not know his Existence by Sensation as well as the Existence of other
things, which, as he says, we know only by Sensation? For, says he, Page 311.
Sect. 2. speaking of the knowledge of Existence, We have the knowledge of our
own existence by Intuition, of the existence of God by Demonstration, and of
other things by Sensation. Then it seems we do not know the Existence of God by
Sensation, but that of other things we do. But why are other things known by
Sensation, but only because their Ideas come in at our Senses? For I suppose he
will not say that the things themselves come in at our Senses; for then what
need is there of Ideas at all? And if other things are therefore known by
Sensation, because their Ideas come in by the Senses, then why is not God also
known by Sensation, forasmuch as his Idea according to him, comes also the same
way? And yet he will not allow that God's Existence is known by Sensation;
which indeed is very true, but then he should not have said that the Idea of
God comes in by the Senses.

But what a strange Adventure is it in Philosophy to make the Idea of God to
come in by our Senses, and to be derived from Sensible Objects! For besides the
Difficulties and Absurdities already touched upon, what is there in the
Material World that can resemble God? Nay, what is there in the whole Creation
that can represent him to our Thoughts? God himself cannot make an Idea of
himself: For such an Idea, whatever it be, must be a Creature; and can a
Creature represent God! Nothing certainly but God himself can do that. He must
be his own Idea, or he can have none. There is but one possible Idea of God,
and that is his Son, the Divine (...), or Ideal World, the brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image or Character of his Person. It Is he that is the
Idea of God, and of the whole Creation, that both is, and represents all
things. And since the way of knowledge by our Senses turns to so poor an
Account, I would desire our most ingenious Author to consider, whether it be
not abundantly more rational and intelligible (not to say pious) to suppose
that we see all things in God, or the Divine Ideas, that is, in the partial
Representations of the Divine Omniformity. For our Author himself confesses,
Page 315. Sect. 10. that Whatsoever is first of all things, must necessarily
contain in it, and actually have, at least all the Perefections that can ever
after exist. Nor can it ever give to another any perfection that it has not,
either actual in it self, or at least in an higher degree. God then, even
according to him, is all Beings; or, has the whole Plenitude of Being. And I
wonder that this Principle had not led this Sagacious Person further. I know
whither it would have carried him, if he had followed the Clue of it. For why
should we seek any further, and puzzle our selves with unintelligible
Suppositions? What else need, and what else can be the immediate Object of our
Understanding but the Divine Ideas, the Omniform Essence of God? This will open
to us a plain intelligible Account of Human Understanding, yea of Angelical and
Divine too. Here I can tell what an Idea is, viz. the Omniform Essence of God
partially represented or exhibited, and how it comes to be united to my Mind.
But as for all other ways, I look upon them to be desperate. But these things
are already by me purposely discoursed of elsewhere, and are also further to be
deduced in my Theory of the Ideal World, Reason and Religion, p. 181.


Having thus far reflected upon the two Principal Parts of this Work concerning
Innate Principles, and the Origin of Ideas, in a continued way of Discourse,
all that further remains is now to consider only some few single Passages as
they stand by themselves.

Page 16. Sect. 3. Practical Principles must produce Conformity of Action, or
else they are in vain distinguished from Speculative Maxims. It Is enough to
distinguish them from Speculative Maxims, if they are in order to Action, that
is, if they are concerning such things as may and ought to be done by us, tho
in the event they do not produce any such conformity. Otherwise a Law would not
be a Law till it is obeyed.

Page 57. Sect. 15. There is nothing like our Ideas existing in the Bodies
themselves. They are in the Bodies only a Power to produce those Sensations in
us. The first part I acknowledge to be true: For certainly Heat in the Fire is
no way resembling what I call Heat in my self, meaning by it either such a
grateful or ungrateful Sensation as I feel, when I approach the Fire more or
less. But the latter Clause I cannot approve, thinking it impossible that any
Body should directly and properly produce any Sensation in my Soul. It Is God
certainly that is the Author of all my Sensations, as well as of my Ideas.
Bodies can only be Conditions or Occasional Causes of them.

Page 158. Sect. 10. Speaking of the Law of Virtue and Vice, says he, If we
examine it right, we shall find that the measure of what is every where called
and esteemed Virtue and Vice, is the Approbation or Dislike, Praise or
Dispraise which by a secret and tacit consent establishes it self in the
several Societies of Men, etc. Praise or Dispraise may be a probable Sign, or
secondary Measure, but it can never be the Primary Measure or Law of Virtue and
Vice; whose difference must be founded upon more certain and immutable grounds
of Distinction than the Praise or Dispraise of Men. For Praise or Dispraise
does not make, but suppose the difference of Virtue and Vice as already settled,
and antecedent to it. A thing is not good because it is praised, but is
therefore praised because it is good. And how comes this Praise or Dispraise to
be established by such a secret and tacit consent, if there be not some other
more certain measure of Good and Evil, according to which our Praise or
Dispraise is to proceed?

Page 185. Sect. 5. I doubt not but if we could trace the^ ^o their Originals,
we should find in all Languages the Names which stand for things that fall not
under our Senses, to have had their first rise from sensible Ideas. Let him
tell me what he thinks of the Word (Although) Has he not a clear Conception of
what is meant by that Word? And yet is there any thing of the Material Relation
under it? I the rather instance in this Word, tho I might instance in a
thousand more, because I have read of a Man (I think the Relation is in Dr.
Cudworth's Intellectual System) that was of our Author's Mind, that there was
no Word but what ultimately stood for something material and sensible, and was
convinced of the contrary by lighting upon the first Word of Tully's Offices
which is Quanquam.

Page 196. Sect. 19. The Doctrine of the Immutability of Essences proves them
only to be abstract Ideas, and is founded on the Relation that is established
between them and certain Sounds as signs of them. True indeed with respect to
us, who because we do not know all the Essences of things, must be supposed to
make that only the Essence which we intend to signify by calling it by such a
Name. But I hope notwithstanding this, the Author will allow that there are
also in reality Immutable Essences of things, independent on our Conceptions,
as may appear in Mathematical Figures. Where the Nominal Essence and the Real
Essence are all one.

Page 205. Sect. 9. He tells us that Essences are only Articles of the
Understanding. It Is true, those Collections of simple Ideas which we bind up
together under one Name, which he elsewhere calls Nominal Essences, are only
Creatures of the Understanding; but as I said before, there are also
determinate Essences in the things themselves, tho for the most to us unknown,
which have a fixed and immutable Nature without any dependence on any
Understanding but the Divine. It Is true indeed, we are fain to sort and rank
things by their Nominal Essences, because the Real Ones are most times unknown;
but that is no Argument against the Being of Real Essences. And this is by the
Author himself confessed, Page 234. Sect. 11. where he says that in our Ideas
of substances we have not the Liberty as in mixed modes, to frame what
Combinations we think fit, to rank things by, but must follow Nature, and suit
our Complex Ideas to real Existences. So that here we have Patterns to follow,
and I desire no more.

Page 242. Sect. 6. Were the signification of Body and Extension precisely the
same, it would be as proper and intelligible to say the Body of an Extension,
as the Extension of a Body. Here he supposes it would be proper, to say the
Extension of a Body upon that Supposition, whereas indeed were they precisely
the same; neither of them would be proper.

Page 244. Sect. 14. The Platonists have their Soul of the World, the
Epicureans their Endeavor toward Motion, etc. These the Author reckons among
unintelligible Forms of Speech, and supposes them to be no better than
Gibberish. As to the Soul of the World it is a Subject of too great a Latitude
to be discoursed of at present. But as to the Epicureans Endeavor toward
Motion, that there is such a thing, he may be sufficiently convinced by looking
upon a pair of Scales, where tho the lesser Weight does not actuactually weigh
down, yet that it presses and endeavors toward it is most certain, since
otherwise as much Weight would be required to weigh it down as if it were quite
empty. But this we do not find; whence it must of necessity be concluded that
the former Weight tho it did not pass into actual Motion, yet it did something
toward it, that is, it Endeavored. The same might also be illustrated from the
Actions of the Will, some of which are perfect and complete Determinations,
others only Velleities or Endeavors. But if the Author would be further
satisfied in this Matter, I desire him to read the 19 and 20 Chapters of Dr.
Glisson, de Natura Substantiae Energetica, where he will find this Argument
very curiously handled.

Page 274. Sect. 19. The Ideas of Quantity may be set down by sensible Marks,
Diagrams, etc. But this cannot be done in Moral Ideas, we have no sensible
marks that resemble them. Very true, which is a plain Argument that such Ideas
are not from our Senses.

Page 289. Sect. 2. Truth seems to me to signify nothing but the joining or
separating of Signs, as the things signified do Agree or Disagree one with
another. This indeed is Truth of the Mind or of the Subject, but not Truth of
the Thing or of the Object, which consists not in the Mind's joining or
separating either Signs or Ideas, but in the Essential Habitudes that are
between the Ideas themselves. And that these are such, our Author himself
implies, by saying, as the things signified do Agree or Disagree with one
another. Here then is Agreement and Disagreement antecedently to any joining or
separating. And I very much wonder that our Author professing in the Title of
the Chapter to discourse of Truth in general, and particularly of that Truth
too which has been the Enquiry of so many Ages, should yet confine his
Discourse to Truth of Words and Truth of Thoughts without the least mention of
Objective Truth. Which indeed is the Principal kind of Truth.

Page 300. Sect. 5. I think it is a self-evident Proposition, that two Bodies
cannot be in the same place. If the Proposition be Self-evident how comes he
only to Think it is so? If it were only Evident he must do no more than so.

Page 323. Sect. 14. Eternal Truths are not so from being written in the minds
of Men, Or that they were before the World: But wheresoever we can suppose such
a Creature as Man is, enabled with such faculties, we must conclude he must
needs when he applies his Thoughts to the consideration of his Ideas, know the
Truth of certain Propositions, etc. This is a true Aristotelian Account of
Eternal Truths. But I demand, Are these Eternal Truths in being before the
Existence of Man or no? If not, how comes he to understand them when he does
exist? What, does he make that to be true, which before was not so? But if they
were in being before the Existence of Man, then their Eternity does not consist
in their being understood by Man when ever he shall exist, but in their own
fixed and immutable Relations, whereby they have an antecedent Aptness so to be
understood. Which the Author himself seems to imply by saying, He must needs so
understand them. Why must needs? Reason and Religion, p. 76*
But only because they are necessarily so and no otherwise intelligible. But of
this I have discoursed elsewhere.

Page 344. Sect. 8. He takes notice of one manifest Mistake in the Rules of
Syllogism, viz. That No Syllogistical reasoning can be right and Conclusive,
but what has at least one general Proposition in it. This our Author thinks to
be a Mistake, and a manifest mistake. But perhaps if we rightly understand that
Rule of Syllogism, there is no Mistake at all in it. All the Ground of the
Dispute is from the Doubtfulness of what is meant by a general or universal
Proposition. A Proposition may be said to be universal either when a Note of
Universality (as All) is prefixed before the Subject. Or when tho that Note be
not perfixed, yet the Predicate is said of the whole Subject according to the
full Latitude of its Predication, so as to leave nothing of the Subject out,
whereof the Predicate is not said. According to the former Sense of
Universality it is not necessary that in every concluding Syllogism one
Proposition be universal. But according to the latter Sense of Universality
(which indeed is the most proper sense of it) it is certainly necessary. And I
dare challenge any Man to show me one Instance of a concluding Syllogism that
has not one Proposition universal in the latter Sense. For even a singular
Proposition is thus universal, since being Indivisible, it can have nothing
said of it, but what is said of it wholly and universally, (...), as Aristotle
expresses it. The Author may see a further Account of this in Dr. Wallis his
Thesis de Propositione singulari, at the latter end of his Institutio Logicae.

These, Sir, are the most considerable Passages that at once reading I thought
liable to Reflection in this Work, which notwithstanding these few Erratas, I
think to be a very extraordinary Performance, and worthy of the most public
Honor and Respect. And tho I do not approve of every particular thing in this
Book, yet I must say that the Author is just such a kind of Writer as I like,
one that has thought much, and well, and who freely Writes what he thinks. I
hate your Commonplace Men of all the Writers in the World, who tho they happen
sometimes to say things that are in themselves not only True, but considerable,
yet they never write in any Train or Order of Thinking, which is one of the
greatest Beauties of Composition.

But this Gentleman is a Writer of a very different Genius and Complexion of
Soul, and whose Character I cannot easily give, but must leave it either to the
Description of some finer Pen, or to the silent Admiration of Posterity. Only
one Feature of his Disposition I am concerned to point out, which is, that he
seems to be a Person of so great Ingenuity and Candor, and of a Spirit so truly
Philosophical, that I have thence great and fair Inducements to believe that he
will not be offended with that Freedom I have used in these Reflections, which
were not intended for the lessening his Fame, but solely for the promoting of
Truth and right Thinking.

And this will justify that part of the Reflections, where agreeing with the
Author in the Proposition intended to be proved, I lay open the insufficiency
of his Proofs. For to say that a thing is false for such Reasons, when it is not
false for such Reasons, tho it be absolutely false, is as great an Injury to
Truth, as to say a thing is false when it is not false. A false Inference is as
much an Untruth, as a false Conclusion; and accordingly he that might reflect
upon the Conclusion if false, may with as much reason reflect upon a wrong way
of inferring it, tho the Conclusion it self be true. Which I mention with
respect to the former part about Innate Principles, where tho I agree with the
Author in the thing denied, yet I think his Reasons are not cogent.

After all, notwithstanding my dissenting from this Author in so many things, I
am perhaps as great an Admirer of him as any of his most sworn Followers, and
would not part with his Book for half a Vatican. But every Writer has his
Alloy, and I exempt not any Writings of my own from the like Defects: Of which
perhaps, Sir, I have been convincing you all this while. But that shall not
trouble me, if at the same time I may be able to convince you of my Readiness
to serve you at any rate, as it highly becomes,

SIR, Your Obliged and Humble Servant, J. N.

A Brief Consideration of the Remarks made upon the foregoing Reflections by
the Gentlemen of the Athenian Society, in the Supplement to the Third Volume,
etc.
THE Gentlemen of this new Society undertake two things, to Report, and to
Judge of the Contents of the most considerable Books that are Printed in
England; which I acknowledge to be a very useful and laudable Undertaking, if
performed Skilfully and Faithfully, with Judgment and Integrity. But whether
they have thus acquitted themselves in reference to the foregoing Reflections,
the Liberty they have taken with the Author, will I think warrant him to Examine.

Supplement, Page 2. Paragraph 1. It will be sufficient to observe that Mr.
Norris is a Cartesian, and as it seems, of those of the Cartesians that are of
Father Malebranche's Opinion. This occasions that being full of these Thoughts,
he seems not always to have well comprehended his meaning whom he Criticizes
upon. Why the being a Cartesian, and according to the way of M. Malebranche,
should make me less apt to comprehend Mr. Lock's Book, I cannot divine. Were
the thing it self never so true, yet I think the Reason here given of it, is as
odd as may be. But 'twill be time enough to seek out for the Reason of my
misunderstanding Mr. Lock's Book, when it is better proved than at present,
that I have done so. But as to that, if Mr. Lock himself had told me so, his
bare Authority without any Reason would have obliged me to suspect my
Apprehension, and to think once again; it being a Deference owing to every
Author to suppose that he best understands his own Meaning. But from you
Gentlemen, who stand upon the same Level with me, I expect Reason, and to be
shown where and how I have mistaken him. For the present I am rather apt to
think that I have comprehended Mr. Lock's Sense well enough, but that you
understand neither Me, nor Mr. Lock.

Paragr. 2. He upbraideth Mr. Lock of attempting to treat of Ideas, without
defining what he understood by this Word. Here is a false Report. I did not
censure Mr. Lock for undertaking to discourse of Ideas, without premising a
Definition of the Name o^ Word, (for that I grant he has done) but for offering
to account for their Origination, without giving a Definition, or any Account
of the thing. My Words are, But sure by all the Laws of Method in the World, he
ought first to have Defined what he meant by Ideas, and to have acquainted us
with their Nature, before he proceeded to account for their Origination. And
again, This therefore ought to have been his First and indeed main Business, to
have given us an account of the Nature of Ideas: And yet this is not only
neglected in its proper place, but wholly omitted and passed over in deep
Silence, which I cannot but remarque as a Fundamental Defect in this Work. What
is it pray, that is here remarqu'd as a Fundamental Defect? Not sure his not
defining the Term Idea (for that I grant page 22. where I say, that so much my
Lexicon would have told me;) but his giving no account of the nature of Ideas,
That is there remarqu'd as a Fundamental Defect, and I find no cause yet to
think otherwise.

Ibid. But Mr. Norris may see that he is mistaken, if he will read over again the
end of the First Chapter of Book I. where the Author begs his Readers Leave,
etc. Mistaken indeed, if he had charged the Author with not defining the Term
Idea, but not at all mistaken, in case the thing charged upon him was the not
defining the Nature of Ideas; for of that the Author gives no account, neither
in the place these Gentlemen refer to, nor any where else.

Ibid. It was sufficient to him (viz. Mr. Lock,) to show in what manner, or if
ye will, on what occasion we come to have different Ideas, without its being
necessary to speak of the Ideas themselves. Here is an implicit Concession that
Mr. Lock does not undertake to open the nature of Ideas, and withal that that
was the thing laid to his Charge, which sufficiently clears the Reflecter from
the pretended Mistake. But then withal it is affirmed here, that there was no
need he should undertake such an Account. Now this being matter of Judgment,
not of Report, the thing must be a little argued. These Gentlemen say it was
sufficient to show how we come by our Ideas, without speaking of the Ideas
themselves. Against this I contend it was not sufficient, it being impossible
to give any satisfactory account how we come by them, till their nature be in
some measure discovered. For how can any thing be affirmed or denied of any
thing, unless its Nature be known? How can any Attribute be given with any
certainty to an unknown Subject? Indeed when the nature of the thing is
sufficiently known and agreed upon, we need only define the Term whereby we
express it: As when it is supposed to be known what the Nature of an Angle is, I
need only say that a Triangle is that which has Three Angles. Which is the
Riason why Euclid in his Geometry thought himself concerned only to give
Nominal Definitions. For the nature of Figures is evidently known; we see the
very Essence of them, and therefore there needs no other Definition but that of
the Term only, whereby we signify them, that so there may be no mistake of our
meaning; that we may not be supposed to mean a Square when we talk of a Circle.
But when the nature of the thing is not known or agreed upon (as in the present
case) then a bare Definition of the Term is not sufficient; but the thing it
self must be (at least in general) explained, before any Proposition can be
with any certainty advanced concerning it. For suppose instead of saying that
our Ideas come from our Senses, I should say that the immediate Object of our
Conception (which is the Nominal Definition) comes from our Senses, what
advantage would this be to the certainty of the Proposition; or how could it be
decided whether the immediate Object of our Conception be from our Senses or
no, unless it be first made known what this immediate Object of our Conception
is? We must know its Nature, before we can derive its Pedigree.

Paragr. 3. Mr. Lock has maintained that there are no Innate Ideas, since
there is no Principle wherein all Mankind agree. But to that the Author opposes
the Evident Propositions which all the World agrees to, etc. To that; To what?
Here is either a great Blunder, or a very gross Prevarication. What Mr. Lock is
here said to maintain, consists of two distinct Parts, a Proposition, and a
Reason of the Proposition. The Proposition is, that there are no Innate Ideas;
the Reason is, because there is no Principle universally assented to. Now to
which of these is it that the Reflecter opposes Self-evident Propositions? Not
to the Proposition certainly, but to the Reason of it. He alleges Self-evident
Propositions not to prove against the Thesis laid down, that Ideas are Innate
(for that he expressly denies, Page 20.) but to prove against the Reason given,
that there are Principles universally assented to. As may appear from the very
Words of the place referred to, Page 4, which I leave the Reader to consult. The
short of Mr. Lock's reasoning in that part is this, If there are no Principles
universally assented to, then there are none Innate; but there are no
Principles universally assented to, etc. Now the Minor Proposition is what the
Reflecter denied, and to which he opposed evident Propositions, a thing granted
by the Author. Not that he intended to infer thence, that there are Innate
Ideas: For tho it may follow that if there be Innate Ideas they will be
universally consented to, and consequently if not so consented to, they are not
Innate: Yet it does not follow that if they are universally consented to,
therefore they are Innate, that being accountable for upon other Grounds. The
Reflecter urges Mr. Lock's Concession of Self-evident Propositions, only to
evince that according to him, there must be Principles universally consented
to, and consequently that he ought not to argue against Innate Ideas from the
want of such Principles. But the Question of Innate Ideas themselves is not
here so much as glanced at: And therefore says the Reflecter, Page 5. There
must be therefore according to him, some Principles to which all Mankind do
give an universal Consent. I do not say that this proves them Innate, but only
that there are such Propositions wherein he thought he had laid in a sufficient
Caution against all Mistake. And yet these Gentlemen would fain insinuate as if
the Reflecter alleged evident Propositions in opposition to the Thesis laid
down, to prove that there are Innate Notions, as plainly appears from the State
of the Question which they are so kind as to put for him in the very next
Words. For

Ibid. Say they, The Question is to know if we understand the same thing by
Innate Notions and Evident Propositions, which is not assuredly in the Ordinary
usage of the Word Innate, that has not at all the same signification with that
of Evident. Had I opposed evident Propositions to the Thesis maintained, in
order to prove that there are Innate Notions, then indeed the Question might
have turned upon this Hinge, whether we understand the same by Evident and
Innate; and their Saying that this is the state of the Question, does impute
the other to me. But since my Appeal to Self-evident Propositions is only to
prove against the reason of the Proposition, that there are Principles
universally consented to, this is so far from being a true State of the
Question, that it is an utter mistake of the Argument. It Is plain that my Design
was not to prove by that or by any other Argument, that there are Innate Ideas,
(for I expressly disown them as well as Mr. Lock,) but only to prove that there
are Principles of Universal Consent. And for this I insist upon Self-evident
Propositions, and I see nothing wanting in the Argument to serve the purpose
for which it was used.

Ibid. Yet Mr. Norris supposing that the Author of the Essay confounds these
Two things, accuses him of Contradicting himself, since he grants that there
are evident Propositions. Well, I find when Men are once got into a Wood, it is
a hard matter to get out again. Here is still a further continuation of the
same Blunder. I am far enough from ever supposing that the Author of the Essay
confounds these Two things, viz. Evident Propositions and Innate Notions, and
as far from confounding them my self, or from arguing from the Former to the
Existence of the Latter, which I tell you again I expressly deny. Nor do I make
the Author's Inconsistency and Self-Contradiction to consist in granting
evident Propositions, and denying Innate Notions (which neither of us take to
be the same) but in granting evident Propositions, and at the same time denying
Principles of Universal Consent: Therein I tax him with Self-Contradiction.

Praragr. 4. One of the Reasons which Mr. Lock used to overthrow Inbred Ideas,
is that there is no Appearance that any has these Innate Ideas, which he never
minded. But Mr. Norris maintains that the Consequence is not good, because
according to him ( according to Mr. Lock it should be) our Spirit may receive
Impressions which we do not at all actually perceive, as are the Ideas which
the Memory preserves. It may be replied to him that he must prove that we may
have Notices which we never made Reflection on. It is replied again, that he
need not prove it, since Mr. Lock has freely granted it more than once, and is
also by his Principles obliged to grant it; as is observed in the Reflections
themselves, Page 8, 9. whither I refer the Reader.

Paragr. 5. The Author in reasoning against what Mr. Lock had said of the
Innate Principles of Morality, insists anew upon this Bottom, that he can
evidently prove, even by Mr. Lock' s Confession, diverse Principles of
Morality. He concludes also from thence, that he is in the wrong, to say that
there are no Principles of Practice to which Mankind give an universal Consent,
since there are Principles of Morality uncontrovertible. But tho a thing be
uncontrovertible, etc. It does not thence follow that it is Inbred or Naturally
known. What, again in the same Blunder? Sure these Men's Heads turn round. Who
ever said it does follow? Does the Reflecter by this contend for Innate
Notions? No certainly; he only infers from evident Principles of Morality, that
there are some that are universally assented to, in opposition to the Author,
who affirmed there were no such. But he does no where make that an Argument for
Innate Notions, which he expressly declares against. One would think these Men
were hard put to it for Employment, thus to frame Consequences of their own,
that they may afterward overturn them again.

Paragr. 6. In fine, the Author after having made diverse Remarks like these
which we relate, upon Mr. Lock's Notions, etc. But what if these hitherto
related be none of the Authors, but your own? However, I believe the rest of
those diverse Remarks would truly appear like these, if represented by the same
Glass: But whether in reality they are like these or no, I leave to the
Consideration of Better Judges.

Paragr. 7. This Definition is notwithstanding like to that of Father
Malebranch. What if it be, is it therefore Sufficient? It Is true, Father
Malebranch in the Second part of his De Inquirend. Verit. Page 196, does thus
define an Idea, Objectum Immediatum Mentis, which is only a Nominal Definition,
as Mr. Lock's is; but will these Gentlemen say that he stops here, and gives no
account of the Nature of Ideas? If so, either they have not read him, or do not
understand him, or do misreport him.

Ibid. When we have no design to treat of the Nature of a certain thing, it is
sufficient to define the Word which we use. If the nature of the thing be
evident and acknowledged, it is sufficient to define the Term, otherwise not.

Ibid. He inlarges very much, especially to show that the Ideas are not all of
the Emanations of the Bodies which we see, which yet Mr. Lock does not in the
least say. What if Mr. Lock does not expressly say so? He says however that they
are from our Senses, that is, from sensible Objects: And if so, then supposing
that he makes them real Beings, they must either be Corporeal Emanations, or
Spiritual Images; the Absurdity of both which I was concerned to show. And I
think it is shown sufficiently.

Ibid. What seems to have set Mr. Norris upon these Reasonings, is that Mr.
Lock says, that most of our Ideas draw their Original from Sense, which
signifies nothing else but this, that we could have no Idea of Diverss things,
unless we had perceived them by means of the Senses. If this were all that Mr.
Lock contends for, we are better agreed than I was aware of; for it is
acknowledged also upon my Principles, that the Senses are the occasions of our
having Ideas; that is, that God has established a certain Order and Connection
between such Impressions made upon our Senses and such Ideas. Not that these
Impressions do cause or produce these Ideas, but that they are Conditions at
the presence of which God will, and without which he will not raise them in, or
to speak more properly, exhibit them to our Minds. But that Mr. Lock means
quite anoother thing from this, when he ascribes the Original of our Ideas to
our Senses, I think no one that reads him with even ordinary Attention, can
doubt. It Is plain, that he means that our Ideas do proceed from without,
namely, from sensible Objects, and are by our Senses conveyed into the Mind;
according to the Hypothesis of the Vulgar Philosophy.

Paragr. 8. Mr. Norris reproaches the Author of the Essay of saying Page 147.
Sect. 33. that it is by means of the Senses that we form the Idea of the Supreme
Being. 'Twere well if these Gentlemen were as free from Reproaching the Author
of the Reflections, as he is from reproaching the Author of the Essay: I should
not then have had this Objection to answer.

Ibid. But our Critic has undoubtedly strangely erred in this place. But what
if our Critic should prove to be in the Right, and our Critics to be they that
so strangely err? Undoubtedly this would be but an ill come off after so
Magisterial and Decisive a Sentence. But why is the Critic so strongly presumed
to have erred? Why because Mr. Lock after having named Sensation and Reflection
as the Sources of all our Ideas, continues thus: It is so in all our other
Ideas of Substances, even of that of God (that is to say, that they are all
formed either by Sensation or Reflection) for if we examine the Idea which we
have of the supreme and incomprehensible Being, we shall find that it comes to
us the same way, (by the one or by the other) and that the Complex Ideas that
we have of God and separated Spirits, are composed of the Simple Ideas that we
have by Reflection. For example, having formed in our selves by our own
Experience the Ideas of Existence, Duration, Knowledge, Power, Pleasure,
Success, and of diverse other Properties, which it is better to have than not to
have; when we will form a just Idea of the Supreme Being, we augment each of
these Ideas, joining that of Infinity to them; and thus we form the Complex
Idea of the Divinity. If Mr. Norris had read all this Article with Attention,
he would have spared himself the pains of seeking Figures of Retoric to refute
an Opinion which no body maintains. Now to set this whole matter in a clear and
fair light, the short of it is this: I had charged Mr. Lock with deriving our
Idea of God from the Senses. Herein they say I reproach him, pretending that
Mr. Lock derives the Idea of God not from Sensation, but from Reflection. Well,
be it so, yet this is to set the Idea of God but one Remove further from the
Senses still, which will come to one and the same thing at long run. For these
Ideas of Reflection are but a Secondary sort Ideas that result from the various
Compositions and Modifications of those primary ones of Sensation. This is all
that can possibly be understood by this second order of Ideas. They are only a
various Composition of the first. For it is not in the Power of the Soul to make
any new Ideas it has not received; she can only variously modifie and Compound
those which she has. So that notwithstanding this Expedient, the Idea of God
will be, tho not immediately, yet mediately and ultimately from the Senses. If
it be pleaded that these Ideas of Reflection are not formed out of those of
Sensation, but from the Operation of the Mind about those Ideas. In answer to
this, I grant that the Mind may reflect upon its own Operations as well as upon
those Ideas they are Conversant about, and that these Operations may then be
considered as Objects that terminate the Understanding. But then I say that
it is impossible that hence should spring any new Ideas of a distinct Nature
from the rest, it being both against the Nature, and above the Power of the
Understanding to make its own Object. And besides, this Expedient is so far
from helping, that it rather heightens the Absurdity. For according to this
Account, the Idea of God would not only be a Creature, but a Creature of a
Creature. Indeed, whether it be said that the Idea of God be from Sensation or
from Reflection, it would both ways follow that it is a Creature; only there is
this difference between them, that in the former way, it would be a Creature of
God's making, but in the latter way, a Creature of our own making: Which I
think is the greater Absurdity of the two.

Ibid. He joyneth therewith some Reflections, to make Father Malebranch' s
Opinion more probable, with which it does not fadge, no more than with those
which he makes on diverse places of Mr. Lock' s Book. Thus these Gentlemen are
pleased to say; but since they offer neither Instance, nor Reason of it, I
shall content my self to Reply, that as Wise Men are of another Opinion.

Ibid. Whom concluding, he highly commends, which a great many People will
Subscribe without Trouble. Well, I am glad there is something wherein I have
the good Fortune to agree with this Noble Society, and if it will be any
Pleasure to them to know how much I do so, I shall take this occasion to tell
both them and the World, that though I have writ against Mr. Lock, I have yet
as great thoughts of him as any of those that so ignorantly defend him; that I
both honor his Person, and admire his Book, which, bating only some few
things, I think to be one of the most Exquisite Pieces of Speculation that is
Extant. And that were I in order to notional improvement, to recommend but
Three Books only in the World, one of them should be this of Mr. Locks.

Paragr. 9. We find furthermore at the end of the Book where the Author
retracts, having maintained in an English Book, that Sin was a Real thing, he
declares now that he believes it is mere Nothing. This is a gross
Misrepresentation that savours neither of the Justice nor of the Civility of
the Press. He declares now. How does he declare it? Expressly or by Consequence?
Not sure expressly. If by Consequence, not to remark the impropriety of
declaring a thing by Consequence, or the injustice of charging any Man with the
consequences of any Opinion as by him declared, were they never so truly
deduced, does it follow, that because I disown the Positiveness of Sin, that
therefore I hold it is a mere Nothing? Suppose I should say, that these
Gentlemen's Ignorance in Philosophy, and the common Principles of Metaphysics
were not of a Positive Nature, do I thereby say it is nothing? Must Sin either
be Positive or Nothing? Is there no Medium? What, did these Gentlemen never
hear of a Privation! But this it is when Nature is not followed, when Science is
Usurped, and when a sort of Men whose Talent was never known to lie much
toward Philosophy, will needs turn a Conventicle into a Port Royal, and set up
for Vertuoso's.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHereas in a certain Discourse of Mine Entitled, Considerations upon the
Nature of Sin, I make Sin to be of a Positive Nature, upon better Consideration
I find intolerable Consequences to follow upon that Supposition, and do
therefore freely own my self to have been in a Mistake, and do here retract it
under my Hand. As to the present Discourses I know of nothing I have to
Correct, only there is One Notion which I find Occasion to enlarge and carry on
further than at first I was aware of. It is in the Third Beatitude concerning
the Meek's inheriting the Earth. By which I am now fully convinced is
Principally meant that they shall possess that New Paradisiacal Earth which is
to succeed the Great Conflagration, and to be the Seat of the Millennial Reign
of Christ. I do not unsay any part of my Former Explication, only I think it
defective; and add this as a further Supplement to it. For which Notion I
acknowledge my self indebted to the Noble Author of the Theory of the Earth;
whom the Reader may Consult for further Satisfaction in this Matter. Part 2.
Chap. 5. Page 162.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.
A Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters, in large 8o. Theory and Regulation of Love; a Moral Essay, in Two
Parts: To which are added Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author
and Doctor More. The Second Edition. In 8o. Practical Discourses upon the
Beatitudes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To which are added Reflections
upon a late Essay concerning Human Understanding. Vol. I. The Fourth Edition.
In large 8o. Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects Vol. II, III,
IV. In 8o. An Account of Reason and Faith, in Relation to the Mysteries of
Christianity. 8o. Letters Philosophical, Moral, and Divine, to the Reverend Mr.
J. Norris, with his Answers. In large 8o. Treatises upon several Subjects,
formerly Printed Single, now Collected into one Volume, viz. I. Reason and
Religion. II. Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life. III. The Charge of
Schism continued. IV. Two Treatises concerning Divine Light. V. Spiritual
Counsel, or the Father's Advice to his Children.
All Written by the Reverend Mr. John Norris, Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ: Showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenanting. With a
Preface chiefly designed for the Satisfaction of Dissenters; and to exhort all
Men to Peace and Unity. The Fourth Edition, 8o. Price bound 2 s. An Explication
of the Creed, the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer; with the Addition of
some Forms of Prayer. Price 1 s. 6 d. A Dialogue betwixt Two Protestants (in
Answer to a Popish Catechism, called, A short Catechism against the Sectaries.)
Plainly showing, that the Members of the Church of England are no Sectaries,
but true Catholics; and that our Church is a sound Part of Christ's Holy
Catholic Church. In 8o. Price 1 s. 6 d. Poetic Miscellanies. In 8o. Price 1
s. 6 d. The Christian Monitor. Containing an Exhortation to a Holy Life. Price
3 d. Those that are Charitably disposed may have them for 20 s. the Hundred.
All Five Written by the Reverend Jo. Rawlet, B. D. Author of the Christian
Monitor.

An Essay concerning Human Understanding, in Four Books: The Third Edition with
large Additions: By John Lock Gent. Malebranche's Search after Truth complete,
in Two Volumes 8o. Practical Discourses on the Parables of our Blessed Savior:
By F. Brag Vicar of Hitchin in Hertford-shire. A New Voyage into Italy, with
necessary Instructions for those who undertake the same. By Maxilian Misson. In
2 Vol. Done out of French, and illustrated with Sculptures. The Roman History,
from the building of the City, to the perfect Settlement of the Empire by
Augustus Caesar, to Constantine the Great. In Two Vol. By L. Eachard, A. M.
Reflections on the good Temper and fair Dealing of the Animadverter upon Dr.
Sherlock's Vindication of the Holy Trinity. The Christian Life, wherein is
showed I. The Worth and Excellency of the Soul. II. The Divinity and
Incarnation of our Savior. III. The Authority of the Holy Scriptures. IV. A
Dissuasive from Apostasy. Vol. 5. and Last. By John Scott, D. D. late Rector of
St. Giles's in the Fields. Moral Essays: Contained in several Treatises on many
Important Duties. Written in French by Messieurs du Port Royal: Englished by a
Person of Quality. The Third Edition with Amendments. In 4 Vol. 8o. Price 10 s.
Christian Conferences, demonstrating the Truth of the Christian Religion and
Morality. By Fa. Malebranche. A Sermon concerning the Excellency and Usefulness
of the Common Prayer. By W. Beveridg. The Charitable disposed may have them for
20 s. a Hundred. -- His Sermon before the Queen. A New Voyage to the Levant,
containing remarkable Curiosities in Germany, France, Italy, Malta and Turkey.
By the Sieur de Mont, in large 8o. Price 5 s. Practical Discourses upon several
Subjects. Vol. 1. Practical Discourses on Obedience and the Love of God. Vol.
II. Both by John Scott, D. D. late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

