Licensed,

November 1. 1689.
REFLECTIONS UPON THE CONDUCT OF Human Life: With reference to the Study of
Learning and Knowledge.

In a Letter to the Excellent Lady, the Lady Masham.

By John Norris, M. A. Rector of Newton St. Lo, in Somersetshire, near Bath;
and late Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

To which is annexed, a Visitation SERMON, By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship, at the Black Bull in Cornhil. M DC XC.

MADAM,
THE Affliction your Ladyship is under for the loss of your Sight is so great,
and your Complaints upon that occasion so just, that I can neither blame you
for the one, nor excuse my self from pitying you for the other. And indeed
since you have been so unhappy as to be deprived of the use of your Eyes, I
think I owe your Ladyship so much Compassion, that I cannot better employ mine,
than in writing you such a Consolation, as the opportunity of my New
Retirement, with the serious Reflections I have lately made in it, will suggest.

And that I believe will be such, as is more peculiarly adapted to the
Circumstance of your trouble, which tho occasioned by a Common Accident, yet, I
find, proceeds upon an Uncommon Principle. For tho it is to be presumed that,
notwithstanding your great Contempt of the World, it must be a considerable
part of your Affliction to lose the Sight of some delectable Objects in it,
since the Wisest of Men (from whom your Ladyship cannot much dissent) after a
censure of vanity past upon all things under Heaven, is yet forced to confess
that truly the Light is sweet, Eccles. 11.7.
and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to behold the Sun; yet I perceive the
chief reason why your Ladyship is so concerned for the loss of your Sight, is
because you are thereby deprived of Conversation with your Books, and
consequently retarded in your earnest pursuit after Learning and Knowledge.

It Is upon this hinge I know that the main weight of your Sorrow turns, and
therefore you will not want a Specific proper for your Malady, if you should
chance to be convinced that our Learning is generally misplaced, and that such
an importunate pursuit after Learning and Knowledge is no way agreeable to the
present Station and condition of Man. For certainly you will no longer lament
the loss of your Eyes, for disabling you from doing that, which perhaps would
not be advisable for you to do, if you had them again. If therefore you once
come to be convinced of this, one main ground of your discontent is removed;
and that you may, is the design of the following Reflections.

The First Reflection. Wherein the general Conduct of Human Life is taxed, for
placing Learning and Knowledge, in such things as are little or nothing
perfective of the understanding.
I.
BEING Naturally more than ordinarily disposed to Thoughtfulness, and from the
circumstances of my present Solitude and Retirement further invited to it; I
began one day to fall into a deep Meditation upon the Conduct of my own, and of
Humane Life. What Reflections I made upon my own, are too peculiarly Calculated
for my proper Circumstances, to be of any General use, and therefore I shall
not trouble you with them. But as for those past upon the conduct of Humane
Life, I think they are of too general use, and withal of too Weighty
Consequence, not to be Communicated. These therefore I shall think worth while
to draw up into a little more orderly form than wherein they were first
conceived, and present to your Ladyships Consideration.

II.
First then I consider that the Conduct of Human Life must be to the End of
Human Life, which is the same with the End of Man, which is Happiness. This
conduct therefore must be and and necessarily is, in Gross to Happiness. But
now whereas there are two Faculties or Powers of Man, by the right ordering of
which this Happiness is to be attained, Understanding and Will, therefore more
immediately and distinctly, this Conduct of Human Life is in order to the
Government and exercise of these two Faculties, the due Regulation of which is
the Immediate End, to which Human Life is to be Conducted. There is therefore a
double conduct of Human Life, Intellectual and Moral.

III.
As to the Moral Conduct of Human Life, I do not intend at present to spend any
Reflections upon it. Not because it is Unexceptionable, but because it is too
Obnoxious, the general Impertinence and Irregularity of it being too open and
exposed, to need any. And besides it is a Butt, that has been Shot at so often,
ever since Preaching and Writing has been in the World, that it is now so
thick-set with holes, that there is scarce room left to fasten a new Arrow in
it.

2. The undue and irregular method of prosecuting what is really Perfective of
it.

3. The too Importunate and over-earnest pursuit after Knowledge in General.

These are the three Cardinal Irregularities, I have observed in the
Intellectual Conduct of Human Life, and upon each of these I shall bestow a
Reflection.

VII.
The business of this first Reflection shall be to Tax the General Conduct of
Human Life, for placing Learning and Knowledge, in such things as are little or
nothing Perfective of the understanding. This I confess to be a Charge of more
than ordinary Severity and Boldness; because it fastens an Imputation of Folly
upon the Learned Order (for with them only is my present Concern) and not only
so, but also in that very thing wherein they think their Wisdom and
Intellectual accomplishment consists, and upon which they value themselves
above the rest of Mankind. To question their Conduct in any thing else, would
be but a trivial Charge, and such as they would not only readily Pardon, but
Acknowledge; it being a common thing with Learned Men not only to own, but
studiously to affect Ignorance in things besides their Profession, as in
Secular business, the common Affairs of Life, the Mysteries of Trades and the
like. But to censure them as defective in that one thing they pretend to, to
make that their Blind-side where they think they see clearest; to maintain that
they are not only not really wise and knowing, but that generally they don't so
much as know what true Knowledge is, and that they generally place it in such
things as contribute little or nothing to the Perfection of that, whereby they
really excel the Brutes, and would be thought to excel the Common sort of Men;
this is so high, and so disobliging a charge, that I fear those who from the
force of what shall be here urged, may be convinced of the Truth of it, will
hardly forgive the Boldness of it.

VIII.
But as high a charge as it is, I question not but that it may be, and will be
here made good. And that it may appear to be true, we will first of all by way
of Address or Preparation, consider what antecedent grounds of probability
there are, that men should generally place Learning and Knowledge in such
things as are little or nothing perfective of the rational Part; and then in
the second place we will proceed directly to prove that they do so.

IX.
As to the first, your Ladyship cannot be so little acquainted either with
hidden Springs, or outward Workings of humane Nature, as not to have observed
that however strong and uuiversal is the desire of Knowledge, yet men are
generally more in Love with the Fame and Reputation of it, than with the thing
it self. There are indeed here and there a few humble retired Souls that are
otherwise disposed, and like your Ladyship are so far from loving the Fame and
Credit of knowledge before knowledge it self, that they don't love it at all,
but are content to court Wisdom privately, and enjoy their own Light in the
Dark. For it may be they consider that be their Seize what they will,
Fame is a thing of infinite uncertainty and contingency, that it depends more
upon the Humors of men, or some more secret unaccountable Fate, than upon real
excellency and merit, that some have the luck to be popular and cried up for
nothing, when in the mean while others that are really and highly deserving can
scarce keep their Heads above Contempt; that the World is seldom just to true
Merit, and that nothing is weighed in a falser Balance than real excellency,
whether Moral or Intellectual; and that there is little reason to expect it
should ever be otherwise as long as Envy and Ignorance hold the Scales. Then
again it may be they consider with themselves, that suppose true worth were
secure of Reputation, yet what a poor slender good is it! For what is it to be
talked of, or pointed at? Should a Man be never so Popular the Antipodes will
never hear of him, or if they do, what is he the better for what is said of him
there? And should his Fame, like the Sun, Travael round the whole Globe,
besides that he is but Master of a Point when he has All, he can enjoy no more
of it but just what he hears, which is inconsiderable. And yet as
inconsiderable as it is, it is like to be his whole Portion. For as for
Posthumous Glory, it comes too late to be any thing valuable. He will either
not be sensible of it, or despise it. For certainly it must needs be mightily
beneath the improvements of a separate state to put any value upon the
injudicious praises of poor Mortals here below. Or suppose that a Deceased
Spirit could take any delight in reflecting upon the Fame he has left behind
him, yet it is to be considered that the Fashion of this world passes away, that
those in whose praises he outlives himself, must also shortly dye, and that
then his Fame will have a Funeral, as well as himself. These perhaps, or such
like Considerations, may prevail with your Ladyship and a few more thinking
Persons, to have but a very cold and indifferent regard for the Reputation of
Learning and Knowledge: But as for the generality of mankind it must be owned
that they are fond of it to a strange degree, and are more concerned to be
accounted Wise and Learned, than really to be so. Otherwise I question whether
our Libraries would be so full as they are.

X.
But now, tho the generality of men be so passionately and keenly set upon the
fame of being Learned and Knowing, yet (so little has Nature designed to
gratify this ambitious humor) there are but a very few that have either a
Genius and inclination for Learning it self, or a capacity of attaining to it.
Not an Inclination, because there is a great variety in the Speculative, as
well as Moral inclinations of men, one being naturally disposed to this sort of
study, and another to that, whereas true Knowledge whatever it be (which shall
be considered in its due place) is of one determinate kind or nature in
general, and consequently must require a certain peculiar frame and disposition
of mind. Not a capacity, because the generality of men are known to have but
indifferent Intellectuals, suited to the exigencies of common life, when as
true knowledge (what ever it be) must be supposed to be a thing of uncommon
difficulty, and the study of it a work fit only for sublimer wits, the more
elevated and Awakened part of Mankind.

XI.
Now put these two things together, that almost all men would fain be thought
Learned and Knowing, and that there is but here and there one that is Naturally
made and fitted for true Knowledge, and then consider what is like to be the
result of this Complication. Why, the Latter Few may succeed well in the search
of what they were naturally qualified for, and having attained to a Competency
of true Knowledge, such as is Perfective of the Understanding, they find
themselves under no Temptation to place it in any thing else, or to bring into
Credit any other sort of knowledge. Because having arrived so far, they are
either wise enough to undervalue the Fame of being Learned, or else despair not
of attaining it by their Proficiency in True Knowledge. Here therefore they
take up their rest.

XII.
But now what shall we do with the others? Are they to be persuaded that they
are not of a Make for the Study and attainment of Learning? You Will find it
tough work to convince them of that. But suppose it possible that they could be
made sensible that they are not like to Commence very Learned and Knowing, yet
all the World shall never be able to persuade them to lay aside that Natural
itch of being so accounted. But you will say, tho this Inclination be too Natural
and inbred to be quite laid aside, yet there is hopes it may be Governed. No nor
that neither. They must put in for the Prize, and it is in vain to dissuade them
from it. But they must despair of ever winning it in a fair way, being supposed
not able to reach the Tree of Knowledge. True. They have therefore but one way
left, and that is, to turn the Tables, and cry up something or other for
Learning which they are capable of. No matter whether it deserve that name,
that is, whether it be really perfective of the Rational Part or no, it is
enough if they can reach it. For those that cannot compass true Riches, and yet
will have the Name and credit of it, are put upon the Necessity of Coining and
Counterfeiting.

XIII.
And truly this Supposition seems to me so very reasonable, that were
experience altogether Silent in the Case, and were I utterly unacquainted with
the State of Learning in the World, yet if I had a Draught given me of Human
Nature, and were told how much the Ambition of being esteemed as Learned and
Knowing exceeds both the Desire and the Ability to be so, and were then asked
what I thought would be the Intellectual Conduct of Human Life, I should
without any further enquiry conclude that in all probability Men would
generally place Learning and Knowledge in such things as signify little or
nothing to the Perfection of the understanding.

XIV.
But from grounds of Probability that they should do so, let us proceed to
prove directly that they do so. Now in this Charge there is something supposed,
and something asserted. The supposition is that there are some things, the
knowledge of which is little or nothing Perfective of the understanding. The
Assertion is, that Learning is generally placed in the knowledge of such
things. The Proof of the Supposition will engage my Pen upon the discussion of
a very Gurious and weighty Question, wherein the Perfection of the
understanding does consist, or what it is that is Perfective of the
Understanding? Which when we have duly fixed and stated, we shall then have a
certain Measure to go by in the Proof of the Assertion.

XV.
To the Question then I answer, that the Perfection of the Understanding, as
that of the will, is either Formal or Objective. The Formal Perfection of the
understanding, as that of the will, is no other than its Exercise or Operation,
which is Thinking and Perception, as that of the other is Willing and Choosing.
According to the vulgar Maxim, that the Perfection of every thing is its
Operation, which must be understood only of the Formal Perfection. The
Objective Perfection of the understanding is Truth, as that of the will is
Good. The Result of these two Perfections joined together, is what in the
understanding we call Knowledge, and what in the will we call Virtue.

XVI.
Our concern is not at present with the Formal, but with the Objective
Perfection of the understanding. This we have said in general to be Truth, as
that of the will is Good. And thus far there is neither Difficulty, nor
Controversy. All therefore that further remains to be here considerd, is, what
Truth that is which is the Objective Perfection of the understanding, or, what
Truth that is, in the Knowledge of which the Perfection of the understanding
does consist,

XVII.
Now since there is so great a Proportion and Correspondence between the
understanding and the will, and the Perfection of each, the first entrance we
shall make upon the Resolution of this Question shall be to consider, what good
that is which is the Objective Perfection of the will, or, what good that is in
the desiring and embracing of which the Perfection of the will does consist.
Which being determined, will afford at least a Fair Ground and Occasion, tho
not an infallible Measure for the determination of the other.

XVIII.
Here then 'twill be necessary to premise a Consideration of the Kinds of good.
The most general distribution of which I conceive to be into these two,
Necessary and Contingent good. By necessary good I understand that which cannot
but be good, that which is always and immutably good. And this comprizes under
it the good of the End which is desirable for it self, commonly called
Pleasant good. And the good of the Means, which has an immutable connection with
it, and is desirable for the other, commonly called Profitable Good. By
Contingent good I understand that which may, or may not be good, and is good,
whenever it is so, only upon a Positive account, because enjoined by the Will
of a Competent Authority. This can never be the good of the End, or a
self-desirable Good; nor can it be such a good of the Means as has a Natural
and immutable connection with it; but is always an Arbitrary and Mutable Means.

XIX.
This being briefly premised, I shall venture to assert that that good which is
the Objective Perfection of the Will is Necessary Good. Either that which is
Self-desirable, as God the Universal, or any other particular pleasant good. Or
else that which has an immutable Connection with it, as Moral good. As for
Contingent good, that is no otherwise perfective of the Will, than in the force
and virtue of the necessary good. For Obedience to a positive Law is no
otherwise a Virtue, than as it is included in some general natural Law, whereof
it is a contingent instance. Which is also the ground commonly assigned by
Casuists, why Human Laws oblige in Conscience. According to that of Aquinas,
Lex Humana Obligat in Conscientia, quatenus participat legem aeternam and
Naturalem. An Human Law obliges in Conscience as much as it partakes of the
Eternal and Natural Law. That is, as far as it is founded, or relies upon the
immutable will of God and the Dictate of Natural Reason.

XX.
This is too plain to need much Proof, though not so plain but that it may be
demonstrated. If then a Reason be demanded why the objective Perfection of the
Will is only necessary, not contingent good, 'twill be sufficient to say, that
that only is Perfective of the Will, which naturally, and of it self, makes it
Happy, and wherein she can acquiesce with satisfaction and delight. But this is
only necessary good, that which is essentially, intrinsically, and immutably
good, either as the End, or as having a Natural Connection with it, either of
which involves Happiness. As for contingent good, that is supposed to be of it
self indifferent as to Happiness, and tho by positive Ordination it may be made
a condition of it, yet still it contributes to it only as an Arbitrary Means,
which has no inward goodness in it self, and whose whole Moral Excellency is
derived from some general Law of Reason, whereof it is an instance by accident,
and in virtue whereof it obliges. Exodus 17.6.
Thus Moses's striking the Rock, had nothing morally good or perfective of the
Will in it, but only as 'twas an Instance of that General Law of obeying the
Divine Will in all things. Nor did the Virtue of Moses consist, properly and
strictly speaking, in striking the Rock, but in Obeying God by striking the
Rock.

XXI.
By this it appears what good that is, in the desiring and embracing of which
the Moral Perfection of the Will does properly and ultimately consist. That it
is Necessary, not Contingent good. Whence we may take instruction how to state
the Perfection of the understanding, which we shall do by following the same
Common Measure. First then be it here also premised, that as in relation to the
Will, all good is either Necessary or Contingent, so in relation to the
Understanding, all Truth is either Necessary or Contingent. For besides the
immediateness of the Opposition, which is Contradictory, I further consider,
that that must be the Adaequate division of Truth which is of Being, Truth
being a property of Being, and such a one, as tho formally and Abstractly
different (for the subject must never be included in the Precise Reason of the
Property) is yet Materially, and Concretely the same with it. But now Necessary
and Contingent is the Adequate Division of Being, therefore also of Truth.

XXII.
By Necessary Truth I understand that which cannot but be True, that which is
always and immutably True. Such is God among Simple Truths, who is immutably
what he is, and all the Divine Ideas which (as I have elsewhere abundantly
explained it) are the very Essence of God, Vid. Reason and Religion. Page 82.
as variously imitable or participable, thus or thus. Such also among Complex
Truths are all Propositions of Eternal Truth, whether Absolute or Hypothetical,
with all their regular Inferences and Conclusions, which (as I have also
elsewhere shown) are nothing else but the Divine Ideas themselves as they
respect each other according to their several immutable Habitudes and
Combinations. Vid. the same Treatise. Page 203.


XXIII.
By Contingent Truth I understand that which may or may not be True, that whose
Truth depends not upon the Essence of God. (That Ground and Pillar of all
Necessary Truth) but only upon his Mere Will and free Pleasure, either
decreeing or permitting. Such among Simple Truths are all Created Beings, the
whole Ectypal World, and all things in it, which tho made according to the
Eternal and Immutable Patterns of the Divine Ideas or Archetypal World, yet in
themselves are Temporary and Mutable. Such also among Complex Truths are all
those Propositions the Terms of which have no Essential or Immutable Connection
with each other, but are so and so combined and related, merely by the Decree
or Permission of him, who is the Author of whatever is besides himself.

XXIV.
Under the First order of Truths are comprehended all those things which are
the Matter of those Arts and Sciences which are built upon Stable and
immovable Foundations, which depend not upon the System of the Present World,
but were antecedent to it, and might have been studied before 'twas made, and
according to which the World it self was made, such as Theology, Metaphysics,
Morality, Geometry, etc. together with all those unchangeable Rules and
Measures of Reason and Consequence which are to be used about them all, which
is the Subject of that Art or Science we call Logic. Under the second order are
comprehended all Matters of Fact, all Temporary Events, all Natural or
Artificial Effects, etc. Which are the Matter of all Arbitrary and Mutable
Sciences; as History, Chronology, Knowledge of Tongues, etc. Which began with
this Mundan System, and stand or fall with it.

XXV.
Now as that good which is Primely and properly Perfective of the Will is
Necessary good, so following the same Proportion I shall not doubt to assert,
that that Truth which is Primely and Properly Perfective of the Understanding
is also Necessary Truth. And as Contingent good is no otherwise Perfective of
the Will, than in the Force and Virtue of the Necessary good (as was above
Explained) so likewise Contingent Truth, is no otherwise Perfective of the
understanding than in the Force and Virtue of Necessary Truth, that is, of the
Divine Ideas wherein it is contained. As for Example, when I Speculate some
Particular Artificial Triangle which is a Contingent Simple Truth, it is no
otherwise Perfective of my Understanding than as it is beheld in its Necessary
and Immutable Nature, or (which is all one) in the Divine Idea. And thus again
when I form a Proposition concerning this Triangle, by ascribing to it some
Property or other, which is a Contingent Complex Truth, this again is no
otherwise Perfective of my Understanding than as it belongs to, and is beheld
in the Nature of a Triangle in Common, which is Necessary and Immutable, being
no other than an Idea, or a Determinate Mode of the Divine Omniformity. So that
at length the Perfection of the understanding is resolved into the Knowledge of
Necessary Truth, which is its only Objective Perfection; that which is
Contingent being no way perfective of it, but only in virtue of the other.

XXVI.
I am ( Madam) very sensible how strange and Paradoxical this way of
Philosophizing will seem to those who are either unaddicted to Meditation in
general, or not conversant in Theories of this kind, and therefore for their
sakes, rather than for any inevidence of the Argument, I will give some Proof
and Confirmation of it, which I will so order, that it shall be an Explanation
at the same time. I will therefore first show that it is so, and secondly, how
and why it is so. That it is so I prove thus: First, I suppose that God was once
when there was nothing besides God. Again, I suppose that as the Being of God
did go before all other being in Order of time, so in Order of Nature it was
antecedent even to the Will of Creating, putting, or permitting any thing.
Again, I suppose that there was therefore then no other Truth but necessary
Truth, that is, the Divine Ideas with their several Habitudes and
Complications. I suppose again, that therefore God must be considered as
knowing then only these necessary Truths. And yet I suppose again, that God was
as perfect then as he is now; and consequently, that the Divine Understanding
was as perfect then as now, the Nature of God requiring not only that he should
be Absolutely Perfect, but that he should be so in himself. Whence I infer,
that therefore the whole Perfection of the Divine Understanding is to be
resolved into the sole knowledge of Necessary Truths, and that the knowledge of
Contingent Truth gives no Perfection to it, any otherwise than as it is beheld
in that which is necessary, as was said before.

XXVII.
From this Process of Reasoning, I presume it is sufficiently evident, that the
Objective Perfection of the Divine Understanding is only Necessary Truth, which
I take in the first place to be a strong ground of presumption, that the
Perfection of Human Understanding does also consist in the same. But to make it
further plain that it does so, I suppose again, that nothing were to exist but
only God, and one Intelligent Being; and that this Intelligent Being had the
full and perfect fruition of God. Upon this supposition I enquire, whether this
Intelligent Being would be perfectly Happy or no? Without all question he
would, as enjoying an All-sufficient Good. Well, if so, then he must be
perfectly happy in his Understanding. And yet it is most certain, that he could
then have the knowledge of very little more than Necessary Truth; for all that
he could possibly know besides, would be only that he himself did exist, and
that he knew these Necessary Truths, and that he was happy in the knowledge of
them, and the like. And lest the knowledge of such Contingencies should be
thought any Accumulation to his Happiness, we will carry our Hypothesis a
little further, by supposing that this Intelligent Being were not to attend to
any of his own Perfections, or to any of those few Contingent Truths resulting
from them, but were only to Contemplate God and the Divine Ideas; and then I
demand whether his understanding would be sufficiently perfected or no? It Is
necessary to answer in the Affirmative, whence it is also as necessary to
conclude, that the only Objective Perfection of our understanding is Necessary
Truth.

XXVIII.
This I think sufficient to prove that it is so. I shall now briefly explain the
Mode of it, by showing how and why it is so; and I account for it after this
manner. Necessary Truth is the same with the Divine Ideas; and accordingly
Plato, I remember, calls Science a Participation of Ideas, and the Divine Ideas
are the very Essence of God, as it is variously imitable according to its
Omniformity: Necessary Truth therefore is no other than the Essence of God, the
very Substance of the Divinity. More particularly, it is the same with the
Divine (...), the second Person in the Holy Triad, who is (...) as Philo
speaks, the Archetypal Seal, and (...) the Intellectual World, (...). p. 3.
and (...) the Archetypal Paradigme, and (...), the Idea of Ideas. Whom also
the Scripture represents as the Wisdom of his Father, and as the Light of the
World, and who inlightens every Man that comes into it, not only Efficiently
(as it is vulgarly understood) but also Formally, he himself being the Truth,
and the Light, in which we see all things.

XXIX.
These things ( Madam) I only hint to you, referring you for further
satisfaction to your deservedly admired Monsieur Malebranche in his de la
Recherche de la Verite, and to a Treatise of mine called Reason and Religion;
where I have purposely treated of the Divine Ideas, and of our seeing all
things in them: In which however whatever is deficient shall be supplied in
another Latin Treatise of a larger compass, now under my hands, and which I
shall communicate to the World e're long (if God please to continue my Life and
Health) under the Title of Theoria Mundi Idealis, sive Metaphysica Platonica.

XXX.
However, lest I should be thought to proceed upon a precarious ground, I will
here give you one short and evident Demonstration that Necessary Truth is the
very Essence of God, and then advance. That God is the cause of whatever is
besides himself, or that whatever is, is either God or the effect of God, is a
clear and acknowledged principle. Upon which I thus argue: Necessary Truth is
either God, or the Effect of God. But it is not the Effect of God, therefore it
is no other than God himself.

XXXI.
That it is not the Effect of God, is evident from the many Absurdities that
would follow upon that Supposition. For first, God would be then a Necessary
Agent; for if Necessary Truth be an Effect, it is a Necessary Effect, and a
Necessary Effect must have a Necessary Cause. Again, God would not only be a
Necessary Agent, but also (which is worse) an Vnintelligent Agent. The
consequence is unavoidable, for if Truth be the Effect of God, then
antecedently to the effecting of it, there was no Truth, and consequently no
Knowledge. Again, if Necessary Truth be the Effect of God, then the Perfection
of the Divine Understanding must be supposed to depend upon something that is
not God; nay, upon something Created by God. 'Twill follow again, that God has
made something which he cannot destroy. And lastly, to add no more, if
Necessary Truth be the Effect of God, then there will be something Necessary,
Immutable, and Eternal, etc. besides God. The Consequences are all plain, and
so are the Absurdities. The last of which appeared so great to the Excellent
Monsieur Poiret, a stiff Opposer of your beloved Malebranche, and of the Ideal
Philosophy, Cogitationes Rationales de Deo p. 296.
that he urges this as one Argument against the very being of Necessary Truth,
because then there would be something Necessary besides God, not considering
that this Necessary Truth is really one and the same with God himself. And this
alone puts by the force of his Argument against the being of Necessary Truth,
which however is sufficiently conclusive to the purpose we now aim at, that
Necessary Truth is not the Effect of God. For if it were, then his Absurdity
would come in, and there would be something Necessary besides God. Since then
Necessary Truth is not the Effect of God, it remains by Virtue of the premised
Disjunction, that it must be no other than the very Substance and Essence of
the Deity.

XXXII.
I further consider, that the Essence of God is intimately and immediately
united to the mind of Man; this is plain from Scripture, which tells us that in
God is our Life, our Motion, and our Being. And from Philosophy, which assures
us, that what pervades all things, must needs be immediately united with every
thing. De la Recherche de la verite p. 208.
And for this, you have the Authority of your excellent Malebranche, who
therefore calls God the Place of Spirits, as Space is the Place of Bodies.

XXXIII.
Now upon these two Suppositions, that Necessary Truth is the same with God
himself, and that the Essence of God is immediately united to the Mind of Man,
it is easy to Conceive how and why Necessary Truth should be the Objective
Perfection of our Understanding; since to make an Object Perfective of the
Faculty, nothing else is requisite, than that it be its proper Good, and that
it be intimately Present to it. And this will also sufficiently give us to
understand that Contingent Truth cannot be the Objective Perfection of the
Mind; first, because that is a Created Being, whereas God alone is our proper
Good. And secondly, because it is without us, and cannot be immediately united
to our minds, without which condition, were it never so Perfective otherwise,
it could contribute nothing to the Perfection of our Understandings.

XXXIV.
And thus have I given a full Resolution to that Curious and Important Question
which the Proof of my Supposition engaged me upon, and which is to be the
Measure of what follows in this Reflection. It is plain from hence, that there
are some things the Knowledge whereof is little or nothing perfective of the
understanding. For as I have shown, it is not Contingent but Necessary Truth,
wherein the Perfection of the Understanding does consist. Whence it follows
that True Learning ought to be placed in the Knowledge of Necessary Truth, in
the Comprehension of those Arts and Sciences whose Foundations are not
Arbitrary, but Stable and Immutable, and in understanding the Eternal and
Unchangeable Laws and Measures of Reason and Consequence. He therefore is the
truly Learned and Knowing Man, who has furnished his Mind with bright and clear
Ideas, lodged them orderly and regularly in his Head, and settled the Relations
and Consequences of one to another. He that is able to think clearly and
distinctly (for so much a Man knows, as he distinctly understands, and no more)
to judge truly and solidly, and to reason dependently and consequentially. In
short, he that sees most of the Divine Ideas, is most familiarly conversant in
the Intelligible World, and has the largest and the clearest view of the Field
of Truth. This I hold to be Learning, and Intellectual Perfection, and besides
what Arguments I have alleged in behalf of this Hypothesis; it is further
Confirmed by the Authority of Plato, when he makes the Happiness or Perfection
of Man (for it is all one) to consist in the Contemplation of Ideas.

XXXV.
But notwithstanding the unquestionable Certainty of the Premises, this is not
that Measure which the generality of the World has thought fit to proceed by.
Learning is generally placed in the Knowledge of Contingent, not of Necessary
Truth. For your Ladyship very well Knows that the World does not esteem him a
Learned Man whose Learning has Cleared his understanding, who is arrived to
clearness and Distinctness of Conception, and is a thorough Master of Notion
and Discourse. No, 'twill cost great Pains, great Labor of Mind, and anxiety
of Thinking to arrive to this Pitch. Nor will all the Pains in the World do,
unless a Man be Naturally made for it, unless he be of a Notional Complexion,
and has had his Head cast in a Metaphysical Mould. Whereupon this Attainment is
like to be the Lot of a very Few. This therefore must not be Learning, but
something else must, that lies more within Common reach, tho of no real Moment
to the Perfection of the understanding. Such (as I have shown) are Contingent
Truths, and yet Learning is generally placed in the Knowledge of these.

XXXVI.
For first, it is reckoned a notable point of Learning to understand variety of
Languages. This alone gives a Man a Title to Learning without one Grain of
Sense; and on the other side, let a Man be an Angel for Notion and Discourse,
yet unless he can express the same thoughts in variety of words, he may go for
a Rational, but will by no means be esteemed a Learned Man. And this brings to
my mind a Passage which I met with not long since in London, where being in
Company with an Ingenious French Man, I ask't him of what repute M. Malebranche
was with the Learned in France? He told me, that he was looked upon as a great
Master of Notion and Speculation, but as a Man of no great Learning. I asked
him, why? Because, said he, he understands but few Languages. How much that
excellent Authors Talent may lie that way I am not concerned. But whatever it
be, the most Learned of them all must give me leave to say, that I would rather
be Master of a Quarter of his Sense, than of all the Languages that may be
formed out of the Alphabet. But is it not a strange thing that so much Stress
should be laid upon such a Triflle? For what am I the better for being able to
tell what it is a Clock in several Languages? What does this signify to the
Perfection of my understanding? Words are purely in order to Thought and Sense,
and therefore are of no further value than as they serve as helps either to
Learn, or to Communicate the other. To affect them therefore for themselves, is
to turn the Means into the End, than which nothing is more absurd. And yet this
vain piece of Pedantry has prevailed all the World over, and with some to that
degree, that they have confounded Ideas with Words, and have made all Science
to terminate in the latter. Thus the Philosophers of the Nominal way, and
particularly Mr. Hobbs who makes Reason to be nothing else but Sequela Nominum,
a well ordered Train of Words. Never certainly was there a grosser piece of
Idolatry, nor a plainer Argument of the great degeneracy of Mankind. And tho
all the Multipliers of Tongues are not Comprehended under this latter charge,
yet it may concern them to consider, how great a Folly it must needs be, to
place Learning in that, which is one of the greatest Curses upon Earth, and
which shall utterly Cease in Heaven. 1 Cor. 13.8.


XXXVII.
Again, it passes for an extraordinary part of Learning to understand History,
that is, in other words, to know what a company of silly Creatures, called Men,
have been doing for almost this 6000 years. Now what is my understanding the
Perfecter for knowing this? I deny not but that there are some matters of Fact,
as the more remarkable Turns of Ecclesiastical History, together with the
greater revolutions of the Civil World, that may be of Moment to be known, not
that the knowledge of them as such is Learning, or Perfective of the
understanding, but because by discovering to us the Conduct of Divine
Providence they supply us with occasions of adoring and glorifying the wisdom
and goodness of God. I am not therefore against the knowing these things, but
only I would not have men think themselves the Wiser or more Learned for such
Knowledge. For it is one thing to say that a thing deserves to be known, and
another to say that it is Learning or Wisdom to know it. For a thing may deserve
to be known, not as perfecting the understanding, but merely as touching upon
our Interest. I grant therefore that it may be of Consequence to know some
Historical passages, if we are any way concerned in them, and so it may to know
the Clock has struck One, if I have appointed an Assignation at that time; but
sure the bare naked Theory of the Clock's having struck one, can add but little
to the stock of my Intellectual Perfection. The most trivial matter of Fact in
the World is worth knowing, if I have any concern depending upon it; and the
greatest without that is utterly insignificant. So that it is not from the
perfecting of our Understanding, but from the Relation they have to our
Interest, that these things deserve to be known.

XXXVIII.
This is sufficiently plain from the Measure we have premised, by which no
Truth is perfective of the understanding but only Necessary Truth. But to
address my self more Convincingly to the great Magnifiers of History, I shall
only desire their answer to this one Question. Suppose such and such Matters of
Fact, on the knowledge of which they Found their title to Learning, and
perhaps, glory more in the knowing them, than the Actors themselves did in the
doing them. Suppose, I say, such matters of Fact had never been done; suppose
Fabius had never Weathered out Hannibal by Delays; nor Cyrus took Babylon by
draining the River into the Ditches, what loss or diminution would this have
been to the Perfection of their Understandings? They cannot say it would have
been any. And why then should the knowing them now they are done, be reckoned
as an Intellectual Improvement? And yet we find that it is so, and that Men
study these things not only for their use (for that I allow) but for their mere
Theory, placing Learning in such History, which has nothing to commend it but
only that it tells you such and such things were done. Of this impertinent sort
is the greatest part of the Roman and Grecian History, which (had not the World
Voted it for Learning) would no more concern a Man to know, than that a Bird
has dropped a feather upon the Pyrenoean Mountains.

XXXIX.
Again, it goes for a Notable piece of Learning to understand Chronology, to be
able to adjust the intervals and distances of Time, to know when such an Action
was done, when such a Famous Man flourished, and who and who were contemporary,
and the like. Now I deny not, but that while Men live in this World, they may
be concerned to have some acquaintance with these things, by reason of some
interest or other that depends upon it. It may therefore, I say, for some
purposes, be convenient to know that. For instance, there is a twofold Era (or
date) of the Victory at Actium, the one reckoned from the Fight at the
Promontory of Actium, according to the account of Dio and Xiphilinus; the other
from the taking of Alexandria, and the Death of Cleopatra, according to
Ptolemy, Josephus, Eusebius, and Censorinus. But however, concerning this may
be, with respect to its usefulness, yet certainly as to any Intellectual
Perfection that accrues by it, it must needs be a very unedifying Stuffage of
Mind; and yet it is counted a great Accomplishment and Enrichment of it.

XL.
Another thing there is which passes for wonderful Learning, which I cannot
well reduce either to Necessary or Contingent Truth, for indeed it does not
belong to Truth at all, and that is our Sophistical way of Disputation. And
indeed it may well be called so, for as it is generally managed, it is nothing
but mere Quibbling and Jesting, not Arguing but Punning. For suppose the
Question be, Whether he that has Faith shall be saved? No says the Opponent, If
the Damned have Faith, then not every one that has Faith shall be saved; But
the Damned have Faith. Therefore, etc Here it is plain that the Word Faith, tho
it has Something in Common in both Propositions, yet according to the entire
Idea signifies one thing in one Proposition, and another in another. And why
then is not the whole Proceedure to be rejected as Idle and Impertinent? As for
downright Fallacy and Equivocation where there is a Manifest Ambiguity (as
between Dog and Dog, one signifying a Celestial Sign, and the other a
Terrestial Animal) this is every where despised and laughed at as unbecoming
both the Acumen and the Gravity of a Disputant. And we think we have
sufficiently discharged our hands of such an Argument, by Crying out that these
are Four Terms in the Syllogism. But now I would fain know whether it be not
the same to all real purposes in the forementioned Instance, which is after the
Common way of our Scholastic Disputation? Is not Faith and Faith there, as much
an Ambiguity as Dog and Dog here? For my part I can perceive but this only
Difference, that Dog and Dog have nothing in Common but the Name, whereas Faith
and Faith have some Generical Part wherein they agree. But what does this Mend
the Matter? For tho there be some Generical Agreement, yet take 'em according
to their whole Ideas, that is, take the Generical part with its Contracting
Difference, and it is plain that they signify two different things, and
consequently that there is really as great an Ambiguity here as there. And this
we plainly Confess when we come to Distinguish. For what is a Distinction but a
Pointing out of an Ambiguity? What is it else but to say, that such a thing is
True in this Sense, but not in that, True in that Sense wherein the Point of
the Question is not concerned, but not in that wherein it is. No? why then,
notwithstanding the Generical Agreement the Procedure is as fallacious and
Impertinent as when the Question being about Star-Dog, the Opposition is about
Land-Dog. And yet (such is the inconsistency of Human Judgment) the one is
counted Trifling, and the other Serious Arguing. Whereas indeed no Arguing can
be so, but where the Terms of the Question are first Defined (as is done in
Geometry) and then always used according to the first Stated Sense. All
Disputing any otherwise than so, must necessarily be nothing else but mere
Punning, only much worse than what is in common use, because it is Punning when
a Man Pretends to be Serious. And yet this is made a considerable Part of our
Academical Education and Learning. And to this I add this further Remark, that
it is reckoned a notable Excellence to be able to Spin out an Argument to a
great length, and he is counted the best Arguer that can thus Pun longest.
Whereas indeed did a Man speak to the Purpose, Brevity would be his greatest
Excellence.

XLI.
There are many other things which the unaccountable humor of the World has
turned up for Learning, which Ignorance will never be the better for, and which
Wisdom does not need. Thus it is counted Learning to have tumbled over a
multitude of Books, especially if great ones, and old ones, and obscure ones,
but most of all, if Manuscripts; the recovery of one of which is reckoned so
much added to the Commonwealth of Learning, as they call it. A Well-read Man
signifies the very same as a Learned Man in most Men's Dictionaries, and by
Well-read they don't mean one that has read well, that has cleared and improved
his understanding by his reading, but only one that has read a great deal, tho
perhaps he has puzzled and confounded his Notions by doing so. Thus again it
goes for Learning, to be acquainted with Men's Opinions, especially of the
Ancients, to know what this or that Philosopher held, what this or that Author
says, tho perhaps he says nothing but what is either Absurd, or Obviously True.
Thus for instance, what can be more Absurd than that Fancy of Empedocles, that
there are two Semi-circles compassing betwixt them the Earth, one whereof was
composed of Fire, the other of Air, and that the former made the Day, and the
latter Night? And yet to know this is Learning. And what again is more
obviously true, than that Grave Doctrine of Aristotle, that Privation must go
before the introduction of the Form in all Generation? And yet it is Learning to
know that he taught thus, tho it be a thing so plain, and so near the Surface,
that a Child cannot miss of it. To know the thing is nothing, because so plain
and easy, but to know that Aristotle held it, that is the Learning. Nay, to
instance in a matter of greater difficulty, tho I know very well, and am able
to demonstrate the grounds of the Atomical Philosophy, or the Motion of the
Earth, or the Circulation of the Blood, yet I shall not be admitted into the
Order of the Learned, unless I am able to tell that Moscus the Phoenician
invented the first, and that Democritus and Leucippus afterward improved it,
and that the two latter owe their discovery to Copernicus and Harvey. So much
more Learned an achievement is it to know Opinions than things; and
accordingly, those are reckoned the most Learned Authors, who have given the
greatest Specimens of this kind of Knowledge. Thus is Picus Mirandula more
admired for the Examination he has made of the Doctrine of the Pagans, than any
of them were for what they delivered; and Plutarch has got more Credit from the
History he gives of their Opinions, in the 2d Tome of his Works, than from any
of his Rational and Moral Discourses. And were he not accounted Learned for the
Former, I question whether the Latter (tho far more excellent than they are)
would ever have given him that Title.

XLII.
Now ( Madam) what an hard and unreasonable imposition is this, that tho I am
able to Think and Write never so much like an Angel my self, yet I must not be
accounted a Man of Learning, unless I can tell what every whimsical Writer has
said before me! And how hard will this fall upon those, whose lot is to breathe
in the last Ages of the World, who must be accountable for all the Whims and
Extravagancies of so many Centuries? And yet this is made so great a part of
Learning, that the Learning of most Men lies in Books rather than in Things;
and among Authors, where one writes upon Things, there are twenty that writes
upon Books. Nay, some have carried this odd humor on so far, that it is thought
Learning to know the very Titles of Books, and their several Editions, with the
time and place, when and where they were Printed. And I have met with several
my self, that have valued themselves not a little upon this Mechanical faculty,
tho they knew no more of what was in them, than they do of what is written in
the Rolls of Destiny.

XLIII.
From this placing of Learning in the Knowledge of Books, proceeds that
ridiculous Vanity of Multiplying Quotations, which is also reckoned another
piece of Learning, tho they are used so unseasonably and impertinently, that
there can be no other end in them, but only to show that the Author has read
such a Book. And yet it is no such Convincing Evidence of that neither, it being
neither New nor Difficult, for a Man that is resolved upon it, to quote such
Authors as he never Read nor Saw. And were it not too Odious, as well as
Obvious a Truth, I could name to your Ladyship, some of those Author-Mongers,
who yet pass for Men of shrewd Learning, and vast Reading.

XLIV.
These, and many other such things (for 'twere endless to reckon up all) are by
the Majority of the World Voted for Learning, and in these we spend our
Education, our Study, and our Time, tho they are all of them Contingent Truths,
that are not Perfective of the Understanding (nothing being so but only
Necessary Truths, or the Divine Ideas, the Eternal (...), the Word and Wisdom
of the Father) and also most of them impertinent and unconcerning ones. So that
in short, the Charge of this Reflection amounts to thus much, That Learning is
generally placed in the Knowledge of such things, which neither the
Intellectual Perfection, nor any other Interest of Man is concerned to know.

The End of the First Reflection.
The Second Reflection. Wherein the General Conduct of Human Life is taxed, for
using undue and irregular Methods, in Prosecuting what is really Perfective of
the Understanding.
I.
IN the preceding Reflection, the Intellectual Conduct of Human Life was
censured for the general Misplacing of Learning, for placing it in such things
as are not Perfective of the understanding. In the Present Reflection supposing
it to be Free from that Fault, we shall consider it as Chargeable with another,
namely, with an undue and irregular Method of prosecuting what is really
perfective of it. The First was an Error about the End; This Second is an
Error about the Means, which are the two hinges upon which all Prudence, and
all Imprudence turns.

II.
That the Truth of this Charge may appear, we must here also propose a Measure,
whereby we may proceed, as we did in the Former Reflection. And as there we
took upon us to determine what that is which is Objectively perfective of the
Understanding, so we must here consider what is the Right Method of Prosecuting
what is so. Which being stated will be a Measure to us in this, as the other
was in the former Reflection.

III.
I design not here a just and Particular Treatise concerning The Method of
Study or Inquiry after Truth, this Province being already Professedly
undertaken, and Excellently adorned by two as great Masters of Thinking as ever
were, or are like to be in the World, Cartesius and Malebranche, of both which
your Ladyship is so much a Mistress, that a further undertaking of this kind
would be as needless to your better information, as to the Argument it self,
after the Management of it under such Excellent hands. However something I must
say, it being impossible to show that wrong Methods are used in this Grand
Inquest, but by predefining which is the Right. This therefore I shall do, but
briefly only, and in General.

IV.
Since therefore that Truth which is Perfective of the understanding is
Necessary Truth, and since this Necessary Truth is the same with the Divine
Ideas (both which being already proved, are here supposed) following the thread
of the same Hypothesis, I find it Necessary to affirm, that the right and
indeed only Method of Enquiry after that Truth which is perfective of the
understanding is by Consulting the Ideal World, where only it is, or the Divine
(...), who says of himself that he is not only the Truth, but also the way.

V.
Here I suppose two things, first that this Divine (...), or Ideal World is
intimately united with, and presential to the Mind. Secondly that we see and
understand all things in him, That he is our Light and our Wisdom, the Light by
which we See, and the Light which we See, that he is the very (...), the inward
word and Substantial Conception of our Minds, as he is of the Father, and that
in this Sense he inlightens every Man that comes into the World. This I need
not prove now, Vide, Reason and Religion.
because I have done it professedly elsewhere, only I shall pass one necessary
Remark upon the manner of our being inlighten'd by the Divine (...), who may be
said to inlighten us in a double respect, either Fundamentally and Potentially
by putting us into a Capacity of Illumination, by his intimate Union and
Presence with us, or else Effectually and Actually, when we attend to his
Divine Light, which is always present to us, tho we are not so to it. In the
Former sense he inlightens every Man, in the latter only those who duly consult
him and attend to him.

VI.
For I consider, that the Divine (...), is an Inlighteness in the same
Proportion as he is a Redeemer. Now he redeems us either by putting us in a
Salvable and Reconcilable State, which is a Redemption Universal Incondionate
and Antecedent, or by actually reconciling and Saving us, which depends upon,
and is consequent to certain conditions, and is conferred only upon those who
are qualified accordingly. And as his Redemption is double, so is his
Illumination. He inlightens either by putting us in a state or possibility of
Illumination by being intimately present with us, and surrounding us with his
Divine Ideal Light, which is a Benefit Common to all, or by actually informing
our understandings when we apply our selves with due Attention to his
all-diffused Light, which is ever present to us, and to the whole Creation, and
Shines even in the Darkness, Joh. 1.5.
tho the Darkness Comprehend it not.

VII.
And I was not a little glad to find the Grounds of this distinction in the
writings of that Elevated Heathen, Hierocles, which I shall give you in the
words of my own Translation. This bright Heathen Commenting upon that Mystical
Prayer of Pythagoras, O Father Jupiter, either free all from their Manifold
evils, Or else Discover to all what Demon they use, Moves this Question, since
they that know God and themselves are free from Mortal Passions; why then are
not all freed, since all are sufficiently assisted with the Opportunities of
this knowledge? To which he first gives this general Answer, P. 144.
Because the greatest part of Men embrace evil of their own accord, since they
neither see nor hear Neighboring good. Then a little after he is more
particular in his Account. Since therefore (says he) that any thing may be
shown to any one, P. 146.
it is necessary that the actions of two Persons concur (for how can you show
what you have a mind should be shown, to a Blind Man, although you offer it to
him a thousand times, or how can you show to one that sees, if you offer
nothing to his Sight) both these must be present, some good proposed by him
that shows, and an Eye capable of seeing in him to whom it is to be shown; so
that from a visible object, and a Faculty of seeing, may result a
Manifestation. This being so, let us suppose that all would be freed from evil,
if their Maker did show to all the knowledge of his own Nature, and what Demon
they themselves use. But we find that all are not delivered from evil, it
follows therefore that he does not make this discovery to all, but to those
only who of their own accord endeavor to free themselves from evil, and
voluntarily fix their Eye upon what is shown by the intention of Contemplation.
And again a little after, thus every Illumination of God by the Concurrence of
our vision, P. 148,
becomes a Discovery.

VIII.
In all which Process, this refined Heathen supposes that God is ready on his
part to inlighten all Men; nay, that he does inlighten them all so far as to
put them in the way, and within the Possibility of Illumination, which then
becomes Actual and Effectual when they yield due Attention to the Divine Light.
He does not indeed descend to so much Nicety and Particularity as to ascribe
this Illumination to the Divine (...), or Ideal World, but only to God in
general, nor does he determine whether God does inlighten us only Efficiently,
by infusing Acts or Habits of knowledge (as is more vulgarly held, than
understood, and indeed is no way intelligible) or Formally by being himself the
very Formal Light of our Minds, and the immediate Object of our Knowledge. This
I say he does not determine, nor do I cite him to this purpose, having
sufficiently Explained and Established this Theory elsewhere, Reason and
Religion.
but only to show his Concurrence with me in this Distinction of the double
Illumination of God.

IX.
These Supposals being premised, First, that that Truth which is Perfective of
the understanding is Necessary Truth; then Secondly, that this Necessary Truth
is the same with the Divine Ideas; then Thirdly, that the Divine (...), or
Ideal World, is intimately united with, and Praesential to the Mind; then
Fourthly, that we see and understand all things in him, and that it is he that
is our inlightner; and that lastly, tho he inlightens all Fundamentally and
Potentially, yet this Illumination is not reduced to Act, and made Effectual,
but by the intervening of some Condition on our parts, which is duly to consult
and apply our selves to him. From these Premises the same Conclusion which we
touched on before, necessarily and evidently follows, that the Right and only
Method of Enquiry after that Truth which is Perfective of the understanding, is
to consult the Divine (...), or Ideal World. For this is the Region of Truth,
and here are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Colos. 2.3.
This is that great and Universal Oracle lodged in every Man's Breast, whereof
the Ancient Vrim and Thummim was an Expressive Type or Emblem. This is Reason,
this is Conscience, this is Truth, this is that Light Within so Darkly talked
of, by some who have by their awkward, untoward, and Vnprincipled way of
representing it, discredited one of the Noblest Theorys in the World. But the
thing in it self rightly understood is true, and if any shall yet call it
Quakerism, or Euthusiasm, I shall only make this reply at present, that it is
such Quakerism as makes a good part of St. John's Gospel, and of St. Austin's
Works. But to return, this I say is that Divine Oracle which we all may, and
must consult, if we would enrich our minds with Truth, that Truth which is
Perfective of the understanding. And this is the true Method of being truly
wise. And this is no other Method, than what is advised us by this Divine
(...), the Substantial Wisdom of God. Prove. 8.34.
Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the
Posts of my Doors. And again says the same Substantial Wisdom, Who so is
Simple, C. 9.4.
let him turn in hither. And again, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me, or (as the word more properly signifies) he that consorts or keeps
company with me, Joh. 8.12.
walks not in Darkness. This therefore is via Intelligentiae, the way and
Method of true Knowledge, to apply our selves to the Divine (...), to consult
the Ideal World.

X.
Thus in general. If now it be further demanded how this is to be done, I
answer that there are three ways of doing it, and I can think of no more. The
First is by Attention. The Second is by Purity of Heart and Life. And the Third
is by Prayer. Upon each of which I shall bestow some few Remarks, such as may
rather give hints than full entertainment to your thoughts, because I Know your
Ladyship loves to have something left to work out by your self in your own
private Meditations. Which Consideration has made me all along use less
Prolixity than the Quaintness and Weightiness of my Argument would otherwise
justify.

XI.
The first Method assigned is Attention, or Application of Mind to the
Intelligible World, the World of Truth. This is the same with Thinking or
Speculating, which if intelligibly accounted for, will be found to be nothing
else but the Conversion of the Mind to the Ideal World, or Omniformity of the
Divine Essence; which as it is the First, so is it also the Directest and most
Compendicus Method of Science. For this is to go directly to the Springhead,
to the Lucid Fountain of Good, it is to take hold of Essential Truth nakedly as
it is in it self (as a very Contemplative Person expresses it) it is to fix the
Eye of the Mind upon the Intellectual Sun, Tauler Sermon, 3. Pasch.
upon him who is Substantial Truth, and the Light of the World. Which must
needs be the most ready way to be enlightened. For the more heedfully we attend
to the Ideal World, the more we shall see and discover of it; and not only so,
but also more clearly distinguish what we do discover. For so a man that casts
a short careless glance upon the Galaxy, sees only a Confused whiteness arising
from the numerous mixture of little Splendors, but when the same Person fixes
his Eye with steadiness and delay of Application, he begins to discern
something more distinctly, a new Star ever and anon arises under his
inspection, not discovered before, and still the longer and harder he looks,
the more he discerns, till at length he has discovered as much as he can well
atttend to at once, and has satiated his Faculty with the Brightness and
Multitude of Light. The Application is as Obvious, as the Figure is Pertinent,
and therefore I shall only remark this one thing more upon this part, that this
was the Method of the first Inventors of Arts and Sciences, who made their way
into the Coasts of Learning by mere dint of Thinking; and further, that this is
the very Method that has been used by the greatest Improvers of them ever
since, such as Bacon, Boil, Descartes, Galileus, Harvey, Mersennus, Digby,
Malebranche, Poiret, and (whom I name with particular Honor and Reverence) our
Excellent Friend Dr. More. All these must be allowed, and I think are to be
great Improvers of Learning, and that 'twas by this Method they did it. And I
dare Prophecy, that if ever any extraordinary Advancement be for the future
made in the World, 'twill be done by Thinking.

XII.
This as to Thinking in General. But now as to the Order of Thinking, if your
Ladyship can be supposed to need any instruction about it, I cannot recommend
you to a better Tutor than your Friend M. Malebranche, in his second part of
his sixth Book of Inquiry after Truth, P. 412.
where he purposely describes the Method of Thinking, which you may remember he
reduces to these few following Laws.

XIII.
The first Law is, that evidence be maintained in our Reasonings. From this
Principle depends this general Law concerning the Matter of our Studies, that
we ought not to Reason but only of those things whereof we have clear Ideas,
and by Necessary Consequence, that we ought always to begin with the most
simple and easy things, and also to dwell long upon them, before we advance to
the inquisition of things more Complex and Difficult.

XIV.
Upon the same general Principle, depend the Laws concerning the manner whereby
we are to proceed in the Solution of Questions. The first of which Laws is
this, That the state of the Question to be solved is to be most distinctly
Conceived. Besides, the Ideas of the Terms ought to be distinct that they may
be Compared with one another, and that the Relations which are sought for may
be Known.

XV.
But when the Relations of things to one another cannot be Known by immediately
Comparing them, then the Second Law is, that we should employ our thoughts to
find out one or more Middle Ideas, which we may use as a Common Measure to Know
by their help the Relations that are between those things. And withal he
advises that we should study to have those Ideas clear and distinct,
proportionably to the Accuracy and Numerousness of those Relations which we
endeavor to deprehend.

XVI.
But when the Questions are Difficult and require a long Examination, then the
third Law is, that from the Matter in hand all those things should be removed
whose examination is not necessary to the discovery of the sought for Truth.
Because the Capacity of the Mind is not to be without reason divided, but all
its force is to be employed about those things from which it may perceive
Light. And all those things which can be removed, and which being removed, the
Question remains entire; they are the things that do not belong to the Question.

XVII.
When the Question is included within a few Terms, then the Fourth Rule is,
that the matter of our Meditation is to be divided by parts, and those parts to
be handled singly according to their Natural Order, by beginning with the more
Simple, that is, with those which include fewest Relations. And that we should
not pass on to the more Complex, till the more Simple be distinctly known, and
rendered Familiar.

XVIII.
When by Meditation these things become Familiar to us, then the Fifth Rule is,
that the Ideas of all these are to be Contracted, and disposed in the
Imagination, or to be Written down in Paper, that they may no longer fill the
Capacity of the Mind. This Rule, tho always useful, yet he makes it necessary
only in the most difficult Questions, which require a great Capacity of Mind.
And he says withal, that the use of this and the following Rules, is not to be
Accurately known but only in Algebra.

XIX.
When the Ideas of all things necessary to be considered, are clear, familiar,
contract, and orderly digested in the Imagination, or expressed in Paper; then
the sixth Law is, That all things are to be Compared or Collated according to
the Laws of Combination, alternately among one another, either by the sole
Intuition of the Mind, or by the Motion of the Imagination, joined with the
Intuition of the Mind, or by the Calculation of the Pen joined with the
Attention of the Mind and of the Imagination.

XX.
If none of all those Relations which result from all those Collations, be that
which is sought after, then again from all those Relations those are to be
removed which are of no use to the Solution of the Question: And the others are
to be made Familiar, to be Contracted, and to be orderly disposed in the
Imagination, or expressed in Paper, and to be compared with each other,
according to the Laws of Combination. And then we are to see whether the
Compound Relation which is sought for be any one of all those Compound
Relations which result from those new Comparisons.

XXI.
If none of those found Relatitions include the Solution of the Question, then
again from all those Relations, the unserviceable are to be cast away, the
other are to be made familiar, etc. And by proceeding in this manner, the Truth
or Relation sought for, be it never so Complex, will at last be found, provided
we are able sufficiently to extend the Capacity of our Mind, by Contracting
Ideas, and that in all our Operations we always attend to the End and Scope
which is to be arrived at. For in every step of this Intellectual Progress, we
ought to have our eye perpetually fixed upon the State of the Question. To all
which he adds one Caution more, that we should beware lest we should sit down
Contented with a false Light or Appearance, and so be deceived. And that
therefore our Collations in order to the finding out the Truth we look after,
be so often repeated, till we can no longer with hold our assent without being
Secretly Chid and reprehended by a Certain Master Answering from within to our
Questions, that is to our Labor, Application of Mind, and desire of Heart. By
which Master within this admirable Theorist can mean nothing else but the
Divine (...), or Ideal World, that Universal Oracle of Mankind, and of all the
Intelligent Creation.

This is a short view of those Laws which the Excellent M. Malebranche has
given concerning the Method of Thinking. And I believe if an Angel had been
engaged in the undertaking, he could not have given Better. They are all
Natural, Clear, Distinct, Easy, and depending; Few enough not to burden or
Distract the Mind, and yet Many enough to inform it. And therefore I shall not
be guilty of so much Presumption and Impertinence as to prescribe any other,
thinking it sufficient to consider and Practice these. And so much for the
first way of Consulting the Ideal World, which is by Thinking.

XXIII.
The second way is by Purity of Heart and Life. This I confess has a more
immediate and special influence upon the Knowledge of Spiritual and Moral
Truths, according to that of our Savior, If any Man will do his will, Joh.
7.17.
he shall know of the Doctrine, etc. and that of his Prime Apostle, 1 Cor. ^.14.
The Animal Man perceives not the things of God, etc. But its Efficacy is not
confined here, but has a larger Sphere of activity, and serves to the discovery
even of all Ideal or Necessary Truth. For as viciousness not only proceeds from
Ignorance, but also causes it, by besotting and clouding the understanding, so
Purity of Heart and Life not only proceeds from Light and Knowledge, but also
produces it, and helps the Soul to see more Clearly and Distinctly. Hence the
Pythagoric and Platonic (...), the Method of Purification and Purgation so much
talked of by Perphyry, Iamblichus, Plotinus, and particularly by Hierocles in
his Introduction to his Noble Comment, where he has these Words, As a Blear Eye
cannot behold a very bright object till it be Purged, so a Soul not yet
Clarified and refined by Virtue is not qualified to gaze upon the Beauty of
Truth. And the same Method is no less recommended in Scripture. Wisdom will not
enter into a Polluted Spirit, 1 Wisd. 4.
says the Wise Man. And says the Angel to Daniel, Dan. 12.10.
many shall be Purified and made white, and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.
I am wiser than the Aged because I keep thy Commandments. And to this purpose
also is that of our Lord to be understood, He that follows me, that is, that
lives after my Example, Walks not in Darkness. Joh. 8.12.
The Purity of his Heart will be a Light to his understanding.

XXIV.
But to represent his more distinctly, there are two ways whereby Purity of
Heart serves to the acquirement of Knowledge. By Natural Efficacy, and by the
Divine grace and Benediction. And first it does it by Natural Efficacy, either
by Clarifying the Medium, or by assisting the faculty. The former I conceive
and represent after this Manner. I suppose in the first place that the Soul
sees through a Medium; Secondly, that this Medium is our Terrestrical Vehicle;
Thirdly, that the Grosness of this Medium hinders the Vision of the Soul. All
which I ground upon those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a Glass, darkly.

XXV.
This Supposed, it follows that whatsoever Clarifys this Medium does also help
the Vision of the Soul. And this Purity does, especially that more Eminent part
of it which consists in Chastity and Temperance. For first it Composes the
Passions, especially that of Lust, by that the Animal Spirits, and by that the
Blood. For the Motion of the Passions Ferments the Spirits, and the
Fermentation of the Spirits agitates the Blood, and by agitation raises all the
feculent and drossy parts of it; and makes it like a troubled Fountain, thick
and muddy. And this I take to be one true reason why Men in any Passion cannot
reason so clearly as when they are in more quiet and silence of Spirit. But now
by Purity of Heart all this disturbance is allayed and composed, the Passions
are becalmed, the Spirits fixed, the Fountain of the Blood clears up, and so
all the inner part of that Glass the Apostle speaks of, becomes more bright and
pellucid, more apt to transmit the Rays of the Ideal Light, and consequently we
see more clearly through it. Tho it be still but Darkly in comparison of what
we shall do hereafter.

XXVI.
But this is not all; This Purity does also Clarify the outward part of the
Glass too. First by Consequence, because the finer the Spirits and Blood are,
the finer will be the Threads of the outward Veil also. Then more directly,
because Temperance does refine and Subtilize the Texture of the Body,
diminishes from its Bulk and Grossness, and unloads the Soul of a good part of
that Burden which not only presses down her Aspirations, but also hinders her
Sight: And besides, it refines the the inner part too, by bringing in fresh
supplies of fine Spirits. Dan. 1.15
This was that Temperance which made the Faces of Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and
Azariah look Clear and Fair, and which made them Wise too, gave a quick and
delicate air to their Countenances, and let in the Light of the Ideal World
upon their Souls. This was that Philosophical Temperance of the Pythagoreans,
which (to use the Words of Dr. More Commenting upon that place) is the Mother
of that Wisdom which makes the Face to shine, and nourishes the Luciform
Vehicle of the Soul.

XXVII.
And as this Purity does Clarify the Medium, so does it also Assist the
Faculty. And this it does by the same general way whereby it clarifies the
Medium, that is, by composing the Passions. For the Passions not only trouble
and thicken the Medium (as was noted and explained before) but al^o divide and
disperse the Faculty. For the more things a man desires, the more things he
will be engaged to think upon, and the more things he thinks upon at once, the
more Languid and Confuse will his Conception be. But now this Purity by
composing the Passions, contracts the Desires, and by contracting the Desires,
it contracts also by consequence the Thoughts, and by this the Man is reduced
to a greater Unity, Simplicity, and Recollection of Mind, and having but few
thoughts to divide him, he is the better enabled to think clearly and
distinctly.

XXVIII.
And thus have I given a clear and distinct account how Purity of Heart serves
to the acquirement of Knowledge by a Natural Efficacy. This it does also
secondly by the Divine Grace and Benediction. Purity of Heart is that Heavenly
Lure which invites not only the Holy Spirit, but also the Divine (...), to come
and dwell in the Soul, and to enrich it with his Ideal Communications. This we
may be assured of from his own mouth, He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, Joh. 14.2.
and I will love him, and manifest my self to him. And again, If a man love me,
my Father will love him, V. 23.
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. The pure, chaste and
good Soul shall not only be loved by the Divine (...), but be also of his
Council and Privacy. For this is the Spouse of the Word Eternal, who first
assumed innocent Nature, and then assumes innocent Persons, the first by a
Natural, the second by a Mystic union. This is the Beloved Disciple who has the
privilege to lean upon the Bosom of his Lord, and to be admitted to his more
secret Communications. And therefore says the Psalmist, The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.13.
and he will show them his Covenant. And says our Lord himself, Blessed are the
Pure in Heart, for they shall see God. And Concerning the Four Children that
refused to defile themselves with the Portion of the Kings Meat, it is said,
that God gave them Knowledge, and skill in all Learning and Wisdom; and that
Daniel had understanding in all Visions and Dreams. Dan. 1.17.
For they were not only Pure and Temperate but Religiously so, in obedience to
the Law of their God, the God of Israel. Which the said God rewarded with
Knowledge and skill in all Learning and Wisdom in them all, but in Daniel
peculiarly, with a faculty of interpreting Aenigmatical Dreams and Visions; as
the Learned Page 5.
Dr. More observes in his excellent Comment upon that place.

XXIX.
The third and last way of consulting the Ideal World is by Prayer. This is a
method which the Scripture also advises us to: If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5.
and it shall be given him. And this we know was the Method whereby the Wisest
of men attained his unparalled Wisdom. 1 King. 3.9.
For as Wisdom was his Choice, so the Method of his seeking and gaining, it was
by Prayer. And it is further observable that he addressed himself to the Divine
(...), or Ideal World in particular, as you may see in that solemn Prayer of
his recorded in the Book of Wisdom, give me Wisdom that sits by thy Throne,
etc. Which I commend to your Ladyships perusal at leisure.

XXX.
And thus ( Madam) have I Defined and by Scripture and Reason Proved, what is
the Right Method of prosecuting that Truth which is Perfective of the
understanding. This in general I have shown to consist in Consulting the Ideal
World; The manner of doing which I have also shown to be, First, by Thinking,
the Order of which is also defined, Secondly, by Purity of Heart and Life, and
lastly by Prayer. This I take to be via Intelligentiae, the Way and Method of
Wisdom, whose House I think is Now Built, tho not upon Seven, yet upon Three
Substantial Pillars, and I should be glad if any one would be so kind as to
show me the weakness of the Ground upon which they stand.

XXXI.
And now ( Madam) I think I I need not use many words to show that as Learning
is generally placed in such things as are not Perfective of the understanding,
so that what is so is generally prosecuted by undue Methods. For it is but to
compare the Methods in common use with that which we have premised and
demonstrated, and you will immediately perceive the falseness and irregularity
of them. For First, whereas the First and general Method of Wisdom and
knowledge is by consulting the Divine (...) or Ideal World, the World of Light,
that Light which inlightens every Man that comes into this World, the
generality of Students don't so much as Dream of this, nor make any such
Application, but apply themselves altogether to the Ectypal World, to the World
of Darkness and Obscurity. So verifying that complaint of God by the Prophet,
My People have forsaken me the Fountain of Living Waters, and have dug to
themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold no Water.

XXXII.
Then again, whereas another more Particular Method is by Attention and
Thinking, this is generally so little regarded, that no sort of Men think so
little for the most part as they that are engaged in the Profess Study of
Learning and Knowledge. This they don't reckon as any part of Study, nor as any
Progress in the Stage of Learning, but only as a Graver way of being Idle. It Is
then only they Study when they are hanging their Heads over an Old Musty Folio,
and are making huge Common-places, and stuffing their Memories with Gray
Sentences, and Venerable sayings: And thus they spend their Time and their Ink,
and having Scambl'd through a company of Books (most of which perhaps were
Written to as little purpose, as they are Read) they think themselves Learned
Men, and the World is too often of their Opinion, tho they have not made
themselves Masters of any Sense or Notion, nor are able to demonstrate one
single Truth upon solid Principles, and in a Consequential Process.

XXXIII.
And this is the Method not only of those who Misplace Learning, but also of
the Most of those that place it aright. For even those that place it in Ideal
Truths do not generally Think for it, but Read for it, Seek it not in their
Souls, but in Books. And this methinks I can never sufficiently Wonder at.
Indeed as for those that place Learning not in being able to frame Clear and
Distinct Conceptions of ones Own, but in Knowing the Opinions of Others, it is
no wonder that they take this Method, for tho it be Not a means to the End they
should propose, yet, it is a Means to the End which they do propose. But the
wonder is how those that place Learning as they should, in the Clear Conception
of Ideal Truths, should think to find this merely by tumbling over Books.

XXXIV.
I deny not but that Reading is One way of Knowing (otherwise I should not be
at the Pains to write this to your Ladyship) but then, it is only by Accident
that it is so, as it gives hints and occasions for Thinking. And therefore
Thinking is the only thing to be regarded even in Reading (for Reading as such
is Nothing) and then we Read to most purpose, when we are thereby most enabled
to Think. So that Thinking is the End of Reading, as Understanding is the End
of Thinking. We Ought therefore to Read only in Order to Thinking. And yet this
Method is generally so much inverted, that the Main Stress is laid upon
Reading. Nothing but Read, Read, as long as Eyes and Spectacles will hold, not
regarding whether the Head be Clear, so that it be full.

XXXV.
As to the particular Order in Thinking proposed by M. Malebranche, I refer
your Ladyship to the same Excellent Author to show you how much it is
transgressed. Which he does at large, and to Wonderful Satisfaction, showing
first that the School-Philosophers do not observe that General Law concerning
the matter of study, which is the Cause of a great many Errors in their
Physiology. Then showing that the second part of the General Law is not
observed by the Common Philosophers, and what extraordinary advances Cartesius
made in Learning by the exact observation of it. Then he proceeds to explain
the Principles of Aristotle's Philosophy, where he shows that he never observed
the second Branch of the General Law, and reflects upon those Errors of his
Philosophy occasioned by his not doing so. But for a fuller account in these
things I refer you to the Author himself.

XXXVI.
Then again, whereas Purity of Heart and Life is another Method of arriving to
the Light and Knowledge of Ideal Truth, your Ladyship cannot but know, and it is
a sad as well as a true observation, that this is not only neglected among that
part of Mankind that sit down contentedly in Ignorance, and aspire to no
greater stock of Knowledge than what they brought with them into the world, but
also among the generality of those few that addict themselves to the
Cultivation and Improvement of their minds. Nay these in proportion to their
Number seem more guilty of this neglect than the other, and nothing so common
as to see men of Curious and Inquisitive tempers and of famed Learning, who yet
are very Corrupt in the Moral state of their minds, and live very ill lives.
Whence some have taken occasion to represent Learning, as an Enemy to Religion,
and have cried up Ignorance as the Mother of Devotion. And tho the Conclusion
of these men be notoriously weak and absurd, yet it must be confessed that the
Ground upon which they build it, is too true. Men famed for Learning, are
oftentimes as infamous for Living, and many that study hard to furnish their
Heads, are yet very negligent in purifying their Hearts, not considering that
there is a Moral, as well as a Natural Communication between one and the other,
and that they are concerned to be pure in Heart and Life not only upon the
Common Account, in order to a happy state hereafter, but also in pursuance of
their own particular way and end here.

XXXVII.
Then again Lastly, whereas another Method of Wisdom is Prayer, I do not find
that the generality of Students do at all apply themselves to this Method. Pray
indeed ('it is to be hoped) they do for other things, which they think lie more
out of their reach, but as for Learning and Knowledge, they think they can
compass this well enough by their own proper Industry, and the help of good
Books, without being beholden to the assistance of Heaven. And this, tho they
do place Learning in the knowledge of Necessary Truth. Which procedure of
theirs I cannot resolve into any other principle, (I mean as to those that act
by any) but the mere want of knowing or considering that this Necessary Truth
is really the same with God himself. For did they attentively consider that God
is Truth, and that so much as they possess of Truth, so much they have of God,
it is not to be imagined they should be so indifferent in using Prayer, or any
of the other preceding Methods of Consulting God for his own Light.

The End of the Second Reflection.
The Third Reflection. Wherein the General Conduct of Human Life is taxed with
a too importunate, and over-earnest Pursuit after Knowledge in General.
I.
HAving passed over the two first Stages of the Intellectual Conduct of Human
Life, that of the End, and that of the Means; and reflected upon the
Irregularities of each, by showing how both are generally mistaken and
misplaced; I am now arrived to the Third and Last, which consists not in the
choice of the Object, or of the Method to it (that belonging to the two former)
but in the Degree of Affection wherewith they are prosecuted. Which part of our
Intellectual Conduct, as it is equally Capable of being faulty, so I shall here
make it my business to show that it is actually as faulty and irregular, if not
more than either of the two former. And the fault that I tax it with, is, A too
importunate and over-earnest Pursuit after Knowledge in General.

II.
The Charge of this Reflection is of a larger compass and extent than either of
the two Preceding, those being directed against such as either misplace the
Object, or else mistake the Method of Learning and Knowledge; but this takes in
both together, and others also not concerned in either of the former. For not
only those that err in the placing of Learning, or in the method to it, but
also those who are Right in both, come under the Censure of the Present
Reflection, they all agree in this, in being too importunate and vehement in
the Pursuit of Knowledge.

III.
Now in the making out the Truth of this Charge, We must here also according to
the Method observed in the two former Reflections, first lay down a common
measure of Proceeding, by stating the due Bounds of our Present Affection to,
and search after Knowledge, Or, how far it becomes man to employ himself in the
Prosecution of Learning and Knowledge? the due stating of which Question will
be a certain direction to us in the Determination of this, whether our general
Inquest after Knowledge be Immoderate or no. Now for the Determination of the
first it will be necessary to draw up the true State or Hypothesis of man
according to the Posture wherein he now stands. Which I shall do distinctly in
these following Considerations.

IV.
First I consider, that the utmost Pitch of Knowledge man by his utmost
endeavors can arrive to in this world is very inconsiderable. God indeed has
given us Reason enough to distinguish us from the Brute part of the Creation,
and we may improve it so far as to distinguish our selves from One another, and
so one man may deserve to be called Learned and Knowing in comparison of
another that is either Naturally more ignorant, or more unimproved; but
absolutely speaking, the most that any or all of us either know or can know
here is of little or no Consideration. What we know of God is but little, for
as the Apostle says, we see through a Glass, darkly; what we know of our selves
perhaps is Less, and what we know of the world about us is not much. We have
seen but a few of Gods works, Eccl. 43.
as the wise man observes, and we understand yet fewer. There are almost an
infinite number of things which we never so much as thought of, and of most
things we conceive very darkly and uncertainly, and there is not one thing from
the greatest to the least, which we do or can understand thoroughly. Those that
apply their whole study to any one thing, can never come to the End of that one
thing, for not only every Science but every particular of it has its
unmeasurable depths and recesses; and it is confessed by a great inquirer into
the Nature of Antimony (as it is related by the Honorable Mr. Boil) that it is
impossible for one man to understand thoroughly that one single Mineral only.
Not. Hist. p. 13.
And if a man I cannot understand All of so little, how little must he
understand of All! Suppose further, that all the Knowledge of the Learned were
put together, 'twould weigh but Light, for what one Art or Science is there
that is brought to any tolerable Perfection? And if the Common Stock be so
little, how small a Pittance is it that must fall to every particular Man's
share! And where is that Man who after all his Poring and Studying, is able to
answer all the Questions, I will not say which God put to Job, Job. 38.
but which may be asked him by the next Idiot he meets?

V.
'Twere an endless undertaking to represent at large the little that we know,
or are capable of knowing. Nor do I design to turn a second Agrippa, and
entertain your Ladyship with a long Harangue about the Vanity of Humane
Sciences, only give me leave to touch upon two notorious instances of our
Ignorance, and in that very Science which is pretended to be at the very
Vertical Point of Improvement. It Is Concerning the the Maximum and the Minimum
Natural, the Greatest and the Least thing in Nature. As to the first, the
Question is whether the Extension of the Universe be Finite or Infinite? If you
say it is Positively Infinite, besides the difficulty of conceiving how any
thing can be so extended, 'twill follow that God himself cannot add the least
further Dimension to it. If you say it is Finite, suppose your self in the
utmost extremities of it, and try whether it be possible for you to dis-imagin
further Extension. Then as to the Second, the Question is whether every, even
the Least assignable Part of matter be infinitely Divisible or no? If you say
yes, then 'twill unavoidably follow that the least Atom will have as many Parts
as the whole World. If you say no, then you must say that Matter may be Divided
so long till at last you come to a Part that does not contain more other Parts,
if so, then I enquire has this uncontaining Part Figure, or has it not? If not,
then it is infinite, Figure being only the Termination of Quantity. But if it
has, then it has more other Parts above, below and of each side, and
consequently may again be divided, contrary to what you supposed. So that you
see here are Desperate Difficulties on both sides, say what you will you are
equally baffled, and yet it is most certain that one only can be true, they
being two opposite parts of a Contradiction, but which is so, is beyond the
Capacity of Humane understanding to determine.

VI.
The like Difficulties we meet with when we inquire concerning Time, whether it
be Infinitely divisible, or only into Moments? And so again in the Business of
Motion, whether there be any such thing as the Extreme Degree of Swiftness and
Slowness, or no? Neither of which can be defined without manifest Absurdity.
But it is superfluous, as well as endless, to display the particulars of our
Ignorance, tho indeed when all Accounts are cast up, that will be found to be
our best Knowledge. This only in General, our Life is so short, our Progress in
Learning so slow, and Learning in it self so long and tedious, and what we do
or can know so very little, that the Patrons of Skepticism had much more reason
to conclude from the Disability of our Facculties and the slightness of our
Seize, than from the uncertainty and Instability of Truth, that there is
no Knowledge.

VII.
Secondly, I consider, that as we can here know but Little, so even that very
little which we do, serves more to our Trouble and Disquiet, than to our
Pleasure and Satisfaction. And here comes in that experimental Reflection of
the Wise Man, Eccles. 1.18.
In much Wisdom is much Grief, and he that increases Knowledge, increases
Sorrow. This Proposition is not true, Absolutely considered, Knowledge being
the Perfection of Human Nature, the Image of God, Colos. 3.10.
and the Principal Ingredient of our Future Happiness; but only with relation
to the present State and Posture of Man. And in this respect it is abundantly
true. First, because the more we know, the more we shall discover of our
Ignorance, (that being the chiefest thing we learn by our study) which we shall
find to be of an infinitely larger Sphere than our Knowledge, and consequently
shall be more troubled for what we do not know, than pleased with what we do.
Secondly, because the Prospect of what yet further remains to be known will
inflame our Thirst after it. For Wisdom says of her self, They that Eat of me
shall yet be Hungry, and they that Drink of me shall yet be Thirsty. Which tho
it be a great Commendation of Wisdom, and an Argument of her Inexhaustible
excellence, yet it is withal a great instrument of Punishment to those who can
attain to so little of it, as cannot satisfy that thirst which it has
inflamed. Thirdly, because the more a Man improves his thinking faculty, the
more apt he will be to be disgusted and offended with the follies of Society;
as the most delicate Touch is the soonest put to pain. There being a thousand
impertinencies that will strike very disagreeably upon a discerning mind which
will not so much as affect a grosser understanding.

VIII.
But the Principal Ground of this Assertion, and which, did not the quickness
of your Ladyship's Apprenhension oblige me to Brevity, I could be Voluminous
upon, is this. It Is most certain that Man is now placed in the Midst of
Vanities and unsatisfying Objects, and and that his True good is not within his
reach, and consequently whatever Pleasure he takes in those things that are, is
purely owing to his Ignorance of their Vanity. Well, if so, then Vae Sapienti,
woe be to the Wise Man. This is not a Place to be Wise in. There is nothing
here Solid enough to endure the Test of Wisdom. The Wise Man cannot find a
Paradise here, tho the Fool can. The more he knows the more he discovers the
Vanity of all pretended Enjoyments, and the more he does this, the more he
streightens and retrenches his Delights, and the more he does this, the more he
retires and withdraws himself from all Worldly Diversions, and this sets him
the more a Thinking and Musing, and this again presents to his mind a fresh and
more lively Conviction of the Worlds Vanity, and this makes him again retrench
his Delights, and so on in this returning Circle, till at length he finds
nothing but his bare Wisdom to delight in. And a little more Thinking makes him
see the Vanity of that too. And now all is gone. To dispatch this part in one
word, this is the Fruit of being Wise, to be able to taste nothing that is
Present, nor to flatter ones self with the Prospect of what is to come, which
is a state of horrible Privation and Sterility. This is the thorough Wise Man's
Lot, and every advance in Wisdom is a step toward this Condition So true is
it, that he who increases Wisdom, increases Sorrow, while in the mean time the
Fool Laughs, and is Merry.

IX.
Thirdly, I Consider, that if our Knowledge could yield us more Satisfaction
than it occasions Trouble, yet our Life is so short, and so encumbered, that we
can make but little of the enjoyment, so little, that it is not answerable to
the mere Labor we undergo in acquiring it. All the Morning of our days is
spent in the Preliminaries of Learning, in Learning Words and Terms of Art,
wherein there is nothing but toil and drudgery, and before we can taste any of
the Fruits of the Tree of Knowledge, before we can relish what is Intellectual
and Rational in it, our Sun is got into the Meridian, and then it presently
begins to decline and our Learning with it; our Light, our Strength, and our
Time make haste to consume, nothing increases now but the Shadows, that is our
Ignorance and Darkness of mind, and while we consider and look about us, the
Sun Sets, and all is concluded in the Darkness and Shadow of Death. But
oftentimes the Sun is intercepted by a Cloud long before it Setts, and we live
backward again, grow weak and Childish, Silly and forgetful, and unlearn faster
than we learnt; or if it chance to shine bright to the last, then we improve
too much, and grow too wise for our selves, and reject the greatest part of
what we learnt before, as idle and insignificant. So that we are under a
Necessity of unlearning in a short time most of what we have so dearly learnt,
either through forgetfulness, or improvement of Judgment.

Fourthly, I Consider, that there is no Necessity of our being so wonderfully
Learned and Knowing here. It Is neither Necessary as enjoined by God, nor as a
Means to any considerable End. We can be Good, and we can be Happy without it.
And as to the Interest of Communities and Public Societies, it is Civil Prudence
and Honesty, and not Learning which makes them Happy. And lest any advantage in
our after State should be alleged for its Necessity, this makes it more
unnecessary than any Consideration besides. For tho we are never so unlearned
now, provided we know enough to do our Duty, and live well, we shall in a short
time arrive to such a degree of Knowledge as is requisite to our Supreme
Perfection, to which our Present Learning cannot add, and from which our
Present Ignorance will not Diminish. I do not say this will be immediately upon
our discharge from the Body, there being some reasonable Controversy about
that, (which would be too great a Digression at present to pursue) tho it is
most certain that even then there must needs be great inlargements of
Understanding; However it is most unquestionable that this our Intellectual
Accomplishment can be no further off than our enjoyment of the Beatific Vision.
We shall then commence instantaneously Wise and Learned, and be fully possessed
of the Tree of Knowledge, as well as of the Tree of Life. For then that Glass
through which we now see Darkly shall be laid aside, and there shall be no
other but the Speculum Deitatis, the Glass of the Divinty, which is no other
than the Ideal World, which shall be now more intimately united to us, and more
clearly displayed before us. And tho even now there shall be Degrees of
Knowledge according to the various Participiation of the Ideal Light, yet the
variety of this Dispensation shall not proceed by the degree of our Knowledge
in this Life, but by some other Measure. For,

XI.
Fifthly, I Consider, that tho there is no necessity of our being so very
Learned and Knowing, yet there is an Absolute Necessity of our being Good and
Virtuous. This is Necessary both ways, as Commanded by God, and as a Means to
our Final Perfection. And besides it is necessary Now, there being no other
opportunity for it. If we don't know here, we may know hereafter, and shall
infalliably do so if we are but Good here; but if we be not good here, we shall
neither be Good, Happy, nor Knowing hereafter. The Main opportunity for
Knowledge is after this Life, but the only opportunity for being good is Now.
And if we take care to improve this, we are sufficiently secure of the other,
and of whatever else appertains to the Perfection of our Natures. But if this
be neglected all is lost. This therefore is indispensably necessary, and it is
the only thing that is so, and it is necessary Now, necessary not only to our
Happiness in General, but also to that of our Intellectual Part in Particular.
For,

XII.
Sixthly, And lastly I Consider, that thus stands the Case between God and Man.
First, Man is supposed to be made in a State of Innocence and Perfection, in
perfect Favor and Communion with God, his true Good, and in a Capacity so to
Continue. From this excellent state he is supposed to Fall, and by his Fall so
to disable himself that he cannot by his own strength Repent and Live well, and
so to provoke God, that tho he could and did Repent, yet he would not be
Pardoned and Accepted, without Satisfaction made to Divine Justice. This
satisfaction Man is supposed not able to make, nor any other Creature for him.
Whereupon God in great Mercy and Pity is supposed to ordain a Mediator, his
own Son, God and Man, between himself and his Lapsed Creature, who by the
Sacrifice of himself should Effect two things, answerable to the double
Necessity of Man, first make Repentance available, which otherwise would not
have been so; and secondly Merit Grace for him that he might be able to Repent.
And this is what we are to understand by the Restoration or Redemption of Man,
which thus far is Universal and Inconditionate.

XIII.
But still notwithstanding all that this Mediator has done for him, Man is
supposed only so far restored, as to be put in a Pardonable and Reconcilable
State (for as for our being actually and immediately reconciled by the Death of
Christ, that is a silly, fond, Antinomian conceit, and no way consistent with
the Great Mystery of Godliness) I say Man is yet only in a Capacity or
Possibility of Pardon and Reconciliation, which is then, and then only reduced
to act, when he actually performs the Conditions of Reconciliation, when he
Believes, Repents and leads a good Life, with which he may, and without which
he shall not be Pardoned and Saved, notwithstanding that Christ has Died for
him. The design of whose Death was not to make a good Life unnecessary, but
only to render it Efficacious and Available, not to procure a Privilege of
being saved without it (as some fancy) but that we might be Saved with it. If
this Qualification be wanting, we shall be so far from being any thing
advantaged from the Redemption purchased by our Mediator, that we shall be
Accountable for it, to the great aggravation both of our Guilt and Misery. It
therefore highly concerns Man to improve with all diligence this short and only
opportunity of Making his Great Fortune, to adorn his mind with all Moral and
Religious Perfections, and his Life with all good actions, since with this he
may be Happy in all his capacities, and without it he shall not only fall into
a state of unutterable Misery, but be also accountable for the Possibility he
had of escaping it, for neglecting so great Salvation, so great an Opportunity
of being saved.

XIV.
These things being Premised concerning the present Hypothesis or state of Man,
First, that he can there know but very little, Secondly, that even that little
Knowledge which he can attain to serves more to his Trouble than Satisfaction,
and so is not only Vanity, but also Vexation of Spirit. Thirdly, that supposing
it as Pleasant as may be, yet such is the shortness and encumbrance of his
Life, that the enjoyment of it is not answerable to the Labor of acquiring it.
Fourthly, that there is no Necessity of such a deal of Learning and Knowledge,
either as to this World, or to the next, and that e're long he shall have his
fill of Knowledge in the Beatifick Vision of the Ideal World, one glance
whereof shall instruct him more, than an Eternal poring upon all the Books in
this, and undistinguish the greatest Doctor from the most ignorant Peasant.
Fifthly, that there is an Absolute Necessity of his being Good and Virtuous,
this being the condition not only of his Happiness in general, but also of the
accomplishment of his Understanding in particular. And that Now is the only
opportunity for it. Sixthly, and lastly, that the Attainment of Happiness and
Intellectual Perfection upon this Condition was the Purchase of his Saviors
Death, who has also Merited Grace for his assistance in the Performance of it.
Which if he neglect, he shall not only miss of Happiness, but be also
answerable for so Great and so Dear an opportunity of gaining it; From these
Premises 'twill I think follow with no less than Mathematical Evidence.

XV.
First, that Learning and Knowledge is not the thing for which God designed Man
in this Station, nor consequently the End or Reason of his bestowing upon him
those intellectual and Rational Powers which he has. For had this been the End
and Design of God he would have made it more Possible for him, and withal more
his Interest and Concern, to attain it.

Secondly, 'twill follow that the End for which God intended Man here, and the
Reason why he made him a Rational Creature, was that he might Live virtuously
and well, so serve him here, that he might be rewarded with Happiness and
perfect Knowledge hereafter; Having furnished him with Intellectual abilities
sufficient for this, tho not for the other. Thirdly and lastly, 'twill follow
that the Principal care and concern of Man both because of his own interest,
and out of compliance with the Designs of God, ought to be to Live a good and
regular Life, to accomplish the Moral part of his Nature, to subdue his
Passions, to rectify his Love, to study Purity of Heart and Life, in one word,
to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, and (which is what we have been
hitherto inquiring after) that he ought to busy himself in the Study of
Learning and Knowledge no further, than as it is conducive to the Interest of
Religion and Virtue.

XVI.
This therefore is the Measure to be observed in our prosecution of Learning
and Knowledge. We are to Study only that we may be good, and consequently ought
to prosecute such Knowledge only as has an aptness to make us so, that which
the Apostle calls the Truth, which is after Godliness. For that is the only
business we have to do in this World. Whatever Knowledge we prosecute besides
this, or further than it is conducive to this end, tho it be absolutely
considered, never so excellent and Perfective of our Rational part, yet with
respect to the present Posture and Station of Man, it is a Culpable Curiosity,
and an unaccountable Vanity, and only a more Solemn and laborious way of being
Idle and Impertinent.

XVII.
And this will be found (if well examined) to be nothing different from the
censure of the Wise Preacher. And I gave my heart to to know Wisdom, says he,
and I perceived that this also is vanity and vexation of Sptrit. Not that he
now first applied himself to the study of Wisdom. No, he had been inspired with
that before, and and by the help of it had discovered the vanity of all other
things. But that Wisdom which saw through all other things, did not as yet
perceive the Vanity of it self. He therefore now gave his Heart to Know Wisdom,
that is, to reflect upon it, and Consider whether this might be excepted from
his general censure, and struck out of the Scroll of vanities. And upon deep
reflection he found that it could not, and that even this also was as much a
vanity as any of the rest. Now this Proposition of Solomon's cannot be
understood Absolutely (Knowledge being an undoubted Perfection of Human Nature)
but only with respect to the present posture of Man in this World. Neither can
it be understood of all kind of Knowledge even in this Life, some kind of
Knowledge being necessary to qualify him for Happiness in the next. It must
therefore Necessarily be understood of all that Knowledge which contributes not
to that great End. So that from these two Necessary Limitations the sense of
Solomon's Proposition (if it have any) must be this; that to Man in this
present juncture all Knowledge that does not Contribute to the interest of his
Afterstate, is downright Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

XVIII.
For, to what purpose should we Study so much, considering that after all we
are able to Know so little, considering that even that little is enough to
trouble and disquiet us, considering that our Life is as much too short for the
enjoying what Knowledge we have, as for compassing what we would have, and
withal considering that there lies no manner of Obligation or Necessity upon us
to do thus. But (which is what I would most of all inculcate) to what purpose
imaginable should we be so busy, and vehement in the pursuit of Learning, of
any Learning, but what is of use to the Moral Conduct of our Life, considering
these two things, First, that it is but to stay a little while and we shall have
all that Knowledge Gratis, from the Communications of the Ideal World, which we
so unsuccessfully drudge for here, to the neglect of more important and
concerning exercises. And Secondly, considering that there is such an absolute
necessity of being Good, and of Living well, and that this short uncertain Life
is the only time for it, which if neglected, this great work must lie undone
for ever? Upon the former consideration this Studious, Bookish humor is like
laying out a great Sum of Money to purchase an Estate which after one weak,
dropping Life will of Course fall into hand. And I am sure he would be reckoned
Fool or Mad that should do so. And upon the latter, it is as if a Man that was
Riding Post upon Business of Life and Death, should as he passes through a
Wood, stand still to listen to the Singing of a Nightingale, and so forget the
main and only business of his Journey.

XIX.
It Is most certain that the two Cases here supposed, are as great instances of
Folly and Impertinence as can well be conceived, and yet (however it comes to
pass that we are not sensible of it) it is certain that they are very applicable
to the Intellectual Conduct of Human Life as it is generally managed. And tho we
are all ready enough to call such men Fools as shall do as in the two mentioned
instances is supposed, yet it is most certain that we do the very same or worse,
that we are too much concerned in the Application of the Parable, and that of
most of us it may be truly said, Thou art the Man.

XX.
For I demand, what difference is there between him that now labors and toils
for Learning and Knowledge, which in a little time he shall be easily and fully
possessed of, and him that dearly buys an estate which would otherwise come to
him after a short interval? what difference is there, but only this, that he
that buys the estate, tho he might have spared his Money, yet however he gets
what he laid out his Money for; his expense indeed was needless, but not in
vain. Whereas he that drudges in the pursuit of Knowledge, not only toils for
that which in a short time he shall have with ease, and in abundance, but which
after all he cannot compass in any considerable measure, and so undergoes a vain
as well as unnecessary Labor. And is therefore the greater Fool.

XXI.
Again I demand, what difference is there between him who when he is employed
upon business of Life and Death shall alight from his Horse, and stand Idling
to hear a Nightingale Singing in the Wood, and him who having an Eternity of
Happiness to secure by the right ordering of his Life and Manners, and having
only this Point of time to do it in, shall yet turn Vertuoso, and set up for
Learning and Curiosity. It Is true indeed the Nightingale Sings well, and 'twere
worth while to stand still and hear him, were I disingaged from more concerning
affairs, but not certainly when I am upon Life and Death. And so Learning and
Knowledge are excellent things, and such as would deserve my Study, and my
Time, had I any to spare, and were more at leisure, but not certainly when I
have so great an interest as that of my final state dependi^g upon the good use
of it. My Business now, is not to be Learned, but to be good.

XXII.
For is my Life so long, am I so over-stock'd with Time, or is my depending
interest so little, or is it so easily Secured, that I can find leisure for
unnecessary Curiosities? Is this Conduct agreeable to the present station and
Posture of Man, whose entrance into this World, and whose whole stay in it, is
purely in order to another state? Or would any one imagine this to be the
condition of Man by such a Conduct! Shall a Prisoner who has but a few days
allowed him to make a Preparation for his Trial, spend that little opportunity
in Cutting and Carving, and such like Mechanical Contrivances? Or would any one
imagine such a Man to be in such a Condition, near a doubtful Trial of Life and
Death, whom coming into a Prison he finds so employed? And yet is there any
thing more Absurd and Impertinent in this, than in the present Supposition,
than to have a Man who has so great a Concern upon his Hands as the Preparing
for Eternity, all busy and taken up with Quadrants, and Telescopes, Furnaces,
Siphons and Air-Pumps?

XXIII.
When we would expose any Signal Impertinence, we commonly illustrate it by the
Example of Archimedes, who was busy in making Mathematical Figures on the Sands
of Syracuse while the City was taking by Marcellus, and so though there were
Particular Orders given for his safety, lost his Life by his unseasonable
Study. Now I confess there was impertinence and absurdity enough in this
instance to consign it over to Posterity. But had Archimedes been a Christian,
or otherwise assured of the great concerns of another World, I should have
said, that the Main of his Impertinence did not lie here, in being
Mathematically employed when the Enemy was taking the City, but in laying out
his Thoughts and Time upon such an insignificant unconcerning Study, while he
had no less a concern upon him than the securing his Eternal Interest. Which
must be done now or never. Nothing certainly is an Impertinence, if this be
not, to hunt after Learning and Knowledge in such a juncture as this.

XXIV.
Sure I am, and your Ladyship too very well knows, that many other Proceedings
in the Conduct of Life are condemned of Vanity and Impertinence upon the very
same grounds, tho not half so inconsistent with the Character of Man, nor so
disagreeable to his present Posture in this World, For is not the World full of
invectives, and have not the Pens of Moral Writers been all along employed
against those that apply themselves to Secular acquirements, spend their short
and uncertain Lives, which ought to be employed in the Pursuit of an infinitely
higher Interest, in gaping up and down after Honors and Preferments, in long
and frequent attendances at Court, in raising Families, getting Estates and the
like? These things I say and such like are condemned and censured not only upon
the stock of their particular Viciousness, as Crimes of Ambition or
Covetousness respectively, but for what they have in Common, as they are
mispendings of Time, and unconcerning Excentrical employments.

XXV.
But now I would fain know, whether any of these Misconducts of Life be more
expensive of our Time, more remote and alien from the main business of it, more
unrelating to our Grand Concern, and consequently more Impertinent, than to be
busily employed in the Niceties and Curiosities of Learning: And whether a Man
that loiters away Six Weeks in Court-Attendances for a place of Honor, be not
every whit as accountably employed with respect to the End of Man in the other
World, and his Business in this, as he that shall spend so much time in the
Solution of a Mathematical Question, as M. Descrates I remember confesses of
himself in one of his Epistles. And why then the Prosecution of Learning should
be the only thing excepted from the Vanities and Impertinencies of Life I have
not head enough to understand.

XXVI.
And yet so it is. All other Excentrical unconcerning Occupations are cried
down merely for being so, as not according with the present Character and State
of Man. This alone is not contented with the reputation of Innocence, but
stands for positive merit and excellence, for Praise and Commendation. To say a
Man is a Lover of Knowledge, and a diligent inquirer after Truth, is almost as
great an Encomium as you can give him, and the time spent in the Study, tho in
the search of unedifying Truth, is reckoned almost as laudably bestowed as that
in the Chapel, and (so inconsistent with its self is Human Judgment) it is
Learning only that is allowed not only to divide, but to devour the greatest
part of our short Life, and is the only thing that with Credit and Public
allowance stands in Competition with Religion and the study of Virtue. Nay, by
the most is preferred before it, who would rather be counted Learned, than
Pious.

XXVII.
But is not this a strenge and unreasonable Competition? It must indeed be
confessed that the Perfection of Man is double, of the Intellectual as well as
of the Moral Part, and that Knowledge is a very Divine Excellence. But
certainly Rectitude of Will is a greater Ornament and Perfection than
Brightness of Understanding, and to be Good is more Divine than to be Wise and
Knowing, that being the Principal, perhaps only difference between an Angel and
a Devil. And tho Solomon's Choice be universally applauded, yet I think that of
Mary is to be preferred before it, and (to use the Expression of the Excellent
Monsieur Poiret) that it is better like an Infant without much reasoning to Love
much, Cogitat. Ration. de Deo. p. 62^.
than like the Devil to Reason much without Love.

XXVIII.
But suppose Knowledge were a much Diviner excellence than it is, suppose it
were more Perfective of, and Ornamental to Human Nature than the Habit and
Practice of Virtue, yet still this Competition would be utterly against Reason.
For it is to be considered (as I have already suggested) that the Former we
cannot have now in any Measure, and shall have it hereafter without Measure, but
the latter we may have now (for we may Love much tho we cannot know much) and
cannot have it hereafter. Now the Question is, whether we ought to be more
Solicitious for that Intellectual Perfection which we cannot have here, and
shall have hereafter, or for that Moral Perfection which we may have here, and
cannot hereafter? And I think we need not consult an Oracle, or conjure up a
Spirit to be resolved of this Question.

XXIX.
And this one Solitary Consideration (much more in Conjunction with the other
parts of the Human Character) I take to be sufficient to justify the Truth of
what measure we have prescribed to our Intellectual Conduct, that we ought to
prosecute Learning and Knowledge no further than as it is conducive to the great
Ends of Piety and Virtue. And consequently that when ever we study to any other
Purpose, or in any other Degree than this, we are unaccountably impertinently,
I may add Sinfully employed. Eccles. 12.13.
For this is the whole of Man, to fear God and keep his Commandments, the whole
of Man in this Station, and consequently this ought to be the only Scope of all
his Studys and Endeavors.

XXX.
And accordingly it is observable that the Scripture whenever it makes mention
of Wisdom with any mark of Commendation, it always means by it either the very
Practice of Religion and Virtue, or such Knowledge at least, that has a near
and strong influence upon it; thereby implying that that is the only Wisdom
which becomes the study of Man. Remarkable above the rest to this purpose is
the 28th Chapter of Job, where having run through several instances of Natural
Knowledge, V. 12.
at length says he, But where shall Wisdom be found? And where is the place of
understanding? As much as to say that in none of the other things mentioned did
consist the Wisdom of Man. Then it follows, V. 13.
Man knows not the Price thereof, neither is it found in the Land of the
Living, V. 14.
The Depth says, it is not in me, and the Sea says it is not in me. Not in
the Depths of Learning, V. 21.
nor in the Recesses of Speculation, seeing it is hid from the Eyes of all
Living, and kept close from the Fowls of the Air, from Men of high and Towering
Notions, V. 22.
and sublime Theories. Destruction and Death say, we have heard the Fame
thereof with our Ears. As much as to say, that after this Life, and then only,
unless perhaps about the hour of Death, Men begin to have a true sense and
Lively Savoury Relish of this Wisdom. But in the mean time, V. 23.
God understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. V. 28.
And unto Man he said, behold the Fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to
depart from Evil, that is understanding. To Man he said. Had it been to another
Creature, suppose an Angel, in a state of Security and Confirmation, he would
perhaps have recommended for Wisdom the Study of Nature, and the Curiosities of
Philosophy, but having to do with Man, a Probationary and unfixt Creature, that
shall be either Happy or Miserable according as he demeans himself in this
short time of Trial, the only Wisdom he advises to such a Creature in such a
Station, is to look well to his Moral Conduct, to study Religion and good Life.

XXXI.
And now ( Madam) since we are upon Scripture-Authority (for indeed so little
has this matter been considered, that I have scarce any other to follow) will
your Ladyship give me leave in further Confirmation of the Measure proposed, to
commend to your Consideration two great Scripture-Examples, both of Men
Eminently Wise, and of a Learned Education. The Men I instance in are Moses and
St. Paul. The latter of which professedly declares that he determined to know
nothing, 1 Cor. 2.
but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, that is, nothing but what concerns either
the Faith or the Practice of Christianity. And the former complaining of the
gross Ignorance of the People committed to his charge, and desiring they would
become wiser, breaks out into this Passionate Wish, O that they were Wise,
Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter End.

XXXII.
Moses had been bred a Scholar, as well as a Courtier, and was well instructed
in all the Secrets of the Egyptian Philosophy, which was then the best in the
World. Besides, he was himself a wise Man, a Man that besides the advantages of
Pharaoh's Court, had the Divine (...) himself for his Tutor, and conversed
personally with his maker, and therefore must needs be supposed to know what
was true Wisdom. But now this he does not make to consist either in the
Accomplishments of Courtly Education, or in the deep Mysteries of Philosophy,
but in the consideration of our latter End. He wishes that his People were
Wise, and to this End he does not wish that they were as Well-bred as he, or as
Learned as he, but only that they understood this, this one thing, that they
would consider their latter End. Which he makes the Summary and Abstract of all
Wisdom. Much like that of Plato, when he defines Philosophy to be, The Theory
of Death.

XXXIII.
And here, if your Ladyship will dispense with a short digression, a digression
from the immediate Thread of my Discourse, tho not from the general Design of
it, I would upon this occasion briefly represent to you what an excellent part
of Wisdom it is for man seriously to consider his latter end. To make this
distinctly appear, I shall proceed upon these two grounds: First, That the
Consideration of Death is the most proper exercise that a wise man can be
employed about. And Secondly, that this is the most compendious way of making
him wise that is not so.

XXXIV.
And First, it is the most proper exercise that a wise man can employ himself
about. For Wisdom consists in a due estimation of things; and then things are
duly estimated, when they are measured and rated, first as they are absolutely
in themselves; and secondly, as they stand in Relation to us. If they are great
and extraordinary then they deserve to be considered for their own sakes; and
if they nearly relate to us, then they deserve to be considered for ours. And
upon both these accounts, Death and its consequences are highly deserving a
wise man's Thoughts and Reflections.

XXXV.
For first, they are great and extraordinary Transactions, barely as in
themselves considered, and as such would deservedly engage the most attentive
consideration, even of a stander by, of any other indifferent Being, suppose an
Angel, that can be no otherwise concerned in it, than as it is a great Event, a
Noble Scene of Providence, a matter of Wonder and Curiosity. I say upon this
single Account Death with its consequences is as fit a subject for the
Contemplation of a Wise man as auy in Nature.

XXXVI.
Or if there be within the Sphere of Nature things of a greater and more Bulky
appearance, yet certainly there is nothing wherein man is so nearly concerned,
so highly interessed as in Death. Since upon the manner of this depends his
Eternal Happiness or Ruin. There is therefore nothing that so much deserves to
be considered by him. Whether therefore we regard the Absolute greatness of the
thing, or its Relative greatness with respect to us, as we are interessed and
concerned in it, but especially if we weigh both, the consideration of Death is
as proper an Exercise as a Wise man can be employed about.

XXXVII.
And as it is so fit an employment for him that is wise already, so secondly is
it the most compendious way of making him wise, truly wise, that is not so. For
all wisdom is in Order to Happiness, and to be truly wise, is to be Wise unto
Salvation. Whatever Knowledge contributes not to this, is quite beside the
Mark, and is as the Apostle calls it, Science falsely so called. The Knowledge
itself is vain, and the Study of it is impertinent.

XXXVIII.
Now the only way to Happiness is a good life, and consequently all wisdom
being in Order to Happiness, that is the only wisdom that serves to the
promoting of good life, according to that of Job before cited, And to man he
said, behold the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding. That therefore is the most compendious way of making a man wise,
that soonest makes him good, and reduces his mind to a moral Regularity. And
nothing does this so soon and so well as the serious and habitual consideration
of Death. And therefore says the wise man, Remember Death and Corruption, and
keep the Commandments. The shortest Compendium of Holy living that ever was
given. As if he had said, Many are the Precepts and Admonitions left us by wise
and good men, for the moral Conduct of life, but would you have a short and
infallible Directory of living well? why, remember Death and Corruption; Do but
remember this, and forget all other Rules if you will, and your Duty if you can.

XXXIX.
And what is here remarked by one wise man is consented to by all. Hence those
common Practices among the Ancients of placing Sepulchers in their Gardens, and
of using that celebrated Motto, Memento Mori. Hence also that Modern as well as
Ancient Custom of putting Emblems of Mortality in Churches, and other Public
places, by all which it is implied that the Consideration of Death, is the
greatest security of a good life. As indeed it must be upon this general
ground, because it does that at a Blow, which other considerations do by Parts,
and gives an entire defeat to the three great Enemies of our Salvation at once.
It sets us above the Temptations of the World the Flesh, and the Devib. For how
can the World captivate him, who considers he is but a stranger in it, and that
he must shortly leave it! How can the Flesh ensnare him who has his Sepulcher
always in his Eye, and reflects upon the cold lodging he shall have there! And
how can the Devil prevail upon him, who remembers always he must dye, and then
enter upon an unchangeable State of Happiness or Misery, according as he has
either resisted or yielded to his Temptations! Of so vast consequence is the
constant Thinking upon Death above all other things that fall within the
compass even of useful and Practical Meditation, and so great Reason had Moses
for placing the Wisdom of Man in the Consideration of his latter End.

XL.
But to return (if being still in pursuit of my general design, I may well be
said to be out of the way) I now persuade my self that from the Character I
have drawn of Man and his present Circumstances, together with those
Reflections built upon it, and interwoven with it, and lastly from Divine
Authority, the measure we have given is so well Established, that if your
Ladyship be not yet, you ought to be convinced that however Naturally desirous
we may be of Knowledge, yet that this Appetite is to be governed as well as
those that are Sensual; that we ought to indulge it only so far as may tend to
the Moralizing our Souls, and the conducting our Lives, and the fitting us for
that Happiness which God has promised not to the Learned, but to the Good. And
that if it be gratified to any other purpose, or in any other Measure than
this, our Curiosity is impertinent, our study immoderate, and the Tree of
Knowledge still a forbidden Plant.

XLI.
And now ( Madam) having fixed and Stated the Measure of our present Affection
to, and Inquiry after Learning and Knowledge, which I think is Established upon
irrefutable Principles, I may leave it to your Ladyship to consider how much
it is observed in the general Conduct of our Studies. It Is plain that it is not
observed at all. For these two things are too Notorious to need any more for
their Proof than only to look abroad into the World. First, that very little of
that which is generally made the subject of Study has any manner of Tendency to
Living well here, or Happily hereafter. And Secondly, that these very studies
which have no Religious or Moral influence upon Life, do yet devour the
greatest part of it. The Best and Most of our Time is devoted to Dry-Learning,
this we make the Course of our Study, the rest is only by the by, and it is well
if what is Devotional, Practical or Divinely-relishing, can find us at leisure
upon a Broken piece of a Sunday or Holiday. But the Main Current of our Life
runs in Studies of another Nature, that don't so much as glance one kind Aspect
upon good living, it is well if some of them don't hinder it. I am sure St.
Austin thought so, Confess. Lib. c. 1.16.
and makes it part of his Penitentials. And yet to these our youth is
dedicated, in these we employ our riper years; nor do we see the vanity and
impertinence of it in old Age. And then when we dye, this very thing makes one
great part of our Funeral Elegy, that we were so diligent and indefatigable in
our studies, and so inquisitive in the search of Knowledge, perhaps that we
procured an early interment by it, when according to the Principles before laid
down, we were as impertinently employed all the while, as if we had been so
long picking Straws in Bedlam. I say as impertinently, tho perhaps not so
innocently. The Sum of all comes to this: The measure of prosecuting Learning
and Knowledge is their usefullness to good Life. Consequently all Prosecution
of it beyond or beside this End is impertinent and immoderate. This has been
fully proved by evident Principles. But now of this sort is the general
prosecution of Learning and Knowledge, as is plain by appealing to the general
Conduct of Study. The Conclusion therefore unovoidably follows. That the
Intellectual Conduct of Human Life is justly chargeable with an immoderate and
impertinent pursuit of Knowledge. Which was the Proposition to be made out, and
I am sorry to see it so well proved.

The End of the Third Reflection.
The Conclusion.
ANd now (Madam) having finished my Threefold Reflection upon the Intellectual
Conduct of Human Life, I have a double Application to make, one to your
Ladyship, and another to my self. That to your Ladyship is this, that you would
consider to what a narrow compass, by virtue of the preceding Discourses, these
three things are reduced, which before use to take up so large a room, viz.
Learning it self, the Method of Learning, and the Desire and Prosecution of
Learning. The first of which is comprised within the Limits of Necessary Truth,
the second within those of Thinking, Purity and Prayer; the third within its
usefulness to the furtherance of good life. These indeed are great
retrenchments, but I think such as are just and necessary to the Regulation of
our Intellectual Conduct, which I am glad to find so compendious and
disincumber'd, that being a Mark of no small Probability to confirm me in the
Truth of it, as the Rightest Line is also always the Shortest.

And since both Learning it self, its Method, and limits of Prosecution are all
so reduced, I would further commend to your Ladyships consideration, whether
from this great Abridgment you can forbear deducing these two Corollaries,
first, that this Bookish Humor which every where so prevails, is one of the
Spiritual Dyscrasys, or Moral Diseases of Mankind, one of the most Malignant
Relics of Original depravation. It carrying in it the very Stamp and
Signature of Adam's Transgression, which owed its birth to Curiosity, and
inordinate desire of Knowledge. Secondly, that those who have Eyes, may in a
great Measure spare them, and that those who have not, should not, upon the
account of Learning, much lament the want of them which is what particularly
concerns your Ladyship's case, and is now addressed to your Private
Considerarion.

Now as to my own particular Concern, the Result of what I have written is
this. I am so inwardly and thoroughly convinced of the certainty of those
Principles, I have here laid down, that I think I am not only under a
particular Obligation, but almost under a Necessity of conducting my studies
according to the Measures proposed. The last of which has left such a strong
influence, such a deep impression upon me, that I think I shall now follow the
Advice of the Heathen ( M. Antonius as I remember) (...), rid my self of the
Thirst after Books, and study nothing but what serves to the advancement of
Piety and good life.

I have now spent about Thirteen years in the most celebrated University in the
World, and, according to the ordinary Measures, perhaps not amiss, having
accomplished my self in a competent degree both with such Learning as the
Academical Standard requires, and with whatever else my own Private Genius
inclined me to. But truly I cannot say that I have ordered my studies in that
Theater of Learning, so much to my own Satisfaction, as to my Reputation with
others. To be free with you, I must declare, that when I reflect upon my past
Intellectual Conduct, I am as little satisfied with it as I am with that of my
Morals, and that I think I have nigh as much to answer for the Former, as I
have for the Latter, being very Conscious that the greatest part of it has been
employed in Vnconcerning Curiosities,, such as derive no moral influence upon
the Soul that contemplates them.

But I have now (if I sufficiently understand my self) a very different Taste
and Apprehension of things, and intend to spend my uncertain remainder of time
in studying only such things as make for the Moral improvement of my mind, and
the Regulation of my Life, not being able to give an account upon any rational
and consistent Principles, why I should study any thing else.

More particularly I think I shall chiefly apply my self to the Reading of such
Books as are rather Persuasive, than Instructive, such as are Sapid, Pathetic
and Divinelyrelishing, such as Warm, Kindle and enlarge the Interior, and
awaken the Divine Sense of the Soul, as considering with my self that I have
now, after so much Reading and Speculation, more need of Heat than of Light.
Tho if I were for more Light still, I think this would prove the best Method of
Illumination, and that when all is done, the Love of God is the best Light of
the Soul. For I consider with the Excellent Cardinal Bona, Via compendii ad
Deum. p. 172.
that a Man may have Knowledge without Love. But he that Loves, although he wants
Sciences humanely acquired, yet he will know more than Human Wisdom can teach
him, because he has that Master within who teaches Man Knowledge. Purity of
Heart and Life being one of the Methods of Consulting the Ideal World, as was
shown in the Second Part.

And now ( Madam) I cannot well presage how your Ladyship will relish this
Renunciation of all studies Merely Curious, from one whom you apprehended
(perhaps upon too just grounds) to have been so naturally disposed to them, and
so deeply engaged in them. Perhaps you will say I am already Countrify'd since I
left the University. How far that Metamorphosis may seize upon me, I cannot yet
tell, if Solitude and Retirement be enough to bring it, I am I confess in great
Danger, being now got into a little Corner of the World, where I must be more
Company to my self than I have been ever yet. But the best on it is, I have not
been so great a stranger to my own Company all along, as to fear any great
alteration by it now. Nor do I think the Management of the Present undertaking
a sign of any such change.

Whether I should have had the same Thoughts in the University or no, I cannot
say, I rather believe they are owing to my Country-Retirement (as I hinted in
the Beginning) but however that be, sure I am they were entertained upon the
deepest and severest Consideration, and I believe are so well grounded, that
the more your Ladyship considers, the more you will be convinced both of the
Truth of what I have Discoursed, and of the Reasonableness of what I design;
which is to devote my self wholly to the accomplishment of my Moral part, and
of my Intellectual, only so far as is Subservient to the other.

And now ( Madam) having bid farewell to all unconcerning Studies, all the dry
and unsavory parts of Learning, it is high time to take my leave of your
Ladyship too; which I do with this Hope, that one great ground of your Trouble
for the Misfortune of your Eyes is by the foregoing Considerations removed: And
with this Assurance, that if these Discourses be too Weak to bring you over to
my present Opinion, they will however prove Strong enough to work you into a
Better, which is to believe, that I still continue in all Reality,

Your Ladyships Most Faithful Friend and Servant, John Norris.
Newton St. Lo, Sept. 2. 1689.
A SERMON Preached in the ABBEY CHURCH OF BATH, Before the Right Reverend Father
in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of BATH and WELLS: At his VISITATION held there
July 30. 1689.

By John Norris, M. A. Rector of Newton St. Lo, near Bath, and late Fellow of
All Souls College in Oxford.

London, Printed in the Year 1690.

John 21. v. 15. So when they had Dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon Son
of Jonas, Love thou me more than these? He says unto him, yea Lord; Thou
know that I Love thee. He says unto him, Feed my Lambs.
THE Words consist of Three considerable parts. First, of a Question put by our
Lord to St. Peter. Secondly, of St. Peter's Answer. Thirdly, of a Command by
way of inference from it. The Question was whether St. Peter Loved him beyond
the rest of his Disciples then present. This Demand of our Lord was not so high
as were St. Peter's former Professions and Pretensions. This warm and Zealous
Apostle had always professed a more than ordinary Adhesion to his Lord and
Master, and pretended to as great a Supremacy of Love, as his Successors do of
Knowledge and Jurisdiction. He seemed to be among the Apostles what the
Seraphim are among the Angels, to outshine and out-burn not this or that
vulgar Disciple only, but the whole Apostolical Order in Zeal, Courage, and
Flames of Divine Love. For no less can that Eminent Profession of his import,
Tho all Men should be offended because of thee, Mat. 26.33.
yet will I never be offended. But not having made good his high Pretensions,
our Lord now puts the Question to him in terms more moderate than those wherein
he had before voluntarily boasted of his own Fidelity; and whereas he had
before made show of a Superlative Love beyond All the Disciples, our Lord only
asks him this Modest Question, Love thou me more than these?

The good Apostle having now partly from the late experiment of his own
frailty, and partly from the manner of our Lords Question, learnt more Humility
and Modesty, returns such an Answer as was short not only of his former
Professions, but even of the Question too. He does not reply, Lord thou know
that I love thee more than these. No, he dares not venture any more so much as
to determine any thing concerning the Measure of his Love, but is contented
barely to aver the Truth, and Sincerity of it. And for this he fears not to
appeal at last to the Divine Omniscience, Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee.

Our Lord takes the Answer, and does not at all question the Truth and
Sincerity of it, only he gives him a Test whereby it might be tried and
justified, both before God, himself and the World, by subjoining this Illative
Command, feed my Lambs, as it is in the Text, or as in the two following
verses, feed my sheep.

This whole intercourse between our Lord and St. Peter, may I conceive, as to
the full stress and scope of it, fitly be reduced to this short Hypothetical
sceme of speech, If thou love me, feed my sheep. Like that of our Savior,
upon another occasion to his Disciples in common, If ye love me keep my
Commandments. This under a shorter view takes in the full force of the words,
and I shall accordingly discourse upon them, as if they had stood in this
Posture.

Hence then I shall take occasion to consider these three things, as naturally
arising from the words, and as no less pertinent to our present Concern.

First the great Love of our Lord Christ to his Church, which he here calls his
Lambs, and his Sheep, which he here commands St. Peter as he loved him to feed,
and which lastly he would not absolutely and finally commit to his Charge, till
after three distinct Inquiries whether he truly loved him.

Secondly, I shall consider the Command here given, and show the great
obligation that lies upon all spiritual Pastors and Guides of Souls to feed
this flock of Christ which is so dearly beloved by him.

Thirdly, I shall consider the Connection and Dependence that is between the
Practice of this command and the Love of Christ. If thou Lovst me feed my sheep.

Lastly, I shall close all with an earnest exhortation to the Conscientious
Practice of the Duty enjoined.

The first thing I shall consider is the great Love of Christ to his Church.
And certainly if there be any Secret in Religion fit for Angels to Contemplate,
and too high for them to comprehend; if there be any Love that has Breadth and
Length, and Depth, and Height, if there be any Love that passes Knowledge, if
there be any love that is stronger than Death, and dearer than Life, if there
be any, lastly, that is truly wonderful, and that passes love not only of
Women, but of the whole Creation, it is this Love of our Lord to his Church. We
have no line long enough to fathom so vast a Depth, nor can Mortality furnish
us with Ideas to conceive, or with words to utter so deep a Mystery. If there
be any words that can reach it, they must be such as St. Paul heard in his
Rapture, strange words, (...) words that cannot be pronounced by an Human
Tongue, and that would be mere Barbarism to a Mortal capacity.

But however, that we may take some Measure of that which really has none, and
be able to frame some Notion of this Love of Christ, which as the Apostle tells
us passes knowledge, we will exhibit a Prospect of it in a Double Light; Ephesians.
3.19.
First, in those verbal Representations which the Scripture gives of it, and
Secondly, in those real and actual Proofs whereby Christ himself has expressed
this his most excellent, and otherwise Incredible Love.

As to the First, the Scripture we know is full of great things, and those set
forth with as great and magnificent Expressions. The Rhetoric and Style of
Scripture runs incomparably high, beyond that of any other writings in whatever
it treats of. But there are three things more especially, in the description of
which the Holy Spirit seems to Labor, and be at a Stand for Expression. And
these are the Glories of Heaven, the Miseries of Hell, and the Love of Christ
to his Church. These the Scripture represents under all the variety of Symbols,
Figures and Images that can be supplied either from the Intellectual or
Material World; that so what is wanting in each single Representation, might be
made up from the Multitude and Combination of them, that if one should miss,
another might strike us, to make if possible some impression of so strange and
so concerning Truths upon the minds of Men.

But the last of these, as it is most wonderful and Mysterious (it being a
greater wonder that God should Love Man, than that either there should be so
much Happiness in the Enjoyment of God, or so much misery in the Loss of him)
so is it more frequently inculcated, and more strongly represented. So
frequently inculcated is it, that were it not for the Mystery of the thing, and
that there is no Tautology in Love, the Scripture would seem Chargeable with
vain Repetitions. Every Page almost in Holy writ breathes forth this Mystery of
Divine Love, and besides that, there is one whole Book particularly employed in
the representation of it, by all the Flowers and Delicacies of the most exalted
Poetry; it may be said of the whole Sacred Volumn that it is but one continued
Expression of Love from Christ to his Church, one Larger Canticles.

And as it is thus frequently inculcated, so is it no less strongly represented.
It Is represented by that which is the most proper Effect, and the last End and
Accomplishment of all Love, by Union. For there are three most admirable Unions
proposed to our Faith in the Christian Religion. The Unity of Essence in the
Trinity, the Unity of Person in Jesus Christ, and the Union that is between
Christ and his Church. The First of these is an Example and Prefiguration as it
were to the Second, and the Second to the Third. For we cannot better represent
the Union of Christ with his Church, than by the Hypostatic Union, or the Union
of the (...) with Human Nature.

For First, as in this Mystery the Plurality of Nature is consistent with the
Unity of Person, so does Love effect the same Miracle in the Union between
Christ and his Church. For here also we meet with a new Theanthropy, a strange
Composition of God and Man, two vastly different Substances, which without
Confusion of either Natures or Properties, make up one and the same Body. For
if Christ be Head of the Church, he is also one Body with it. And so St.
Austin, Totus Christus secundam Ecclesiam and Caput and Corpus est.

Again, as in the Mystery of the Hypostatic union there is a Communication of
Idioms or Properties whereby what primarily and abstractly belongs to one, may
secondarily and concretely be attributed to the other, as that God is man, and
man is God, so has Love introduced the like Communication between Christ and
his Church, which may be said to be happy and glorified in Christ, as he is
said to suffer in his Church.

Again, as in the Mystery of the Hypostatic union the Word uniting it self to
Human Nature adorned and exalted it, not only by the Privilege of so sacred a
Confederacy, but also with many distinct Graces and Excellencies, whereby it
was necessarily tho not forcibly determined to love the Divinity, and highly
fitted to be loved by it, so is it also in this Union between Christ and his
Church. He has not only innobled her by so sacred an Alliance, but is ever
conferring upon her his Gifts and Graces, and will never cease to do so, till
at length he present her to himself a Glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.27.
without spot or blemish, and make her in some measure worthy of so great a
Love, and so intimate an Union. For it is observable, that in Scripture Jesus
Christ is set out as the Author and Dispencer of all Grace, to him is ascribed
the Work of the Second as well as of the First Creation, from his fullness we
all receive, and the Apostle says expressly, that to every one of us is given
grace according to the Measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7.


But not to pursue this Metaphysical Parallel any further, let us return to
consider this Union, as it is represented in Holy Scripture. Now there are but
two sorts of Union in the World, Natural and Moral. And the Holy Spirit has
made Choice of the Closest of each, whereby to Figure out to us the Union
between Christ and his Church. The closest of Natural Unions is that between
the Head and the Body; and the closest of all Moral Unions is that between the
Husband and the Wife. And both these are by the Holy Spirit applied to this
Mystery.

Thus is Christ oftentimes called the Head of the Church, and the Church the
Body of Christ. Thus again is he styled the Bridegroom, and the Church honored
with the Name of his Spouse. And because this Latter Figure carries in it more
of sensible endearment, therefore is it of more frequent use, and withal of
more Ancient Date. For besides that Adam first opened this Mystery, and by his
Miraculous Marriage typified to us that of Christ with his Church, which came
out of the Wounded Side of our Lord, as Eve was taken out of Adam's, the
Prophets have also given our Lord the title of Bridegroom in the Old Testament.
The 45th Psalm is a plain Spiritual Epithalamium, and so is the whole Book of
Canticles, and the Holy Baptist, in whom both Types and Prophecy expire, calls
him expressly by the Name of Bridegroom.

Strange Miracle of Humility and Love! That ever God should come down to seek a
Spouse upon Earth! was it not enough, O Blessed Jesu, that thou wast one with
the Father and Holy Spirit, in the Eternal Trinity? was it not enough that thou
had made thy self one with our Mortal Flesh by assuming our Nature, but that
thou must yet heap Mystery upon Mystery, and as if thou were not yet near
enough allied to us, must also make thy self one with thy Church? But such is
thy Love to man as not to be contented with one single union with him? And so
great thy Condescension as if thou need'st a Partner, to complete thy
Happiness, and as if it were no more good for the second, than 'twas for the
first Adam to be alone.

These are the two Principal Figures under which the Scripture Pictures out to
us the Love of Christ to his Church, and his union with it. Not that they rise
up to the height of the Mystery, but because they come the nearest of any to
it. For indeed they fall vastly short, and give but a faint shadowy resemblance
of what they are intended to represent. And therefore as we have hitherto
represented the dearness between Christ and his Church, by that between the
Head and the Members, and the Husband and Wife, so we may, and with better
reason invert the Order, and propose the Former as an Example and Measure for
both the Latter. And it is observable that St. Paul does so; Ephesians. 5.25.
For says he, Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ loved the Church. And
again, No Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but Nourishes and Cherishes it even
as the Lord the Church. Ver. 29.
Where you see the Love of Christ to his Church is not, as before, set out by
that of Married Persons, and that of a Man to his own Flesh, but these are set
out and illustrated by the other. So great and transcending all Love, yea even
all Knowledge, is this Love of Christ to his Church.

But 'twill appear yet greater, if we take a Prospect of it in the Second
Light, namely in those Real and Actual Proofs whereby Christ himself has
expressed this his most excellent and otherwise incredible Love. And certainly
they are such as never were, will, or can be given by any other Lover. For (to
make the Prospect as short as maybe) was it not an amazing instance of Love for
the great and ever Blessed God, who could neither be advantaged by our
Happiness, nor damaged by our Misery, to come down and assume our Nature in its
meanest Circumstances, to live a needy and contemptible Life, and dye a painful
and execrable Death, and all this to reconcile a Rebel, to restore an Apostate?
Indeed the work of Man's Redemption, if we deeply consider the whole Method and
Contrivance of it, is such an Heroic instance of Love, and so much exceeding
that of his Creation, that it is well Man was Created and Redeemed by the same
good being, since otherwise his obligations to his Redeemer being so much
greater than those to his Creator, he would be very much divided and distracted
in his returns of Love and Gratitude.

But let us reflect a little upon the Life, before we further consider the
Death of our Redeemer. It was one constant Argument, one continued Miracle of
Love. He lived as one purely Devoted to the good of Mankind. All his Thoughts,
all his Words, all his Actions were Love, His whole business was to Glorify his
Father, and (which was his greatest Glory) to express his Love to Man, which
tho at all times exceeding wonderful, yet toward the Evening of his Life it
thickened and grew stronger, like Motion within the Neighborhood of the
Center, and as then he Prayed, Luke. 22.44.
so he Loved yet more earnestly.

For 'twas then that he wept over Condemned Jerusalem, and bedewed with Tears
the Grave of Lazarus. 'Twas then that with desire he desired to Eat the
Passover with his Disciples, instituted a perpetual Monument of Love, his Holy
Supper, and left another of Humility by condescending to wash their Feet. 'Twas
then that he comforted his Disciples with the variety of the Heavenly Mansions,
with a Declaration that he himself was the way, the Truth and the Life, with an
assurance that their Prayers in his Name should be effectual, with a Promise of
the Holy Spirit, and with a Legacy of his own Peace, to compensate for the
Tribulation they should meet with in the World. 'Twas then, lastly, that he
recommended the state of his Apostles, together with his own Glorification, Jo.
17.
in one and the same Solemn Prayer to his Father, that he would preserve them
in Unity and Truth, and at length Glorify them with the whole Body of true
Believers with himself in Heaven. And all this at a time when one would have
thought his own concern should have been his only Meditation, and Fear his only
Passion, for now was he within view of his amazing sufferings, and the shade
was just ready to point at the dreadful hour, and yet even now his Love was
truly stronger than Death, and the Care of his Disciples prevailed over the
Horrors of his approaching Agony.

Which he further showed by giving up himself to a cruel and shameful Death,
for the Life and Salvation of the World. A Death (to say no more of it) of such
strange Sorrow and Anguish, that the very Prospect of it put him into a Sweat
of Blood, and the enduring it made him complain of being deserted of his
Father. And then that his Redemption might prove effectual, after his
Resurrection he gives Commission to his Disciples to go and publish it with its
conditions throughout the world, and orders them all, as he does here St.
Peter, to feed his Sheep. And lest the the Benefit of his Death should be again
frustrated for want of Power to perform the conditions, presently after his
Ascension he sent down the Spirit of consolation upon his Apostles, and does
continually confer Grace upon, and make Intercession for his Church. So
tenderly affected was he toward this his Spouse, that even the felicities of
Heaven could not make him forget her, as he further showed by complaining in
behalf of his Church, when from the midst of his Glory he said, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Which words show him as much concerned for the wounds
given to his Mystical, as for those he felt in his Natural Body.

And now since the Love of our Lord to his Church is so exceeding great, it
certainly concerns all Christians, especially those whom he has entrusted with
the Care of his Church to be alike minded. Which leads me in the Second place
to consider the command here given, and to show the great Obligation that lies
upon all spiritual Pastors, to feed this flock of Christ which is so nearly
beloved by him.

Feed my sheep, says our Lord to St. Peter, and in him to all the Pastors of
the Christian Church, who are equally concerned both in the Command and in the
Duty.

And that they are so is, already sufficiently concluded from what has been
discoursed concerning the great Love of Christ to his Church. To make you
therefore more sensible of this Duty I need only propose to your Meditation,
how affectionately our Lord loves his Church, and how dear her Interests are to
him, that out of this his abundant Love, he has set apart a distinct Order of
men on this very purpose, to promote and further her in the way of Salvation,
that he has entrusted the care of her in their hands, and has made them his
Vicegerents and Trustees; that it is a Charge worthy their greatest care, for
which there needs no other Argument than that it is committed to them, by him
who knows the worth. of Souls; that he strictly commands them, as they have any
Love or Regard for him, to feed his Sheep; that 'twas the very last Command
that he gave them, when he was just leaving the world, and upon the very
confines of Glorification, and that lastly as this is the greatest Trust that
was ever by God reposed in Men, so there will be the severest account taken of
it at the last day, at the Great Visitation of the Bishop of Souls.

This is enough, if duly weighed, to show the Obligation of this command, and
to conclude this part, were it not necessary to add something concerning the
manner of discharging it. Feed my Sheep is the Command given by Christ to the
Pastors of his Church, and we have seen the obligation of it: But how are they
to Feed them? I answer, First by Prayer for their respective charges both in
Public and in Private. This is the First thing belonging to the Pastoral
Office, and accordingly with this St. Paul begins his Admonition to his Son
Timothy. 1 Timothy 2.1.
I exhort therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions
and giving Thanks be made for all Men.

Secondly by Preaching, with Private Instruction and Admonition as occasion
shall serve and require. And here their first care should be to Preach nothing
but what is True. Secondly, to confine their Discourses to Useful Truths, such
as tend to the promotion of good Life, that which the Apostle calls the Truth
which is after Godliness. 1 Titus.
Thirdly, to deliver only Plain Truths. For there are many Truths which are
highly useful and have a very Practical aspect when they are once understood,
which are not so easy and obvious to be so. These therefore ought as much to
be waved as those which are not useful, because tho useful, simply speaking,
yet respectively they are not. And upon these two latter accounts we should not
trouble our Unlearned Auditories, either with Thorny Questions and Knotty
Controversies which in themselves have no Practical use, or with more refined
Theories and School Niceties, which to them are as useless and unpractical as
the other. To Feed them with the Former would be to give them Stones instead of
Bread; And to Feed them with the Latter would be like placing a Man in the
Region of pure Either; why, he cannot breath in it, and will starve by reason of
the over-fineness of his Diet.

Nor is it enough that the Truths we Preach be Useful and Plain, unless in the
Fourth place they be delivered in a Plain and Intelligible Manner. For what
signifies it that the things are in themselves Plain, if we make them obscure
in our expressing them; we are all ready enough to laugh at the Poor Friar for
going about to Preach the Gospel to Beasts and Trees, and are not they alike
ridiculous that order Discourses so as not to be understood by those that hear
them? Don't these also Preach to Beasts and Trees? We ought therefore to
consult the Capacity of our Hearers, and consider to whom, as well as what we
speak.

And to this Plainness of Expression we would do well to join some degrees of
Warmth and Concernedness. And this I rather recommend because there are some
that affect a Cold, Dead, careless and heartless way of Delivery. But certainly
this has as little Decorum in it as it has of Devotion. For since the things we
speak are supposed not only to be Truths, but Concerning and Important Truths,
what can be more absurd than to see a Man deliver a Sermon as drily and
indifferently, as one would Read a Mathematical Lecture? It Is said of John the
Baptist, that he was a Burning, as well as a Shining Light. John 5.35.
And truly we have need of such in this Cold Frozen Age. Plain Sermons,
Preached with Warmth and Affection do more than the Best, Coldly delivered. You
know the Story in Eusebius of the Heathen Philosopher coming into the Council
of Nice, who was baffled into Christianity by the mere Warmth and Heartiness
wherewith the good Old Man addressed him. He could have resisted his Arguments,
but not the Spirit and Zeal wherewith he spoke. And this is all I shall think
proper to remark to you upon the Preaching part.

The next way whereby the Pastors of the Church are to Feed the Sheep of
Christ, is by duly Administering to them the Holy Sacrament, which is their
true Spiritual Food, the Manna that must sustain them in this Wilderness. This
is the most proper way of Feeding them, for the Body of Christ is Meat indeed,
and his Blood is Drink indeed.

There remains yet one way more of Feeding the Flock of Christ, without which
the rest will signify but little, and that is by a good Example. Among the
other Properties of a good Shepherd, our Savior reckons this as one, that he
goes before his Sheep, and leads them by his Steps, John 10.4
as well as with his Voice. There ought to be a Connection between Hear and Do,
but much more between Preach and Do. And he that is not careful of this, as he
cannot expect to do much good to others, so he will certainly Condemn himself.
To be short (for I hope I need not enlarge, speaking to Wise Men) a good
Preacher who is an ill Liver is such a Monster as cannot be Matched in all
Africa. And for his State hereafter, I may leave it to be considered how great
a Condemnation awaits him, whom not only the Book of God, and of Conscience,
but even his own Sermons shall Judge at the last Day.

These are the several ways of discharging this Precept, Feed my Sheep; to
which however I think it necessary to add one thing more, and that is that we
Feed them our selves, and not by Proxy, or Deputation. For out Lord does not
say to St. Peter, do thou get some body to Feed my Sheep, but do thou Feed them
thy self.

For however St. Peter's Shadow might do Cures upon the Body, it must be his
Person that must do good upon the Souls of his Charge. To speak out plainly
what I intend, Non-residency is one of the greatest scandals of the Reformed,
yea of the Christian Religion, contrary to all Reason and Justice, as well as
Primitive Practice. And whoever are guilty of it, plainly show that they are
Lovers of Ease, Honor or Profit more than Lovers of Christ. For certainly he
that Loves Christ as he ought will not think himself too good to Feed his
Sheep. Which leads me in the Third and Last place to consider the Connection and
Dependence that is between the Practice of this Command and the Love of Christ.
Now this I briefly make out upon a double ground.

The First Ground is, because the Love of Christ will naturally engage us to
Love whatever he Loves, and consequently since his Church is so exceeding dear
to him, 'twill engage us to Love his Church, and if to Love it, then
consequently to be diligent in Feeding it, that being the most proper instance
of showing our Love to it.

The Second Ground is, because the Person of Jesus Christ consisting of a
Double Nature, God and Man, the Love of him must include the Love of his
Humanity; as well as of his Divinity. If therefore we Love Christ, we Love the
Human Nature as well as the Divine, and if so, then we Love Man as Man,
consequently all Men, and if we Love all Men, we shall desire and endeavor
their Salvation, and accordingly take care to Feed them with the Bread of Life.

Upon these two Grounds it plainly appears that there is a strong Connection
between the Loving of Christ, and the Feeding of his Sheep, and that such
Pastors as do not well discharge the Latter, have no right of pretending to the
Former. This is the Test whereby both St. Peter's and every Spiritual Pastor's
affection to our Lord must be tried, If you Love me, Feed my Sheep.

Let me therefore exhort you all, as you Love our Lord Jesus Christ, and as you
desire to be Loved and approved of by him, to a sincere and Conscientious
Discharge of your Pastoral Duty, to take heed unto your selves and to all the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to Feed the Church of
God, Act. 20.28.
which he has purchased with his own Blood. Let me beseech you to consider what
you are, and what you should be. What you are by your Character and Profession,
and what you should be in the Exercise of it, and therefore to take heed to
your selves, to your Doctrine, and above all to your Public Life and
Conversation. For certainly it cannot be an Ordinary Measure of Religion that
will serve our turn, who are concerned not only to be Good, but Exemplary, and
must Live well for others as well as for our selves, what therefore is
Perfection in others, will be but strict Duty in us. The Devotion of our
Ordinary days, ought to exceed that of their Festivals, and we should Live in
as much Warmth of Religion as they Dye. Tit. 2.7.
(...) In all things showing thy self a Pattern of good Works, That Is our Rule,
we ought to be Patterns and Examples of a Holy and refined Conversation. Let
your Lamps therefore be always trimmed, and your Lights always Burning, and
that with such Brightness, as to shame those that will not be allured by the
Glory of the Flame.

And that you may the better do all this, let me desire you all frequently and
seriously to Meditate upon the Excellent Example of the great and good Shepherd
Christ Jesus, whose Life was wholly employed, and at last laid down for the
good of his Sheep. I pray you (My Reverend Brethren) consider this and all that
has been said, that so when this great Shepherd shall return to visit his
Flock, you may all give up the same Account to him, that he did to his Father,
Those that thou gave me I have kept, John 17.12.
and none of them is lost. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Sam. Manship, at the Black-Bull, in Cornhil.
ODes. Satyrs, and Epistles of Horace, done into English; the second Edition.
Lives of the most Famous English Poets, or the honor of Parnassus, in a brief
Essay of the Works and Writings of above two hundred of them, from the time of
K. William the Conqueror, to the Reign of the late K. James the second, in
Octav. Reason and Religion, or the Grounds and Measures of Devotion, Considered
from the Nature of God and the Nature of Man, in several Contemplations, with
Exercises of Devotion, applied to every Contemplation; by John Norris, M. A.
and Fellow of All-Souls-College in Oxford. Octavo, price 2 s. The Theory and
Regulation of Love, a Moral Essay in two Parts, to which is added Letters
Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and Doctor More, by I. Noris, M. A.
and Fellow of All-Souls-College in Oxford. 2 s. A Cap of Gray-Hairs, for a
Green Head, or the Fathers Counsel to his Son an Apprentice in London:
Containing wholesome Instructions for the Managements of a Man's whole Life:
The Fourth Edition in Twelves. 1 s. The Injured Lovers, or the Ambitious Father
a Tragedy; Acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal: by W.
Mountfort. A Comedy. The Comical Revenge, or Love in a Tub; as it is now Acted
at their Majesty's Theater: by Sir Geo. Ethenege. The Gallant Hermaphrodite, an
Amorous Novel, Translated from the French, of the Sieur de Chouigny. price 1 s.
The Marrow of Divinity, or the Chief Grounds of Protestant Religion, briefly
Explained in a Form of Catechizing; by way of Question and Answer, by William
Ames, D. D. price 3. d.
FINIS.

