A SERMON Preached before the University OF OXFORD At St. PETER'S Church in the
East on Mid-Lent Sunday March 29. 1685.

BY John Norris M. A. and Fellow of All Souls College in OXFORD.

See thou a man wise in his own Conceit? There is more hopes of a Fool than
of Him.

Prove. 26. 12. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Thomas Fickus
Bookseller. 1685.

To the Reverend Dr. HENRY MORE of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.
Reverend SIR,
NEither the Ambition of honoring this Discourse with your Great Name, nor the
Vanity of thinking this slender Oblation a sufficient discharge from those
strong Obligations whereby I stand endebted to you, were the Motives which
determined my Choice in this Dedication. I intend only hereby to express my
great Veneration for your Worth, and my Gratitude for that Particular share
which you have been pleased to vouchsafe me in your Favor.

As for the Discourse which now beggs your acceptance and protection, I am not
unsensible that much of it lies out of the common road of thinking, and may
upon that Score incur the Censure of those narrow-spirited Theorists, who
confine their Speculations to the limits of Antiquity, resign up the natural
Prerogative of their understandings to the Tyranny of dead Authors, and prefer
Lead and Copper so it wear the Stamp of Authority, before the finest and
noblest Metal that has not the luck to be a Coin.

But Sir, I need not fear your disapprobation on this account, whose active.
Soul has long since traversed over the whole Field of Truth, and whose temper
is so unprejudiced and even-pois'd, as to receive the most Novel Hypothesis
(were it possible for any to be such to you) without starting and amusement,
and if true, to embrace it, tho with the Censure of Singularity.

And here Opportunity tempts me to run a long Descant upon your great Worth and
the Variety of your Intellectual Accomplishments, but I consider, that should I
with the Athenian Orator employ Ten years in a Panegyric, I could add nothing
either to your Fame or to your Satisfaction, and besides I fear I shall
sufficiently abuse your Patience in the following Papers, and therefore I am
the more concerned to spare your Modesty in this.

But I forget how sacred your hours are, and have perhaps already too much
reason to beg your, and the Worlds, pardon for disturbing an excellent
Meditation. For which offense a speedy Conclusion will be the best Apology. I
end therefore with this humble Request, that whatever your judgment be of this
Present as to other respects, you would not fail to think it a sincere
Testimony of that vast esteem which you most deservedly have in the heart of

(SIR,) Your most Obliged and Humble Servant JOHN NORRIS.
All Souls College Mar. 31.
A SERMON Preached before the University of OXFORD, etc.
ROMANS 12. Chap. v. 3. -- Not to think of himself more highly than be ought to
think; But to think soberly according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith.
THERE is nothing wherein men are so much divided from one another as in
Opinions, and nothing wherein they unanimously conspire than in thinking well
of themselves. This is a Humor of so Catholic a Stamp, and universal Empire,
that it may seem to challenge a place among those Elements of our Constitution,
those Essentials of our nature which run throughout the whole Kind, and are
participated by every Individual. For should a man take the Wings of the
Morning, and and travel with the Sun round the Terrestrial Globe, he would
hardly find a man either of a Judgment so difficult to be pleased, or of
accomplishment so little to recommend him, that was not notwithstanding
sufficiently in love with himself, however he might dislike every thing else
about him; And without question that arrogant and peevish Mathematician who
charged the grand Architect with want of skill in the Mechanism of the World,
thought he had played the Artist well enough in himself, and as to the Harmony
of his own frame acquitted the Geometry of his Maker.

And as men are thus naturally apt to think well of themselves in general, so
there is nothing wherein they indulge this Humor more than in the Opinion they
have of the Goods of the Mind, and among these there is none which has so great
a share of their Partiality, as their Intellectual faculty. The Desire of
Knowledge is not more natural then the Conceit that we are already furnished
with a considerable Measure of it, and tho a particular Sect were Uncharacterized
by that Appellation, yet all mankind are in reality, Gnostics. For as it is
(ingeniously observed by the excellent Cartesius) nothing is more equally
distributed among men than the Intellectual Talent, Dissert. de Method. p. 1.
wherewith every one fancies himself so abundantly stockt, that even those who
have the most unsatiable Desires, and whom Providence could not satisfy in any
one thing else, are notwithstanding as to this Dispensation of Heaven well
enough content, complain not of the dull Planet that influenced their Nativity,
or wish their minds more richly endowed than they are. And although there are a
generation of men who use to be very eloquent in setting out the degeneracy of
humane nature in general, and particularly in decyphering the Shortness of our
Intellectual Sight, and the defects of our now diminished understanding, yet
should a man take them at their word, and apply that Verdict to themselves in
particular which they so freely bestow upon the whole Species, no men in the
world so full of resentment and impatience as they; and I dare affirm
notwithstanding their Harangues upon the Corruption of Human Nature, could all
mankind lay a true claim to that Estimate which they pass upon themselves,
there would be little or no difference betwixt lapsed and perfect Humanity, and
God might again review his image with paternal Complacency, and still pronounce
it good.

Nor is it at all to be wondered that Self-Conceitedness should be of such an
unlimited and Transcendental Nature as to run through all Sorts and Classes of
men, since the cause of it, Self-love, has such an universal Jurisdiction in
our hearts. It Is most natural and necessary for every man (and indeed for every
Intelligent Being) to be a Lover of himself, and to covet whatsoever any way
tends to the perfection of his Nature. And as it is necessary for every man to
be thus affected toward himself, so is this the only Disposition of mind
wherein Man acts with Constancy and Uniformity. Our other Passions have
sometimes their total intermissions, and at best their increases and decreases,
but this is See my Discourse of Heroic Piety Page 72 and 73.
allways at Full, and stands drawn out to the utmost Stretch of its Capacity.
No man loves himself more at one time then at another, and that because he
allways loves himself in the highest Degree that is possible. More than all
good he cannot with to himself, and less than all he will not, nay I had
almost pronounced it impossible for Omnipotence it self which stays the proud
waves of the Ocean, (...)
and blocks up its violent efforts with bars and doors, to say unto this
Passion, hitherto shall thou come but no further, or to set any other bounds to
it besides those of all possible good.

Now Man being such an infinite Lover of himself, is easily brought to believe
that he is really Master of many of those excellencies and perfections, which
he so passionately wishes among the Inventory of his possessions. For there is
this notorious difference betwixt Selflove and the Love of others, that whereas
the Love of others supposes an opinion of their excellency, the love of our
selves begets it. We love others because we think well of them, but (so
preposterous is the method of Self-love) we think well of our selves because we
first love our selves. So that now upon the whole, considering how necessarily
and vehemently every man is carried on to the love of himself, and what a
natural product Self-conceit is of Self-love, it is much to be feared, that as
we cannot set any bounds to the love of our selves, so we shall hardly set due
ones to our Opinions of our selves, and consequently the most mortified and
resigned Man of us all, has no reason to think himself unconcerned in this
Admonition of the Apostle. -- Not to think of himself more highly than he ought
to think; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith.

It Is supposed that the Apostle in these words had respect to the then
prevailing Heresy of Gnostics, a sort of men that pretended to great Heights,
of divine Knowledge, to close intimacies and familiarities with God, and upon
that presumption grew so haughty and insolent as to despise dominions, and
speak evil of dignities, and withal so careless and secure, as to defile the
flesh, and indulge themselves all manner of Sensuality, as you may see their
Character in the Epistle of St. Jude. Nay of such turbulent ungovernable
Principles and profligate manners were these men, that some of the Learned (and
particularly an eminent Divine of our own Church) have adventured to write upon
their Foreheads, Dr. Hammond
Mystery, and to place them in the Chair of Antichrist. As an Antidote
therefore against this Poison, the Apostle who through the Abundance of
Revelation had himself been in danger of being exalted above Measure, 2 Cor.
12. 7.
and experimentally knew how prone humane nature is to swell and plume upon a
Conceit of its own excellencies, thought it expedient to advise his Charge at
Rome (the place which Simon Magus the Author of that proud Sect had (as
Eusebius tells us) made choice of to be the Scene of his Magical Operations) to
moderate and sober thoughts of themselves, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 13.
and being to teach them a Lesson of Humility, he modestly ushers it in with a
Preface of his Commission and Authority. For I say (says he) through the grace
given unto me to every man that is among you not to think of himself more
highly, etc.

The Discourse which I design upon these words shall be comprised within these
limits.

First, I observe that we are not at our own liberty to entertain what Opinions
we please concerning our selves, but that we ought to regulate them by some
Standard. Which I collect from the former part of the Text, Not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly.

Secondly, I observe that the Standard whereby we are to regulate our Opinions
concerning our selves are those excellencies and perfections which we are
really endowed with, which I collect from the latter part of the Text,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith.

And in the third place I shall consider the Absurdities and ill Consequences
of transgressing this Standard, whereby it shall appear how highly reasonable
this Admonition of the Apostle is, and so conclude with a practical Application
of the whole in relation to our selves, and the present occasion.

I begin with the first Proposition, That we are not at our own liberty to
entertain what Opinions we please concerning our selves, but that we ought to
regulate them by some Standard.

The Acts of the understanding are by some men thought as free from all Law as
the Acts of the will are from all necessity, and accordingly they give every
one a Toleration to abound in his own sense and (provided his actions be
conformable to the Rule) to think what he please. Now since a Man cannot be
accountable for an Opinion of himself in particular, unless it be first granted
that he is under a Law as to the Acts of his understanding in general, before I
can proceed any farther I find it necessary to lay down this Preparatory
Position, That we are under an Obligation as to the Acts of our understanding,
or (which is all one) that we are accountable for them. Nay I believe I may
venture higher and affirm that the understanding is not only under Obligation
but that it is the Primary and immediate Subject of of it. For the proof of
which Paradox, I desire the Patrons of the Intellectual Libertinism to
consider, that that must be the Primary and immediate subject of all Obligation
which is so of Liberty. Now that this cannot be the Will, I suppose will be
acknowledged a clear consequence if the Will necessarily follows the Practical
Dictate of the Understanding. And that it does so, I think there is
Demonstration.

It Is an unquestionable Axiom in all the Schools of Learning in the world, that
the Object of the Will is apparent good; Now apparent good in other words, is
that which is apprehended or judged to be good, and if so, then it follows that
the Will cannot but conform to the Dictate of the Understanding, because
otherwise something might be the object of the Will that is not apprehended
good, which is contrary to the supposition. In short, the Will (as Aquinas has
well expressed it) is the Conclusion of an Operative Syllogism, and follows as
necessarily from the Dictate of the Understanding as as any other Conclusion
does from its Premises, and consequently cannot be the immediate subject of
Liberty, and consequently not of Obligation.

But then are we not involved in the same difficulty as to the understanding?
Does not that act with equal (if not more) necessity than the Will? So I know
it is ordinarily taught. But if this be absolutely and universally true, I must
confess it above the reach of my Capacity to salve the Notion of Morality, or
Religion, or to find out an expedient how the Foundations of the Intellectual
world should not be out of course. For since it is evident both from the
preceding Demonstration, and from experimental Reflection, that the Will
necessarily acts in Conformity to the Dictates of the Understanding, if those
very Dictates are also wholely and altogether neccssary, there can be no such
thing as a (...), the man is bound hand and foot, has nothing left whereby to
render him a Moral Agent, to qualify him for Law or Obligation, Virtue or Vice,
Reward or Punishment. But these are Absurdities not to be endured, and
therefore I conclude according to the Rules of right Reasoning, the Principle
from which they flow to be so too.

To clear up then the whole Difficulty with as much Brevity and Perspicuity as
in a matter of this intricacy is possible, I shall no longer consider the
Understanding and Will as Faculties really distinct either from the Soul it
self, or from one another, but that the Soul does immediately understand and
will by it self, without the intervention of any Faculty whatsoever. And that
for this demonstrative reason in short, because in the contrary Hypothesis,
either Judgment must be ascribed to the Will, and then the will immediately
commences Understanding, or the Assent of the Will must be blind, brutish, and
accountable, both which are as great Absurdities as they are true Consequences.
This being premised, I grant that as the Soul necessarily Wills as she
understands, so likewise does she necessarily understand as the Object appears.
And thus far our sight terminates in Fatality, and Necessity bounds our
Horizon. That then that must give us a Prospect beyond it, must be this, that
although the Soul necessarily understands or judges according to the Appearance of
things, yet that things should so appear (unless it be in Propositions that are
self-evident, as that the whole is greater than any one part, or the like) is
not alike necessary, but depends upon the degrees of Advertency or Attention
which the Soul uses, and which to use either more or less is fully and
immediately in her own power. And this indifferency of the Soul as to attending
or not attending I take to be the only (...), the bottom and foundation into
which the Morality of every action must be at length resolved. For a farther
proof as well as Illustration of which Hypothesis let us apply it to a
particular case and try how well it will answer the Phenomenon. In the case
then of Martyrdom, I look upon sin as an evil, and not only so but (while I
attend fully to its Nature) the greatest of evils. And as long as I continue
this Judgment it is utterly impossible I should commit it, there being
according to my present apprehension no greater evil for the declining of which
I should think it eligible. But now the evil of Pain being presented before me,
and I not sufficiently attending to the evil of Sin, this latter appears to be
the lesser evil of the two, and I accordingly pro hic and nunc so pronounce it,
and in Conformity to that judgment necessarily choose it. But because 'twas
absolutely in my power to have attended more heedfully there was Liberty in the
Principle, the mistake which influenced the action was vincible, and
consequently the action it self imputable. This Hypothesis however strange it
may seem to those that have sworn Faith and Allegiance to the Dictates of the
Schools, I believe will be the more approved the more it is examined, and that
not only as rational and consistent in it self, but also as a refuge from those
Absurdities which attend the ordinary Solutions. Neither is this account
wholely unlicens'd by Authority, for I find some hints and intimations of it in
the Sea Hierocles upon the Golden Verses of Pythagoras.
School of Plato, where the reason why those middle sort of Beings called
Heroes are not so uniformly pure as the (...), or (...), is assigned to be
because they do not so equally attend to the Beauty of the Supreme Good.

From what has been said it appears plainly that the Morality of every humane
action must be at length resolved into an immediate indifference that the Soul
has of attending or not attending, and consequently that we are not only under
Obligation as to the acts of the Understanding, but that all Obligation begins
there.

Having thus cleared the way by the Proof of this Preparatory Position, that we
are under Obligation as to the acts of the Understanding in general, I may now
proceed to consider that our opinion of our selves is one of those acts of the
Understanding which are subject to Law, or in other terms, that we are not at
our own liberty to entertain what Opinions we please concerning our selves, but
that we ought to regulate them by some Standard. Now the general reason of this
is, because it is of great moment and influence in relation to our Practice,
what Opinion we entertain concerning our selves. Indeed there are many acts of
the Understanding which tho originally free, yet fall under no Obligation by
reason of the Indifferency of the Matter, as in things of pure and naked
Speculation. These are the unforbidden Trees of the Garden, and here we may let
loose the Reins and indulge our thoughts the full Scope. Thus there is no
danger of Heresy in asserting or denying the Antipodes, nor is Orthodoxy
concerned whether the Moon be habitable. But although to mistake a Star be of no
consequence to the Theorist that sits immured in his Study, yet it may be to
the Pilot that is to Steer his Course by it. There are other things which have
a practical Aspect, and here it is not indifferent what we think, because it is
not indifferent what we do. Now among these the Opinion of our selves is to be
reckoned, as having a great influence upon our well or ill demeaning our selves
respectively, as will more minutely and particularly appear when we come in the
third and last place to consider the absurdities and ill consequences of
trangressing the Standard prescribed, and therefore I shall defer the farther
prosecution of it till then, and in the mean while proceed to the second
Observable, Namely.

That the Standard whereby we are to regulate our Opinions concerning our
selves, are those excellencies and perfections which we are really endowed
with. Which is collected from these words, according as God has dealt to every
man the measure of Faith.

In the former part of the Text there was indeed a Restraint laid upon our
Opinions concerning our selves, but it was general only and indefinite. But
here the ground is measured out, and the Boundaries precisely set. (...),
that is the great Ecliptic Line which is to bound the Career of our most forward
and Self-indulging Opinions. If we keep within this compass our motion is
natural and regular, but if we slide never so little out of it, it is unnatural
and portentous. or to speak with greater Simplicity, he that judges of himself
according to those excellencies, whether Moral or Intellectual, which he really
has, does (...), thinks soberly, and he that thinks himself endowed with any
King or Degree of Excellence which really he has not, does (...), thinks of
himself more highly than he ought to think.

Here then are Two things to be considered.

First that we may proceed so far as this Standard.

And Secondly, That we may not go beyond it.

First, That we may proceed so far.

It has been taught by some of the severe Masters of Spiritual Mortification,
That we ought to take up the most low and abject thoughts of our selves that
are possible, to be conscious of no manner of excellency in our selves, and
consequently not to be affected with the least Self-complacency; That we ought
to account our selves to be Nothing, to have nothing, to be worth nothing, but
to be very refuse and offscouring of all things. 1 Cor. 4. 13.
And this they call the Mystical Death, or the Spiritual Annihilation. Now
whatever degrees of excellency this may have (which I shall not now dispute)
it is most certain it can have nothing of Duty. For tho it may, and oftentimes
is required of a man to think the Truth, yet he can never be under an
Obligation to be mistaken. Besides, It Is hard to conceive how any man
(especially one that dwells much with himself, and heedfully reflects upon the
actings of his own mind) should be master of any considerable excellency, and
yet not be conscious of it. And besides, That very degree of Attention which is
required that a man should not think himself more accomplished than indeed he
is, will also infallibly hinder him from thinking he is less. It Is true indeed
Moses knew not that his Face shone, after he had been conversing with God on
the Mount. He saw not the Orb of glory that streamed from him, and wondered what
it was that made him so dreadful to the people. But it is not so with the Soul,
whose reflexive faculty will not fail to give her information of her most
retired and reserved accomplishments. It Is not with the Lesser, as with the
Greater World, where whole Tracts and Regions (and those some of the best too)
ly undiscovered. No, Man cannot be such a Stranger to his own Perfections, such
an America to himself. For who can know the things of a man, if not the Spirit
of man which is in him. And accordingly we find that the Ignorance of our
selves with which Mankind has been hitherto so universally taxed, runs quite in
another Chanel, and does not consist in overlooking any of those indowments
which we have, but in assuming to our selves those which we have not.

I confess (were it possible) I should think it advisable for some persons to
be ignorant of some of their excellencies, and like the Sun not to reflect home
to their own Sphere of light; Not that I think in the least unlawful to be
fully conscious of ones own worth, but only I consider that some men have not
heads strong enough to endure Heights, and walk upon Spires and Pinnacles. But
if they can stand there without growing vertiginous, they need not question the
lawfulness of the station, they are still within the Region of Humility. For
it is not every thinking well of ones self that falls in with the notion of
Pride, but only when there is more of Opinion than there is of Worth. 'Twas
this that was the Condemnation of the Apostate Angel, not that he took a just
complacency in the eminency of his Station, but that he vainly arrogated to
himself what was not his due, in that he said, I will ascend into Heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the Stars of God, Isai. 14. 13.
I will sit upon the sides of the North, I will ascend above the heights of the
Clouds, I will be like the most High. 'Twas for this that the Angel of Death
drew upon Herod, not because he was pleased with the fineness and success of
his Oratory, but because he was not so just to God as the People were to him,
but looked upon himself as the Headfountain of his own perfections, and so gave
not God the glory. Acts 12. 23.


But now if we take care to proportion our estimation of, and our Complacencies
in our selves to the measure of our endowments, and if we look upon those very
endowments not as originary and independent but as derivative from the Father
of lights from whom every good and perfect gift descends, James 1. 17.
and accordingly refer all to Gods glory and with the Elders in the Revelations
take off our Crowns from our Heads and cast them at the foot of the Throne,
Rev. 4. 10.
we have not only the express words of the Text, but likewise all the reason in
the world to warrant the Sobriety of our Opinions. For, this is but to have a
right and exact understanding of ones self. And why may not a man be allowed to
take a true Estimate of himself as well as of another man? Or why should a man
think an excellency less valuable because it is in himself? The Happiness of God
consists in seeing himself as he is; he reflects upon the Beauty of his
Essence, and rejoices with an infinite Complacency. Now certainly that wherein
consists the Happiness of the Creator, cannot be a Sin in the Creature.
Besides, I would fain know why a man may not as lawfully think well of himself
upon the Score of his real worth, as desire that others should think well of
him for the same reason? And that he may do the latter is confessed as well by
the Practice, as by the common Suffrage of Mankind. For otherwise what becomes
of that good Reputation which Solomon says is rather to be chosen than great
Riches, Prove. 22. 1
and of which the Best and Wisest men of all ages had ever such a tender, such
a passionate Regard? Nay it is looked upon as a very Commendable thing to be so
affected, and the contrary is censured as the mark of a dissolute and
unmoraliz'd temper. Only there is a (...) to be observed in this as well as in
the former, 2 Cor. 10. 13.
and as we are not to stretch out our selves beyond our measure, 2 Cor. 10. 14.
so must we take care with the great Apostle, not to give others occasion to
think of us above that which they see us to be. 2 Cor. 12. 6.
Besides, if we may not be allowed to take the full Height of our own
Excellencies, how shall we be able to give God thanks for them? The Elders must
know they wear Crowns before they can use them as Instruments of Adoration, and
Herod must be conscious of the right Genius of his Oratory, before he can give
God the Glory. Again in the last place, if a man may not have leave to take
Cognizance of his own Deserts and to value himself accordingly, what will
become of that (...) (...) Which the Apostle speaks of, the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
which is nothing else but a Sentence of Approbation, which a man passes upon
himself for the well managing of that Talent of Liberty which God has entrusted
him with? Now this is the Reward of Virtue, and therefore certainly not
contrary to it.

Neither is this Self-esteem only the Reward of Virtue but also the Cause of it
too, and consequently it is not only allowable, but also highly needful that we
should think Honorably of our selves. It Is a frequent Observation among Moral
and Divine. Writers, That most if not all the Sins which men commit, proceed
from want of a due sense of the Dignity of their Nature. And consequently a due
reflection upon a man's own Worth, must needs be a strong Preservative against
whatsoever would stain its Glory, Shall such a man as I flee? Neh. 6. 11.
Was the powerful consideration that buoyed up the sinking Spirits of Nehemiah.
And it is one of the Capital Precepts of Pythagoras's Morals (and perhaps one of
the best too that was ever given to the World) -- (...). Above all things
reverence thy self. And 'twas the Saying of another of the Sons of Wisdom, Let
not the Reverence of any man cause thee to sin. Which it certainly will do,
unless we observe the former Rule, and reflect with due Reverence upon our own
Worth and Dignity.

From these considerations (not to urge any more) it seems to me very evident,
that it is not only lawful but in some respects highly Expedient, that our
Opinions of our selves should rise up so as to be of a Level with our
Excellencies, whatsoever they are. Let one of the Scales be mounted never so
high, yet if there be a proportionable Weight in the Other, the Balance moves
regularly, and as it should do. We may then proceed so far as this Standard.

But Secondly, We must not go beyond it. For all beyond this is Pride. Pride,
that turned the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, and levelled the
great King of Babylon with the Beasts that perish; Dan. 4. 33.
and which is nothing else but an Intemperate Opinion of our selves, which
consists either in assuming to our selves any Excellency which we have not, or
in Overrating what we have. Tho indeed in Strictness of Notion this latter
falls in with the former, For to Over-rate what we have, is indeed to assume
some Degree of good which we have not. Here then begins our Restraint, the
Reasonableness of which will appear from the Absurdities and ill Consequences
which attend the transgressing of this Standard, and which in the third and
last place I come now to consider.

I shall observe only the most notorious; and these I shall reduce to these
Three general Heads.

First, That it unqualifies us for the performance of many Duties.

Secondly, That it betrays us into many sins.

And Thirdly, That it frustrates all methods of Reformation. Of these very
briefly.

First an excessive opinion of our selves (and that is so which surpasses the
measure of our real worth) unqualifies us for the performance of many Duties;
and that both in relation to God, our Neighbor and our Selves.

First in relation to God.

As Folly leads to Atheism, so does an overweening opinion of our own Wisdom or
any other excellency to Profaneness. For as the Fool has said in his heart
there is no God, so it is said in another place That the ungodly is so Proud
that he cares not for him. Psalm. 10. 4.
Pride then is altogether inconsistent with that Subjection, Honor and
Veneration which we owe to God. For how can he submit his passions to the
Authority of the Divine Will who has made a Law of his own? And as it
indisposes us for all active, so likewise for all passive Obedience; for how
can he suffer that with Patience, which he thinks he does not deserve in
Justice? Or how can he submit with resignation to the seeming unevenesses of
Providential Dispensations, the equality of which because he cannot discern, he
must in honor to his own understanding deny? And upon the same ground it
unqualifies us for Faith in many of the Divine Revelations. For how can he
Captivate his understanding to Mysteries, who thinks it a dishonor to own any,
and is resolved to believe no farther than he can comprehend?

Lastly, It unqualfies us for Gratitude toward God, and consequently puts a
Bar to all those good actions which we would otherwise perform upon that
Principle. And by this it becomes a Multiplied, a Legion evil. For how can he
acknowledge an Obligation passed upon him by Gods Favors, who calls them not
by that name; but esteems them as Rewards and Payments, and inverting the
Protestation of the good Patriarch, Genesis 22. 10.
thinks himself worthy of the greatest of his mercies.

Then Secondly, In relation to our Neighbor, it unqualifies us for Obedience
to Civil Government. For how can he submit to the Wisdom of his Superiors, and
pay an implicit deference to the Occult reasons of State, who thinks himself
wiser than a whole Senate, and disputes even the ways of Providence? Pride was
ever observed to be the Mother of Faction and Rebellion, and accordingly St.
Jude makes it part of the Character of the Proud Gnostics, To despise Dominions
and speak evil of Dignities.

Again, It unqualifies us for those acts of Justice which consist in a due
observation of our Neighbors Merits, and a deference of external Respect
proportionable to that observation. For how can he be at leisure to take notice
of another worth, who is so wholely taken up in the contemplation of his own?
Let the Reputation of his best Friends (if it be possible for a Proud man to
have any) be in never so great danger, he like Archimedes, is so overbusie in
admiring the Creatures of his own brain, those Draughts and Ideas which he has
formed of himself there, that he regards not the Ruin that is about him. Or if
he does, he is so far from appearing in their defense (as in Justice he ought)
that he rather rejoices at their Spots as Accessions to his own brightness.

Again, It unqualifies us for the Offices of Humanity, and Civil Behavior, and
all kinds of Homilitical virtue: for how can he treat those with any tolerable
Civility, whom he looks down upon as a whole Species below him?

Lastly, it unqualifies us for Gratitude toward our Benefactors. For how can he
think himself obliged by man, who counts God his Debtor?

Then Thirdly, In relation to our Selves, here is this grand ill consequence of
an immoderate salf-esteem, that it unqualifies us not only for higher
seize, but even for the very endeavors of improvement, and so cuts short
and bedwarfs all our excellencies. It Is the Observartion of Cicero, Multi ad
scientiam pervenissent nisi se jam pervenisse credidissent, The Opinion of the
Proud man has so far got the start of the real worth, that the latter will
never overtake the former.

And as the immoderate esteem of our Selves unqualifies us for the performance
of many Duties, so does it also in the Second place Betray us into many Sins.

First, Into all those sins which are contrary to the forementioned Virtues
respectively. And besides them into many more, such as are presumption and
security, vexation and discontent, contempt of others (tho at the same time it
exposes us to theirs) Anger and Contention, Malice and Revenge. For the Proud
man is not content to be his own private Admirer, but quarrels with all others
that are not of his perswasi^n, and with the Tyrant of Babylon kindles a fire
for those who will not fall down and worship the Image which he has set up.

Neither does the Leprosy stop here. But as it betrays us into many sins, so in
the Third and last place (which is the most dismal Consequence of all) It
frustrates all Methods of Reformation. Gods judgments will but exasperate and
inrage him, because he thinks he does not deserve them, and his Mercies will
not indear him, because he thinks he does. Advice he thinks he does not need
and Reproof he cannot bear. Besides he thinks so well of himself already, that
he wonders what you mean by advising him to become better, and therefore as he
does not endeavor after any of those excellencies which he thinks he has, so
neither can he dream of mending those faults which he thinks he is not guilty
of: Thus is the man Sealed up to iniquity, and deeply lodged in the strong
holds of sin, where nothing that has a Salutary Influence can come nigh him.
And in this he resembles the first Presidents of his Folly, who from Angels
transformed themselves into Devils, and fell beyond the possibilities of
recovery.

These are some of the fruits of this Root of Bitterness, and tho more might be
named, yet these I think sufficient to justify this Admonition of the Apostle
to every man, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but
to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.
Let us then all endeavor to conform our opinions concerning our selves to this
Standard. Let us not stretch our selves beyond our natural dimensions, but
learn to entertain modest and sober thoughts of our own excellencies and
indowments, and mortify our understands as well as our sensitive affections.
And thus shall we complete our Lent Exercise by joining the mortification of
the Spirit to that of the flesh, without which the greatest Austerities
wherewith we can afflict the latter, will not be such a Fast as God has chosen.
For what will it avail to macerate the Body, while the principal part the Soul
remains unmortify'd? The Humility of Moses must conspire with his Forty days
Fasting to qualify a man for Divine Intercourses, to make him the Joy of
Angels, the Friend of God. Thus then let us accomplish the Refinings of our
Souls, and fill up the Measure of our Mortifications. To which end let us add
this one further Consideration to what has been already said, that Humility in
the Judgment even of the High and Lofty one that's inhabits Eternity, is a
Virtue of such great Excellency, and singular advantage to the happiness of
Mankind, that our Blessed Savior came down from Heaven to teach it, that his
whole life was one continued Exercise of it, and that he has dignified it with
the first place among his Beatitudes. Let us then as many as profess the
Religion of the Humble and Crucified JESUS make it our strict Care that we
neglect not this his great Commandment, nor omit to Copy out this Principal
Line, this main-stroke of the Pattern he has set us. Especially let us of this
place who are set among the greater Lights of the Firmament, and whose
profession and business is to contemplate Truth and to think of things as God
made them in Number, Weight and Measure, labor in the first place to take just
and true Measures of our Selves, that our Knowledge puff us not up, nor our
Height become our Ruin.

Now to the only Wise God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost be all Adoration and
Thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

The END.

